

WHAT'S ON
SEPTEMBER
WELCOME
September is one of my favourite months for walking as it's invariably cooler — and wetter, it's true!— yet the days are still long and it's easier to avoid the crowds.
So this is a great month to do Paul Buttle's circuit of the Lakes, written especially for Outdoor Action and concluding on page 12.
The 140 mile main route takes 12 days to complete but it can be done in sections.
And if the weather does turn nasty there's always a low level alternative.
On grotty days it's a great advantage to stick to the lowlands, and our valleys are just the places to head for with their tremendous scenery and often surprisingly challenging walking.
See page 6 for our route suggestions.
Enjoy your Outdoor Action!
WEATHER WATCH
At home the month often starts dry, warm and sunny but ends wetter, cooler and windier with north-west Scotland being the coolest and wettest.
Further afield, for good September walking weather and a warm sea try Portugal, Spain and western Mediterranean lands.
Greece and Cyprus stay hot and dry, but the Balkans and Turkey are cooling off to a nice temperature for hikers.
Alpine days stay reasonably warm for the first half of the month.
After that walkers need to dress as for an English summer and keep an eye open for thunderstorms.
In northern and eastern Europe, temperatures tumble as the days shorten.
Highs and lows
‘September blow soft’ prayed the old harvesters, ‘till the fruit's in the loft.’
Their prayers were often answered as the month usually starts with a settled mild and dry spell, although around mid-month days shorten, temperatures dip and summer blows away.
In 1885 London's earliest snow fell on September 25th.
And in 1958, a Sussex storm delivered a 5oz hailstone, Britain's heaviest ever.
Britain's hottest September day reached a staggering 35.6°C/96°F in 1906.
In 1975/6, the wettest September for 58 years followed England's longest overall period of drought.
Flickering along northern horizons the aurora borealis or Northern Lights lit up most of Britain's sky in September 1951 and gave a brilliant show across north-west Europe in September 1958.
EVENTS
1 Three hour family walk in Pembrokeshire looking for animal tracks.
Starts Fishguard.
Bookings only.
Contact:.
4–6 British Birdwatching Fair 1992 at Egleton Nature Reserve, Rutland Water.
Leics.
Contact:.
5 Learn how to use a compass at Jerusalem Farm in Calderdale.
Some knowledge of map reading is useful.
Bookings only.
Price £4, includes map.
Contact:.
5–6 Kielder Classic Mountain Biking event in Northumberland.
Contact:.
6 Map and compass skills for beginners from Sedburgh in the Yorkshire Dales.
Booking essential.
Contact:.
6 Enjoy great views from Blakey Ridge in the North York Moors National Park.
Starts 1.45pm from the Lion Inn, Blakey.
Contact:.
12–13 Try orienteering weekend.
Introductory events around the country.
Contact:.
12–13 RYA Women's National Sailing Championships at Grafham Water.
Contact:.
13 Explore the woodlands at Trowse in Norwich.
Starts 2pm.
Contact:.
13 Scarborough Samaritans Challenge Walk.
Covers 25 miles in the North York Moors National Park.
Contact:.
20 Mountain biking around the Hebden Bridge area of Calderdale.
Bookings only.
Contact:.
20 Cliff top and hedgerow walk from Flamborough Head Lighthouse, N Yorks at 2pm.
Contact:.
26–27
Contact:.
Dry Stone Walling Association Cheshire Branch training course for beginners and improvers.
Contact:.
27 British Heart Foundation weekend of fundraising walks.
Contact:.
27 Local walks for Ramblers' Association Forbidden Britain Day.
Contact:.
Head for the coast of Exmoor on September 1 for a bracing natural history walk.
The walk starts at 10am from Hunter's Inn car park sigh-posted from the A39 and A399 (SS 655 481).
Contact:.
VALLEY WALKING
come on down!
You don't need to head up high to get a kick from the countryside.
Paul Traynor outlines six of the best walks around Britain to tempt you off the peaks and into the valleys.
Valleys have one big advantage over hills.
On a misty day when on a hill walk all you'd see is your feet, in the valley acres of countryside can stretch before you.
Whatever the weather British valleys provide a stunning variety of walking — whether you choose to follow the course of a fast flowing stream or a broad meandering river.
This selection of valley routes concentrates on waterside walking.
Some are easy rambles but others should kick into touch the idea that valleys are easy options.
Paul Traynor is a freelance journalist with 25 years' experience of walking and backpacking at home and abroad
The Wye Valley
OS Landranger 1:50,000, sheets 162, 149 and 161
The Wye Valley is full of walking waymarks and understandably so.
Its scenery is widely regarded as being among the best in the country.
Most visitors, though, rarely stray far from the ‘honeypot’ car parks and the selective walker can enjoy surprising peace even on summer weekends.
The eastern bank between Chepstow and Monmouth gets Offa's Dyke walkers off to a flying start — there's superb walking high above the river with sensational views.
Chepstow is also the southern end of another excellent long distance path — the Wye Valley Walk which passes through the heart of an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, keeping close to the river bank where possible.
You could in fact devise a circular walk on a grand scale using the two paths.
After 75 miles the Wye Valley walk reaches Hay-on-Wye, also a staging point for the Offa's Dyke path.
An outward journey on one and a return by the other would make a great expedition.
The walking is seldom demanding, though the many stiles and gates in the heavily farmed country will make you feel like a steeplechaser at times.
And a word of warning — when you arrive in   Hye-on-Wye beware of the second-hand bookshops.
There are dozens of them, some with very good outdoors and walking sections and it's an unusually restrained visitor who leaves without a few extra pounds in the backpack.
If the backpack gets too heavy, of course, you could always canoe back down the river to Chepstow!
Skye
OS Outdoor Leisure 1:25,000, Map 8, The Cuillin and Torridon Hills
The Sligachan Hotel and campsite soon become familiar to visitors to the Isle of Skye and they mark the start and finish of a classic walk — through Glen Sligachan to Camasunary on the shores of Loch Scavaig and back.
This is a round trip of some 16 miles and on Skye counts as one of the easiest expeditions.
The rough, boggy going combines with the forbidding beauty of the heights looming on both sides to create an impression of seriousness out of all proportion to the difficulties underfoot.
The path passes below the shapely peaks of Marsco and Blaven and the views are a reminder of the caution needed when heading high on this unforgiving island.
A diversion to glimpse the contorted interior of Harta Corrie is well worth doing.
The return trek can seem like a very long haul but all the effort seems well worthwhile by the time you're comfortably sitting in the bar at the Sligachan Hotel cradling your glass of single malt.
Highlands
OS Landranger 1:50,000, Sheet 41
The town of Kinlochleven will be familiar to West Highland Way walkers.
An industrial centre, it's not the most attractive of Scottish towns.
But it is the staging post for the final leg which takes the long distance route to Fort William — and it's the beginning of another fine walk which, like the Way, skirts the heights of the Mamore range to reach scenic Glen Nevis.
But while the Way continues north-west on the old military road, this route climbs a hillside footpath from the town to join the track heading broadly north-east towards Luibeilt.
Loch Eilde Mor is soon reached and the going is easy along its north side, at the base of the steep flanks of Sgurr Eilde Mor.
Past the smaller Loch Eilde Beag the track swings north to reach Luibeilt after around two miles of wild walking from the north-eastern end of the loch.
Luibeilt is a junction of tracks on the Abhainn Rath stream — this route takes the one running west following the right bank.
You go on to pick up the beginnings of the Water of Nevis and the homeward leg.
That's not to say the fun's over.
A little more than three miles of excellent walking takes you past the Upper Steall ruins, down to the valley bottom where you can stop to admire the Steall waterfall.
But the best is yet to come — a superb section on a well used track through the Gorge of Nevis to reach the roadhead car park and hopefully transport!
Given that the West Highland Way drops into the glen a few miles further down, there's a possibility of a two-day circular route.
If you base yourself in Kinlochleven and use the popular campsite in the glen for an overnight stop, the circuit could make a rewarding introduction to the rigours of backpacking in this Highland region.
Yorkshire Dales
OS Landranger 1:50,000, sheet 98 and 104
The Dales of northern England soon win a special place in visitors' affections.
Not only does the superb landscape of fell and valley provide wonderfully varies walking, but the villages, full of character, are also home to some of the best pubs in the country.
Lovers of good beer — well deserved of course after a hard day's exercise — won't have to go far for a fine pint.
One of the great attractions of the area is the way many of the finest walks combine high exposed moorland sections with exploration of the sheltered dales.
And the valley of the River Wharfe takes some beating.
The long distance Dales Way takes in the length of the dale, hugging the riverside where possible.
It's well worth doing in one go but it is also well suited to shorter walks — I've outlined a couple of my favourites.
The stretch of river below Barden Bridge makes for a particularly rewarding walk.
A simple route up one bank of the river and a return by the other takes the walker through delightful Strid Wood, alongside The Strid — where the Wharfe is constricted through a deep, narrow channel — and the attractive High Strid.
Bolton Abbey makes a suitable starting point, though if time is especially tight Cavendish Pavilion serves equally well, cutting the length of the walk to about five miles.
The river crossing at Barden Bridge is the northern turning point.
The combination of woodland and water is irresistible and there's no need to divert your attention from the scenery — a map is scarcely necessary on the well-trodden and  clear paths.
Visit outside the main holiday times if you want to experience the place at its best.
A slightly longer walk higher in the dale combines a peaceful riverside amble with superb hillside walking.
Kettlewell is the starting point.
Cam Head the high point, and the hamlet of Starbotton the third point of the triangle.
You use Top Mere Road to climb out of Kettlewell to a cairn at Cam Head before an old drove route drops you sharply into Starbotton to the inevitable pub.
You'd be well advised not to overdo it on the old liquid refreshment, however, as the return leg beside the river involves crossing an awful lot of stiles.
The Yorkshire Dales win a special place in visitors' affections.
Not only does the superb landscape of fell and valley provide wonderfully varied walking, but the villages are home to some of the best pubs in Britain
Thames Valley
OS Landranger 1:50,000, sheet 175
Many outsiders' knowledge of the Thames Valley is restricted to the view they get from their car window while they're hurtling along the M4.
And though this is indeed a busy, heavily populated area, first impressions are deceptive.
True, the area is short on tough physical challenge, but it's got loads of charm and what's wrong with a bit charm now and then?
This region has the sort of villages that Hollywood thinks is ‘typical England’.
It's amazing to see that the picturesque cottages, cricket on the green, meadows, mature woods, friendly pubs and riverside backwaters really do exist.
I was introduced to the area around Cookham and Bourne End, near Maidenhead, by a rare entry into the world of sponsored walking.
Such was the organisers' strong determination to live up to the movie image of English life, they even laid on a scatty vicar wearing a panama hat to serve tea and sandwiches at the finish.
The National Trust owns several tracks of land in the area and one of their suggested walks takes in some of the best sights.
There are lots of footpaths to choose from, so getting around is no problem, though it can be fiddly in places.
From Cookham the route heads via the John Lewis Golf Course and some lane walking, to Cookham Dean with its very own village green and welcoming pubs.
From there you climb Winter Hill, a pleasant village point reached through the attractive beeches of Quarry Woods.
You continue on through the meadows of Cock marsh — a Site of Special Scientific Interest — to the banks of the Thames.
Riverside paths return to Cookham.
National Trust properties on this circuit of seven miles or so include Cookham Moor, Harding's Green, and Cockmarsh — which gives you an idea of how attractive the area is.
Devon's Teign Valley
OS Landranger 1:50,000, sheet 191
On the fringes of Dartmoor, near Drewsteignton to the west of Exeter, the river Teign cuts  through a deep gorge.
Heavily wooded, in pleasing contrast to the moors, it's an important and protected haven for wildlife — and provides some very impressive walking.
A circular walk based on Drewsteignton takes in the dramatic gorge and passes close to one of the most notable curiosities of the area — Castle Drogo.
The last castle to be built in Britain, it was completed in 1930 and is now owned by the National Trust who open it to visitors in the summer.
From Drewsteignton a steep lane drops to Fingle Bridge and from here the route heads upstream along the gorge, picking its way through woodland which grows thickly right to the water's edge.
You then follow Hunter's Path, swinging uphill above the gorge, then crossing Piddledown Common to head back to the village.
Left: Bolton Abbey is a good start point for a walk alongside The Strid in the Yorkshire Dales.
The Wye Valley has some of the country's best scenery
COMPETITION
WIN £1,000 OF ADIDAS GEAR
FIRST PRIZE
Two lucky readers will soon be kitted out with Adidas Equipment Adventure jackets and pants — windproof, waterproof and breathable.
Made from a microfibre outer laminated to an Aditex lining, each suit is worth £289.98 and is available in petrol/rust.
The pants come in sizes 30–36 and the jacket in 38–40/40–42/42–44 and 44–46.
To top it off, the winners will also receive Adidas Equipment Adventure High waling boots worth £79.99 a pair.
SECOND PRIZE
Two second prize winners will each win an Adidas Equipment Adventure Polar Fleece, a warm, lightweight, quick-drying fleece top made from Polartec 200.
The top has a half-zip front, reinforced elbows and two handwarmer pockets.
The fleece comes in rust and in the same sizes as the jacket (above).
It sells for £84.99 in the shops.
THIRD PRIZE
Two third prize winners will each get Adidas Equipment Adventure T shirts.
The T shirt is an ideal first layer or warm weather top.
Its minimesh construction draws perspiration away from the skin, keeping you dry and comfortable.
It comes in rust in the same sizes as the jacket (above).
Price £29.99.
HOW TO ENTER
For your chance of winning one of these great prizes, just solve the three anagrams.
They all relate to the prizes.
Write your answers on the back of a postcard or envelope no bigger than 5in × 6in — please include your boot size, the size of jacket, fleece or T-shirt you'd like, and your size for waterproof pants — and send it to Outdoor Action Adidas Competition,.
The closing date is Wednesday September 30, 1992.
ANAGRAMS
1.
Creepe foall.
2.
Sad Ida.
3.
Mad true queen ven pit.
RULES
1.
Entries must be on the back of a postcard or envelope no bigger than 5in × 6in.
2.
Entries are limited to one per person.
3.
No cash alternatives will be offered.
4.
The judges' decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.
5.
Employees of Hawker Consumer Publications and Adidas (UK) Ltd and their relatives are ineligible to enter.
6.
No entry will be accepted after last post on Wednesday September 30, 1992.
WALKING IN THE LAKES
Lakeland Circuit
In the third and final part of his circuit of the Lake District, Paul Buttle takes you through five days of great walking.
The circuit takes 12 days in total and can be walked using high or low level routes.
DAY 8
BORROWDALE TO DUNNERDALE
This is the hardest day of the whole circuit.
Even the lower level route climbs above 2,500ft and is a long march through a wild empty mountain landscape.
But on a good day it makes for an exhilarating walk taking in two of the most appealing summits in the Lake District — Bowfell and Crinkle Crags.
The walk ends in Dunnerdale, the Lakes' least visited major valley.
Main Route
Distance:15.5 miles
Highest point:Bowfell 2,960ft.
Total ascent:3,500ft.
Maps:OS Landranger sheets 89 & 96, Outdoor Leisure 4 & 6, Tourist Map 3.
Starting point:Rosthwaite.
(NY 258 148).
Public transport:bus service from Penrith Railway Station to Keswick (number 104), from Windermere Railway Station to Keswick (number 555) and from Keswick to Seatoller via Rosthwaite (number 79).
All operated by Cumberland Motor Services..
Walk Directions
From Rosthwaite walk southwest into the Stonethwaite valley past the village of Stonethwaite (1.25 miles), turning south into the long wild empty valley of Langstrath.
Halfway down the valley, climb up to your left to the top of Stake Pass (3 miles).
From here follow a very soggy but level path to Angle Tarn (1.5 miles) in an impressive glacial corrie, and walk up to Ore Gap (southwards 0.5 miles)— the high passway between Bowfell and Esk Pike.
Follow a distinctive path here which leads to the summit of Bowfell (0.5 miles).
From the summit a path descends along Bowfell's eastern ridge before swinging sharply south to Three Tarns Pass (0.5 miles).
From the pass go up onto the ridge leading to the summit of Crinkle Crags (0.75 miles).
From the top of Crinkle Crags make a careful descent to the head of Mosedale to the south-west (1 mile).
There's no established path but the ground is not too difficult.
Continue down the short valley of Mosedale to the road, which you follow eastwards until it crosses the River Duddon (1.75).
From here another narrow twisting road begins which runs the length of the Duddon valley.
However a good alternative to the road is along an interesting series of paths and tracks.
These run down the valley to the west of the river through Black Hall, Birks and Grassguards farms to Seathwaite village (4.5 miles).
Escape Route
Three Tarns Pass to Lingcove Beck (1 mile).
Low Level Route
Distance:14.5 miles.
Highest point:2,600ft.
Total ascent:2,800ft.
This varies little from the main route.
Walk along the main route to the top of Ore Gap (6.25 miles).
Go down the other side to follow Lingcove Beck for just over two miles, before crossing over the very shallow col separating the Lingcove valley from Mosedale.
Once in Mosedale, continue along the main route as previously described.
In bad weather even this route is tough to follow.
There is an alternative route which is longer and involves slightly more climbing, but it stays at a lower level, never rising higher than 1,600ft.
Follow the main route to the top of Stake Past (4.25 miles), and then descend the other side into Langdale and along the valley floor to join the roadway at the Old Dungeon Ghyll Hotel (2.75 miles).
Walk along the road to the top of the little pass running beneath Side Pike (0.75 miles).
Use the path along the western edge of Blea Tarn to join the Wrynose Pass road.
Follow the road over the pass and down into Dunnerdale (4.5 miles).
This would actually be my preferred lower route if it wasn't for the traffic on the Wrynose Pass road.
Accommodation
Camping:Turner Hall Farm ,.
A small and quiet campsite.
Bed and breakfasts:Haverlock, Seathwaite, Duddon Valley, Broughton in  Furness, Cumbria .
Cockley Beck Farm, Duddon Valley, Broughton in Furness Cumbria .
Shops:none.
Pubs and eating places:The Newfield Inn, Seathwaite .
An attractive pub with bar meals.
Public transport:postbus from Cockley Beck Farm (NY 246 014) to Broughton in Furness (SD 212 875), a mile and a half north of Foxfield Railway Station.
For times .
Alternatively, look at the collection times on the post boxes.
DAY 9
DUNNERDALE TO ELTERWATER
The route is mainly over the Coniston Fells giving a high rocky ridge walk, with a final descent down Little Langdale — another quiet valley which still retains much of its old world character.
This is an easy walk so if you have any energy left try climbing Lingmore Fell for good views of the Langdale Pikes and Great Langdale.
Main Route
Distance:11 miles.
Highest point:Coniston Old Man, 2,631ft.
Total ascent:3,200ft.
Maps:OS Sheet 96 & 90, Outdoor Leisure 6, Tourist Map 3.
Starting point:Seathwaite.
(SD 229 960).
Public transport:bus service from Broughton in Furness, a mile away from Foxfield Railway Station, to Cockley Beck Farm via Seathwaite..
Walk Directions
From Seathwaite follow the access road to Long House Farm (1 mile) but bypass the farm to go on to the Walna Scar Road (actually a bridleway).
From the crest of the ‘road’ follow the ridge north to the summit of Dow Crag (2.5 miles), and from here head east to The Old Man of Coniston (1 mile).
Head north from the Old Man on to Swirl How and Great Carrs (2 miles) where the ridge descends into Little Langdale (3 miles).
Go east along the valley on the track around the southern side of Little Langdale Tarn.
Cross the bridge at the tarn's outflow and carry on up to the valley church (1.5 miles).
A couple of hundred yards west of the church track to Elterwater (1.5 miles).
Escape Route
None.
Low Level Route
Distance:10 miles.
Highest point:2,000 ft.
Total ascent:2,100 ft.
Walk Directions
From Seathwaite follow the main route to the crest of the Walna Scar ridge (2.5 miles) and continue on the Walna Scar road downhill round the southern slopes of the Old Man to the village of Coniston (3.5 miles).
From here walk north along the A593 until you reach a minor road leading to Tiberthwaite Farm (1.75 miles).
Where the surfaced road ends at the farm an unsurfaced trackway leads to Little Langdale (3 miles) from where you can follow the main route to Elterwater (1.5 miles).
Accommodation
Camping:Baysbrown Farm,,.
Youth hostel:Elterwater Youth Hostel, Elterwater,,.
Bed and breakfast:Stonethwaite, Elterwater,.
Hotel:Eltermere Country House Hotel, Eltermere ,.
Shops:Maple Tree Corner in the centre of Elterwater..
Pubs and eating places:The Britannia Inn in the centre of the village.
Public transport:bus service from Elterwater to Ambleside (number 516 Ambleside to Windermere Rail Station (number 555 & W1).
Cumberland Motor Services..
Day 12 and the final day of the circuit — on the way from Hagg Gill to Threshthwaite Mouth
DAY 10
ELTERWATER TO GRASMERE
(Optional)
As the crow flies, Elterwater and Grasmere are only two miles apart, so it would be easy to miss out this day's walk if you wanted to shorten the complete circuit.
All you need to do is cross the ridge separating the two  villages and continue on to Day 11.
The main route for Day 10 is a fairly short walk in any case, as is Day 11, so if you're feeling fit you could combine the two.
The main route is via High White Stones.
The featureless fell top is in the middle of the Lakeland fells and offers spectacular panoramic views.
The descent is via Far Easedale — a wild valley which seems a thousand miles from the tourist bustle it leads to at Grasmere.
Main Route
Distance:10 miles.
Highest point:High White Stones, 2,500ft.
Maps:OS sheet 90, Outdoor Leisure 6 & 7, Tourist Map 3.
Starting point:Elterwater (NY 326 048).
Public transport:bus service from Windermere Railway Station to Ambleside Services (nos 555 & W1), Ambleside to Elterwater (number 516).
Operator:Cumberland Motor Services..
Walk Directions
From Elterwater go up to the crest of the ridge separating Elterwater from Grasmere (0.75 miles) via a path passing between Red Bank and Dow Bank.
From the crest turn left and follow the length of the ridge, over Blea Rigg to Sergeant Man and on to High White Stones (4.5 miles).
From the summit of High White Stones descend north to Greenup Edge, the shallow pass between High White Stones and Ullscarf. (0.75 miles).
Turn right and follow an old packhorse route to Far Easedale and Grasmere (4 miles).
Escape Route
Blea Rigg — Easedale Tarn — Grasmere.
Low Level Route
Distance:2 miles.
Highest point:700 ft.
Total ascent:500 ft.
Follow the path as in the main route between Red Bank and Dow Bank and continue over the ridge until you reach the road leading to Grasmere (2 miles).
This is obviously too short to be considered a day's walk so if you're sticking to the low level route you should link straight in to Day 11 by following the road from Elterwater to Grasmere.
Go past High Close youth hostel before branching off to the right on to a path which goes around the lower slopes of Loughrigg Fell to Rydal village (2.5 miles).
From Rydal follow the low level route for Day 11.
Accommodation
Youth hostels:Butharlyp, How Grasmere, Ambleside, Cumbria.
LA22 9QG.
(NY 336 077)..
Thorney How, Grasmere, Ambleside, Cumbria LA22 9QW.
(NY 331 084).
For further accommodation details contact the Grasmere Information Centre, Red Bank Road.
(NY 336 073)..
Pubs and eating places:For my money the Dove and Olive Branch bar, part of the Wordsworth hotel, is the best bar in Grasmere.
The Baldry Restaurant serves good food at a reasonable price and the Rowan Tree is good for vegetarian food.
Shops:Co-operative Store ,.
Public transport:bus service from Grasmere to Windermere Railway Station (numbers 518 & 555).
Operator:Cumberland Motor Services..
DAY 11
GRASMERE TO HARTSOP
The main route and the low level route for Day 11 take two quite different courses.
The main route is a very high level long ridge walk to the summit of Fairfield — with brilliant views over Ullswater — followed by a descent down a short, steep, twisting little valley called Dovedale.
The lower route passes through the wide quite valley of Scandale along a broad enclosed trackway leading to Scandale Pass.
Unfortunately, to reach this path using official rights of way involves venturing into Ambleside which can get very crowded, especially in the summer.
However, I suspect you could take an obvious short cut across the open fell side to avoid the town without too much trouble.
From the top of Scandale pass a path that leads down Caiston Glen to Patterdale.
Main Route
Distance:10 miles.
Highest point:Fairfield 2,863ft.
Total ascent:3,000ft.
Maps:OS sheet 90, Outdoor Leisure 5 & 7, Tourist map 3.
Starting point:Grasmere (NY 335 075).
Public transport:Bus service from Windermere Railway Station to Grasmere.
Services (nos 518 & 555).
Operator:Cumberland Motor Services..
Walk Directions
From the centre of Grasmere follow the road leading past Dove Cottage.
Where this branches, take the left hand fork and where this road branches, bear right.
The surfaced roadway soon becomes a rough bridleway leading to the hamlet of Rydal (2 miles).
At the end of the bridleway continue along the path which leads to Heron Pike (1.5 miles), Greatrigg Mann (1.5 miles), and eventually Fairfield (1 mile).
From Fairfield walk south-east to Hart Crag (0.75 miles) and then down to the gap between Hart Crag and Dove Crag (0.25 miles) in the same direction.
From here descend north-east along a thinner path into Dovedale which leads to Hartsop Hall Farm (2 miles).
From the farm follow a track past Brotherswater onto the A592.
From here turn right and follow the road to Hartsop village (1.25 miles).
Escape Route
none.
Low Level Route
Distance:10 miles.
Highest point:1,750ft.
Total ascent:1,800ft.
Follow the directions as for the main route to Rydal, but from  there leave the main route and follow the driveway leading round the back of Rydal Hall.
Head through the grounds of the Hall to the main A591.
Follow the main road into Ambleside (3.5 miles) to the Market Cross in the centre of town, which is not actually a cross but a stone pillar.
From here continue uphill along North Road.
At its junction with another road turn right and continue uphill.
Take the first turn left onto Sweden Bridge Lane and branch off this road onto Belle Vue Lane which leads eventually to Nook End Farm (0.5 miles).
From the farm continue along a trackway leading northwards over a bridge spanning Scandale Beck.
Three quarters of a mile from the farm a path branches right off from this track down to High Sweden Bridge.
Cross over this bridge and follow the broad trackway on the other side leading up the valley to Scandale Pass (3 miles).
From the pass continue down Caiston Glen to Hartsop Hall Farm (2 miles) and on to the village of Hartsop (1.25 miles).
Accommodation
Camping:Sykeside, Brotherswater, Patterdale, Penrith.
CA11 ONY.
(NY 403 118)..
Bunkhouse:at the above campsite.
Bed and breakfast:Fellside, Hartsop, Patterdale, Penrith.
CA11 ONZ.
(NY 407 132)..
Shops:Sykeside Campsite Shop.
Well stocked.
Pubs and eating places:The Brotherswater Inn.
(NY 404 118).
A good contender for the most dispiriting pub in the Lake District.
Also has a snack bar.
Barn End bar, part of Sykeside Campsite.
This is open only to residents on the campsite or for people eating there.
Public transport:bus service from Patterdale Hotel to Penrith Railway Station (number 108).
In summer this service is extended to Hartsop and Windermere Railway Station.
Operators:Cumberland Motor Services..
DAY 12
HARTSOP TO STAVELEY
The last part of the circuit is flexible.
The main route directions take you back to the starting point, Staveley, though this means the final five miles of the circuit are spent moving away from the real Lake District.
So if you're not too much of a purist about completing the circuit you'd most probably be best off finishing in Windermere — I've outlined how to adapt the main route to do this — or in Troutbeck village where the low level route finishes.
The main route goes along a narrow elevated ridge from Gray Crag to Thornthwaite Crag where you'll find the tallest cairn in the Lake District at around 20ft high.
From a distance it looks strangely like a chimney.
From there the route follows the southern part of the High Street Range.
The lower route explores the small, and probably little known, valley of Pasture Beck.
It's surprisingly wild in its upper reaches where it leads to  Threshthwaite Mouth — one of the most distinctive though seldom used passes in the Lake District.
This gives access to the Troutbeck valley and the village of the same name.
Main Route
Distance:13 miles.
Highest point:Thornthwaite Crag 2,569ft.
Total ascent:2,800ft.
Maps:OS sheets 90 & 97, Outdoor Leisure % & 7, Tourist Map 3.
Starting point:Hartsop.
(NY 408 131).
Public transport:bus service from Penrith Railway Station to Patterdale (number 108).
In summer this service is extended to Hartsop and Windermere Railway Station.
Operator:Cumberland Motor Services..
Walk Directions
From Hartsop village follow a distinct path east to Hayeswater reservoir (1.25 miles) before tacking diagonally uphill to your right onto the Gray Crag ridge (0.5 miles).
Follow this narrow ridge to Thornthwaite Crag (1.75 miles) and from this summit continue southwards across the distinctive ridge peaks of Froswick, Ill Bell and Yoke before descending to Garburn Pass (3.5 miles).
Here you meet the Garburn Road, a rough trackway which crosses over the pass.
Follow this track south until it branches into two (1.25 miles).
From here take the left hand fork which eventually merges into a surfaced minor road leading to the hamlet of Ings (3.5 miles) on the main A591.
Follow this back to Staveley (1.5 miles).
The final miles back to Staveley are not very pleasant as they involve road walking, particularly the last mile and a half which is along a main road.
To avoid this you could instead turn eastwards on the Garburn road and descend to the village of Kentmere (1.5 miles) and walk back to Staveley from there (4 miles).
Alternatively you could take a right turn from the lane leading to Ings (2 miles from the Garburn road), and cross over a small hill top called Orrest Head (1.25 miles).
It was from this little hill Wainwright obtained his view of the Lake District which altered the whole course of his life.
Hopefully, from here you'll see many of the fantastic hills you've walked during the course of the circuit.
To finish off your walk head south from the hill top to Windermere Railway Station (0.5 miles).
Escape Route
none.
Low Level Route
Distance:9.5 miles.
Highest point:1,900ft.
Total ascent:1,700ft.
From Hartsop village, follow Pasture Beck to Threshthwaite Mouth (2 miles), the deep col which lies between Stony Cove Pike and Thornthwaite Crag.
From here descend south following a thin path to Troutbeck Park Farm, then take the farm access road south which leads to the village of Troutbeck (4.5 miles).
From the village, walk to Windermere using the road.
These last few miles are not exactly very appealing so you might actually be better off taking the CMS Penrith to Windermere bus which picks up outside the Queen's Head.
Unfortunately though the service only operates during the summer season.
During the rest of the year the nearest bus pick up point is Troutbeck Bridge where the minor road leading from Troutbeck village joins the main A591.
Accommodation
Camping:Rotherheath Lane Campsite, Rotherheath Lane, Crook, Nr.
Kendal LA8 8JU.
(SD 479 955)..
Youth hostel:Highgate, Kendal, Cumbria LA9 4HE.
(SD 515 924)..
For further details of accommodation in Kendal contact the Kendal Information Centre, Highgate..
Public transport:bus service from Troutbeck Bridge to Kendal via Staveley (number 555).
In the summer only there is a service from Troutbeck Village to Windermere Railway Station (number 104).
Operator:Cumberland Motor Services..
Railway service from Windermere to Oxenholme via Staveley and Kendal..
Don't miss out!
If you don't catch parts one and two of this great Lakeland circuit exclusive to Outdoor Action and published in the July and August editions, back issues are available from Outdoor Action,, priced £2.50.
It's a Breeze
MULTI-ACTIVITIES SERIES
SAILING
Catherine Moore discovers the joys of plain sailing in part two of our great multi-activity series
Sailing has always seemed like a decent way of spending time to me.
As a kit I was envious of my cousins on the Pembrokeshire coast who could shoot off after school to get in a spot of sailing before tea.
But the idea of trying to do the same was impossible for Midlander like me — the nearest reservoir was over 20 miles away and after a couple of circuits would soon have lost its charm.
But just because I didn't learn to sail as a kid seemed a poor reason for not having a go now.
I wanted to learn the basics in a one person, single-sailed Topper.
I'd had some sailing instruction before on Lake Bala, in a larger Wayfarer which has room for two people and an instructor, but I found that I was tending to leave the thinking to my partner and the instructor, and just doing what I was told without knowing why.
Now I decided it was time to find out.
This happens pretty quickly in a Topper.
The 11 ft-long boats are fairly forgiving, and don't fling you overboard at your first error.
And when — inevitably — you do capsize, you soon learn how to not make the same mistakes again.
There were six of us on the course, all aiming to get the RYA (Royal Yachting Association) Level 1 Certificate.
There are five different RYA Levels for dinghy sailors, from Level 1 Start Sailing , to Level 5 Advanced Skills .
First lessons involve learning a few words of ‘sailspeak’.
After all, if your luff is flapping you need to know where it is before you can put it right.
Our instructors taught us the correct names for the parts of the Topper.
The mast I could manage but I didn't know there were different names for the parts of the sail — the head being at the top, the leech at the back and the luff by the mast.
(If your luff is indeed flapping you need to pull the sail towards you in order to fill it with wind.)
The main sheet is not a sheet at all, but in fact a rope which allows you to control the Topper's one sail.
Direction is controlled by the tiller which moves the rudder, while the centreboard keeps the dinghy sailing forwards rather than sideways.
The boom is the pole running across the bottom of the sail, designed to swing across the boat and hit you on the head when you try to turn.
Our group learned the basics on a dry land simulator — a Topper without the sail.
We were taught the right way to hold the tiller and mainsheet, how to pull the sail in and out and how to ‘tack’— change direction by turning the front of the dinghy into the wind.
On this first morning we planned to practise the ‘reaching’— sailing at an angle of 90 degrees to the wind.
Our next task was rigging.
It's not a thrilling task but is easy and only takes minutes.
Much to my surprise I was soon out on the water like a regular Captain Pugwash.
I'd expected to last only a few minutes before my first ducking but the gentle wind was perfect for getting used to the moves.
During the day we all became more confident and learned about another ‘point of sailing’—‘beating’ where you sail at 45 degrees to the wind.
Capsize drill rounded off our first day's sailing.
After pushing our boats over into the water, we then righted them by putting all our weight on the centreboards where they poked out of the bottom of the boat.
Not as difficult as it sounds.
I loved being out on the sea — it felt much more like ‘real’ sailing than being on a lake.
Sometimes I tried to go as fast as I could, but it was easy to let the sail out and slow down if I felt I was getting out of control.
With more days sailing on the sea we learned to ‘run’— sail downwind — and to gyb, that is, to change direction by turning the back of the boat into the wind.
By the end of the week there was just a simple theory test left where we were asked questions about winds, how to overtake and so on— and then it was certificate time.
My little red RYA Level 1 Certificate doesn't mean I can now start my solo circumnavigation of the world, but I like to think it's a step in the right direction.
Catherine Moore leaned to sail in Greece with Greek Islands Sailing Club (details on ).
There are RYA recognised sailing centres all around the UK and abroad.
For details contact:.
Riding along on the crest of a wave.
Picture by The Water Source
OUT & ABOUT
Every month we feature a fascinating walk in fourteen areas of the country.
Walks compiled by Catherine Moore
1
Ross-shire Through the National Trust for Scotland's Kintail estate
2
Cairngorms A short but serious walk to the summit of Meall a'Bhuachaille
3
Scottish Borders Walk from Traquair to Yair along an ancient drove road
4
Northumberland Circular walk to Harbottle Hill offering spectacular views
5
Lake District A ridge walk to the summit of Rannerdale Knots
6
Northern Ireland The Navar Trail in County Fermanagh
7
Peak District The Monsal Trail running along part of an old railway line
8
Snowdonia Walk and scramble up four summits
9
Pembrokeshire Route along an ancient track on St David's Peninsula
10
Brecon Beacons A hill walk to historic upland sites
11
Heart of England The Worcestershire Way starting from Kingsford Country Park
12
Norfolk Route to Upton Dyke along the River Bure
13
Dorset Walk to Agglestone Rock and Old Harry Rocks
14
Somerset Route along the edge of the Quantocks
WALK TO SUMMIT OF BEINN FHADA
This walk takes you through the National Trust for Scotland's Kintail estate to the summit of Beinn Fhada.
It's a stunningly beautiful area of the Highlands.
From the car park at the Morvich visitor centre follow the metalled road to the end then cross the bridge to the left.
Turn right past the house and lake taking the path on the left signed to the Falls of Glomach.
Follow this path through Gleann Choinneachain until it fords the stream.
After the ford the path zig-zags steeply uphill for around 350yds.
The path then continues straight, towards the pass and here a less distinct path leaves it to the right.
Walk along this and stay on it till it disappears at the top ridge.
Follow the ridge going south-east to the top of Beinn Fhada at 3,385ft (sometimes called Ben Attow).
Leave the summit walking south and look out for a shallow gully leading towards a steep grass slope beside a burn and on to Glenlicht House.
Cross the river by two bridges and turn right to join the Gleann Lichd road back to Morvich.
Recommended by the National Trust for Scotland.
Ross-shire
Distance:approx 11 miles.
Time:approx 8.5 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey Landranger Sheet 33.
Start/finish:National Trust for Scotland visitor centre at Morvich.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
MEALL A'BHUACHAILLE (THE SHEPHERD'S HILL)
A relatively short route but one which climbs to a height of 2,654ft to the summit of Meall a'Bhuachaille and so should be treated as a serious hill walk.
At the end of the Forestry Commission car park, in front of the Forestry Commission building, you'll see a sign marked Shepherd's Hill Trek which directs you around the side of the building.
Turn left before Reindeer House and follow the road through the gate, taking the left fork soon after.
The route is fairly easy to follow from here, marked by wooden stakes with a green band, and climbs through dense forest.
Above the tree line take a grassy path leading steeply up towards the saddle between the summit and the hill to the left, Creagan Gorm.
On reaching the saddle bear right along the ridge to the summit.
From the summit the path then turns a little to the left to descend the other side of the hill towards Ryvoan bothy.
Turn right at the bothy onto a track heading to Lochan Uaine.
Beyond the lochan the route follows the wide forest road.
Ignore a road off the left and continue to Reindeer House and back to the car park.
Recommended by Aviemore and Spey Valley Tourist Board.
Cairngorms
Distance:5.25 miles.
Time:3 — 3.5 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey Outdoor Leisure Sheet 3.
Start/finish:Glenmore Forestry Commission car park — just off the ski road, opposite the entrance to the Glenmore campsite.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
TRAQUAIR TO YAIR ALONG THE MINCHMOOR ROAD
This route follows part of the 212 mile Southern Upland Way from Traquair to Yair.
And for much of the time it follows the Minchmoor Road, an ancient drove road which was also used by Scottish monarchs staying at Traquair House.
From the car park in Traquair turn left and follow the narrow road up the hill for 100yds to where the main road turns right.
Carry straight on up a rough track — this is the Minchmoor Road.
Look out for the Southern Upland Way markers.
Follow the track up the hill to the large forestry plantation.
Cross the forest road and keep straight on up the hill.
Do the same at the next forest road.
At the edge of the plantation keep the trees to your right and follow the path up the hill to a track.
Turn left and follow the track on upwards now with trees on your left.
Cross the forest road and where the track forks, bear left and follow the old drove road past a marker post keeping the fence on your left.
The Minchmoor Road turns right and drops down to Yarrowford.
Cross the ladder stile and follow the path, keeping the wall on the right.
At the three stone cairns turn sharp right and head downhill to the edge of the forest.
Turn left into the forest and follow the track downhill crossing the forest road.
At the next forest road there are two options.
you can either turn left and follow the road for 100yds turning right onto a path above a stream.
Then turn right at the tarmac road and follow it to the main road and the car park.
Alternatively you can turn right along the forest road then go left and drop down off the road to follow a track and waymarkers down to the car park.
Recommended by Borders Regional Council.
Scottish Borders
Distance:approx 9 miles.
Time:approx 5 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey Landranger Sheet 73.
Start/finish:Traquair Village Hall car park/car park off A707 past Yair House and junction to Fairnilee.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
HARBOTTLE HILL CIRCULAR WALK
This circular walk climbs Harbottle Hill, giving views across the Cheviots and along Coquet Valley.
From the car park follow the track uphill past the information centre, through the kissing gate and onto the Nature Reserve.
Climb to the summit bearing left to the Drake Stone.
Beyond this is Harbottle Lake.
Follow the path to the near right hand corner of the lake and then bear right, keeping the lake on your left and walk to the fence but do not cross it.
Turn right on the track with the fence on your left.
After entering the wood keep straight on for half a mile.
Keep the line of broken wire fence which descends through the wood to a gate leading onto a broad track.
Turn right onto it and go through a large gate by the army range notices.
Descend to the main road.
Turn left and cross the road bridge.
Turn right at the cottages.
Follow the narrow road across the cattle grids and go uphill to Park House.
Pass the farm buildings on your right.
Go through a gate and continue up a track before reaching another two gates and descending into a wood.
Walk past a cottage and cross the footbridge on your right.
This brings you to Harbottle Castle.
Turn right onto the road through Harbottle village and go straight ahead to the car park.
Recommended by Northumberland National Park.
Northumberland
Distance:approx 4.25 miles.
Time:2 — 3 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey Landranger Sheet 80.
Start/finish:Car park, just over half a mile west of Harbottle village.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
RANNERDALE KNOTTS RIDGE WALK
This is a walk of contrasts, through woodland with a steady climb and a ridge walk to Rannerdale Knotts, providing superb views.
You start by taking the path opposite the Bridge Hotel into Ghyll Wood.
Follow Mill Beck, crossing the footbridge and stiles.
The path continues upstream.
Cross the footbridge and follow the steep zig-zag path up to the wall and the ladder stile.
Keep climbing up the fell side, gradually bearing right to a small cairn at the end of the ridge where several paths meet.
Take the path on the left along the ridge to Rannerdale Knotts.
A very steep paths leads down from the summit.
After descending, bear left onto the grassy bridleway which joins the road.
Turn left onto the road and after a short distance bear left onto a stony track which rejoins the main road further along.
Look out for the kissing gate on your right and go through it on the path heading to the lake which passes through Long How Wood.
Cross the beck by the bridge and turn right, down to the shore of Crummock Water.
The path then skirts woodland at Nether How and returns via Mill Beck to Buttermere car park.
Recommended by the Lake District National Park.
Lake District
Distance:5 miles.
Time:3.5 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey
Outdoor:Leisure Sheet 4.
Start/finish:Buttermere.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
NAVAR TRAIL IN FERMANAGH
Fermanagh is one of the most beautiful counties in Ireland with a stunning variety of wooden glens, lakes and heathlands.
This walk covers around 15 miles of the 560 mile Ulster Way through Fermanagh, beginning at the Roscor Viaduct at the west end of Lower Lough Erne.
Waymarking is with orange or red markers.
From the viaduct follow the road south for half a mile to the main Enniskillen to Belleek road.
Turn left for 300yds then take the road on the right.
After less  than half a mile you arrive at the Whealt.
Continue along the minor road for a mile to rejoin the main coast road, the A46 which has wonderful views across the lough.
After three miles you arrive at Magho where there is a small car park on the right.
Take the track out of the car park and zig zag up to the viewpoint.
The track continues west along the edge of the escarpment before turning left to the first of many little lakes — Parabaun.
The track emerges onto a forestry lane, taking a sharp right and continuing on the lane.
After two miles the track goes left to a path running along Meenameen Lough shore.
West of  Meenameen the route rejoins the forestry road to Lough Navar.
The track crosses the bridge over the Sillees River and then the scenic forest drive to follow a well marked way to Melly's Rock.
The track then descends to join the scenic drive, leaving it almost immediately to follow a path through the forest to a hill overlooking the Glennasheevar road.
On reaching the country road turn left to go along the road for a few yards before taking a right.
The track now heads southwards on a forest road and then heathery paths.
It passes by Largalinny Lough onto the forest lane for a short distance, leaving it to pass through forestry to Lough Fadd.
From here the way continues to join up with the car park at the Doagh road forest entrance.
Recommended by the Northern Ireland Tourist Board.
Northern Ireland
Distance:15 miles.
Time:8 — 9 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey of Northern Ireland 1:50,000 Sheet 17, Lower Lough Erne.
Start/finish: Roscor Viaduct/car park at Doagh  road forest entrance.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
THE MONSAL TRAIL
The Monsal Trail runs along part of the old Midland Railway line in the Peak District National Park.
Route finding is easy, though four tunnels which originally formed part of the railway line have been closed down for safety reasons.
They are bypassed by alternative paths.
People in wheelchairs will be able to used the section of the route running south from Bakewell Station to Coombs Road viaduct and running north to the closed Headstone Tunnel near Great Longstone.
Between Blackwell Mill and Monsal Head the route cuts through the central limestone plateau of the Peak District as it follows the deep valley of the River Wye.
As it runs south of Monsal Head the landscape becomes noticeably gentler.
Passing through Millers Dale station you will see limekilns — commercial kilns built in the 19th and 20th centuries.
The last one closed down in 1944.
Further on you pass Litton mill, a cotton mill notorious for its bad treatment of child workers.
Soon you come to Cressbrook Mill, which dates from 1182, before crossing the Monsal viaduct and on to Bakewell Station and the Coombs Road viaduct.
Recommended by the East Midlands Tourist Board.
Peak District
Distance:8.5 miles.
Time:approx 4 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey Landranger Sheet 119.
Start/finish:Blackwell Mill Junction, three miles east of Buxton/Coombs Viaduct, one mile south-east of Bakewell.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
WALK TO SUMMITS OF CARNEDD LLEWELYN AND CARNEDD DAFYDD
This is an exciting walk in Snowdonia with some short scrambling and spectacular views.
From map coordinate 687602 follow the reservoir road north-east to the bridge over the ditch.
Follow the ditch south-east to the second bridge.
Cross it and follow the faint footpath to the wall (699609).
Pick up the path going north up Y Braich and continue to the summit of Pen yr Helgi Du.
From the summit descend steeply north-west to Bwlch Eryl Farchog.
Continue north-west with short scrambles on the path which skirts the crest of Craig yr Ysfa and continue to the summit of Carnedd Llewelyn.
Go south descending over rocky terrain at first to reach a track heading south-west along a ridge to reach Craig Llugwy spur (678 632).
Continue west to the summit of Carnedd Dafydd.
From here head south-west over a stony plateau, descending slightly to a large cairn.
Follow grass ridge to the summit of Pen yr Ole Wen.
Go east descending a spur on a well used track, with little rock steps to reach the track at Afon Lloer.
Follow this track over a stile heading south.
Descend to meet the footpath going west on the north side of Llyn Ogwen to reach the A5.
Turn left onto the path to each the tea hut at Ogwen (649 603).
Recommended by HF Holidays.
Snowdonia
Distance:9 miles.
Time:approx. 5.5 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey Landranger Sheet 115.
Start/finish:West of Helyg on A5 (687 602) Ogwen Tea Hut (649 603).
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
FFOS-Y-MYNACH ANCIENT TRACK
This five mile walk takes you along the route of the Ffos-y-Mynach (Monk's Dyke), an ancient trackway which links the north and south of the St David's Peninsula in Pembrokeshire.
Park your car on the road verge at map coordinates 777252 near the phone box.
Walk down the narrow road and cross the ladder stile on the left into a field.
A second ladder stile brings you onto the coast path above Ogof y Ffos — the cave of the dyke, best viewed from the coast path.
Retrace your steps along the road and cross over the main St. David's — Haverfordwest road.
On leaving the lane turn left onto one of the ‘Roman roads’(actually these tracks may date back even earlier).
After crossing the stream turn right along the track which passes close to Trepewet Farm.
Cross the main road and take the trackway onto Dowrog Common, a marshy area designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest.
On reaching the road turn right.
Cross the bridge and turn left, taking the path alongside the house and carry on over three stiles to the stream.
Cross it by the stone bridge.
Turn right and walk over the common beside the river.
The route turns away from the Ffos-y-Mynach at Waun Lodi where the path is boggy and dangerous.
Go right along the road, then left beyond Castell and right again up a lane called Feidr Dwr towards Treleidir Farm.
The route goes through Treleidir farmyard, over a stile and towards the hill of Penberi.
From Penberi you can either retrace your steps along the Ffos-y-Mynach and return to the road by Penberi Farm.
Or is it possible to complete a 20 mile circular walk by going along the coast path via St David's Head, St Justinian, Porth Clais and Caerfai.
Recommended by Pembrokeshire Coast National Park.
Pembrokeshire
Distance:5 miles (10 miles return).
Time:approx 3.5 hours one way.
Map:Ordnance Survey Landranger Sheet 157.
Start/finish:two miles east of St David's on main St David's — Haverfordwest road.
(777 252) /Penberi hill.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
PARTRISHOW AND CWMYOY
A hill walk to historic upland sites.
From Five Ways take the Crickhowell road west to cross the Grwyne Fawr river by Pont-yr-Esgob bridge.
Continue up the hill to the fork, at the right hand side of the fork take the field gate and follow the track until you reach a gate in the top corner of a field.
Go half right along the obvious track to the next field boundary.
Once in the field turn left, following the hedge through a gap at the top and make for a stone stile in the top right hand corner.
At the lane turn right, and keep right at a fork to  Partrishow Church.
Take the obvious path at the rear of the churchyard and follow it down until you reach the valley road.
Turn left then take the first right over the stream.
Turn left at the Tabernacle Chapel and climb past the farms of Ty Mawr and Upper House to a mountain gate.
On the open hill keep a drystone wall to the right and reach Dial Garreg on the crest of the hill.
Make a steep descent to the Llanthony Valley following the zig-zag outline of the forestry estate to the left across a forestry track and past Toed-y-rhiw-gou Mill.
Go over a stile and follow the right-hand hedge to the B4423.
Turn left at the road, go down to cross the bridge and turn right for Cwmyoy.
Past the first cottage on the left there's a hairpin bend in the track and a stile on the bank on the right.
Cross the stile and follow the path to join the lane at Cwmyoy.
From St Martin's church bear left past Cwmyoy Farm.
Take the path through the second gate on the right to the footbridge.
Climb to cross the B4423 to reach Coed Farm on the hill.
Bear left on the forestry track to the road below Pen Rhiw.
Cross the road into a green lane following it to the Ffwddog road.
Turn left and return to Five Ways.
Recommended by Brecon Beacons National Park.
Brecon Beacons
Distance:8 miles.
Time:4 — 4.5 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey Landranger Sheet 161 or Outdoor Leisure Sheet 13.
Start/finish:Five Ways, Fforest (4 miles north of Abergavenny) in the Grwyne Fawr Valley.
(285210).
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
THE WORCESTERSHIRE WAY
The Worcestershire Way starts on the sandstone ridge of Kinver Edge and then follows the River Severn from Upper Arley to Bewdley before crossing limestone ridges running north from the Malvern Hills to Malvern.
The walk is waymarked throughout its length with yellow or blue arrows.
From Kingsford Country Park the Way passes Solcum Farm and goes to the village of Drakelow and on to Shatterford.
From here the route heads through Eymore Wood to skirt the bank of the river Severn to Upper Arley.
Follow the western bank of the River Severn through woodland and meadows to Bewdley and on to the village of Ribbesford.
The route then climbs out of the Severn Valley and goes across country to Heightlington.
The next section cross rolling countryside to the strangely named Joan's Hole before heading south-west to climb Abberley Hill.
The route passes Abberley Hall, and head up Walsgrove Hill to reach Shelsley Beauchamp quarry.
The route then follows the spine of Rodge Hill, high above the Teme valley, to the little hamlet of Kingswood Common.
After this it heads up the 600ft Berrow Hill to go on to Berrow Green and then Ankerdine Hill.
It continues through Knightwick and follows the limestone ridge of the Suckley Hills to Longley Green.
From here the route climbs up to Birchwood Common before heading back to Malvern.
A map pack and guide book describing the whole of the Worcestershire Way is available for £2.95 plus 50p postage and packing from Hereford and Worcester County Council Countryside Service.
For details .
Recommended by Hereford and Worcester County Council.
Heart of England
Distance:39 miles.
Time:3 — 4 days.
Map:Ordnance Survey Landranger Sheets 138 and 150.
Start/finish:Kingsford Country Park, Kinver, Staffs/Malvern, Worcs.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
UPTON TO SOUTH WALSHAM
This walk takes you by the River Bure to Upton Dyke and then back along quiet lanes and through woods and fields.
From the car park follow Fleet Lane down to Fleet Dyke which connects South Walsham Broad with the River Bure.
At the bottom of Fleet Dyke the path follows the River Bure.
The marshes round here support many birds, plants and insects.
Look out for lapwing and redshank in particular.
Follow the river until Upton Dyke from where you continue along quiet lanes and through the village of Cargate Green.
Look out for the waymark on your right as you go up the lane following the edge of the Dales which consist mainly of alder and oak woodland.
Carry on through Upton Fen Nature Reserve — an exceptional site for dragonflies including the rare Norfolk aeshna.
Walk on, following the road past Low Farm and along Marsh Road.
Continue until you see a waymark on your right.
The path continues along the edge of the field, through the hole in the hedge and back to the South Walsham Staithe Car Park.
Recommended by the Broads Authority.
Norfolk Broads
Distance:7.5 miles.
Time:3 — 4 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey Landranger Sheet 134.
Start/finish:South Walsham Staithe Car Park.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
AGGLESTONE ROCK, STUDLAND AND OLD HARRY ROCKS
From Swanage this walk goes across country to Agglestone and then on to Old Harry Rocks and around the coast path back to Swanage.
From Prospect Crescent in Swanage turn left then after 150yds turn right into an alley.
Go over a stile and head north-north-west, cross another stile and follow the stream to the road (016802).
From here take the footpath north and then head north-north-east after crossing a concrete stile.
From the next stile turn right and follow the fence on the right to another stile in the corner of the field.
Turn left and head north to a wide track (016809).
Turn left and climb to the right of Ninebarrow Down.
At the gate on your right (002813) take the path going east-north-east to find a path at the east end of the woods.
Go north-east through the woods to meet the Corfe-Studland road.
Turn right and follow the road to a gate on the left (017818).
Go between the fence and the hedge to the golf course and follow the stone markers to Agglestone Rock.
Head north-east then east to enter a small wood.
Turn right over the stream and follow the path and track to a road.
Turn right to get to the path on the left leading to Studland.
From Studland church go south to the modern cross, turn left on the road and you'll come to the Dorset Coast Path.
Follow it around, first to Old Harry Rocks and on to Ballard Down.
When you reach some steps turn left and take the path to the beach.
Turn right and follow the beach to Swanage.
Recommended by HF Holidays.
Dorset
Distance:10.5 miles.
Time:approx 6.5 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey Outdoor Leisure Map Sheet 15.
Start/finish:Swanage.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
WEST BAGBOROUGH AND WILLS NECK
From West Bagborough school walk uphill for 150yds and turn left to the church.
Take the footpath between the hedge and the gravestones to go through a gate and along a grassy path.
This brings you to a barn.
Continue through two gates, heading for just left of the farm on the skyline.
There are obvious paths through the first three fields.
In the fourth where the track to the farm bears right, keep walking on the grass until you reach a gate.
Once through it bear slightly right and uphill to a kissing gate and a lane where you turn right.
Walk 150yds to the start of a wood.
Fork left here and keep to the path closest to the hedge on your left until you reach the Blue Ball Inn at Triscombe.
Go left past the inn then immediately right.
After 50yds fork right onto a track which climbs up Triscombe Combe.
At the end of the woodland on the left there's a gap in the hedge leading to a path which ascends to the main ridge track.
Turn right and walk to a junction of roads and tracks.
Follow the obvious wide track to the summit of Wills Neck.
Once there continue along the wide ridge path until it passes a wood on the right.
Before reaching the gate turn right down a wide track.
This leads to the Rising Sun and down the road to the school.
Recommended by Taunton Deane Borough Council.
Somerset
Distance:5 miles.
Time:approx 2.5 hours.
Map:Ordnance Survey Landranger Sheet 181.
Start/finish:West Bagborough school.
Accommodation:,, Tel:.
OUTDOOR NEWS
COUNTRYSIDE
Traffic will overload country roads
England's countryside is under threat from a massive increase in traffic.
The current volume of vehicles could triple, or even quadruple, over the next 30 years and the bulk of the increase will fall on rural roads rather than urban streets or motorways.
This is the conclusion of a report published by the Countryside Commission and compiled by Oxford University's transport studies unit.
The results are based on current trends and predictions made by the Department of Transport in 1989.
These suggested that from 1988 to 2025 private car use would grow nationally between 82% and 142%.
The unit argues that traffic on motorways and urban roads is unlikely to increase over 50%, so the main impact will fall on rural byways which are not equipped to cope with such a volume of vehicles.
The unit's findings are based on a variety of factors such as: *more travel is likely to be for leisure purposes, with people taking greater advantage of greater access to the countryside *there simply isn't enough space in the cities to accommodate the predicted number of privately owned cars.
The Commission's Director General Michael Dower said ‘The countryside simply cannot accommodate traffic growth of this order.
We believe that everyone will need to use the private car more selectively — possibly cycling or walking for short journeys or using public transport where this is possible.’
BROADS FLICK SWITCH
In a bid to boost environmentally-friendly tourism, the Broads Authority and Eastern Electricity have set up the first of a series of recharging points for electric boats on the northern rivers of the Broads.
The points are aimed at tempting boat operators, who rent out boats for weekly cruises, to switch from diesel to electric boats.
The carrot for operators is that electric boats are much cheaper to run, using one fifth the amount of energy used by a diesel-driven boat of equivalent size.
The advantages for the conservation of the Broads are virtually silent operation, no pollution and a hull design which helps minimise bank erosion.
News from the National Parks
Wheel turns full circle
The massive south wheel at Carew Mill on the Pembrokeshire coast will soon be turning again following the replacement of timber paddles and iron fixtures.
Carew Mill is the only restores tidal mill in Wales and it is hoped it will produce flour again in the future.
In the meantime visitors to the wheel can see a major exhibition on milling through the ages.
Special sites
English Nature have proposed two areas in the Lake District to be designated Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
Winster Wetlands, just south of Windermere, supports many plant communities only found in the Lake District, while Ennerdale Fell to the west of the national park is a good example of how plant communities change with increasing altitude.
The Ennerdale Fell site also includes the steep crags of Pillar, with its unusual plant colonies.
Something in the pipeline
An oil pumping station near Brecon has won an award from the local branch of the Campaign for Rural Wales for good environmental practice.
The pump, part of the pipeline which moves 20,000 tonnes of petroleum products each day from Milford Haven to the industrial Midlands, had been built inside a barn made from local stone with a slate roof.
Mud fights
Mud is being pumped out of the land-locked Alderfen Broad in Norfolk in an attempt to restore a rich water plant community and a healthy fish population.
In common with other Broads, Alderfen has suffered from algal blooms caused by phosphates and nitrate-rich pollution such as sewage and fertilisers.
These pollutants are held in the mud at the bottom of the Broad and must be pumped out to give the Broad a chance to recover.
Traffic trouble
Traffic jams, illegal parking, noise and pollution are the worst side effects of visitors in the North York Moors, according to a survey of residents.
In an average August week over 250,000 people enter the national park.
To help tackle the problem, the park authority is carrying out a research study.
The results will be used to develop transport policies for the future and will be of use to other national parks suffering from similar traffic problems.
Forget the car
Walkers in the North York Moors will find it easier to get into the heart of the countryside in the future — without using their cars.
Thanks are due to an extended Moorsbus service taking people from centres of population to the start of many popular walks.
Tourism Officer Bill Breakell says ‘This is good news, both for visitors and for the environment.
After all, it's a national park, not a car park.’
News supplied by the Council for National Parks
MULTI-ACTIVITY
Up, up and away
Cloudbase Paragliding are offering you a great opportunity to take to the air and raise money for the charity Barnardos.
All you have to do is raise £140 in sponsorship to qualify for a free full day introductory course at one of the club's sites around Bristol.
For details contact  .
Munro bashers
For most people, walking up all of the Munros — Scotland's 277 peaks over 3000ft — during a lifetime is challenge enough.
But not for athletes Andrew Johnston and Rory Gibson, who have set a new record by bagging the whole lot in 51 days and 10 hours.
The duo cycled roads between some of the peaks, and even swam Loch Lomond, but most of the time they were on foot.
At the finish they'd covered around 1,400 miles and climbed 400,000ft — roughly a marathon every day and the height of Everest every four days.
The run hoped to raise £50,000 for the Scottish Cot Death Trust.
CONSERVATION
Helpful holidays
Fancy tracking pandas in China or otter watching in Scotland?
Well now there's the chance to do just that while supporting the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF).
The WWF have teamed up with tour operator Discover the World to offer trips to wild places and conservation projects, with WWF staff and other experts on hand.
A percentage of the income from each trip will go directly towards WWF's conservation projects around the world.
Contact:.
A challenge in a million
A million nature lovers all over the country are being asked to show how much they care for the countryside in an innovative challenge from the RSPB.
The Society are asking people to depict their favourite image of the countryside in a drawing, photograph, painting, cookery recipe or poem.
The Million Image Challenge has been issued to coincide with moves towards agricultural reform, both in the UK and the European Community.
The RSPB are appealing for a demonstration of public support for reforms which will benefit the environment.
The aim is to reach the target of a million contributions by December 11.
The images will then be displayed in Edinburgh during a meeting of the European heads of government.
The best and most thought-provoking images will be published and sold to raise funds for the RSPB campaign for the countryside, to be launched in September.
Postcard-sized images should be sent to the RSPB Million Image Challenge,.
Peregrines persecuted
Human persecution has caused the failure of over 50 peregrine falcon nests in Scotland and Wales this year.
In one of the worst years on record many nests have been robbed or destroyed and adult birds shot or poisoned.
The UK has 25%–30% of the Western European breeding population of peregrine falcons.
Agricultural pesticides had a devastating effect on numbers during the 50s and early 60s but since certain chemicals have been banned the figure has risen to around 1,050 pairs.
The RSPB recently launched a £400,000 appeal in support of a plan to halt the persecution of birds of prey.
The plan calls for stiffer penalties for offences and increased government resources to investigate more incidents.
Dormouse rescue plan
English Nature have launched a plan to boost the numbers of dormice around the country.
The dormouse, once found throughout England, is now close to extinction everywhere except in the south and west of the country.
The plan will involve studying the behaviour of these shy nocturnal creatures which live in the thickest parts of woods.
The results will then be used to help compile a handbook for woodland managers on how to manage their woods in a dormouse-friendly way.
Boots for winners
Congratulations  .
You are the lucky winners of our July competition and will soon be stepping out in style with a pair of great fabric boots from Line 7.
Don't despair if you weren't lucky enough to win this time.
Turn to page 11 for a chance to win some fabulous Adidas gear.
FOOTPATHS
COTSWOLD CONTENDER
Three long distance routes are being investigated by the Countryside Commission as potential National Trails.
The newest suggested route, the Cotswold Way, joins the Pennine Bridleway and Hadrian's Wall as contenders for the benefits brought by National Trail status.
These benefits would include greater publicity and the resulting increase in funding.
Gloucestershire County Council have appointed two Project Officers, Ann Edwards and Tony Jones, to explore the route of the path over the next year.
They will be talking to local people, organisations and authorities and writing a report on the route's suitability for upgrading.
The Cotswold Way runs for 100 miles from Bath in Avon to Chipping Campden in Gloucestershire.
RIDGEWAY TRAIL GUIDE
A free public transport guide to the Ridgeway National Trail should make access to the 85 mile route much easier.
Published by the Countryside Commission, the guide details services along the entire trail running from Overton Hill in Wiltshire to Ivinghoe Beacon in Buckinghamshire.
For a free copy send a large stamped addressed envelope to Jos Joslin, Ridgeway Officer,.
FORBIDDEN BRITAIN
The Ramblers' Association (RA) are planning over 30 events across the country on September 27 as part of Forbidden Britain Day.
The protest walks are aimed at regaining and protecting public rights of access to the countryside.
Blocked footpaths are one of the major problems which the RA wishes to highlight.
They also want to focus media attention on other threats to footpaths such as a luxury golf course development in Oxfordshire and the proposed quarrying of a wood in Nottinghamshire.
Contact: RA .
SCOTTISH NEWS
ANOTHER FINE MESS
Aviemore is being destroyed by overdevelopment, argue the Royal Fine Art Commission.
The Commission are seeking an emergency meeting with Grampian region's planning authority to put this point, and no doubt many hilltrampers will agree with their crew.
Aviemore, the Highland village on the fringe of the Cairngorms, was planned as a tasteful, Alpine-style centre, but garish commercial developments have turned it into a dump.
Attracting 600,000 visitors a year, the village is littered with ugly shop fronts and tacky signs.
Modern developments in the village has meant the loss of many historic buildings.
Aviemore Cottage, built around 1886, was demolished five years ago to make way for a block of flats — some of which have never been sold — while Aviemore House, a posting station on the old stagecoach route from Inverness, was pulled down by a property consortium in the 1960s.
The latest proposal is for a £2.5m superstore on the site of Craiglea, an 11-bedroom turn-of-the-century guest house.
Aviemore is a classic example of how a good idea has gone disastrously wrong because commercial needs have overridden environmental sensitivity.
Hopefully, the meeting will swell opinion in favour of more thought being given to the existing premises and new developments.
SELFISH WALKERS?
I RECENTLY TOOK PART in an access discussion broadcast by the BBC when a landowner quoted a stalker as asking what walkers and mountaineers contributed to the running of an estate.
This view angered me because it seemed to judge everything in purely monetary terms.
Surely the hears, minds and souls of people who love the hills are potent forces for good because they see themselves as guardians of these beautiful places?
But even if we respond to the money question alone, we can find a very real contribution.
 Visitors to an area can help support local accommodation, transport and shops.
And national taxation pays for grants and subsidies to owners and landowners.
Rennie McOwan has been hillwalking in Scotland for over 30 years and is the author of nine books on the outdoors
BAD MOVE
A NEW CATEGORY OF mountain peaks are listed in Alan Dawson's book,The Relative Hills of Britain .
Called ‘Marilyns’, these hills are 500ft higher than their surrounding landscapes.
In my opinion, this idea should be buried at birth.
Munro's Tables have some historical importance, Corbetts (hills over 2500ft in the Lowlands) can also claim to be part of mountaineering history.
But there is a groundswell of opinion, and not before time, that ‘categories’ are becoming far too important.
It has reached a point where some of the guiding agencies report that clients will not go up a hill unless it is in a category.
What a shame.
Our primary motives for climbing a hill should be because it simply looks attractive, or out of botanical, geological or historical interest.
At least Munro, Corbett and Donald are real mountaineering names.
What is the significance of Marilyn other than a cheap giggle?
There is a strong danger of a mountain ‘twitcher’ emerging, who like some bird fanatics finds a tick in the book more important than the joy of climbing the hill.
IN MEMORY
I AM ONE OF MANY mountaineers who owe a great debt of gratitude to international climber and outdoor gear retailer Graham Tiso.
He died in an accident while working on his boat in St Lucia in the West Indies.
Originally from Birmingham, he developed a love affair with the Scottish mountains and moved to Edinburgh in 1961.
Here he opened a climbing gear shop, the first of his chain.
At that time hilltrampers tended to buy their gear from Army & Navy stores because wartime surplus material was still readily available, although not always functionally efficient.
The other Edinburgh alternative for buying gear was the prestigious Jenners shop which was too expensive for most hill gangrels.
Graham's shops coincided with an increasing number of people taking to the hills.
His attention to detail in gear was meticulous and he had a clear understanding of the needs of hill men and women.
Graham was a pioneer rock and winter climber before a broken leg turned him to sailing.
He was also a generous supporter of the Scottish countryside as a trustee of the John Muir Trust.
Graham Tiso was a true outdoor man who will be greatly missed.
MORE MUNROS
MURIEL GRAY is to present a second series of her highly popular The Munros Show , to be shown in the near future.
She will also host six programmes about skiing which are currently in production.
Now Muriel Gray, TV personality, mountaineer and columnist, is not everyone's cup of tea.
She says bluntly what she thinks about landowners, the Royal Family, social injustice and access to the hills.
But life is never dull when she is around.
Her first series on the Munros drew strong reactions from people who either loved her approach or criticised her for including ‘flip’ material.
Personally I think she's great.
It is always a pleasure to come across someone with passionately held views and who truly loved the hills.
Scottish Television should be congratulated on The Munros Show and the new series will be eagerly watched by many.
NORTHERN VIEWS
I HAVE JUST RETURNED from a trip to Norway, a country I find like an exaggerated version of Scotland — bigger mountains, wider moorland, wilder scenery and more extreme temperatures.
And what joy to see miles and miles of natural birch instead of Sitka spruce.
Scotland can learn much from the Norwegians.
They have a more enlightened view on access for a start.
Their four million inhabitants have an automatic right of access to ‘wild land’, with provision made for privacy, disturbance and damage.
If freedom to roam can be protected in Norwegian law, why not in Scottish, where the density of population and general conditions are similar?
We in Scotland are also having an environmental row over the bridge being built from the mainland to the Isle of Skye.
The bridge is an ugly design and tolls will be charged to cross it.
The Norwegians have more sense.
For example, in the city of Tromso within the Arctic Circle, there is one main, attractive and toll-free bridge linking two parts of the city.
LETTERS & QUERIES
CHANGING FACE OF THE LAKES
This month's winning letter comes from Lancastrian-in-exile, Geoff Thompson, who writes from Sweden.
I recently visited my relatives in Morecambe and took the opportunity to do some fell walking in the Lakes.
Things have changed so much since I lived there.
I often used to go fell walking but cannot ever remember seeing the deep ruts caused by walkers that were all around, in some cases up to 12–15in deep.
Another thing which struck me was how people seem to take pleasure in adding to the proportions of the many cairns by tossing a stone onto the mound.
This is needless and removes stones and rocks from their natural location and further damages the environment.
The views are still tremendous in the Lakes, but sitting down to be surrounded by two or three belligerent sheep whose main occupation in life is to steal my cheese and pickle sandwich is about the best way of spoiling a good day out.
I remember when the sheep were quite happy nibbling grass and left me alone to munch my sandwiches.
However times have changed.
Lots of walkers have decided that the poor Berwicks need some extra protein.
Sheep automatically seem to connect people with food, so that they become bothersome and, in some cases I saw, dangerous as they tried butting until harassed walkers gave in and handed over some of their food.
Remember the next time you're on the fells it's up to us — only we can prevent the hills from vanishing, so watch where you're putting your feet.
And please keep your butties to yourself and let the sheep eat grass as nature intended.
I hope your brand new Lowe daysack helps keep your butties safe from those marauding sheep.
MAP AND GUIDE
I would just like to point out to anyone thinking of tackling the Lakeland Fells that a small guidebook alone is not a sufficient aid to path finding.
I make this point after returning from a day's walking near Ullswater when I was approached by a party of walkers who had followed me for some distance thinking that I was headed for the same destination.
When they caught up with me we discovered that they had strayed six miles from their route.
They had no map, just a small guidebook.
Such books are ideal for planning a day's walking but if you stray off the designated route it's almost impossible to find your way back.
These guides should only be used in conjunction with the relevant OS map.
WORLD SUPPORTER
I write as one who did the ‘Climb for the World’ in the Peak District on June 6.
I was sad to learn in Outdoor Action of the disappointment expressed by founder Edwin Drummond on the low turn-out and money raised.
I'm sure one of the main reasons for this was the lack of publicity for the event.
I read five walking/climbing magazines each month, but Outdoor Action was the only one to give details.
I enjoyed this day, felt I had done something worthwhile and was grateful for the generosity of my sponsors who contributed to such worthy cause.
WIN A LOWE DAYSACK Each month the writer of the best letter published wins the super Lowe Alpine Walkabout 25 daysack
HELP FOR DISABLED
I read with interest the article in the August edition of Outdoor Action about access to the countryside for the disabled.
At the Youth Hostel Association (YHA) we fully support any initiative to help improve access to the countryside and have taken this into account in recent developments at our youth hostels.
Our network of 250 hostels includes a number which have been specially equipped for wheelchair access, and most are suitable for people with other special needs.
The YHA would encourage any disabled people keen on exploring the countryside and looking for suitable budget accommodation to get in touch with the YHA.
Details of suitably equipped hostels are provided in the YHA accommodation guide.
Q
I found your article entitled ‘Research Scientist’ most interesting.
I have been a keen bird photographer for almost three years and have spent many holidays walking the same heather-covered ground described in the article.
As yet I have not seen a golden eagle on any of my trips to Argyll, but if I do I would appreciate any tips you could give me for photographing them.
A
Unfortunately the chances of you getting such a shot are highly unlikely.
As the golden eagle is a protected species you prohibited by law from going anywhere near its nest.
Out in the open the bird can fly enormous distances, so even if you spotted one, the chances are it would have flown miles away before you could get your camera ready to shoot.
Perhaps the only way of getting a picture would be to take one in a bird sanctuary.
Q
I am currently planning a backpacking holiday and intend to walk the area to the north-west of Fort William in Scotland.
While I am a very experienced walker in the rest of the UK, I have little experience of Scotland.
However I've been told there is no law of trespass as long as there is due consideration to private property.
Is this correct?
A
Contrary to what is often said, there is a law of trespass in Scotland but it is rather a complex and grey area.
Most Scots believe they have a moral right to walk in wild places provided they are causing no harm and behave appropriately.
This de facto freedom to roam exists in most of Scotland provided that such freedom is accompanied by good countryside manners and respect for the legitimate needs of landowners.
Got any problems?
Something you want to get off your chest?
Anything going on in the outdoors which interests, irritates or simply makes you laugh?
If so I'd like to hear from you.
I'll do my best to answer any questions on the outdoors and to let you have your say, so there's no time to waste — get scribbling now.
Write to me,.
MARKET ROUND UP
BINOCULARS
We turn the spotlight on a wide range of binoculars to help you see more clearly
CHOOSING YOUR BINOCULARS
The magnification and objective diameter are the most important things to consider when choosing a pair of binoculars.
The magnification tells you how much larger an object looks that if it were viewed with the naked eye.
The objective diameter tells you the diameter of the objective (big) lens.
The higher this figure is, the more light it lets into the binoculars, brighter the image it gives.
The magnification and objective diameter are usually spelled out in the name of the model of binoculars — eg: the Acme 8 × 35 Binocular will make things look eight times bigger and have an objective diameter of 35mm.
You may also find it useful to know a binocular's field of view — usually expressed as the width of the area you can see at a distance of 1000m or 3,280ft.
And, if you intend to use the binoculars in darker light, look for a pair with a large pupil.
This is the disc of light you see if you hold the binoculars at arm's length and look through them.
This feature is also useful for keeping things in view when you're on unsteady ground.
LEICA 7 × 42 BA
Design:provides a bright image in low light.
Ideal for use in woodlands and at twilight.
Features:central focusing wheel and dioptre adjustment (allows you to compensate for eyes of different strengths).
Carrying case.
Neck strap.
Size:5.5in × 4.5in Weight:2lb.
Exit pupil:6mm.
Field of view:460ft at 3,280ft.
Price:£649.
Contact:,,.
SIRIUS CLUBMAN 8 × 21
Design:compact, lightweight, general purpose binoculars.
Features:rubber outer with rubber eyecaps — to be bent back by people who wear glasses.
Cord neck strap and case.
Dioptre adjustment on right eye.
Size:3.75. × 2.75in Weight:7.5oz.
Exit pupil:2.6mm.
Field of view:400ft at 3,280ft.
Price:£39.99.
Contact:,,.
PENTAX 8 × 24 UCF
Design:‘Uni barrel Centre Focusing’(UCF) binoculars suitable for outdoor activities such as walking, birdwatching etc.
Features:central focusing wheel and dioptre adjustment.
Glasses-wearers can roll back rubber eye cups.
Neck strap and case.
Size:4in × 3.5in Weight:9.9oz.
Field of view:429ft at 3,280ft.
Exit pupil:3mm.
Price:£69.99.
Contact:,,.
AICO 8 × 21
Design:easy to carry.
Features:Central focusing wheel and dioptre adjustment on right eyepiece.
Suitable for people who wear glasses.
Soft carrying case with wrist strap.
Size:4in × 2.5in Weight:7oz.
Exit pupil:2.6mm.
Field of view:400ft at 3,280ft.
Price:£48.99.
Contact:,,.
VIKING 8 × 21 MINI
Design:for general use in woodlands and at twilight.
Features:Central focusing wheel and dioptre adjustment.
Suitable for people who wear glasses.
Size:4in × 3.25in Weight:10.5oz.
Exit pupil:2.66mm.
Field of view:400ft at 3,280ft.
Price:£58.95.
Contact:,,.
GREENKAT 8 × 25 WATERPROOF
Design:compact model giving sharp, bright images.
Features:waterproof with carrying case and straps.
Size:3.5in × 4in.
Weight:14oz.
Field of view:486ft at 3,280ft.
Price:£125.
Contact:,,.
GEAR TEST
STOVES
Backpackers and other lightweight campers ask a lot of camping stoves.
We want them to be light and compact, yet robust, stable and reliable; simple to operate, yet capable of reasonably fine heat control; economical with fuel, yet able to bring pans to the boil quickly; and despite all these conflicting demands, they must be safe to use in difficult field conditions.
There's a wide range of stoves on the market from cheap to expensive, using a variety of different fuels such as butane, propane and butane mixtures, petrol (or similar), meths and paraffin.
When you're choosing a stove you should bear in mind where and when you'll be using it.
Basic butane picnic stoves are a perfectly safe, reliable and inexpensive choice for mild weather trips.
Butane's cold weather performance can be near useless, however, resulting in the growing use of propane mixes to enhance performance.
Generally reliable cold weather performance makes petrol, white gas or paraffin stoves popular choices with high mountain and winter specialists.
Availability of fuel is another important consideration.
If you intend tackling long trips in remote places, searching for a special fuel or type of gas cartridge can be a fruitless exercise.
Low octane petrol is readily available almost everywhere, while paraffin is widely used in the third world.
Most backpackers end up owning a modest selection of stoves to cover varying conditions.
Paul Traynor puts five very different models to the test.
CAMPING GAZ BLEUET 470 HPZ
Designed for:general backpacking and lightweight camping.
Fuel:the cartridge attachment method means the burner unit may only be used with the Camping Gaz 470 propane/butane mix gas cartridge.
However, Camping Gaz tell us that a small CV270 cartridge is to be introduced holding a little over half the gas of the larger cartridge currently available.
The weights and fuel consumption times given below refer to the larger CV470.
Weight:burner — 11oz (340g); full cartridge — 24oz (660g); total including optional base — 37oz (1,050g).
Setting up/lighting method:the burner is attached directly to the top of the cartridge.
An attachment ring with protruding feet at the base of the burner unit is turned to securely engage the feet inside a ring surrounding the cartridge valve.
Top: the Primus 2246 Super Trekker.
Above: Camping Gaz Bleuet 470 HPZ
Flame control:good — a large control knob ‘clicks’ positively through flame levels from full blast to low summer.
Stability:the large cartridge means the unit is just over 9in high without the pan.
It's stable enough on level ground with the optional plastic stabilising base fitted to the cartridge, but the height makes it a little wobbly on rough ground.
The five pivoting pan supports may be swung together for ease of packing but lock firmly in place to create a pan base about 5.5in in diameter.
Wind shielding:no integral wind shield.
Boiling time:(one litre water) 4 minutes.
Fuel life:the large CV470 cartridge lasted three hours at maximum setting.
Price:£19.95.
CV470 cartridge — £3.90 (the forthcoming CV470 cartridge should cost about £2.15).
Stabiliser base — £3.25.
Paul's verdict:ease of use and good performance in sheltered conditions are this stove's good points — and the propane/butane fuel mix makes it suitable for colder seasons.
At present the unavoidably large cartridge makes life complicated for backpackers trying to limit their fuel load to what is strictly necessary for longer trips.
It also makes the unit awkward and heavy.
The introduction of the smaller cartridge should effectively deal with those criticisms.
One drawback which will remain is the burner's incompatibility with other types of resealable gas canisters.
While Camping Gaz fuel is widely available and UK users should have no difficulty in finding a supply, if you intend heading to more remote parts, even of Europe, it's another story.
Contact:,,.
OPTIMUS 8R HUNTER
Designed for:general backpacking and trekking, including high altitude and cold conditions.
Fuel:white gasolene (such as Coleman fuel) and low-grade petrol, ie two-star petrol or equivalent.
Weight:24oz (675g) empty.
26.5oz (740g) with integral tank filled to the recommended level.
Setting up/lighting method:the stove is supplied in a metal case with integral pan supports.
The fuel tank clips positively into a hinged flap at the front of the case base and when this flap is lowered it pulls the stove assembly forward, positioning the burner unit correctly between the pan supports — a very simple procedure.
The stove must be pre-heated but this is also straightforward.
You squeeze a dollop of special paste into a small cup at the base of the burner and light it.
When this is nearly burnt out, you turn the control key attached to the side of the burned to allow fuel through.
The stove should then light, quickly building up power.
With a little practice lighting becomes a matter of course.
An optional simple minipump (not supplied as standard) which pressurises the fuel tank is easy to operate and improves the stove's performance, so it's a good idea to invest in one.
Flame control:the control key allows quite fine flame adjustment, though you need practice to get this right.
The key is turned to the left for maximum output, but if turned too far the integral cleaning needle engages and may snuff out the flame — you need to be really careful.
If the control key is left attached to the adjustment spindle it rapidly becomes too hot for comfortable handling.
It's best to remove the key as quickly as possible, re-engaging it as necessary.
Stability:the stove's low profile (just 3in high), weight and integral design make it hard to knock over.
Wind shielding:the burner design gives the flame good protection and the case lid's stiff hinges allow it to be propped upright giving some extra protection (assuming the pot does not get in the way).
Boiling time:(one litre water) 11 minutes from cold start.
When using the pump this was reduced to about 10 minutes.
Fuel life:the integral tank gave 45 minutes burning time at full output setting.
It should be noted that Optimus say the tank should only be filled to two-thirds of capacity — a little over a tenth of a litre.
In the field it is difficult to be exact when filling so the burning time of the tank will vary.
Price:£58.95.
Pump £18.45.
Paul's verdict:once I overcame reservations about what appears to be a messy lighting procedure, I warmed to this stove.
In practice getting the thing going is straightforward — though care should be taken to avoid excessive flaring.
It's heavy compared to gas burners, but being able to use low-octane car petrol is a real plus for those heading off the beaten track.
A ‘go-anywhere-anytime’ stove, it's also robustly packed in a metal case which will take some knocking about.
Contact:,,.
MARKILL 808 MINI
Designed for:lightweight backpacking.
Mini size offers stability and compactness.
Fuel:butane or butane/propane gas in any compatibility screwtop resealable cartridges.
Weight:11oz (320g).
Setting up/lighting method:very simple.
The folding legs are swung out for action and the control valve (at the end of 12in flexible tubing is screwed onto the gas cartridge.
The stove is then ready to use.
Flame control:good.
Fuel flow is easily controlled by a knob on top of the cartridge attachment.
Stability:three folding legs and the stove's low profile (the pot sits just 3in above the ground) make it very stable.
The three simple pan supports have raised ends which prevent the pot slipping around.
They extend to hold pot with a maximum diameter of about 7in.
Wind shielding:the burner unit sits inside an all-around windshield offering good protection against moderate breezes.
Boiling time:(one litre water) 6.5 minutes.
Fuel life:a Primus 2207 cartridge lasted 145 minutes full output setting.
Price:£24.95.
Paul's verdict:its simplicity, low profile and good windshield made it a pleasure to use in less than ideal conditions.
Considering its robustness and the all-round windshield, weight is kept low and it packs neatly away into the small bag supplied.
The painted finish on the windshield is charred in places but this doesn't affect its performance.
Contact:,,.
PRIMUS 2246 SUPER TREKKER
Designed for:lightweight, compact backpacking; two/three season use.
Fuel:butane/propane mix.
Weight:burner — 9oz (225g); burner, pans and base — 28oz (800g).
Setting up/lighting method:the burner unit is simply screwed directly onto the gas cartridge to engage the valve and it's ready for use.
Flame control:knob is easy-to-reach and turn with good simmer control.
Stability:the unit is supplied with a separate plastic base with slots for two sizes of cartridge and this considerably improves stability.
Used with the 2207 cartridge the unit stands a little under 7in high.
Wind shielding:there is no integral windshield.
Boiling time:(one litre water): 3.5 minutes.
Fuel life:the 2207 cartridge burned for one hour 38 minutes at full output setting.
Price:£38.50 — includes aluminium pot, lid/frying pan, kettle, pot handle and stuff sack.
Paul's verdict:the burner alone is simple and very efficient in sheltered conditions.
The set — including the stabiliser base — packs completely away into the pot.
Overall it offers an acceptable balance between performance, practically and weight.
The pan set is not the lightest combination available — though I like (and use) a similar combination of pan and kettle.
Having said that, it's a convenient — though quite pricey — way to buy a good quality cooking outfit.
Contact:,,.
COLEMAN PEAK I APEX MODEL 450–700
Designed for:backpacking and lightweight camping; all year use.
Fuel:Coleman fuel/Coleman Peak I fuel (the stove may also be adapted using paraffin by changing the generator unit.
Weight:burner unit — 11oz (310g); empty fuel bottle with valve assembly — 8oz (230g).
Setting up/lighting method:the stove is in two parts — the free-standing burner unit and the fuel bottle (supplied) with screw-top valve, pump and connecting hose assembly.
Once the two are connected, lighting is straightforward.
After the fuel bottle is pressurised using the integral pump, the flame adjuster on the burner is set wide open, the fuel valve on the bottle opened and the stove is lit.
More strokes on the pump stabilise the flame.
This is much easier than it sounds but not without snags.
The instructions warn that if the stove burns with a high yellow flame it should be turned off at the fuel valve and allowed to cool.
The first few times I lit the stove, up popped yellow flames and I turned it off.
With practice I learned that those flames instantly settled down to a proper blue flame.
Flame control:a certain amount of finesse is required to fine tune the heat output.
An over-clumsy turn of the flame adjuster towards the low heat setting can douse the flame.
A quick turn back to high output, however, relights the stove immediately if it's hot and running.
Stability:the unit sits squat and stable, just over 3in high, without using the stabiliser legs supplied with the kit.
Adding these however not only helps stability but also lifts the base clear of the ground making it easier to use the adjuster key.
One of the three legs has a levelling screw which proved helpful on uneven ground.
Wind shielding:the burner is well protected by an all round wind shelter.
Boiling time:(one litre water) 11 minutes from cold.
Once the stove was up and running 9.5 minutes.
Fuel life:the standard fuel bottle filled to the advised two thirds level lasted three hours 38 minutes at the high output setting.
Price:£60 approx — includes fuel bottle, service parts kit and stabiliser legs kit.
Paul's verdict:the stove proved much more manageable than the complicated arrangement of parts first appeared.
The valve assembly — with protruding plastic tubes essential to its operation — looked particularly vulnerable to rough handling.
In practice this assembly spends most is its time housed inside the fuel bottle out of harm's way.
The stove remains quite a complex piece of engineering however and careful handling and maintenance is necessary.
Taking the supplied fuel bottle filled to the recommended level gives sufficient burning time for a trip of up to several days.
With experience the amount of fuel carried could obviously be adjusted depending on what length of trip you're doing.
At the moment the stove runs on Coleman's own fuel which is quite pricey.
The option of using paraffin (by switching generator units) is however, a versatility plus point.
Coleman tell us that an unleaded version of the stove is on its way — a move which will greatly reduce running costs.
Contact:,,.
Top left: Markill 808 Mini.
Above: Optimus 8R Hunter.
Left: Coleman Peak I Apex Model 450–700
TESTING CONDITIONS
The test results for each stove are for guidance only and are not intended for direct comparison.
Time performance of stoves and fuels varies widely depending on temperature, weather conditions — notably wind — and altitude.
In the test the boiling times and fuel-life figures for each stove were taken on a mild summer's day with only a light breeze.
The same two litre aluminium pan was used (uncovered) for all.
If the same stoves were to be tested together on a windy, winter morning, individual results would probably be very different.
The fuel-life figures are intended as only a very rough guide to how long the stoves took to exhaust varied fuel stocks — typical gas cartridge, integral fuel tank etc — while running at full output setting.
Remember though, that just setting the stove to maximum output and leaving it to run doesn't mean that the stove is giving off a constant level of heat throughout the test.
For instance as gas cartridges empty, the heat output tends to fall and they can linger on, burning weaker and exaggerating their effective life in such a simple assessment.
NATURE WATCH
September
Richard Marpole highlights the natural wonders you can see in the countryside this month and described a nature walk in Dartmoor
BEECH TREE
Trees are preparing for winter and their leaves are taking on the beautiful colours of autumn.
In winter the ground becomes cold and the trees are unable to take in the same amount of moisture as they do in summer.
Deciduous trees, like this beech, lose a lot of water through their leaves and so water loss is reduced by shedding them.
The autumn colours come when the green pigment chlorophyll is broken down and re-absorbed into the tree.
The reds and browns come from the carotenoid pigments which then come into their own.
Once all the useful substances have been absorbed back into the tree, the end of the leaf stalk is closed off and the leaf dies and falls.
BLACK-HEADED GULL
The black head of this gull is only apparent during its breeding season from March to August.
In September these birds are changing to their ‘eclipse’ plumage, where the black of the head becomes just a dark spot behind the eye.
Always quick to exploit the habits of humans, the birds follow ploughs, picking up invertebrates brought to the surface of the soil.
Our refuse dumps are important feeding sites for them, and were they were once a rare sight in cities, they are now common.
TROOPING CRUMBLE CAP
A prominent fungus growing on tree stumps or nearby is the trooping crumble cap or fairy's bonnet coprinus disseminatus .
It's a common sight in woodlands at this time of year, sometimes growing in groups of hundreds.
It's a delicate fungus with a pale to dark buff cap and white stem.
You can eat it but it's small with hardly any flesh so it's not worth the effort to collect.
FELLWORT
If the warm weather runs into the autumn, it's worth looking for autumn gentian or felwort gentianella amarella on the chalk hills of southern England.
It can be confusing when you're first trying to identify this plant because some books insist that the flowers have five petals, whereas in fact they can have four.
Some plants even have both four and five petalled flowers on them.
It's a very attractive plant with its many purple flowers, and is an important source of nectar for bumble bees.
RED DEER
The red deer is the largest of our native mammals, measuring up to 48in at the shoulder and weighing as much as 30 stone.
Most of our red deer are feral, having been introduced to or having escaped from deer parks.
However in the Scottish Highlands, the Lake District and Devon, you can still find indigenous red deer.
From mid-September through October it's the rutting season, when stags fight for the right to collect a harem of females to breed with.
AT this time of year the stags can be dangerous, so it's wise to keep well clear of them.
DARTMOOR IN FOCUS
A huge dome of moorland-covered granite, Dartmoor stands in stark contrast to the mild coastal area of South Devon.
While its outer edges are a green landscape of river valleys and downland, the high moorland of Dartmoor can be bleak, with few landmarks except where the underlying granite thrusts through the soil to form tors.
But in this very bleakness lies Dartmoor's beauty.
There are very few roads crossing the moor, and the wildlife remains relatively undisturbed.
It's a wonderful place for the adventurous walker and as the moor is criss-crossed with bridleways it's ideal for horse riders and mountain bikers.
But beware!
Dartmoor mist can blanket everything, and some of the ‘mires’, or bogs can be deep.
Anyone who has read The Hound of the Baskervilles will know what fate is in store for those who wander off into a mire!
But despite the fact that it seems inhospitable, Dartmoor has a long history of use by humans.
This becomes very obvious when you see the many remains on the moor dating from pre-history to more modern times.
There are burial chambers and standing stones from the Bronze Age, Iron Age forts, and tramways from mining and quarrying in the last century.
Clapper or rough stone bridges are also a familiar part of the Dartmoor scenery.
Most are thought to date from the 13th century when packhorses were used to transport goods.
Parts of the moorland — some would say too many — are used as military training areas and are closed to the public at certain times.
Surprisingly though, the wildlife seems to flourish on these ranges, despite the firing of live ammunition.
Don't enter the firing ranges when the red flags are flying — usually from prominent places such as hilltops.
Information on the closure of the military areas is available from the National Park information centres, police stations and post offices.
NATURE WALK ON DARTMOOR
Starting from the car park at Dartmeet, this four mile walk takes you through a contrasting landscape of open moorland, river valley and woodland.
September is a good time to see the lovely heathers on the moor and to see birds like meadow pipit and stonechat.
If there's been a lot of rain this route may not be possible, because the river will be too full for you to cross the stepping stones over the East Dart river at Brimpts norther wood.
Check the level of the river at the Dartmeet car park before setting off.
(Look out for a fine clapper bridge here).
Go out of the car park and turn left, following the road as it climbs up the hill.
This is a steep climb, but there are several things to look at on the way — plenty of excuses to stop and catch your breath!
As you climb, the view  back over the way you've come opens up and the wild moorland and rolling downlands stretch into the distance.
Scattered over the moorland to the left are the remains of hut circles.
These huts had dry stone walls, perhaps three or four feet thick, with thatched heather roofs.
The floor was often dug out by as much as three feet to increase headroom.
Sometimes the doorway would have an entrance passage to protect the people inside from the wind.
This is also a good place to watch for buzzards.
While I was visiting the area, one perched on a small hawthorn tree on the other side of the road and I got quite close to it.
As much a part of the scenery as the granite tors are the Dartmoor ponies, and there are usually quite a few around the hut circles.
These tough animals, who live on the moors year round, were once used extensively in the coal mines.
Remember though that these ponies are wild animals and shouldn't be approached.
After about a mile, where the road forks, take the left fork and after a further 200yds, turn left a crossroads and follow the road which goes across the saddle between two tors.
About a quarter of a mile down this road, off to the right, is a memorial commemorating a tragic death on the hillside.
Take a short diversion to have a look at it.
After a mile, the road passes through a small hamlet.
Carry on for a further third of a mile, then take the signed bridleway on the left.
Keep to the bottom of the small valley rather than following the track which goes off to the left.
After a while, a stream develops on the right which you have to cross by the plank bridge hidden among the trees — watch out because it's easily missed.
Once on the other side turn left to follow the stream to the stepping stones across the East Dart.
Cross the stones then turn left to walk along the river bank.
The thick mixed woodland on your right is a good place to see birds.
There's a lot of movement of bird species at this time of year, so quite a few species may turn up, some quite unexpectedly.
Keep an eye out for tits, treecreepers and possibly woodpeckers.
AT the end of this stretch of woodland, the path leaves the river bank and crosses several fields to Brimpts Farm, where you can get refreshments and cream teas.
Follow the signposts through the farm and onto the drive which you follow to the main road.
The last 400yds pass through woodland.
Turn left onto the main road, go downhill to the car park where the Badger's Holt tearoom serves a welcome cuppa.
Dartmoor is littered with many intriguing historical remains, such as this hut circle above Dartmeet
BUYERS' GUIDE
VANGO VULCAN JACKET
This is a stylish reversible fleece jacket — you can either have the fleece on the outside, with the Sans Compromis logo emblazoned on the back, or reverse it to have the Tactel fabric as the outer.
Whichever way this popover jacket looks distinctive.
Looks are only fabric-deep though and performance is what really counts.
On this level the jacket doesn't disappoint.
The wind resistant Tactel and Ebyl Thermovelours fleece helped keep me snug and warm on the few chilly days we've had this summer.
An when the Tactel's on the outside the jacket is also showerproof.
The baggy cut of the jacket made me look as it I'd eaten one roast dinner too many, however the loose fit gave complete freedom of movement — particularly useful for stretching when scrambling or skiing.
Features include zipped hip pockets on both sides, elasticated cuffs and adjustable waist drawcord.
The jacket is fastened with a zip and studded stormflap.
I found the Vulcan to be a highly versatile jacket — great for hillwalking, spring skiing and everyday use.
Material:Ebyl Thermovelours fleece/Tactel.
Colours:brick/air force, bordeaux/plum.
Sizes:s–xl.
Price:£89.90
Contact:,,.
POUBELLE SHELTER
Design:emergency shelter suitable for three -four people (larger model for seven-eight people also available).
Made from ripstop nylon, each shelter comes in three bright colours so it can be spotted out on the hill.
Two drawcorded vents can be used to increase air flow in the shelter or to pass things in or out.
One vent is even large enough to poke your head through.
The shelter packs down into an attached stuff sack.
Mail order only.
Materials:ripstop nylon.
Colours:wide range of bright/fluorescent colours.
Price:£39 (three-four people).
£59 (seven-eight people).
Contact:,,.
DOUBLE BULB HEADLAMP
Design:head torch with two bulbs for long or short light beams.
Made from lightweight plastic it's ideal for camping or fishing but not really sturdy enough for caving.
A battery pack, taking three 1.5V D-type batteries, can be clipped onto a belt while an adjustable rainbow elastic head-band fixes the torch around your head.
The torch can also stand free, resting on a hinged mount.
Price:£4.75.
Contact:,,.
SPENCO ARCH SUPPORT AND INSOLE
Design:a three quarter length arch support and insole giving underneath padding from the heel of the foot to the base of the toes.
Materials:made by bonding two layers of closed cell Rubatex neoprene, enclosing a firm latex mound at the arch of the foot.
Price:£10.73.
Contact:,,.
MIDGE MASTER
Design:fine mesh nylon ‘veil’ supported by three flexible hoops.
Polycotton hood and vest attached.
Designed to be worn under a jacket to protect face and neck from midges and mosquitoes.
Materials:nylon veil/polycotton rear hood and vest.
Sizes:to fit chest sizes 34–38 or 40–46.
Colours:olive/black.
Price:£38.50 (add £2 p&p for mail order).
Contact:,,.
KARRIMOR BALTORO MOUNTAIN JACKET
TRIED AND TESTED
This comfortable lightweight jacket gives good protection from the elements without feeling like a heavy duty mountain coat.
The free and easy movement of the fabric, particularly around the arms, means the jacket comes into its own when you're climbing and scrambling.
The supple two layer Ferrara Gore-Tex is also hard wearing.
The jacket comes with a two-way front zip protected by a storm flap and fastened with press studs, while an internal front zip allows you to zip in a fleece jacket.
There are two external zipped hip pockets, both with storm flaps, and a map pocket concealed inside the jacket.
I personally prefer an external chest map pocket as you don't have to undo the jacket to get to the map — particularly important when it's blowing a hooley.
There are elasticated adjustable drawcords on the hem, waist and on the hood.
They all fasten exceptionally well.
Inside the jacket there's a mesh liner made from a dry mesh ripstop nylon which although it held a little perspiration, dried quickly.
This well-styled jacket, incorporating Karrimor's now familiar K2 logo, is at the pricey end of the market but has enough winning features to guarantee it'll be popular.
Material:two layer Ferrara Gore-Tex.
Colours:purple, navy, damson.
Sizes:s-xl.
Price:approx £196.
Contact:,,.
ISLANDS IN FOCUS
GOZO
The small hilly island of Gozo, just five miles from its sister island Malta, has a range of great walking routes to choose from.
Donald Brown explores
TOURIST OFFICES
,,.
WHERE TO WALK
Gozo packs seven hills, 14 villages, 6,000 years of history and a network of ancient paths into its still rural 26 square miles.
Tracks follow farmed valleys, link tiny villages, climb low hills and skirt sheer seacliffs.
In a week, you need hardly tread the same way twice.
Base yourself centrally at Rabat (Victoria) or Xaghra.
Then slice the island like a cake, taking a day to explore each segment.
Southward takes in Xlendi harbour, Sannat cliffs and Xewkija.
To the NNE lie Ramla and a cliff path via Ghain Barrani to Marsalforn.
Go south-east to the steepsided narrow inlet of Mgarr ix-Xieni, along the coastal track below Fort Chambray into Mgarr.
Return beneath the Nadur escarpment, past Borg Gharib and Ta' Hamet.
Quiet villages with ornate traditional balconies dot the north-west and you'll find fertile valleys running down to tiny beaches throughout the north-east.
WHEN TO GO
Summers are dry and hot, averaging 78°F in July.
Winters are cool (January average 55°F), although often with bright sun.
December is the wettest month.
April is an ideal time for walking.
Winds can blow up unexpectedly and there may be rain but it doesn't usually last long.
And many walkers like September and October when the sea is still warm and light autumn rains are beginning to restore green to the land.
GETTING THERE
Gozo island lies five miles NW of Malta.
Return flights to Malta cost from £149 to £220 (Gatwick), from £162 to £251 (Manchester), from £161 to  £224 (Bristol).
For details contact: on .
From Luqa airport it's 15 miles to the Gozo ferry at Cirkewwa.
Go by taxi (about LM1 a mile) or on the bus via Valletta.
In 1991 the ferry cost LM1.50 return.
GETTING AROUND
Traffic drives on the left.
Cheap bus services radiate from the capital Rabat (Victoria) to most villages.
The only known public timetable is on the wall of the information kiosk at Rabat bus station.
Most police officers know the bus times.
Taxis (cars of minibuses) are more convenient and cheaper than hired cars.
Available in Rabat or the port Mgarr they will pick you up at pre-arranged prices.
MONEY & PRICES
The Maltese Lira (LM)— universally known as a Pound — is worth around £2 sterling.
Only LM50 can be imported to the islands, but hotels and banks change sterling notes or travellers' cheques.
Food prices are much as in the UK.
There's often a discount on purchases made with sterling notes.
Credit cards are accepted in larger hotels, restaurants and shops.
FOOD & DRINK
As you walk you see the luscious vegetables that figure strongly in Gozitan meals: try soppa ta' l-armla (widow's soup, with vegetables, egg and cheese).
Fenek biz-zalza (casseroled rabbit) is absolutely delicious.
Fish-eaters are spoiled for choice with cuttlefish, octopus, swordfish, pagell or lampuki.
Make a picnic meal with fresh goat's cheese on crusty and chewy Maltese bread.
150 years of British rule left reasonably-priced British meals on most menus.
Italian dishes are common.
Gozitan wine is cheap but just recently has been of variable quality.
Cafés sell it by the tumblerful.
Cisk is a lager-type beer, while Hop Leaf is a pale ale.
A pleasant Maltese soft drink, Kinnie, is faintly fizzy and has an unusual flavour of orange and herbs.
Tapwater is safe by can taste odd.
Bottle water from the island's artesian supply is pleasant to drink and cheap (25c a litre).
WHERE TO STAY
Every coastal village has its hotels, with off-season prices in April.
For a cheap apartment, ask in the nearest bar.
Flights from Gatwick and a week's half-board shared accommodation cost from £264 to £500 for hotels.
If you prefer self-catering, prices start from £230 to £375.
Contact: on .
Sovereign Holidays  and Transair  also organise flights and accommodation.
Camping is not allowed.
WAYMARKING
There is no real need for any — but recently some paths have been waymarked.
MAPS & GUIDES
The only map suitable for walkers is the 1:25,000 Maltese Survey, comparable with the British OS.
Availability is intermittent, try the Rabat Information Office.
The walks guidebook The Landscapes of Malta and Gozo , Sunflower £6.95, has helpful sketch maps.
Try Malta Insight Guide , Harrop £11.95 ;The Blue Guide to Malta and Gozo ,A&C Black £9.95 ;Malta, Gozo and Comino by Brian Dicks, Windrush Island Guide £6.95;Malta and Gozo Travel Guide Harper Collins £3.95.
The above are available, mail order from: The Traveller's Bookshop,,.
ACTIVITIES
Riding, cliff-climbing, cycling, scuba diving (permit needed).
Watersports dominate in summer — equipment and instruction are easily accessible.
GUIDED WALKING
Guided walking holidays on Gozo, with a weekend in Valletta on Malta, are operated by Waymark,,.
In the spring of 1992 ten days cost from £395 to £475 inclusive from UK.
In the autumn a seven night walking holiday in Gozo with no stop in Valletta costs £450.
Ramblers Holidays offer one week in Malta, one in Gozo for £397 to £414.
Contact: Ramblers Holidays,,.
FLORA & FAUNA
Keep an eye out for butterflies (19 breeding species in the Maltese archipelago), bats (14 species recorded), birds (346 species logged, a few breeding, some wintering), snails, wall-lizards, a surprising variety of wild-flowers and the 15 species of trees.
LANGUAGE
Maltese is a Semitic language with hints of Arabic — and imports from English and Italian.
English is widely spoken.
Gozo's capital city has two names, Rabat in Maltese and Victoria in English.
Many place names include a descriptive syllable — marsa (harbour), ghain (spring or well), ramla (sandy), wied (valley), ghar (cave).
Pronounce x as sh, g as j, and gh as h.
Above: looking to Ramla Bay.
Left: the limestone gorge of Wied Hanzira, with the impressive Church at Xewkija in the distance.
Donald Brown discovers the many fascinations of Gozo on a walking holiday along cliff tops awash in history, legends and local charm
Leaving the port of Mgarr, our bright red taxi shot up a hill and the island of Gozo opened out ahead of us.
The horizon was rimmed with flat-topped hills, crested by khaki coloured villages, each crowned by its church.
At the centre of the island and highest of all, the square-cut Citadel rose sheer above the capital, Rabat.
Between the hills, the valleys were still green with springtime crops.
We could see grassy tracks winding through the fields between stone walls and hedges of prickly pear.
Larks sang high above us and cocks crowed below.
From Rabat we walked south to Xlendi.
A strengthening morning sun warmed the bamboo, bananas and lemons of the fertile Lunzjata Valley.
The valley sides steepened into a fjord-like inlet.
Tamarisk trees shaded a narrow strip between the water and a line of shops and cafés.
To the right a white statue of St Andrew watched over fishermen mending their nets, holding the mesh taut between their bare toes.
Behind the fishermen, steps led around the cliff to descend through a grated passage into Carolina's Cave.
The Cave is reputed to have been a secret swimming place used by nuns.
Above the cave we found an overgrown track which soon emerged onto bare rock and led steeply up to the cliff edge.
These inaccessible 470ft sheer cliffs were also the last haunt of the Maltese Falcon — the peregrine.
Throughout the island we found evidence explaining why there are no longer any falcons on the islands.
Nets, cartridge cases and ledges for decoys lay all around — revealing the Mediterranean passion for shooting and trapping birds.
Yet swallows plummeted past and clouds of doves wheeled overhead as we headed west along a cliff-top path round Wardija Point to Dwejra Bay.
On the very corner of the island, looking south towards Africa, we rested in a square cell cut into the rock.
The cell is said to be the remains of an ancient Carthaginian temple.
Far below, Fungus Rock jutted up offshore.
The Knights of St John placed a permanent armed guard on the island in 1744 to protect the shrub-like fungus with rare medicinal value fungus melitensis which once grew there.
Maybe this is the earliest nature reserve on record?
Following fossil layers along the coast, we reached the Inland Sea, a salt-water lagoon landward of the cliffs.
From here, boatmen took us through a dog-leg cave where refracted light gleamed strangely blue in the water.
Bobbing under the sheer cliffs, we passed through the Azure Window, a massive cliff-arch carved out by the sea and weather.
Caves figure strongly in the island's mythology, usually as the palaces of Queen Calypso — the legendary queen of Gozo who once rescued Ulysses.
These caves are also believed to be hermit hide-outs and places of magic.
Eastward from Rabat, we explored the Ggantija temples on the edge of Xaghra plateau.
Their clover-leaf form was shaped nearly 5,000 years ago from massive boulders moved and stacked by muscle power.
Gozitan legend says that a giantess built the temples single-handed, suckling her baby at the same time.
From Ggantija we ambled down to Ramla Bay and then climbed up old terraces.
Here we came to a cave cut into the cliff as a gunport to deter pirate raiders.
The cave frames a striking view across the bay to Marsalforn and beyond.
Inland from the gunport, deserted roads passed field yellow with crown daisies and splashed with purple clover.
Irises, poppies, caper and snapdragon coloured the verges below Judas and carob trees.
We walked along ancient stone irrigation channels down the richly cultivated terraces of San Blas Bay.
Fieldworkers waved to meet us and cursed their barking dogs.
Turning inland again, we paused at Nadur church before returning to the sea at Hondoq.
Our last cliff path led us above the water, west into the setting sun, to Mgarr where we had landed a week earlier.
Every day we had tackled a different walk, each enriched by the gentle Gozitan kindness we net along the way.
Hedges of prickly pear border the cliff paths giving superb views out to a gleaming blue sea
JOURNEY OF A LIFETIME
ADVENTURE PLAYGROUND
High peaks, stunning lakes and wild forests — New Zealand's Nelson Lakes National Park has it all, as Judy Armstrong discovers
Serious foot surgery was taking place on the shores of Lake Rotoiti.
Four raw feet dangled in the icy water; on the bank were four newly broken-in boots.
Our warm-up hike before tackling Mount Robert, in New Zealand's Nelson Lakes National Park, was certainly off to a flying start.
Getting to the launch point, the village of St Arnaud near the tip of the Southern Alps, had long been a logistical triumph.
In the teeth of a true Kiwi southerly we hitched a ride in a four-seater Cessna airplane to a small airfield in Blenheim, at the top of the South Island.
Having hear many stories of friendly locals eager to give lifts to strangers, we stood on the road to St Arnaud and waited.
After about two hours, when one tractor and a bicycle had gone by, we stopped a pedestrian.
He explained that we had made a grave error — it was Saturday afternoon.
All self-respecting citizens were in the pub or watching the rugby, so he suggested we pitch the tent and wait until Monday.
Suddenly, only the second car to be seen on that road all day pulled up.
We soon roared away in a cloud of dust, shoulder to ribcage with the largest man I have ever seen in my life.
We had chosen the Nelson Lakes park as the perfect walker's playground.
It covers 237,216 acres of mountains, lakes, and river valleys, providing varied wildlife habitats.
The area was once covered by a glacier hundreds of feet deep, carving valleys out of rock as it slowly ground its way towards the distant Tasman Sea.
The park was formed to preserve forever the spectacular countryside, lakes and river systems created in the wake of the glacier.
Famed for its hospitality and wildlife, New Zealand is also renowned among campers for the wonderful national parks'  accommodation system — you have the freedom to camp in the middle of nowhere, or you can pay a small sum and use their lodges.
These are basically wooded huts with open fires, sometimes cooking facilities, and outdoor toilets.
We opted for a mixture, on that first night in pouring rain, of camping in the bush and building an enormous log fire in the Kerr Bay hut.
The weather did a typical about-turn the next morning, bald blue sky and ferocious summer sun replacing the grey blanket of yesterday.
We happily planned a day hike as we swam in the long blue lake while butterflies fluttered around us.
A recommended route is to walk down one side of Lake Rotoiti and catch a water-taxi back, a stroll of about seven miles.
We opted for a more strenuous trip, packed out sunhats and set off.
Following the lake shore, through moist native bush and along sandy beaches, we were continually sidetracked by whistling birds, strange tree growths and inviting rivers.
New Zealand plays proud host to an immense variety of indigenous birds, bugs and bits of greenery, and beech-fringed Lake Rotoiti claims its fair share of the offerings.
At 7pm we crawled along the last golden beach, clocked up the 19th mile, and collapsed.
A blister burst, I cursed weakly, peeled off my sock and burst another one.
We discovered the joys of moleskin and the art of walking on our hands and knees.
Main pic: on top of Mount Robert at 4,630ft.
Left: on the Pinchgut track
Next day we checked into the National Park centre in St Arnaud to tell the authorities of our hiking plans.
We wanted to cross the range between Lake Rotoiti and Lake Rotoroa, via the poetically named peaks Mount Robert and Mount Cedric.
A cheerful woman warned that it was an enjoyable walk, if a little steep, rocky and cold, and there were two huts on the way if we ran into trouble.
Navigating along dry forest roads we arrived at the base of Mount Robert.
The Pinchgut Track spiralled above us, 3,000ft of ascent on top of the 1,500ft we had climbed from the lake.
Hauling ourselves up a zig-zagging path, brushing juicy punga ferns aside with our loaded rucksacks, we finally arrived in the Mount Robert winder ski basin.
The scenery changed dramatically above the treeline.
Instead of damp ferns and dripping creepers, the ground was covered with coloured mosses, lichen and rocks.
The track ended at the Relax Hut on top of Mount Robert itself.
From here we were following compass bearings and the occasional pole wedged between rocks to guide skiers.
Cloud swirled up from the valleys, clearing spasmodically to reveal distant peaks, ice-cold lakes and the long ridge in front.
We leapt from rock to rock, trying to synchronise the landing wobble into a launch aid.
After a few hours a rustling noise nearly shocked me off my boulder.
A kea, New Zealand's native parrot, swooped by out of the gloom, its green wings flapping round my head and its curved beak frighteningly close to my face.
We cringed away from it, then realised it wasn't in attack mode and let it follow.
It soon took the lead staying close for an hour, and left shortly before we saw Lake Angelus.
After seven hours of rock hopping and scree climbing we were glad to slide down to the mist-covered mountain lake to pitch our tent.
We had planned an easier second day with some early climbing, then we had decided to follow the contours around and up Mount Cedric, ending with a descent to Lake Rotoroa.
A gentle breeze helped nudge us up the first incline — then the next, and the next, before we reached a tricky scramble round a rocky peak.
Undaunted, we crushed our bodies against the stone and eased ourselves up and over.
Going down would be a breeze after this!
The contour lines on the map were remarkably close together for the final descent but we decided it couldn't be as bad as it looked.
We say Lake Rotoroa several thousand feet below, walked over the lip of a long, smooth slope and were suddenly back among trees.
The ground dropped sharply beneath us as we bounced off the nearest trunk.
For the next two hours we flew from tree to tree, grabbing onto creepers to break the fall to the next ancient branch, to land in a pile of ferns and fall on again faster.
Even the insects couldn't keep up as we shot down Mount Cedric like a beer down the throat of a thirsty All Black rugby player.
We were in a mild state of shock by the time we arrived at the bottom.
Dazed, we wandered along flat ground towards the lake, when we heard the roar of an approaching speedboat.
Conscious that Rotoroa is notorious for its insect and wasp populations, and that tackling the remaining section of path around the lake involved skills more suited to machete-wielding Ecuadorians, we knew what we had to do.
We ran.
Dodging through prickly gorse and clumps of bracken, we hurtled onto the jetty.
Two bespectacled scientists, doing an early season wasp count, were about to head back to the far end of the lake with their analyses of how often the summer visitors would be stung that year.
‘Where've you jokers been?’ asked one of them, as he stared at the bits of tree hanging off us.
Then, ‘Why?!’
Whizzing down the centre of Lake Rotoroa, as beautiful from water level as from the dizzy heights, it took a mere half hour to the park ranger's jetty.
Native bush curled around the top end of the lake.
Trout sent ripples over the silver surface; we cracked up a Steinlager, then joined them.
FACT FILE
Judy Armstrong travelled independently to New Zealand.
Holidays in New Zealand which include walking in the Nelson Lakes National Park can be booked with: New Zealand Travel Information Service,,.
After a tough descent of Mount Cedric, seen here in the distance, calm Lake Rotoroa makes a great rest stop
GEAR GUIDE
Sleeping Bags
There's nothing worse — well, almost nothing — than a sleepless night on the hill.
Our comprehensive guide will help you choose the right bag to guarantee a good night's kip
Buying the right sleeping bag is crucial.
There's nothing worse than setting off on a day's walking after a cold sleepless night when you feel as though you've been trussed up in a straight jacket.
It can also be an expensive business but if you think about your requirements and know your way around the manufacturers' jargon you should be able to avoid any costly mistakes.
SEASON RATINGS
Most manufacturers classify the warmth of their bags by giving them season ratings.
A one season bag is for typical British summer use, when night temperatures are at their highest.
A two season bag will take you from late spring to early autumn, and a three-season bag can be used for all but winter conditions.
Four season bags are for all-year use and five season bags are designed for the kind of extreme cold temperatures you're likely to find on winter expeditions.
Remember that once you start camping above the valley floor, you'll need a higher rated sleeping bag.
And when you're choosing your bag you'll need to take account of what your metabolism is like — whether or not you're a cold or a warm sleeper.
Manufacturers' ratings should therefore only be used as a guide.
INSULATION
The purpose of a sleeping bag is to insulate the body from the cold around it and to prevent heat from escaping.
A good bag does this by protecting the body with a barrier layer of air.
This is trapped between the inner and outer shell with an insulating filling divided into compartments for greater efficiency.
LOFT
The term ‘loft’ is used to describe the ability of the filling to expand within the shell construction to produce the required layer of still air.
Maximum loft is achieved when the bag is fluffed up.
A good filling will retain its resilience and ability to loft for many years.
CONSTRUCTION AND FILLINGS
Down is the best insulator there is in dry conditions.
It's light, breathable, compressible and very resilient, and nothing synthetic can equal its softness and lofting capabilities.
And if treated correctly it has a much longer life than synthetics.
But it's expensive, useless as an insulator when wet and takes a very long time to dry.
Most down-filled bags are constructed with internal walls (boxed, slant-walls or V-baffles — see illustration) which prevent the filling from shifting around and keep your body evenly covered.
The down then insulates efficiently against loss of body heat, at the same time allowing body moisture to wick through.
Top quality bags will have no visible stitching on the shells as they are made with internal seams.
This prevents any stitches becoming snagged and broken causing the filling to shift from its proper place.
Simple quilting or through stitching is only used on cheaper bags which are intended for summer use only.
Polyester fibres are treated in various ways to produce fillings which can trap a great deal of air.
They are bulkier and heavier than down, and don't compress as well.
Because they haven't been on the market for long, it's not possible to say how well they'll stand the test of time.
The synthetics are cheaper than down however and will provide some insulation even when wet.
Most synthetic bags are made using two layer construction with offset stitching (see illustration) to prevent cold spots.
More recent developments have led to some top quality bags being made with a shingle construction, making them lighter and less bulky than two-layer bags.
Along with conventional bags with down or polyester fillings, some are made from fibrepile fabric.
They're available in various weights to suit different temperatures.
The fabric is very warm and comfortable and performs exceptionally well in damp conditions.
It's an excellent under-body insulator and has a long effective life.
The biggest drawbacks are weight and bulk.
However the fibrepile bag can be used in conjunction with a lightweight down or polyester-filled bag to make it warmer.
SHELL MATERIALS
The vast majority of quality sleeping bags are covered in Pertex and other similar fabrics which allow moisture generated by the body to wick through to the outside of the sleeping bag.
Although these materials are made from nylon fibres they have a comfortable feel.
Some manufacturers use  taffeta nylon, cotton, polycotton or viscose for the linings, although these add to the weight of the bag.
Ripstop fabrics are used in some top quality bags; these have a fine grid of stronger fibres running through the fabric, giving extra tear strength without increasing the weight.
ZIPS
Some manufacturers offer the choice of a full length zip or a short side zip and some sleeping bags have no zip at all.
Individuals have different preferences of course, but a full-length zip makes it easier to regulate body temperature.
Many bags are available with left and right hand zips, allowing two to be zipped together.
Some use spiral zips, which are often self-repairing, while other have moulded zips.
There should always be a baffle behind the zip to prevent draughts, but snagging can sometimes be a problem.
Anti-snag tapes are sometimes used, although these are not always infallible.
TOPS AND TAILS
In other words, hoods and feet.
More than 30% of body heat can be lost through your head, so it's important to have a hood on any bag which will be used in cold conditions.
The simplest hoods consist of a curved extension at the top of the bag tightened with a drawcord.
These can be a nuisance, especially in polyester-filled bags, because there's a lot of bulky material bunched around your face.
A better hood, on this type of bag anyway, will be shaped to avoid the extra bulk and give a close fit around the head.
Good quality bags will have a boxed foot so your feet will be cocooned in a hollow ‘cushion’ of warm filling with no cold spots.
When looking at a bag with this design make  sure there's enough room for your feet without compressing the filling.
Ordinary ‘family camping’ bags, made like a quilt with an all-round zip, will have neither hood nor special foot features.
CHOOSING
There's no point buying a bag intended for expedition use if you're going family camping in summer.
Consider the range of temperatures you are likely to encounter on your camping trips, and plan accordingly.
The best shape of bag is tapered or mummy-shaped, and there should be enough room for your body to feel comfortable inside.
Some manufacturers make extra-long bags for taller people.
Rectangular bags are generally only useful for family camping in summer, and will not keep you warm in cold conditions.
If you want to join two bags together to make a double, make sure the zips are compatible.
And of course you also have to consider the depth of your pocket — down bags cost more but are a good investment.
LININGS
A sheet lining will help keep your bag clean, although some folk find them restrictive.
They're worth considering, particularly if you have a down bag, as they can be washed frequently.
Meraklon and fibrepile linings can be used to upgrade a bag in cold weather.
STORAGE AND PACKING
A stuff sack should be used to carry your bag in a rucksack, but stuff sacks are rarely waterproof so always put the whole lot inside a polythene bag.
Storing your bag at home is another matter.
After airing, roll loosely and keep in a large cushion cover or storage bag — not a plastic one though, as condensation can build up inside.
CARE OF SLEEPING BAG
Keep your bag as clean as possible by using a sheet liner, air thoroughly each day and protect from damp.
Bags should never be compressed for storage.
Down bags should be washed with special products, or dry cleaned by a specialist cleaner.
Don't wash a down bag in a washing machine, but by hand in the bath tub.
Polyester bags can be washed in a large machine, or by hand.
Use detergent when washing synthetic bags, as soap can destroy the crimping and cause the bag to lose its loft.
GLOSSARY
Baffle:(1) A padded or filled strip of fabric sewn behind a zip to prevent draughts.
(2) A strip of material sewn down the sides and between the inner and outer shell of a down-filled bag, preventing the down from migrating from top to bottom.
Batt:The term used to describe a sheet of wadding.
Box wall:A method of construction, using ‘boxes’ made by sewing vertical walls between the outer and inner fabric of a sleeping bag to hold the filling in position.
Boxed foot:The foot of the sleeping bag with a square or round end, constructed so that the filling forms a box around the foot.
Dacron Hollofil:Bonded polyester from Dupont, each fibre having a hollow core which traps air and increases warmth value.
Dacron Thermoline:Solid polyester fibres from Dupont, bonded into a thin sheet, giving a high warmth value for less bulk.
Differential Cut:Where the inner lining of a down filled sleeping bag is cut slightly smaller all round than the outer shell, allowing the down to expand or ‘loft’ fully.
Down:The soft plumage of water fowl, minimum weight ratio 85% down, 15% feathers.
Down and Feather:A mixture of the two, minimum weight ratio 51% down, 49% feathers.
Feather and down:a mixture with a minimum weight ratio of 15% down, 85% feathers.
(Note: The above are British Standards definitions.
Continental standards may be determined by volume, and the ratio of down may not be so high.)
GLT:= Goldeck Loft Technology: A special system developed by Goldeck whereby polyester hollow fibres are spirally crimped in a three-dimensional configuration giving a down-like performance.
Gore-Tex:A microporous membrane which is both waterproof and breathable.
It is normally bonded to nylon fabrics when it is used for sleeping bags.
Hollow fibre:Unbranded hollow core bonded polyester.
Isodry:A slimline bonded polyester from Neidhart of Switzerland with a high warmth to thickness ratio.
Loft:The term used to describe the ability of the filling to expand within the confines of the shell construction, thus producing the required layer of still air for insulation.
Meraklon:Double brushed polypropylene fabric which is often used as supplementary liners.
Very light, warm, stretchy and dries very quickly.
Microfine:A tightly woven polyester/ nylon microfibre, used as a lining fabric.
It helps reduce heat loss and dissipates moisture which may accumulate.
Microlight:Polyester microfibre from Jack Wolfskin.
Microtwin:A product developed exclusively for Brett Harris Ltd.
The  world's first layered insulation.
It has the resiliency of Turboloft plated on top of a superfine conventional filling.
(Turboloft is a process that arranges fibres vertically, improving the recovery of the filling.)
Neidhart Wadding:A superfine polyester wadding with a high curl for greater loft, the surface of which is treated for ‘slip’ and softness.
Offset stitching:The method of stitching on bags with more than one layer of filling.
Stitching is ‘offset’ so that there are no cold spots.
Parachute ‘silk’:A very lightweight ripstop Pertex nylon fabric originally designed for parachute canopies, but very light and strong.
Used in conjunction with Neidhart fillings for the Snugpak ‘Softie’ range of sleeping bags.
Pertex:A very fine lightweight nylon made from micro-filament yarns which is downproof, highly wind resistant and allows moisture to escape, giving the fabric a comfortable feel.
Pertex BH:A ripstop Pertex fabric, a further development of Pertex parachute ‘silk’.
Pile Fabric:Synthetic fur.
Instantly warm to the touch.
It is as warm when wet, as it is when dry.
Easily washed and dried.
Very hard wearing.
Polarguard:Continuous filament hollowfibre polyester.
Polyamide:The chemical name for Nylon.
Polyester:Polyester fibres, usually coated with synthetic resin to bond them together in a flat sheet.
Polynosic:100% Polyamide (nylon) Viscose which has a cotton ‘feel’ to it.
Quallofil:Bonded polyester from Dupont, each fibre having a core of four holes instead of a single one, trapping more air and increasing the warmth value.
Some versions of Quallofil have a core of seven holes.
Radial Baffling:A patented design involving a ‘sunburst’ pattern of baffles over the chest area.
Radiant Barrier:A layer of reflective material sewn in with the filling of the bag, designed to keep heat in and cold out.
Random stitching:Some synthetic bags are quilted in a random-stitch pattern, intended to allow the filling to loft more easily.
Reflex:A fabric used on the outer of some sleeping bags.
It is hydrophilic and breathable.
Shaped or tapered foot:The foot of the sleeping bag is shaped to accommodate the feet, but has no round or square insert.
Shingle construction:Small ‘batts’ of polyester fibres are sewn to the outer cover and lining of a bag and are overlaid to eliminate cold spots.
They are sewn in the same manner as the slant walls on down sleeping bags.
Siliconised Hollow fibre:Bonded hollow fibre with a silicone finish to give extra softness and ‘slip’.
Slant wall construction:The walls making the boxes between outer and inner are slanted to give better distribution of filling and avoid cold spots.
Straight foot:The end of the sleeping bag is sewn straight across, or the zip may continue around the bottom of the bag.
Superloft:Continuous filament polyester fibre.
 Taffeta  Nylon:A closely woven lightweight nylon.
Texapore:A waterproof, windproof, microporous, breathable fabric.
Thermoflect:An aluminised reflective barrier fabric, sewn inside some sleeping bags to reflect body heat back to the sleeper, and intended to improve warmth value.
Thinsulate fleece:A heat reflective fleece, mostly used for liners and supplementary bags.
Through-stitched:The stitching passes through all layers of the sleeping bag.
Trilobal:Very lightweight nylon with a shiny finish.
Tyvek:A non-woven aluminised fabric from Dupont, used as a radiant barrier to retain heat in a sleeping bag.
Ultrasoft nylon:A very lightweight and super-soft nylon fabric used for Mountain Equipment's top range of sleeping bags.
V-Baffle:A series of overlapping tubes inside the sleeping bag shell which are filled with down, and sometimes with continuous filament polyester fibre.
Bags made this way are very warm, as more filling can be used.
Versatec:A densely woven fabric made from highly breathable superfine fibres.
Viscose:A synthetic fabric normally made from wood fibres.
OUTDOOR PEOPLE
TRAINEE MOUNTAIN GUIDE
A mountain guide is trained and assessed on five gruelling training courses.
John Cousins has completed three and explains what they're like
‘There are only one hundred mountain guides in the country at the moment, probably because it takes a long time to qualify and the standards are very high.
The courses you need to complete are also expensive — each of the five day courses costs in the region of £350.
But I wanted to do them because they give very good training and will let me work all over the world.
I've now done three of the five stages.
To get accepted on the first training course is difficult enough.
You need a broad level of climbing experience at home and abroad at E1 standard — the first level of extreme climbing.
You need to have done 50 hard winter climbs, climbed some classic routes in the Alps — normally 3,000ft long, and be able to ski at a reasonable parallel level both on an off piste.
I'm 32 and have been climbing seriously for the last 18 years, which helped me  get accepted.
The next stage is summer course.
I did mine last June with 22 others.
Five days of close assessment was a very daunting prospect.
We spent the first day climbing on Anglesey's big sea cliffs to prove that we could climb at an extreme level.
We also had to do a written test.
On the second day we went out climbing again but the assessors — there was one for every two candidates — constantly posed us with problems to find out how we would deal with rescues and emergencies.
We looked at things like how to abseil off a cliff hundreds of feet high, while protecting the person you are guiding at all times.
On the third day we were assessed on our guiding abilities.
Our brief was simply to give our clients a good day out with lots of climbing.
I found this day the most enjoyable because I'm used to dealing with people.
I'm already a mountain instructor and have worked at national centres and as a freelance guide.
I currently work as the Technical Officer for the Mountain Leader Training Board.
For the last two days we went on a two day expedition.
In 24 hours, night-time included, we were expected to climb on five different cliffs in three different ranges.
And we had to wear boots rather than rock climbing shoes.
We also had to do a navigation test.
I was one of 15 who got through to the third stage which is a five day winter course.
I did mine in the Cairngorms in March.
We had to climb a classic route on Ben Nevis and our ice axe braking, step cutting and navigation skills were all tested.
We also spent two days guiding clients with the instructors assessing us.
I got through to become an ‘aspirant guide’.
This means I can now go on to the fourth stage, a five day course in the Alps, before working for 30 days alongside a qualified guide as a kind of apprentice.
The last stage is yet another five day training course, this time working in ski mountaineering, followed by another 20 days working alongside a guide.
By this point people are usually very capable and confident and it's unusual for them to fail.
It's difficult to make a living as a guide in the UK.
Most guides work independently, taking clients climbing wherever they want to go.
Others work at outdoor centres, particularly the two national mountain centres, Plas y Brenin and Glenmore Lodge.
Some guides use their climbing and rope skills to work on oil rigs or construction sites.
Others train police and service people.
I'm not sure what I'll do when I finish.
I would like to guide and work in New Zealand or Canada.