

WHAT'S ON
OCTOBER
WEATHER WATCH
We often enjoy a good spell in Britain at the start of October but then autumn rainstorms usually take over.
Plan for shorter days and lower temperatures, with the west wetter than the rest — but there's always hope for an Indian Summer.
Best bets for good walking weather are southern Europe, the Balkans and the eastern Mediterranean.
A few showers restore the green to west Mediterranean islands, and the sea's still warm enough for swimming.
Enjoy autumn colours through Europe's high mountains from Spain's Picos de Europa to the Carpathians.
Expect frosty nights, foggy dawns, and snow on the Alpine passes.
Highs and lows
Optimistic folklorists forecast ‘St Luke's little summer’ around the saint's day on the 18th.
London's hottest recorded October day hit 28.9°C/84°F in 1921.
Ten years later, Lincolnshire was lashed by over seven inches of rain in five hours.
And in 1959, Suffolk welcomed the end of a 57 day drought.
A gale in October 1987 devastated south-east England, killing 19 people and felling millions of trees.
Wind gusted to 99mph at Gatwick.
Twice in previous centuries tornadoes have destroyed churches — at Widecombe, Devon in 1638 and St Mary-le-Bow, London in 1091.
OCTOBER AVERAGES
EVENTS
4 Walk for the Forests of the World, Sponsored walks throughout the country organised by WWF to save our forests.
Choose where and how far you want to walk.
For details and sponsorship forms contact: Walk Hotline 
WELCOME
I'd like to introduce more initials into Eurospeak.
There simply aren't enough with EEC, MEP, ERM, CAP, IGC, WEU — and we don't even know what half of them mean.
So here's my offering to the cause of European détente — GBFH, better known as Great Backpacking Found Here.
Many people are put off by the thought of heading abroad to backpack, but with a bit of careful planning, it's within anyone's reach.
Read Paul Traynor's article on page 6 to find out if GBFH will catch on.
Elsewhere in the issue we've got plenty of wonderful walks, tropical tests, fun features, a cracking competition and an exclusive interview with perhaps the most famous mountaineer ever, Sir Edmund Hillary.
Enjoy your Outdoor Action!
WALK FOR FORESTS OF THE WORLD
Walk for the Forests of the World with the WWF on October 4
WALKING IN EUROPE
EUROTREKS
Europe — we've talked about it, we've read about it, so why not get out and explore it?
Paul Traynor gets to grips with the real issues — where to walk, what to see and when to go.
It's a lot easier than you might think
Main picture: away from it all in the Dolomites.
Above: the Tour du Mont Blanc.
Pictures by Paul Traynor
Paul Traynor is a freelance journalist with 25 years experience of walking and backpacking at home and abroad
There can be few backpackers who haven't gazed dreamily at pictures of Europe's great mountain ranges and wistfully thought ‘That's for me!’
In practice though only a minority actually take the plunge and turn armchair fantasy into reality.
Many people are just plain scared off by the amount of organising a walking trip abroad suggests, not to mention the travel, the awesome scale of the mountains by British standards, and even the language barrier.
The truth is it's never been easier to pack your sack and experience at first hand the sensational scenery and classic challenges across the Channel.
Any number of things can stir your interest in a particular area — a magazine article, a TV programme, a friend's enthusiasm, you name it.
But how do you get from ‘I fancy the Pyrenees’ to the mountain themselves?
Whether you're planning a long backpacking trip or a succession of short excursions, having a clear idea of what you want to accomplish is the surest way to get the most for your time and money.
Digging out information on Europe's better known mountains is straight-forward these days.
Reliable walking guidebooks cover many of the most popular continental routes.
A book covering the area you're interested in will tell you about the terrain and give you an idea as to whether or not your walking companions will be physically able to tackle the route(s).
And there's more to this than questions of individual fitness.
Are there technical difficulties which would bother any members of the group — things like scrambling sections or exposed ridges?
The superb high-level walks in the Italian Dolomites, for example, often involve steep, exposed climbs, traverses and descents, aided by fixed cables and ladders.
Even experienced mountain walkers take to them with varying degrees of enthusiasm — so you should consider if that sort of thing will be to the taste of everyone in your group.
If even one person is hesitant on tricky sections it will, at the very least, slow the whole group down.
And one person involved is unlikely to have a good time.
Time is the next factor to consider.
Most of us have to ration our holidays pretty carefully — two weeks is the average break most people can manage.
Is your holiday realistically long enough for you to get to and from your chosen area as well as complete the walk?
Miscalculation can land you in difficulties.
On some walks, like the Corsican High Level Route for instance, cutting the route short is time is running out is by no means easy.
You may be able to abandon the high mountains and find a small roadhead village but getting from there to the airport is likely to be an adventure in itself.
In Britain we're never very far from roads, phones, taxis, buses and trains, allowing plans to be  changed pretty painlessly.
In somewhere like the Pyrenees the nearest civilisation may be a no-horse hamlet two day's walk away.
And some walks are more accessible than others.
If your days off are limited this could be a deciding factor in where you go.
What of the route itself?
A healthy dose of realism does no harm here.
We all have a tendency towards over-optimism when assessing how far and fast we'll travel.
It's far better to err on the side of caution and be surprised than to be forced into a head-down gallop to stay on schedule.
Most UK walkers take a little while to adjust to the scale of high mountain routes.
Summer heat too, can take its toll.
If your holiday plan is so tightly organised that it allows for no days off, and no travel delays, it's time to think again.
How you intend to tackle the route is another important factor.
Most continental high mountain areas are well served by networks of mountain huts and refuges, usually offering dormitory accommodation.
In the busier areas these are often large, bustling places serving food and drink.
Like most British national trails, many continental distance routes assume that walkers are travelling light and seeking a roof over their heads each night.
Some people love the atmosphere of refuges; others, myself included, would rather give them a miss.
Although usually quite reasonable priced, the cost of using them tots up to a considerable amount over several days.
Expense, though, is not what turns me off.
I never sleep well in dormitories and all their hustle and bustle jars after a day's walking.
They do have considerable advantages though, and it's worth giving them a try to see if they suit you.
If they do, it might pay to look into joining an Alpine club — membership usually brings a discount on charges.
Find out more information about continental Alpine clubs from the British Mountaineering Council..
I prefer the flexibility and independence of backpacking with a tent, but with that freedom comes the penalty of carrying the extra weight.
Progress is inevitably slower and more tiring and a bulky pack may make difficult terrain even more demanding, sometimes dangerously so.
And remember that times given for stages in guidebooks and on mountain path signposts are estimates for typical, more lightly equipped walkers.
Backpackers must make adjustments — quite easy to do with a few days' walking under your belt, not so simple when your planning trips in your living room.
Again, it pays to give yourself plenty of leeway.
Once you've decided on a route and how your going to tackle it, the last factor in the equation is when to go.
The time of year can effect all the above calculations.
Frequency of flights and availability of public transport and accommodation may alter, daylight hours change and, more crucially, conditions on the route may vary greatly.
Mountain weather is notoriously difficult to predict, but trends can be fairly accurately identified.
You'll need to know when snow should cease to be a problem and when it's likely to reappear.
Some months are wetter than others and thunderstorms may be more common at particular times of year.
If your holiday dates are pre-set then set great care should be taken to ensure you're adequately equipped for the worst of possible conditions.
A heavy snowfall can transform an easy walk into a serious proposition in just a matter of hours.
I've been seriously caught out more than once on early ambitious trips — the ice axe which nearly stayed at home was worth its weight in gold.
If snowfall — or lingering snow on high passes — is even a remote possibility, take an axe and other appropriate gear.
Backpackers faced with an already heavy load should resist taking a gamble on the weather — it's far better to adjust your plans to suit your load and the condition than risk a one-way ticket.
The key to success in heading abroad is getting these first planning basics right.
The odd detail, however, can prove an embarrassment.
On a trip to the Dolomites a few years ago, four of us brought three different stoves between us rashly thinking we had all angles covered.
More fool us. 'TWAS not to be.
One old petrol stove clogged up and failed to work at all.
One ultra-lightweight model broke.
The other used special gas cartridges which Italian shopkeepers thought quaint but didn't stock.
We ended up buying a cheap gas picnic stove for which cartridges were sold everywhere — and luckily it did us proud.
Make sure your gear is in good condition and that stove fuel is available in your chosen area — you can't take it with you on planes.
Tour du Mont Blanc
The route:the complex massif of Mont Blanc, Western Europe's highest mountain at 14,664ft, straddles the borders of France, Switzerland and Italy.
The Tour du Mont Blanc is a high altitude rollercoaster route on a grand scale involving long ascents, high passes (some over 8,000ft) and equally long descents, as it picks its way through the seven main valleys — and three countries — which surround the massif.
Most walkers use the famous Chamonix Valley as a base, starting the circuit at Les Houches.
The variations to the official route suggested by Andrew Harper in his guidebook (see below) are recommended.
Distance/time:71 miles taking 10–12 days.
When to go:July to September.
Snow may linger as late as mid-July.
August is peak French holiday time.
For these reasons a September trip is a popular choice.
Foot notes:this is a cracking circuit which should be within the capacities of any reasonably fit walker.
The scenery is spectacular throughout and, other than the possibility of snowfields lingering on the high passes, there are no technical difficulties or dangers on generally good paths.
Carrying an ice axe is, however, a wise precaution.
Most walkers use the good choice of refuges, hotels and gîtes — though booking ahead is not easy and you're committed to reaching a bed each night.
The flexibility of backpacking has a lot to recommend it and there are loads of pitching possibilities, often in sensational situations.
Backpackers should make sure they're in good shape, though, as the scale of  the climbs and descents can come as a shock to UK walkers.
A final tip — be sure to take plenty of cash in the three currencies you'll need.
Corsican High Level Route
The route:a hard traverse of the rugged mountains of the French Island of Corsica which lies north of Sardinia about 50 miles of the coast of Italy.
The mountains rise to 8,875ft and although the well-waymarked route avoids the peaks, it nevertheless more than lives up to its name.
Staying almost wholly above the 3,000ft contour, the highest point of the walk is 7,245ft.
The route is conveniently divided almost in half by the Vizzavona Pass, a railway halt and important staging post and supply point for walkers.
The most scenic and demanding half of the walk is to the north of the pass, through the southern section is no pushover.
The terrain is very rough in places, often requiring easy scrambling in fairly exposed situations.
One section in the north — crossing the Cirque de la Solitude — would be a modest rock climb without the fixed cables and chains.
The lack of supply points on the route adds to the difficulties of the walk.
Distance/time:110 miles taking 13–15 days.
When to go:June to mid-October.
Snow may linger on the high passes as late as June.
July and August are the most popular months for continental walkers to visit the island, but the summer sun is fierce.
It's best to go later in the season.
Foot notes:a superb expedition on an atmospheric island, this is a route for experienced, confident and fit walkers.
Quite apart from the strenuous nature of the walking, planning presents problems.
Not many people will complete the route in fewer than 12 days, so trying to fit the walk into a two-week holiday is pushing your luck — you must make allowances for delays and for time spent on the island getting to and from the start and finish.
There is a chain of mountain huts placed at roughly day-stage intervals but these do not offer meals.
You should carry supplies for several days at a time.
Backpacking the route also offers security against not reaching a hut.
Litter problems and a high fire risk have led to a crackdown on wild camping along the route, though camping and bivvying near huts is permitted.
The official guide starts the walk at Calenzana in the north and ends it at Conca, and most walkers tackle it that way.
Many walkers, particularly Brits, prefer to start in the south, reaching the more spectacular northern half when acclimatised.
If time is tight the central rail halt at Vizzavona allows walkers to take on either half of the route.
Pyrenean Traverse GR10
The route:a complete crossing of the French Pyrenees from Hendaye-Plage on the Atlantic to Banyuls-Sur-Mer on the Mediterranean.
The GR10 stays entirely in France, avoiding the mountaineering difficulties of the Pyrenean High Route which, hugging the lofty frontier ridges, frequently strays into Spain.
There are many variants on both these best-known traverses, and a number of sections may be shared.
The Gr10 is well signposted and waymarked, following tracks and country roads as well as paths, and reasonably fit walkers should have no difficulties.
Accommodation is readily available in the villages and small towns on the way and in remoter areas thee is a good network of refuges and gîtes.
Backpacking the route is quite feasible and buying provisions shouldn't be a problem.
Distance/time:400 miles taking seven/eight weeks.
When to go:summer and autumn.
Weather varies markedly from one part of the Pyrenees to another.
Spring can be wet, especially in the Basque country, and snow may fall in the high mountains even in July.
Thunderstorms are common in August.
In the eastern Pyrenees the high summer temperature can be oppressive.
To tackle the whole route therefore, requires careful timing.
Generally speaking, a late season start, extending into October, is a good bet.
Foot notes:this classic walk offers varied and consistently rewarding scenery.
Few people will be able to complete the route in one go, but luckily it is accessible by public transport at a number of staging points, so it can be split into chunks more manageable in a fortnight's holiday.
The central section between Lescun and Luchon offers the finest walking and great possibilities for varying the route.
FACT FILE
Maps
Insurance
Mountain rescue and medical treatment arrangements vary from country to country and walkers may be liable to pay all or a portion of costs.
These could run into thousands of pounds is a helicopter is involved.
Walkers are therefore advised to take out suitable insurance cover.
Companies specialising in this area include:.
GEAR TEST
Winter SLEEPING BAGS
It ain't cool to be cold when you're trying to catch some kip after an energetic day's walking.
Dave Weatherley strips off in the line of duty to put seven seriously warm bags to the test.
With a decent sleeping bag, a night under canvas in even the bleakest of winters is cosy and restful.
But let's face it, the sleeping bag that did you proud on those hot summer nights in Italy, and got you through the night on the floor after the party, isn't exactly going to be your best friend when the temperature drops below freezing.
A good 4–5 season sleeping bag is a must for anyone who doesn't throw in the towel the minute October dawns.
Here eight sleeping bags have been put to the test, judged according to their performance and quality of construction.
Necessarily, Dave Weatherley tested the bags in less then freezing conditions.
So to compensate he slept in them all stark naked, without even a tent to reduce the windchill.
SLEEPING BAG TIPS
Never keep the bag in the stuff sack at home.
Hang it up in a wardrobe, lay it flat on a spare bed or roll it very loosely.
Check all zips and drawstrings are running smoothly before you set off camping.
It's no good finding things broken on a cold night.
If the bag gets wet, dry it immediately — mould will soon grow if left too long.
Wash your bag occasionally.
Clean down bags with specialist products in a bath; synthetic bags in a large machine or by hand with detergent.
MOUNTAIN EQUIPMENT VOYAGER 3
Warmth rating:4–5 season.
Performance and comfort:this is an extremely warm bag.
It's large and bulky — you certainly know you're inside.
Drawcords at the waist and shoulders to close in to give a more snug fit — a novel and effective touch.
Construction:insulation is very good as there's no through stitching in this bag — where the insulation layer is sewn onto the outer or inner fabric.
Filling:double layer of thermal-bonded twin fibre.
This filling gives a high level of insulation and offers good internal stability.
It maintains and holds its loft extremely well.
Materials:both inner and outer are lightweight Taffeta nylon.
This has a nice soft feel to it.
Hood:a good fitting cowl-shaped hood with a drawcord that pulls it in well, giving a snug fit around the head.
Zips:the zip pulls up well from the inside and is prevented from snagging the fabric by webbing running along the full length of the zip.
It also has a good zip baffle with Velcro fixings on its side.
Left or right hand zips are available.
Measurements:weight 3lb 13oz, length 7ft 4in, packed size 18in × 11in.
Price:£90.
Dave's verdict:this is a well put together bag which offers great value for money.
The voyager 3 is an excellent winter sleeping bag that will keep you warm in very low temperatures.
Contact:Mountain Equipment,.
VANGO ICARUS 190
Warmth rating:4 season.
Performance and comfort:this is a good all-season bag with a high loft capacity and good insulation.
It's comfortable and not too restrictive and the box foot gives ample room for your feet to move around freely.
Construction:shingle construction — sections of fibre are sewn to the outer and liner and overlaid to eliminate any cold spots.
This is an expensive but effective method of construction for synthetic bags.
Filling:Polarguard — a soft insulation fibre giving excellent loft to the bag.
Materials:the inner is made from a comfortable microweave nylon fabric and the outer from  Taffeta nylon.
Hood:a well-shaped hood gives maximum head cover when the hood is drawn in tightly.
Just inside the bag is a  shoulder baffle for extra warmth.
Zips:the two-way zip is well protected inside with a baffle and has anti-snag webbing along its full length.
This worked very well indeed.
Left or right hand side zip available.
Measurements:weight 4lb 10oz, length 7ft 6in, packed size 16.5in × 9.5in.
Price:£99.
Dave's verdict:Vango's top of the range bag is a winner.
I particularly liked how small it packs down when compressed in a stuff sack.
Contact:Vango (Scotland) ltd,.
Dave Weatherley has been involved in the outdoors all his life.
He is a qualified mountain leader and runs an activity centre in the lakes.
SNUGGLEDOWN AJUNGILAK KOMPAKT
Warmth rating:4 season.
Performance and comfort:if you prefer bags with lots of room to move, then this may not be for you.
It's exceptionally comfortable and cosy inside but was the closest fitting bag on test.
However it did warm up very quickly.
Construction:this double layered offset stitched bag is constructed in such a way to prevent any cold spots.
Filling:Du Pont's new Quallofil 7 insulation has seven ‘air trapping’ channels in each fibre unit, giving the bag good insulation and a low weight.
Materials:both the inner and outer are ‘treated’ Pertex which improves the fabric's water resistant qualities.
Hood:the well-shaped cowled hood gives a good fit and the free running drawcord closes it down very small.
Zips:a strong two-way zip runs very freely — a series of pleated stitching close to each side of the zip preventing any loose fabric catching.
Left and right hand zip available.
Measurements:weight 3lb 6oz, length 6ft 4in. packed size 13.5in × 9in.
Price:£99.95.
Dave's verdict:Kompakt by name compact by nature.
This is great for the space conscious backpacker — for a four season synthetic bag it packs down extremely small.
Contact:Snuggledown of Norway (UK) Ltd,.
From left: bags from Brett Harris, Vango, Kozi-Tec, Snuggledown, Mountain Equipment and Outbound
OUTBOUND EMBER
Warmth rating:3–4 season.
Performance and comfort:a comfortable bag with a cotton liner which warms up very quickly.
It's not a highly technical sleeping bag as the price reflects, but will give you a good night sleep at temperatures down to the zero degree mark.
A good sized box foot gives ample room for your feet.
Construction:the bag has a double layer construction, offset stitched.
Filling:Hollofibre insulation.
The warmth of this bag comes from its insulations and construction as there is very little loft to trap warm air.
Materials:the outer is made in Taffeta nylon with a polycotton inner.
Hood:a generous hood which unfortunately bunched up when pulled in by the drawcord.
However, there is a good shoulder baffle with a free running drawcord which pulls in well.
Zips:there is a good-sized zip baffle but the zip did tend to catch at times when pulling  from the inside.
Right or left hand zips available.
Measurements:weight 4lb 12oz, length 7ft 2in, packed size 18in × 11in.
Price:£38
Dave's verdict:a low cost budget sleeping bag which is suitable for a range of varied conditions.
However I wouldn't stretch its limits too far when temperatures fall below zero.
Contact:Cobles,
SNUGPAK SOFTY 12 OSPREY
Warmth rating:4 season.
Performance and comfort:with Softy filling and Pertex inner fabric this is an extremely cosy bag.
It has good insulation and feels very much like a down bag.
The Osprey is well made and packs down small and so is good for all-season backpacking.
Construction:the Softy 12 uses a double off-set quilted layer pattern
Filling:this bag uses Softy filling — a quilting with down-like qualities and a soft pliable feel.
Materials:Pertex inner with Snugpak's own Paratex outer fabric.
Hood:a well fitting shaped hood which closes down effectively.
The drawcord runs freely.
It also has a neck baffle for extra warmth.
Zips:the full-length, two-way zip is free running and didn't catch on the side wall.
This is due to stiff webbing running along the full length of the zip.
Left or right hand zip available.
Measurements:weight 4lb, length 7ft 9in, packed size 16in × 8.5in.
Price:£85.
Dave's verdict:this well constructed, comfortable sleeping bag is well suited to all year use in colder temperatures.
And at £85 it offers great value for money.
Contact:Brett Harris Ltd,.
RAB ATLAS 1000
Warmth rating:4 season.
Performance and comfort:luxury, pure luxury.
The moment you climb inside this soft and extremely comfortable bag you start to warm up.
The 1000 grammes of duck down used as filling is good for all year British use.
Construction:the box wall construction holds a certain amount of filling in each box evenly throughout the bag.
Filling:duck down.
This is cheaper than pure goose down but like all down bags maintains superb loft capacity.
Materials:both the inner and outer are Pertex 4 fabric.
Hood:a well-shaped hood which closes down well for a snug fit.
The shoulder baffle is easy to adjust and comfortable.
Zips:a double zip which is smooth running with an inner draught baffle.
However, the fabric caught a couple of times.
Measurements:weight 3 lb 12 oz, length 7ft 6in, packed size 15.75in × 1.5in.
Price:£150.
Dave's verdict:the Atlas is a completely new bag and we at Outdoor Action were the first to test it.
It's well put together and retails at a competitive price for a four season bag.
Contact:Rab Down Equipment,.
KOZI-TEC 500
Warmth rating:3–4 season.
Performance and comfort:this mummy shaped bag uses cotton and nylon fabrics which are comfortable and warm enough for all year round use.
Construction:a double layer construction using offset quilting helps to minimise cold spots.
Filling:Hollowfibre insulation gives the bag good loft.
Materials:the outer shell is made from proofed nylon and the lining from cotton giving just that little extra comfort.
Hood:the hood is big but closes down well when the drawcord is pulled in to give a comfortable fit around the head.
Zips:the full length zip is protected inside with a zip baffle.
You can also zip the bag to another Kozi-tec model to create a double sleeping bag.
Left or right hand zip available.
Measurements:weight 4lb 12oz, length 7ft 2in, packed size 18in × 11in.
Price:£40.
Dave's verdict:if you're looking for a reasonably priced bag for general camping the Kozi-tec 500 may be just what you're looking for as it's warm and comfortable with plenty of room to move inside.
Its relatively large packed size makes it a bit cumbersome for backpacking though.
Contact:I & M Steiner Ltd  .
TECHNICAL TERMS
Loft:this is the ability of the filling to expand within the shell construction to trap the required still air to keep you warm and cosy.
Maximum loft is achieved when the bag is fluffed up.
Boxed foot:the end of a sleeping bag with a square or round inset to allow room for the feet.
BUYING YOUR SLEEPING BAG
When you buy a sleeping bag test it out in the shop — put it on the floor, get inside and get the feel of it.
Never buy a sleeping bag without first finding out whether or not all the drawcords can be pulled from the inside and the zip can be pulled freely from inside too.
Make sure you feel comfortable in the bag — that it's long enough and wide enough for you.
Of course you will need to buy a bag that's warm enough for your purposes.
Sleeping bags all have season ratings — from one to five — taking you from hot summer nights to high mountain winter camps.
The warmth rating a bag gets is due to its filling/insulation; construction — the way the filling is organised in the bag — and the level of ‘loft’ it is capable of — how well the filling can expand within the shell to trap air for insulation.
Down bags are usually more expensive than synthetic models but the weight to warmth ratio tends to be better and down bag can be packed very small.
However modern synthetic fillings are much less bulky and heavy than you may remember if you haven't looked at sleeping bags for a while.
WALKING IN WALES
POWER POINT
Wicked winds whip across the wild expanses of the Gower Peninsula.
Beryl Pyecroft finds walking there an electrifying experience.
Threecliff Bay — one of the highlights on the coast path west of Mumbles.
Picture by Derek Forss
Rocky shores and magnificent beaches give way to some of the finest cliffs in the country — not a bad borderline for the 90 square miles of rich fertile countryside which is the Gower Peninsular.
It won't surprise you to hear that I'm not the first to recognise the beauty of this region of South Wales — it was officially recognised in 1956 when it was designated as the very first Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty in Britain.
Known as the lung of Swansea, the boot-shaped peninsula points a toe up the Bristol Channel towards the Atlantic.
Fresh of the ocean, the wind is bracing or literally breathtaking, depending on how hard it's blowing.
On our walk we certainly felt it.
From The Mumbles, where urban Swansea gives way to rural Gower, a footpath follows the south coast to the most westerly point of the peninsula, Worms Head.
Sheltered by the land, we walked and explored the sandy coves and bays along the way, watching with fascination as the tide, with a truly frightening speed, engulfed the beautiful beach at Threecliff Bay.
But the main aim of our visit to the Gower was to walk from Port Eynon to Rhosili, where, we were assured, the best of the scenery was yet to come.
By the time we had driven to Port Eynon, the wind had really picked up but not easily deterred, we abandoned the car and set off towards the cliffs.
Passing the youth hostel, we climbed through gorse and bracken to Port Eynon Point.
Here it was well worth the buffeted just for the views.
Across the Bristol Channel we could see over to the cliffs of North Devon, while off to the west Carmarthen Bay and the Pembrokeshire coast stretched out into the distance.
From Port Eynon the limestone cliffs extend for five or six miles to Worms Head.
Constantly challenged by the turbulent sea, the cliffs tilt backwards to the land, pointing their flat, green topped rock layers to the sky.
They're a mile from the nearest road and accessible only by foot, unless of course you're one of the thousands of seabirds wheeling and jostling for a place on the rocky ledges.
Aeons ago, prehistoric  animals roamed these parts and hid in the Paviland Caves below the cliffs.
Their bones have been found here along with the headless skeleton of a young prehistoric palaeolithic man from before 12,000BC.
The skeleton was originally thought to be female and was called the ‘Red Lady of Paviland’ because the bones had been dyed with the red ochre of a ritual burial.
Our path dropped down to the relative calm of the sea shore, edging craggy inlets beneath overhanging cliff tops.
Then it began climbing again to give wonderful views over the tilting layers of rock and lush green land behind us.
Leaving the grassland behind, the terrain became more barren with cliffs and rocks tumbling down into the sea.
The path rose and fell over headlands and round inlets.
Impressively blackened rocks loomed large, their outer edges darkly green against the frothy white-capped waves.
After one more headland we joined the official high level route to go round the edge of a deep gully.
Inland, the rich red of the plough fields glowed in the sunshine.
Below us, a dangerously narrow path still followed the rocky shoreline.
The path seemed to be washed away in places, so better safe than sorry, we decided to stay on the upper path.
Besides, from this path we could see right across the meadows to a clutch of villages nestling beneath the highest point on the Gower, the rounded silhouette of Rhosili Down (632ft).
This area is one of three National Nature Reserves on the Gower — there are also 21 Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
One look at the dramatic bays and steep-sided cracks in the rock cloaked in shrubs and plants shows why.
After the upheaval of rocks and land, the coast becomes quieter at Mewslade Bay.
Here you can safely get back to the lower path to meander round coves of sparkling sandy beaches.
This is the last stretch of south-facing land before Worms Head.
This elongated, rocky finger, which gets its name from the ancient word for dragon, is said to resemble the creature at rest.
Personally, I thought it looked more like an earthworm!
Rounding the mysteriously named ‘Kitchen Corner’, all thoughts of worms and dragons were blown away, not only be the wind but more by magnificent sweep of Rhosili Bay.
This is the Gower's west coast, the inverted ‘toe of the boot’— a glorious three mile crescent of golden sand backed by the gentle, green contours of the downs.
Open to the full force of Atlantic weather, layer upon layer of white-edged surf rolls up to the beach.
Many a ship has come to grief along this shore, including one in the 19th century carrying the dowry of Catherine of Braganza, Queen of Charles II.
The silver dollars washed ashore provoked a local ‘silver rush’.
We witnessed a ‘rush’ of another kind.
Battered and windblown as we were, we had to laugh when a coachload of tourists spilled out and hurried to the cliff-top.
Within seconds they had click-clicked with their cameras and, having ‘done’ Rhosili, disappeared off into the tea room.
I must admit, we joined them a few moments later for a well-earned cuppa after our day's exertions.
The view from a coach is better than no view at all I suppose, but I know which way we preferred to arrive at Rhosili.
Constantly challenged by the turbulent sea, the cliffs tilt backwards towards the land, pointing their flat green-topped rock layers to the sky
On the western end of Gower Peninsula, Rhosili Bay makes a dramatic end to the coastal walk from Port Eynon.
Picture by Derek Forss
CYCLING IN THE N YORK MOORS
PEDAL dash
Judy Armstrong makes a quick escape from the everyday hustle and bustle for a weekend fun-filled mountain biking in the rugged North York Moors.
Phew!
Time to give the old legs a rest on a steep descent into the beautiful Farndale Valley
You could spend weeks pedalling up and over the North York Moors, but if you've only got a weekend to spare, then the Rosedale area is without doubt the place to go.
Bridlepaths and tracks are shared happily with walkers; footpaths are, of course, off limits to bikers.
The geographic centre of the North York Moors National Park is the pretty village of Rosedale Abbey.
It's the main settlement in one of the most beautiful dales in North Yorkshire — a well wooded narrow valley running north and south for about eight miles.
It's the perfect base for a weekend of off-road excitement with numerous campsites, bed and breakfasts and excellent pubs (the White Horse Farm Hotel is famous for its filled Yorkshire Puddings).
And from the valley there is a choice of easy forest trails or serious climbs to the rigg tops.
Our idea was to arrive on a Friday night, eat far too much at one of the local pubs, and build up our strength for a full day's riding on Saturday.
After a hard week locked inside a stuffy building, a serious lung-opener was called for.
Setting off from Rosedale village centre (the bakery there does a rather stunning line in apricot and mincemeat slices), we headed up towards the infamous Chimney Bank (a one in three climb, used for the British National Hillclimb Championships).
Thankfully we peeled off opposite the White Horse Farm Hotel, just before our muscles gave up on us.
The narrow road towards Thorgill ducked and dived under the lip of Thorgill Crag, with a splendid view of the old Rosedale Railway — a 19th century standard gauge railway built to transport the valley's mineral wealth over the moors to Middlesbrough.
The railway line is currently uncategorised by the National Park and so is, sadly, officially out of bounds to both bikers and walkers.
Our road ended abruptly at a cluster of cottages with names like Moor Head and Little Gill.
It became a rough bridleway, leading through a series of gates onto the lower reaches of moorland.
We bore right at the first gate — the left track leads up to a farmhouse — and later, along a grassy track with pine forest on the left, right again, where a dry stone wall creates a Y-junction.
The fields here were fringed with rowan trees, their bright red berries clashing horribly with the purple heather of late summer.
White thistle heads floated up my nose as I struggled to keep up with Duncan, his suspension forks making light work of the ruts and bumps on the ground.
The track — optimistically marked on the map as Daleside Road — edged through a final gate and onto the road.
We turned left, took a deep breath, and changed down to the very smallest chaining.
The road banked upwards, through Moorlands Farm (following the dirt track towards a five bar gate, between two farmhouses).
And up and up and up…my pedal rotations became ever slower until a dreadful realisation dawned on me.
It would be quicker walking.
The long haul up to Blakey Rigg was actually quite entertaining.
A glorious red butterfly with sapphire blue eyes on its wingtips fluttered and curtsied in front of me, moorland sheep scuttled reluctantly off the track as I ploughed towards them and a group of walkers cursed as they struggled up the bank.
Once you got to the top, you have a stunning view and a choice.
Turning right will take you to the Lion Inn at Blakey — one of the highest pubs in the land, perched on a windswept ridge and surrounded by Standing Stones.
Instead, we turned left and then right, down Blakey Bank to Farndale.
Freewheeling down this long, windy road can be especially exhilarating because emergency action is often needed to dodge the tractors that chug around the hedge-blind corners.
Our descent ended in delightful Farndale, at the Feversham Arms to be precise.
Here we ate a huge lunchtime bar meal in the garden, overlooking the dale and its daffodil fields.
Relaxed and complacent, we headed our way out of the pub and down to a dip — then straight up a ferocious bank turning right at a junction in the road, signposted to Dale End.
Immediately after a semi-derelict farmhouse we turned left through a gate and headed straight up a stony track to Rudland Rigg.
‘YON BASTARD CLIMB’
This is known to the locals as ‘Yon Bastard Climb’.
A deeply rutted track, it crunches its way up to Monket House Crags, skips over a V in the skyline, and up some more.
It finally eases off on the very top of Rudland Rigg, a majestic shoulder of land running north to south, with views right across the moors.
At the top, the path joins with Westside Road, a track which runs the length of the Rigg for 16 miles.
We turned left onto it, through an undulating sea of purple heather up to Golden Heights.
Cruising along the crest, we could see almost as far as the coast to one side and over Bilsdale mast to the Cleveland Hills on the other.
After dropping 100m in about 4.5 miles, a sneaky left hand turn (just after you come to some dry stone walls) led us down a long rough track to the Low Mill — Gillamoor road.
The smooth descent was bliss followed immediately be a left turn onto Lowna Road and a lung-crushing climb up to Hutton-le-Hole.
This pretty village is one of the Moors' ‘honeypots’.
Seething with tourists all year round, it still manages to retain a remarkable degree of charm.
One major attraction for the weary mountain bike rider is the large expanse of grass where you can collapse with an enormous ice-cream from the village shop.
Wicked but by that time we felt we deserved it.
From there we turned right to ride up the hill towards Lastingham, over the bottom of the wild moor that backs on to Rosedale.
This is, I think, one of the nicest villages in the North York Moors, not least because the Blacksmith's Arms sells possibly the finest pint of Bass bitter in the country.
Passing the Blacksmith's Arms, we followed the road to the left, then turned left up a hill past the Lastingham Grange.
The road fizzled out at a gate plastered with fire hazard warnings, leading onto the moor itself.
I gritted my teeth and hung on for the climb up to Ana's Cross on the peak of Spaunton Moor.
Ana's Cross is visible for miles, and is thought to be on a ley line with Young Ralph's Cross at Blakey.
We met a group of walkers at the top, who cheered as we raced for the cross.
You're supposed to touch the cross for luck; we fell on it to make doubly sure of ours.
During the day we had shared a track with several bands of people — dog walkers, long-distance backpackers, ramblers and day walkers.
We all shared small talk of the ‘Isn't it a wonderful day!’ nature and several people stopped us to check directions.
The tales of Mountain Biker Attacks Rambler are certainly a far cry from the friendliness we met with in this area.
And these moors are used heavily by walkers and bikers alike.
Dissuading some of the smallest walkers from clinging to our pedals, we moved on from Ana's Cross, to the road down Chimney Bank back to Rosedale Abbey.
As we flew down around hairpin bends, I thanked Fate we weren't doing the day's route in reverse!
Later we stretched out on the long benches of the White Horse Farm, comparing our bruises and recounting our 30-mile epic.
Mountain biking is wonderful — you're on top of the world while you're pedalling and even higher when you've finished.
HILLARY INTERVIEW
MAN OF THE MOUNTAINS
Sir Edmund Hillary has spent much of his life, and a great deal of the determination that took him to the top of Everest, raising funds to help the Sherpa People of the Nepalese Himalaya.
Henry Druce meets the great man himself.
Climbers don't come more famous than Sir Edmund Hillary.
Most people have heard of him — the first to climb Everest, which he did with Tenzing Norgay in 1953.
I felt I was climbing a mountain of my own as I made my way to the interview battling on my bike against the fierce London traffic to meet Sir Edmund at a plush hotel next to Harrods in Knightsbridge.
Although I hadn't met him before, like many would-be adventurers I'd read a lot about his life and experiences.
Hillary became obsessed with climbing mountains as a young lad in his native New Zealand and would go to extraordinary physical lengths to pursue his hobby.
Some of his feats make him sound like the Bionic Man.
When he was in the air force he once spent the weekend cycling uphill for 11 hours against the wind, before climbing for an hour to reach a mountain hut.
The following day he climbed 8,500ft before cycling back to his air base.
Hillary climbed pretty much every mountain worth climbing in New Zealand.
He made a successful first ascent of the south ridge of his country's highest mountain, Mount Cook, before getting a taste of the European Alps in 1950.
His increasing climbing experience plus his renowned strength and stamina made him an obvious choice for the first New Zealand expedition to the Himalaya in 1951.
Hillary didn't actually manage to reach the summit of Makut Parbat which was his main objective, but the expedition gave him invaluable experience.
More importantly it brought the team to the attention of Eric Shipton, the leader of the British expedition  group planning an attempt on Everest.
(Shipton was the leader eventually replaced by Colonel John Hunt).
Hillary's lucky number came up and he was one of the two members from the New Zealand team chosen to join an expedition which was to give him his place in the history books.
In his autobiography Nothing Venture Nothing Win Hillary describes the moment in 1953 when they became the first people ever to reach the top of Everest.
‘Tenzing and I shook hands and then Tenzing threw his arms around my shoulders.
It was a great moment.’
Hillary was catapulted to stardom and his life has never been the same since.
His new status made it much easier to raise money for expeditions and so satisfy his quest for adventure.
He went on several more expeditions to the Himalaya and was involved in a race to the south pole.
A major turning point in his Hillary's life came in 1961 when he founded the Himalayan Trust to help improve conditions for the Sherpa people and protect the environment in which they live and we love to trek.
Since the Trust was founded Hillary has spent much of his life touring around the world raising money, always with the same enthusiasm that once took him to the top of Everest.
And it's a fundraising trip which brings 74-year-old Hillary to London and the ever-so-English surroundings of the Basil Street Hotel.
He epitomises the polite, friendly grandfather figure, all six foot three of him greeting me with a firm handshake.
His once trim body has fallen victim to one fundraising lunch too many but he still looks very much the explorer with his classic square jaw and steely blue eyes.
He's here to specifically to publicise a new book,Sagarmatha .
It's crammed full of stunning photographs capturing the grandeur of the Nepalese Himalaya and the vibrant culture of the Sherpa people who inhabit the area.
All the photographs were contributed free by some of the world's best mountain photographers, keen to support the aim of the book — raising cash to build the Thyangboche Monastery which was burnt down on January 19, 1989.
The Sherpas raised $50,000 and Hillary's fundraising efforts have already boosted that sum by a further $400,000.
He is hoping the sale of the book will help reach the total $500,000 needed to complete the restoration work.
As we drank our tea Hillary told me that the monastery — a well known landmark to anyone who has trekked in the region — is worth restoring because it is the focus of the Sherpa's spiritual world.
In his softly spoken New Zealand accent he says ‘It's the biggest and the most influential monastery in the area and is very much regarded as a religious and cultural centre for the local people.
I flew into the monastery by helicopter just a couple of days after the fire and it was still smouldering.
It was obvious that the Sherpas and monks were tremendously distressed and they turned to me and said Thyangboche must rise again.’
This reflects what Hillary says has always been the aim of the Himalayan Trust — to achieve what local people want.
And his unceasing efforts to achieve that aim are easily seen.
Over the last 30 years the Trust has helped build 26 village schools, two hospitals and 12 medical centres.
The first school he helped build at Khumjung in 1961 started with 40 pupils and one teacher — it now has 400 pupils and 17 teachers.
Hillary is aware that some of his efforts to help the Sherpas and their environment have led to threats from the pressures of tourism.
The airport at Lukla, which Hillary helped to build in 1964 to fly in materials to build a hospital, has since become the most important mountain airfield in Nepal catering for vast numbers of trekkers and mountaineers.
One major problem has been the pressure on the Sherpas to cut down trees for firewood for tourists — previously tree felling had been strictly regulated.
‘During our Everest expedition in 1953 we had vast quantities of firewood at base camp and never thought about the problems, but environmental consciousness has grown enormously over the last 30 years or so.’
Hillary was a strong supporter of the campaign to make the region around Everest a national park so that restrictions to curb the firewood problem would be introduced.
Sagarmatha National Park was born in 1976 and has since been declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.
But national park designation has not solved all the problems.
Although there are now strict regulations governing wood cutting and kerosene is sold at the entrance of the park for cooking, Hillary explains ‘Lots of people tempt the Sherpas offering money for wooden fires.’
The 300,000 annual visitors to Nepal have also brought with them another problem — litter.
Hillary says ‘Climbing expeditions tend to leave all their junk high up on the mountain.
Once they've completed their trip all they want to do is head off back home and they simply don't devote the time, energy and money on clearing up.
This is especially true on Everest which is the highest rubbish heap in the world.’
Hillary is more generous towards trekkers whose behaviour, he argues, has improved.
Since Nepal's borders were opened in the 1950s Hillary has noticed how attitudes among the Sherpas has changed.
Inevitably the introduction of money into their economy has made them more materialistic, and they're not quite as open with tourists as they once were.
There have been an awful lot of people though who've taken for granted the right to go into a Sherpa house and abuse Sherpa hospitality.
Sometimes I've been drinking tea with a Sherpa friend of mine in the village of Kundy and there'll be a clatter up the stairs caused by a dozen people saying ‘We understand Hillary's here’, as if that gives them the right to charge in and take over.’
But the influx of tourists and the money they've pumped into the economy has had big advantages.
The standard of living has definitely improved — many of the Sherpa houses now have windows and chimneys.
In fact the general health of the Sherpa people has improved so much that they're experiencing a population explosion and so need more arable land at the expense of forests.
Hillary believes that family planning and afforestation are the major challenges for the Trust in the future.
It takes a very special person to dedicate so much of his life to helping others when he could have just milked the lecture circuit for his own gain.
But with typical modesty Hillary says ‘Working with the Sherpas and other people in Nepal is worthwhile, but we don't suffer particularly, because we enjoy it.’
I felt very humbled as I left the conqueror of Everest and the Sherpa's most vocal mouthpiece still sipping his tea.
Previous page: Main pic: Taweche, Khumbu, Nepal.
Pic: John Cleare.
Inset: Hillary at work in Nepal.
Pic: Chris Brasher
During our Everest expedition in 1953 we had vast quantities of firewood at base camp and never once thought about the environmental problems
WILDLIFE PHOTOGRAPHY
WELL caught!
Walking offers wonderful opportunities to get close to wildlife.
Wendy Newing suggests plenty of practical tips to help you capture the perfect shot
Photographing wildlife sounds easy — have your camera at the ready when you're out walking and click away when you spot something.
Most people will have such shots in their collection — the dark blob in the middle is a yeti, honest!— but with the right tools and a little practice you can get some brilliant results.
The right tool for this trade is the 35mm single lens reflex camera (SLR) with a decent zoom lens.
Serious wildlife photographers go for super long lenses (250mm–600mm) which are relatively heavy and need to be supported by a sturdy tripod.
Obviously for us walkers weight is all important so a good compromise is a telephoto lens with a range up to 300mm — the Sigma 75mm–300mm lens for example weighs an easily manageable 22.6oz.
The many automatic SLRs on the market make it that much easier to capture wildlife when you're on the hoof.
The aim and shoot features allow you to forget the technicalities and concentrate on composing the picture.
Autofocus does have draw-backs though — when an animal is in foliage the camera may focus on the undergrowth and not the animal.
In these cases its best to use manual focus.
Whatever type of camera you use, for hand-held wildlife shots the camera speed should never be set at less than  second.
At this speed ‘camera shake’, which causes the image to become blurred, is minimised.
Long telephoto lenses limit your depth of field — the distance between the nearest and furthest objects which will appear in sharp focus in the picture — so precise focusing is crucial.
Getting close
Sunset and sunrise are particularly good times to capture mammals and birds on film.
At these times they're often near water or close to their nests and dens.
To boost your chances of a close encounter move quietly through the countryside and wear clothing which isn't noticeably lighter or darker than the surroundings.
A broad-brimmed hat in summer or a dark woollen hat in winter helps keep sunlight from lightning up your face.
Movement, scent and sound can give you away when you're heading in for a close up shot.
In most animals the senses are more keenly developed than in humans.
For example owls and other predatory birds such as buzzards have binocular vision and acute hearing although they have a poor sense of smell.
On the other hand all mammals have a good sense of smell and those with big moveable ears such as rabbits and deer have excellent hearing.
Unless they are hunters, like cats, their eyesight is often the least developed of the senses but they still quickly detect movement.
It's best to approach an animal with the wind blowing into your face so they can't pick up your scent.
Avoid dry leaves, twigs, puddles and mud as any noise will act as an alarm signal to the animal.
If you do snap a twig then freeze and wait for several minutes before continuing.
Most animals react to a short sudden noise by focusing all their senses to find the source.
They don't take flight immediately as they could be heading straight into the lion's mouth, so to speak.
If they don't hear anything else then they'll regard it as a false alarm.
Adopt a smooth noiseless walk with oodles of patience and you'll be surprised at your own success.
Top left: to get decent photos of smaller animals you need to be well concealed.
This buzzard was photographed in Dartmoor with a car used as a hide.
Bottom left: a 90mm macro lens was used to get close up with a flash to counter poor light.
A small aperture, f16, helped give good overall sharpness.
Left: the hare was captured on film with a 300mm f2.8 lens mounted on a monopod.
The camera was set to auto programme so the photographer only had to concentrate on focusing.
This helps to avoid twisting an ankle when stalking these animals on the rocky terrain they favour.
Photos by Richard Marpole.
COASTAL WALKING
EDGE WAYS
Fuelled by clotted cream teas Neil Harris walks part of the South West Way and feasts on the spectacular coastal scenery
Leaning back in a creaky old chair in a Padstow café, faced with yet another cream tea was the perfect way to round off a fabulous week's backpacking on part of the South West Coast Path.
The 50 mile walk from Morwenstow just north of Bude to Padstow takes in some of Britain's most breathtaking coastal scenery.
The Atlantic Ocean's pounding of the north Cornish coastline has eroded the sandstone and slate into a panorama of headlands, coves, cliffs and beaches.
Walking is quite strenuous in parts, with streams carving deep valleys into the rocks.
But with the effort comes the reward — great views of rugged cliffs and thunderous Atlantic waves.
From Morwenstow, a well marked and well trodden path winds along the cliff edge, past Higher and Lower Sharpnose Point where government satellite receiving dishes look like monstrous props from a 1960s science fiction film.
On a clear day you can see them from 20 miles away at Port Isaac.
As you approach Bude the crowds increase, but once you're one or two miles away from the main centre the numbers quickly drop off.
The walk southwards brings you to Widemouth Bay, a large expanse of golden sands.
At Millook the cliff rocks are made of sandstone and shale layers which have been folded over millions of years into zigzag patterns.
At Dizzard Point the path runs through a last remnant of coastal oak woodland.
Trees and hedges have been deformed by the fierce salt spray and strong sea winds during winter.
At Crackington Haven, flanked by the soaring cliffs of Cambeak and Pencannow Point, Atlantic rollers crash in on the tide.
Past The Stranglers there is a steady climb to High Cliff.
At 743ft it's the highest point of the walk.
The path leads to Boscastle with its natural harbour — the only secure one on the rugged coastline between Padstow and Bude.
Boats have to negotiate a narrow winding channel between high slate walls to reach it.
From Boscastle the path dips sharply down to Rocky Valley.
For those with energy to spare, another path runs up Rocky Valley to the Bronze Age labyrinth — its rock carvings are 3,500 years old.
Further up the Valley is Trevillet Mill which serves clotted cream teas — just the thing to prepare you for the two to three mile trek to Tintagel.
The walking here is very gentle.
As you approach Tintagel the headland fortress is the first visible landmark.
King Arthur, so the story goes was born at Tintagel Castle and raised there by Merlin the magician.
The town has some lovely old buildings and museums as well as the usual tourist shops.
From Tintagel the coast follows a gentle sweep to Port Isaac, about nine miles away.
This is quite an energetic section of the walk with steep slopes covered in beautiful maritime heaths.
You've got a good chance of seeing the rarer migrant butterflies here, as well as buzzards, kestrels, and even a hobby or peregrine falcon.
I found this part of the walk the most satisfying, both for the scenery and nature.
Two miles or so past Tintagel the path drops down to Trebawith Strand.
Here the Atlantic waves, funnelled into the shore by the surrounding cliffs, crash over huge boulders which have been left stranded on the beach by millions of years of erosion.
Just offshore Gull Rock makes this point a scenic gem.
Port Isaac nestles above its small harbour.
This beautiful little fishing town is packed full of narrow winding cobbled streets and colourful terraced houses.
The path follows the road out of Port Isaac and at the top it's worth glancing back for a final look at this fascinating place.
Moving on past Varley and Kellen Head, the path drops down into Portquin.
With the town of Polzeath in sight the path hugs the coast all the way around Pentire Point — the beach at Hayle Bay marks the start of the town.
If you carry on through New Polzeath, Polzeath and Trebetherick the path emerges at Daymer Bay.
Before reaching the town of Rock the path runs through the only sand dunes that we encountered on the whole walk.
A ferry then takes you on a short trip across the Camel Estuary to a well deserved cream tea at Padstow, and your journey's end.
Steep ascent from Tintagel
NATURE WATCH
October
As autumn marches on, Richard Marpole tells you what to look out for in the countryside this month and describes a nature walk in the mighty Cairngorms
SMALL SCABIOUS
The normally small scabious scabiosa columbaria flowers in July and August, but if we have a wet spell now after a dry summer, then it could well flower a second time.
These attractive plants grow up to 2ft tall and have lilac blue flowers with the petals on the circumference much larger than those in the centre.
They are to be found only on lime-rich soils.
Such late flowering plants are an important source of nectar for late flying insects.
MARSH WOUNDWORT
There may be a few examples of marsh woundwort stachys palustris still flowering during October.
As its common name suggests, it was once used to dress wounds and has mild antiseptic properties.
The generic name stachys derives from the Greek meaning ‘spike’ because of the way the flowers are arranged.
BOLETUS FUNGUS
In most ‘parasol’ fungi the underside of the cap is covered in veins radiating horizontally from the centre, but boletus fungi have vertical tubes ending in an opening — the pore — on the underside of the cap.
Most boletus fungi are good to eat, but a few species, such as the Devil's bolete boletus satanas are poisonous.
Generally, inedible ones have red or orange pores.
The flesh of many boletus species will turn a surprising blue colour when bruised as chemicals in the fungus's flesh oxidise on contact with air.
Try pressing the underneath of the cap and watch the result.
ROSE HIPS
The wild rose is a familiar sight in woods and hedges.
There are more than 100 species and identification can be difficult.
The fruit or ‘hips’, help to distinguish species and are ripe now.
Hips are a rich source of vitamin C.
If you're keen to get your species identification right.
New Flora of the British Isles by Clive Stace (Cambridge University Press £24.95) is the reference book and definitely worth buying.
REINDEER
To see reindeer in a natural setting visit the Cairngorms where there's a herd of about a hundred animals.
They are unique among the deer family in that both the males and females have antlers which are eaten when shed to build up the reindeer's calcium stocks.
COMMON CENTAURY
Common centaury centaurium erythraea is one of the few plants still in flower.
It's found in lowland areas on chalk grassland and among sand dunes.
It varies in height from a few inches to two feet depending on the habitat.
The densely clustered flowers have five pink petals, at the rear end of a tube around which are the green sepals.
CAIRNGORMS IN FOCUS
Walkers can't resist the call of the Cairngorms.
Sooner or later they have to go and see these imposing mountains for themselves.
And you can bet that the first visit will not be the last.
The Cairngorm massif in the Scottish Highlands is really high by British standards — in fact it's the largest area of land over 3,000ft in the British Isles.
It also boasts four of the five highest peaks.
And because of its altitude is has an alpine climate which brings gorgeous flowers with it, true alpines such as the mountain azalea loiseleuria procumbens , mountain speedwell veronica alpina , alpine lady's mantle alchemilla alpina and bog whortleberry vaccinium uliginosum .
The weather in the region is quite amazing, you get anything from brilliant sunshine through to biting winds and complete white-outs, sometimes changing from one to the other in a matter of minutes.
And because the winter here is long, the flowering season is short and starts late, several weeks later than in the south.
The snow which brings so many winter sports enthusiasts to the area can lie all year round in some parts of the Cairngorms and plays an important role in protecting flowering plants.
Its good insulating properties mean that the young emerging plants in the spring are saved from the worst of the biting cold.
With an area of 160 square miles, there's a wide variety of walks in the Cairngorms, from easy waymarked trails for the casual walker to challenging backpacking expeditions for the experienced mountain walker.
The weather is so unpredictable that only those who are well equipped and experienced walkers should attempt the high tops.
The Ryvoan Bothy, nestling in splendid isolation in the Ryvoan pass
NATURE WALK IN THE CAIRNGORMS
Rather than go onto the Cairngorm plateau itself, this walk passes through The Queens Forest and to the summit of Meall a' Bhuachaille.
The views — in good weather — are outstanding.
It's a demanding walk — allow 6 hours to enjoy all it has to offer.
Good comfortable boots are essential, as are map and compass and the ability to navigate.
Bad weather can come suddenly, and snow can fall in any month on the high tops, so get properly equipped!
From the Glenmore car park, go back onto the road and turn right.
Follow the road until the shop/ski hire centre.
Cross and take the path towards the youth hostel which runs parallel with the road — a green-topped post tells you this is the start of the walk.
The path passes behind the youth hostel, and then drops down slightly towards the Forestry  Commission information centre and turns left, following the green posts.
After a short distance, the path meets a forestry track, turn left onto this.
This track goes through the Queens Forest for three-quarters of a mile, climbing steadily.
On the way up, look out for several wood ant nests.
These are domed-shaped mounds, around three feet across, covered in pine needles and busy with ants moving over the surface.
Take care around the nests, because wood ants have a vicious bite!
Notice as you walk up this path the difference between the plantation on the left, which has a mixture of broadleaf and coniferous trees, and that on the right which is mostly pine.
Notice too, the rich lichen flora covering many of the trees — this is an indication that the air here has a low pollution level.
Cross the stream which has been on the left for some time by a wooden bridge.
The track swings to the right almost immediately after the bridge.
It winds up the hillside, and looks as if it could become a raging torrent in wet weather.
Eventually the track emerges from the woodland onto open moorland, and climbs up the hillside.
There is now peat underfoot, and in places on this stretch of track you can find butterwort pinguicula vulgaris — it's impossible not to tread on it, especially around the green-topped post marked No 1.
When the route comes to a flat area, a narrow track leads straight on and another heads left, turn right up the steep hill to the prominent summit of Meall a' Bhuachaille — the ‘hill of the herdsmen’.
As you approach the summit of the hill there are various plant species to look out for.
Cloudberries rudus chamaemorus , are numerous along the path and by now they have their orangery red fruit.
Within a few yards of the summit you can find fir clubmoss huperzia selago , and mountain azalea loiseleuria procumbens , both delightful finds for the plant hunter.
At the top there is a large, untidy stone cairn/shelter.
This is most welcome, because the wind here can be very strong.
The summit offers a 360 degree panoramic view, taking in the Cairngorm plateau to the south, Loch Morlich to the south-west and the Abernethy Forest to the north.
Leave the shelter taking a course slightly north of east.
Soon the track becomes similar to the Pennine Way — like a motorway, until it starts to drop steeply downwards.
At this point there's yet another exciting landscape, full of lochans.
1,100ft below in the Ryvoan Pass you can see the Ryvoan bothy.
On the way down, the path can be muddy and steep and in places needs extra care.
On reaching the bothy, turn south and head down the valley.
In the far distance, the prominent notch in the skyline marks the Creag a' Chalamain, the ‘Rock of the pigeons’.
As the track descends look out for heather ‘calluna vulgaris’, bilberry vaccinium myrtillus and especially cowberry vaccinium vitis idaea .
Both the vacciniums will be showing fruit by now, while the heather will be in full flower.
Three-quarters of a mile from the bothy, the track reaches An Lochan Uaine — the ‘Green Lochan’.
Legend has it that the green of the water comes from the fairies washing their clothes in the lochan!
At An Lochan Uaine the route leaves the main track, turns right at a post marked blue, climbs the hillside and contours along with views across the valley.
Follow the blue posts until the track meets an obvious forestry road, and as a reward for having come this way, a wooden seat.
Just the place to get your breath back.
Follow the road back to the Forestry information centre at Glenmoret.
Quiet and observant walkers may see red deer along this particular stretch.
When you reach the main road at the information centre, turn right for the car park.
The Cairngorms are the only place in the country where you can see reindeer in the wild
OUT & ABOUT
Every month we feature a fascinating walk in fourteen areas of the country.
Walks compiled by Catherine Moore
1
Wester Ross Moorland walk from Drumchork to Fionn Loch
2
Central Highlands Coire Ardair Path through National Nature Reserve
3
Western Highlands Classic walk up Britain's highest mountain.
Ben Nevis
4
Central Borders Wildlife-rich woodlands by the River Tweed
5
County Durham Exploring the Tunstall Valley near Waskerley Beck
6
Lake District Route to the top of Grisedale Pike
7
Snowdonia Short walk with great views of Swallow Falls
8
Midlands 92 miles along the Staffordshire Way
9
East Anglia Five to seven day walk along the Angles Way
10
Heart of England Wychavon Way through classic countryside
11
Black Mountains Discover the little known Garn-wen Ridge
12
Somerset The Leland trail through lowland landscapes
13
Kent The South Foreland along the famous White Cliffs
14
Cornwall Fowey to Polkerris and the Saints' Way
DRUMCHORK TO FIONN LOCH
Drumchork is right opposite the turnoff for Aultbea from the A832 and this walk starts from the Drumchork Hotel.
Walk up the path behind the hotel and then turn left by the fence before crossing Allt Beithe and continuing along the edge of ‘Loch a' Bhaid Luachraich.
After the first loch the track rises sharply over the shoulder of the Carn Bad nah-Achlaise before running along the side of Loch Mhic'ille Riabhaich which was named after a local 16th century outlaw.
The track then runs to the edge of Fionn Loch.
Look to the South of the loch where you'll see such peaks as Beinn a' Chaisgein Mor, Ruadh Stac Mor and Beinn Lair.
Return to base along the same route.
COIRE ARDAIR PATH
The creag Meagaidh National Nature Reserve was set up in 1986 to protect this valuable area around the peak of Creag Meagaidh in the Monadhliath mountains.
This walk takes you through the heart of the reserve to Lochan a' Choire.
At the start of the path, by the farmhouse at Aberarder, you will see a few explanatory posts telling you a little bit about the reserve and the mountains within its boundaries.
Go along the path, keeping the farmhouse on your left and pass through a metal gate.
The path goes through fields and as it continues over rough ground you can see remnants of old riverbeds — the Allt Choire Ardair has changed its course several times over the years.
The track becomes less distinct and goes into birchwood and a beautiful glen.
In the wood look out for whinchats, redstarts and spotted flycatchers as well as evidence of deer and pine martens who live here.
The path descends to run by the Allt Coire Ardair.
On the open moorland you might see meadow pipits and wheatears.
From here a final rise brings you to the waters of Lochan a' Choire.
Retrace your steps to Aberarder.
BEN NEVIS
Ben Nevis really needs no introduction, and as most walkers intend to climb it at some point it's worthy of inclusion.
Just because Ben Nevis is a popular peak don't be lulled into a false sense of security — it's a peak worthy of respect and in snow and mist should only be tackled by experienced walkers.
Start your ascent from Achintree Farm in Glen Nevis.
Reach this by taking the A82 from Fort William to Inverness, take the first turning on the right after the mini roundabout signed ‘Achintree Claggan Industrial Estate’.
After 800yds, turn down the road signed ‘Achintree’.
From Achintree Farm, the path winds its way up the side of Meall an t-Suidhe towards Loch Meall an t-Suidhe.
As you walk the path which starts from the Glen Nevis Youth Hostel joins the main route.
As you continue, you can see the path meandering its way up Ben Nevis in long zig-zags to the right of the Red Burn.
It's easiest to stay on this path rather than taking the more obvious route up the side of the burn.
The climb slowly eases off as you reach the summit plateau.
Don't wander too far off to the left or you'll come across the 600yd high sheer cliffs of the North Face.
It is best to retrace your steps for the return journey.
WOODLANDS BY THE TWEED
The walk follows the course of the River Tweed and starts from the bus stop opposite the Royal Bank of Scotland in Newton St Boswells.
From here, walk along Melbourne Place past the post office and follow the road to the left signed ‘To the Glen’.
The wooded glen at the start of this walk is home to over 120 species of flowering plants and has been designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest.
When you come to the burn, cross it by the footbridge and follow the path straight ahead which rises then falls to the road and a footbridge over the Tweed Cross the footbridge if you want to make a diversion to see either Dryburgh Abbey or Wallace's Statue.
Back at the river, walk down the track, turning right through the trees and follow the Tweed to St Boswells.
Follow the path up into the village and then follow the waymarked route behind the houses to the Golf Course.
Then follow the river to Mertoun Bridge.
Cross the river and descend to the path by the river and follow it through the wood, past the well below Benrig House to steps beside a wall.
Turn left at the top of the steps, beside the graveyard.
Cross a burn then climb through a wood to Maxton Church.
Follow the path to the road and turn right into the village.
TUNSTALL VALLEY
This walk takes you around the Tunstall Valley in the area around the Waskerley Beck.
From the picnic area take the path alongside the Waskerley Beck, through the kissing gate in the north-west corner of the site.
Follow the beck, then at the kissing gate beyond the second footbridge, turn left along the hedge.
At the road go through two more kissing gates and continue on the path along the park wall.
The house you see on the left is Fawnless Hall.
At the edge of the moor, climb the high stone wall by the stone stile from where there are views of the Wear Valley and the Cleveland Hills.
Turn right after the Park Wall stile (a farm called Park Wall once stood here).
Take the left hand gate and follow the track to Jofless Cottage and go on to High Jofless.
Turn left onto a track across the fields to Tunstall Cottages and the road.
At the lodge gates turn right over the reservoir dam then walk up through Blackstone Bank Wood.
Follow the track to reach the right side of Fawn Wood.
Bear right at the fork to cross Spring Gill Beck and cross three grass fields.
As you pass Baal Hill Farm, take the left fork of the track and head for the trees.
At the road and the kissing gate turn right and go quickly left through another.
After two more kissing gates you reach Wolsingham's Uppertown.
Turn right for Demesne Mill and the Market Place.
Packs detailing walks in County Durham are available from the Environment Dept,.
GRISEDALE PIKE
This walk takes you through the Whinlatter Forest and up through the trees to the top of Grisedale Pike at 2,593ft.
If you fancy a longer walk it is easy enough to extend your trip through the forest — a circuit of the forest is just under nine miles and will take you around four or five hours.
Alternatively you could extend your walk from the summit of Grisedale Pike and head over south-west to Hopegill Head and join the forest road at Swinside.
The Forestry Commission have made route finding easier in the forest by having numbered posts which you can follow.
From the visitor centre at Whinlatter (off the B5292) the most direct approach to Grisedale Pike takes you east along the road for around a quarter of a mile, then south to guide post 43.
From here you go south-west to posts 41 and 42 and move out of the forest and follow the line of the wall to the summit of Grisedale Pike.
You can retrace your steps for the return journey or head north-east on the path off the fell along Sleet How.
Turn left off the main path after around three quarters of a mile to enter the forest.
Head north to guide posts 47 and 46.
Follow the forest paths around to the left to posts 45 and 44 then back to post 43 and along the road back to the visitor centre.
SWALLOW FALLS
A short walk, but worthy of inclusion because of its view of the Swallow Falls in the Afon Llugwy.
Try to visit after a rainy period as the falls are very impressive then.
If you want a lengthier walk there are plenty of routes to choose from in the forest.
The walk starts on the left of the forest road and climbs fairly steeply.
The top of this step slope (Coed Cae Huddgl) is around 600ft.
From here the path descends to the top of Summerhouse Crag which stands over the Llugwy Gorge.
You descend further through the trees and turn left along the forest road to meet a tarmac road.
Follow this downhill for around 300yds.
Steps to the left lead up to a long stretch of path which continues parallel to the road.
You go down to cross the tarmac road and return to your start point along the side of the Afon Llugwy, passing through the gorge with a view of the lovely Swallow Falls.
STAFFORDSHIRE WAY
The Staffordshire Way starts along the gritstone of Congleton Edge at Mow Cop — giving good views over the Cheshire Plain — before turning towards Rudyard Lake and Leek.
South of Leek it follows the towpath of the Caldon Canal through the Churnet Valley.
The way then climbs along hilltop paths before joining the Churnet again and following it to Rocester.
From here you go on to follow the River Dove to Uttoxeter and go through gently rolling farmland to the village of Abbots Bromley.
It then goes on to the village of Colton and the Trent Valley.
You follow the Trent and Mersey canal to Shugborough Hall and Cannock Chase — an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
Passing through Cannock Chase, the Way goes to the village of Bednall and then on to Penkridge using the towpath of the Staffordshire and Worcester canal.
From the village of Mitton you go through the Bickford Meadows Nature reserve and past Lapley to the Telford Aqueduct on the Shropshire Union Canal.
Continue to Brewood and Codsall.
Nurton, Seisdon and Highgate Common through parklands and pasture.
After passing through Enville the Way wanders through the lovely old village of Kinver and climbs up to its end on the sandstone ridge of Kinver Edge.
The Way is waymarked the 92 miles from start to finish and a book giving detailed route descriptions is available for £3.40, including postage.
Contact: Country Planning & development Department,.
ANGLES WAY
This 77 mile route takes you along the Waverney and Little Ouse valleys on the borders of Norfolk and Suffolk.
The landscape varies open heaths and conifer woodland to low lying grazing marshes and broads.
From the Knettishall Heath Country Park, south of the A1066 east of Thetford, the Way follows the Little Ouse River.
You pass by Thelnetham, just south of a recently restored tower mill.
You go on to pass through a nature reserve at Redgrave and Lopham Fen, and on through Royden Fen, also managed as a nature reserve.
You carry on, through Diss and Scole by now following the line of the River Waverney.
From Brockdish to Weybridge the way runs through watermeadows and on to Harleston, Momersfield, Earsham and Ditchingham.
The way then passes by Oulton Broad, the extreme south-eastern part of the Broads Navigation and through the Somerleyton Hall estate village.
From here you go on to reach Breydon Water local nature reserve via the Fritton Lake Country Park and around the walls of Gariannonum — the best preserved Roman monument in the Norfolk.
Before long you arrive at the seaside town of Great Yarmouth.
WYCHAVON WAY
The Wychavon Way travels through classic Heart of England countryside of rich farmland and rolling hills to finish up in the Cotswolds.
From Holt Fleet the Way crosses the parkland of Ombersley Court and passes through the village of Ombersley and across Westwood Park to the town of Droitwich the route continues along the Roman Salt Way and goes through a variety of farms, follows a canal and passes through several small villages.
The way then climbs a series of hills and through villages known as the Lenches.
From here there are views across to the Malvern Hills and Bredon Hill.
It then descends to the Vale of Evesham to cross the River Avon between Fladbury and Cropthorne.
The Way continues to Bredon Hill and on to Ashton-under-Hill taking it into the Cotswold Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
The last section of the path goes over Alderton Hill, passes through Gretton and climbs over Langley Hill.
It finally travels into Winchcombe.
The Way actually joins up with the Cotswold Way at this point if you fancy a more epic walk.
The Wychavon Way is waymarked with a yellow symbol throughout.
THE GARN-WEN RIDGE
This walk goes around the extreme southern fringes of the Brecon Beacons National Park, an area often ignored by visitors.
From the junction of main roads known as the Turnpike about half a mile east of the centre of Pontypool, go 50yds along the Abergavenny road.
Heading north go through a gap in the houses and walk over steep open fields crossing two stiles.
Keep on until you reach the Garn-wen ridge.
Alternatively you can reach the ridge from Pontypool park.
Follow the obvious path leading north along the ridge as the path opens out into a wide track.
As you continue north you reach a ruined folly and an RAF memorial.
Past the folly, cross a stile and a road and follow the track for a short while over Little Mountain until you rejoin the mountain wall.
Keep to the wall on the right and continue onwards to Garn-wen.
Continue along the ridge for another two miles on grassy tracks.
Half a mile past the isolated farmhouse at Garn-Illech turn right to join a lane leading to a forest gate and the Goose and Cuckoo Inn.
Follow the road back to Llanover where you can get a bus back to Pontypool or on to Abergavenny.
THE LELAND TRAIL
The Leland Trail travels through the lowland landscapes, dairy and arable farmland typical of south Somerset.
It is called after the local 16th century scholar John Leland who recorded travels along a similar route.
The route is waymarked throughout with distinctive yellow waymarks.
From the car park at Alfred's Tower — on the National Trust's Stourhead Estate — the route goes around three miles across country to Redlynch and on to Burton.
From Burton High Street the trail continues to Wyke Champflower Church and on into Cole and then Castle Cary.
From Castle Cary the Way passes to the left of the George Hotel into Paddock Drain, onto Lodge Hill and across to North Cadbury.
The trail passes through North Cadbury, going on to Compton Pauncefoot and then South Cadbury.
Just past South Cadbury is Cadbury Castle and you can take a diversion here before going on to Sutton Montis and Queel Camel.
From here you walk to West Camel, then to the south of Yeovilton and on to Ilcester.
The final section of the walk takes you south to Montacute and then west to Ham Hill.
THE SOUTH FORELAND
This walk takes you across farmland to St Margaret's, and back again to your start point along the famous white cliffs.
From the Langdon Cliffs car park entrance by the bend follow the road downhill and cross the bridge.
Go down the steps, cross the stile and walk ahead, veering left after 400yds to reach a gate in the corner of the field.
Go up the track to the road.
Turn right and follow the road for a third of a mile to the roundabout, continue for 200yds and go over the stile on the right.
After 200yds cross a stile on the left.
Follow the path to the field corner.
Cross the stile, go down the bank, carry on down, over the next stile and across the track.
Over the next stile go slightly right onto a track.
Follow this through the cattle yard.
Carry on over the field, go over a stile and cross the right corner of field and go over another stile.
Go left to the corner of Bere Wood.
Bear slightly right across the first and second fields, go over a stile and bear slightly right across the third field, over another stile and across the right hand corner of the last field, going over a stile midway along the right hand boundary.
Turn left and follow the line of the dismantled railway for around half a mile.
At the end cross a stile by the gate and take the road to the T junction.
Turn right and follow Sea Street into St Margaret's.
FOWEY TO POLKERRIS AND THE SAINTS' WAY
This walk takes you on the coastal path around to Polkerris and then back to your start point on the Saints' Way — a 35-mile route which crosses Cornwall from Padstow to Fowey.
From Readymoney Cove at Fowey the coast path is clearly signed to Polkerris.
You can visit the village — it has a pub, beach and a shop — then retrace your steps through the woods to reach the Saints' Way.
Keep on the upper path, and cross the fields to a gate to join the Saint's Way.
Turn right onto it and soon you come to Tregaminion church.
The Saints' Way is signed by the church gate.
From here follow the Way's Cornish Cross symbols back to Readymoney Cove via the Domesday Manor of Trenant, Lankelly Farm and Love Lane.
MARKET ROUND UP
COMPASSES
Choosing a compass can be confusing.
We look at some of the models available to help point you in the right direction
JOURNEY OF A LIFETIME
OUTER Limits
Blood sucking leeches, wild weather and breathlessness at high altitude are not everyone's cup of tea.
But Donald Brown finds the effort well worthwhile as he treks to Kanchenjunga, the world's third highest mountain
And then the rain stopped and the skies cleared to reveal a bright snow-capped Himalayan horizon — a spectacular backcloth for our evening meal
Even the porter was shivering.
‘Here is Gocha La,’ he said decisively.
‘Nobody goes past here.’
At over 16,000ft the Himalayan pass on Gocha La is as close as trekkers from India come to Kanchenjunga, the world's third highest mountain.
From there on, it's serious expedition country.
Rock and ice falls scarred the slopes and the valley bottom was a sea of fine sand.
This was crossed by a line of hoofprints while along its edge were a trail of mysterious padmarks.
With lungs clutching for oxygen, we looked up from our darkness to the glittering peaks of Kanchenjunga, Sikkim's holy mountain, sparkling in the early sunrise.
CUCKOO CALL
A distant cuckoo called out as we turned back down to our tents at Lake Samiti and the return journey to Yoksam.
Yoksam township at 5840ft/1780m is where we'd started from.
It has a few houses and shops, even a post office.
And it was at the trekkers' hut eight days before that we'd met our porters with their dzos, Dzos — pronounced ‘Joes’— are great hairy pack animals, a cross between yaks and cows.
Virtually weather-proof, sure-footed and with big lungs, they work best at high altitudes and can carry loads of up to 220lb.
Our leader known to all as ‘BK’, was an experienced Himalayan mountaineer and he knew the best local porters.
He also brought two big, unshaven cooks with him.
After two days on the bus from Darjeeling to Yoksam, we were glad to stretch our legs and walk up to Dubtek, Sikkim's oldest monastery.
Damp leaves covered the rocky path rising between old walls.
To our horror we saw wormlike blood-sucking leeches making their way unerringly towards any passing animal, including us.
We discovered that some had already found their way through our boots and were making a tasty meal out of our feet.
Luckily a pinch of salt got rid of them, leaving behind a blood-stained sock.
To help keep these bold bloodsuckers at bay we rubbed wet salt on our boots.
Our porters had a different approach — they shifted them form their bare feet with damp salt pads attached to the end of short bamboo canes.
The next morning we set off northwards.
Faded prayer flags fluttered above the smoke — blackened bamboo roof of a Tibetan refugee's hut.
Hens scratched, children peeked and dozing dogs ignored us as we left Yoksam's sunshine for the muted greenwood light of the Rathong valley.
The forest felt spacious.
On one side we looked into a vast ravine.
High above, curved oak, spruce and chestnut grew beside giant magnolias.
Lost in the leaves, birds sang while yellow and white orchids sprouted from tree stumps against green screens of creeper, moss and fern.
Low cloud became wet mist that turned into drizzle.
By mid-afternoon we had covered six miles and ascended 3,000ft.
A chill rain was falling steadily when we reached Bakhim Forest Rest House.
Most of the trekkers' huts have a table, chairs, some basic beds and even more basic mattresses.
All have a kitchen with smoke-blackened stone walls and a rough and ready loo hut.
There is no electricity and the water comes from a stream or spring.
Now we learned why BK brought his cooks halfway across India.
‘What do you want?’ they asked with big bristly grins.
‘Indian food?
Chinese?
Tibetan?
Continental? you name it’ And they weren't kidding.
Every day, whatever the time, whatever the weather, up came a piping hot meal, savoury snacks, cakes and a good brew.
The next day was hard.
It started badly when a woman in the group found a tick burrowed deeply into her leg, needing a painful pull with tweezers to extract it.
Heavy rain delayed our start.
Oblivious to the weather, the loaded dzos went ahead, churning the path into pools of glutinous mud between steep and slippery rocks.
Mist filtered away sound and colour from the forest.
As we stumbled over a greasy corduroy track, rhododendron branches reached eerily out of the greyness.
Four and a half sodden miles in as many hours took us through 3,300ft to Phedang.
There was no trekkers' hut here, however basic; just a shed for the kitchen and an uneven acre of soggy mountain meadow for our camp.
And it was getting colder.
Weary and wet, sustained by blessed tea, we helped each other with the tents.
And then the rain stopped and the skies cleared to reveal a bright snow-capped Himalayan horizon — a spectacular backcloth for our evening meal.
Dzo bells lulled us to sleep and then woke us to a clear and sunny morning.
We drank our tea against a panorama of peaks listening to birdsong.
Just before the treeline, at 13,200ft we reached Dzongri hut.
The sun shone over a wide grassy valley.
Dzos stood patiently in line waiting to be unloaded, and moving forward in turn without orders.
From a crest above the hut we watched the sun set on a line of peaks: Kanchenjunga, Kabrru, Pandim, Rathong and more.
Cloud flooded the southern valleys but our night was clear and starry, the coldest yet, with a white ground frost.
Bottles of boiling water from the kitchen kept us warm at night and provided sterile drinking water for the next day.
But we all slept badly in the thinner air, suffering headaches and breathlessness.
Beyond Dzongri a ridge ran north, pointing straight at Kanchenjunga.
Prayer flags fluttered along the crest where quartz gleamed in the rocks.
FRESH PASTURES
We looked out over a bare open landscape, its thin grass patched with sandy stretches.
Snow lay in dark hollows below occasional clumps of rhododendron.
Tiny azaleas grew alongside bushes of sang used for Tibetan incense.
This is summer pasture land.
Sheep, cattle and horses graze here every year, having been herded from places like Darjeeling and further afield.
They graze through the monsoon and return to their homeland in September.
Occasional cairns led us to a challenging rocky descent into another forest, full of  rhododendron blossom, pine scents and birdsong.
A thousand feet below, Prek Chu river roared invisibly.
Quite suddenly the temperature dropped and we pulled on sweaters, gloves, scarves and balaclavas.
It became harder to move.
The party spread out as gaps between lengthened.
Tow hundred yards wide, the river bed scarred the forest from north to south.
We turned upstream, clambering across tumbled boulders to find a crude wooden bridge.
The wind blew icy cold and driving cloud swirled round Pandim's peak high ahead.
The challenging climb out of the river bed reduced our group to a series of individuals.
At last the track levelled into a wide grassy valley.
Outside a stone hut, porters unloaded our dzos while inside the cooks were frying crisp savouries, slicing slab cake and filling a gallon teapot.
A painted board read ‘Thangsing — 13,000ft’.
At dusk, Kanchenjunga and Pandim shone on the horizon, still touched by the sun.
A slender new crescent moon lay on its back high in the clear night sky.
In the thin atmosphere, faces became puffy, eyes almost disappeared and some people's sight was affected.
A few of us lost our appetites.
Passang watched for symptoms of mountain sickness.
One of the group decided enough was enough and stayed put.
Northwards from Thangsing, we walked through flat meadows alongside a river.
A herd of yak grazed under the eye of a small boy, their calves playing, rolling on their backs in sandy patches by the water.
Skylines peaks glistened in the bright sun, with Kanchenjunga our market straight ahead.
A cairned track climbed away from the river, up a ravine.
Among the rocks gleamed multi-coloured stones; pink and white, veined with black and green, and some running with rust.
Our highest camp was pitched at 15,748ft at Jemathang, on a stony patch beside a cooking hut among house-sized rocks.
BK told us this had been base camp for early attempts on Kanchenjunga from the south.
Tea helped us rise at 3am for the final climb.
Ice shrouded our tents and frost glistened on the ground.
We climbed clumsily past Lake Samiti, its dark waters reflecting peaks already shining in their early dawn.
An inevitable cuckoo called and two Himalayan snow-cock rocketed past.
We hauled ourselves upward, legs and lungs straining, wondering why we were doing it.
Suddenly we knew.
Closer than seemed possible, striking against an almost purple sky, we saw Kanchenjunga with a bright plume of snow standing out like a triumphal flag.
‘Here is Gocha La’, said the porter.
‘Nobody goes past here’.
Previous page: Lake Samiti, last stop before heading for the heights.
Facing page: there's nothing like a brew to soothe aching limbs but where's the Kendal Mint cake?
Above: Thangsing at 13,000ft towers in the background
SIKKIM FACT FILE
Donald Brown travelled with Exodus.
A 22 day trek to Sikkim: Kanchenjunga, including flights to and from London costs from £1,690.
Background
Until recently an independent kingdom, Sikkim is now an Indian state, landlocked in the eastern Himalayan between Nepal, Tibet and Bhutan.
Altitude rises from 800ft/244m to 2,822ft/8603m.
The capital is Gangtok.
Inhabitants are a mix of original Lepcha tribes and incoming Tibetans, Nepalese, Bhutanis and Indians.
Activities
Trekking from low-level forest paths to high-altitude mountains.
Rafting on Testa and Rangeel rivers.
Rich in forests, ferns and flowers, including 600 orchid varieties blooming in September and October.
The area is great for watching wildlife with 600 butterfly species and almost as  many bird types.
Getting there
Fly via New Delhi or Calcutta to Bagdogra.
Train or bus to Darjeeling.
Bus to Yoksam.
Hotels at all prices and standards.
Health
Protection recommended against malaria, cholera, typhoid, polio, tetanus, hepatitis.
Ring  for free Traveller's Guide to Health — and consult your GP.
Climate
Best in April–May, September–November.
Otherwise too wet and cold.
MULTI ACTIVITY — CAVING
HOLE Life
Catherine Moore heads down under and discovers a whole new world on a caving trip in South Wales
Being inside my first real cave — not a floodlight or a handlight in sight — was an incredible experience.
It felt like I was inside and part of a huge virtual reality machine.
I couldn't quite get my head around the fact that this vast underground world existed, going on and on underground with chambers, tunnels, streams and pools, all underneath hills, roads and houses.
Everything about the place was different: the thick darkness broken only by the beam of our head torches: the damp chill of the air: and the chocolate coloured shiny walls and floors which looked like they had Cadbury's Flake crumbled all over them.
The cave was Ogof Ffynnon Ddu II in the upper Swansea Valley, north of Swansea.
Access is strictly controlled by the South Wales Caving Club on behalf of the Countryside Council for Wales.
It's part of an enormous cave system, the deepest in Europe at 1,000ft so it's important that people don't wander in and out at random, even if they're experienced cavers.
So how did I as a novice get in there?
Friend in low places so to speak.
My friend Tony Baker is a member of the South Wales Caving Club and a total caving junkie.
I got myself invited along as I wanted to find out what drove him to travel all the way from Surrey to South Wales nearly every weekend.
So soon I found myself fully kitted out and ready for action with fleecy undergarments, waterproof suits, wellies, helmet and head torch.
Tony was well briefed before we descended to the bowels of the earth.
I was, I explained, a bit of a big girl's blouse when it came to crumbling ledges, sheer drops, being underwater for unreasonable lengths of time and squeezing into jam jar sized spaces.
He listened patiently, with a wry smile.
I had obviously believe the gospel according to The Sun when it came to caves, where the underground world condemned hapless scout leaders and their unsuspecting charges to at least 15 hours trapped up to their necks in slimy cold water, if not to horrible slow deaths from rock falls and suffocation.
No wonder I couldn't quite believe it when we went into the top entrance of OFD II and it opened into wide open spaces where it was easy to walk at full height.
And I was surprised at how easily my eyes became accustomed to seeing in the light of the head torch.
Tony selected a great route through the cave, a mixture of small passages, huge chambers, underground streams and some startling cave formations.
Gnome passage, where we headed after leaving the cave entrance, was one of the highlights of the cave for me.
A field of stalagmites lies there, looking strangely translucent, and I suppose they could look like a little army of gnomes if the shadows were right.
And another highlight, though of quite a different kind, was in store next.
We were walking with our legs on ledges either side of a narrow passage when one of the ledges came to an abrupt end.
We had to edge sideways along with our arms outstretched against the opposite wall for support.
I looked down, couldn't see much and around three quarters of the way along asked Tony whether there was much of a drop, ‘Not really’, came the reply, ‘about 60ft’.
Now in my book that's a bloody huge drop.
As my legs and arms suddenly felt shaky like they were going to give way, I decided that in this case ignorance would indeed have been bliss.
I got to the end of the passage, called — harmlessly enough — Edwards's Shortcut.
I expected a fanfare to greet me, or at least for Tony to fall to his knees in admiration.
No such luck.
Sixty foot drops are not really much to write home about when someone's been caving as long as he has.
I gave myself a pat on the back though and carried on through Cross Rift into Selenite Passage where the rock sparkles with the glassy selenite running through the walls.
We went through to see a couple of remarkable rock formations, the Trident and the Judge — no prizes for guessing where they got their names.
It was these incredible, unique sights in the cave which made me enjoy my trip so much, though everyone gets different things from the sport.
For Tony it's the physical challenge, the idea of breaking  new ground and of working out how to get around seemingly impenetrable barriers.
We followed a stream up Salubrious Passage before squeezing ourselves through a small twisting passage to bring us back above ground.
We weren't enclosed long enough for it to become worrying and I got a real adrenaline rush when at one point one side of the passage was replaced by empty space leading to a huge open chamber.
For a second I was mesmerised by the chasm before me but as the only way I was going to fall was it I made the effort to jump, I realised that I was actually enjoying the thrill of imagined danger.
We eventually reached Big.
It is indeed a very big chamber — an underground cathedral — and we sat and turned off our torches.
There is really nowhere else you can experience this intensity and expanse of darkness.
When I came out of the cave I was so exhilarated I felt drunk.
I fell down on the hillside and lay there laughing.
Whether it was simply mere enjoyment or relief that I'd survived my worst imaginings I don't know — but it felt good.
Left: it's a bit of a squeeze but well worth the effort.
Right: stalagmites are one of the many treats in store for the downwardly mobile.
Pictures by Tony Baker
The chocolate covered shiny walls and floors looked like they had Cadbury's Flake crumbled all over them
HOW CAVES ARE MADE
Caves haven't always been a feature of our landscape.
They have come into being over thousands of years.
In fact it's estimated that most of the major cave systems in the world today started life between 10,000 to two million years ago.
Sea caves are formed when tides and waves erode weak areas in the rock, forming chambers and passages.
Some caves — usually small — are formed when blocks of rock have moved relative to each other, leaving a gap.
But the caves which are of interest to British cavers are inland caves — formed with the key ingredients of water, limestone and one hell of a long time.
Limestone is an ancient rock, formed at the bottom of the oceans which covered much of the earth's surface millions of years ago.
It's actually mostly made up of the skeletons of billions of tiny sea creatures.
The gaps between the skeletons were filled in by sand and the even tinier remains of micro-organisms.
The lower levels of these vast ‘graveyards’ built up into beds of limestone and colossal shifts in the earth's structure meant that much of this was raised above sea level.
During this process, cracks appeared in the limestone and water seeped in.
Carbon dioxide from the atmosphere made the water slightly acidic so it corroded the limestone, and where the water had to get through peaty soil before it hit the rock the acidity was stronger.
Gradually, the cracks in the limestone became bigger and bigger and water began to flow through them.
Sand and rock carried by the water helped to erode the limestone further and to chisel out cave passages and chambers in areas where the rock was particularly weak.
As water levels changed over the years some caves became dry, while others are still being made larger by the effect of underground streams, and some are still completely waterlogged.
But every cave is unique — none will have formed in exactly the same way.
A variety of factors will have shaped their development — the acidity of the water, the hardness or softness of the limestone, and the number of cracks in the original limestone.
As you'd expect, most cavers in this country head off to the area where caves are thickest in the ground.
The Yorkshire Dales feature prominently as does the Peak District.
The Mendip Hills is one of our busiest caving area and many huge caves are found in the Brecon Beacons in South Wales.
The largest system is the Lancaster-Easegill complex where there are around 30 miles of cave passages.
CAVE FORMATIONS
Cave formations are one of the most fascinating and beautiful aspects of the world underground, and like the caves themselves, they're caused by water eroding rock.
Water seeps down through the limestone, carrying along tiny deposits of the rock it's washing away.
And if this water then comes into contact with air from a cave passage it releases some of the carbon dioxide gas contained within it.
This acts with the dissolved rock to form calcite crystals which build into often spectacular formations.
The hollow and fragile straw stalactites are formed when water drops from a cave roof, leaving a microscopic ring of calcite before it falls.
This builds up over hundreds, sometimes thousands of years.
If the straw becomes blocked, the water flows down the outside, building up the calcite and forming tapering stalactites.
If the floor of the cave passage is rock or clay (as opposed to water), even more calcite is deposited and builds up very, very gradually into stalagmites.
And sometimes columns are formed when stalactites and stalagmites meet and join together.
You can often see  translucent curtain formations — where water has seeped down a sloping, overhanging wall.
The most common formation is flowstone where water seepage creates whole walls of calcite, or remarkable ‘frozen rivers’.
Rarer are helictites which leap out of roofs or walls, winding out into passageways.
There is some argument as to exactly how they are formed.
It can't be stressed too often that when you're underground the rule is look but don't touch.
Many formations are easily snapped — quite possibly thousands of years creations gone in an instant.
BOOK REVIEWS
Travellers' Health — how to stay healthy abroad
Contents:this best-selling guide contains comprehensive practical advice for all types of travellers on every aspect of worldwide travel medicine.
It looks at diseases, prevention and drugs, and analysis is backed up with frightening statistics.
There is up-to-date information on recent developments, including HIV infection and drug-resistant malaria, provided by over 50 authoritative contributors.
It's a must for travellers wanting peace of mind.
Rural Rambles near Bristol and Bath
Contents:detailed walk directions are given for 18 shortish walks — all around 5 miles — in this overlooked part of the country.
As well as directions, for each walk there are details of where to get refreshments en route; how to get to the start of each route by car and, where possible, by bus; plus a section on places of historical interest.
This no nonsense guide is good for those wanting to go on an interesting selection of gentle walks.
Long Distance Walks in the Pyrenees
Content:the author outlines a selection of walks in the heart of Europe's last great wilderness area.
Nine walks — some linear, some circular — are outlined and vary from 13 to 74 miles.
Each walk comes with a useful table giving distances and heights, map details and suggested reading.
The focus of the book is for people who only have two or three weeks to explore the mountains but Townsend also describes side trips and two long distance walks.
Townsend says the aim of the book is to give enough information for people planning a trip and ‘to try and capture at least some of the joy and excitement of walking in these mountains’.
He succeeds on both counts.
BOOK OF THE MONTH
Walking Britain's Skyline
In his introduction, Tony Greenbank gives an honest personal account of the reasons why he decided to produce this book.
Fortunately for the reader he continues in the same way — anecdotal, down-to-earth and humorous stories which reflect his love of the mountains.
As a skyline links individual mountain peaks, so Greenbank brings together 45 classic routes from the Lake District, Scotland and Wales.
For him the attraction of skyline walking is obvious — once you have made the initial effort to climb the first peak, everything else that follows is usually progressively less strenuous.
You can't really argue with that can you?
What makes this book even more readable though are the superb colour photographs and three-dimensional drawings.
Greenbank took most of the photos himself and he's clearly an accomplished photographer.
His shots of the Woolpack Round are particularly rich and those of the Snowdon Horseshoe are nothing less than spectacular.
The drawings by Al Phizacklea are equally amazing when you consider they were primarily figments of his imagination.
He studied the various Ordnance Survey maps, visualised the layout and shape of the hills and then sketched.
The illustrations are not meant to be accurate — for use as maps — but they succeed brilliantly as indicators of the terrain likely to be found on these walks.
The foreword is by Chris Bonington who gives a deserved endorsement to the book and to  Greenbank's credentials as the provider of such enjoyable escapism.
Although it's a bit on the big side to lug around the mountainside, I advise you to keep a copy handy as the cold nights draw in — it'll ensure your skyline walking dreams stay with you through the winter.
BUYERS' GUIDE
KWART SYSTEM SLEEPING BAG
This four-in-one sleeping system comprises a fleece liner, a Softie 3 Merlin sleeping bag, a Para-Tex bivvy bag and a compression stuff sack.
The system can be used in different combinations and packs down into one stuff sack.
The sleeping bag liner and bivvy bag also have their own small stuff sacks with each packing down to roughly the size of a bag of sugar.
The bivvy bag can be stored in a separate compartment at the base of the larger compression sack.
However the Velcro entrance to this compartment is only 3in long which can make stuffing back the bivvy bag a bit of an effort.
The bivvy bag is ultra lightweight and waterproof and has high wicking qualities.
It also has taped seams.
The Merlin sleeping bag is rated as one to two season and comes with a well designed zip.
It runs freely and doesn't snag on the fabric, thanks to well placed webbing running under the length of the zip.
The Calamai fleece liner is windproof and extra warm with high wicking properties.
The drawcords on the fleece and the Merlin sleeping bag pull in freely and close tightly if required.
I was comfortably warm using the main bag and bivvy bag for an outdoor bivvy (lowest temperature +5°C) and only found a small amount of condensation on the inside when I woke up.
Dave's verdict:lightweight travellers, cyclists and mountain marathoners would do well to look at the advantages this flexible combination system offers.
KONICA HEXAR CAMERA
Design:a compact camera designed as an alternative to an SLR.
The camera can be used manually or with adjustable programmed modes.
Features:include three exposure modes: manual, aperture priority and program which lets you point and shoot; also has extra bright f/2.0 high resolution lens allowing the camera to be used in low light without a flash.
SILKING THERMAL UNDERWEAR
Design:a range of 100% silk underwear.
The picture shows the men's long sleeve pullover and long underpants, a unisex balaclava and a pair of glove liners.
This range also includes  women's outfits, mittens, socks and muffler.
SPIROLIGHT NUTRITION BARS
Design:a natural, high energy meal in a bar.
Contains dried fruit and 5g of Spirulina — a rich natural source of protein, vitamins, minerals, iron etc.
One bar provides a third of the body's daily nutritional requirements.
Available from most health food stores.
SPRAYWAY JAMMER REVERSIBLE JACKET
Fleeces are so versatile and functional these days that we tend to wear them everywhere.
Sprayway's Micro Jammer is a fleece jacket made even more functional with a windproof outer layer.
It's reversible, using Polartec 100 fleece on one side and a microfibre Pertex shell on the other.
Even though the coat feels thin, it's surprisingly warm and works equally well whichever way round you wear it.
Polartec 100 is one of the lighter-weight ‘close net’ weave fleeces and the Pertex shell has a soft silky texture.
Put together these fabrics make a great combination and create an extremely comfortable jacket.
The Pertex shell has a fluorocarbon hydrophilic coating which is very effective in showers — water just rolls off.
The Jammer also worked well in more prolonged and persistent rain.
When I wore it for seven hours in wind-driven rain, the jacket only started absorbing water after the fourth hour.
The jacket is a great windstopper — I never once needed to put a waterproof on top to stop the wind getting through.
The high collar is good for protecting your neck from draughts.
It rolls up small so takes up little space in a rucksack.
I was even more impressed with the jacket's performance when I wore it next to my skin — it has an antibacterial finish to the fleece which makes it suitable for this purpose.
On a dry but extremely windy day I never once felt cold as I sat on top of Red Screes for half an hour munching through my packed lunch.
Other features include two zipped hip pockets on both sides of the reversible jacket, elasticated cuffs which are not too tight around the wrists and a front single one way zip.
A scoop back hem has an elastic drawcord.
The jacket allows plenty of all round movement and the hem will not ride up once the drawcord is tightened.
Dave's verdict:I give the Jammer top marks as a very versatile jacket which is suitable for all year round use.
OUTDOOR NEWS
PRIZES GALORE FOR WINNERS
FAME AT LAST?
Outdoor Action's very own editor Laura McCaffrey has been the focus of media attention recently both at home and abroad.
As we were scrambling to finish the issue, a BBC TV crew came into the office to ask Laura her views on access to the countryside.
The interviewer Martin Pailthorpe was interested to find out Laura's views on imposing a levy on outdoor goods to pay for the maintenance of footpaths.
Laura totally opposed the idea of a compulsory levy.
‘Voluntary schemes are to be welcomed, but it remains the responsibility of the local Highway Authority to maintain public rights of way.’
When asked if she thought Outdoor Action readers were being petty in writing to complain about blocked paths, her reply was forceful to say the least.
‘It's hardly petty to want to be able to go for a walk along a public right of way.
A Countryside Commission survey found that walkers had only a one in three chance of completing a two mile walk along rights of way.
That's not walkers being petty, that's landowners and farmers behaving disgracefully.’
The programme will be shown as part of the Western Approach documentary series on BBC2 at 7.30pm one Thursday in October and will go out to the Somerset and Dorset West region.
But Outdoor Action readers are less likely to see Laura's first international TV appearance.
She was interviewed on Turkish TV while trekking the Taurus mountains.
Her feature on the area will be published soon — as long as there aren't too many other interviews to deal with.
Cue — lights, action, sound, but where's Jeremy Beadle?
CONSERVATION
OUTCRY OVER WINDFARM PLAN
The Secretary of State for the Environment Michael Howard has given the green light for a windfarm development on the edge of the Lake District National Park.
This overturns the recommendations made by one of the Department's inspectors following a four day public enquiry last June.
The proposal from National Wind Power is for 15 wind turbines, each 24 metres high, to be erected only half a mile from the park's southern boundary on Kirkby Moor — a Site of Special Scientific Interest.
There had been strong opposition to the scheme from the national park authority, Cumbria County Council, English Nature and the Council for National Parks.
Its sole supporter was the South Lakeland District Council.
The plan had previously blocked because the inspector concluded that the visual impact would be too great.
Howard justified  overruling the recommendation saying it was national policy to proceed as quickly as possible with renewable energy projects.
He added that the district council supported the scheme and the turbines would be positioned outside the national park.
Jenny Cunningham of the Council for National Parks said ‘We are disappointed at the decision because there are far more suitable sites available.’
The tiny bit of silver lining on the cloud is a new application by National Wind Power — they want to reduce the number of proposed turbines from 15 to 12.
UNDERWATER NATURE TRAIL
Scottish conservationists have won a major award to create a marine underwater trail at Dunollie Point near Oban.
Operation Brightwater, a three-year campaign run by The Scottish Conservation Projects Trust, received £2,000 from Glenfiddich Living Scotland Awards.
The money will be used to set up the trail and to produce a waterproof colour guide.
The Puffin Dive Centre at Glenshellach, Oban, is responsible for the actual building of the trail.
Duncan McKelvie, Director of the Centre, says ‘The aim of creating this trail is to encourage novice scuba divers to become interested in marine ecology at the very outset of their interests in the sport’.
The 300 metre trail will include 12 marked ‘stages’ where different aspects of marine life can be observed.
The campaign desperately needs more disused climbing rope to link the stages.
Contact   if you can help.
News from the National Parks
Golf course to go ahead
Dartmoor National Park Authority's request to the High Court to overturn the Secretary of State's appeal decision granting permission to develop a golf course has been turned down.
The golf course proposal to be carved out of a 113 acre site at Canonteign was originally rejected by the Park Authority as being inappropriate and detrimental to the landscape.
With the High Court's decision, the golf course is now able to go ahead and the Park authority is liable for the costs of both the original appeal at Public Enquiry and of the hearing in the High Court.
Cash boost needed to repair Three Peaks Path
Remedial work costing £469,000 is still needed to repair damaged footpaths over Ingleborough, Whernside and Pen-y-ghent in the Yorkshire Dales National Park.
This is despite the near completion of a £70,000 five year project set up to save the paths.
The Three Peaks Project began in 1987 as a result of major concerns about erosion from the thousands of walkers using the paths every year.
However, much of the work has been experimental due to technical problems in restoring paths.
A number of methods have been used to repair damaged ground, including building broadwalks, experimenting with chemicals to harden soils and reseeding worn areas.
Funding is now needed to ensure that the experiments of the project are fully implemented.
Coast to Coast Cycle Route
A cycle route is planned to link Whitehaven in Cumbria to Sunderland in Tyne and Wear.
The Keswick Railway Line, owned by the Lake District National Park Authority, would form an important section of the proposed route.
The charity Sustrans has produced a feasibility report looking at the possibility of linking existing railway paths in West Cumbria and Country Durham via a network of minor roads, bridleways and disused railway tracks.
Meetings between the various authorities involved, including the Lake District National Park, are to be set up.
This is a welcome initiative, especially as National Park Authorities are looking at ways to reduce car use by visitors.
Charging for Recreational Events
The Lake District National Park Authority has decided to charge for organised recreational events, particularly orienteering.
The Park Authority will charge competitors 50p an event on its land (25p if under 16 years old).
It also decided that a ‘code of conduct’ leaflet should be produced for the benefit of events' organisers.
COUNTRYSIDE
PLEA FOR REFORM
Common farmland birds in Britain are under serious threat unless the government introduces major agricultural reforms according to a report from the RSPB.
Our Countryside Our Future claims that intensive agriculture, promoted by current agricultural subsidies, is destroying natural habitats and putting 40 out of 130 bird species at risk including barn owls, redshank, corn bunting and corncrake.
All have declined dramatically in recent years but corn bunting tops the bill with a massive 60% reduction in their population since 1964.
The main thrust of the report is to call for the government to designate 30% of the UK within its Environmentally Sensitive Area scheme by the year 2000.
Currently covering only 4% of the country the scheme gives farmers cash incentives to help manage the countryside for wildlife.
The report is published at a time of intense debate between EC member countries about the future of agricultural subsidies.
At a meeting this May the Agricultural Ministers agreed that reform was necessary and gave each other a deadline of June 1993 to come up with concrete proposals.
RSPB chief executive Barbara Young, says that the Government now has a fixed deadline for action and must lay the foundations for lasting reform.
‘If it does not show that commitment, then the pressures from modern agriculture, neglect and creeping urbanisation will destroy all that is best in our countryside’.
She dramatically concludes ‘Unless we act now, the silent spring forecast 30 years ago will become reality.’
OUTDOOR SKILLS
Young Outdoor Action readers heading back to school will at least have something to look forward to — outdoor activity lessons.
It's all part of the PE programme which is to be introduced onto the National Curriculum for the first time.
The Curriculum says that as part of the programme 11–14 year olds should experience at least two outdoor activities.
An education spokesperson said that teaching orienteering skills would be a good way for teachers to meet the requirements of the new course.
Sue Larcombe of the RA welcomed the move and says ‘Learning to use a map and compass is as essential as learning to swim’.
RAMBLERS TOUR BRITAIN
Leading members of the Ramblers Association (RA) are on whistle stop tour to highlight access disputes around the country and whip up media attention before a series of protest walks on Forbidden Britain Day (September 27).
The tour will take in Nottinghamshire, Cumbria, Clwyd, Oxfordshire, Kent and Essex.
At each stop national and local campaigners will speak out about problems facing walkers.
David Beskine of the RA said ‘The Hot Spots represent a small sample of the problems which the Ramblers are tackling head-on during Forbidden Britain Day’.
MULTI-ACTIVITY
PARACHUTIST NARROWLY CHEATS DEATH
A parachutist narrowly escaped death after his canopy became tangled with the landing gear of the light aircraft he was jumping from.
Terry Wakenshaw, a veteran of 600 jumps, sustained injuries to his head, chest and right arm as he was caught in the slipstream of the Cessna 206.
According to his instructor at the Borders Parachute Club, Wakenshaw had the presence of mind to carry out a textbook emergency descent to save his life.
He used his left arm to release the tangled parachute and after falling 500ft pulled the ripcord of his reserve chute.
Unfortunately he added to his list of injuries by twisting an ankle on landing.
Friends were left watching helplessly from the ground at Brunton airfield in Northumberland.
Three parachuting colleagues and the plane's pilot were unaware of the incident as it happened.
FOOTPATHS
ROUTE UPGRADE
Britain's oldest road has been officially opened as a regional route by Countryside Commission Chairman Sir John Johnson.
The new designation gives the Icknield Way, running between Ivinghoe Beacon in Buckinghamshire and Knettishall Heath Country Park in Suffolk, a status above ordinary footpaths but below that of National Trails.
However the real benefit of the upgrade for walkers is increased waymarking and the opening up of new stretches of the 100 mile route which has a fascinating history.
It used to form part of a trade route in Neolithic times (4,000–2,000 years BC), providing access between the Norfolk Coast and the downlands of South Central England.
Walking and horse riding leaflets covering the route are available fresh off the press from: Countryside Commission  .
They're free but you'll need to enclose a stamped addressed envelope.
NATURE TRAIL RESTORED
A nature trail has been restored just outside Guildford in Surrey.
The five mile walk winds through three different wildlife habitats — woodland, downland and wetland.
Walkers will see a variety of flora and fauna including deer, kestrels and woodpeckers.
A free colour guide is available from the council offices,
COLNE VALLEY PARK WALKS
The Colne Valley park can now be explored through a series of circular walks.
Colne Valley Groundwork have produced leaflets to guide you round the eight country walks in Denham, Iver, Wraysbury, Harefield, Rickmansworth, Staines Moor, Chalfont Park and Chorleywood.
The leaflets cost 25p each or £2 for the presentation pack of eight — for further details please contact Geraldine Alexander..
SCOTTISH NEWS
Rennie McOwan has been hillwalking in Scotland for over 30 years and is the author of nine books on the outdoors
ON YER BIKE
A KEY SECTION of the Clyde cycleway at Rutherglen Bridge, Glasgow, has now been completed, forming an uninterrupted route for cyclists.
Work was carried out by the Scottish Conservation Projects Trust, working on behalf of Sustrans, the cycling charity which campaigns for ‘sustainable transport in our cities’.
The Clyde cycleway provides a traffic-free route from Glasgow centre and follows the river Clyde to its source.
Previously cyclists had to get off their bikes at Rutherglen and climb steps to cross a dangerous main road.
A path has now been built under the arch of the bridge at the east end of Glasgow Green.
A stone wall has been built using materials from old motorway road surfaces and live willow stakes have been planted to form a natural barrier to prevent erosion by the river and to provide a wildlife habitat.
Overseas volunteers and local people took part in the work.
The project has been funded by the Scottish Office Environment Department, Strathclyde Regional Council River Valley Strategy and the council's road department.
The project is registered with UK2000 Scotland and also as an Operation Brightwater project.
It is good to see more and more cyclists in Scotland and an increasing number of cycling groups on the main roads and in cities.
The new project will greatly help these cyclists as well as lessening the effects of car pollution.
CLAMPDOWN ON BIRD THIEVES
A poisoned golden eagle has been found in the freezer of a stuffed wild bird dealer in Ross-shire.
Dingwall Sheriff Court fined Richard Michalek of Duncanstown, Ross-shire, a hefty £4,000 after he admitted being in possession of 14 dead wild birds.
The police and an RSPB inspector found a barn owl, two hen harriers, a short eared owl, two peregrine falcons, two sparrowhawks, a dipper, a raven, a merlin and a tawny owl at Michalek's house.
The court was told that a stuffed golden eagle could be worth £1,000 and the other birds could fetch £160 each.
An RSPB spokesperson said later that they were very satisfied with the outcome of the case.
‘The important thing is not the fine, but the sheriff's acknowledgement of the seriousness of the offence.’
Mountaineers and hillwalkers who truly care about bird life in the hills and on the shores can help curb such activities by being eagle-eyed themselves.
Always report suspicious looking persons or vehicles to the police or RSPB.
Duncan Orr Ewing, an RSPB officer, recently said egg thieves were now using climbing spikes to rob nests in high trees.
He said the thieves were mostly from Yorkshire and Tyne and Wear and they travelled north each February to raid golden eagle nests.
In May thieves returned to take osprey eggs.
Soon red kites, breeding again in Scotland for the first time in 100 years, may be added to their list.
Orr Ewing said ‘We know for a fact that 20 thieves come here regularly from the north of England, but it is not easy to catch them.
These eggs have no cash value.
It seems the collectors get a kick out of just looking at them.
Fines of up to £3,000 can be imposed for stealing rare bird eggs, but two witnesses are needed to make a prosecution.’
This is the year of the eagle count in Scotland.
Hillwalkers seeing one should send a card with the date and map reference to the RSPB or the Scottish Wildlife Trust.
Care should be taken, however, not to mistake buzzards for eagles.
I failed recently to convince a group of people on Arran that the ‘eagle’ they were seeing was, in fact, a buzzard.
They wanted to see an eagle so they saw one.
A golden eagle is much bigger, tends to soar in great swooping circles, has splayed out wing tips and usually flies higher.
Once you have seen them both there is no confusion.
Hillwalkers finding an eagle's eyrie should stay mum, but let the RSPB know what they have found.
I was startled to read a review copy of a new book that gave a detailed description of an eagle's nest location.
Very unwise.
ACCESS PLAN
TALKS HAVE BEEN held at the high profile Letterewe estate in Wester Ross about a possible overall access pattern for the Letterewe and neighbouring estates.
The meeting issued a formal statement, the Letterewe Accord , and outlined key issues that need to be resolved:
the need to formulate public statements on public access including a better balance between improved access and constraints during the stalking season.
examination of measures to reduce deer grazing pressures to allow regeneration of birch and oak woods.
education programmes to increase visitor awareness of how to tread lightly in a sensitive area.
Improved public funding for ecologically sound land management was also discussed, as were criteria for reaching high environmental standards.
Unfortunately there is a tendency for too many of these outdoor discussions to have a ‘behind closed doors’ feel about them — more public discussion is vital.
Watch this space for further details.
CAUGHT IN THE ACT
THE TENTH DUNDEE Mountain Film Festival will take place on December 4 and 5.
The next best thing to climbing mountains is reading about them or attending slides-theatres or watching films.
The standard of this festival improves every year and has gained international attention.
More details from Terry Isles, the energetic director of the John Muir Trust, at Gardenhurst,.
Ask anyone who has been to previous festivals and they will tell you not to miss it.
FAST MOVE
If it wasn't so tragic it would be pathetic.
Mark Dicks, a 36 year old bed manufacturer from Uden in the Netherlands, recently brought the Ben Alder deer forest in Inverness-shire, one of the most scenically attractive and historic areas of Scotland.
But three weeks later he put it back on the market.
It had rained for a fortnight when he, his wife and two children took up residence in the 12 room Ben Alder Lodge.
Mrs Dicks hated it and told her husband so.
Faced with a family mutiny, he decided to pack it in and sell up.
He wants offers in excess of £1.4m.
Poor souls.
Surely someone told them that it rained in Scotland.
Scottish public opinion is rightly outraged that land can be bought and sold in such a fashion.
OOOPS!
GREMLINS GOT INTO Rennie McOwan's column last month.
His comparison between the Norwegian city of Tromso and the Skye Bridge row in Scotland was meant to emphasise how the Norwegian way of linking the city's islands with tunnels could be applied to Skye.
It would be preferable to the plans for an ugly toll bridge.
LETTERS & QUERIES
WIN A LOWE DAYSACK Each month the writer of the best letter published wins this super Lowe Alpine Walkabout 25 daysack
Got any problems?
Something you want to get off your chest?
Anything going on in the outdoors which interests, irritates or simply makes you laugh?
If so I'd like to hear from you.
I'll do my best to answer any questions on the outdoors and to let you have your say, so there's no time to waste — get scribbling now.
Q
Could you please give me some information about British or French guides or outdoor holiday companies who arrange ski touring trips on the Haute Route?
I don't need a pure instruction type course as I'm a ski leader and have been ski touring in Scotland, the Lakes and the Northern  Pennines .
A
Surprisingly there don't appear to be any holiday companies offering ski touring trips on the Haute Route .
For those who don't know it, the Haute Route runs from Chamonix to Zermatt in the Alps and is one of the best known routes in Europe.
The Ski Club of Great Britain and Eagle Ski Club used to organise touring trips but demand dropped off.
However there are many guides who run trips normally for a maximum of six people.
Those who are fully qualified and members of the British Mountaineering Council include  .
If you need further information give the British Mountaineering Council a call..
Q
I'm a keen walker but have had to stop since my son was born.
However he's now five months old and I'm looking forward to getting back out there.
Can you recommend some manufacturers of baby carriers so that I can bring my son along too?
A
Well there are quite a few.
Those who produce these carriers for toddlers and are members of the Camping and Outdoor Leisure Association include:.
Give them a bell and they'll send you their catalogues.
IT WEREN'T LIKE THAT IN MY DAY
My concern for pollution was positively brought home to me on a recent weekend backpacking trip in the Dark Peak.
I'm not talking about pollution from deadly chemicals or refuse, but from a group of ‘guided’ teenagers who were shouting and screaming.
Not only was this behaviour upsetting for anyone hearing it, but it gave my walking partner and I quite a scare.
When we heard screams and cries for help, we both set off ‘hot foot’ thinking someone was injured.
However when we arrived at the spot we were confronted by a group or ten or so 16–18 year olds scattered across the moor who were screaming and shouting as they jumped in and out of peat troughs.
The two mid-aged adults with the group seemed helpless to stop them.
I've nothing against young people discovering the beauty of our national parks (I myself am only 23) and my anger is not directed at the offenders themselves, but at the so-called leaders of the group.
I know for the readers of Outdoor Action I don't have to quote the Country Code, but for all our sakes let's stick to it.
I fully sympathise with you Nick, but your talk of ‘young people' is alarming.
You're showing old fogey potential at a frighteningly young age.
OLD HAT VIEWS ON ABSEILING
I write concerning the letter from John Cleare headed ‘Abseiling Fears’ in the August issue of Outdoor Action .
I really am fed up with other people's old hat views about abseiling.
As a sport it's safer than a lot of other outdoor sports, including rock climbing.
For rock climbers abseiling is often seen as a necessary evil, only because belays are often flimsy and safety ropes never used.
Reputable centres use safety ropes and good natural and artificial belay points.
Like every other sport, abseiling only becomes dangerous when people are negligent.
Done properly, abseiling is safe, fun and gives enjoyment and a sense of achievement to many.
Judging by the many letters we've received (sorry not enough space to print them all), there are clearly a lot of people who agree with you.
EC IS DESTROYING OUR COUNTRYSIDE
This month's winning letter comes from Brian Cooke of Suffolk
Our countryside is being destroyed by the folly of the EC's agricultural policy.
Farmers are paid subsidised prices to increase productivity, resulting in fields being lumped together into vast prairies with the accompanying loss of hedgerows and public rights of way, not to mention the soil erosion and dust storms.
This is all so that we can produce more that we can eat, and yet for some reason the excess can't be sold off at reduced prices.
It can't even be given away, so it ends up being stored at enormous expense on even more land.
In order to maintain this high level of productivity, it is then necessary to pour huge quantities of fertilisers and pest control chemicals onto the soil.
These in turn get into the food chain, crippling our wildlife and the water supply which then has to be brought up to EC standards at great cost.
The net result seems to be that lowland farming conglomerates are financially happy, as are the manufacturers of agricultural chemicals and the owners of storage silos.
On the other hand the person in the street appears doomed to see ever more of the countryside becoming inaccessible, pay higher food prices, and through higher taxes pay for the storage of grain mountains, beef mountains, wine lakes and so on.
Wouldn't it be much simpler to tackle the problem at its root, and at least try to return towards old fashion farming methods — smaller fields, natural fertilisers and pest controls, a level of productivity we can comfortably consume and an end to the gradual poisoning and demolition of our countryside?
Turn to our news pages to see a story about the RSPB who are calling on the government to change agricultural policy and rectify many of the problems you've outlined.
GEAR GUIDE
STOVES
Our unique gear guide gives you all the gen you need to choose a stove and lists every model
IF THERE'S ONE thing for sure it's that backpacking makes you ravenous.
Over the last few miles to your overnight spot it's often hard to think of much else except getting a hot meal and a drink — quickly.
Food never tastes so good as it does after a long day's hike.
And a cuppa is never so welcome as at a rest stop en route.
Not difficult to understand then why a stove can be a backpacker's best friend — or worst enemy if it's not suited to the use you intend.
Reliability, simplicity, small size and light weight are the things to look for in the many models on the market today.
Some stoves are sold as complete sets with windshield and pans, but if you already have a good set of pans this may be an unnecessary expense.
You choice of stove may depend on the fuel you want to use.
Convenience, cost and availability all come into the picture, with the choice ranging from gas through various liquid fuels to paste or solid fuel blocks, all with their advantages and disadvantages.
KINDS OF FUEL
GAS
Liquid petroleum gas (LPG) for small camping stoves is clean and simple to use.
It usually comes in disposable pressurised containers or cartridges, although larger stoves may use refillable containers.
When you open the control valve the liquid is released into the stove burner as a gas.
Disposable cartridges are either pierceable or self-sealing.
Pierceable canisters sit in the stove base and are pierced by a hollow spike.
A sealing washer stops them from leaking but once they're fitted the cartridge must not be removed until all the gas is used.
Self-sealing cartridges have built-in valves and can be fitted or removed whenever you want.
The stoves either fit directly onto the cartridge or are fed through a short hose with a control valve.
Empty cartridges can retain a residue of flammable gas and so need to be disposed of carefully.
The most common type of LPG gas is butane, but it does not vaporise — so therefore cannot burn — at temperatures below about 4°C.
So for cold weather use look for a mixture of butane and propane.
These gases combined will burn successfully well below freezing point and are generally more efficient.
Propane alone requires stronger, and therefore heavier, containers as it is stored at higher pressure.
With a few exceptions, both pierceable and self-sealing cartridges from different manufacturers follow agreed standards, leading to worldwide interchangeability.
METHYLATED SPIRIT
This is a form of alcohol with added dye and other substances, usually used in simple non-pressurised burners.
It is effective over a wide temperature range although lighting may be difficult in extreme cold.
The spirit can be carried fairly safely in closed containers and evaporates quickly if you spill it without leaving a smell or mess.
The dye and additives used in the UK tend to leave a sooty deposit on pans, but a purer form available in other countries avoids this.
PARAFFIN
Paraffin burns efficiently when  vaporised and mixed with air under pressure, even in bad weather.
It requires a pre-heated burner and leaves a nasty smell if spilled.
It can be carried safely in closed metal or plastic containers, is cheap and fairly easy to buy.
PETROL
Burned under pressure as a vapour mixed with air, petrol can be one of the most efficient fuels.
It may be necessary to pre-heat the burner in cool weather and the fumes can be smelly.
Petrol should only be carried in metal or specially-made plastic containers, and the vapour given off under normal temperatures is very flammable.
Lead-free petrol for cars (not premium grade) is widely available but additives can clog the stove burner.
A specially-formulated fuel for petrol camping stoves, sold as Coleman Fuel, avoids many of the problems but is not cheap.
Some stoves are now designed to run on unleaded petrol.
SOLID FUEL
Solid fuel tablets or burning paste are usually used for pre-heating paraffin or petrol burners.
They're not really used for serious cooking but are OK for making a hot drink en route.
OTHER FUELS
Some stoves are designed to operate on a variety of liquid fuels including, for example, white spirit.
These can be useful where choice of fuel is limited.
CARRYING STOVES
Obviously when you're choosing a stove you have to take into account the space taken up by stove and fuel combined.
Some liquid fuel stoves can be carried with fuel already in the tank, usually enough for a weekend.
Pierceable gas cartridges must remain attached to the stove.
WINDSHIELDS
An enclosing windshield is advisable to conserve heat and fuel and as an additional safety feature.
Some stoves are already fitted with one.
STABILITY
A relatively tall stove on a small base can be a safety hazard when it's got a full pan on top.
Low, wide-based stoves are better.
Always check the stove is level when you're cooking.
Some stoves can be pegged to the ground.
FLARING
Gas, paraffin and petrol stoves may flare in cold conditions as the fuel hasn't  vaporised properly.
This is usually due to insufficient pre-heating of the burner, or in the case of gas stoves, liquid gas collecting in the burner feed tube.
Some designs allow the fuel feed tube to pass through the burner flame before reaching the jet to reduce this risk.
HELPFUL HINTS & SAFETY TIPS
Always study the instructions supplied, try out your stove before setting out, and always keep safety in mind.
Never remove or change gas cartridges in or near your tent or near any source of flame, and never refill a fuel tank when it is hot or near a flame source.
Dispose of used cartridges carefully.
Always make sure there is plenty of ventilation when using your stove.
Do not use the stove inside a tent because of the risk of fire and toxic fumes.
Make sure the stove is level.
On uneven ground use a base and peg it down or use stones to steady it.
Be extra careful when using large pans.
Pans with fixed handles are easily knocked — use separate pan grips.
An effective windshield can save time and fuel.
If using the stove on the ground, cut away long grass and stand the burner on a pad of aluminium kitchen foil.
This will prevent scorch marks.
Store unused gas cartridges or fuel bottles well away from the stove when it is being used.
Use a filter funnel when filling your liquid fuel pressure stove.
Check sealing washers and pump washers.
Carry spares and jet-cleaning prickers on long trips.
FAMILY CAMPING STOVES
These usually have two or more burners and possibly have a grill.
Most run on bottled gas (refillable cylinders) but some use petrol.
OUTDOOR PEOPLE
Walkers and landowners often clash but the conflict is unnecessary, says Environment and Water Advisor for the Country Landowners Association Alan Woods
Access Advisor
‘I'M IN THE business of trying to get people to live together and tolerate each other, so that landowners, countryside users and local authorities can work together on access.
Most of my work is related to the Country Landowners Association (CLA) policy statement on recreation and access which was put out last September.
Basically, we decided to look at our decade-old policy on rights of way and access to open country.
I was secretary of the working party which produced the statement.
CLA members and staff all contributed and we made around 23 policy recommendations on every aspect of access.
Now I'm working to follow up that policy statement.
We want rights of way to be legally defined, definitive maps brought up to date and any conflicts sorted out.
We want properly maintained rights of way and better information about the resources needed to sort them out for the benefit of all.
The best way to counter trespass is to put up waymarks, so rights of way should be properly signposted, not just marked at the edge of the road.
We want the rights of way network to be improved and modernised by  consensus , with more bridleways, more links between rights of way to make circular walks, and links which may also be used to take people out of sensitive areas for forestry and farming.
We want rights of way to be properly managed so that people who litter, trespass, leave gates open, or whose dogs kill sheep can be dealt with.
In the urban fringes, when paths go through farms, farmers daren't leave their tools out in case they get nicked.
We're not in favour of a right to roam on open country — if you have this it'll override other rights.
The right to manage shooting or produce crops should also be a priority, though access shouldn't be ignored.
I'm currently working out measures which can follow up on the policy statement and bring about changes in practice and law.
The CLA won't get exactly what it wants but we hope to get some sort of general agreement.
If we can get some action on the ground to tackle rights of way issues, we'll be able to deal with the kinds of conflicts we've seen in the past decade.
I'm on a working party of the Haselhurst Committee, chaired by the Countryside Commission, with representatives from the National Farmers Union, the Ramblers' Association, the Department of the Environment, MAFF, the Association of County Councils and the Association of District Councils.
We're focusing on rights of way and trying to find out if there's any kind of  consensus to build on.
I also go to conferences, seminars, speak on programmes like Farming Today , appear on television and write letters.
I advise landowners on problems and lobby government — this often involves writing briefs for debates in the House of Commons and organising meetings of MPs.
I also lobby statutory agencies, county councils and voluntary organisations.
Additionally, I work on CLA's conservation policy for the landscape, wildlife and historic buildings and deal with water resources and fisheries.
I'm interested in raising the political profile of access issues — we have to get action.
In general, ramblers and landowners do get one but there is a minority of ramblers who do cause problems, just as there is a minority of landowners who don't respect the rights of walkers.
I have no interest in the fundamentalists on either side, I'm just interested in the people who do want to get one.
The Ramblers' Association would get more progress if they worked with us all the time.
On the public platform they forget the things they're achieving on a local level while working with us.
Most landowners do realise that people have a right to be there and the best PR for them is to ensure the rights of way are clear and enjoyable — landowners need public support.
It is important to make access an integral part of land management agreements wherever possible, but the landowner must be the one to decide on this and enter into a voluntary agreement to provide access.
Access will be improved more quickly by securing agreements than by adopting a fundamentalist approach with the attitude that ‘we will not be moved’.
For a long time local authorities have been getting away with murder — they're not keeping maps up-to-date and have low maintenance budgets for rights of way.
They haven't shown the political will to sort out the problem — there has been an element of divide and rule.
They are reluctant to waste money on access when ramblers and landowners can't get one and sit down together to agree on what's needed.
It's so easy for problems to get out of proportion — most conflicts can be overcome by thoughtful action.
Landowners don't see the public as a problem.
The issues members raise are related to ignorant, inconsiderate or criminal people.
The majority of ramblers are not a problem — it's just those particular people that get the attention.’
SUBSCRIPTION OFFER
FREE BOOK
Subscribe now to get your free copy of John Cleare's Trekking — Great Walks of the World worth £14.95
Every copy signed by the author
This book will whisk you away to some of the wildest and most beautiful trekking areas in the world: from the Annapurna Circuit in Nepal to the Mountains of the Moon in Uganda; from the Royal Road of the Incas in Peru to New Zealand's Routeburn Track; and from stormswept Patagonia to Vancouver Island.
The 13 treks outlined in Trekking — Great Walks of the World are all written by experienced travel writers who give engaging accounts of their various adventures along with a real insight to the areas they visit.
Many of the writers are also professional photographers and this certainly shows — the book is crammed full of sumptuous colour pictures.
Maps and illustrations also help to bring it alive.
Armchair travellers will be  riveted to their seats while the more adventurous will get itchy feet.
For those wanting to satisfy that itch there is an extensive factual section with each trek giving lots of useful practical information.
We are giving every new subscriber to Outdoor Action a free copy of this invaluable book, each one personally signed by the author.
So here's a way to guarantee a brilliant read both now and every month — take out a new subscription to Outdoor Action and we'll send you your free copy of this top quality book, plus the next 12 issues of Britain's Brightest Outdoor Magazine, straight to your door.
But don't delay — this offer is only open while stocks last.
If you don't want to cut your