

NORTH WING.
1794–1948
BEFORE THE HOUSE OF INDUSTRY
The history of the North Wing of Bedford General Hospital is deeply rooted in legislation; in laws which were designed to deal with the problems arising from unemployment, sickness, destitution and vagrancy.
In the middle ages, apart from the help provided by family and friends, parish churches and monasteries extended charity, usually by distributing food, to those in need.
They provided hospitality to travellers, and people with property endowed foundations for the care of the old and the sick.
Two mediaeval hospitals are known to have existed in Bedford.
St. Leonard's Hospital was devoted mainly to the care of lepers but by the time of the Reformation, leprosy had largely disappeared from England.
The original building was, by all accounts, demolished when St. John's railway station was constructed on its present site.
The hospital of St. John was founded in the thirteenth century for the reception and support of the decayed freemen of Bedford.
It developed into the small, but well-endowed parish of St. John the Baptist in Bedford and it escaped the destruction and confiscation of property that was the lot of monasteries and most hospitals during the Reformation.
(It was beautifully restored by the architect, John Gedge, in 1970, when original mediaeval walls and plaster and Tudor timbers were uncovered.
At present the building serves as the headquarters of the local branch of the St. John Ambulance Brigade.)
With the suppression of the monasteries and many of the hospitals, increasing numbers of beggars and paupers produced problems which were dealt with by statute, so that the responsibility for the sick, the poor and the unemployed was placed firmly on the parishes in which they lived.
Voluntary contributions to the ‘poor boxes’ in the parish churches proved less and less adequate to maintain those in need, and from time to time a tax, or rate , was levied on all the property in the parish; the proceeds were then used by the churchwardens and by ‘overseers of the poor’to support the old, the sick and orphans, to provide work for the able-bodied poor, and accommodation for the homeless.
The accounts of the parish officers were audited annually at the Easter Vestry Meeting.
The body of law became increasingly complex as time went by.
It was founded on the Poor Relief Act of 1601 (43 Eliz.1, c.2) which defined the duties of the parish officers towards the poor.
An Act of 1662 (14Car.II.c. 12) defined the law of settlement; that is, how a pauper's place of legal settlement could change from one parish to another, and therefore which parish was legally bound to support him.
The overseers of the poor could board out orphans, and then apprentice them until they could earn their own living.
The sick were provided with food and medicine, neighbours were paid to nurse them and in some cases the overseers paid for medical care by contract with a local practitioner, or patients might be sent to hospital.
Parish poorhouses and workhouses were established for the destitute and if there was no work available, the unemployed were put to paid work on the roads or on local farms.
Vagrants were always discouraged, and those who were able to work, but were not willing to do so, could be sent to a local House of Correction.
In the eighteenth century a number of parishes in England took advantage of an Act of 1722–3 (9 Geo.I.c.7) to combine with other parishes to build a central workhouse in order to manage the problems of poverty more economically.
There were five ancient parishes within the Borough of Bedford and in the second half of the eighteenth century they experienced increasing difficulty in dealing with the poor in the town.
The establishment of the Harpur Trust in 1764, with its provision of marriage portions for girls, and apprenticeships for boys was said to have brought many paupers to the town.
The decision was made to combine the parishes and to form, under the terms of a special Act of Parliament, one large workhouse for the whole Borough of Bedford.
THE HOUSE OF INDUSTRY OF BEDFORD
The House of Industry was established by an Act of Parliament of George III, 1794, ‘…for the better regulation and employment of the poor in the town of Bedford’.
The preamble stated, at length, that the poor within the five town parishes (St. John, St. Mary, St. Peter, St. Paul and St. Cuthbert) were ‘very numerous and supported at great and burthensome expense by the inhabitants of those parishes’.
A house was to be provided to receive those incapable of supporting themselves by reason of age, infirmity or disease; to provide work for those who were capable of it;to correct and punish the idle and profligate; and to educate the infant poor in habits of industry and religion.
By the end of the eighteenth century the American colonies had been lost and the French Revolution, which had begun in 1789, was at its height.
Famine had spread across Europe, the price of bread had risen alarmingly and there was widespread fear of revolution in this country.
Circumstantial evidence suggests that the passage of the Bill through Parliament was largely the work of Samuel Whitbread II.
The first of that name, a Cardington-born brewer of porter, and a Member of Parliament, had lost his seat there in 1790, and was succeeded by his son, who showed little interest in the family business and devoted his considerable talents to work of philanthropy and reform, as well as to patronage of the arts.
He was a radical, a follower of Charles James Fox, the Whig leader and was sympathetic to the aims of the French Revolution.
In addition to his promotion of the Act of Parliament, Whitbread made a loan of £800 to the establishment of the House of Industry.
His father, Samuel Whitbread I, who died in 1796, left a legacy which made possible the building of the Bedford Infirmary (later to become South Wing) a few years later.
After the passage of the Act through Parliament, events in Bedford moved quickly.
All occupiers of property in the five parishes who were rated at £10 per annum, or whose personal estates were worth more than £500, were nominated as the Guardians of the Poor of Bedford.
They met for the first time on May 13th 1794, a date which had been specified in the statute.
The meeting was held at the old Town Hall, and twelve directors of the House were elected.
Again in accordance with the Act, they could not refuse election, nor could they take part while in office in any contract to supply the necessities of the House (with the notable exception of building and repair work).
All this was on pain of a £20 fine and, in respect of the contracts, dismissal from office; the directors were made to take an oath on assuming office (but Quakers were allowed to affirm).
To the twelve directors was added another.
The Mayor of Bedford for the time being was always to be an additional director and at the time of the meeting the Mayor was John Wing, who had been sworn in on 29th September 1793, and served for one year, after which he remained as one of the aldermen.
Mr. Wing was a prominent local architect and he went on to design and build the House of Industry.
Later he designed the Bedford Infirmary, precursor of the County Hospital, Bedford Gaol, and the   adjoining House of Correction.
He also rebuilt the Town Bridge in 1811.
The first stone of the House of Industry was laid in September 1794 and it was officially opened for the reception of paupers in April 1796.
The original building remains virtually intact and is now the administrative block of the North Wing.
There had been some disagreement about the value of the land on which the House was eventually built, and John Wing had written to the Earl of Ashburnham saying that:
‘…we are certain that the candour of Mr. Pearsey and the generosity of your Lordship would be equally distant from wishing to take any extreme advantage in a case of this nature when the interests of the town at large are so materially involved…‘
His Lordship's estate would, the directors hoped, benefit ultimately from the prosecution of the plan.
They agreed to limit the whole to 23 acres, 13 of which were on his Lordship's land, and offered 40 years' purchase of the actual rent — an offer which ‘we flatter ourselves will preclude the unpleasant necessity of having recourse to the decision of a jury’.
The land in question, in the fork between the road to Kimbolton and that to Goldington, also included tracts belonging to the Duke of Bedford and Samuel Whitbread.
Powers were given to the directors to borrow money on the security of the rates levied on the five parishes and on the property itself.
The building, which was designed to accommodate 200 paupers, cost £5,000 in all, for which the Duke of Bedford made a loan of £2,000 and Samuel Whitbread one of £800.
Interest of £100 per annum and £40 per annum, respectively, was paid regularly until the Board of Guardians took over in 1836, when the principal was repaid in full .
The rates (precepts) settled for the five parishes in 1796, ranged from £157.16s. from St. Paul down to £11.7s. from St.John.
The officers of the House — clerk, surgeon, steward, matron and chaplain — were appointed by the directors.
The paupers continued under the care of the churchwardens and overseers of the parishes until the House had been built, but then the directors had powers to apprehend vagrants, single pregnant women, and other malefactors, to admit them, and to set and keep them at work — but only for a maximum of six months.
Five constables were appointed to police these activities.
The directors could apprentice or hire out the children and other inmates, and the industrious poor could be rewarded out of any profits from their work, although no part of the money could be spent on liquor.
They had the responsibility of providing burial grounds and, up to 1855, paupers were  buried in unmarked graves at the western boundary of the grounds, by the entrance from Kimbolton Road.
(This is now a car park.)
At that time, the principal manufacture locally was of lace.
There was extensive trading in coal, which was brought up the river from Yarmouth, and the rich tracts of land surrounding the town produced a considerable quantity of corn, particularly barley.
This was sold in the market and sent by water to the East Anglian ports.
The population of the town numbered about 5,000 and the House of Industry was designed to accommodate two hundred persons; men, women and children.
By January 1st 1799, the number of inmates was 119.
Able-bodied men were put to farm and garden work, which included hedging (‘cutting the quick’).
The women, and children as young as four years of age, made lace and wove flannel.
By 1801, the House was providing all the clothing for the prisoners in Bedford gaol.
These activities went on in the Great Workshop, where the looms were installed.
Many years later, this area was sub-divided and used as a physiotherapy department at the North Wing until in 1986, it was opened out again — for use as a sewing-room.
The directors, who met weekly, acted as a house committee, and the minutes of their meetings show them to have been diligent in pursuing the objectives set out in the preamble to the Act of Parliament which had brought them into existence.
They appointed William Smith as master, and his wife as the matron.
When he died in 1800, Mrs. Smith took over her husband's duties and continued to do so for several years, to the satisfaction of the directors.
John Pulley of St. Paul's Square was appointed surgeon at a salary of £45 per annum.
No part of the accommodation had been specifically designed as a sick bay, but at an early stage the directors, on his advice, fitted up the room at the eastern extremity as a ‘suitable place of confinement’.
(It is now the district manager's office.)
The minutes and the printed annual accounts of the directors throw further light on the activities at the House of Industry in the early years of the nineteenth century.
The County Infirmary, the voluntary hospital south of the river, had been open to receive patients from 1803 and the directors duly subscribed 10 guineas per annum, later increased to £21, so that sick paupers could be sent there.
On the recommendation of the surgeon, patients such as Edward Ford, who had scrofula (‘the King's evil’), were admitted to Margate Sea-Bathing Infirmary, for which payment was made.
The educational needs of the  inmates were not overlooked, and Mr. T. Eagles was paid a salary of £3.5s. ‘for teaching the children to sing’(presumably at services in the chapel).
Patients sent to the lunatic asylum, which was off the Ampthill Road, were charged at a weekly rate to the directors according to the numbers; in 1818 for example, the cost was £18.12s., but two years later, £78.
There were payments for medical relief and outdoor relief as well as for midwifery and for leeches (14s.6d).
Medical relief was granted to meet extra expenses of paupers in their homes.
Widow Mansfield, for example, was granted 3s. medical relief for ‘bad eyes’, John Treadwell had 2s.6d because his two children were ill, and William Ames was allowed 5s. on account of his wife's lying-in.
In addition to the income from the rates collected from the parishes, the directors received cash payments from the fathers of illegitimate children by order of the magistrates, as well as the proceeds from the sale of lambs, calves, skins, wool, and the hire of horses.
Inmates were put out to sweeping the streets, which netted £l7 in 1816.
On Christmas Eve 1817 a special meeting of the directors was held to consider a claim from a Mr. Simmonds who had suffered damage to himself, as well as a broken window and injury to his goods, from the horse-and-cart belonging to the House.
The claim was settled by arbitration for about £100.
The annual accounts for that year include the sale of a dead horse for  fourteen shillings, and the sale of a live one for fifteen pounds.
(Which of the two horses, if either, was responsible for the accident is not stated.)
The men employed on the road were to be given notice that they would be required to work from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m., each being allowed one hour for breakfast and one hour for dinner.
William Kirby was ordered to be ‘confined on bread and water for a week for abusing the Master and Mistress and uttering horrid oaths and imprecations at the directors’.
He was discharged a month later.
The Commissioners for the Improvement of the Town of Bedford proposed to the directors of the House that they should sweep and clean the carriage and foot pavements in the town for £26.5s. per annum.
This was agreed — on behalf of the inmates.
The Trustees of the Harpur Charity were asked to admit the female children of the House to their preparatory school.
In 1821, Mr. Pulley resigned and his successor, Thomas Woolridge, a surgeon of the High Street, was appointed at 50 guineas per annum, to be followed himself by Mr. Blower a few years later at a salary of £63 per annum .
Mr. Chapman, the master, and his wife, who acted as the matron, were together paid £50 a year, which included their rations.
By 1831, the directors noticed that an increased number of beggars were ‘practising impositions on the humane inhabitants of the town’.
An advertisement was put out requesting that no relief be given to beggars; the really needy were to be referred to Mr. Chapman at the House of Industry.
From the end of the eighteenth century the population, particularly in the rural areas, began to increase; there was rising unemployment.
Under the old Poor Law, a man without work stayed in his own home and the parish provided an allowance for him and his family.
Although he could be put to work on the roads, or in the gravel pits, or on a farm (as a ‘roundsman’), that work brought in no extra funds to his community; many over-populated agricultural communities faced bankruptcy in consequence.
In order to economise, the officers of some parishes put their workhouses out to private contract; this practice — an early example of privatisation — was known as ‘farming the poor’.
An example of this expedient occurred in Potton in 1812:
‘We do agree in Vestry held at the Bull Inn in Potton the 13th day of October 1812 that Roger Johnson, breeches maker of Potton, Beds. aforesaid shall farm the workhouse after the rate of 4s.6d per head old and young, to have their earnings and to employ them in any way to his advantage, to provide a sufficient quantity of good wholesome food and  to have their meals hot three days in the week (commonly called pott days)…’
‘If corn etc. continuing at the high price 'tis now, 'tis to be left in the breast of the churchwardens and overseers to advance what they think proper — if corn etc. falls during the year no deductions to take place…’
This contract is signed by the two churchwardens, the two overseers and several others.
Unemployed labourers were aware of their legal right to stay where they were, even though the developing industrial centres in the North and in the Midlands were desperately in need of labour.
The main intention of the new poor law was to redress that balance, and to persuade those who were able-bodied, but without work, to travel north to find it.
For them, relief was to be provided only in the workhouse , where families were separated and the workhouse diet was meant to be less palatable than that of the poorest working labourer in the district.
The ‘deserving’ poor, and the aged who had homes, remained eligible for out-relief.
The new Bill received the Royal Assent in 1834, against the background of agricultural depression and rioting.
The radical William Cobbett described it as a ‘poor man's robbery bill’, designed to reduce the standards of the labouring poor.
A central commission with powers to group parishes into Unions for Poor Law administration and to form Boards of Guardians in each locality was established.
These Boards had powers to decide the provision of relief and admission to workhouses.
So it was that the affairs of Bedford's House of Industry came under scrutiny by a Mr. Adey who wrote to the then mayor, Dr. George Witt, saying that he ‘would certainly recommend that that nearly useless building, at present, should be taken advantage of to form an extensive union of parishes for workhouse purposes’.
Mr. Adey had intended to call on the directors to explain his ideas, but he had been ‘confined by a complaint in his legs and was still obliged to be carried from his sofa to a carriage’.
He had no doubt that the Board would ‘speedily declare a union of the five Bedford parishes with forty or fifty surrounding ones’.
In this way the new Bedford Poor Law Union, consisting of most of North Bedfordshire, found a ready-made workhouse in the Bedford House of Industry.
(The other poor law unions in the county, for example in Ampthill and Biggleswade, had to build anew.)
There was considerable opposition to the new system, and riots occurred in Bedfordshire.
A relieving officer was attacked and robbed on successive   days; the Ampthill House of Industry was stoned and the High Constable knocked down.
An inspector, two sergeants and eighteen men of the Metropolitan Police arrived and 150 specials were sworn in.
Four troops of yeomanry were held in reserve in Luton but were not needed.
One of the rioters claimed afterwards that ‘all they had wanted was work’.
Mr. Adey's judgement of the state of the old House of Industry was harsh, but possibly justified by the facts contained in the last annual report and account, up to March 1836, by which time the average number of inmates had fallen to sixty-six.
The manufacture of flannel had been discontinued because of the growth of the textile industry in the large towns — and the consequent loss of markets where it could be sold without loss.
(According to the local newspaper, the looms remained in the large room at the North Wing until near the end of the nineteenth century.)
In that final year, the income from the sale of lace, vegetables, fat and lard, pigs, horses, hay and firewood together brought in a total of only £74.
The building and the organisation were handed over to the new body of Guardians of the Bedford Poor Law Union, on November 7th 1836.
EARLY DAYS IN THE BEDFORD UNION
The Poor Law Commissioner arrived from London to make arrangements to combine the rural parishes with those of the town in the Bedford Union.
Three of the twelve directors strongly opposed the plan; among them the redoubtable Mr. Hurst.
George Hurst, the son of a curate, was born in 1800 and was apprenticed to a silk mercer at the age of 13, at the end of which time he applied himself to an energetic programme of self-improvement and became a schoolteacher.
In 1826 he took over his deceased brother's drapery business in Bedford at a time when there was a serious run on the banks and many small traders were struggling to survive.
He did, however, and went on to become a leading citizen.
Hurst had family connections with the medical profession; his brother Isaac was a Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons, a one-time pupil of Sir Astley Cooper, and practised in Bedford.
George's son, Robert Charles, qualified in medicine and was in practice at Olney, but died at the age of 34.
In 1828 George Hurst became a director of the House of Industry and subsequently a member of the Board of Guardians, a position which he held until he was in his nineties.
He was a radical and five times the Mayor of  Bedford, remaining on the council until 1892, when he was voted out by the Conservatives (who expressed personal regret).
He died in December 1898, just before his ninety-ninth birthday, and his funeral, at Holy Trinity, was a great occasion of public mourning in Bedford.
Hurst Grove is named after him.
The consent of two-thirds of the directors of the House of Industry was necessary before the building could be transferred, and after the Mayor, Dr. George Witt, had met in ‘a somewhat private way’ with the Commissioner, a special meeting was called to obtain the required number of signatures.
The three opponents still refusing to sign on the grounds that there had not been adequate consultation, and two more being absent, the Mayor rode off on his horse and collected a signature from one of the absentees.
And so the House of Industry became the workhouse for the whole union; it remained the property of the Board of Directors, who let the building and the front garden to the Poor Law Guardians for £280 per annum.
A number of sub-committees were set up to put into effect the directions of the Poor Law Commissioner and at a meeting on 23rd September l835, it was found administratively convenient to group the parishes into Northern and Southern districts, an arrangement which has persisted in the health  service in Bedfordshire in various forms for the same reason up to the present day.
The Board of Guardians gave notice that medical gentlemen willing to furnish medical relief to the paupers resident in the Bedford workhouse, with special arrangements (fees) for midwifery, were to send sealed tenders to Mr. Samuel Wing, clerk to the guardians, stating their ‘terms per case’.
Their duties included that of inspecting the inmates twice weekly, whether sick or not.
In the event, Mr. Blower remained in office, as did Mr. Chapman, the master, each at a salary of £50 per annum.
The care of the sick had not been the main concern of the House of Industry, and early personal records are lacking, but the workhouse master kept a weekly journal, the earliest entry in which is dated April 23rd 1842.
On May 21st 1842 at a meeting of the Board, Mr. William Bailey, MRCS, was appointed as the new surgeon at a salary of £50 per annum plus 10s.6d per case for midwifery.
The committee also agreed to pay the master his expenses in apprehending runaway boys from the workhouse.
Adult inmates who absconded from the workhouse, were charged, on their recapture, with making off with clothing which was the property of the workhouse.
One, Catherine Barton, absconded after supper by climbing over the wall and did not return until the next morning after 7 o'clock.
Two days later the master reported that she was taken before the magistrates, and was sentenced to three days in the House of Correction.
Sarah Fuller had complained that she had lost some money.
Sophie Swales was found to have in her possession 1s.1d and Jane Lawrence 3d., which she said she had borrowed from Sophie Swales.
Mr. Chapman enquired of the Board whether the paupers and children should be allowed to have money in the workhouse.
In July 1842, the master noted that James Paine, an able-bodied man, ‘objects and refuses to attend divine worship on the grounds that he is of no persuasion, and that he will not attend in a place like this, where they act contrary to scripture in parting man and wife’.
Despite a lengthy conversation with the chaplain, Paine could not be persuaded to attend divine worship and consequently he was placed in a room by himself during the time of the service.
Some time later this ‘incorrigible rogue’ was taken to court for running away and leaving his wife and four children who became a charge on the parish of Felmersham.
On another occasion the master recorded that on entering the men's yard, he discovered that Paine had newspapers concealed in his pocket:
‘The Master took them quietly from his person and told him such things were not allowed to be introduced into the workhouse, he then placed himself in a fighting attitude and threatened to knock the Master's teeth down his throat, thereby setting bad examples to others’
Finally James Paine committed an assault on the master, and was sent to gaol for two months whereupon his wife Sarah, who had by then been herself admitted, ‘maliciously broke a square of glass in the dining hall window and was very violent’.
At a time when there were five married couples over the age of 60 in the workhouse, Mr. Chapman noted that, while William Wilson and Frances, his wife, were desirous of sleeping together, Thomas White and his wife Elizabeth, could not agree to do so — the man was willing but his wife was not.
In another entry the master had sent the porter for the medical officer at three o'clock in the morning to attend a single woman in childbirth.
Mr. Bailey requested the porter to call Mr. George Burnham to attend for him and so he did, but not until the child was born.
Special diets were allowed for sick inmates and these were allocated at the discretion of the medical officer:
Full Diet : 6 ozs. meat, 15 ozs. bread, 1 oz. butter, 1 pt. beer, tea & sugar.
Ordinary : 4 ozs. meat, ½ pint of beer, with the house allowance of bread & cheese or butter daily, according to age and sex.
Fever : Milk, arrowroot, sago, eggs, tea and sugar, with bread.
Extra diets (e.g. for ‘sitters-up’): 6 ozs. bread, ½ oz. cheese or butter, with tea and sugar for the night.
Paupers engaged in emptying the cesspools during the night were allowed one pint of beer, 7 ozs. bread and 1 oz. cheese.
In November 1842 the master, Mr. Chapman, resigned and the appointment of his successor was to prove crucial to future relations in the workhouse.
The Board had decided that, in the event of a married man being elected (the matron was remaining in post), his wife would be required to live in the house with him, and £15 per annum would be deducted from his salary in respect of her maintenance.
There were 70 candidates for the post, and the shortlist of eight included a sergeant, an inspector, and a superintendent of police, and a sergeant-major of the 25th Regiment of Foot.
The appointment went, however, to William Clark, a married man aged 32, who had been assistant overseer and vestry clerk at Eaton Socon.
He was elected on the third round of voting.
At the same meeting the Board approved medical relief on the application from relieving officers in the outlying parishes.
(This could consist of money, special diet, medical expenses or admission to the workhouse because there was a doctor there.)
Charles B. of Roxton had a fractured thigh; others were suffering from spitting of blood, illness of wife, injury to chest, accident to child, cut hand, and — which may have provided relief of a different sort to the Board — two men with fever: Abraham Fox and James Rabbit.
Before the new master arrived, the Board found it necessary to appoint a sub-committee to enquire into the truth of a report which had been submitted to them ‘which, if founded in truth, would affect the character of Mr. William Clark’.
The committee cleared his name and he took over from his predecessor on December 10th 1842.
Mr. Chapman's last entry in the journal noted that at 8.45 a.m. a ten-year-old boy had been in the sick ward for three days but had been taken much worse.
The medical officer had been sent for, but the boy died before he arrived, at 9.30 a.m.
An inquest was held on the following day and his death was ascribed to natural causes.
On New Year's Eve the new master reported that Harriet Shimmers used profane language, and wouldn't eat supper or have it weighed.
She gave it to a girl named Boston.
The master got it back from Boston, upon which Shimmers and Susan Cox swore at him.
On going to bed they began singing, disturbing other inmates.
From then on, the journal, and the minutes of the Board reveal a picture of increasing trouble in the workhouse.
At Christmas, 1843, some of the boys became disorderly, breaking a wall and making a fire in the privy.
A number of the men absconded during the week, returning again in the evening when they said that they had been Christmas boxing.
‘The whole of the inmates were rather disorderly on Monday, in consequence of this being Christmas Day and having nothing but bread  and cheese for dinner.
Some of those who had absconded, and some women who were brought before the Board, were taken to the magistrate's and on the Sunday evening after Christmas the house was in a very disturbed state so far that we did not think it prudent to assemble for Divine Worship.’
Mr. Clark had to get a bricklayer to repair the walls that were broken and he complained that although the schoolmaster was in attendance the whole time, the boys had made it worse than it was before.
He also recorded his suspicions that those paupers who had gone to prison were now wearing clothes belonging to the workhouse, and enquired whether their own clothes should be sent to them.
He further complained about the matron, who had lost her key which he subsequently found in the door of the laundry, and ‘seven women busily engaged among the clothes’.
Mr. Clark called the attention of the Board to the schools, and to the female side of the house as he was ‘certain if the business is conducted as it has been, it is impossible to carry out the system…’.
One entry in the Journal at this time summarises, perhaps, the atmosphere in the workhouse:
‘Several of the Wootton paupers were very obstinate on their admission, and persisted in not being parted from their wives.
The Master tried both persuasion and threats but…was compelled at length to send for a constable and resort to force.
One pauper was locked up for a short time and when let out he was very quiet and all of them have been so since.’
Matters were clearly out of hand.
The Mayor of Bedford wrote to the Board expressing the concern of the Justices of Peace about the state of insubordination in the workhouse.
There was a big turnout at a meeting of the Board of Guardians, which included the Poor Law Commissioner, to consider the matter.
A sub-committee had conducted a strict review of the conduct of all four members of the staff and that of the porter.
They had discovered with regret that bad feeling existed between the matron and the master to an extent prejudicial to the discipline and good order of the House.
The matron was recommended for dismissal.
The moral and industrial training of the children was the most important of all the important duties, and the schoolmaster was deficient in his ability to enforce obedience.
Great disorders had occurred among the children which would not have taken place had proper influence been exerted by the  master.
He should be dismissed.
The schoolmistress was ‘quite inefficient’ and was also to go, but the porter was to be admonished only.
The Commissioners were not surprised to find that the arrangement of the master and the matron of the workhouse not being man and wife had not succeeded, and they concluded that all four should be called on to resign, as ‘none of these appear fit for their respective offices’.
It was further resolved that the new master and matron should be man and wife, at a joint salary of £80 per annum, with board and lodging in addition .
It was thought preferable for the schoolmaster and schoolmistress to be man and wife.
A Mr. and Mrs. Martin were subsequently appointed as master and matron, and their daughter Selina was given the post of schoolmistress.
The acting schoolmaster at the time was a young unmarried man.
The journal for 15th June 1844 records the presence of 269 inmates.
One of the boys, Reuben N., had scaled a wall and run away from the workhouse.
He had been observed by Dr. Rudge of Great Barford, and sent back to the House under the care of Beech, a policeman.
The master questioned the boy and the reason he gave for absconding was that the schoolmaster had ‘meddled with him’.
John Graham, a vagrant, had destroyed his own clothes and was now naked….
MIDDLE YEARS AT THE WORKHOUSE
In the aftermath of the disorders, and prompted by the Mayor's letter, attention turned to conditions in the workhouse.
Not only was it overcrowded, but there was ‘an utter want of employment for the male paupers’.
It was suggested that a flour-mill for the employment of the paupers should be created, the flour produced to be used for making the bread for the paupers in the workhouse, as well as for the several parishes in the union.
Six ‘pounders’ were purchased, so that the able-bodied men in the workhouse could be employed in the bruising of bones for use in the glue factory; each man was to process one hundredweight a day.
George Hurst did not remain aloof and at his insistence, a system of industrial training was begun, the inmates undertaking the manufacture of all articles of clothing, the knitting of stockings, tailoring, and shoe-making.
The youths made considerable progress in learning their trades and most of  those who were put out as apprentices retained their situations.
There were exceptions, however.
An apprentice named James King had been severely and cruelly beaten by his master, an Ampthill tailor.
The boy had been examined by a surgeon, Thomas Chapman, who found numerous wheals, bruises and lacerations, and his report to the guardians led to proceedings being taken against the tailor before the County magistrates; he was convicted and fined £5.
A few weeks later the boy complained of a further assault; the tailor was again convicted and once more fined £5, but on this occasion the clerk to the Board applied successfully to the magistrates for the boy to be discharged from his indentures.
It is pleasant to record that after a two-month trial period, James King was happily settled in a new apprenticeship to a stonemason of St. Paul's, John Andrews, and that he signed the indentures ‘without aid or assistance’.
William Bailey was medical officer to the workhouse and also to Bedford and Cardington district, as well as being the public vaccinator.
On 27th May 1854 while the Board of Guardians was in session a message was passed in to say that two persons from St. Cuthbert with smallpox had just been brought to the workhouse.
The Board ordered that they be received into the vagrants' ward as a temporary measure, and went on to instruct the medical officer to vaccinate all the other unprotected inmates of the workhouse.
This was at a time when the principle of vaccination had still not been universally accepted, although the Vaccination Act of 1840 had enabled the guardians to provide it for paupers.
Mr. Bailey's own views are not stated, but as his appointment had included that of vaccinator, his reaction to this command was probably provoked by what he saw as lay interference in a professional matter.
(It may have been simple retaliation — he had been mildly reprimanded by the guardians for allowing an unqualified assistant to  attend a midwifery case as his deputy earlier that year, and had been instructed to provide the name of a legally qualified locum.)
He insisted on seeing the Board in person for an explanation of their order; some accommodation was evidently reached and Mr. Bailey was continued in office for a further year.
But on 24th March 1855, he died quite suddenly, and his deputy, William Thurnall, continued until a new medical officer had been appointed.
On April 7th 1855, Charles Edward Prior MD, was elected by 29 votes to 12 on the second round of voting, and remained in post until June 1st 1900; he and his successor, Dr. Goldsmith, kept medical report books, the earliest survivor of which begins in February 1873.
The duties of the workhouse doctor had been laid down in 1868 by order of the Poor Law Board:
To enter in writing, daily and punctually, reports as to defects in the diet, drainage, ventilation, warmth etc. at the Institution.
To note any excess in the numbers of any class of inmates which he may deem detrimental to health.
To note defects in the arrangements for the infirmary or the sick wards and the performance of the duties by the nurses of the sick.
In the early days, Dr. Prior concentrated in his reports on these duties.
The temperature in the sick rooms was to be maintained at 65° and a thermometer was to be installed.
He noted that the class of ‘able-bodied men’ included a large percentage of partially disabled and debilitated persons who ‘do not bear low temperatures with impunity’.
There was no fire in the dining hall (it is now the committee room and the adjoining waiting area).
Dr. Prior felt that means of warming the room should be contrived so that the temperature at the commencement of the meal should not fall below 32° Fahrenheit.
More than a year later he was still complaining about the ‘cold dark dining room (which the sun never shines into)’.
The only way of heating it was by means of six or seven gas burners.
The iron bedsteads in the wards were only 2ft; 4ins; wide and there was an insufficient number of flock mattresses so that the bedding projected in the gaps between the iron laths.
In November 1872, the Board received an application from Cambridge Medical School for the bodies of paupers who had died in the workhouse, and were without funds or relations, to be sent there for the study of anatomy.
Opinion was divided and George Hurst proposed that the request be refused; he was outvoted by 10 votes to 8 and gave notice of his intention to protest.
In October 1875, their medical officer drew the attention of the Board, after many previous attempts, to meet the need for a separate building, or wards, to receive alleged lunatics who were not susceptible of curative treatment (sic ) in an asylum, but ‘whose habits and conduct are such that they cannot be associated with the other inmates without injury to the latter’.
His pleas evidently remained unanswered, but Dr. Prior didn't give up.
Eight years later he was pleading that ‘insane persons are occasionally and necessarily detained in the house for one or two days while arrangements are being made for their removal to the asylum’.
Some were very violent and it was necessary to close and barricade the room.
There was no special room for the purpose except the receiving-room for all persons on first admission, and they found such lunatics dangerous and objectionable.
From time to time cross-infection, such as an outbreak of erysipelas among the elderly men, caused problems.
In May 1878, complaints had been received that the beer and the wine were bad, and the doctor was called upon to taste them.
He reported that the beer was very weak but not too bad, and that the wine was of low quality and likely to produce acidity.
For reasons that were probably unconnected with wine-tasting, Dr. Prior's subsequent entries became very sparse until, some years later, the chairman of the Board made a note of his own saying that he ‘would be obliged if Dr. Prior would make more frequent entries in the book as to the general condition of the house and its inmates’.
The chairman who ventured that mild criticism was well-placed to do so.
He was Charles Longuet Higgins, who was born in Turvey Abbey in 1806 and lived for most of his life in the family home.
In his youth, his first ambition was to take holy orders; his second was to acquire a thorough knowledge of medicine.
He went up to Cambridge in 1826 and read Divinity; while there he helped to found the Jesus Lane Sunday School.
His brother-in-law wrote in a memoir that on his return to Turvey in 1829, Higgins was ‘unremitting in his solicitude for the poor of the parish’.
He wanted to take holy orders, but his father prohibited such a step.
However, ‘he remained in heart a clergyman to the end of his days’.
Higgins then persuaded his father to allow him to ‘walk the wards’ at the London hospitals, and he became a medical student at St. Bartholomew's Hospital from 1836 to 1838 (the great Sir James Paget was a fellow-student there).
At the end of that time ‘he qualified himself for practising whether as   a physician or a surgeon’, and returned to Bedfordshire where, ‘with the consent of the Clergy and the local practitioners, he attended the destitute poor’.
A long wand was kept in front of the Abbey so that, in case of sudden emergency at night, he could be aroused by tapping on his bedroom window.
He continued his medical studies in Bedford:
‘Twice a week throughout more than one winter, he rose at five in the morning, and having saddled his pony himself, left the Abbey punctually as the clock struck six in order to attend Dr. Witt's clinical lecture at seven, in the Bedford Infirmary’.
Nothing, it was said, was ever out of his line; he attended women in labour, extracted teeth, and treated fractured limbs with equal dedication.
He was in active practice for twenty-five years, and was elected chairman of the Board of Guardians in 1837, serving for forty-eight years.
After his death, his wife told of an occasion, when Higgins was at the height of his medical practice, and when a young woman was ‘seized with such a violent haemorrhage that the only expedient was transfusion’.
The proper instrument for the purpose not being at hand, a man was sent to get it from the Bedford Infirmary.
Charles offered himself as a donor and sat with  his arm ready bared to give blood, but the unfortunate patient had died by the time the messenger returned.
Charles Longuet Higgins died in 1885 and was buried in the family vault at Turvey.
SMALLPOX
In 1871 there was an outbreak of smallpox in Bedfordshire, as elsewhere.
The first cases were reported to the Board of Guardians from Renhold, Kempston, Thurleigh, and St. Cuthbert's in the town.
In October Mr. Johnson, the resident surgeon and secretary of Bedford Infirmary, wrote to the guardians saying that a special meeting of the governors of the infirmary would be held to consider the exclusion of smallpox patients from the Fever Hospital (which had been established there in 1847).
Shortly afterwards, the news came that the Infirmary would no longer accept such patients, and at a meeting of the Guardians on 2nd December 1871, the Rev. Canon Haddock proposed the erection of a smallpox hospital in the form of a detached building on workhouse premises.
A deputation from Bedford Corporation, acting on this occasion as the Sewer Authority , proposed joint action to build a temporary smallpox hospital on land held by the local government board.
The guardians, led by George Hurst, readily agreed.
It soon transpired, however, that the Corporation had agreed to combine with the guardians for the reception of smallpox patients from the Borough only, not from the rural areas, whereupon Mr. Haddock gave notice that he would raise once more the question of putting the hospital on workhouse premises, specifically the south-east corner of the grounds.
On 6th January 1872, a committee appointed by the local government board attended a meeting of the Guardians, and there was agreement to the joint enterprise; a letter from Mr. J. T. Wing enclosing a rough plan for a smallpox hospital to accommodate 24 patients at an estimated cost of £300 was also considered.
The guardians proposed that the Borough would contribute a quarter of the cost of the building and payment for the patients they sent.
The Borough preferred to build the hospital themselves and make suitable financial arrangements with the guardians; in this they were supported by Mr. Hurst, but not by a majority.
On March 2nd 1872, a letter came from the Mayor saying that the Corporation's building would be ready in a few days and that they would be  willing to receive patients under ‘such arrangements as may be deemed best adapted to check the progress of the epidemic’.
The Corporation yielded on the question of receiving pauper patients from outside the town, and agreement was reached, although the Rev. Mr. Haddock still wanted to hold out.
On the same day the lowest tender to build the smallpox hospital, for £350 (Mr. Toll), was accepted, on the understanding that the contract had to be completed in three months.
The faction still wanting their own building on the workhouse grounds continued to press their case, but were finally defeated by the local government board, which raised serious objections concerning the terms on which the guardians held the land and the details of the proposed building.
In short, planning permission was effectively withheld.
The epidemic continued; by March 16th 1872, Dr. Goldsmith, the medical officer for Bedford and Cardington districts had had under his care alone 75 cases of smallpox, of whom 15 had died.
Of the latter, ten had never been vaccinated at all, and in two others no marks of vaccination were to be seen.
In no instance had any person recently vaccinated or re-vaccinated contracted the disease.
A vigorous programme of vaccination continued throughout the epidemic.
The smallpox hospital was sited between the London Road and the railway, and on November 29th, 1873, the Town Council sold the building to the Board of Guardians for £100.
It had been built to accommodate sixteen patients and in February of that year was occupied by twenty-one paupers, for whose maintenance the Board of Guardians had been responsible.
The outbreak was gradually contained, and in November 1874, Mr. Wing, the surveyor, in reporting the completion of alterations at the smallpox hospital, had noticed that the person in charge had stored corn and other garden produce in the building, which had become very dirty, and was infested with rats.
As a result of this report the caretaker was informed that if he did not mend his ways he would be discharged.
Sporadic cases of the disease continued for some years and from time to time it was necessary to reopen the hospital for their reception.
A fairly serious outbreak occurred in 1928 at the workhouse.
There were twenty-five cases in all, six of whom were casuals, and two non-resident officers.
All of these were admitted to the smallpox hospital, which was, however, later demolished, when the ground was built over for industrial purposes.
DR.
PRIOR
In February of 1873, in the midst of all the heated discussions about the smallpox outbreak, there came a letter of complaint from Lord St.John.
If it afforded the guardians a little light relief, the minutes do not suggest that the complaint was taken anything but seriously.
Paupers were often taken back from the workhouse to their own parishes for burial.
A funeral procession from the workhouse had had the temerity to pass through his Lordship's private grounds, thereby producing feelings of outrage.
The porter who had accompanied the procession was called before the Board, and in explanation said that the driver of the cart didn't know the way, nor did he himself.
They had made enquiries of someone in the village, Melchbourne, but were given the wrong directions, through ignorance or malice.
The porter was reprimanded and a humble apology was presented to his Lordship.
During the last quarter of the nineteenth century, the needs of the sick and disabled at the workhouse occupied more and more of the time and energies of the officers and the Board of Guardians to whom they were responsible.
At Christmas 1888, the figures given in the master's journal show the size of the problem:
Dr. Prior added his voice to that of the master in drawing the attention of the Board to the increasing number of aged, infirm and sick.
On one occasion, he noted that curtains had been put between three of the beds in  the aged women's ward, and thought this undesirable for several reasons — having reference to cleanliness and ventilation.
He continued to refer patients to the Sea-Bathing Hospital and to other special hospitals such as Moorfields in London for eye complaints.
An eight-year-old boy from Riseley with a club foot, and another eleven-year-old with serious hip disease, were transferred to an orthopaedic hospital, while the father of the latter, who probably had tuberculosis of the spine, was sent to a convalescent home at Margate with the consent of the governors, who provided the necessary funds.
Relations with the Infirmary (which was to be rebuilt as the County Hospital at the turn of the century) were not always amicable.
It was a time when many advances were being made in the diagnosis and treatment of conditions for which little could be done before.
The voluntary hospital, the Infirmary, was specifically designed to care for the sick, and its relative freedom from the constraints associated with spending public money gave it the advantage over the sick wards at the workhouse.
The Board of Guardians was continuing to subscribe to the Infirmary and Dr. Prior referred a number of his workhouse patients for admission and treatment.
On January 6th 1890, he noted:
‘William Joseph C., a deaf-and-dumb man with venereal disease, was sent to the Infirmary on Saturday last with a certificate, but was sent back as ‘not a fit patient for admission as an in-patient’.
For thirty-five years all patients of this class have been sent to the Infirmary for care and treatment.
I shall be glad to receive the instructions of the Board as to the present case and for my future guidance.’
The Board instructed their clerk to communicate with the governors of the infirmary on the matter, and in his reply a week later, the house surgeon there (who acted as hospital secretary) said that he had thought the case capable of being treated as an out-patient.
This view was supported by the medical staff whom he consulted on the matter.
In response, the guardians pointed out that for the previous thirty-four years the infirmary had received patients suffering from the same class of disease as William Joseph C. from the workhouse, in accordance with the arrangement whereby the guardians were currently paying £202 per annum to the infirmary.
As there were now objections to receiving them, and as the guardians were not allowed to send out-patients from the workhouse, the committee were considering stopping the payments and providing an adequate infirmary at the workhouse — an arrangement which might have ‘many advantages, pecuniary and otherwise’.
Nevertheless the governors supported their doctors; the Bedford Union subscription to the  infirmary was discontinued, and was not resumed until some ten years later.
Facilities at the workhouse for treating the sick and coping with the elderly were gradually expanded.
By 1905, for example, of the 268 beds at the North Wing, only 99 were for the able-bodied.
The sick wards were now referred to as the workhouse infirmary, a new block was built in 1916, and by the twenties, it was this section of the Bedford Union which became St. Peter's Hospital.
The four beds in the lying-in ward were usually fully occupied.
The master reported to the Board that a young woman named Annie H. had been sent to the workhouse immediately after her confinement by her mistress, Miss M., of Woburn Road, and the clerk to the Board was directed to call the attention of the lady to the serious risk incurred by her in so doing.
Dr. Prior noted that the number of cases, both medical and surgical, requiring special appliances was increasing and on his recommendation the Board agreed to the purchase of a water-bed (or a water-mattress) and two additional spring beds.
The medical report books, as Queen Victoria's reign approached its end, bear eloquent witness to the progress that had been made at the workhouse  since those days when the deaths of the fifteen-year-old Samuel B., and the Infant Bastard child of Susan C. had been recorded in the cold official language of the time.
George Shepherd, aged 24, had been in the workhouse for some months suffering from consumption.
He was anxious for further treatment, and Dr. Prior arranged for him to go to Kings College Hospital in London where treatment introduced by the celebrated Professor Koch was under trial.
George Swinson, a sixty-five-year-old sailor, had sustained a serious accident a year previously when he fell from the upper yard of a ship at Portland, Oregon.
He had been treated for nine months in one hospital and two months in another, and had returned home with recurrent dislocation of one knee and an un-united fracture of the other thigh.
He was referred to University College Hospital for specialist treatment.
A young man had epilepsy in a somewhat unusual form.
His condition was, said Dr. Prior, pitiable.
Enquiries were made of the National Hospital for the Paralysed and Epileptic where, however, there was a lengthy waiting list.
One morning the young man was seized with a fit, in Dr. Prior's presence, of ‘such a frightful nature that it required strong nerves to witness same in those who are used to such sights’.
The patient was shortly afterwards transferred to the National Hospital, but quite soon discharged himself against medical advice, evidently heedless of the fact that the Board had agreed to pay 2s.6d per day for his maintenance there.
He returned to the workhouse and was promptly sent to the Three Counties Lunatic Asylum at Arlesey.
In 1893, it was found necessary to perform a minor operation on one of the inmates, for which the administration of ‘laughing gas’ was required.
A local dental surgeon, Mr. Williams, was kind enough to attend at Dr. Prior's request and he administered the gas gratuitously.
In reporting this incident to the Board, Dr. Prior said that another similar operation was required and he requested the ‘usual fee’ for Mr. Williams.
The usual fee was one guinea.
The more pastoral duties of the medical officer were not neglected.
When it was reported that a considerable number of young children in the house were not eating their breakfast, which consisted of porridge and bread, he recommended that, for children under sixteen, the same diet should be given for breakfast as for supper.
The new dietary proved to be an improvement although the youngest children were still wasting a great deal of the milk porridge, and alternation of a diet with tea and bread-and-butter was advised, similar to that given to children over the age of nine.
Some of the aged men and women in the sick wards had difficulty in digesting the suet pudding which was the prescribed house diet for dinner on Friday.
Those  who were fortunate enough to be in the sick wards were given sago, or rice pudding instead.
Some children needed to be fitted with spectacles and this was in the doctor's opinion ‘probably best done in London’.
He inspected the boys, of whom there were 37.
One of them was ruptured and needed to be fitted with a truss.
In the autumn of 1897 seven children contracted diphtheria and were sent to the Isolation Hospital.
The attendance of the remainder at school was discontinued and the house was closed to visitors; it was visited by the Inspector of Nuisances for the Borough.
Dr. Charles Edward Prior retired in the summer of 1900 after serving for forty-five years as medical officer to the workhouse.
The Board accepted his letter of resignation with regret and presented him with a testimonial, a bowl and an album.
In addition to his duties as medical officer to the workhouse he was a magistrate and the coroner for the Borough of Bedford.
The Board met to choose his successor and Dr. George Harvey Goldsmith was appointed at the age of thirty-two, and at a salary of £80 per annum.
The guardians undertook to supply medicines and the necessary appliances — the cost of which had been borne by his predecessors.
In December 1899, new receiving wards for casuals or tramps were under construction, and they were ready for occupation by the time that Harvey Goldsmith arrived.
(They were to remain in use for that purpose until the reception of casuals was finally discontinued on November 7th 1949, when their presence was represented as a deterrent to the recruitment of nurses and a hindrance to the upgrading of what had become the North Wing of Bedford General Hospital.
The building was named Florence Ball Block after the matron of the time.)
Mr. and Mrs. Harvey, the master and matron, were both away on sick leave in the early months of 1900, and the Board received a letter from their general practitioner, Mr. C. G.Johnson, to say that they were making good progress and that he recommended continuing the champagne which had contributed to their recovery.
The clerk was instructed to inform Mr. Johnson however that the guardians ‘did not see their way to continuing supplying champagne’.
In May, Harvey wrote to say that he and his wife were now fit to return to duty.
He was uneasy about what had been going on in his absence, which  had lasted for some months.
Mr. and Mrs. Dawes were the acting master and matron, and they were not universally popular.
The guardians had received a string of complaints from the nurses about their accommodation, insufficient lavatories, and deficiencies in their uniforms.
The bread-room was said to be in a deplorable state; the acting master and the needlewoman were at loggerheads, as were the labour master and the carpenter.
Children had been left with matches to light the gas, and the girls' caretaker and the needlewoman had both taken ‘french leave’.
A committee was appointed to look into the disagreements, and having failed to persuade Mr. and Mrs. Harvey to prolong their leave, allowed their temporary replacements to depart (with testimonials).
Shortly afterwards Dawes wrote to the Board complaining that a flag had been hoisted at the workhouse on the occasion of his leaving.
When questioned, Mason, the carpenter, agreed that it was he who had raised the flag, but said that he had done so because he had been prematurely informed of the relief of Mafeking.
(They were not amused; he was ordered to leave the premises at once, and the guardians went on to celebrate one or other event in their own way by providing extra diet for the inmates.
They raised a collection from the members present at the meeting, and arranged a special entertainment.)
Mr. and Mrs. Harvey took up their duties again, but the problems continued.
The workhouse management committee recommended that ‘with regard to children still in the workhouse, the older girls should be employed, when not at school, in making/mend or other useful work and as soon as practicable should be sent out as domestic servants’.
A somewhat curious complaint reached the guardians in October of 1900.
Some directors of the House of Industry had trespassed on workhouse premises, where they had lopped some trees without permission.
This was sixty-five years after the Poor law Commissioners, Messrs. Wylum and Nicholls, had laid an order legalising the transfer at an annual rent of £280.
The document had continued:
‘AND WE DO HEREBY FURTHER ORDER AND DECLARE THAT from and after the said twenty-first day of this instant September the said directors of the poor within the town of Bedford shall cease to act and intermeddle as such Directors in the management and government of the poor within the said parishes…’.
On December 11th, the master left the house at ten in the morning.
When he returned at 8.45 p.m., he was said to have been ‘accompanied by a member of the Board, Detective Wells, five constables, four men and two  medical men’.
His resignation was accepted, reference to grounds of ill-health being deleted.
‘26th January 1901: The Board adjourned as a mark of respect and profound grief at the death of our Beloved Sovereign, Queen Victoria.’
An annual subscription of £21 to the funds of Bedford County Hospital was sanctioned, thereby bringing to an end the disagreement which had begun 10 years earlier.
The amount was, however, considerably less than previously, and the guardians were in no way deterred from their intention to develop a workhouse infirmary.
DR.
GOLDSMITH
George Harvey Goldsmith M.D., was educated at Bedford Grammar School, after which he went to Cambridge and then St. George's Hospital, where he had been house surgeon and house physician.
He then had some training in ophthalmic surgery in London, and concurrently with his post at the workhouse at Bedford, was a visiting ophthalmic surgeon to the County Hospital.
His impact on the workhouse was considerable.
Very soon after his appointment he was pressing the Board to provide a consulting room where he could do his work, particularly the surgical operations.
He transferred an inmate to the newly rebuilt County Hospital, where, pending the provision of the facilities he had requested at the workhouse, he operated on the man for cataract.
Another operation was done on a woman with a diseased hip; the general anaesthetic was given by Dr. Willmer Phillips.
At the workhouse, he was faced with a case of pregnancy complicated by infection.
A pair of india-rubber gloves was purchased from Messrs. Anthony and Son for the nurses' use at a cost of 8s. which he claimed from the Board, with Dr. Phillips' fee of one guinea for a further anaesthetic, when an old dislocation of the shoulder was reduced.
In October 1900, only three months after Dr. Goldsmith had been appointed, the minutes of a meeting of the Board recorded their reaction to the pressure they felt themselves to be under:
‘We have to remark that there is no doubt that our present Medical Officer, whose experience is greater in the treatment of patients in modern hospitals than in union workhouses, would naturally like to have the sick treated in the same way as in a large hospital, but taking   into consideration cases under treatment, which are mostly chronic, as well as the means at the disposal of the Guardians, we cannot recommend any sweeping alterations.
However…we recommend that a consulting room be provided for the Medical Officer.’
In June 1901, the Board received a letter in which he expressed his gratitude for the provision of a room for himself, and congratulated them on the efficient way in which the alterations had been carried out.
Shortly afterwards Dr. Goldsmith operated on ‘Rose's child who suffered from rupture’.
In the following year, Priscilla C. an inmate, was taken ill with a strangulated hernia.
Operation afforded the only prospect of recovery and he was assisted by Dr. Phillips and Mr. Skelding.
Somewhat sadly, he recorded that ‘the operation was successful but the patient died — in consequence of exhaustion.
She was 77.’
In the early days, a distinction was drawn between those inmates who were classified as ‘sick’, and those who were ‘infirm’; the latter came to be described as ‘chronic sick’ later on.
Until Harvey Goldsmith took over, the column in the report book in which the condition of the inmates was recorded contained only such  expressions as ‘good’, ‘poor’ and so on, but his entries were more descriptive; imbecile, lunatic, religious mania, feeble, infirm — blind, and infirm — cripple, for example .
His diagnoses were sometimes even more precise, as in: ‘gangrene’, ‘venereal, pregnant’, ‘senile decay’, ‘cirrhosis’, and ‘ague’(malaria).
Dr. Goldsmith was always reluctant to certify patients as insane.
One, Martha Barratt, had been very noisy at times, and he had been told that she had been found with a knife in her bed.
He commented that she was too cunning to allow him to see anything himself which would justify her certification, but in fact she was removed to the asylum a month later.
He was slow to sign up two aged persons as being of unsound mind, and only did so after they had given a good deal of trouble at the workhouse.
In such an institution, he felt, there was bound to be a number of aged people of unsound mind simply because of age; they were better kept at the workhouse with a special attendant, and in a ground floor ward.
‘The general public,’ he said, ‘label all cases sent to the asylum as lunatics; this is of course incorrect…they are feeble-minded because they are old.’
In his report book he asked if something could be done to make the lunatic wards a little less depressing.
The walls were bare and whitewashed; they might be distempered or painted and a few bright prints could be added and hung high enough to be out of the patients reach.
In July 1904, he referred to Laura H., a twelve-month-old child who had contracted measles, and had a very bad attack of broncho-pneumonia (which was a common complication at that time).
‘She was so bad that I thought it well to have oxygen administered; this I procured from Blake, Edgar's.
I think we may attribute the child's recovery to the gas, not forgetting the excellent nursing.’
Laura's mother had been admitted to the workhouse with her three children a month earlier.
On admission, the child's condition was said to be good, and she had fully recovered by the autumn.
In 1905 several cases of erysipelas of the face occurred.
Dr. Goldsmith had evidently done his homework, and had read his predecessor's report books.
Dr. Prior was called in for consultation and his advice was followed.
In the summer of 1905, Robert Connolly, a groom aged thirty-eight, applied for admission to the casual wards, saying that he came from Wellingborough, and was on his way to London.
As was the custom, such applicants were expected to do some work in exchange for shelter in the sleeping cell and for their food, and such work was at the discretion of the labour master.
The workhouse master was called to Connolly's cell and  found him lying on the floor.
He said that he had been knocked down by the labour master (who was present).
He then got up off the floor and threatened to hit the labour master with his boots in his hand.
The labour master explained that on admission he had told Connolly to break 1 cwt. of stone, and had received the information that Connolly did not break stones and that he, the labour master, could break the stones himself.
This was, couched in ‘filthy and disgusting language’.
As he raised his boots to hit the labour master, the latter, in self defence, slapped him with the flat of his hand and closed with him, whereupon both fell to the ground.
The workhouse master reported that Connolly then put his boots on and went off to the police station to make a complaint of assault.
On his return he was taken to the sleeping cell and, following the usual routine, was locked in, but on the next day the cell was empty; he had broken the stone to which the iron grid was fixed.
Connolly gave himself up to the police and was charged with damage to the cell amounting to ten shillings.
Dr. Goldsmith and Dr. Phillips were asked to examine him because he said he had been kicked and jumped on by the labour master, and that his body was black and blue; no marks of violence were in fact found.
Dr. Goldsmith's comment was that if the man was physically fit to break out of his cell, he should have been fit to do the lighter task of breaking stones.
Connolly was sentenced to one day's imprisonment, after which he applied for a summons against the labour master for alleged assault.
A week later the labour master was convicted; he was fined ten shillings and costs, although the solicitor who was defending him asked for him to be sentenced to a term of imprisonment (in which case, an appeal could have been lodged).
An entry in the medical officer's report book of January 1906 is in marked contrast.
An aged woman, said Dr. Goldsmith, had been admitted in a most horrible condition of neglect.
‘I have never seen such a state of things.’
His description of the bed sores, gangrene, and so on, is unsuitable for these pages, but not his conclusion.
‘Of course,’ he said, ‘she has only come in to die, but I think that had she been removed before, much of her suffering would have been saved.’
His reports end in January 1913.
Throughout that decade he had complained of overcrowding at the workhouse, particularly of elderly women.
There were insufficient baths, particularly for the women, and he referred to the matter every year from 1905 to 1911, before there were any improvements.
The workhouse visitors, who functioned as a house committee, had noted  that the supply of water to the workhouse had failed on several occasions, and they expressed the hope that an adequate supply would be forthcoming quickly, ‘which would enable each person to have a fresh quantity for his or her bath’.
At Christmas 1910, the committee gave permission for the women to go out to the pantomime at the kind invitation of a lady of the town, and — possibly put off by some unrecorded experiences in the previous year — they recommended that no eggs be pickled that season.
In May 1911, the inmates were allowed a special diet to mark the coronation of King George the Fifth, and the usual extras ‘as at Christmas’ were added.
A Union Jack was to be purchased for the occasion at a cost not exceeding one pound.
The continued need for economy was reflected by their rejection of the chaplain's request for three dozen copies of the hymns for the Coronation Service, and the carpenter, the bricklayer and the engineer were granted two days' extra holiday (but were paid for one day only).
It was decided that a charge of eighteen shillings should be made on the Cambridge School of Anatomy to cover the cost of each coffin when bodies of unclaimed and unknown persons were sent there.
The expenditure was to be accounted for by the master in his receipt book and under no circumstances was any officer to receive a gratuity.
Some walnuts from the workhouse grounds were sold for £2.2s.6d, and some picked oakum was bought by a London firm for 12s.6d a hundred-weight.
The Borough Education Committee had invited tenders for the supply of faggots, but the committee replied that ‘the Guardians do not enter into competition with the trade’.
In the summer of that year there was an outbreak of swine fever among the workhouse pigs.
All twenty-six were slaughtered on the directions of an inspector from the Board of Agriculture who also said that if the Borough meat inspector passed any of them, they could be sold for food; the others were to be buried.
The committee gave permission for Arthur Withet, aged sixty-one, to be put to stone-breaking, and ordered iron bars to be placed across the windows in the senile ward.
Separate day and night attendants for the lunatics were to be engaged as required, and the master was told that as far as possible fresh water should be provided for bathing each casual.
Two guineas were to be subscribed annually to the Bedford Volunteer Fire Brigade in consideration of the Brigade's inspecting the workhouse fire-appliances and instructing the staff in their use.
Two infant girls contracted scarlet fever; they were sent to Oakley Isolation Hospital (now Clapham Hospital, a geriatric outpost).
In November 1911, Nurse Fall having resigned, there was no nurse on the staff qualified in midwifery; Dr. Goldsmith attended the committee meeting by invitation and said that he, personally, would attend all midwifery cases.
The County and Borough authorities had been informed that accommodation at the workhouse was too limited for it to be used as a place of detention under the Children's Act of 1909.
It was recommended, on the basis of a report from the medical officer, that outside accommodation in cottage homes be provided for children over the age of three years who were not eligible for boarding out.
Florence W., aged four, was to be handed over to her father as soon as he was discharged from prison.
The visitors' committee did not always support the workhouse master.
On one occasion he complained to them of the insubordination of two of the officers.
He had found the porter visiting the superintendent nurse in her room, a form of social exchange that was strictly forbidden.
As the house committee was unwilling to dismiss the porter, the master asked the Board of Guardians to fine him, to deliver a severe reprimand to the nurse for her conduct, and ‘give her plainly to understand that I am the Master of this house, and all lawful orders are to be obeyed ’.
The Board obliged and, in fact, dismissed the porter.
The master took the opportunity to complain further to the Board that on several occasions he had drawn the medical officer's attention to an inmate, William Sabey, who was at times a danger to others and had attempted to stab the labour master.
Dr. Goldsmith didn't want to certify the man at first, but later relented, and Sabey was sent to the asylum.
These two episodes help to illustrate, perhaps, the realities of power at the workhouse.
The statement of his position by the master was factually correct, and he had the backing of the law of the land, as enacted by Parliament.
Whether he was wise to invoke it is doubtful, however, as later events were to show.
THE GREAT WAR AND ITS AFTERMATH
In October 1913 the institution housed 206 people, made up of 107 men, 87 women and 12 children.
Eighty-six vagrants had been accommodated during the previous fortnight, and seventy-nine of these were men, with five women and two children.
The master recorded in his journal gifts of flowers, cakes, toys and illustrated papers to the inmates, some of whom were taken out for treats, such as visits to the Bedford Picture Palace.
Early in 1914, the Board felt it advisable to appoint a House Committee to deal with the day-to-day affairs of the Institution, and the committee met for the first time on 28th April with Mr. W. T. Lansberry in the chair.
Members of the committee visited the institution in rotation and reported back to the full committee.
At that first meeting, two applicants for the post of assistant nurse were considered (but neither was thought suitable for interview).
The laundry women and the scrubbers had asked for dinner to be provided but the committee felt that ‘the wages of these employees were quite adequate’ and the application was rejected.
Dr. Goldsmith had reported the admission to the infirmary of a young woman, Phoebe B., who was suffering from tuberculosis.
Isolation facilities were very limited and the clerk was directed to write to the County Council enquiring whether they intended to provide a sanatorium for ‘consumption’.
The medical officer also said that the body of a friendless inmate, ‘not belonging to this Union’, had been sent to the School of Anatomy at Cambridge; the House Committee noted the fact without comment.
The doctor had been requested, under the provisions of a recent Act for the treatment of mental deficiency, to furnish a report about the number of such inmates who were suitable for treatment in a separate institution — he was able to identify five such patients, whose ages ranged from 13 to 25 years.
War was declared in August 1914 but it was not until the following year that it made much of an impression on the affairs of the Union.
A number of troops were stationed in the town, some in the grounds of the workhouse, and others at the Bedford Infirmary, and in January 1915 the master's attention was called to the need to disinfect military blankets and clothing, and to the provision of baths for verminous soldiers.
It was probably unconnected, but the superintendent nurse asked for an extra scrubber for the male side, and the temporary appointment was approved.
The committee added a rider that, in future, scrubbers were to start at seven a.m. instead of eight, and stop at ten on Sunday morning and mid-day on Saturdays.
The master at this time, J.W., was in trouble when it was reported that he had been boarding some of the officers and two of their relatives in his own apartments under a private arrangement.
A sub-committee was appointed to look into the matter, and the master subsequently apologised and paid the sum of £7 to the common fund of the Union.
It was, in fact, an early hint of his involvement in more serious misdemeanours which produced a crisis four years later.
In 1916, a special committee produced its recommendations for the precautions to be taken in the event of an air raid.
They included the following:
The town authorities were to be asked to notify the master of the news of the approach of enemy aircraft.
The master was to check all the gas taps, and the tap on the meter, on being notified of the state of alert.
Fire alarms were to be provided and fire drills begun.
The Fire Brigade was to be asked to instruct the officers in the use of the appliances.
Six canvas stretchers were to be bought at a cost not exceeding £5.
Miss Gabriel offered to give instruction in First Aid.
In April 1916, the institution housed 200 inmates, none of whom was able-bodied.
Every week, approximately thirty casuals were accommodated.
As early as 1914, arrangements for building new sick wards, that is, a workhouse infirmary, had been progressing, and in October, some sheds which had been used for wood chopping and storage were demolished to make way for the building of the new sick pavilions.
In December 1914 the guardians consented to the erection of the new buildings, the local government board having affixed their seal.
The estimated building costs amounted to £6,800 which was to be borrowed and to be repaid within twenty-five years.
The guardians applied, unsuccessfully, to the Public Works Loan Board and it was left to a sub-committee, consisting of the chairman of the Finance Committee, the chairman of the Board of Guardians (W. T. Lansberry) and the clerk to arrange the loan elsewhere.
The new wards were to be built on the northern side of the workhouse grounds, and a sub-committee was appointed to keep an eye on progress.
A resident of Kimbolton Road expressed the fear that the new infirmary might be prejudicial to his property.
The reply from the committee was that the local government board had sanctioned the development, a statement which seems to have silenced the opposition.
By July 1916 the contractors, Dawes and Bowler, reported that the building was ready for occupation and with the help of members of the Bedford Volunteer Red Cross Detachment, the patients were carried across to the new infirmary.
The Board was favourably impressed and recommended that because of increased wartime costs, an additional allowance of £120 should be paid to the contractors — by the local government board.
The Infirmary Sub-Committee might also have been commended for their diligence and attention to detail while building was in progress, as the following two consecutive minutes from the House Committee's meeting in April 1916 show:
‘Padded Room : the clerk was instructed to ask the architect to obtain a price for padding the floor of the padded-room in the lunatic block.
‘Manure : that 20 loads of manure be purchased from the military authorities.’
Committee meetings had taken place at fortnightly intervals ever since early in the nineteenth century, but now, in view of the fact that there was a war on, the local government board asked for the meetings to be held monthly, a suggestion that was accepted with alacrity.
In the same letter, the local government board dispensed with the need for certain forms and reports to be completed, a concession which was even more warmly received.
Shortly afterwards, an olive branch came from the County Hospital, Bedford Infirmary having been rebuilt on the South Wing site by then, inviting the guardians to send a representative as a governor there; Mr. T. E. Sinfield was appointed.
The House Committee continued to exercise its jurisdiction over a wide variety of day-to-day matters at the institution.
At one point Dr. Goldsmith was informed that ‘this committee definitely order him to see all persons who apply for admission to the House before they are admitted, in accordance with the requirements of the local government board’.
Dr. Goldsmith was evidently not responsible for the health of the staff.
The master told the Board that a temporary porter was subject to fits, and after the unfortunate man had been interviewed by two of the guardians, he was made to resign.
The matron, wife of the master (an arrangement which had been continued since the riots seventy years before), had no professional control of the nursing staff; her position was that of overall housekeeper.
The superintendent-nurse was in charge of the sick wards, and interference from matron or her husband in nursing matters was greatly resented.
When, in  April 1916, the assistant matron, Miss Loader, and the children's attendant, Miss Thomas, resigned on the grounds that they were unable to work with the matron, and when Mrs. Adams, the labour mistress, also appeared before the committee with a similar complaint, it was evident that all was not well.
The superintendent-nurse took the opportunity of the enquiry to complain to the committee of interference from the master, and her statements were reinforced by a letter to similar effect from her predecessor (who was probably still resentful of the sequel to her entertainment of the porter).
Matters did not, however, come to a head until the war had ended.
In January 1919, the superintendent-nurse, Miss Price, returned to duty after two months' sick leave (which had started on Armistice Day).
With Dr. Goldsmith, she attended the meeting of the House Committee, and Mr. Kenealy, a member of the Board, referred to serious complaints about the administration of the sick wards.
He refused to say who had made the complaints; they included inattention to patients, negligence as to cleanliness, and lack of supervision by the superintendent nurse.
Mr. Kenealy then asked the medical officer a number of specific questions about Miss Price's work.
Dr. Goldsmith replied cautiously, but while he was not enthusiastic, he did not support the complaints.
The acting superintendent-nurse, Miss Worthington, was brought before the committee and questioned about the condition of certain bed-ridden patients, to which she replied that she was aware of only one case with a bedsore, and of two others who had already had them when they were brought in.
All three were being nursed on water-beds.
Mr. Kenealy then said that he had reliable information that patients' heads were verminous, but he absolutely refused to divulge the sources of the complaints, in which case, the committee said, they would take no further action.
The medical officer was subsequently questioned about some individual patients.
He had discharged one of them from the infirmary in no worse condition than when he had arrived.
He was not in the habit of examining patients' heads for vermin unless asked to do so by the superintendent-nurse, in which case he had always directed that they be disinfested.
Dr. Goldsmith refused to answer the question whether Miss Price was capable of her duties, and Mr. Kenealy went on to say that a Mrs. Rainbow, bedridden for two years, had been made to get up only one week after her admission.
The doctor replied that ‘a lot of old people would stay in bed without any cause if they weren't made to get up’.
It is difficult to escape the suspicion, on reading the detailed notes of this affair, that the complainants were in fact the master and matron themselves.
If that were so, subsequent events had some of the characteristics of poetic justice.
As a result of the various charges and counter-charges, an inspector from the local government board visited the institution and later reported on the state of some of the patients, of the arrangements for bathing them, and of the quantity of pudding supplied to some of them.
Certain stock was missing from the infirmary, including a number of mackintosh sheets.
Most of the items in the inspector's report were dealt with.
However, ‘Mrs. Butler, one of the aged attendants’ appeared before the committee, and said that she couldn't bathe the females without help; to which matron replied that there were no able-bodied female inmates in the institution to give such assistance.
The committee authorised matron to ‘make any arrangements that she could’.
The superintendent-nurse, the master and matron were interviewed concerning the stock of ward equipment.
Nurse Price said that eight of the missing mackintoshes had been mysteriously returned, but thirty-eight were still missing.
The master was instructed to draw up an inventory of the whole stock in the sick wards; some weeks passed but he still failed to do so.
The committee resolved that as soon as the inventory was complete, such articles afterwards considered useless should not be disposed of until the committee itself had dealt with the matter.
On May 13th at a meeting of a special sub-committee, it was reported that various articles of furniture had been found in the master's apartments.
These had been made by the institution's carpenter in the guardians' time, and at their expense.
The master said that some wood used in the construction was from a beech tree which had been felled.
He apologised for the incident and paid some money into the common fund.
The mackintoshes were still missing, however, and an outside stocktaker was to be appointed to draw up an annual inventory of all stocks of the institution.
The whole affair came to an abrupt conclusion in August, when two members of the House Committee reported that on their way out of a board meeting, they came across a group of about fifteen women who were waiting outside the laundry for their pay, which had been due the previous day.
The master's books were inspected and they showed a balance of about £50 (which was more than enough to pay the wages).
He was called before the committee and asked to produce the money.
When he returned he said that he had only £15 but could get the balance ‘in a few days’.
‘Chairman: Where has the money gone?’
‘Master: I can't say at present.’
‘Chairman: Have you spent it?’
‘Master: I suppose I have, some of it.’
The master was sent away to bring the rest of the money, but didn't return until a messenger was sent to fetch him back.
He then produced the £15 and counted it out himself on the corner of the table, not letting the chairman or anyone else do so.
(It is somewhat remarkable to note that after such stirring events, the committee went on to draw the master's attention to the fact that a horse had been observed grazing in the paddock, which had been let for sheep only.
He was told to ask the tenant farmer, Mr. Blyth, to remove the horse forthwith.)
The Board of Guardians dealt with the matter in committee, and later issued a statement to the press: the master had been before the Board about certain irregularities, but had nothing to say in response.
He had been given the opportunity to resign, but declined, and was then suspended, after which the matter had been reported to the Minister of Health, who subsequently consented to his dismissal.
Had he agreed to resign, he would have been entitled to his superannuation for 29 years' service in Poor Law Institutions; as it was, he was given only the nine years entitlement from his time at Bedford.
On 2nd October 1919, the bailiffs arrived with a warrant of distraint; master and matron left the premises on Thursday October 9th at 10 o'clock at night.
Later that month, Dr. Harvey Goldsmith who had been appointed medical officer to the Poor Law Institution in 1900, resigned.
According to the Bedfordshire Times , he told the Board of Guardians that the duties had taken up too much of his time.
He had stayed on during the war only because so many doctors had been away, engaged in service to the country.
Among the applications for his post were Dr. W. H. Miller, aged 38, of de Parys Avenue, and Ethel M. Stacey, a woman doctor practising in Kimbolton Road.
In the event, the appointment went to Henry Dean Pollard, MB, BS, FRCS, aged 44, of Harpur Place.
At this time there was evidence of increasing irritation locally over what was seen as interference by central government.
For example, in September 1919, in its account of a meeting of the Board of Guardians, the Bedfordshire Times reported that a member had complained of what he referred to as ‘an appalling increase of rates’.
It was said that the County Council ‘received orders from the Government to do certain things in…education and other matters, and were bound to spend the money’.
Shortly afterwards at another meeting, Mr. Fairbank said, in response to a letter from the Ministry of Health suggesting that the vaccination officer should be paid a fixed salary, that ‘the time had come when Whitehall had to be told that the local authorities were going to stop being ciphers, and would exercise their own judgement.
All the local authorities were being subjected to this dictation from departments in London, and a centralised bureaucracy stood for extravagance.’
The Board resolved to refuse the suggestion from the Ministry on behalf of the electors, and on the grounds that it was necessary to exercise tight control of expenditure in the public services!
The new master at the institution was Mr. H. M. Allen, and his wife was appointed matron.
He noted, in his journal in October 1919, that there had been an increase of 37 vagrants attending the institution as ‘casuals’ in the previous two weeks compared with the same period the previous year; six of them were discharged soldiers.
He was of the opinion that this increase was due to unemployment and that the numbers would continue to increase.
(The figures show that his forecast was correct.
In 1922, for example, in one fortnight, 316 male vagabonds were relieved, and of these 182 were ex-soldiers.)
Christmas of 1919 seems to have been vastly more festive than it had been at the workhouse in, say, the Dickensian days of 1844.
There were 173 inmates, including 18 children, and roughly equal numbers of men and women.
88 vagrants had been admitted in the two week period, most of them being men.
There had been gifts of a tree and other decorations, with oranges for the aged women, and toys for the children.
A choir sang Christmas hymns in the various wards, and twelve members of the Board of Guardians assisted with the serving of dinner.
A concert was given by the staff to the inmates in the evening, and on the following day, an afternoon entertainment, during which sweets and tobacco were distributed, took place.
The band of the Discharged and Demobilised Soldiers' and Sailors' Association performed for the patients and they were reported to have enjoyed another concert which included lantern views.
Two or three patients a week, mostly the elderly, died — of such conditions as stroke, heart failure and kidney failure.
Among the younger patients the usual cause was pulmonary tuberculosis, but one, Ernest William B. aged 43, an army pensioner and disabled in the recent war, died of pneumonia.
The persistence of high unemployment in the post-war years continued to make an impact on the institution, particularly on the casual wards.
In October 1922, 326 male vagabonds were received in one fortnight; 200 of them were ex-soldiers.
Groups of unemployed men marched in procession from all over the country to protest in the capital, and in the course of these hunger marches, stayed overnight in institutions such as that of the Bedford Union.
Mr. S. Walker left a note for the Board of Guardians expressing thanks for their kind and courteous hearing when his group had been interviewed on the subject of the unemployed marchers, and for the treatment they had received at the institution.
This letter was also signed by Arthur Withers who described himself as ‘a member of the advance guard’.
In two weeks of December the number of male vagrants had risen to 371, which included 252 ex-soldiers, and the master was of the opinion that the increase was due to the fact that many of the unemployed in London were returning to their own towns through the casual wards.
He made a special entry in his journal about ten unemployed men marching from Bootle to London, with seven who were going from London to Leeds; they stayed for one night and were provided with tea and breakfast.
Their conduct, he said, was ‘quite satisfactory’.
In November of 1924 the House Committee submitted a special report to the Board concerning the difficulty of obtaining suitable nurses for the Poor  Law Institution.
They acknowledged that there was an acute shortage of nurses throughout the country and concluded that a training scheme should be organised.
The General Nursing Council had laid down conditions for recognition of ‘places like ours’, and it was necessary to make arrangements with a larger hospital in order to provide a complete programme of nursing training.
It was only now that the name, ‘St. Peter's Hospital’, emerged, other terms, such as‘workhouse infirmary’ no longer being acceptable.
A four-year training period was proposed, the first two years of which were to be spent at Bedford, where probationers could be prepared for the preliminary examination.
The guardians' responsibility for training would then end, and the probationers would be absorbed into the affiliated hospital for their third and fourth years.
The committee pointed out that no great increase in costs would be incurred, because at that time, each vacancy had to be filled from nursing institutes (agencies) at a cost of 2½ guineas a week.
It was proposed that the trainee nurses would be accommodated in the main building of the institution and the committee recommended a scheme for ten probationers, five of them in the first year.
The Board gave its blessing to the scheme and in May 1926, the Minister of Health confirmed that application had been made to the General Nursing Council for approval of St. Peter's as a training school.
On receiving an assurance from the guardians that they would lose no time in putting up a nurses' home, the Minister would be prepared to recommend the Nursing Council to give its approval.
The assurance was given; a special committee to plan the nurses' home had already begun its work, and agreement had been reached with Hackney Hospital for amalgamation of the two nurse-training schools.
There is nothing to suggest that a link with the County Hospital was ever contemplated; the proposed collaboration was evidently to be with other poor law institutions only, and the initial approach was made in fact to the North Evington Infirmary in Leicester.
The tender of Walter Laughton, a builder of Bedford for the construction of the nurses' home in the sum of £7,722.11s.1½d was accepted, and the Minister of Health was asked to sanction the raising of the necessary loan for a period of not less than thirty years.
The master's journal continued to reflect the state of the world outside the workhouse gates.
Late one evening, a party of thirteen unemployed men from Newport Pagnell were admitted as casuals.
They had been given a meal there but had refused to stay overnight.
The master reported that their  conduct was ‘fair’.
When he was notified that 200 unemployed marchers were expected from Ampthill, however, he arranged for them to occupy the Drill Hall in George Street for sleeping and feeding.
In March 1924 the presence of 198 inmates was noted; the number of vagrants admitted during the previous fortnight had risen to 437.
Miss Gabriel, who had given First Aid instruction during the Great War, invited the crippled inmates out to tea ‘in connection with the Guild of the Brave Poor Things’.
In April of 1925 a vacancy for the post of superintendent nurse was advertised and the appointment went to Miss May W. Hall, who was 32 years old, and had been the assistant tutor and deputy superintendent nurse at St.James' Hospital, Chester.
Her salary was £85 per annum with board and lodging, rising to £95 after one year.
Unease and uncertainty was growing among Boards of Guardians throughout the country about their future responsibilities.
A letter came from the President of the Poor Law Unions' Association, asking for support in opposition to a Bill which had been introduced on behalf of Bradford Corporation.
This proposed empowering a summary court to order, on application by the medical officer of that Corporation, the removal and detention and maintenance,in an institution infirmary , of elderly, infirm, or physically incapacitated persons living in insanitary conditions, or who were suffering from any grave chronic disease.
The Board supported the protest.
Later that year, it was agreed that the rating and valuation Bill should be opposed.
This would remove the overseers and, as one member put it, give the power to the Inland Revenue and to the Railway Assessment Authority to determine the basis of local taxation (and by implication, the income of the institution).
In September, an inspector from the Ministry of Health attended the Board meeting and submitted a number of proposals.
These included:
The medical officer and superintendent-nurse to have a free hand in selecting new nurses.
The master and matron were to do likewise in respect of the other officers.
The building of a porter's lodge and closure of alternative exits from the grounds.
Improvements to the operating theatre.
The casual wards to be extended to accommodate about forty more men.
The Ministry inspector's recommendation for a porter's lodge was taken up and went out to tender.
Purslow Brothers of Clapham submitted the lowest tender — for about £633.15s.0d — and this was accepted.
The building was ready for occupation in October 1928 and the labour master, who had become porter-and-gardener combined, and his wife, the labour mistress, moved in.
Work was still provided for the casuals, however, and granite blocks were purchased — the broken stone was to be used for paths at the institution.
Emily Jane Wood needed a full set of dentures at a cost of £6.
The Guild of Help offered to pay the remainder if the Board would contribute £4, but the looming presence of the Railway Assessment Authority may have persuaded the guardians to offer only half the sum needed, i.e. £3.
The following year, 1926 the Ministry of Health issued draft proposals for reform of the Poor Law but copies were not sent to Boards of Guardians, and it was decided that a letter of protest about the omission should be sent.
In May 1927, there were 66 applicants for the posts of master and matron.
The Board appointed Mr. G. Chaplin and Miss Anne Reid, who had been assistant master and matron respectively at the Hackney Union, but it was conditional on their being married (to one another) by July.
They were so, and it proved a happy choice all round.
Miss Reid was a fully qualified nurse, and when, some months later, the post of superintendent-nurse at St. Peter's Hospital became vacant, the new Mrs. Chaplin took on the duties in addition to those of matron.
She received £50 per annum extra (and the net savings to the guardians amounted to £90 for the year).
A new outbreak of smallpox occurred early in 1928.
It began among the casuals and spread rapidly to the inmates and staff, so that by mid-February 22 cases had been diagnosed and transferred to the smallpox hospital.
241 officers and inmates were vaccinated, and the wards or casual cells where those affected had slept, were disinfected.
All visiting was stopped.
The epidemic was rapidly contained, and apart from two or three among casuals, it was over by Easter.
Concert parties started attending again, and the seasonal flow of gifts of flowers, eggs, vegetables and toys (including a rocking-horse for the children) was resumed.
The epidemic had not been confined to Bedford.
A circular from the Ministry of Health, effective for all Unions, directed that the medical officer should examine every casual admitted to the institution, in order to detect  cases of smallpox, and this order was duly obeyed — at a cost.
Extra fees were charged by the medical officers for these inspections, and a resolution from Hungerford and Rugby Unions that the Ministry of Health should bear the extra cost was supported by the Bedford Guardians.
The public vaccinator for Bedford was Dr. A. F. Goldsmith, the brother of Harvey, and honorary physician to the County Hospital.
He was hard pressed during the epidemic, and had obtained permission for the acting medical officer of health for the Borough to man a relief vaccination station at the Town Hall.
The standard fee for giving an anaesthetic, judged by that earned by Dr. W. H. Miller in the course of an ear operation, was still one guinea.
Another, now familiar, name that appeared in the minutes was that of Dr. N. R. W. Wynn-Williams who had been appointed to assist the medical officer for Great Barford district.
Patients at St. Peter's and other hospitals in Bedfordshire were not all fully maintained from public funds.
Contributions from relatives were welcomed and in some cases enforced.
The offer of Mr. L. H. to pay the full cost of treatment of his wife at St. Peter's Hospital was gladly accepted, and a 64-year-old widow was transferred to the ‘private class’ at Three Counties Mental Hospital, the cost of certification and removal being paid for by her son.
A letter was received from Mrs. Hogan of Brighton asking if she could take over a sixteen-year-old blind boy, Arthur B. Her own son had died the previous year at the same age, and she said that she would ‘do her best to make the lad happy, and find him light work in Brighton’.
By the summer, after a trial period, he was doing well, and the necessary clothing was provided for him by the Union.
The lady almoner of the Royal Waterloo Hospital in London requested the guardians to remove Sarah A., aged 63, from there to St. Peter's, she now being ‘settled’ in the Bedford Union.
She was suffering from tuberculosis of the spine and was in a special bed; accordingly, a motor ambulance would be required.
The patient's husband was interviewed by the Board and offered to pay half the expense of the ambulance, and to contribute 10s.6d. per week towards the cost of his wife's treatment.
A certain amount of ill-feeling was aroused when an inquest was held on a patient who had died after transfer from the County Hospital to St. Peter's.
A letter was despatched to the secretary there asking the County Hospital authorities to provide an ambulance if, in future, it were necessary for such a case to be sent to St. Peter's.
In reply the guardians were asked to remove any cases of enteric and other infectious diseases from the County Hospital if the  patients were ordinarily resident in the area of the Bedford Union.
If not, would they bear the expense of removal and treatment in ‘some isolation hospital’?
The Board of Guardians replied that they didn't have any isolation hospital and were unable to accept liability.
The impending reform of the Poor Law was a constant preoccupation.
A resolution from Biggleswade, that the transference of the functions of the Board of Guardians to the County Councils would be detrimental to the poor and to the ratepayers, was strongly supported, as was another from elsewhere; the newly elected government was to be asked to postpone the operation of the Local Government Act of 1929.
All was in vain; the poor law functions of the Boards of Guardians were transferred to the County Council, and on March 29th 1930 the Board of Guardians met for the last time.
Bedfordshire County Council, through the new Public Assistance Committee, was now responsible for the care of the sick and aged poor, the casuals at St. Peter's, and the occupants of the Kempston Grange Children's Home.
ST.
PETER'S AND THE PUBLIC ASSISTANCE ORDER
Under the terms of the Poor Law Act of 1834, a central body, the Poor Law Commissioners, had been formed to regulate the flow of relief.
They formed the Poor Law Board in 1847, and this was transformed into the Local Government Board twenty-four years later; in its turn this became the Ministry of Health in 1919.
The transfer of Poor Law functions to the County authorities took place in 1930.
‘Poor Law’ became ‘Public Assistance’, and under the terms of the Act, Bedfordshire County Council set up a standing committee under that name to take over the functions of the former Board of Guardians.
There was provision for a general exchequer (i.e., rate support) grant to Counties and County Boroughs, to cover losses on the rates and total losses on grants, including payments towards the salaries of medical officers of health, public vaccinators etc.
The county was divided into four areas in each of which, with commendable foresight, a Guardians' Committee was brought in, thereby retaining the important element of voluntary service by local residents.
The last meeting of the Board of Guardians of the Bedford Union was held on 29th March 1930.
In the chair was William T. Lansberry who became a    member of the new Public Assistance Committee.
The balance in the Treasurer's hands at that final meeting of the Guardians was £9,807.17s.9d.
A few outstanding bills were paid, and the application by the master and matron for a testimonial was granted.
The meeting closed with votes of thanks to the guardians' clerk, Walter George Daniels, and to the chairman and vice-chairman.
The new statute had set out the management arrangements governing the institutions which the county authority had taken over.
The Bedford Area Committee, in addition to its responsibility for the administration of relief, had the job of visiting, inspecting, and managing what is now the North Wing of Bedford General Hospital.
At that time it was officially known as the ‘Poor Law Institution’, although the sick wards there had been distinguished as St. Peter's Hospital for some years.
The two terms are carefully defined in the Act:
An institution was any establishment provided by the Council for reception and maintenance of the poor other than a hospital, a children's home or a separate casual ward.
A hospital was any poor law establishment recognised by the Minister as a separate establishment for the reception and maintenance of the sick, or persons requiring maternity treatment.
The North Wing appears to have been treated as though it were both.
Dean Pollard was continued in his post, Mr. Chaplin remained master, and his wife stayed on as matron and superintendent-nurse.
Their duties and responsibilities were set out in detail in the Public Assistance Order of 1930:
The first duty of the master was to govern and control the institution (subject to the direction of the management committee) and 'cause to be obeyed’ all the relevant regulations.
It was he who would inform the medical officer if the prompt examination of an inmate on admission was necessary, and it was his duty to ‘take care that all sick and insane inmates and the infants are duly visited by the medical officer’.
These, and his other statutory duties leave no room for doubt that the master was there to manage the institution.
Husbands and wives over the age of sixty were not compelled to live apart in the workhouse.
If they were younger and one of the partners was disabled, infirm, or sick they could live together, but the arrangement had to be reported to the Minister.
No master of a workhouse was allowed ‘on any pretence’ to confine by chains or manacles any poor person of sound mind; by implication, they could do so for those who were not.
Subject to any medical recommendations, inmates were to be kept at work according to their capacity and should not receive any remuneration for their labour.
They were not to be employed in the sick wards, and under no circumstances was an inmate to be allowed to nurse a sick fellow.
(There is a record of a complaint by an inmate of a workhouse elsewhere, that although he was paying six shillings a week for his maintenance, he had to do work such as window-cleaning and blacking grates.
His argument met with the response that the regulations applied irrespective of his contribution.)
Breaches of discipline, and the appropriate punishment, were classified under two headings.
Someone who used bad language, for example, or refused to work, pretended sickness, or climbed over a fence instead of using the official entrance (or, what is more likely, exit) was deemed DISORDERLY; he could be put on bread and water for forty-eight hours and other privileges were stopped.
More serious offences such as being drunk and disorderly or damaging property, labelled him as REFRACTORY, and he could then be locked up in a separate room with bread and water for twenty-four hours.
Alternatively he could be taken before a magistrate for punishment.
No inmate, however, was to be confined at night without being provided with a bed and other conveniences.
It was forbidden to punish children by confinement during the night , and corporal punishment was not inflicted except for boys under the age of fourteen (and then at least two officers were to be present).
An approved rod or other instrument had to be used for this purpose, and the punishment was not to be applied more than two hours after the offence.
It was still not lawful for any Council member or officer concerned with the relief of the poor to supply goods to the institution.
The fine for such an offence when this rule had been applied to the original directors of the House of Industry in 1794 was £20 it had now risen to £100.
The Committee may have been relieved to hear that in one case at another institution, the Inland Revenue had decided that officers who took round, for sale, firewood that had been chopped by the inmates, were exempt from the need for a hawker's licence.
Extracts from the Annual Report of the Chief Medical Officer of the Ministry of Health were sent in a circular to the Committee; each area was to aim at providing as effective and complete a service as was practicable.
The work of all the institutions in the area concerned with medical or surgical treatment should be co-ordinated, and there had to be close and  active co-operation between the public and the voluntary authorities and their respective officers.
Walter Gifford Nash, honorary surgeon at the County Hospital, had expressed support for co-operation with the local authority, but added a rider to the effect that if the voluntary hospital were enlarged and improved, and if it increased its work, ‘County Council would have very little to do’.
Arnold Whitchurch, the chairman of the Board of Governors there, thought that ‘if the hospitals worked with the County Council they might do a tremendous lot for the co-ordination of the general health system.
It would be for the benefit of every member of the community in the country’.
He believed that ‘there was nothing to prevent those who wished to give their service voluntarily working with the authorities, and after many years producing a magnificent edifice for public health to help their fellows’.
Competition between county authorities and voluntary hospitals was to be avoided, but the Council could, with the consent of the Minister, subscribe annually to the support of, for example, any public hospital or infirmary, or any institution for the blind, or the deaf-and-dumb.
The Committee was warned, however, that while under the terms of the Public Health Act of 1925 reasonable subscriptions by a local authority to a voluntary hospital or institution were permitted; their expenditure was not to exceed the equivalent of the penny-in-the-pound (0.4°) rate on the property liable to be rated for such expenditure.
The medical officer of health of the county council was expected to exercise general supervision over the work of the public health and medical staff in the various services including the hospitals , but it was recommended that he should interfere as little as possible in the clinical work, i.e. between doctor and patient.
The medical officer of an institution was, subject to the direction of the management committee, to visit and attend the inmates regularly, and to carry out all the duties of his predecessor with additional duties laid down by the Act.
The deaths of casuals or sudden or accidental deaths occurring among the inmates had to be reported by him to the Minister within twenty-four hours, and he had ‘forthwith’ to inform the master of every case of serious or dangerous illness in the institution.
Certain reports had to be made to the medical officer of health for the district.
In the case of an establishment which had been designated as a hospital, the medical officer was to be replaced by a medical superintendent and the master by a steward.
In that case the steward was, in the modern term, ‘accountable’ to the medical superintendent, as was the matron.
The medical superintendent of a hospital had to be a duly qualified   medical practitioner of five years' standing.
It was a full time appointment.
Dean Pollard continued in practice as a physician from 1 Shakespeare Road, and it seems, therefore, that he was officially the medical officer to the institution, rather than a medical superintendent.
As the statutory duties of medical superintendent included some of those applicable to the master of an institution, he was expected to have had administrative experience.
The Order also laid it down that ‘the medical superintendent shall reside in the part of the hospital assigned to him by the Management Committee, or in such other place as the Committee may approve’.
The first meeting of the Bedford Public Assistance Committee took place at the Shire Hall on November 2nd 1929.
Harry Arnold had been appointed as chairman, and those present included Samuel Howard Whitbread and J. Arnold Whitchurch.
The only member of the former Board of Guardians to have been appointed to the committee was William Lansberry, who had been its chairman, and he was immediately put on a sub-committee to appoint a Public Assistance Officer.
Early the following year an Institution sub-committee was appointed, but the full committee was called upon to decide the question of providing a permanent covering for the verandah at St. Peter's Hospital.
They were  evidently unprepared for handling such matters, and Mr. Lansberry was not present at the meeting — the County medical officer of health was asked to give his recommendation.
The subscription to the County Hospital had risen to £52.10s.0d. per annum and this was continued, as was a similar amount for the Royal London Ophthalmic Hospital.
In the autumn of 1930, the sub-committee was instructed to consult the governing bodies, and the medical and surgical staffs at the voluntary hospitals, ‘in order to enable the county council to discharge the functions transferred to them under the Local Government Act 1929, Section 13, relating to the provision of hospital accommodation’.
At the annual meeting of the governors of the County Hospital in 1931, some doubts were expressed:
‘After referring appreciatively to the work of the honorary medical staff, Arnold Whitchurch, the chairman, said that until any hospital made arrangements with somebody to take money for work done he was certain the medical staff would continue in their honorary capacity.
But when the hospitals tried to make money by entering into agreements with local authorities, then the edifice would begin to crumble stone by stone, and there would result the rate- and state-aided institution instead of the voluntary principle of generosity, personality, and sympathy.’
Britain was in the grip of economic crisis.
Unemployment remained high, and it was estimated that at any one time at least a million men were without work.
Against this background the institutions which had become the responsibility of Bedfordshire County Council were under pressure which was reflected in the occupancy figures at St. Peter's for July 1931:
Senile dementia and other forms of mental illness presented a problem and it was recommended that a new building accommodating six beds and one padded room should be provided at an estimated cost of £2,400.
A sub-committee which included the medical officer of health, the county surveyor and the public assistance officer was appointed to consider the problems of accommodation, and their recommendations included the provision of a new block of 80 beds for casuals which would include 20 displaced by the demolition of the existing ward.
In April 1933, a new casual block at an estimated cost of £4,000 (which would include a wood-chopping shed in the labour yard) was approved.
It had been the intention to incorporate part of the old casual ward, to the east of the infirmary but in the course of the preparatory work it was found that the old buildings were bug-infested to an extent which made it undesirable to use any part of them.
The extra cost for the new casual ward (now ‘C’ block) was estimated at £950.
Early in 1935, the medical officer of health, Dr. Welch, and the county surveyor submitted a report on the existing accommodation at St. Peter's Hospital; there were 98 beds and 16 cots, with a small observation block for mental cases.
They recommended that two wings be added to the infirmary, one at each end.
Each wing was to be of two storeys and providing two wards of twelve beds each with one of the ground floor wards to be reserved for mental cases and to have a padded room.
This was to result in an overall increase of fifty beds.
The existing brick bungalow, to the north of the chapel, which constituted the lunatic wards in the 1916 plan should, they suggested, be adapted for the isolation of cases of puerperal fever (a general term including ‘the several affections which may occur as a direct result of childbirth’).
It was a notifiable disease.
This was done; the building is still there, and is now the North Wing pharmacy, the original barred windows serving a different, but equally useful purpose.
Antibacterial drugs, such as the sulphonamides, did not become generally available until some years later, and as in the case of erysipelas in Dr. Prior's day, the only treatment consisted of isolation with adequate nursing care and hygiene.
The estimated cost of all these improvements amounted to some £18,000.
Dr. Welch recommended them to the committee, who noted the report but took no further action.
Two years later, Dean Pollard recommended, as a matter of ‘extreme urgency’, the addition of a further 100 beds.
Cuthbert Welch, the medical officer of health, took the opportunity to emphasise his own higher responsibilities.
Having regard to the requirements of the county as a whole, he wrote, and having the advantage of consultation with members of the Ministry of Health , he had decided to recommend the addition of two wings each of three storeys, providing a further 81 beds and a two-bedded ward to be  added to a small existing building.
Allowing for the effect of the alterations there would be a net addition of 77 beds.
The two existing verandahs were to be used for patient accommodation ‘for which they were intended’ and the number of patients in the present wards should be reduced by 17 ‘to conform to standards of spacing’.
The Bedford Area Guardians Committee continued to exercise control over matters great and small.
The doctors' fee for giving a general anaesthetic at the institution was confirmed at one guinea, the same amount as in the previous century.
This would have been enough to allow the guardians to purchase 300 hot cross buns for the inmates at current prices; that, too, was duly authorised for Easter 1930.
The county surveyor, no less, was asked to report on the practicability of covering the verandah at the infirmary, and was also requested ‘to have the bagatelle board put in order’.
The record shows that the committee continued to use the greatest care in the expenditure of public money, however.
‘The action of the relieving officer in granting milk to the value of 5s.3d. to Ernest J. W…who is suffering from gastric ulcers, and in providing an ambulance for conveying him to Bedford for operation at a cost of £1.6s.0d.’ was confirmed.
The medical superintendent of the Three Counties Mental Hospital was authorised to spend 2s.6d. per week to provide additional comforts for three inmates there, the Ministry to Health to be informed accordingly.
But, mysteriously, ‘no additional comforts can be granted to Elizabeth F. as there is a dependent child’.
The Guild of Brave Poor Things was still active.
It was given the authority to send William Mingay to Manfield Orthopaedic Hospital at Northampton for ‘re-education of the muscles’ for a period of three months, the cost not to exceed £2 per week.
Other patients were sent to the Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital and to the Children's Hospital at Great Ormond Street at a similar cost.
Surgical boots cost £3.3s.0d., a spinal support was £1.15s.0d., and £3 was disbursed towards the cost of dentures and treatment for another patient.
Mr. White applied to the committee for permission for his children to be allowed to visit their mother once a month.
The response of the committee was that they adhered to their previous decision to allow them to do so only once a quarter.
Their reasons for what, in the present day, seems an unduly harsh refusal are obscure.
A night watchman, William Barber, was appointed at £2 per week.
John Pedder, the window cleaner, was to render assistance in the casual wards as and when necessary, his wages being increased to £1 per week.
In the spring of 1931, Mr. and Mrs. Chaplin resigned, and in July, Walter George Ball and Florence May Ball were appointed master and matron respectively, the matron also to act as superintendent-nurse.
They came to Bedford from the Luton Public Assistance Institution where they had been assistant master and assistant matron.
His salary was to be £200, and hers £180 per annum plus furnished apartments, rations and laundry.
In January 1933, Percy Henry Wood, of the Public Assistance Institution at Kettering, was appointed as labour master at a salary of £70 with board and lodgings.
PERCY WOOD AND THE ‘CASUALS’
Percy Wood was appointed senior labour master in 1933, and lived in a cottage on a site now occupied by the boilerhouse.
He was in charge of the casual wards as well as of all ‘workhouse’ inmates and ‘test’workers — the latter being men sent on trial for twenty-four hours a week by the relieving officer.
When Wood retired in 1968 (by which time he had become head porter) he gave an account of his 35 years of service; what follows are extracts from his address, in his own words:
‘In those days casual wayfarers used to be housed in the Institution.
They would hide their money or belongings in the hedges and grounds surrounding the Bedford Institution and would then take their sacks (or ‘peters’, as they were called) and enter by the large iron gates.
On one of the brick piers was inscribed the words, ‘The poor are with ye always’.
‘Upon entry, the casuals were searched, and all their belongings were temporarily confiscated.
These included cigarettes, because they were not allowed to smoke in the Institution.
They were then issued with clean shirts and towels.
They were made to have a bath and encouraged to wash the shirts they were wearing.
These casuals were probably some of the most hygienic people in England, because every institution plunged them and their shirts into the wash before all else.
‘The staple diet at first was ‘shellshock’ and ‘marge’.
Shellshock was cocoa, which was served with bread and margarine for breakfast and tea.
At mid-day they had bread, cheese and shellshock.
‘The old buildings contained a row of tramps’ cells for recalcitrant or workshy wayfarers.
There were also work cells in which a truculent tramp could be placed with a hundredweight slab of concrete or granite as a companion.
He would not let out until he had pulverised his ‘cell-mate’ and fed it down a chute into a wheelbarrow outside.’
(According to a circular of March 20th, 1931, stone-breaking, stone-pounding and corn-grinding were no longer among the tasks prescribed for casuals; none could be imposed without the approval of the Minister.
In the annual report of the Ministry of Health it had been said that it was the practice, in some wards, to require a casual who was locked in a cell by himself to break a given quantity of stone, often very hard, down to a specified standard of size which was reached when it could be passed through a ring:
‘As a task for all alike this is clearly open to the objection, among others, of inequality.
Its severity depends on the skill or knack of the breaker and the quality of the stone.
It comes easy to the habitual vagrant; it is well-nigh impossible to the inexperienced.
We cannot too strongly condemn such a practice and we recommend its total abolition…
. We are clear that it should not be used as a punishment or as a deterrent, and we think that there should always be an alternative task available for men for whom stone-breaking is unsuitable.’
The report referred to the opinions of Arthur Shepherd M.P., a member of the departmental committee who:
‘…considered that a casual with a skilled trade may have his efficiency seriously impaired by being required to break stones and may, in order to avoid this task, feel compelled to sleep out or to commit some other offence against the law; that it is impossible to expect the officer in charge of a casual ward to discriminate between men for whom the task would or would not be suitable, and that this would lay him open to accusations of favouritism or vindictiveness; that the task could rarely be made a profitable one, and is repugnant to the class of workers most liable to unemployment, being looked upon by them as having penal associations and as entirely deterrent.’)
‘The average tramp's cell had a bed with a mattress, a straw pillow, and three blankets.
There was a little seat fixed onto the wall.
In the door was a spy-hole through which he could be observed.
But the tough treatment was only for tough customers.
In the main, the destitute wayfarers were treated well.
They were awakened at 6.30 a.m., breakfasted at 7.30 a.m. and were put to work from 8.0 a.m. to 11.30 a.m.
‘I would line the men up outside, then I would pick out the youngest and strongest for sweeping and cleaning.
The older men would sit chopping wood, more able-bodied would saw wood, while the others would bundle it.
Other work included gardening in the grounds, and in the summertime farmers would take away parties for pea-picking and potato-picking.
At one time we kept pigs and used to feed them up with the waste food and sell them in the market.
‘The men included honest tradesmen out of work because of the depression, the usual ‘Dosser’, the wandering tramp and the ‘Jake-Wallah’, who was a Meths drinker.
I only remember having to take four men to the police station.
If they acted properly, I did well by them.
If they didn't, I had to discipline them myself.
If a man was workshy and mutinous I would put him in a cell to cool his heels for a while.
They were treated well and they asked nothing more of life.
At least there was someone to look after them as they wandered about from place to place.
‘The casuals had dinner from 12.45 to 2.0 p.m., worked from 2.0 p.m. to 3.30 p.m., and from 3.30 had a make-and-mend and washed their shirts before tea.
They were up in their dormitories by 5.45 p.m., where they often played cards.
Their clothes were locked away so they had to remain in the dormitory.
When they were discharged at eight in the morning, they were given back their belongings, with a sandwich of bread and cheese.
We often found as much as 20 lb. of bread and 4 lb. of cheese tossed about the Kimbolton Road area after they left.
‘After I had been at the Bedford Institution for a few years there were changes for the better.
We managed to get the cocoa changed to tea, and abandoned the hard-labour cells.
I had to give first aid treatment when needed and issued simple medicines, which included ‘Miss Alba’, a white elixir effective in the eradication of constipation.
(In the Navy we used to call it No. 9.)
‘The diet was improved.
Bread and cheese at mid-day was replaced by 2 oz. of bully beef, 2 oz. of cheese, and two slices of bread with potatoes, beans and peas.
Some of them used to conceal tea in their shoes.
They would sit in the lavatories and brew up tea in a can by holding a candle underneath.
They would often play cards for matches.
They seemed a surprisingly happy crowd and they were not underfed.
Any man who did not do his work could be reported to the police and might go to gaol for a week or so.
‘I received about 80 to 100 casuals each night.
Any of the casuals who showed signs of being genuinely ill were referred to the medical officer and were treated in the infirmary.
The inmates of the institution were treated well, whether they ware in the workhouse or in the infirmary.
Some were elderly people who would now be housed in old people's homes.
Then there were the chronic sick who had to be looked after.
They had a good diet of bread, margarine, jam and bacon for breakfast, roast beef, potatoes and greens, and rice pudding for lunch, and bread and jam for tea with cake once a week.
For their work, the male inmates got 2 oz. of tobacco a week and the girls had sweets.
They were also a happy crowd.
They were well looked after and were given plenty of beer, cigarettes and extras at Christmas time.
The staff gave them concerts.
They could have discharged themselves at any time, but they were destitute and the best was done for them that was possible in the circumstances.
There were mentally deficient people housed in the institution as well as chronic sick and destitute.’
The following extract from a Ministry of Health committee report in 1931 emphasises the contrast in the attitudes of those responsible for the administration of public assistance compared with those prevailing in the early days of the Bedford Union: ‘…
We see no objection to smoking being allowed at prescribed times and with reasonable precautions against fire.
Books and newspapers should be provided; every facility should be given to casuals to attend Divine Service on Sunday.
We have heard evidence of arrangements being made for special services on Sundays in casual wards…every endeavour should be made to break the monotony of the casuals’ Sunday by these and other means, such as visits by persons of goodwill’.
James Paine (p. 16) was evidently born a century too soon.
ST.
PETER'S IN THE SECOND WORLD WAR
A long and carefully detailed letter of complaint was received by the committee early in 1939, and it is quoted at length here for its revelation of some of the prevailing attitudes towards the Public Assistance Institution (of which St. Peter's Hospital was now an integral part).
The letter concerned the mother of the complainant who had died at the hospital, where she was a paying patient.
Mr. J. praised the nurses who had  looked after his mother, and did not blame them in any way for her death.
The diet, of bread and butter and tea for breakfast, bread and butter and tea for tea, milk for supper, and a very limited variety of items for dinner, came in for adverse comment.
He had to say that it was neither suitable nor adequate for a paying patient…any extras had to be brought in by friends.
He had complained to the storekeeper , who had said that the diet was sufficient but
‘…as an in-patient in hospitals on several occasions myself I had had a more appetising variation of diet.
‘Oh,’ he replied, ‘that would be in a voluntary hospital.
This is a poor law institution!’…a poor law institution in which the patient is charged nearly £3 weekly!’
Mr.J. drew the attention of the guardians to a recent book about modern English prisons: ‘Sixteen different dinners are served every month for convicted criminals, and only four for paying patients in a hospital’.
On the subject of what he called atmosphere —‘…after all, this is a home for vagrants, and no-one who was not an outcast would be caught on the premises’.
He was surprised to find that the medical officer was not resident at the hospital, ‘…my wife and I, and a friend (the wife of a highly-placed London County Council Official) tried to interview the medical officer at his home’.
They were not successful; Dean Pollard refused to see them.
The letter concludes with a homily addressed to the management: ‘Remain human!
It is the most difficult thing for any Government official to do.
They all become little tin gods and jacks-in-office unless spoken to at times, and reminded they are human beings.’
(When subsequently, the hospital became crowded almost to bursting point with the influx of evacuee patients from London, the master reported to the Guardians Committee that, owing to limited cooking facilities and greatly increased numbers, it had become necessary to suspend the existing dietary — which had so displeased Mr.J. — and adopt a more simplified bill of fare.)
With the beginning of the war, the Emergency Medical Service (EMS) was set up by the Government.
Its primary purpose was to make room for the large number of civilian air-raid casualties which were expected in the big cities.
St. Peter's Hospital was designated under this scheme.
On September 30th 1939, there were 240 patients in the hospital and 40 inmates of the ‘House’(i.e. the original House of Industry, now the administrative block).
The total number in the institution was made up of 138 men, 125 women, and 17 children.
The total number of casuals for the four weeks previously was nine, none of whom were men.
For the corresponding period in the previous year 818 men had been accommodated, plus 22 women and one child.
At the outbreak of war, the casual wards had been closed by order of the Ministry of Health, and the master reported to the committee that on August 31st 1939, he had received instructions from the medical officer of health to evacuate, 116 patients and children to other institutions within the county to accommodate the patients evacuated from London hospitals.
22 non-sick inmates of the institution were sent to Ampthill, and 88 to Biggleswade, while six children were transferred to the Kempston Children's Home.
On September 1st, 300 patients were transferred from London hospitals to St. Peter's on one day.
With these arrivals, there were then 420 patients at North Wing.
The air raids failing to materialise at that time, 152 of these were transferred to the Orchard London County Council Hospital in Dartford.
Throughout the war, others took their place but in much smaller numbers.
The increased hospital population produced problems for the chaplain, Mr. Wassell, who had helped to carry stretchers on the day when they had arrived.
Ministering to their spiritual needs would be a full time job, he said, and he offered to devote the major part of this time to the work for the period of the war.
The Bedford Area Guardians Committee continued to function as a house committee.
Two wings were added to the infirmary in 1939, with a new maternity department and an additional wing to the nurses' home.
Facilities for X-ray were installed, and a new operating table and lamp were obtained at a total cost of £150.
The committee, expressing their thanks to Lord Nuffield, who had provided an iron lung for the treatment of poliomyelitis victims, accepted liability for its maintenance costs, amounting to £1 per annum.
Because of improvements such as these, St. Peter's had become a Grade 1 hospital under the EMS scheme, and in view of the additional duties falling on the shoulders of their medical officer, Dean Pollard's salary was increased from £350 to £450 per annum.
The public assistance officer, Mr. W. G. Daniels, reported that the displaced casuals had been accommodated in lodging houses in Bedford; these were inadequate and in October 1940, the committee applied to the Ministry of Health for release of the casual wards for their ‘proper purpose’.
There is no record of the Ministry's response to this request.
The guardians committee had the power to levy contributions from relatives for treatment and maintenance of patients in the hospital, and  appeals against those orders were forwarded to the guardians from the parent Public Assistance Committee at the Shire Hall.
It is perhaps worth remembering that the Beveridge Report was published as early as 1942; it embodied the aspirations of so many who had been disappointed by the failure of Lloyd George's ‘land fit for heroes to live in’ to materialise.
Numerous letters of appeal against assessment were received:
‘Sir, In reply to your letter received this morning I want to no how ever you think i can pay 4s. a week towards my Father.
I told you when I rote that it was impossible for me to pay anything, as he was allowed by the parish when he was at Muggerhanger, and I told you I had my daughter on my hands for over seven years, and I have been doctering her all the time so I think you will consider the matter over and no that I cannot help in any way, and in any case 4s. is a lot of money to pay a week.
I am worried to death, what with my three sons being away in the Army.
I hardly no how to keep going and you must no that I am not a young man.
When you get on towards sixty you are not like any one younger, so will you kindly consider the matter over and help me out of it.
I am your obedient
W.J.A.’
One man explained that he was unable to continue payment in support of his mother because he had joined the Navy, and he was given exemption.
Another wrote:
‘Again I have received a demarned in respect of my Farther…
. Just think of this food, clothing, shoes all to come out of my earnings the average of £3.9.9d. a little more sometimes, a few shillings Bonus, and my son has been ill for the past three weeks, whos going to pay the doctors Bill also I have lost time at work through air raid warnings no pay.
I am luckily to be hear to write after the bombing of our works I have not had a chance to explain or to see the person who is in charge of this case…
W.W.’
In February 1942, Captain Oswald Benton, a welfare officer, Royal Artillery, wrote to the county treasurer on behalf of one of his soldiers whose wife had had an operation at St. Peter's, and who had received a bill for £1.4s.0d. (which included £1.1s.0d. for the anaesthetic fee):
‘He assures me that he cannot pay this amount as he has a wife and two children to keep on Army pay.
I have tried for a grant from the War  Office for this purpose but it has not been awarded.
It would set this soldier's mind at rest if you could kindly cancel this debt.’
The debt was written off.
In December 1939, the guardians committee had recommended the purchase of a refrigerator for Kempston Children's Home at a cost of £156.
This was considered by the public assistance committee which promptly referred it back saying that apart from the question of cost, a refrigerator was unnecessary.
The chairman, Mr. Lansberry, evidently stung by the refusal, accepted personal responsibility for approving a smaller refrigerator which was bought from a firm in the High Street for £80.
(It had been reduced from £103 as it was a showroom model.)
In June of 1940, France and the Low Countries had fallen; the air attacks on Britain began shortly afterwards.
The first bomb fell in the county at 0051 hours on June 27th 1940 at Pertenhall, and broke some windows of a farmhouse.
The first casualty from enemy action occurred at Stewartby brickworks on August 23rd 1940, and was the result of machine-gun fire from a single aircraft, but bombs landed near Henlow R.A.F. station in September and two people were taken to hospital.
The number of casuals who were accommodated at St. Peter's was more striking; it reached a peak of 453 in February.
In January 1941, the local newspaper carried a description of the fires of London reflected in the southern sky, and in the same issue of the Bedfordshire Times it was reported that a member of the Area Guardians Committee had stated that a number of men employed as labourers on government works were being lodged at the Public Assistance Institution as casuals.
The matron and the acting master confirmed that a ‘good percentage’ of casuals, accommodated free of charge, were Irish labourers earning good money (up to £6 a week) on local works.
The deputy public assistance officer, Mr. H. L. Davison, said that this was because there was no other accommodation available in the town's lodging houses.
If the police didn't issue them with ‘tickets’ they would probably sleep in the air-raid shelters.
Bedford was also faced with an influx of evacuees from the battered capital, and the evacuation committee and other bodies collaborated with similar London-based organisations in making billeting arrangements and adapting social centres.
The movement of people, especially children, that was taking place led the Borough medical officer, Dr. G. K. Bowes, to issue a warning to the town council of the danger of a diphtheria epidemic.
Whereupon a member, Mr. Hawksley, moved that the council should cease its policy of inducing ‘the  working classes’ to submit to diphtheria immunisation; it had, he said, already cost the ratepayers £1,000 since it had been introduced in Bedford in 1935.
‘If parents knew how the serum…was obtained and produced, the Council would not get one per cent of them to consent.’
There was, he asserted, no convincing proof of benefit.
His proposal failed to find a seconder, and the following week another council member, Dr. Meldrum, comprehensively refuted the argument in a letter to the editor of the Bedfordshire Times .
Among the points he made was the fact that the cost of immunising a child was 7s.6d., against thirty times that amount for treating him in hospital.
About one thousand high explosive bombs and eight thousand incendiaries fell on Bedfordshire during the war (apart from Luton Borough).
The total number of casualties was less than 150.
There were twelve deaths, ten of them in the Borough of Bedford.
On July 23rd 1942, at 9 a.m. a Dornier 217 dropped four high explosive bombs in the region of Midland Road railway station.
Out of fourteen casualties, only four needed hospital treatment.
One week later the most serious raid occurred when incendiary bombs with explosive nosecaps landed in the region of Kimbolton Road and Putnoe.
Ten people were killed, there were ten serious injuries and one hundred minor casualties.
All the emergency services were involved: Cuthbert Welch, the county medical officer of health, was in charge of the casualty services and his staff officer was Eric Stonebanks.
The public assistance officer, W. G. Daniels, was in charge of the rest centre services.
Mobile first aid depôts were stationed in various parts of the Borough including the County Hospital and St. Peter's.
To quote Percy Wood:
‘In July 1942, Bedford had a bombing attack with incendiaries, which started a lot of fires in the ‘Black Tom’ area.
The old men's dayroom was converted into a casualty reception station, where the injured were brought before going to the wards or the operating theatre.
When a German ‘plane was shot down near Roxton the sergeant navigator who survived was brought in as a patient and I assisted with his reception.
He was a most grateful patient.’
Thirty air-raid casualties were admitted to St. Peter's; by early August, five of them had died and another five had been discharged.
In June 1940, Dean Pollard had reported to the committee that an infant, Margaret C., who had been born at St. Peter's, and who had a double harelip and cleft palate, had been referred to the Children's Hospital, Great  Ormond Street.
The corrective operation could not be undertaken until the child was three months old, and the doctor recommended that the child should be allowed to stay at the hospital until she was due for surgery, her condition producing difficulties in feeding.
By October, however, conditions in London were impossible because of the air-raids, and the child was accepted for the operation in Oxford.
That summer, George Ball, the master (who was later to become the first hospital secretary of Bedford General Hospital) joined the R.A.F. A special committee met in order to appoint a temporary master, and George's father, Walter Mills Ball, a retired poor-law officer, offered to fill his place while his son was serving.
This was readily agreed, and Mr. Ball the elder held the post efficiently throughout the remainder of the war.
The Ministry of Health distributed a circular concerning the provision of air-raid shelters in hospitals; part of the building was to be designated for the purpose, ‘such overhead and lateral protection being provided as is possible’.
In special cases, it was conceded, outside shelters might be necessary, but because of the heavy drain on materials and labour, the use of steel or timber in any quantity could not be authorised.
Structural work had to be restricted to ‘the minimum compatible with the provision of a reasonable standard of protection for the ambulant patients and the staff not required to remain on duty’.
(No record exists of any air-raid shelter at St. Peter's Hospital, but the original cellars of the House of Industry would have served the purpose well, if any such had been needed.)
In November 1940, the master reported that in the previous four weeks there had been 93 admissions, plus 12 patients from the Services and 170 evacuees from London hospitals.
The following year, the medical officer noted a great increase in maternity cases at St. Peter's Hospital and said that it was ‘absolutely necessary to have a staff midwife to relieve the maternity sister’.
It was impossible for the matron to relieve her.
The post was duly advertised and an appointment was made from the end of June.
A man serving in the R.A.F. wrote to say that he was deeply indebted to the doctors and nurses who had looked after his wife when she had been admitted with a complicated confinement, which had needed an operation.
He had received a bill for £10.12s.6d. which he respectfully offered to pay off at 30s. a week.
‘Had I been in a civilian occupation,’ he wrote, ‘I should not have hesitated to pay the full amount.’
The Guild of Brave Poor Things, which had been founded by Miss M. L. Gabriel in 1911, made further gifts, including two wheelchairs.
Miss Gabriel retired from the secretaryship in order to become chairman in January 1941, and on that occasion she told of her long association with the Guild, which  she was chiefly instrumental in establishing thirty years previously.
It had taken her nearly ten years to do so, ‘as everyone said that we have enough societies in Bedford already’.
She said that she had nearly given up the idea, but ‘every time she met a cripple her conscience smote her’.
One member of the committee, a local industrialist, served on it throughout the war years and was meticulous in sending a personal letter of apology for absence before each and every meeting.
By way of variation, in October 1943, his secretary wrote to say that he was away on business, and that it was ‘quite probable’ that he would not be able to attend on that occasion.
Subsequently, however, he was able to resume the announcement of his non-attendance himself.
A moving letter, written in May 1944, may help to explain the welcome which the National Health Service received four years later.
The writer had received a bill from St. Peter's Hospital for £10.5s.6d.:
‘My husband has been in the R.A.F. for nearly four years, but we had saved enough for the costs of a normal confinement in a nursing home, and as it was my first baby, we thought it well worth a little extra expense.
However, after being in the ‘Rena’ for a week, I became seriously ill with septicaemia and was moved to St. Peter's Hospital, where I stayed for three weeks.
My baby had to remain at the nursing home, as I had no one to look after him, and he was not admitted into hospital because of whooping-cough in the nursery there.
As soon as I was strong enough, and could walk again, I fetched my baby from the nursing home, but he then died of shock from an operation necessitated by stomach trouble.
The baby was in the Rena for four weeks at two guineas a week…the bill amounted to £16.12s.10d. and so you see, with all these expenses, the cost of having a baby has turned out to be very great, and now there are of course the funeral fees.’
She offered to make over her full allowance of 28s.6d. per week from the Air Ministry to cover the cost of her stay in St. Peter's and the cost of the ambulance (ten shillings).
Her offer was accepted without comment.
It has to be emphasised that the committee worked always in the shadow of the law: Section 132 of the Public Health Act 1875 had said that any expenses incurred by a local authority in maintaining in a hospital a patient who is not a pauper , should be deemed to be a debt due from such patient to the local authority, and could be recovered from him at any time within six months after his discharge from the hospital.
Under the Local Government Act 1929 it was the positive duty of the local authority to recover the whole of the expenses (or as much as the person could afford).
LAST DAYS OF ST.
PETER'S HOSPITAL
The Committee received a circular from the Minister of Health in June 1944 recommending that:
(a) the Public Assistance Committee should be called in future ‘The County Council Social Welfare Committee’;
(b) the Guardians Committees should become ‘Welfare Committees’;
(c) the Public Assistance Officer should in future be known as ‘the County Council Director of Social Welfare’.
The original titles should, said the minister, be retained only for statutory purposes.
The committee made no comment but as far as can be ascertained, no action was taken; more urgent matters required attention.
Because of war conditions, the costs connected with contracts for the extensions at St. Peter's had increased.
Moreover, there was a serious shortage of nursing and domestic staff at public assistance institutions and children's homes throughout the county.
The master reported that the new maternity unit had been opened in addition to the existing temporary maternity ward because of a considerable increase in the number of such patients.
Extra midwives had been taken on for the same reason.
The attention of the council was drawn to an anomaly in the existing arrangements for patients suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis.
Antibiotic treatment and chemotherapy had not yet been introduced, and for some ‘consumptives’, the outlook was hopeless.
Those who had a reasonable chance of survival received an allowance from the health department of the local authority, but those incurables who needed financial help were made aware of their grim prospects because they had to apply for public assistance instead.
Representations were made to the County Councils Association for amendment of ‘this present unsatisfactory scheme’, and that particular problem disappeared, with many others, in the reforms embodied in the National Insurance Act of 1946.
Staffing problems persisted throughout the war years.
A newspaper report of an inquest on a patient at the Biggleswade institution appeared to imply  that the guardians had not done their duty in respect of the provision of adequate nursing staff.
The committee, evidently nettled by this slur, informed Mr. R. G. Rose, the coroner for the North Bedfordshire district, that the council had, in fact, done all that they possibly could to get nurses but without success.
The war in Europe came to an end on May 8th 1945, and the task of reconstruction and expansion began.
A small electric lift was installed in ‘D’ Block, the original House of Industry, at a cost of £800.
The sanitary arrangements were upgraded (£1,500), and the GPO switchboard and telephone exchanges were installed.
The cost of maintaining a patient in St. Peter's Hospital in June 1945 was calculated at just under £3 a week.
A general inspector of the Ministry of Health paid a visit to the hospital and submitted his report which was considered by the Area Guardians Committee in December 1945:
Among other observations he had noticed that the new extension to the nurses' home could not be used until the furniture had been installed, and that there was no recreation room for the nurses and resident staff.
(Two years later, the tender of Samuel Foster Limited of Kempston for the nurses' recreation room in the sum of £10,295 was accepted, despite an amendment which was put forward to postpone this project for three years, but which was lost on a show of hands.)
The inspector drew attention to the absence of dayrooms for the ambulant chronic sick, who sat around and had their meals in the wards, where ‘there were very few wooden armchairs’.
He had words of praise, however, for the excellent nursing care of the chronic sick.
The old nursery block had been taken over temporarily as part of the laundry, and the children who were not sick were maintained in a ward on the female side.
They were taken out into the grounds, weather permitting, otherwise ‘they spend most of their day in this ward, which is a day-and-night nursery combined.
In some cases the first three years of life are spent in this ward before transfer to a children's home.’
The male inmates who were accommodated in the House would be better off in a more suitable institution.
‘The hospital,’ concluded the inspector, ‘is carrying on under extreme difficulties with a shortage of nursing and domestic staff, and with rebuilding and adaptation going on.
The hospital appears to be well known and popular with local residents and therefore a vast amount of acute work…is undertaken.’
Inclusion of the hospital as a training school for assistant   nurses was under consideration, but he felt that the nursing and domestic staff needed to be reinforced before that were done.
On August 6th 1945, the first atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima and four weeks later the Japanese surrendered.
The war was finally over.
Official circulars commended hospital staff for their work during the conflict, outlined arrangements for the release of nurses from the Forces and announced programmes of capital expenditure.
A letter from the Ministry of Health in March 1946 called for the Council's proposals for the improvement of hospital accommodation in the subsequent five years, during which the building of new hospitals would probably not be possible.
These proposals were to be put in order of priority (a requirement which became a regular feature of hospital development programmes ever after).
The Institutions Committee said that they were unable to comply with this request until further information was available about the progress of the National Health Service Bill.
Nevertheless, estimates had already been obtained for the provision of a nurses' recreation room and tennis courts for the nursing staff.
The Medical Research Council proposed to erect and maintain a public health laboratory in the grounds of St. Peter's Hospital and this was approved, the building being leased to the M.R.C. for 25 years.
A draft scheme to provide a comprehensive ambulance service for the whole of Bedfordshire was approved.
The number of beds at St. Peter's reserved under the Emergency Medical Scheme was reduced from 75 to 60 in September 1946 (and eighteen months later, to 10).
In 1946, the National Health Service Act was placed on the Statute Book, and the future of St. Peter's Hospital became the subject of intensive local debate and negotiation.
A proposal to build office accommodation was rejected by the Ministry of Health which suggested that the scheme be deferred for the Regional Hospital Board to consider, ‘in the event of the hospital being transferred to the Minister under the provisions of the NHS Act’.
In March 1947, the Government announced its intention to round off the social service provision that had been made by the National Insurance and National Health Service Acts of 1946, by introducing legislation to break up the poor law, and to introduce a comprehensive system of national assistance.
Instructions were given for easing the routines in homes and institutions for the elderly.
There was ‘no reason why the provisions of the Poor Law of 1930 should be applied to the aged’.
A few months later H. L. Davison, the public assistance officer, reported to the Institution Committee that the new National Assistance Bill had received its second reading in Parliament.
Under the terms of the Bill, it would be the duty of the National Assistance Board to provide and maintain reception centres for persons without a set way of life i.e. the casual poor, or vagrants.
Mixed institutions, the greater part of which were used for other than hospital purposes, were to remain with the local authority and would not be taken into the National Health Service.
In July 1947, the Ministry asked for a statement concerning the hospital premises and funds.
The figures for December 1947, show that there was, at that time, temporary accommodation for 10 casuals.
Most of the hospital beds were distributed as follows:
There were no non-sick (workhouse) beds at the Bedford Institution; they had been closed at the beginning of the war.
The Clerk of the Council advised that:
‘…there are some persons maintained in the sick wards at the Bedford Institution who may be classified as infirm and not requiring constant hospital treatment.
Where an institution as a whole is for the non-sick but with some sick beds, the premises will not be transferred to the Minister.
In that case the County Council will have to look after the sick there,possibly with supervision of the staff by representatives of the Regional Hospital Board .’
That clinched it; the Public Assistance Committee lost no time in recommending that Bedford should go to the minister and be incorporated in the NHS.
In April 1947, the Minister of Health was asked for his observations on a proposal to appoint a resident medical superintendent at St. Peter's Hospital.
His reply is not recorded, but it was probably in the negative.
It was widely assumed that the pattern of administration in the new NHS hospital would follow that at the County, the voluntary hospital.
There, the influence of the honorary senior medical staff was considerable, and the presence of a medical superintendent would have been an unwelcome irritant.
On November 5th 1947, Dean Pollard resigned.
He had been the medical officer and acting medical superintendent at the Bedford Institution for 28 years (as well as holding the post of assistant surgeon at the County Hospital from 1920 until he resigned in July 1924, when he was replaced by Dr. W. H. Miller).
Dr. Lewis Brough M.D. was appointed at St. Peter's on a temporary basis.
As the M.D. indicates, he was a physician, and the committee specified that Griffith J. Griffiths, who had been appointed to Goldington district, and who later became the senior surgeon at Bedford General Hospital, should be co-opted in cases where major surgery was required.
Guy Storrs, the medical officer of Bedford No. 1 district, was to join Griffiths on being appointed consultant orthopaedic surgeon at Bedford.
There were some problems which the Public Assistance Committee was able to unload without regret.
In January 1948, the Clerk of the Council wrote to its chairman:
‘Mr. H. is well known in public assistance circles, and the Ministry have issued a circular that he is not to be accorded any special treatment.
He managed to get himself a special bed at Bedford Institution on pretence of sickness, which proved quite unfounded.
He also presented himself to the Rehabilitation Officer and has been a very great nuisance to him…
Mr. Lowe (Public Assistance Officer) has had long talks with him and is convinced that the man is not normal; he continually contradicts himself and his great joy is getting publicity.
He had a huge pile of paper cuttings etc.
If he has any social reform plans, he should approach the Minister of Health who is at this very moment bringing to an end the old Poor Law…’
In February the Institution sub-committee reported that a meeting had been held with representatives of the North West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board: Sir Frederick Messer, M.P.
(chairman), Mrs. F. M. Baker (vice-chairman), Mr. H. R. Neate (Alderman Horace Neate), Dr. H. N. C. Macauley (medical administrator), and Mr. Bennett (secretary).
The handover of the Bedford and Luton institutions was agreed.
The Regional Board representatives suggested that the council should move sick patients from Ampthill and Biggleswade institutions to Steppingley and Biggleswade Isolation Hospitals, to make room for the non-sick.
Taking over the isolation hospitals did not appeal, and the clerk of the council said that, in the event of the council's not being able to find sufficient beds at Ampthill and Biggleswade for non-sick patients, it would be necessary to have a lien on the accommodation at Bedford and Luton institutions when they were taken over by the Regional Board.
This was rejected.
When, on July 5th 1948, St. Peter's and the County Hospital became one, the former brought to the union the remaining casual attenders and a handful of workhouse inmates.
It was an unwelcome dowry.
Eric Stonebanks, the first Group Secretary, in his published survey of the Bedford Group of Hospitals up to 1958, wrote that:
‘…the continued reception of casuals at St. Peter's Hospital was a deterrent to nursing recruitment and a hindrance in the upgrading of the work of the hospital.
After a good deal of pressure on the authorities  concerned, the reception centre ('C' Block) was closed on 7th November 1949.’
With the departure of the hospital from its jurisdiction, the Bedfordshire County Council retained the responsibility for health centres, the care of mothers and young children, domiciliary midwifery, health visiting, home nursing, vaccination and immunisation, and the ambulance service.
And so, from the sick wards in the old House of Industry and then of the Bedford Union, through the workhouse infirmary, St. Peter's Hospital, providing a comprehensive range of services for the sick and injured poor of the district, had emerged from the chrysalis as the North Wing of Bedford General Hospital.
Submission to central authority was deeply ingrained in its 150 years' history, and the hospital was only now to throw off the last traces of its even more ancient deterrent purpose.
The agreement by the County Council to transfer St. Peter's to the minister was not without irony — the Ministry of Health had grown out of the same succession of poor laws which had produced both the institution and, indeed, local government itself.
The voluntary hospital, the South Wing of Bedford's new general hospital, had developed as a result of charity; private for the most part, but also with financial support from the public sector; the story of its development until it was combined with St. Peter's in 1949 is the subject of the following section:
SOUTH WING.
1803–1947
FOUNDATIONS
Samuel Whitbread was born in Cardington on August 20th 1720, and at the age of 16 was apprenticed to a London brewer, John Wightman, later starting his own brewery in Chiswell Street.
He acquired a considerable fortune and was noted for his philanthropy; he was elected Member of Parliament for Bedford Town in 1768.
Whitbread had no formal education and seems to have been the archetypal self-made man.
He was a follower of William Pitt and an acquaintance of Dr. Samuel Johnson; he advised his son, Samuel the Younger, while the latter was still an undergraduate, that ‘the respectable way to get into Parliament was by invitation, not by contention’.
Whitbread died at Bedwell Park in Hertfordshire on June 11th 1796, and was buried in the imposing family tomb in St. Mary's Church, Cardington.
The words on his memorial were written by his son:
‘By the indefatigable exertions of honest industry he acquired an ample fortune which his large but discriminating generosity rendered serviceable to the encouragement of virtue, by diffusion of knowledge and the relief of the afflicted….’
In a codicil to his will, Samuel Whitbread declared that:
‘…there is not as yet any public hospital or infirmary…in or near the Town of Bedford or in the County of Bedford for the reception and relief of sick and lame Objects within the same Town and County such as those in Northampton and Leicester Counties and which appear to me to be very much wanted…and are usually created by public subscriptions….’
He left the sum of £8,000 for the purpose.
A maximum of £4,000 was to be spent on the building, the residue being for ‘the general uses of the hospital’(i.e. revenue).
He further stipulated that the building was to be erected within seven years of his death, otherwise the trustees were authorised to apply the money to any other charitable purpose.
Three trustees were named; his son Samuel, who was now M.P.
for Bedford, and two nephews — Jacob Whitbread and John Wingate Jennings.
The money was to be invested at interest within two years of Whitbread's death.
The deadline was June 11th 1803, and on July 7th 1801 the first general meeting of subscribers was held in the Session House in Bedford.
Samuel Whitbread was chairman of the committee which, he reported, had ‘advertised in the London and country papers and caused upwards of one thousand circular letters to be distributed to the different landed proprietors, principal occupiers and clergy of the County…
‘. Resident clergy and dissenting ministers in the county had been asked to preach sermons in their respective parishes and meetings for the benefit of the infirmary.
It was proposed that all benefactors of 20 guineas per annum should be governors while their payments were maintained.
All governors were to have the right to recommend patients to the infirmary in proportion to their subscriptions.
The Treasurer was Joseph Barnard, who had established himself as a coal merchant in Bedford by 1773, after which he founded the bank which bore his name.
A committee was appointed to consider the plans, to choose a site for the infirmary and to make other recommendations; it included the Duke of Bedford, Mr. Osborn, Mr. Pym, Mr. Higgins of Turvey, Lord John Russell, Samuel Whitbread and Dr. Yeats — the latter a local physician.
It met at the  Swan Inn, Bedford on July 22nd 1801; the funds included £1,914.4s.0d. in donations and £297.3s.0d. in annual subscriptions.
This was clearly insufficient to produce a building adequate for the needs of the county, and another circular letter was sent out asking for support.
The resident clergy and parish officers were asked to give subscriptions:
‘The advantage to be derived by the lower class of your parishioners in case of accident or severe illness from such an asylum is sufficiently obvious as is the great saving to the parish rates’.
The committee decided that the best site was in Thomas' Close in the south-west of Bedford and off the Ampthill Road; the land belonged to the Duke of Bedford.
It was recommended that three acres of this ground should be purchased.
A plan had been submitted by the architect, John Wing (already noted for other projects in the town).
The infirmary was to hold 38 in-patients, and the subscribers were recommended to accept the plan.
‘Mr. Wing has been indefatigable in his researches and the plan recommended appears to your committee to combine the excellency, and to obviate the defects of those already built.’
The building was to be finished by lst June 1803 and at an estimated cost of £5,800.
Weather conditions being favourable, the committee ordered the making of a large quantity of bricks.
In October 1802, with Samuel Whitbread in the chair, the committee decided that George Cloake, the surveyor, should be asked to meet John Wing to revise the estimates because the price of building material was expected to fall ‘in consequence of the peace’.
That peace was short-lived however, and within a year, England was once more at war with France.
The agreed price of the three acres of land was £180 and a proper conveyance was to be prepared by Theed Pearse the solicitor, who was also owner of the adjoining land on which the County Hospital was to be built nearly a century later.
By January of 1802 a fence of quick had been planted all round the site and John Wing reported that the foundations were dug out and in part laid.
A well had been prepared and a brick-kiln built; about 85,000 bricks had been burned.
The deed of conveyance of the land was executed on 21st January.
On 23rd April 1802 Francis, the fifth Duke of Bedford, died:
‘Your committee are now compelled to bring to your recollection the sad event which has deprived the Body of the illustrious Person, who  was its most efficient Member.
His loss has been felt as a great national calamity…assembled as we are in the execution of a Plan of great public Utility….’
By January 1803 the building of the infirmary was progressing well.
It had been slated-in and was secure from the weather.
The scaffolding had been cleared away and the plastering had progressed as far as the season would allow.
Six months remained for the building to be finished.
‘As the period of the completion of the undertaking is not now far distant, your Committee have considered of the most eligible mode of appointing medical attendants to the institution; upon the due and disinterested attention to which most important point its wellbeing and existence so materially depends.
After mature deliberation your Committee venture to propose to you to entrust them with powers to digest a scheme for the medical department, to receive claims, and investigate the merits of the different candidates who may propose themselves to fill the different situations in this line, as well as of the subordinate attendants of the house, and to report to you at your next general meeting the names of such persons as to them appear most proper, for your final approbation.’
In other words, the committee was asking permission to appoint the staff; this was granted.
Some of the annual subscribers to the infirmary were dissatisfied because they had been asked to pay their first subscription before the building was complete.
They were informed that the sums subscribed for the building were still inadequate and unless the subscriptions were paid in advance ‘for the legitimate purposes of providing food and medicine for the patients…the object of the building would be totally defeated’.
In January 1803, Samuel Whitbread received an apologetic letter from his cousin Jacob, a fellow trustee.
The letter asked for detailed information about the disposal of the funds, and Whitbread replied in dignified tones.
He had paid the sum of £9,035.11s.0d. to the treasurer as well as £39.12s.1¼d., being the interest on that fund.
The whole of the accumulation, he said, was accounted for to the fraction of one farthing.
£4,000 would be applied to the building and the rest to the endowment; the builder had received £2,000 on account.
‘I solicited and obtained an Act of Parliament…to exempt the legacy from the Legacy Duty.
As your co-trustee I have not been inattentive to my duty…and I in no shape deserve to be the object of the prosecution  of my co-trustees.
I hope that you will write to Mr. Glendhill to withdraw your name from the suit….’
Jacob Whitbread replied promptly, and with evident relief.
He was completely satisfied with the explanation; the lawsuit was to be discontinued as far as he himself was concerned, and he had written to Mr. Jennings asking him to withdraw as well.
Nevertheless, the action was heard by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Eldon, in March 1803.
Mr. A. Harman, confidential clerk at the brewery, wrote to Whitbread saying that the Attorney-General (Spencer Perceval) had stated that he knew of no security having been given for the sum of money in Mr. Whitbread's will.
After some discussion the Lord Chancellor directed that the money was to be put into the hands of trustees nominated by the committee, or else paid to the Accountant-General — which was likely to lead to added expense.
The governors responded promptly to the judgement, and William Lee Antonie and Samuel Whitbread were appointed trustees for the funds.
What lay behind this odd episode is uncertain.
Patricia Bell has suggested that the founder's charitable impulses tended to outrun the total of the many legacies in his will.
Doubts about the son's ability to ensure that this bequest remained intact in the face of other claimants may have led his co-trustees to start the legal action.
On February 1st 1803 the committee decided that the medical establishment for the Bedford Infirmary should consist of one physician, two surgeons-in-ordinary, and one house surgeon/apothecary combined.
It was also decided that the house surgeon should act as hospital secretary.
It was resolved that the attendance of the physician and the surgeons should be given free of all expense to the institution, and that each should be allowed the privileges of a governor by virtue of their appointments.
The house surgeon should be constantly resident in the infirmary and he should on no account be allowed to practise outside; his was the only salaried medical post.
All applications for the post were to be accompanied by testimonials ‘from the place of their medical education and of their attendance at medical and anatomical lectures’.
The committee met at the Swan Inn on March 11th 1803 and recommended the appointments of:
Dr. Grant David Yeats M.D. as physician to the institution,
Mr. Charles Short and Mr. John Pulley as surgeons,
Mr. James Butlin as house surgeon, apothecary, and secretary,
Mrs. Elizabeth Purser was appointed as matron.
At this time, one of the ways of learning the skills of a medical practitioner was to be apprenticed to a physician or surgeon.
The parents of such a pupil would pay a substantial fee to his instructor, who would benefit not only from the additional income but also from assistance with his patients.
The rules of the infirmary permitted the honorary medical staff (and later the house-surgeon) to take on such pupils, but how many there were at any one time and whether they were resident or not was seldom recorded.
The statement of the treasurer's accounts included the expenditure of £1.7s.6d. ‘for poor's rates for the building’.
(Since the income of the infirmary included contributions from the town as well as rural parishes, this would appear to be an early example of a circular movement of funds with which those acquainted with today's public services may be familiar.)
On July 13th 1803 John Wing reported that one six-bedded ward would be fit to receive patients by August 7th.
The public were advised that the ward would be ready to receive on Saturday August 13th, and that ‘medical gentlemen would be ready to give their advice to all such out-patients as shall come properly recommended on the same day’.
Subscribers who were in arrears were notified that no recommendation from them would be accepted.
The Duke of Bedford was appointed Grand Visitor and Samuel Whitbread the Second became Perpetual President.
The original plans for the building have not survived, but David Bennett, district building officer for North Bedfordshire HA, has constructed the following description from the building notes drawn up by George Cloake and John Wing:
‘The extended plan was more of a ‘U’ than an ‘H’shape, with 60ft. between the two wings, each 24ft. 6ins. wide in themselves and 52ft. long, later extended by some 64ft. on the north side.
The structure was in brick  with Totternhoe stone quoins, resuscitation and dressing.
The main entrance had a semi-circular arch, as did the window above it and while most of the windows were double-hung sashes with oak lintels and gauged arches, the basement windows were leaded lights and there were some casements.
The basement was some 8ft. high, the ground floor 9ft. and first and second floors approximately 12ft with the beams projecting below.
‘Most of the flooring was in timber with oak main beams and boards, the main passage was in York stone, but some basement flooring was of brick and the bottoms of the ‘areas’ to the basement windows were gravelled.
Internal finishes were generally simple with plaster finish to masonry, and lath-and-plaster to ceilings and stud partitions.
All walls seem to have been lime washed, even those not plastered, such as in the ‘dead room’ in the basement.
The staircases were also simple, of the carriage type and with rounded, not moulded, handrails.
The Committee room sported a veined marble chimney piece, but other rooms were provided with Portland stone; doors were panelled.
‘A low pitch slated and boarded roof with lead dressings topped the structure, with a skylight to the operating room; the roof void contained two lead-lined water cisterns, fed via ballcocks and two ‘force pumps’ from 4ft. diameter stone-lined walls.
Internal plumbing was in lead with sinks and patent W.C.s on all floors but ‘a York (stone) cistern to the cold bath 7 foot by 3 foot’ was provided.
‘From the records available, it would seem to have been a substantial and well-constructed building, typical of its time with pleasant grounds and circular carriage drives front and rear.’
An inventory of the bedding and furniture was drawn up.
A pair of sheets cost 12s.0d. and a pillowcase 1s.6d.
The iron bedsteads for the five wards were equipped with circular curtain rods and chains.
50 pewter chamber-pots cost 6d. each but the bedpans, of which there were 20, were more expensive at 9s.6d. each.
The bathroom was equipped with a 20-gallon boiler, bath tubs, three flannel gowns and ‘a ducking-chair with pulleys etc.’.
The dead room (mortuary) was provided with a table and shell at a cost of £1.4s.0d.
There was an ‘elaboratory ’ with mortars and copper pans.
The equipment for the operating room included three gowns, three pairs of oilskin sleeves, three deal-framed oval stools, and an operating table, plus three angle-tables.
The matron, the house surgeon and the pupil each had a bedroom and a sitting room.
There were four nurses' rooms each of which was to contain one bedstead, a flock bed, pillow and bolster and two blankets, two pairs of sheets and two pillow-cases; the porter's room was similarly furnished.
The estimate for all the furniture and bedding for the infirmary came to £881.16s.6d.
The house committee met weekly and dealt with a variety of matters.
For example: Mr. Butlin, the house surgeon and secretary, reported that he had received a letter from Mr. Whitworth, the Town Clerk, informing him that Bedford Corporation had agreed to subscribe five guineas per annum .
Various items of furniture had still not yet arrived, and the alteration to the cistern in the apothecary's shop had not been done — the plumber had not yet received the necessary part from London!
The building was insured for £4,000 and the furniture for £500, the policy being made out by Mrs. Mary Partridge of Bedford, agent for the Royal Exchange Assurance office.
The condition of Anne Freeman, in-patient, was ‘much mended’ and one of Mary Boyce's eyes had continued to recover; the other was much inflamed since the last report.
Sarah Taylor of the parish of St. Paul was admitted as an in-patient on the recommendation of Mr. Barnard, and John Field from the same parish was accepted as an out-patient without recommendation because he had suffered an accident.
Twelve bedsteads were urgently required and were ordered from Messrs. Kilpin and Leach; the mattresses and ticking for them were obtained from the House of Industry.
On December 17th 1803 the house committee ordered that each patient and servant belonging to the House should have ‘one pound of Plumb Pudding and half a pound of Beef’ for dinner on Christmas Day.
The bread supplied by Benjamin Maulden was ‘very indifferently baked’ and the house surgeon was to write to him expressing the Board's dissatisfaction — which was extended to a Mr. Bentham, whose bread was found to be underweight.
Joseph Freeman had been on trial as a porter, and his appointment was confirmed.
A pair of buckskin breeches was provided for him, as well as a coat and waistcoat of cloth and a plain round hat, with a fustian close jacket for morning work.
On August 24th 1804, William Spies of the parish of Harlington was admitted as an in-patient on the recommendation of the parish officers of Westoning.
It was found that the parish of Westoning was in arrears and the patient was ineligible.
Nevertheless, he was retained and the secretary was instructed to write to the parish officers informing them of the same; they were told to pay the subscription within a few days otherwise Spies would be discharged from the infirmary.
SAMUEL WHITBREAD II AND THE BEDFORD INFIRMARY: 1803–1815
The house committee to manage the infirmary consisted of Dr. Yeats, the physician, the surgeon of the week (or both), and one of the other governors.
Samuel Whitbread usually took the chair but occasionally Dr. Yeats or one of the other governors presided.
The minutes were written by the chairman in his own hand; in Whitbread's case, this did not enhance their legibility.
On August 13th 1803 it was ordered that ‘a hole be dug at a proper distance from the house and that the matron be directed to see that the  servants do empty all the pails from the house into the said hole until the privies etc., shall be built out of doors’.
Dr. Yeats produced a code of statutes and rules for the government of the infirmary.
Tenders were to go out for provisions, and every person in the infirmary was to find his own tea (except for the house surgeon, the matron and Dr. Yeats' pupil).
Any quantity of sugar that the matron thought, reasonable for the patients was to be provided; lump sugar was to be allowed to the house surgeon, matron and pupil.
The breakfast hour of the nurses was to be regulated by the house surgeon.
Dinner was to be invariably at one o'clock.
Sufficient meat was to be dressed every day for the staff, and first sent into the matron, house surgeon and pupil, thence to the house servants.
The linen on the beds was to be changed once in fourteen days, and there were to be three blankets and one quilt to each bed.
The servants were allowed to go out at the discretion of the matron and the house surgeon, and the house was to be locked up at 10 p.m.
William Warden was appointed porter to the infirmary; the regulations stated that he was to have bread and cheese for breakfast.
Mary Storey had been admitted from the parish of Kempston in August without a change of linen having been provided.
The ‘caution’ money (to pay funeral expenses in the event of death) had been paid.
It was decided that the need for linen to be provided for the patients should be added to the printed forms of admission.
The following week James Butlin reported that she had been ‘exceedingly foul in her linen and verminous at the time of her admission’.
A letter was sent to the parish officers of Kempston informing them of the gross impropriety of their conduct respecting the patient and the institution.
It was later decided that she was incurable.
She had completed the agreed term of admission of two months and in accordance with the rules of the institution, the parish officers were asked to remove her; before they could do so however, Mary Storey had died.
A general meeting of the subscribers was held at the infirmary on September 14th 1803.
Samuel Whitbread reported on behalf of the standing committee.
‘Thirty months have not elapsed since you first determined that the noble bequest of the late Mr. Whitbread should not be lost to the County of Bedford.
Your building is completed; your medical establishment arranged; the rules and orders for the government of the House suggested and published; and already for more than one month, the indigent and afflicted have been deriving comfort and relief from the institution.
Those benefits may be continued for a long succession of  generations upon deserving objects, let us strenuously support our own undertaking: and may our children, and our children's children feel an ardour even greater than our own in the cause of humanity; so that as long as the County of Bedford exists, its Infirmary may be one of the chief objects of care, and one of the principal sources of its honest pride.’
He went on to give a detailed account of the finances of the infirmary.
The Committee felt that it was their duty to state that in their opinion, before the whole building was completely furnished and every necessary article provided, the total deficiency would not amount to less than £1,000 ‘Many opulent individuals of the County have hitherto withheld their contributions; but application by letter has been made to them all; and no doubt can be entertained by your Committee of their ultimate assistance and support.
Voluntary contributions are always uncertain and under the influence of extraneous events…some of the original contributors have already sunk into the grave.’
On April 11th 1804 the half-yearly meeting of the subscribers was held.
From the day of the first admission of patients no fewer than 90 persons had applied for medical relief.
Only one ward had been opened then, and no more than six patients could be admitted.
All five wards were now open however and fully furnished; 38 patients could be accommodated on the recommendation of subscribers.
Of the three people who had died in Bedford Infirmary:
‘…one was a female pauper of very advanced age who had laboured for many years under a complication of incurable disorders, and her situation was so desperate as to have precluded her from being received into the House had it not happened that she was the first patient presented.
The second died of one of that class of terrible diseases which are the invariable consequences of habitual drinking; and the third of apoplexy.
It may also be for the benefit of the institution to state that of the patients discharged, cured and remaining in the House three were afflicted with that most excruciating complaint, the stone…the operation has been thrice successfully performed.
Two out of the three patients have been discharged cured, and the third remains in the House in a state of convalescence recovered already beyond the probability of danger, and likely soon to become an active and useful member of society.
It is remarkable that two out of the three patients here described are children under the age of 10 years whose grievous sufferings commenced almost with their birth and would in all probability have continued to their death had not this infirmary been established.’
Among the subscribers to the infirmary in 1806 were the Directors of the Bedford House of Industry (10 guineas), the Corporation of Bedford (5 guineas), and John Foster of Brickhill (after whom Foster Hill Road was named).
John Higgins of Turvey and his sons subscribed, as did the Duke and Duchess of Bedford, Lord and Lady St. John and the Earl of Upper Ossory.
Francis Pym Esq.
M.P., Samuel Whitbread and John Wing were also among the supporters, as were a great many of the country parishes.
By July 18th 1807, 515 in-patients and 189 out-patients had been treated since the infirmary had been opened.
Samuel Whitbread had extracted a fine of £5 from a malefactor who had been brought up before him in his magistrate's court; this became a donation to the infirmary.
Mr. G. Sharp contributed £5, the profits from a hymn which he had composed, and subsistence money for a solder at the infirmary produced an additional £3.16.6d.
Nevertheless, despite a donation of 100 guineas from Sir Gregory Page Turner Bart .
and contributions from new annual subscribers (including Lord Ashburnham and the parishes of Blunham, Bromham, Felmersham, Henlow and Shitlington), the infirmary was in financial difficulties.
The sum of £250 had been borrowed from Joseph Barnard, the treasurer, to make good the actual deficiency which ‘had not arisen from any defect or negligence whatever in the management of the institution, but on the contrary arose from the great success of the Infirmary and the high reputation it had acquired, so that the number of patients had increased rapidly’.
The Grand Visitor, the Duke of Bedford, agreed:
‘…the extent of the establishment is but barely sufficient for the exigencies of the County, and it cannot be contended that it is on too large or extravagant a scale; the number of patients constantly on the books of the Infirmary; the high reputation which it has justly acquired under the excellent management of the medical and other officers belonging to it; the strict economy which to the general satisfaction of the Governors has been observed in the ordinary expenditure of the House…call forcibly upon the County at large to hold out a protecting hand to save it from ruin which appears inevitably to have waited, if not averted by our timely interference.’
The Duke said that there were two possible courses — to increase the endowment and/or to increase the annual subscription.
The endowment was too limited for an establishment of this extent, and it was evident that the cost of maintaining the infirmary had been seriously underestimated .
He proposed to  create an additional fund to increase the endowment and started it off himself with a donation of £1,000.
Of the 130 parishes in the county, only 47 were annual subscribers; the governors should use their influence with their home parishes.
The Duke himself increased his yearly subscription to 40 guineas.
The suggestions of their Grand Visitor were immediately put into effect and at the meeting £1,597 was subscribed.
This was to be laid out in 3% consols in the names of the Trustees, and a general increase of their subscriptions was recommended to the subscribers.
Dr. Yeats had evidently been absent through sickness and at this meeting he was welcomed back.
Charles Short and John Pulley, the surgeons, were commended for their ‘extraordinary assiduity’ during his absence.
A notice was attached to the printed annual report for July 18th, 1807, informing the public that the physicians and surgeons attended the infirmary every Saturday morning from 11 o'clock to two in order to admit patients.
None could be admitted at any other time except for cases of sudden accident or emergency, ‘which are taken into the House at any hour of the night or day without any recommendation whatever.’
There was a printed form of recommendation of patients for admission to the benefits of the infirmary, and it was emphasised that no child under seven years of age, except in case of an operation, and no person without decent apparel and a proper change of linen, or labouring under any infectious disorder whatever could be admitted as an in-patient.
By 1809, six years after the opening, 855 in-patients and 427 out-patients had been treated.
There had been 44 deaths among the in-patients and 12 among the out-patients in that time.
The great majority were said to have been either cured or relieved.
The right of subscribers to recommend patients was determined strictly in accordance with the amount of their subscriptions; for example, no subscriber of less than 2 guineas annually could recommend an in-patient, but he could send one out-patient within the year.
For 5 guineas a year or a single donation of 50 guineas, the allowance rose to 3 in-patients and 2 out-patients.
In 1811 the governors laid out £2.0s.0d. for surgeons' instruments, £103.3s.8d. for medicines and £15.12s.3d. on leeches.
Taxes and the poor rates cost £4.1 ls.0d. and insurance premiums of £5.8s.6d. per annum were continued.
The house surgeon received £3.3s.0d. for attending a coroner's inquest on a patient who had died in the infirmary, and Samuel Whitbread, in his capacity as magistrate, exacted contributions from time to time: in  August 1813, for example , the infirmary funds benefited by £10 which had been received from John Schoner and William Edwards ‘paid in atonement to stay of prosecution for disturbing the Methodist meeting at Biggleswade during Divine Service’.
Donations in August 1810 included £8 from Mr. Simms, manager of a touring theatre company then in Bedford, and £2.10s.0d. from John Miller Esq., ‘being his half (as informer) of a penalty levied on S. Peacock for using a greyhound’.
The Sergeants and Drummers of the Bedfordshire Local Militia gave £1.9s.0d., and the alms box at the Swan Inn yielded 4s.3d.
In the autumn of 1811 a young woman named Mary Flint was admitted to the infirmary after she had been savagely beaten by a man named John Field, in whose house she was a servant.
W. Wilshere, a fellow magistrate, wrote to Samuel Whitbread asking him to be present when the girl was questioned.
He enclosed a copy of a notice that he had sent to Field:
‘It having been stated to Samuel Whitbread Esq., and to me…that Mary Flint, now in the Bedford Infirmary, is in danger of death in consequence of the wounds and injuries which she received from you, we intend to take her examination at the said Infirmary on Tuesday 8th October inst. at 1 o'clock of the afternoon of which I give you this notice that you may if you think proper be present.’
Field was arrested and an application for bail was refused.
A Mr. Chapman wrote to Whitbread asking him to return the copy of a report written by Dr. Yeats who had seen the girl on admission.
‘I would not for a moment have it supposed that I mean anything derogatory to Dr. Yeats…but human nature is fallible.
If he has been deceived I am inclined to think he is not the first’.
He suggested that Mr. Whitbread might talk to the doctors who had attended Mary Flint before the incident, and he doubted whether the medical evidence would in itself be a justification for having refused bail.
On January 5th 1812, William Leech, the house surgeon at the infirmary, in reporting to Samuel Whitbread wrote:
‘I am extremely sorry to inform you of the death of poor Mary Flint — the haemorrhage from the stomach had ceased for nearly a week in consequence of which her other symptoms became aggravated.
On Friday morning she was seized with a bilious vomiting accompanied with spasms and died about 12 o'clock at night.’
The post-mortem examination had been attended by the infirmary doctors as well as by several other medical gentlemen and the inquest was to be on the following day.
(In the same letter Leech referred to a man who ‘was brought into the Infirmary this morning with violent concussion of the brain occasioned by a fall from the mail coach as it was passing through Harrowden, he was much intoxicated at the time the accident happened.
When put to bed he appeared nearly lifeless and died a few hours after.’)
Whitbread received several accounts of the inquest, which sat until late into the night.
The most detailed of these came from Wilshere, who said that most of the time had been taken up by the medical evidence — summarised with a wealth of detail (which will not be repeated here).
The girl had suffered from tuberculosis of the lungs, but it was agreed that although that would ‘probably at no very distant period have terminated fatally’ the immediate cause of death was in the stomach.
Opinion had been divided over the question of whether the injuries had caused Mary Flint's death.
Dr. Kerr had said that they had not done so — but he was ‘too wordy and declamatory for a witness’.
Dr. Hicks of Baldock had given the same opinion ‘in words of less meaning’, and Gibbon of Bedford had not felt qualified to give any opinion at all.
Charles Short, the surgeon, was Mayor of Bedford at the time and as such, the presiding coroner:
‘…he conducted himself with the utmost propriety…
I've never heard testimony better delivered than Pulley's (and) Leech gave his with great clearness and good sense’.
Wilshere said that had he been a juror in this case, he would have voted for sending Field to trial; his conduct had been cruel and brutal in the extreme and ‘the violence to this poor creature in her diseased and irritable state’ increased the symptoms and hastened her death.
It did not in his opinion amount to murder, nor was it likely that Field would be convicted.
On March 9th 1812 William Leech wrote to Samuel Whitbread as usual with an account of the monthly committee meeting and of the state of the patients at the infirmary.
(A Mrs. Furness, for example, ‘was last night seized with vertigo and other symptoms of congestion of the head which by the immediate application of a dozen leeches was presently relieved…’).
He went on to report that on the previous Saturday, Field's case had come before Mr.Justice Heath; three of the four witnesses had been examined and there had been no evidence to prove that the deceased had received blows on her stomach, the diseased state of which organ caused her death.
The jury were directed to acquit the prisoner.
In September of 1811, Samuel Whitbread sent Dr. Yeats a bottle of oil ‘for the treatment of cancer’.
He had obtained the recipe from a letter in a newspaper, had a sample made up, and suggested in a covering letter that Dr. Yeats might try it out on some of his patients.
In his reply Dr. Yeats expressed his gratitude and assured Whitbread that he would take the earliest opportunity of using the oil; a month later however, the doctor sent his servant with an apology — he had not yet had a chance to use it.
Nothing further was heard from him on that subject but in the meantime Whitbread had made contact with a Bedford surgeon, Samuel Young, who embarked on an extended trial of the remedy over the course of the following three years.
Among his patients was Lady St. John (Whitbread's sister).
(There had earlier been a clash between Dr. Yeats and Lady St. John who had called to inspect the infirmary.
She wrote to her brother saying that Dr. Yeats had avoided her and evidently resented her visiting.
He appeared to consider her proposals trifling and moreover he had ignored Whitbread's own orders, and had said that prostitutes should be isolated from other  patients.
Dr. Yeats had replied that he had only followed the practice in Edinburgh hospitals, where cases of venereal disease were isolated.)
Young provided Whitbread with detailed clinical notes on the progress of his patients, their symptoms, the exact appearance of their various growths and the methods of treatment — the oil was applied directly to the tumour.
He had difficulty in persuading colleagues of what he saw as the benefits of the method:
‘…a most miserable and criminal state of ignorance, presumption and apathy is chargeable against the profession.
If they know nothing upon the question, is that nothingness still to be respected?’
In 1814 he told of the arrival at the Swan Inn of a Mr. and Mrs. Nanny who had travelled 245 miles from Wales to London to get advice from Mr. Astley Cooper and other eminent surgeons there.
The outlook was said to be hopeless, and they started the journey back to Wales.
Their groom ('a very attached servant’) had formerly been in the service of Mr. Pym, the brother of the M.P.
This gentleman was told of the deplorable state of the lady and the even worse state of her husband, and he recommended the couple to Samuel Young.
The cancer of the breast was hopelessly advanced and Young felt that it was the result of wearing fashionably tight dresses, ‘very beautiful in a picture and there only to be admired…
. When such a case…lost by ignorance and neglect comes before one, no language is sufficient to speak the feelings of regret and indignation….’
By Easter Monday 1814, Samuel Young was advising Whitbread not to ‘hope too much…the undertaking is a very uphill work, too tedious for a mere lover of fame to undertake…’.
He said that he was still confident of the benefits of the treatment despite some disappointments, which are detailed in the last letter on this subject to have survived.
In 1813 a serious professional dispute took place between Dr. Yeats, on one side, and Mr. Short and Mr. Pulley, with others, in opposition.
It concerned a young woman, Ann Fook, who had allegedly not passed any urine naturally for about 26 weeks, ‘during which time it was vomited up’.
While Yeats was away in Ireland, the patient was admitted to the infirmary where she came under the care of John Pulley, who didn't believe the story.
In a letter to Samuel Whitbread on July 21st 1813, Dr. Yeats complained that in his absence five medical men including Mr. Pulley, Mr. Short and Mr. Gibbon, a Bedford apothecary, had sent for, and examined the patient.
Yeats regarded Gibbon as being responsible for having ‘moved the whole opposition against the poor girl’.
He didn't know ‘what statement  Mr. Gibbon had made to the other gentlemen or what reasoning they could have employed so as to sign a paper declaring the fact of urinous vomiting to be utterly impossible — here I must be at issue with them believing as I do…from my little physiological knowledge, that vomiting of urine for 26 weeks is by no means impossible…’.
It was unfair not to hold the meeting until he could be present.
He had witnessed the girl's suffering and had analysed the fluid brought up from the stomach — it had all the appearances of urine — colour,taste , smell and consistency.
The girl and a neighbour had taken an oath before a magistrate.
In December of that year Dr. Yeats again wrote to Whitbread on this subject, saying that since his previous letter ‘a paper war has been carried on between my opponents and myself…
. An élève of your school, I do not wish to do anything but what will elucidate the truth…
.’ Gibbon had followed up his opposition to the girl by ‘acts of personal hostility to me’.
The argument continued into the following year, Samuel Whitbread being deluged with medical journals and copies of letters in support of what can now be recognised as an untenable position i.e. that the stomach in this case had ‘really taken up in some measure the office of the kidnies (sic)’.
At that time Dr. Yeats indicated to Samuel Whitbread that he intended, after having considered the matter for about a year, to ‘transplant myself to the metropolis and…quit the early scenes of my professional exertions after 15 years in Bedford’.
He intended to resign his post as physician to the Infirmary the following February and to leave in March.
He enclosed a number of copies of testimonials and requested one from his illustrious patron.
On March 15th, William Leech, then house-surgeon at the infirmary, sent a strongly worded letter to Whitbread.
A pauper named Garratt had died suddenly at the lunatic asylum in Ampthill Road.
Leech had conducted a post-mortem examination and found cerebral haemorrhage as the cause of death.
A Dr. Thackeray, who had been ‘appointed medical superintendent’ only the previous week had, he said, addressed him in a very censorious manner.
Dr. Thackeray had never seen or prescribed for any of the patients at the asylum.
Leech had only a short time to go before his own appointment came to an end, but thought that under the circumstances he should offer his resignation.
Dr. Yeats wrote on the same subject three days later.
Dr. Thackeray had the temporary appointment of physician to the asylum but Mr. Leech had not been aware of the fact.
Thackeray had been told of the death and of the anatomical examination after it was all over and he had spoken ‘with warmth and sharpness’ to Mr. Leech.
This was a simple misunderstanding  by Dr. Thackeray who had shown ‘…very prompt zeal and anxiety…that no blame should rest on the medical department of the asylum, the body having been opened unknown to the friends’.
In a  postscript Dr. Yeats reported that he had subsequently seen both Dr. Thackeray and Mr. Leech who had been together since he had been with them on the previous day.
‘The harmony is perfect.’
At the meeting of Medical Committee on January 29th 1814 Dr. Yeats submitted his resignation.
In a lengthy letter he gave thanks to the Duke of Bedford and to the House of Russell and to the Earl of Upper Ossory, who had given him great support throughout his period of office.
Samuel Whitbread came in for special praise; he was ‘essentially useful to all with whom he is in any way connected, resolute and firm…of energetic character…’.
He referred to the help he had received for his humble efforts during the year of his mayoralty (1811).
The governors had placed great trust in him over the period of ten years ‘during one of which it pleased its liberal Grand Visitor to take me with him to Ireland’.
An advertisement was placed in the Northampton Mercury and two London newspapers (the Bedford Mercury did not appear until 1837).
A special Court of Governors was requested to meet at the infirmary on Saturday February 19th 1814 at 1 o'clock to elect a physician.
Candidates were asked to send in their applications with testimonials to Mr. Leech, the secretary.
Dr. Joseph Thackeray wrote to Samuel Whitbread on February 8th:
‘A vacancy having occurred in the medical department of the Infirmary at Bedford in consequence of the resignation of Dr. Yates (sic ) I have been induced to turn my professional views towards that place.
In this situation my intention has been naturally directed towards the leading patrons of that institution.
Under this view the powerful influence of one of its most active supporters could not escape my notice.’
He went on to give an account of his education at Eton School and then at King's College, Cambridge ‘of which society I am at present a Fellow and from which University I have derived my medical Honors’.
In addition to his studies in Cambridge and London he had spent three years at Edinburgh and one in the University of Glasgow.
For the last two years he had been in practice in Northampton, and he did not at that stage wish to endanger his prospects there by letting his application to Bedford be generally known; if Whitbread gave his support however, Thackeray would ‘make his pretensions public’.
A few days later Lord Ossory wrote to Samuel Whitbread enclosing a testimonial from Dr. John Dixon of Boughton.
Dixon had strongly  recommended Thackeray, and had concluded his letter by expressing the hope that his Lordship had not (as he had himself had been in danger of doing) suffered in the recent inclement season by the want of fuel.
In his covering note to Whitbread, Lord Ossory said that Dixon was an old friend of his and ‘a good judge of mankind and physicians’.
Lord Tavistock took the chair at the meeting to appoint a successor to Dr. Yeats.
Also present were Whitbread, Pym, Lee Antonie, Capt. Waldegrave and others including Charles Short, who was the surgeon for the week.
John Pulley was not there.
The governors felt unable to part from Dr. Yeats without expressing their ‘unfeigned regret’ at his determination to move away from Bedford.
They wished him all possible prosperity in the future, and went on to elect Dr. Thackeray unanimously as physician to the infirmary.
A week later, on February 24th Samuel Whitbread presided over another meeting, this time to appoint a new matron.
There were three applicants — Mrs. Taylor, Mrs. Bowyer and Mrs. Darney.
Another was not called for interview:
‘Sir I take this libertey to aske the favour for my sister Smith the widow if you have the goodness to recommend her to be the patron for the infurmarey, as her incombe is so very scant, to live on.
I should feel my self higley gratefied in this favour from you for hur, & hope you will parden the libertey I take in this Important solicitation for my sister
from your friend & humble servt.
Jno.
Lilley’
(The governors may have been reminded of an earlier letter from the overseer of Flitton:
‘The charge you demand on our Parish as Subscribers to the Bedford Infirmary much alarmed our Parishenors, they are utterly unacquainted with these arrears.
Our Minister Mr. Robinson entred as a subscriber three years past and one man was sent and was soon sent back uncucarable which year was as I understand settled and a Declaration was sent to Declair off…
. Sir I am the present overseer but these things was before I came to the Parish.
I have acquainted them with the Buiseness and they Dont seem willin to pay, but you may answer this to me if you please, but we now Declair off and will have no more to do with that Biseness, yrs
William Thorngate, Overseer’)
Election of the new matron was by ballot and Mrs. Elizabeth Theed Taylor was appointed.
At the same meeting certain alterations to the rules of the infirmary were agreed; the physicians and surgeons were to attend alternately on Saturday mornings from eleven to two to see patients, and on Wednesday mornings all three would be there.
No person was to be present at an operation other than with the consent of the surgeon who was performing it.
The Battle of Waterloo took place in June 1815; three weeks later Samuel Whitbread was dead.
A radical all his life and a follower of Charles James Fox, he had spoken out strongly in the House of Commons against the declaration of war on Napoleon after his escape from Elba.
He had been closely involved in the revival of the Drury Lane theatre and had clashed with the playwright Sheridan, who was in the habit of referring to Whitbread as ‘His Dictatorship’.
It is said that after Waterloo, ‘the fire seemed to vanish from his speeches’.
He had developed a droning style of speaking, and the general appearance of sluggishness alarmed his friends.
He complained of intolerable headaches, and on a visit to Vauxhall pleasure gardens, a disturbance among the footmen was interpreted as contempt for himself.
‘I am become an object of universal abhorrence,’ he is reported to have said, and in a letter to his sister Emma (Lady St.John) he wrote ‘I am not ill but I am not well and I feel the sort of depression which you have often felt….’
On the morning of July 6th 1815, at his London home in Dover Street, he was found dead with his throat cut and a razor nearby.
At the inquest held on the same day the jury found that he had been in a deranged state of mind, his friend Wilshere having given evidence to that effect.
Samuel Whitbread was 51 years old; he was buried in the family vault in St. Mary's Church, Cardington, his memorial being sculpted by Henry Weekes.
His father had founded the Bedford Infirmary by his bequest, but it was the son, above all, who by his tremendous energy and dedication, brought it into being.
The enormous volume of his correspondence, handwritten notes and minutes, with their close attention to detail, speak eloquently of the driving force of which the Bedford Infirmary was now deprived.
It was Dr. Joseph Thackeray, the newly appointed physician to the infirmary who took up the burden.
In June 1830, the Duke of Bedford presented a small bronze bust of Samuel Whitbread II which had been executed by George Garrard in 1820.
It is kept in the unit manager's office at the South Wing of Bedford General Hospital.