

Chapter One
As usual, there were five of them on the village green, waiting for the school bus.
Also as usual, they began to talk differently as Mrs Bouverie approached, louder, more self-consciously, and the younger two, in their all-weather uniform of jeans, and bare feet thrust into stiletto-heeled shoes, put their cigarettes behind their backs.
It was, Mrs Bouverie thought, as if she were a headmistress.
But she was worse than a headmistress; she was the Rector's wife.
Every weekday afternoon in termtime, the school bus from Woodborough stopped at Loxford village green and decanted nine children.
The reception committee of mothers was always waiting, partly out of maternal duty, but mostly because those ten minutes on the village green filled the same gossiping function as ten minutes at the village pump had for earlier generations.
When the children clattered, yelling, down the bus steps, their mothers regarded them with a mixture of disgust and pride, as if amazed anew each afternoon that they had managed to produce children of such spectacular offensiveness.
The last child — and the oldest — was always Flora Bouverie, who came trailing down the bus steps burdened with splitting carrier bags and fragile, half-made artefacts, peering about her blindly for her mother.
She took her glasses off, every journey, because, if she did not, they were taken off for her and thrown out of the bus window into a hedge.
Mrs Bouverie knew this, and she also knew that the Loxford mothers despised her for meeting a child of  ten.
If she had said, But I meet her as miserable compensation for enduring Woodborough Junior which is quite the wrong school for her, they would have despised her even more.
‘Intolerable,’ Flora said, dropping her bags on her mother's feet.
She scrabbled about in her duffel-coat pockets until she found her glasses.
‘I hate this coat.
I look like a train spotter.’
Anna Bouverie thought with revulsion of the bags of jumble lurking in the Rectory garage.
‘I know.
But the alternatives are even worse.’
Flora put on her glasses.
She looked up at her mother with eyes enlarged and blurred by the lenses.
‘What does cretinous mean?’
‘Literally, mentally defective.’
Flora looked round at the village children swirling, screaming, across the green, like gulls round the ships of their mothers.
‘Exactly!’
Flora shouted after them.
One mother turned back.
She worked most nights in the pub, and was the self-appointed keeper-up of the village spirits, relentless in her jollity.
‘See you tomorrow, Mrs B!
Don't be late!’
They all cackled with guilty laughter.
‘What does she mean?’
Flora said, staring after her.
‘I'm usually late for the bus.
I have to run.
They watch me running.
That's all.’
‘Frankly,’ Flora said, stooping for her burdens, ‘I think it's intolerable.’
‘You're full of huge new words —’
‘English,’ Flora said briefly.
‘We had to find six words out of a newspaper.
We always do everything out of a newspaper for English.’
She paused.
‘I found flatulence.
It means burping — and the other one.’
‘Farting,’ Anna said.
Woodborough Junior's familiarity with rich obscenities had overlaid Flora's natural vocabulary with an anxious and reacting gentility.
‘Yes,’ Flora said, looking away.
Anna bent to disentangle a bag or two from Flora's fingers.
‘Come on.
Tea.
It's starting to rain.’
Ominous little gusts of wind were digging playfully in the nearby litter bin and scattering crisp packets about.
They blew damp draughts against Anna and Flora's faces and veiled Flora's spectacles with infant specks of rain.
The mothers and children were out of sight now, reduced to no more than faint yelps from among the council houses built on rising ground above the green, and there was no-one else about, and would not be, until the men began to come home at dusk.
‘Why,’ said Flora, in the dead and hopeless tone of one who has uttered a particular, heartfelt question over and over, to no avail, ‘why does school have to be so horrible?’
Loxford church was medieval, with a square tower and a Norman tympanum over the south door of the Harrowing of Hell.
Loxford Old Rectory was Georgian, built of the same blond stone as the church, and it sat behind grand double gates whose posts were boastfully crowned with new stone eagles.
Loxford New Rectory was redbrick and had been built in the early sixties.
It had, Anna Bouverie's mother said, all the quiet charm of a bus shelter.
Its redeeming feature was its setting.
It had been built on a piece of glebe land behind the church, with a narrow drive running up beside the churchyard wall, separating it from the lane, isolating it from other houses.
Its front windows looked towards the church, and its back ones over farmland to a series of gentle green hills, the furthest one crowned with a low, dark copse, like a pool of spilled ink.
When Peter and Anna had come for interview, Anna had looked at the hills with hunger, and not at the cramped kitchen or the meanly proportioned sitting-room, and had urged  Peter to accept.
‘Oh, we must,’ she had pleaded.
‘You must.
Please.’
He had been doubtful.
He was doubtful about being sole incumbent in five parishes — he had visualized a team ministry — and even more doubtful about the rural ministry in itself Did he…
Was he…
‘While you are waiting for God to write it down for you in capital letters,’ Anna had shouted finally, exasperated out of all diplomacy, ‘I shall decide for you both.
We are going to Loxford.’
To Loxford.
Loxford with Quindale, Church End, New End and Snead.
After six years in a Birmingham slum parish, Anna thought, you became desperate not to have a front doorstep strewn with down-and-outs and to have a back garden littered with worms, not discarded syringes and used condoms.
Six years!
Six years of bringing up Charlotte and Luke with chicken wire tacked across inside their bedroom window, and a security system worthy of Alcatraz so that the parishioners who needed to get to you never could.
Flora had been conceived the minute they reached Loxford, out of sheer relief.
Anna supposed that she should then have had another baby, to keep Flora company, but had found that she felt as unlike having another baby as she had once felt like it.
Walking up the drive beside the churchyard wall, Anna said, ‘What happened to Marie?
I thought she was your friend.’
‘She went to Germany,’ Flora said, stopping to peer at the wall, where moss was beginning to swell into new plump spring cushions.
‘With her father.
He's a corporal.’
Half Flora's school were Army children.
They lived briefly in the great camps round and about, and then vanished.
Flora envied them because all the things she craved in life they could buy cheaply in the NAAFI.
They seemed to take money for granted.
Flora, accustomed to a life of bare sufficiency, knew differently.
She put down a bag and dislodged a green dome of moss.
‘Look —’
Flora had always dawdled.
Toddler walks with her had been a superhuman test of patience as she squatted by every puddle, slowly stirring the water with sticks, and picked up myriads of stones, tenderly brushing them free of earth and inserting them with infinite laboriousness into pockets already grinding with pebbles.
She roared with fury if helped or hurried.
‘It really is raining now,’ Anna said.
Flora must be fed, the sitting-room fire lit, the dining-room tidied for tonight's Parochial Church Council meeting, supper organized.
And then, there was her translation.
Paid by the page, Anna translated German and French technical books into English.
It was dreary work, but it was private.
Peter had discovered that his five villages would not like him to have a working wife.
‘You will find,’ Colonel Richardson of Quindale House had said, not unsympathetically, ‘that it would cause a lot of resentment.
A lot.
Particularly among those who don't go to church —’ he eyed Peter —‘but might?’
Peter did not repeat this to Anna.
There would have been no point; she would simply have laughed.
Her natural vivacity, her particular charm, had led her too often into thinking that people would be drawn into seeing things her way, with disastrous results.
At least, Peter had found them disastrous, and he would find them so again if Anna chose to try and charm Colonel Richardson out of his opinion of working clergy wives.
So, to avoid this, Peter merely said that, for the moment, he'd appreciate it a lot if she'd keep working a bit quiet.
She had taught in a language school in Birmingham three mornings a week, a language school with a crèche, run by an enlightened Belgian woman, where Charlotte and Luke had gone until they were old enough for school.
She said to Peter, ‘Teaching is very quiet.
Isn't it?’
‘No,’ he said.
‘Not invisible enough.’
They had been in Loxford six months then.
She was happily pregnant and still sustained by the hills.
She saw the advertisement for a technical translator in the newspaper.
It was easy to learn the vocabulary, as easy as it was dull.
So strange, she sometimes thought, to have all this engineering knowledge in three languages and still be so unable to apply a single word of it that she could scarcely change a plug without helpful diagrams.
In order to make a weekly sum of money even dimly visible to the naked eye, she had to translate fifty pages a week, a drudgery she tried to regard as ineluctable as brushing her teeth or washing the kitchen floor.
A decade of it now, ten years at two and a half thousand pages a year.
Best not to think of it, in case her temper slipped out of gear and, as once she had done, she threw a bowl of apples at Peter.
She had missed; the bowl had broken.
It was a blue-and-white pottery bowl Peter's mother, Kitty, had brought back from a timeshare holiday with a friend in southern Spain.
The apples had rolled everywhere, gathering bruises and fluff.
She had found one months later under the vegetable rack, shrunk to the size of a nut, dark wizened brown, and smelling of cider.
‘Where's Daddy?’
Flora said, setting her moss down carefully on the kitchen table.
‘Gone to see the Bishop.’
‘Wowee,’ said Flora.
She pressed the moss and watched a trickle of earthy water ooze out of it.
‘Why?’
Slicing bread, Anna said untruthfully, ‘I honestly don't know.’
The Bishop had been to Woodborough Junior once, to take prayers.
Flora, unwisely, told her class he would wear a purple robe and a great cross round his  neck and a huge ring like a winegum.
He arrived in a dark suit and a black shirt buttoned down over his dog collar and kept his hands folded so that nobody could see if he had on a ring at all, let alone one like a winegum.
It had been a humiliating day for Flora and she bore the Bishop a grudge in consequence.
‘Would you like cheese in your sandwich?’
‘What I would really like,’ said Flora, knowing there wasn't any, ‘is chocolate hazelnut spread.’
Recognizing the game, Anna waited.
‘Or black cherry jam.
Swiss jam.’
Silence.
‘Or smoked salmon,’ Flora said inventively, never having had any.
‘Or cheese.’
‘OK,’ Flora said, ‘cheese.’
‘Cheese, please.
I can't think why I'm making this sandwich for you.
Why aren't you making it yourself?’
Flora stuck out her hands and her lower lip.
‘Search me.’
‘Flora,’ Anna said, ‘have you got prep?’
Flora put her hands over her ears and began to jump about all over the kitchen.
‘Shut up, shut up, shut up, shut up —’
Again, Anna waited.
She watched Flora with exasperation and pity.
Charlotte and Luke had managed school perfectly well, had made friends, had slipped effortlessly in and out of all the required fads and fashions.
Charlotte had gone on to university; Luke was now at sixth-form college.
Flora was different.
She was cleverer than either of them, more elusive, more fragile.
She said sometimes, of school, ‘But I can't make the right conversation,’ and it was true.
Something uncompromising in Flora prevented her from understanding where she went wrong.
Her frustrated jumping, which sent her thick, straight, dark hair — Anna's hair — flying up and down like dog's ears, was no more than a maddened expression of how she felt  when reminded of school, of a world where she was doomed to remain odd.
Anna put the sandwich on a plate, and then put the plate on the table, beside the moss.
Flora stopped abruptly, and said, ‘I forgot my flute.’
‘Does it matter?’
‘Yes!’
Flora said on a rising note.
‘It's my lesson tomorrow, I must practise —’
The telephone rang.
‘I'm so sorry,’ Anna said into the receiver, ‘Mr Bouverie is out just now.
He should be back by six; could you — oh.
Oh, I see.
Are you sure he said he would call?
All right, I'll tell him.
Mrs Simms, 7 New End.
Goodbye.’
She put the receiver down.
‘Daddy apparently forgot to go and see Mr Simms in Woodborough General.’
The telephone rang again.
‘No,’ Anna said, ‘Mr Bouverie isn't back yet.’
Flora came up close and mouthed, ‘My flu-u-u-te.
My flu-u-u-te.’
‘A wedding in May.
I'm afraid he has his diary with him.
Could you call back?
Before seven-thirty, he has a meeting.
No,’ Anna said, ‘no.
He won't mind that you aren't churchgoers.’
‘He will, actually,’ she said when she had put the receiver back.
‘He will, but he can't.’
‘My flute —’
‘Flora,’ Anna said, pushing her fringe off her forehead, ‘I can do nothing about your flute.
Daddy has the car.
And now I have to do an hour's work.’
Flora turned away and cast herself, face down, across the table, narrowly missing the sandwich.
‘It's the end of the world,’ she said.
‘It's intolerable.’
She kicked one of her bags.
Very slowly, its side seam split open and a flute rolled quietly out on to the floor.
Anna worked at a little table in their bedroom.
It was an Oriental table, donated by her mother who was an actress of the old school and given to lavishness of gesture.
The table was made of bamboo, lacquered scarlet, and the top was painted with gilded peonies.
It bore its load of textbooks incongruously, and a typewriter that a parishioner had given Anna, a weekender who worked on a London newspaper, and who had sworn, positively, that she had outgrown the thing, didn't need it.
‘Chuck it in a jumble sale,’ she had said to Anna, trying to make it easier to accept.
‘I've got pride,’ Anna had replied, taking it, ‘but no false pride.
Thank you very much indeed.’
It was electric.
It produced smooth, bland sheets of text that Anna's publishers greatly preferred to the characterful efforts of her previous old portable.
She sat down in front of it and looked at the half-page she had typed that morning.
She thought of Peter.
He would by now have left the Bishop, would be crossing the Close to find his car, would know what lay ahead for them both.
She looked out of the window and saw the brown strip of plough, and then the line of willows marking the river, and then the green slopes rising, dotted now with the first sheep of the year.
In a month, she thought, in just a month, I might be looking at quite a different view.
And what is more, I might never ever have to look at German again except on a menu in a restaurant on the Rhine where we might go, like other people do, for a real holiday instead of borrowing mildewed cottages and cardboard holiday-houses from people to whom we than have to be disproportionately grateful.
She  looked up at the bedroom ceiling, where a pale stain recalled a burst pipe nearly fifteen months ago.
Through that ceiling, and through the roof above it, lived God, omniscient, omnipresent God.
‘You try living your adult life on nine thousand a year,’ she said to Him, and bent, with a sigh, to her typewriter.
The telephone rang.
Luke Bouverie missed the last bus out of Woodborough to Loxford, so he thumbed a lift.
This happened most nights and he had grown to think that it was an easier and more interesting way of travelling, particularly as his looks and his load of schoolbooks and his thinness caused people to stop.
They were mostly local people, often men from the villages who worked in Woodborough.
Only once, last autumn, had there been an unnerving lift, a well-dressed man in a Mercedes, who had wanted Luke to drive on towards Devon with him, had offered him dinner and a night at a hotel, had put his hand high up on Luke's thigh, and been altogether menacing.
Luke, who had a reputation for staying cool, had panicked.
He had heard himself squeak in a long-outgrown pre-pubertal voice.
‘You be careful, my dad's a vicar!’ and the car had stopped and the man had sworn at him viciously, using some phrases Luke later regretted not remembering, and Luke found himself shaking on the dark verge a mile out of Snead.
He had had to walk home, three and a half miles, but luckily his parents were out, at some deanery get-together, and Trish Pardoe, who helped in the shop, was babysitting Flora.
Trish never asked questions; she was only interested in telling you things.
That night, she'd said, ‘If you'd come out the Quindale way you'd never've got through; it's flooded right across the road from Briar Farm to the old water tower, three feet deep, burst water main,’ and Luke had said, ‘Yeah,’and gone out to the kitchen to raid the fridge.
This evening, his lift was Mike Vinson who worked as an electrician for a firm in Woodborough and ran the Loxford cricket team.
He and his wife had so done-over a cottage on the green that its original simplicity had been quite obliterated in an orgy of DIY neo-Georgian.
Mike Vinson had a respect for the church.
He never darkened its doors, but he thought it was the  proper place for weddings and christenings and funerals, and he was always prepared to rig up lights for the annual parish nativity play, with a dimming spotlight to beam sentimentally on the Virgin Mary.
He would say, casually, to his wife later that night that he had given young Luke Bouverie a lift home.
‘Nice lad,’ he would say.
‘Nice manners.’
He would go to bed with a small satisfaction at having given a lift to the Rector's son.
Luke said, ‘I'm hopeless.
I always miss the bus.’
‘You'll be driving soon,’ Mike said.
‘Own car, and all.
Change your life.’
‘Yes,’ Luke said, suddenly miserable.
He had practised in the car, but there was no money for lessons and as for a car of his own!
Even the family car had come from some Church-loan scheme.
The application form for a driving test had lain, unfilled in, in the muddle on his bedroom table since his seventeenth birthday.
Anna had promised him lessons — when they knew.
Knew what?
‘Just wait,’ she said, smiling.
‘Not long now.’
‘And what'll you do with your life?’
Mike said.
‘Vicar like your dad?’
Loyalty just prevented Luke from saying.
‘No fear!’
He said, ‘I want to do art.’
Mike tried to imagine it, and failed.
‘Stage sets,’ Luke said, to help him.
‘Theatre design.’
Mike nodded.
He had no vocabulary to ask what he felt were appropriate questions.
‘Nice boy,’ he planned to say to Sheila later, ‘artistic, too.
Interested in drama.’
Sheila liked drama.
When he had found her, on holiday in Bournemouth, she had been very keen on amateur theatricals.
She'd stopped for him, though.
He didn't like the thought of her kissing other men, even in Show Boat .
‘Father approve?’
‘I think so,’ Luke said.
‘And your Mum?’
Mike's voice was elaborate with nonchalance.
In his view — a strictly private view aired neither to Sheila nor to the lounge bar of The Coach and Horses in Quindale — Anna Bouverie was, well, something; not just a looker, but something more, something —
‘She's all for it.’
Mike took a grip on himself.
‘Been here a long time —’
‘Yes, since I was seven.’
‘What happens,’ said Mike, abruptly interested, ‘what happens to vicars?
I mean, do you get to climb the ladder?’
‘What?’
‘Chances of promotion.
That's what I mean.
Where does your dad go from here?’
Luke thought.
‘Well, he's rural dean, so I suppose the next thing is archdeacon.’
Mike slapped the wheel.
‘He'll be a bishop one day!
What d'you reckon?’
‘I don't know,’ Luke said.
His whole soul had been so given over to dreams of leaving Loxford recently that he was startled to think his father might share them.
‘He's happy here,’ Luke said stoutly.
He did not want his parents to leave Loxford; just him to leave.
He wanted them to be where he could visualize them.
The Loxford sign gleamed briefly from the black hedgerows.
‘Lovely village,’ Mike Vinson said, ‘smashing.
I grew up in Harlesden.
You don't know you're born, growing up here.’
Courteously, he drove to the far end of the green and let Luke out by the church.
‘Really kind of you,’ Luke said, getting out.
‘Thank you.’
He turned up the drive.
The Rectory's windows glowed behind drawn curtains.
His father couldn't be home yet because he would have turned half the lights  off again.
Some evenings, his parents almost seemed to circle round after one another, his mother turning lights on, his father switching them off.
‘It's the tiniest luxury,’ his mother would say and his father would reply, without looking at her, ‘No, it isn't.
It's provocation.’
Luke thought that, as his father plainly was not home yet, he would use his absence to do a little preliminary softening up of his mother, about plans for the summer.
She was in the kitchen.
She was wearing the huge red skirt she had made out of some curtains someone had sent to the jumble, and a black polo-necked jersey, and she had tied her hair up with the Indian scarf Luke had given her for Christmas.
She was slicing onions.
Beside her, with a music book propped against a milk bottle, Flora was playing slow, unlovely exercises on her flute.
Anna stopped slicing and offered Luke a cheek wet with onion tears.
‘You missed the bus.’
‘But not Mike Vinson.’
Luke gave Flora a mild cuff.
She squealed.
‘Where's Dad?’
‘Not back yet,’ Anna said.
Luke put his books on the table where they toppled sideways against the milk bottle which tipped over and spilled milk across Flora's music book.
Anna took no notice.
She picked the onions up between cupped hands and dropped them into the frying pan on the cooker.
Luke began to mop clumsily at the pool of milk with a teacloth.
Flora stood frozen, torn between wishing to scream and giggle.
Her dilemma was solved by the telephone ringing.
‘Do get it,’ Anna said, ‘I'm oniony.
Say Daddy isn't back yet.
Say don't ring till nine, after the meeting.’
‘Say don't ring ever again,’ Luke suggested.
‘Hello, Ga,’ Flora said with pleasure into the receiver.
‘No, I've had an intolerable day.
No, I'm not!
I'm not!
OK.
I'll get her.’
She held the receiver away from her with distaste.
‘Ga says I'm a little tragedy queen.’
‘It's not put on, you know,’ Anna said to her mother, retrieving the telephone.
‘She isn't making it up.’
‘Is he back?’
Laura Marchant hissed.
‘Is Peter back?’
‘No.’
‘Hades.
I left ringing till now because I was sure that he would be.
Do you think his being so long is a good sign?’
‘I simply don't know.’
‘Oh, such wild celebrations there'll be!
You can remove poor Flora from that sink of a school and send her to some nice nuns.’
‘Tonight's celebration,’ Anna said, ‘is the Loxford PCC meeting in the dining-room.
The secretary, who also organizes the church flower rota, has just resigned in a huff, because she says the Sunday school has taken over some shelves in the vestry flower-vase cupboard without asking, so I have to take the minutes.’
‘My poor darling.
Shall I come down and bring a breath of life and urban decay?’
Anna shifted so that her shoulder was comfortably propped against the wall.
‘I wish you would.’
‘Next weekend —’
Luke dropped the sodden cloth back on to Flora's music book.
‘Here's Dad, I heard the car —’
‘Peter's back,’ Anna said.
‘I must go.
I'll ring you.’
‘Yes,’ Laura said, ‘yes.
He must have it, he must.
Or it's to hell in a handcart.’
Anna put down the telephone and waited.
Luke and Flora waited too, by the table.
They heard Peter slam the car door, then pull down the groaning metal garage door, then approach the house along the path of concrete slabs which were lethally glazed all year  round with slippery green.
He opened the kitchen door and came in and shut it before he turned to face them.
He looked wholly unhappy.
‘It seems —’ he said, and then he stopped.
‘It seems I am not to be Archdeacon of Woodborough.
The next Archdeacon of Woodborough is to be someone from the north, someone called Daniel Byrne.’
Chapter Two
Kneeling in the Rectory pew of Loxford church, Anna watched Peter preparing deftly for communion.
He looked tired, in the bruised way that people who are physically slight do look tired, but not so much so that any of the congregation would notice.
Anna was inclined to think that most of them would only notice if he looked disgustingly well, when they could say suspiciously to one another, The Rector looks all right , doesn't he, wonder what he's been up to ?
The rest of the time, they were not disposed to look at Peter as a human being, but only as a rector, a creature of whom standards of motive and conduct were expected that they did not expect of themselves.
Anna's one great clerical friend, a woman deacon in Woodborough, said that it was being a village congregation.
‘Towns are much more forgiving.
Villages are crippled by people who can't bear to have the veil torn from their fantasy of idyllic retirement.’
Poor Peter.
If anyone was crippled just now, it was Peter, by disappointment.
In the three days since his interview with the Bishop he had scarcely been able to speak for the bitterness of his blighted hopes.
He had lain wakeful beside Anna in the bed that had not been quite wide enough for twenty years and felt himself to be all at once boiling with misery and quite immobilized by it.
A change of parish, the Bishop had suggested, a spell of team ministry, perhaps.
He had not said, Frankly, Peter, you are not up to being Archdeacon, he had instead emphasized the need for someone from outside the diocese, for someone with  ecumenical experience in urban work, for someone accustomed to ministerial care.
Burble, burble.
Peter lay in the dark and hated the Bishop.
It was the only small luxury he could discover.
He had telephoned the present Archdeacon of Woodborough, a valued friend, the friend who had indeed suggested and supported his application, and he had said that he simply did not know why Peter had been turned down, he had no idea.
He was so sorry, he said, so very sorry.
But then, he was going on to be a suffragan bishop in East Anglia and his sorrow and his support would go with him.
‘I'm not moving,’ Peter said to the Bishop.
‘I'm not leaving Loxford.’
The Bishop waited.
‘I am Rural Dean, after all,’ Peter said, with a small defiance.
‘Indeed you are.’
Peter looked round the Bishop's study, which was entirely lined with books.
An academic, Peter thought with angry scorn.
An academic!
He's never even had a parish.
The Bishop, reading Peter's thoughts, would have liked to have put his arms around him, would have liked to have said, I cannot make you Archdeacon because you have insufficient judgement and experience, but you are a good priest, a conscientious priest, and I am wretched to disappoint you.
Instead, he said gently, ‘When you have thought it over, you must come straight to me if you would like a change.’
‘I won't change,’ Peter said.
The Bishop's wife had shown him out tenderly, as if he were ill.
He imagined them putting the kettle on afterwards, making tea, saying, Oh dear, what an unfortunate business, so glad it's over.
They did indeed put the kettle on, but then the Bishop took it off again and said he needed a drink more, oh, that poor fellow; and his wife said, ‘And his poor wife.’
‘It would have doubled his stipend,’ the Bishop said, looking sadly at the remaining inch in the gin bottle.
‘Don't,’ said his wife.
‘How old is he?’
‘Forty-five.’
‘And will he never go further?’
‘I don't think so.’
‘I'd share your gin,’ the Bishop's wife said, ‘except that it would make me further inclined to cry.’
Anna had not cried.
It had all gone too deep for crying.
She rather thought Luke had cried and Charlotte certainly did, on the telephone from Edinburgh.
Peter did not think Anna should have told the children anything about it, but she was not, as she frequently said to him, that kind of mother.
She hoped she had given Peter the chance to cry, if he had wanted to, but he had not taken it.
Flora roared, without knowing why, just knowing something was violently the matter.
Anna said to God, while she dug her prolific vegetable patch, ‘I think You are a toad.’
Now, kneeling on one of the Jubilee Year hassocks organized by the county Women's Institute, she was not inclined to think differently.
She looked at Peter's back — she had not, she observed, done a perfect job this week on ironing his surplice and old Miss Dunstable, who was Mistress of the Robes at the Cathedral, but lived in Loxford, would both notice this, and point it out — and wondered what would become of him.
Not in a career sense, because the leaden weight that lay on her heart told her that his career was now Loxford with Quindale, Church End, New End and Snead until relieved by the trumpets of Doomsday, but as a person.
He would be changed by this; he couldn't avoid that.
Even the gradual assimilation of his disappointment would leave scars and blights, like a landscape after fire.
What a thing to do, Anna accused God, what a thing to do to someone who serves You.
God said nothing.
He held Himself aloof.
Anna looked at Peter again and said to herself in a guilty whisper, ‘Will he become even more difficult?’
She wondered if a stranger could tell that he was difficult, just by looking at him.
Would such a person, watching Peter now, reading the prayers of Rite B in his level, pleasant voice, notice that resentment lay, like his blood, just under his skin, because the life he had chosen had not turned out as he had expected it to?
Anxiously, Anna had sometimes wondered if Peter had lost his faith.
As for herself, she was uncertain she had ever had any, and yet, for all that, she sometimes joyfully felt that she knew what it was about.
She had tried to explain this fleeting instinctive comprehension to Peter, but he had said, ‘I think you are confusing faith with emotion,’ so she had not tried again.
Peter had grown afraid of emotion; he considered it messy stuff that could lead one into a fatal labyrinth of self-forgetfulness.
He had once said to Anna, in a touching burst of confidence, ‘You know what's the matter with me?
I'm just clever enough, and no more.’
Those limitations had been a great attraction to Anna, when they first met.
The only child of parents whose steady outrageousness was only charming to outsiders — oh, the luck, Anna used to think as a child, oh, the sublime luck of being an outsider!— Anna, at university, sought out friends who seemed to be defiantly normal.
Even the dullness of her room in a hall of residence possessed, for her first year at least, a kind of charm.
Reality, in the form of banality, seemed very precious to Anna, a token of having stepped out of a nightmare into the sanity of the waking world.
This overreaction was not to last, but, while it was still strong upon Anna, while she briefly favoured neat cardigans and regular library hours and institutional meals, she chanced upon Peter Bouverie.
She liked his name.
She liked his quiet manner, his bookish looks, his thin hands emerging from the voluminous sleeves of jerseys knitted for him by his mother who plainly, in her mind's eye, saw him as a strapping youth of six foot two.
He was reading  theology, a subject which seemed to Anna both mysterious and sophisticated.
He too was an only child, the son of a widow: his father had died of cancer when he was seven.
Mr Bouverie was a solicitor, Peter said, but he had wanted to be a priest, had intended to try for ordination if cancer had not prevented it.
His mother was called Kitty.
He showed Anna photographs.
Kitty Bouverie looked like an eager little lap dog, bright eyes hopeful under a curly fringe.
‘My father adored her,’ Peter said.
He made it plain, quite quickly, that he was poised to adore Anna.
She rather liked it, not least because it was wonderful to have someone of her own, someone she could talk to.
One of Peter's best qualities was his ability to listen.
Anna told him about her childhood, about the house in West Kensington that resembled a gigantic, filthy theatrical props cupboard, smelling of face powder and cats and old ashtrays, where a five-foot plaster saint, dumped on the drawing-room sofa three years before, as a joke, by one of her mother's lovers, had subsequently never been moved.
The same lover had made palm trees out of Edwardian ostrich feathers and tied them to all the newel posts of the four-storey staircase.
They were thick with dust, Anna said, but they too would never be removed.
Peter said, ‘My mother has never had a lover.
I don't think she is interested in men now.
I think there was only ever my father, for her.’
‘But your father wasn't queer,’ Anna said.
Peter, who was drinking coffee, stopped drinking.
‘Is yours?’
‘Yes,’ Anna said loudly, full of pride and shame.
Peter looked at her speculatively.
‘Then how —’
‘Oh, he can do it with women,’ Anna said.
‘He'd just rather do it with men.
So the house is always full of men.
Men for my father and men for my mother.’
She was suddenly overcome by the drama of her situation.
‘Don't sit there like a stuffed owl!’ she shouted at Peter.
‘Say something!
Do something!’
He put his arms round her.
Then he kissed her.
After a while he took off her cardigan and his jersey and then the rest of their clothes, and made love to her on the folk-weave bedspread of her university bed.
Anna did not say that she was not a virgin, that she had been to bed with two of the men in West Kensington and had been, at seventeen, much inclined to suppose herself in love with one of them.
She liked Peter's smooth, clean skin, and his childhood-smelling hair, and the way he gazed at her with huge eyes without his glasses.
‘I'll look after you,’ Peter Bouverie had said to Anna then.
‘We'll do things together.’
He had wrapped her in a blanket off her bed and made her more coffee.
‘Which saint is it,’ he had said, ‘the one on the drawing-room sofa?’
And his question, making Anna laugh, drawing off the poison, sealed the success of his courtship of her.
Anna's mother loved him.
She treated him as a malnourished curiosity, swooping down on him with tender cluckings, and seductive titbits — a crab claw, a lychee, a chocolate truffle — asking him to describe God, or Heaven, or sin, treating him as a confessional, trying to dress him up as a cardinal, showing him off to her friends.
To Anna's amazement, Peter did not mind.
He did not seem to like it very much either, but he was perfectly good-natured and only jibbed at the dressing up.
He even showed a quiet courage.
‘Say it,’ Laura Marchant demanded of him.
‘Go on, little padre, say it.
Say this is the most toweringly revolting house in all Christendom.
Don't just sit there and ooze the thought at me.
Say it!’
‘It's so disgusting,’ Peter said calmly, ‘that I'd rather not have meals here, and sometimes I have to put my shirt on my pillow.’
Laura adored that.
She embraced him in a clash of bracelets and beads.
He then, with equal calm, cleaned part of the kitchen.
‘For Anna and me to use,’ he said.
Anna's father, an actor of no great distinction, said to Peter, ‘Marry me.
Marry me at once.
You are wasted not being a wife.’
Peter made Anna, for the first time in her life, fond of home.
Lifelong bogeys became jokes; the long tunnel of what had always seemed to her exaggerated behaviour and elaborate unorthodoxy had a light at the end of it, the light of a life with Peter.
She was certain his faith would be infectious; that, like maternal love being born fiercely with the baby, her belief would spring to life with marriage.
Her future mother-in-law, peering worriedly at her, said, ‘You're sure you can cope with God?
I mean, He's very full-time.’
‘Oh yes,’ Anna said, not understanding.
‘You know best,’ Kitty Bouverie said, fidgeting the flowers she was arranging.
‘You know your own mind, a clever girl like you.
But between you and me, I'm not sure I could have managed.
With God, I mean.
Perhaps it's a blessing —’ She broke off.
‘There now.
All that messing about and I've broken a lily.’
Little Kittykins, Laura called her.
Anna's father called her Madame Bovary.
She perched in the drawing-room beside the recumbent saint.
‘Completely flat-chested, you see,’ Anna's father said, indicating the saint, and offering a jaggedly opened tin of caviar and a kitchen spoon.
‘So she must be St Agatha.
Breasts sliced off —’ he held out a glistening spoonful; Kitty blenched —‘for refusing to submit to the lustful wishes of one Quintian.
Eat up, Madame Bovary, eat up.’
He licked his lips.
Kitty said, in her little voice, ‘I'm afraid I can't bear caviar.’
Joyfully, the Marchants elected Kitty to the same category of quaint but endearing knick-knack which they had devised for her son.
Like Peter, Kitty did not  seem to mind.
‘Your mother,’ she said to Anna, ‘thinks you are so clever to have found us.’
Anna said hastily, ‘She doesn't mean to be patronizing.’
‘Of course not!’ said Kitty in surprise.
‘She is so kind.’
Anna stared.
‘And brave,’ said Kitty, taking out her needlepoint.
‘Brave?’
Kitty unwound skeins of pink and beige wool.
‘Brave.
I'm not brave, so I always spot it in others.’
A fortnight before Anna and Peter were married, Anna's father was knocked down in the Fulham Road at two in the morning by a van driving without headlights.
His companion managed to drag him into St Stephen's Hospital, where he died within the hour.
Anna, neither knowing what she felt, nor what she would like to feel, went to her mother expecting to find Laura in a similar confusion of relief and distress, and treating her loss as occasion for a fine theatrical flourish.
But Laura was sad; deeply, quietly sad.
She sat in the dishevelled shabby glamour of her bedroom and stared out of the window for hours at a time.
Gently, Anna tried to suggest that a life free of an ageing queen had a great deal to recommend it.
Laura said simply, in reply, ‘But I loved him.’
Anna said, ‘How —’ and stopped.
‘If I had not loved him, I should have left him,’ Laura said.
‘But I did love him.
And he loved me.
He loved me more than anyone.’
In consequence of his death the wedding was very quiet.
‘Barely audible, Kittykins,’ Laura confided, putting on a brave show of a scarlet hat and a velvet coat stamped with heraldic signs in gold.
Kitty wore powder-blue.
Anna wore a short cream dress, from which her long legs emerged, seemingly, for ever.
After the service, Peter said, ‘I wish we hadn't slept together.
I wish tonight was the first night.’
‘Are you being romantic or religious?’
Anna asked, wanting to know.
He looked at her.
‘You should know me better than to have to ask that.’
They had a peculiar little wedding breakfast in West Kensington.
St Agatha was lifted from the sofa and stationed at the window in a bridal veil, to the electrification of passers-by.
They sat, with some of the lovers, and with Peter's startled Uncle Roland, at an improvised round table draped in shawls, and ate seafood and drank Guinness and champagne.
Anna felt, with a sudden pain, huge affection for her mother, for the house of her childhood, at last for her dead father.
She looked at Peter, gravely answering the teasing of one of the lovers, and wondered if what she felt for him was the same quality of feeling that her parents had known and relied upon.
Then Kitty kissed her, and gave her a pearl brooch, shaped like a lily of the valley, which had been her mother's and they climbed into Peter's Morris Minor and drove away to Wales, for a honeymoon.
They stayed in a pub, near Penmaen Pool, and walked for miles and miles each day.
They only had a week.
On the last day, Peter bought Anna a Welsh wool shawl she had craved, striped like the summer sea, and, when they packed to go home, she deliberately left all her cardigans behind, in the rickety chest of drawers of the pub bedroom.
At theological college, near Oxford, the docility of most of the wives of other students irritated Anna.
She said to Peter, ‘I won't be, in inverted commas, a ‘clergy wife’.’
She said sometimes to the other students' wives, ‘I married the man, not the job.’
Only the older ones, the ones whose husbands had been engineers and farmers and management consultants first, agreed with her.
They often looked very strained to Anna, as if they were holding on to their loyalty for dear life.
Loyalty was not yet a problem for Anna.
She worked in a language school in Oxford, and returned home at night with coffee and flowers from the covered market, and a fine little air of independence.
Peter admired her for it; he liked the way she stood out from the other wives.
She made a friend at the language school, a fellow teacher called Eleanor Ramsay, who was married to a young don and wished to be a writer.
In turn, Eleanor introduced her to someone else, a young woman named Mary Hammond-Heath, who had been at Oxford with Eleanor, and who was not much interested in being married.
She had read law as an undergraduate and was now reading for the Bar.
She came home to Oxford at weekends, and she and Eleanor and Anna spent Saturdays together, and often the husbands joined them for supper.
Peter called Mary and Eleanor The Friends.
They were Anna's first women friends of significance.
When Peter was made curate in a northern suburb of Bristol, Anna celebrated the event by becoming pregnant.
Eleanor Ramsay did not become pregnant until three years later.
Anna and Peter had a small, yellow terraced house with a garden, and Anna worked part-time as a clerk in the almoner's office of a nearby hospital; the Ramsays had only a flat, off Norham Gardens in Oxford, and even less money than the Bouveries because they were supporting Eleanor's widowed mother-in-law, who had senile dementia.
Mary Hammond-Heath, still not a qualified barrister, lived in a room in a house in Clapham, and came to see the Bouveries on the long-distance bus, because it was cheaper.
They none of them had much money, but the Bouveries had a house, for which they did not have to pay rent.
It was also a pleasant parish, and the vicar's wife was very kind to Anna and shielded her from exploitation.
‘She is so young,’ she said to her husband.
‘And  she's such an appealing girl.
I don't quite know what it is, but it's more than looks.
It's a kind of sparkle, and it would be such a shame to extinguish it with duty.
She hasn't had time to have any freedom yet.’
That brief curacy was to be the best of her freedom.
When Charlotte was born, Anna stopped working.
The parish was very interested in Charlotte, and supportive, but Anna could no longer be independent.
Her baby and the parish, like water flooding slowly across low-lying land, began to claim her, as did a new and unwelcome preoccupation with money.
Without her earnings, and with the addition of Charlotte, money seemed to have dwindled to nothing.
Anna was twenty-three.
It was the first occasion in her life that she had had to take stock of it.
She had no idea whether she was early or late in doing so, and was inclined to chastise herself for self-indulgence.
She wrote a long and intimate letter to Eleanor describing her state of mind and her new and disturbing sense of isolation, but Eleanor was working on the first draft of her first novel, and replied at length but not to the point.
The lives of her characters were more preoccupying to her than Anna's life.
Anna read the letter with incomprehension, then put Charlotte into her secondhand pram — donated by the Young Wives' Group — and went out for a long and significant walk.
It was significant because during the course of it two things became very plain to Anna.
The first was that, although several people recognized her and stopped her and peered into the pram saying ‘Ah’, to none of them could she have begun to say what was on her mind.
In none of them, even in the young woman who was almost her age and who had a baby Peter had just christened, could she confide.
They were friendly and nice, but she was the curate's wife and somehow, therefore, in a separate category of human being.
If she had entrusted one of them with her secret thoughts, made one of them into a particular friend, it would  have created immediate parochial difficulties, rifts and divisions and jealousies.
There was, Anna saw with clarity, no possibility of intimate friendship within the parish, and never would be.
Later, much later, when she had occasion to meet a policeman's wife, a woman who had been beaten up by her husband for taking a lover on the nights he was on duty, the wife said to her, ‘Well, you ought to understand.
You should know how lonely it is for us.’
The second thing that struck her was on a different plane, but was another restriction.
She was suddenly hungry, being young and having pushed Charlotte for several miles on a cold October afternoon, and longed for a bar of chocolate.
She had braked the pram outside a newsagent and was just stooping to pick up Charlotte and take her inside for the chocolate, when she thought: I mustn't.
She had enough money with her and the chocolate wasn't going to be expensive, but chocolate was not what her money — Peter's money, their money — was for.
She took her hands away from Charlotte and thought of the half-loaf at home.
She must go back and eat that.
She must get into the habit of using what she had, loaves instead of chocolate, herself instead of other people.
She was not, at twenty-three, in the least cast down by either of these realizations.
Pushing Charlotte home in the dusk, she felt rather exhilarated, as if she had made a discovery.
It did not cross her mind — and would not, for several years — that Peter could not supply a complete companionship and that she would intermittently always yearn for metaphorical chocolate.
When she got home, she answered an advertisement in the parish magazine for a baby minder (how simple; why had she not thought of it before — she was at home minding Charlotte anyway, so why not several more?) and offered herself to the Vicar's wife for parish duties.
The Vicar's wife gave her the magazine to edit and type up.
The moment she had settled to this, Peter was given his first parish, a little parish in a country town to the south of Bristol.
The vicarage was half a huge Victorian house — once it had been the whole — and the parish was elderly and sedate.
Within weeks, it became perfectly plain that the parish was in the inflexible grip of a powerful and intractable laity, who would not let go.
Peter, unable to bear such a pedestrian first appointment (he saw himself in those days as a fervent worker priest), chafed almost from their arrival.
He badgered his local rural dean, wrote letters to the nearest archdeacon and then to the Bishop, complaining of his frustration and begging he might be relieved
Infected by his impatience, Anna grew restless too.
There were no small industries around the town, so few working mothers, so no call for the baby minding she had grown accustomed to.
There seemed to be nobody to teach, and the quiet, firm lay organizers of the parish were not about to allow a girl of twenty-four to interfere with the way things were done.
They disliked having so young a couple in the vicarage and they made that plain.
When Laura came to stay, and swept into church in an Easter bonnet of her own devising which quivered with artificial lilac, and laughed out loud at a tiny joke in Peter's sermon, to encourage him, one of the churchwardens wrote to the Bishop.
Bored and thwarted, Peter and Anna turned to one another.
The result was Luke, born two weeks after Anna's twenty-fifth birthday, and almost called Benedict, whose Rule Peter was then enthusiastically studying.
They argued contentedly about which saint emerged as the more attractive personality: St Benedict won on grounds of religious influence, St Luke on those of influence over secular life, because of his gospel.
In the end, Anna won.
Benedict Bouverie, she said, was affected in any case, because it alliterated.
The day she brought Luke home from hospital Peter was offered a slum parish in another diocese, in Birmingham; sole charge, a mighty challenge.
They celebrated in the cavernous vicarage kitchen with a shop pork pie and a bottle of local cider, both of which later gave five-day-old Luke colic.
To The Friends, Anna's life in a slum had radical chic.
Eleanor's husband had secured his first lectureship, and her first novel had been acclaimed in literary circles.
They had bought their first house and were expecting their first baby.
They drove to Birmingham occasionally and were deeply, seriously interested in the problems of such a parish as St Andrew's.
Mary Hammond-Heath had distinguished herself as junior to a QC in a fraud case that had made national headlines, and was inclined to regard the Bouveries' life as an excellent test case for some of her theories.
She had also become agnostic, and could see no sense in expecting a God to take the slightest interest in St Andrew's.
But she quoted the Bouveries in London, as the Ramsays quoted them in Oxford.
Anna, knowing nothing of this, and battling to come to terms with the violence of her surroundings, while The Friends seemed to expand and achieve by the month, succumbed every so often to the demon envy.
It was also evident that St Andrew's was almost too much for Peter, even from the beginning.
He took everything too seriously, and was apt to shoulder all burdens, all responsibilities, to initiate too many schemes for battered women, delinquent children, alcoholics, drug abusers, prostitutes, the old and the destitute.
Anna, determined not to be able to reproach herself for not trying, took on the women and children.
There was no peace.
The kitchen and the one spare bedroom were constantly, noisily occupied, the doorbell rang at all hours, and once, answering it, a man she had never seen struck her on the side of the head  with an empty bottle and told her to leave his wife alone.
They put a chain on the front door and bolts on the ground-floor windows.
Anna only went to her meetings if she was accompanied, and never after dark because she trusted no-one else to guard the children.
One Guy Fawkes' night, she found the children's bedroom window shattered and a half-brick on the floor, so Peter tacked chicken wire across the frame inside.
Anna was so frightened she grew furiously angry with Peter and screamed at him and accused him of putting God before herself and the children.
He said, ‘I am doing what I have to do.’
Incoherent with rage and terror, she threw a dictionary at him and caught his temple.
He bled copiously and went about the parish for a week adorned with a large piece of sticking plaster, like a clown.
But he emptied the house of its demanding lodgers, some of whom subsequently abused him, when they saw him in the street.
In the eyes of the more docile he read their unsurprised acceptance of the fact that even God would not help them.
He wondered sadly aloud to Anna whether experience could finally make one more robust.
Anna, worn through to her nerve ends, said she thought one would probably drop dead before one ever knew.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
Anna put her hands over her face.
‘Please don't be.
I haven't the strength left to comfort you.’
One day, taking the children into central Birmingham, Anna saw from the bus window the name of the language school she had taught at, in Oxford, on a board outside a small office block.
She got off the bus at the next stop, and went back to the building, pushing the children in a collapsible pushchair, which had a propensity only to collapse when occupied.
Yes, it was the same school, just another branch.
Yes, there was a vacancy for part-time work.
Yes, Anna might apply for interview.
Anna went home via St Andrew's  Church, where she apologized to God and then thanked Him.
She then went home — there was a man asleep on the doorstep whom she took care not to waken — and apologized to Peter.
He said, ‘It's hard, isn't it?
I never knew it would be so hard.’
They held each other soberly, and Anna noticed he was as thin as a ruler, all bone.
He's too thin now, Anna thought, kneeling in Loxford.
St Andrew's nearly killed both of us, in various ways, but Peter couldn't say so.
He had asked to be tested.
Now, in a way, he has asked to be rewarded.
He failed the test and the reward has gone to someone else and it is not, Anna said fiercely to herself, pressing her palms to her closed eyes, it is not fair that he should never know what he cannot do, that he should always set himself targets he can't achieve, that he should never be allowed to progress.
Around her the congregation rustled to its feet, indicating that she should go up to the communion rail first, as was fitting, as was customary.
Peter did not look at her as she walked towards him up the chancel: he stood waiting, holding the paten, the first moonlike communion wafer ready between finger and thumb.
She knelt in front of him and raised her crossed hands.
There is no gaiety in Peter, she thought, bending her face to the wafer, no real pleasure in living, just an anxious shrinking from everything except duty; obligation has become his Rule, he clings to it, it stops him drowning.
The communion wafer glued itself to the roof of her mouth.
She pressed it with her tongue, as she had pressed hundreds, thousands now, over twenty years' worth of these papery discs stamped with crosses, made by nuns.
I take communion too often, Anna thought, I take it to show the flag, Peter's flag, and I never think what I am doing.
‘The Blood of Christ,’ Peter said softly, stooping to her with the chalice.
She took it in both hands.
She loved the chalice, made in 1652, used in Loxford  church for over three hundred years.
She took a sip of wine, sweet and strong.
Peter, with a square of folded white linen, laundered by Anna among all the Rectory sheets and pillowcases, wiped the place on the chalice that her lips had touched, and moved on.
Chapter Three
Miss Dunstable decided to say nothing about the Rector's imperfectly ironed surplice.
She decided this on Monday afternoon, having seen Anna digging manfully in the vegetable garden she had made behind the Rectory.
The apple trees beside it, to Miss Dunstable's eye, also looked properly pruned.
Miss Dunstable surveyed this evidence of — to her mind — most proper domestic industry, from a hundred yards away, on the footpath to her favourite walk, and made up her mind on the side of tolerance.
So firmly did she make it up that she even waved her stout walking stick in the air, and hallooed at Anna.
Anna straightened up, looked round, and hallooed faintly back.
Triumphant and satisfied, Miss Dunstable marched away.
Anna returned to the task of removing the last, fibrous, old leeks of winter which would make, oh groan, yet more soup.
She was proud of her ability to make things grow, a new skill, developed at Loxford, but a garden was a tyrant as well as a satisfaction, and this garden was regarded by her family as very much her business.
Luke would mow, or sweep leaves, very occasionally, but with the air of one earning himself exemption from such tasks for months to come.
Flora was only a nuisance, stopping after seconds of weeding to write her name in pebbles on the lawn (all ready for the tender teeth of the mower blades) or float daisy heads in a puddle, and Peter was never so galvanized by holy necessity calling from the far side of the parish as when the garden was mentioned.
Anna thought he did not much notice the  country, earth, growing things; but then he had not observed city things much, either.
‘What are you thinking about?’
Isobel Thompson said.
She had rung the doorbell, but as no-one had come she had walked round the house to the garden.
She wore a fawn mackintosh and a scarf patterned with neat flowers.
Straightening up for a second time, Anna thought Isobel looked more like a librarian than a deacon.
Was one of the problems with the public perception of women deacons the fact that they did, often, look so like librarians?
‘Peter,’ Anna said.
Isobel stepped on to the earth, and kissed her.
‘That's why I've come.’
‘It's really nice of you, but if you say one word about the Will of God, I shall hit you with my fork.’
Isobel said.
‘Would you like me to dig too, or will you stop and make me a cup of coffee?’
‘You can't dig,’ Anna said.
‘Not with your little white deacon's hands.
And you've got trim little parish shoes on.’
Isobel Thompson took off her scarf and ruffled her grey curls.
‘Goodness me.
You are cross.’
‘I'm angry.
And miserable.
Peter deserves better.’
‘Shall I go away?’
‘Please don't.’
Isobel said, ‘I don't expect Peter minds as much as you do.’
‘Why?
Because of his vocation?’
‘Exactly.’
Anna stuck her fork in the earth and scraped mud off her boots against it.
‘I think you overestimate vocation.’
‘How is Flora?’
‘Much the same.’
‘And Luke?’
‘He wants to travel, this summer.
Some friends have clubbed together to buy an old van and they think they  are going to drive to India.
I don't blame him, but we can't help him.
I wouldn't mind driving to India.’
They began to walk back towards the house.
Isobel put her hand on Anna's arm.
‘I'm sorrier than I can say.
Truly I am.
But might it not draw you and Peter together?’
‘Not so far.’
‘Anna,’ Isobel said pleadingly, ‘Anna, don't so set your face against things —’
Anna whirled round.
‘My face!
My face is set against nothing!
It's the damned Church, Isobel, that's what it is!
Slammed doors, refusals, hierarchy, muddle, divisions, loneliness.
I'm sick of it.
And I'm sick of seeing what it's doing to Peter —’ She stopped and took a breath.
‘It's a prison, you see,’ she said in a calmer voice.
‘It may not be spiritually so, if you are lucky, but socially it is a prison.
I can't be myself.
I can't be an individual, only someone relative to Peter, to the parish, to the Church.
I'm forty-two and I don't expect I ever will be myself now.
The parish has become the other woman in my life — our lives — I don't blame Peter for that, he has to believe in its importance in order not to feel he has wasted everything.
I expect that for other clergy wives whose husbands are less disappointed than Peter God is the other woman.
Do you understand me?
Are you listening?’
‘Oh yes,’ Isobel said sadly.
They had reached the back door and the muddle of trugs and boot scrapers and milk-bottle crates that lay outside it.
‘Of course I'm not tidy,’ Anna said, following Isobel's gaze, ‘of course I can't be.
I'd go mad if I had to be tidy as well as everything else.
Come in and I'll make you coffee.’
She paused and opened the door.
‘Actually, I think I shall go mad.
It seems to me the only thing to do.’
When Isobel had gone — dear, patient, wise Isobel whom she loved and to whom she was often so unreasonable — Anna ran water into the empty coffee mugs and stood them in the sink.
It was two o'clock.
There was time to start on the parish magazines before the school bus came, a job which had reverted to Peter because he was not good at asking people to do things he did not like doing himself.
So Anna did it, on foot, delivering the magazines to the twenty-seven households in Loxford who took it, chiefly, Anna suspected, for the useful directory on the back page of plumbers and decorators and taxi services.
They also liked it — as did the other villages — for the spiteful inter-village competitiveness that lay under the seemingly innocent accounts of the Snead Women's Institute going on an Easter outing to Weston-super-Mare, while the Quindale branch could only muster a local dried-flower expert whose crisp and solid arrangements, adorned with bows of florist's ribbon, they could all have recognized in their sleep.
There was also the monthly parish draw — top prize, £5 — a ‘Children's Corner’(rabbits and a cross to colour in this month) and Peter's ‘Letter from the Rector’, which Anna had given up reading because she could not recognize the man in the message.
‘Is it a myth that the Church is just for Sundays?’ he had written.
Exchanging her shoes once more for Wellington boots, Anna wondered if he found such phrases in a ‘How to…’ book.
She carried the magazines in a plastic bag from Pricewell's, the supermarket in Woodborough.
It was the combination of the carrier bag and the boots and the voluminous purple cloak that had been a present from Laura that attracted the attention of the man at the first-floor windows of Loxford Old Rectory, the man who had decided to buy it.
Patrick O'Sullivan, whose Daimler stood at the elegant, twin-leaved front door below, turned to the present owner of the house and said, ‘Who is that?’
Susie Smallwood peered out under the festoon blind.
As was usual with Susie, she was being uprooted by her restless husband the moment the last blind was in place, this time to Oxfordshire.
She didn't particularly mind leaving Loxford.
At least the new house was close to the M40 and thus to London.
She said, ‘Oh, that's the Rector's wife.’
‘Are you sure?’
Susie turned away from the window.
‘She always dresses like that.
Causes a lot of talk.
Her mother's an actress.’
Patrick O'Sullivan went on watching as Anna walked along the lane.
‘What is the Rector like?’
Susie had never been to church.
‘He seems all right.
Bit dreary.’
She sighed.
‘Do you want to see the main bedroom again?’
Anna walked on, swinging her bag.
It was a dead time of day in Loxford, with only a handful of people out in their gardens — she would have to have the usual shouted conversation with Mr Biddle among his brassica stumps, and a whispered one with Mrs Eddoes, who treated life as a giant conspiracy — and nobody in the shop or on the green.
She always began her delivery among the less picturesque groups of cottages on the south side of the green.
These cottage front doors were never used — some even had rows of flowerpots across the sill as a deterrent — and Anna had to go round to the back to find a resting place for the magazine.
There was no sentimentality about these cottages.
Their back doors were protected by makeshift porches of ribbed plastic, and the gardens grew as many derelict motor bikes as they did dahlias and cabbages.
Only the windows had been modernized, with the old, many-paned windows replaced with blank sheets of glass through which Anna could see the inhabitants, burrowed deep in the comfortable fusty layers of their living-rooms, mindlessly absorbed  in the relentless quacking of the television set.
These were the people, Anna thought affectionately, who knew the rules of village living, as of old.
She wedged their magazines between old paint tins and imperfectly washed milk bottles and towers of flowerpots, and crept away.
The north side of the green was another matter.
The prettier cottages here faced south, and were divided from the green by a stream which necessitated a little stone bridge to every garden gate.
Here the Vinsons lived, and the Partingtons, and the Dodswells, all newcomers to country life who had decided ideas, gleaned chiefly from magazines as to how to live it.
Their cottages had scarcely survived their attentions.
It gave Anna real pain to post magazines through one new front door hinged and studded so as to resemble part of the set for a pantomime of Robin Hood, and then another, moulded and classically pedimented, between half-pilasters made of fibreglass.
The third had a goblin lantern, and stone frogs cemented (for fear of theft) to the little bridge and the nameplate which read ‘The Nook’.
Yet Elaine Dodswell, who inhabited The Nook, produced the annual Sunday-school Christmas Play, and organized the parish hospital-run for those visits to out-patients' departments at Woodborough so cherished by three-quarters of the population.
‘You,’ said Anna to herself, squeezing a magazine into The Nook's small and fancy wrought-iron mouth, ‘are a snob.
God is not a snob.
God values Elaine Dodswell because she does what she does with a good grace.
Which is more, my girl, than can be said for some.’
The Nook's door opened.
‘I'm so glad to catch you,’ Elaine Dodswell said.
She wore a tracksuit and an expression of deep sympathy.
‘I heard.
I just heard.
I'm ever so sorry for you both but of course I'm ever so relieved.
We don't want to lose you.’
Anna stared.
‘Colin heard in Woodborough.
In the pub, he said.
The Coach and Horses.’
Anna leaned weakly against the varnished door jamb.
‘Nothing's private, is it?
You can't breathe in a village —’
‘Come in,’ Elaine said.
‘Come in and have a coffee.’
‘I can't.
I've got eighteen more houses before the school bus.
But thank you.’
‘Is Peter ever so upset?’
Elaine asked cosily.
‘Oh no,’ Anna said, ‘I think he's relieved.
He was advised, you know, but he loves it here.’
She stood upright again.
‘It would have been an awful wrench.’
Elaine nodded.
‘Yes.
Yes, I'm sure it would.
I'll tell Colin, then.’
She began to push the door to.
‘He'l’ be ever so glad.
We were so worried, that Peter'd mind.’
The door closed and then Elaine pulled the magazine in, from inside, causing the letter box to snap shut smartly.
Anna made a face at it before she turned away.
Damn, damn, damn.
No face to save, no place to hide.
She crossed the bridge between the frogs and set off for the far end of the green, where the lane led up into the council estate.
As she turned uphill, a dark-red Daimler slid by, and blew its horn at her.
She stood and stared after it.
‘It's the new chap!’
Mr Biddle bellowed from his potato bed across the green.
‘It's the chap that's bought the Old Rectory.’
Anna waved in acknowledgement.
Poor Susie Smallwood, she had always said to herself, poor Susie, with her discontented little face and her sports car and her Rolex watch; but now enviable Susie who could, and would, albeit with a show of petulance, leave Loxford and begin again.
‘E give four ‘undred thousand!’
Mr Biddle shouted.
‘Bloody crackpot!’
Anna turned away from the green and climbed the hill towards the council houses, in whose gardens interminable lines of washing were guarded by yellow-eyed German shepherd dogs.
She could not help reflecting, as she pushed a magazine into the first letter box, that a world in which Daimler drivers could pay four hundred thousand pounds for a country house while she could not even muster a couple of hundred for Luke's modest share of an old transit van had a certain imbalance to it.
The school bus was late, so Anna was on time.
Someone said to her, ‘Made it all right today, then, Mrs B?’ and she said, ‘I know.
It's a bit of an achievement, isn't it?’ and bravely smiled.
They had watched her, in the council estate, they knew what she had been doing.
They were not unkind people, not mean-minded, but it would never have occurred to them to offer to help.
The parish magazines were Church business: Anna was the Rector's wife.
When the school bus pulled up, there was the usual avalanche of nine children, and then a pause.
It was quite a long pause.
Anna moved towards the bus steps and saw the driver looking behind him down the length of the bus, waiting.
After several seconds, Flora came, as slow as a snail, bumping her bags down the steps, head bent.
‘Flora,’ Anna said.
‘Darling —’
Flora raised her head a little.
Her face was blotched and swollen with crying.
‘Oh Flora,’ Anna said, holding out her arms.
Flora stopped in front of her, and leaned tiredly against her, still holding her bags.
The village mothers and children watched in uneasy silence.
Flora said something.
Anna could not hear it.
‘What?’ she said, stooping.
Flora whispered, ‘I can't bear it any more.’
Holding her, Anna looked up at the others.
They  began to shift and move away.
One of them, taking the lead, said loudly, ‘It's a shame.
Poor kid.
You want to tell the headmaster, Mrs B. That's what you want to do.’
‘I've got a deanery meeting,’ Peter said.
He stood in the kitchen, half into his depressing mackintosh.
‘Will you be late?’
‘Nine-ish —’
‘On the way to your meeting,’ Anna said, piling supper plates, ‘would you think about Flora?’
Peter shrugged on his second sleeve and began to button himself up, collar neat, belt buckled.
‘Please —’ Anna said in exasperation.
‘Please.’
‘What?’
‘Must you do yourself up so — so trimly ?
Must you look so utterly suburban?’
‘I am suburban.’
‘Flora,’ Anna said.
‘Just think about Flora.’
‘I was.
It was you —’
‘I know.
I know, I'm sorry.
I'm on edge because of Flora.’
Peter finished buttoning and buckling.
‘What do you suggest we do?’
‘Take her away from Woodborough Junior and send her to St Saviour's.’
‘But that's Catholic!’
‘Same God.’
‘No,’ Peter said.
‘So bullying is better?’
‘Why St Saviour's?’
‘Because it's the cheapest private alternative in Woodborough.’
‘How cheap?’
Peter said.
‘Six hundred pounds a term.’
He let out a yelp.
‘Six hundred!’
‘Yes,’ Anna said.
‘Kind nuns.
Small classes.’
Peter seized the black document-wallet he always took to meetings.
‘You must be mad.
Where can we find six hundred pounds three times a year?’
‘Borrow it,’ Anna said, beside herself, not caring if the remark were a red rag to a bull.
Peter gasped.
He glared at her, wrestling with himself, then he went out to the garage, banging the kitchen door behind him.
The telephone rang at once.
‘Anna?’
‘Yes —’
‘Anna, it's Celia Hooper here.
Just rang to remind Peter —’
‘He's gone.
Just left.’
‘Oh good.
Splendid.
Just rang to make sure.
You know.’
Celia Hooper, secretary to the Deanery Synod, one of what Anna thought of as Peter's groupies.
‘Thank you, Celia.’
‘Not at all.
Must fly.
Bye!’
If we haven't got the money, Anna thought, putting the telephone down, and we can't borrow it, we must make it.
She visualized more hours at her red lacquer table.
Well, if needs must, they must.
She considered telephoning Laura, and Kitty, both of whom were long on sympathy and short on cash — so strange that Peter's orthodox solicitor father should have left his widow quite as poorly provided for as Anna's unconventional one had left Laura — and decided that it would be unfair.
What could they do, except be made miserable by impotence?
She went upstairs.
Flora was lying on her bedroom floor doing her homework.
Through the wall came the thump of rock music which was Luke's required accompaniment to doing his.
‘Flora,’ Anna said.
Flora rolled over and peered up at her mother.
She looked terribly tired.
Anna sat on the edge of Flora's  bed.
‘Look,’ she said, ‘I think you've had enough.’
Flora waited.
‘I don't quite know how we'll manage it,’ Anna said, ‘But we will, somehow.
You won't have to stay at Woodborough Junior much longer.
I promise.’
‘St Saviour's?’
Flora said.
She had seen the nuns in Woodborough.
They had appeared to her like grey gulls, mysterious and soothing.
‘Is that where you would like to go?’
Flora considered.
Girls at St Saviour's wore dark-green skirts and jerseys, not their own clothes.
‘Could we afford the uniform?’
‘I should think so.
Secondhand, of course, but we're used to that.’
Flora, suddenly flooded with relief, said stoutly, ‘But we always have new toothbrushes.’
She got up from the floor and sat on Anna's knee.
‘Soon?’
‘I have to do a bit of planning.
And talk to Sister Ignatia.
You'll just have to bear it for a little while longer.’
Flora leaned back and Anna put her arms around her.
‘Did you pray?’
‘No,’ Anna said.
‘I did.
I expect Daddy did.
If you had, I might have gone to St Saviour's last term.’
‘It isn't as simple as that.’
Flora wasn't listening.
She began to play with the string of amber glass beads round Anna's neck (Oxfam Shop, Woodborough).
‘Perhaps I'll have a best friend,’ Flora said.
Laura came down from London on the long-distance bus.
She had never learned to drive and disliked the train because, she said, you were too low in a train to see properly.
A coach was just right; like being on a very tall horse, or even an elephant.
And nowadays coaches had lavatories and armchairs and dear little  hostesses whom Laura liked to induce to tell her their life stories.
‘Do you know, Anna, my darling, that the poor child longed, only longed, to be a concert pianist but was literally forced by her  ogreish father to nurse him while he died of drink and now her spirit is quite broken and all she can bring herself to do is dispense plastic cups of repellent coffee to OAPs going to Ferndown to see their married daughters?’
Laura travelled in style.
She had a leather suitcase which bore the remains of labels from pre-war Oriental hotels, a hatbox and an immense carpet bag which sighed out little puffs of dust every time it was set on the ground.
She also had a tattered travelling rug —‘Purest cashmere, darling, just feel, adorable little goat's tums’— and a string bag full of books and apples.
As the bus came to a halt in Woodborough bus station, Laura slid open the window and lowered her string bag down to her son-in-law.
‘Darling.
Too thrilling.
Take this, do.
Reminds me of Port Said, and you're a little bumboy in a boat.’
The travelling rug followed the string bag, and then the driver came round the bus to release Laura's other luggage from the boot.
She swept down the steps and embraced Peter warmly.
‘Oh my darling, I've wept for you.
I can't bear it.’
Leaning against her with an almost childish relief, Peter said, ‘I'm not at all sure I can.’
‘And Anna?’
‘What do you think?’
Peter said.
‘What else can she feel but utterly let down?’
‘Not by you.’
‘Oh,’ said Peter crossly, freeing himself and seizing Laura's luggage.
‘Who else could it be but me?’
Laura opened her mouth to say, The Church, of course, and shut it again.
Tact, as she often proudly said, was as alien to her as hygiene —‘The sign of a bourgeois mind’— but this was an occasion for  affection above even a fine disregard for tact.
If Peter were encouraged to despise and disbelieve the very authority he had given his life to, where would that leave him, but spinning in an abyss?
So instead, Laura said, ‘She's just desperate with disappointment for you.
Peter, half hearing, said, ‘Oh, I'm desperate all right,’ and gave a little barking laugh, and set off across the bus station to the car park, grasping Laura's luggage.
Dear heaven, Laura thought, trotting after him with her string bag and her blanket.
Dear merciful heaven, is this what happens to a thwarted man of God?
She cast her eyes skywards, muttering soft curses.
A man, passing her, took one startled look and reflected anew what a very unwise policy was the current one of closing nineteenth-century asylums and turning the inmates loose into an alarmed and inadequate society.
By bedtime, Laura was exhausted.
She lay in Charlotte's bed and looked up at the ceiling that Charlotte had festooned with shawls and old curtains and Indian bedspreads (there was a definite small weight in one of those hammocks: what lay there?
The body of a — mouse?) and considered the household now shut away around her in the spring darkness.
They had all come to her, one by one, during the evening, an evening harried with telephone calls —‘I don't think,’ Anna had said at one point, ‘that we have eaten an uninterrupted meal in twenty-one years’— and they had all explained to her how awful they felt, and how guilty they felt about feeling awful, because it wasn't anybody's fault, and that made it worse, having nobody to blame.
‘I know Mum and Dad can't help with the van,’ Luke said.
‘And I'd like to make the money myself, I mean, I could, easily, at the Quindale garage, but I haven't time because of A levels and the others are all going at the beginning of July.’
Laura, thinking privately that she would telephone  Kitty and propose £100 each (St Agatha must be worth something, silly to hang on to her for sentiment, even though she had now become something of a friend, someone waiting when Laura came home to what was, to be honest, a deeply, darkly dire apology for a decent flat), patted Luke and said, ‘Mmm.’
Luke said, ‘I don't suppose you think it matters.’
She turned huge eyes on him.
‘But I do!
I'm plotting.’
‘The thing is,’ Luke said, encouraged, ‘I don't want to give Mum a lot of grief about it, but you do get hacked off with being patient, a bit.’
‘Wait!’
Laura held up a forefinger burdened with an enormous cameo ring.
‘Just wait!
And trust!’
‘Sounds like a bloody dog,’ Luke said, grinning.
If Luke needed £200, Flora needed uniform.
It had not crossed Flora's mind that St Saviour's might need payment for teaching her, only that her place there depended upon her ability to have the right uniform, all the uniform, down to the last sock garter and science overall.
‘They must be green,’ Flora said to her grandmother, ‘with my name here —’she patted the left side of her nightie-clad chest-'in chain stitch.
Mummy can't do chain stitch.’
‘Immaterial,’ Laura said, gesturing.
‘Chain stitch, satin stitch, feather stitch, stump work, back stitch, smocking, tacking —’
‘Chain stitch,’ Flora said loudly.
She had been in the habit of anxiety and tension for so long that she could not stop now, merely because the menace was being taken away.
‘Chain stitch, chain stitch,’ Flora cried.
bursting into tears.
‘It has to be, I've seen one —’
Chain stitch, Laura thought, eyeing the weight in the ceiling cloth (had it moved?), chain stitch and 600 a term.
She could only sell St Agatha once, and there was precious little left besides to sell.
‘I don't mind more work,’ Anna said, ‘but I have to confess that my heart does rather quail and fail at the  thought of three times as much French jacquard-weaving machinery specifications to translate as I have already.’
‘Defy the village,’ Laura said.
‘Take pupils!
Teach French!’
Anna, sitting on the side of Laura's bed wrapped in a bath towel, looked miserable.
‘If it was just defying the village I wouldn't think twice.
But if I defy the village — the parish — I automatically defy Peter.
And truly I can't do that to him now, on top of everything.’
‘I'll think,’ Laura said, shutting her eyes.
‘I'll cudgel my brains.
Cudgel, cudgel.’
‘Don't get me wrong,’ Anna said, standing up, ‘I'm not giving up.
I'm just stuck.
I can't think what to do next, except the same things.
The same old rather fruitless things.’
Me too, Laura thought.
Whither now, at sixty-five, with an agent who sends me postcards from abroad as conscience sops, but never telephones because what work is there for such a one as I (or is it me)?
And is it better to be poor Kittykins, in that dull ground-floor flat in the wrong part of Windsor, for whom life's highlights have dwindled to pension day and nature programmes on the telly box?
Gnash teeth, thought Laura, roll eyes, tear hair.
She turned on her side so that, if the mouse on the ceiling began a stealthy movement, she would not see it.
And then, as was her wont, she began to declaim ‘The Lady of Shalott’ to herself, to chant herself to sleep.
‘God in his mercy, lend her grace,’ she muttered, thinking of Anna, her Anna, who had grown from being such a dull child into a truly engaging woman, a woman so richly deserving of being lent a little of God's grace.
And why, why in hell's name, didn't He?
On Saturday morning, Peter went off to do his rounds of parish patients at Woodborough Hospital.
Luke  went with him, to see schoolfriends and to get out of Loxford.
Flora sat in the kitchen, laboriously practising chain stitch on a rag torn from an old shirt of Peter's, and Anna, who was in charge of the cleaning-rota, went off to the church to see if it actually had been cleaned.
Being medieval, she thought it was unsuitable for the church to be visibly glittering, but, if the pews and the brass weren't polished, it quickly looked sad and Anna did not like it to look sad.
She had an affection for the building, as if it were a sturdy and uncomplaining beast that had stood and endured human volatility and neglect since 1320.
It demanded very little and gave a good deal in return.
When she was alone in it, she would, in affection and gratitude, pat the squat stone pillars that held up the nave roof.
Laundering its altar linen and hoovering its aisle carpet often seemed like the instinctive care she gave to anything dependent of which she was fond.
Today, only the altar candlesticks had been forgotten (it was Elaine Dodswell and Trish Pardoe's week and they could at least be relied upon) so Anna gathered them up and took them home to polish.
On the way back, she met Miss Dunstable with an armful of pussy willow intended for the church porch.
‘Action, action!’ cried Miss Dunstable, indicating the candlesticks.
‘Good for you!
Only way!’
‘Only way to what?
‘Get anything done!’
‘I think,’ Anna said a minute later, setting down her brass burden on the kitchen table, ‘I think I have had a little revelation.’
‘An angel!’
Laura said.
‘A tweed one,’ Anna said, thinking of Miss Dunstable.
‘A tweed one in a mackintosh hat.
Action, she said, action.
I've got to act —’
Flora, whose notions of acting were confined to the village nativity play, tugged in puzzlement at her sweaty chain stitch.
‘As long as I do something outside the parish,’ Anna said, ‘does it matter what I do?’
‘Teach again —’
‘I can't.
My qualifications aren't enough for state teaching, only for private language schools.’
Laura flung out her arms.
‘Does it matter?
Petrol pumps, shop assistant, filing clerk, who cares?’
Anna looked at her.
‘I don't,’ she said.
‘Not any more.’
Chapter Four
The administration manager at Pricewell's seemed to Anna very young.
He was slim and dark and he told her his name was Steve.
(His office door — an office the size of a cupboard — had ‘Mr S. Mulgrove’ on it.)
He said consolingly to Anna, ‘The lack of experience isn't a problem.
Most of our school leavers don't have any experience.
It had been an impulse, appealing to Mr S. Mulgrove.
Anna had been suddenly struck as she pushed open Pricewell's double glass doors, by the ‘Vacancy’ notice pasted to the inside of it.
‘General staff wanted,’ it said.
‘Full- and Part-time.
Stock and checkout assistants.
Apply the Administration Manager.’
‘May I take your name and address?’
Mr Mulgrove said.
Anna gave it.
He did not flinch when she said ‘the Rectory’.
Perhaps he didn't even realize what the implication of living in a rectory was.
‘I don't mind what I do,’ Anna said.
He said delicately, ‘Stock involves quite a lot of ladder work, in the warehouse…’ as if Anna might not be up to such physical strenuousness.
‘I think I'd rather climb ladders than sit at a checkout.’
Mr Mulgrove rather wanted to say that her voice and appearance would be an asset on the checkout, good for Pricewell's public image (a cause dear to his heart), but he was uncertain how to put this.
‘I wouldn't like you to be in the wrong situation…’
Anna, emboldened by the energy of taking action, said, ‘Would I be paid more for one than the other?’
He shook his head.
‘What would I be paid?’
As Anna was the sort of person Mr Mulgrove associated with being a customer rather than a member of staff, he was suddenly embarrassed.
He flicked, with much throat-clearing, through a plastic-sheeted folder.
‘Three twenty-one an hour.’
‘Three pounds and twenty-one pence —’
‘Yes.’
‘Heavens,’ Anna said.
‘You see, I need to make at least fifty pounds a week for thirty-six weeks a year.’
He could not look at her: he was overcome by her directness.
He said, ‘That would mean twenty hours a week as a part-time assistant.
Four hours a day for five days.’
There was a little pause.
‘You're on,’ Anna said.
She held her hand out to him.
He took it doubtingly.
‘You're sure?’
‘Yes.’
She smiled at him.
‘Yes.
It also means no Church and no village for twenty hours a week.’
He did not understand.
He wondered if he were making a mistake.
He said, ‘Of course, there has to be a three-month trial —’
‘Oh, of course.’
‘And you will have to work under supervision for the length of that period —’
‘Why do you think I might be difficult?’
Mr Mulgrove went scarlet.
Give him a school leaver any day, or a nice, motherly woman going back to work once her children were grown-up, or an obliging pensioner, prepared to collect trolleys from the car parks…
‘I won't be difficult,’ Anna said gently, to comfort him.
‘I need a job and I'd be really grateful if you would let me have one.’
He looked at her, for the first time.
Why on earth did  she need a job?
What was she doing?
Bravely he said, ‘You're not having me on?’
‘No,’ Anna said, ‘no.
My youngest child is being bullied at school and I want to send her to St Saviour's.
That's all.’
Mr Mulgrove relaxed.
His sister had been to St Saviour's.
He stood up.
‘If you'd like to come this way, Mrs Bouverie, I'll show you the warehouse and the rest room.’
He held the door for her to squeeze past.
‘There's a bonus scheme, of course,’ he said, ‘for good work.
Some people get awarded it before the trial period is up.
It would mean an extra ten pence an hour.’
‘I can go in on the morning bus with Flora,’ Anna said, ‘and home on the early-afternoon one to Quindale.
It's perfectly simple.
And they were so nice.
They said I could work just in termtime as long as I give them notice of the definite weeks a month in advance.’
She looked at Luke.
They were sitting either side of the kitchen table, in the debris of supper.
Peter had gone to the New End PCC meeting.
‘I will wear a navy-blue overall with a checked collar and cuffs, and a little badge saying, ‘I'm Anna.
Can I help you?’
She waited for Luke to laugh.
Luke did not laugh.
People who are drowning in mortification do not find it easy to laugh.
Luke would have said that politically he stood way to the left of his mother and way, way to the left of his father, but somehow he could not reconcile himself to the thought of his mother stocking shelves in Pricewell's.
With a badge on.
He had a lump in his throat and he felt his skin prickling with shame at the thought of his friends and his friends' mums going in to Pricewell's and seeing Anna unloading ketchup bottles with ‘Can I help you?’ pinned on her overall.
‘Oh Luke,’ Anna said.
She used the tone of voice she had used when he was little and she caught him doing  something he had been expressly forbidden to do.
‘Won't your principles stand being acted upon?’
‘Shut up!’
Luke shouted.
He glared at her.
She'd promised him money for the van, which she would make wearing that bloody badge.
He didn't want money made that way; he didn't want the humiliation.
‘I'm sorry,’ Anna said, ‘I didn't mean to tease.
But really you must try to be a little consistent.
And practical.’
She stopped.
She had been about to say, You're just like Daddy, but that, though true, would not have been fair, or kind.
So she said, ‘What's so different about my working in Pricewell's from your working at the garage?’
Luke squirmed.
He could not say that the garage was macho and Pricewell's was naff, because she would tease him again.
He was unable to imagine what she was after, why she had chosen this way out, why she seemed so bloody cheerful.
‘I'm not qualified to do much else,’ Anna said, in the gentle voice she had used to Peter.
(‘It's deliberate, isn't it?’
Peter had said.
‘Just rubbing my nose in it.’)
‘It won't be for ever.’
‘Why can't you do something where people can't see?’
‘Ah,’ Anna said, ‘I see.
You do think like Daddy, don't you?’
‘What's Dad think?’
‘That I'm doing it to show off.
That it's Ga coming out in me, a kind of exhibitionism.
Why can't I go and be a clerk in the Council offices where no-one can see, is that it?
Well, I'd rather work in a shop, among people.’
‘But —’
‘Luke,’ said Anna, leaning forward, looking intently at him, ‘Luke.
I want to be normal.’
He held her gaze for a couple of seconds, then dropped his own.
‘Yeah.’
‘This doesn't have to be a big deal.
This has to be a practical way to rescue Flora and get you to India or  wherever.
You and Daddy seem to expect a freedom for yourselves you have no intention of awarding me.’
Jesus, Luke thought, I'm going to cry.
‘If your friends’ mothers despise me for working in a supermarket, then they are to be pitied.
But they won't.
They'll understand.
Women do,’ Anna said with vehemence.
Luke rubbed his hand across his eyes and nose.
‘You ought to know,’ Anna said more gently, ‘you ought to know by now that things you want don't just fall off trees.
There's Charlotte on the most basic grant, you dressed entirely from the Pakistani stalls in Woodborough market, Daddy miserable because he can't just magic up school fees for Flora.
It's a struggle, isn't it?
You know that.’
Luke nodded.
He understood all right, but he had a dim feeling that dignity was all the same compromised by what Anna proposed to do.
He thought he would not begin on all that, so he got up from the kitchen table.
‘Well, Flora seems pretty happy —’
Anna smiled.
‘Now she has cracked chain stitch, she's fine.’
‘I liked Woodborough Junior.’
‘You're a very different kettle of fish from Flora.’
She paused, and then she said, ‘And from me.’
Luke turned in the kitchen doorway and said suddenly, ‘Mum, you OK?’
Anna nodded.
Luke looked relieved.
‘I'll go up then,’ he said, and went.
On Anna's first morning at Pricewell's, she caught the early bus with Luke and Flora.
Flora clung to her, like a limpet.
As the bus swung slowly round Loxford green, Anna saw that two immense removal vans were parked in the drive of Loxford Old Rectory.
The Smallwoods were off to Oxfordshire.
Anna made a mental note to go in that evening and wish them well:
Peter would like it; poor Peter, who had broken down in bed the night before, and wept that he had failed her, failed her as well as— but he couldn't actually articulate that.
‘It's not your fault,’ she had said, hardly knowing what she meant.
‘It is, it is.
I've failed everything I've attempted.’
‘I don't think so,’ Anna said.
‘I think the goalposts have been moved.
Godly goalposts.’
It was two in the morning.
She had been downstairs to make tea.
‘Are you lonely?’ she said to Peter, handing him a mug.
He seemed reluctant to answer, doubtful.
He said at last, ‘I've got you,’ in a slightly hearty voice.
She waited for him to ask her if she was lonely, but he didn't, merely drank his tea obediently, like a child with hot milk.
‘Do you want,’ Anna said, embarking impulsively on the thinnest ice, ‘do you want to reconsider everything?
I mean everything ?
Our lives, where we live, even — even what you do?’
He stared at her.
‘Heavens, no.’
‘Sure?’ she said, persisting.
‘I wouldn't be afraid, you know.’
‘No,’ he said loudly.
He set the mug on the tray.
‘I can't just throw it in because I haven't succeeded yet.
The test is part of it all.’
‘Part?’
‘Part of holiness,’ Peter said rapidly.
‘To be tested is to suffer.
Suffering is part of spiritual progress.
You know that, that's child's stuff.’
‘So is listening.’
‘Listening?’
‘To me,’ Anna said.
She jerked a glance upwards.
‘To Him.’
Peter made an impatient noise.
‘So you think I don't pray?’
Inside herself, Anna shrank away.
They had had this kind of conversation before and it always ended with her frustrated and him defiant.
‘No,’ Anna said tiredly, ‘I don't think that.
I was only trying to help spring you from a trap if you felt you were in one.’
‘I'm not in a trap,’ he said, ‘I'm just in a dark bit of the wood.’
‘Sure?’ she said for a second time.
‘Oh, quite.’
He'd slept then.
In the morning he looked hollow-eyed, but he'd gone off, with dogged cheerfulness, to take prayers at Snead Hall, a sad, second-rate little girls' public school, where he was Chaplain, and the rest of them had caught the bus.
He had not, Anna tried to remember, wished her luck.
Flora had to be detached from Anna physically as the bus approached her school.
Luke had to pull off her hands, one by one and half carry her along the bus and down the steps.
When he got her on to the pavement, she sagged against the school wall and would not move.
Luke shouted up to Anna that he would take Flora in, and then walk on to the sixth-form college.
‘You're a hero,’ she mouthed back.
She felt sick, and tearful at Luke's goodness.
He waved and grinned at her and jerked a thumb upwards.
The bus pulled away from her children and headed for the market-place.
‘Anna,’ said Mr Mulgrove with an effort (he would so much have preferred to call her Mrs Bouverie), ‘this is your supervisor.’
‘Hi,’ said the supervisor.
He looked about sixteen.
He had red hair and a bad complexion and huge ears.
But he was smiling broadly.
‘I'm Tim.’
‘I'm Anna,’ Anna said, anxious to do what was expected of her.
‘We're on grocery,’ Tim said, ‘we're doing bottled sauces and mustards this morning.’
He waved a batch of papers at her.
‘Stock reports,’ he said enticingly.
Rustling in her stiff new overall — Mr Mulgrove's administrative eye had rested in disappointment on the extra foot of Anna's grey corduroy skirt that hung below it — Anna followed Tim out of the warehouse and down a grim cold staircase on to the shop floor.
It was like coming on stage in a theatre, out of the dark wings into warmth and light.
Tim loped off down an alleyway lined with pet food, and halted before a tier of shelves of bottles, brown and red bottles, ochre and copper and olive-green.
‘Got to do your facings,’ Tim said.
Anna nodded.
‘Know about facings?’
Anna thought about the needlework classes of her schooldays, in which she had been such a conspicuous non-success.
Facings had been something of a nightmare then, a closed book of mysterious rites that led, finally, her teacher assured her, to the temple of tailoring.
‘No,’ Anna said with complete honesty to Tim, her supervisor, who was certainly young enough to be Tim, her son, ‘I know absolutely nothing about facings.’
Tim looked delighted.
He turned behind him to a metal trolley where neat regiments of jars and bottles waited breathlessly under sealing plastic.
Tim considered them, glanced back at his shelves, noticed a gap and pounced upon a rectangular block of tikka masala sauce.
‘Now,’ he said.
His ears glowed with satisfaction.
‘Check your stock sheet.
Column one: numbers of items in case.’
He held out the block; this was a game for Anna to play with him.
She counted obediently.
‘Twelve.’
‘No need to look.
Stock sheet tells you that.
Second column: shelf allocation?’
Anna peered.
‘Two?’
‘Right.
Twelve jars to go two abreast.
And the front two,’ Tim said with emphasis, ‘must touch the shelf rim exactly — that's called presenting — and,’he paused, ‘they must all face the front.
That's called facing up.
Now you put them on the shelves, and I'll check you.’
It was not, Anna reflected, unlike doing the church flowers, except that Tim was being so much nicer to her than Miss Dunstable or Freda Partington ever were.
He stood three feet behind her with his adolescent arms folded inside his blue overall sleeves and said, ‘That's right.
You're getting there.
Cheers,’ at intervals.
When Anna stepped back, she said, ‘I think I'll go straight home and face and present the larder.’
Tim did not understand.
He said, wagging a forefinger, ‘No coffee break till ten-thirty-five!’
At ten-thirty-five, a stout woman in a blue overall with plain, pale-blue collar and cuffs to denote her seniority came up with a clipboard and said, ‘Tim and Anna.
Ten minutes coffee.’
Anna said, ‘I'll just finish the teriyaki sauces.’
They had a pretty label with almond blossom and a blue cone of oriental mountain printed on them.
Tim and the stout woman looked astonished.
‘It's coffee break,’ Tim said reprovingly.
He led Anna back up the gaunt staircase to the dining-room Mr Mulgrove had shown her when she came for interview.
‘Two-course lunch with fruit juice, ninety-five pence,’ Mr Mulgrove had said, and then, indicating a brightly coloured graph on a notice board, ‘Our wastage display.
We try and beat it every week.’
He had looked very grave at the thought of all those rotting star fruit, those superannuated pies and fizzing yoghurts.
‘Smoke?’
Tim said.
Anna shook her head.
She was  surprisingly pleased to sit down.
‘Getting engaged, Easter,’ Tim said, lighting up and drawing deeply.
‘Are you?
How are you going to ask her?
Have you planned it?’
‘I didn't ask,’ Tim said.
‘Her mum said why didn’ we get engaged Easter so we said yeah.’
He pulled a photograph out of his shirt pocket inside the overall, and held it out to Anna.
‘She works at Crompton's, on the industrial estate.
Wages clerk.’
Anna looked at a plump little person with a determined mouth.
She wore jeans and a black leather jacket.
‘Will you be married in church?’
‘She wants it.’
‘Don't you?’
‘Bit old-fashioned, i'n'it?’
Tim said.
‘You could excuse God for thinking He was perhaps beyond fashion —’
‘Come again?’
‘Sorry,’ Anna said, ‘thinking aloud.’
Tim looked at the clock.
‘Time's up.’
Later, silently passing each other little stone jars of French mustard, Tim said, ‘I never heard anyone say God 'cept for swearing.
Seems a bit rude to say it otherwise.’
‘God and death,’ Anna said, marshalling jars, ‘two of the rudest words in the world.’
This was going too far.
Tim said loudly, to quell her, ‘We run six'n a half thousand lines in Pricewell's.
Six'n a half thousand.’
He left her only once, to go to the lavatory.
He was gone perhaps for five minutes.
During those five minutes, while she was reading the history of the poppadom from the back of a packet, a female voice said to her, in a strangled way, ‘Mrs Bouverie?’
She looked up.
There, poised and trim in a camel jacket (probably Jaeger) and a plaid skirt (undoubtedly The Scotch House), stood Mrs Richardson.
Mrs Richardson, wife of Colonel Richardson (churchwarden, Diocesan Board of Finance, Red Cross, Council for the Preservation of Rural England) of Quindale House.
From her suavely coiffed pearl-grey head to her excellent shoes polished to the gloss of a new conker, Mrs Richardson radiated amazement.
‘Mrs Bouverie.
Anna?’
‘Heavens, Marjorie,’ Anna said, ‘I quite forgot about you.’
‘Forgot?’
‘Forgot that, occasionally, you shop in Pricewell's.’
Mrs Richardson looked round.
‘Are you an employee ?’
‘Yes.’
‘With your husband's consent?’
‘Only reluctant, I'm afraid,’ Anna said.
Tim was coming loping down the aisle.
‘Needs must where the devil drives, Marjorie.
This is my supervisor, Tim.
Tim, this is Mrs Richardson, from Quindale.’
‘Pleased to meet you,’ Tim said cheerfully.
‘Anna's first day.’
Marjorie Richardson swung her trolley in a neat, brisk semicircle.
‘I shall telephone you,’ she said to Anna.
Tim watched her walk away from them, upright and outraged.
‘She a friend?’
Anna checked her stocklist for the shelf allocation for the poppadoms (plain, spiced, garlic and chilli, ready-cooked) with all the slick professionalism of three hours' experience.
‘Not any more, I'm afraid.’
‘Was it very dull?’
Kitty Bouverie asked her daughter-in-law, on the telephone.
‘Yes.
But quite peacefully so.
I am instructed by a boy who is getting married because his girlfriend's mother has told him to.’
Kitty Bouverie was not really listening.
Since hearing of Anna's job, she had been fired with restiveness, pacing round her small green-and-magnolia sitting-room, peering yearningly out of its single window at the narrow terrace which was all of the outside world that she owned.
‘How old,’ Kitty said, ‘were the oldest people working at Pricewell's?’
‘I should think in their sixties.’
‘I'm in my sixties!’
Kitty cried.
Anna waited.
‘There's a branch of Pricewell's here,’ Kitty said.
The flat seemed suddenly as small and confining as a birdcage.
‘Was it difficult, what you did today?’
‘Oh no.
And you are helped.’
The word help seemed like a balm to Kitty.
Nobody helped her beyond the poor sad girl at the library to whom she was kind and who now bounded about the romantic fiction section for her, feverishly pulling down titles she thought Kitty would like.
Neither of them cared for the sexually explicit —‘Rather like having an operation described to one, don't you think?’
‘Do you suppose,’ Kitty said now, ‘do you suppose that there is even any point in my going to the manager and asking?’
Anna thought not, and could not say so.
‘I would so like it,’ Kitty said wistfully.
‘I would so like to be with people.’
‘Isn't there something gentler?’
‘I'm tired of gentleness,’ Kitty said crossly.
‘I feel like an old Marie biscuit that someone's left under the sofa.’
‘Then go to Pricewell's,’ Anna said, closing her eyes at the thought of telling Peter.
‘Go and good luck to you.’
She had hardly replaced the receiver, when the telephone shrilled again.
‘Anna?’
‘Yes.’
‘My dear, it's Harry Richardson here.
From Quindale.
I wonder if I could just pop over.
Have a quick word?’
On the second day, Tim showed Anna the system in the warehouse.
On the third, he explained how to use the computer for reordering.
On the fourth day he was off sick, and Mr Mulgrove asked Anna if she thought she could manage, and to ask Heather on flours and dried fruits if she wasn't sure of anything.
She said she would be fine.
Indeed, to have a whole morning undisturbed by any thoughts profounder than wondering why on earth the people of Woodborough should consume so much tandoori curry powder, while ignoring pesto sauce, was quite luxurious.
But Colonel Richardson came between Anna and the tandoori curry powder; personable, kindly, inflexible Colonel Richardson, who had sat in her insufficiently tidy sitting-room in his beautiful old tweed jacket, and had said to her that she was harming her husband, the community and the Church.
She had explained to him about Flora, thinking that his undoubtedly benevolent heart would be touched.
It was.
Harry Richardson appalled Anna by offering to lend her Flora's school fees, interest-free, for as long as she needed them.
‘Be glad to,’ he said.
Anna sat dumbstruck.
‘Marjorie mistook you,’ Colonel Richardson said.
‘Didn't understand.
Thought it was defiance.
No idea about Flora.
Too bad.
Poor girl.
Frightful places, these great state schools can be.
Such a pity.
Noble experiment, state education.
Like the welfare state.’
Anna said slowly, ‘You are so kind.
But — but I don't think I can accept.’
‘Nonsense.
Who's to know?
You, me, Peter and Marjorie.
Look,’ he said, leaning forward and putting a warm, capable hand on her knee.
‘I know what your financial situation is.
Better than anyone.
No joke.
Don't blame you for earning a bit.
Plucky stuff.
Admire you for it.
But it's out of the question.
Completely, utterly.
Not to be thought of.’
‘I want to do it,’ Anna said.
Colonel Richardson took his hand away.
‘Course you do.
Natural for a mother.
Quite right.
But you're a rector's wife before you're a mother.
Church before children.
Setting an example, if you like.’
‘Oh no,’ Anna said.
He stared.
In the phrase of twenty years before, Anna said, ‘I married the man, not the job.
I'm not an outboard motor, I'm another boat.’
‘Don't follow you.’
‘I am truly grateful to you.
You're a kind, dear man.
But you are so used to an unquestioned independence that you forget how many people don't have it, people who, in human terms, Christian terms even, have just as much right to it as you do.
The Church doesn't understand it either.
Lambeth has no idea in the world what it's like for people like us.
I'm Peter's wife, not an unpaid curate.
And I am Flora's mother, which I rate very highly indeed.
I would rather, please, find her school fees myself.
It is good for all of us, in this beleaguered little rectory, if I do.’
She could see she had made Colonel Richardson very sad indeed.
It was not his way to speak sharply — that was his wife's department — but he could not conceal the fact that he thought Anna was both wrong and behaving badly.
Her remarks about independence were totally incomprehensible to him.
What did she mean?
Good God, if you marry a parson, you marry all that goes with it!
Like marrying a soldier, as Marjorie  had, seventeen moves in twenty-four years of active service and never a bellyache out of her.
She knew the terms even before he'd turned to her, by the water jump at a point-to-point in 1949, and said, ‘I suppose you'd never marry me, would you?’
So Anna should have known, indeed she should.
What was the use, Colonel Richardson asked himself, what was the use of being such a splendid rector's wife all these years, and then chucking the whole lot out of the window, for a pig-headed whim?
‘I suppose,’ he said to Marjorie later, pouring whisky for them both, ‘it's all this women's lib nonsense.
Whatever that may mean.’
‘Too old for that.’
Privately, Marjorie Richardson had decided in favour of the menopause as the culprit, but not for the world would she say such a thing to Harry.
Her own menstrual cycle, including its uncomfortable drawing to a close, had been strictly her own affair.
Some things — love, sex, God, bodily functions — were simply not for discussion.
Am I being defiant, Anna thought now, pushing her metal cage of bottles down the aisle towards her allotted shelves, am I simply cocking a snook at Peter?
At the Church?
Is it because I am consumed with envy when I pass the Woodborough bookshop, and there is Eleanor's newest novel in a special display, and with resentment because I haven't heard from Mary for over a year because she is so busy now, commuting to Brussels being a Euro-lawyer?
Is it because I am forty-two?
Or is it because I am worn out by passivity, by having to accept and bear and endure, and because I am quite clever and resourceful, I have just turned, like the proverbial worm?
If I'm a worm, I'm a fairly angry worm, but then I did not like my interview with Colonel Richardson, and I did not like it because he wasn't angry, he was hurt.
I could have coped with his anger, using mine, but not his pain.
Colonel Richardson's pain is only the first pain to make me feel dreadful  (why, oh why, do women take to guilt like ducks to water?) and most people won't be as nice as he was.
It's only the beginning, this arranging of soy sauce, it's only a start.
I wonder, she said to herself with a sudden lurch of her heart, I wonder if I'm embarking on something I shall not be able to stop?
‘You there?’
Anna turned.
Heather from flours and dried fruits was standing in the gap between two aisles.
She was a small, rat-faced girl with a frizz of dry brown hair and a crucifix round her neck.
('They said to me in the shop,’ she'd said to Anna, ‘they said did I want the one with a little man on or not.
‘Course I did!
The plain ones look ever so bare.’)
‘Yes, of course.’
‘There's a gentleman looking for you.
I thought you were in the warehouse.
I'll send him round.’
‘Thank you —’
A gentleman?
Round the corner came a perfectly strange man, a stocky middle-aged man with wire-rimmed spectacles and a shock of greying brown hair.
He wore a grey tweed jacket and, oh, damn, Anna thought, a dog collar.
Here he comes, sent by the Bishop, at the Richardsons’ instigation, via all those labyrinths of diocesan checking-up they call ministerial review, ho ho, here he comes, the official ticker-off.
He smiled at Anna.
He had a sweet face.
‘Yes?’
Anna said, unhelpfully.
She held a raft of glass jars between them.
‘Mrs Bouverie?’
‘Yes.’
‘I'm so glad,’ he said, ‘I'm so glad.
I was told I'd find you here.’
He looked at her burden.
‘Vegetable ghee.
How extraordinary that such a thing should sell in Woodborough.’
He glanced at her.
‘Mrs Bouverie, I am Daniel Byrne.
I am to be the new Archdeacon here.’
Chapter Five
Daniel Byrne drove Anna home.
He was not, she noticed, a good driver, nor was he at all car-proud.
The back seat was strewn with books and newspapers, and the floor was littered with car-park tickets.
If Laura had ever owned a car, Anna reflected, this is how it would have looked inside, with the addition of old shoes and chocolate wrappers and squashed hats.
Indeed, their own car would probably look like this if left to Anna; but Peter tidied it, because of all the parishioners he gave lifts to.
‘Oo,’ they'd say at the merest smear of mud, ‘you had a pig in here?’
‘I saw your husband,’ Daniel Byrne said.
‘I found him at Church I: nd.
He said I was to talk to you first.
He said you had been harder hit than anyone.’
Anna said nothing.
‘I see,’ said Daniel Byrne.
‘I'm sure you don't.’
‘But I will,’ he said equably, ‘in time.’
Anna looked out of the car window.
The ploughed field they were passing was speckled with brilliant-green shoots.
Damn Peter.
Damn him for dissembling; for pretending to Daniel that he wasn't wounded to the core at being passed over, pretending that it was only Anna who was suffering, as if it were she who could not bear the lack of advancement, of increased prosperity.
She glanced sideways at Daniel's profile.
It looked sturdy and peaceful and good-humoured.
Had Peter implied, or worse even, said, that Anna had rushed impetuously to take a job in a supermarket because anything was better than the prospect of an  unchanged status quo?
Had he — no.
She must stop.
She must not work herself up into a terrible temper on supposition.
‘What are you bursting with?’
Daniel Byrne asked.
Anna was so startled by his perception and directness that she said, ‘I was worrying that you had got the wrong impression, that you —’ She stopped, silenced by loyalty.
He changed gear at precisely the wrong moment and the car bucked and complained.
‘I'm a mass of impressions,’ he said, taking no notice and merely raising his voice a little to be heard above the unhappy engine.
‘I came down from Manchester two days ago, to meet my fellow archdeacons, and the Bishop told me of your husband's application and of course that made me wish to meet him, and to meet you.
I had no idea.’
‘Why should you have?
It's hardly your fault.’
‘That isn't the problem.’
‘No,’ Anna said.
‘Which is why I came to find you.
Why I am driving you home.
Why I asked your husband if we could all three meet for a little when I got you home.’
He swerved without warning to avoid a peaceable bicycle and was hooted at violently by an approaching car.
He threw Anna a smile.
‘If, that is, I do get you home —’
She did not mean to, but she laughed.
The sitting-room at Loxford Rectory was a surprise to Daniel Byrne.
It had been a surprise to Loxford for ten years, previously accustomed, as rural communities are, to modesty and neatness in the pastoral dwelling-house.
It contained the Knole sofa on which St Agatha had reclined in West Kensington (too large for Laura's tiny flat), several lowering pieces of reproduction Jacobean furniture donated by Kitty ('Your father loved it but I can't bear it, it's so threatening’), hundreds of books on shelves made by Peter out of bricks and planks and the unmistakable overlying  detritus of family life.
Anna, making room for Daniel on the sofa, moved a pile of sheet music, several seed catalogues, a jersey of Luke's and Flora's latest piece of chain stitch in which a huge needle glittered.
‘How very nice,’ said Daniel, sitting down.
He looked round him.
‘How comfortable.
Tidiness makes me nervous.’
‘When Peter married me, I was tidy,’ Anna said, recalling her cardigans with a sudden pang; those emblems of an imagined and ordered future.
‘I seem to have slumped, as time's gone on.’
‘Me too,’ Daniel said.
He leaned back among the battered brocade and velvet cushions that the sofa had always owned.
‘I was a monk until I was thirty-five.
One would think that monastic orderliness would be ingrained in one as deep as heart's blood, by thirty-five, but it did not seem so, with me.
Perhaps,’ he said, turning as Peter came in with a tray of tea, ‘perhaps being a monk is bad training for the handling of possessions.
Not having any for fifteen years means I find them quite arbitrary now, impossible to control.
It's as if they have a life of their own.’
Peter put the tea tray down with difficulty on a table already strewn with books and papers.
‘You were —’ he said.
His voice was tight with suppressed curiosity.
‘A Benedictine,’ Daniel said.
‘I decided, when I was thirty-five, that I was more use out than in.
Fifteen years on, I couldn't be sure of that intellectually, but the instinct still says I'm right.
We none of us listen to instinct enough.’
‘Hear, hear,’ Anna said.
She poured tea.
Passing Peter to take a cup to Daniel, she tried to catch his eye, to give him a little loving glance, but his expression was withdrawn, his eyes and thoughts elsewhere.
Daniel watched them both.
He drank his tea.
He noticed how they took chairs at some distance from one another and from him.
He debated, within himself, whether to be oblique or direct with Peter, whose face seemed to him both shuttered and vulnerable.
He would clearly hate to be patronized; he would smell patronage in any apology, in any request for help made out of desire to soothe sore feelings.
Daniel glanced at Anna, upright on her ugly dark chair, her gaze bent on the carpet.
They don't talk, Daniel thought.
They can't.
I smell no honesty here.
He sighed.
He said, ‘May I call you Peter?’
Peter jumped, ‘Of course—’
‘We are brothers in this.’
Anna wanted to say, I don't think Peter is brother material.
That's part of the trouble, part of why he is so lonely, but she just looked at the carpet in silence, at the dark place where Luke had once spilled black coffee.
‘I have never been in rural ministry,’ Daniel said.
‘I suppose I could learn without you, but I would so much rather learn with you.’
‘Of course,’ Peter said again, politely, without warmth.
‘One of the useful things you learn, as a monk,’ Daniel said, putting his empty teacup on the floor by his feet, ‘is how to gauge character and mood without speaking.
I am under no illusion about how difficult my presence here is for you.’
‘Robert Neville will be a great loss to me,’ Peter said rapidly, mentioning the last archdeacon.
‘And I might be a gain,’ Daniel said, ‘if you would let me.’
He glanced at Anna.
Her head was now so bent that her dark hair had swung forwards so as to obscure her expression.
Daniel felt that she was willing Peter to respond, to show himself bruised and in need of comforting, to expose his wound so that it might be healed.
‘Of course,’ Peter said, yet again.
Daniel levered himself out of the sofa and stood up.
He took off his spectacles and polished them thoughtfully with a red snuff-handkerchief.
He seemed to be weighing up what he should say next when Peter exclaimed, ‘It's so hard on Anna.
And the children.
She works too hard in any case, so much parish work, so much —’ He stood up.
‘You should see her vegetables.’
‘I don't mind,’ Anna cried, flinging her hair back from her face.
Peter said, ‘Of course you do.’
She said, ‘I don't mind hard work.
All I mind, all I really mind is —’ She caught Peter's eye and stopped.
Daniel said, ‘May I go and see your church?’
‘Certainly.
Let me show you.’
Daniel put his hand on Peter's arm.
‘Thank you, but no.
I will go alone, if I may.’
He turned to Anna.
‘Thank you for tea.’
She looked up at him.
Her eyes were miserable.
‘And you, for the lift.’
Later she said to Peter, ‘I think he's a lovely man,’ and the moment she had spoken, she knew it was a mistake.
Sister Ignatia led Flora down a clean, polished corridor.
On one side, the corridor was walled, but on the other it was glass, and through it, Flora could see a very orderly garden with a pink blossomed tree in the middle, and a bird bath.
The corridor smelled of polish and Sister Ignatia smelled of cloth and soap.
She wore a short grey habit and behind her glasses, her eyes were as bright and dark as a robin's.
They had left Anna sitting in Sister Ignatia's study, looking at the school prospectus.
Sister Ignatia had said that Flora couldn't know whether she wanted to come or not until she had had a sniff of the place, seen some of the other girls.
‘Convent schools aren't what they were,’ Sister Ignatia had said to Anna, ‘nothing like so enclosed.
I  like to think our academic standard's gone up, and we know what's what in the world.
It wouldn't be much use a modern nun not knowing where to kick a troublesome man, now, would it?’
She led Flora by the hand.
She said, ‘And why aren't you getting on where you are?’
‘I'm different,’ Flora said.
‘I don't know why, I just am.’
Like your mother, Sister Ignatia thought.
She opened a cream-painted door and the smell of school lunch rushed out at them.
‘Nobody'll be concentrating,’ Sister Ignatia said.
‘They never do, after twelve strikes, all thinking of their tummies.
Now, in we go and you'll see the third form.’
She knocked on a second door and opened it to reveal twenty children of about Flora's age at old-fashioned desks with inkwells sunk into the top right-hand corners of the lids.
There was a youngish nun by the blackboard, drawing a map of the River Nile.
Everybody stood up.
‘Good afternoon,’ Sister Ignatia said, ‘good afternoon, Sister Josephine.
This is Flora, girls, this is Flora who may be coming to join us.’
Flora looked down.
Twenty pairs of eyes stared at Flora.
Sister Josephine did, too, and so did Christ, sadly, from his crucifix above the teacher's desk.
‘I know her,’ someone said.
The eyes all swung to the speaker.
‘Her father's a vicar,’ the someone said.
She was small and plump and her hair was tied in bunches like spaniel's ears.
‘Her father's the Rector in our church.’
Flora raised her head.
It was Emma Maxwell, from Snead.
Flora waited, her heart like lead in her chest, for the inevitable reaction to her shameful and laughable parentage.
‘Well now,’ said Sister Ignatia, ‘isn't Flora the lucky one?’
Emma Maxwell thought that actually Flora's luck lay more in having an older brother.
She resolved to tell the others, over lunch, about Luke Bouverie, whose brooding adolescent glamour gave his parents a certain status in the eyes of the parish's girls.
Sister Josephine smiled at Flora.
‘She is, indeed,’ said Sister Josephine, with warmth.
‘We'll leave you now,’ Sister Ignatia said.
‘We've the art room to see, and the music school.
What about a kind goodbye to Flora?’
Amid an obedient chorus, Flora followed Sister Ignatia with a bursting heart.
‘I don't think you'll feel so different here,’ Sister Ignatia said.
‘We're all different in ourselves, but we're all the same family.
Now, whose family could that be?’
Back in the study, Flora turned a beseeching face upon Anna.
Anna had no need to be besought, for she had done a quick sum on the back of her child benefit book, and had worked out that, if Flora could start at St Saviour's in the summer term, she would have earned enough to put down at least £100 towards the first term's fees.
While she waited, she had rehearsed what she considered a dignified little speech for Sister Ignatia, explaining that, for this first term, it would not be possible for her to pay the fees in advance, as was customary, but that she would…
‘If it helps to make up your mind,’ Sister Ignatia said, ‘I've four places a year to offer without fees.
At my discretion.
There are only two such girls in the present third year.
I'd be happy to suggest such a place for Flora.’
Anna said, quite thrown, ‘Oh, but you see, I can pay, and being Protestant —’
‘Please,’ Flora screeched, not comprehending Sister Ignatia's offer but terrified that Anna would somehow bungle her chance, ‘please!’
‘It's at my discretion,’ Sister Ignatia said.
‘How kind, how nice of you —’
‘Talk it over with Flora's father.
Talk it over.
Then telephone me.
I shall reserve a place for Flora from the end of April.’
Flora, heavy with adoration and gratitude, but uncertain of the etiquette involved in hugging nuns, stood and yearned towards Sister Ignatia.
‘I will telephone,’ Anna said.
‘I am so grateful.’
Sister Ignatia put her hand on Flora's head.
‘God bless you.’
Flora closed her eyes in ecstasy.
Clearly quite a different and much more glamorous God than the Loxford one lived at St Saviour's.
Later, while sitting at the kitchen table making a special list of people to help with Easter flowers, and a subsidiary list of those who might be approached to donate Easter lilies, Anna and her conscience had a little tussle.
Anna's conscience said that she must report the whole of her interview at St Saviour's faithfully to Peter, and then they could rejoice together that prayers had been answered, and that Pricewell's could be abandoned.
But Anna found herself wholly disinclined to listen to her conscience.
She discovered that she had no intention of making Sister Ignatia's offer plain to Peter, and no intention of giving up Pricewell's.
Pricewell's, whatever its reality, represented the best taste of independence that Anna could remember since those far-off days in Oxford when Peter was a theology student.
Twenty years was a long time to bear dependence if your spirit craved something stronger and your intelligence rebelled at continual submission to powers who neither, Anna felt, knew or cared how she and Peter lived.
Pricewell's gave Anna that inch or two of dignity she had felt so sorely in need of and that she now felt she could never again surrender.
What Eleanor and Mary took for granted in their lives Anna was just creeping towards, as a novice.
If, she said to herself, writing Marjorie  Richardson and Lady Mayhew and Miss Dunstable down for Easter lilies, if I do everything in the parish that I should do, and I keep the garden going and the meals and the house (sort of) and the translation, then where can be the harm in doing this other undeniably humble little thing that so curiously makes me feel strong and alive?
And if I promise myself that, once Peter has calmed down, I will tell him of Flora's free place, where can be the danger of a little, temporary deception?
She waited.
Her conscience said nothing, it felt as if it were holding its breath.
It was, of course, poor thing, out of practice at making decisions of the kind she had just put to it; it had, Anna considered, been given an easy ride for twenty years.
She put her hands over her ears.
‘That's settled then,’ Anna said loudly, to whoever was listening.
Peter sat in Celia Hooper's sitting-room in Quindale.
Her house was a new one, built of bright reconstituted stone, and her sitting-room was full of blue Dralon armchairs, and occasional tables, each bearing a single china ornament, mostly whimsical animals.
Celia Hooper's husband was a bank manager in Woodborough, and it was he who tended so ferociously the disciplined garden beyond the patio doors.
Celia, who had trained as a physical education instructor, now ran the Loxford parish Guides, a swimming group for the disabled, and was Peter's Deanery Secretary.
She was formidably efficient.
Her minutes were works of precise art.
She believed — and frequently declared — that the rural deaneries were the grassroots of the Church of England.
Peter sat in one of the blue chairs.
At his elbow, a little table bore a cup of coffee and a piece of shortbread on a plate that matched the coffee cup.
Celia Hooper-seated opposite him in just such a chair and situation, so that they resembled two bookends without intervening books — was suggesting that she  should draw up a basic plan for the annual deanery party, which happened at Loxford Rectory after Easter, a get-together for all the priests of the deanery, eight of them, and their wives.
‘If I do the planning, you see,’ Celia said, turning to a clean page in her notebook, ‘that will spare Anna.’
Mindful of the proprieties, Celia was not going to mention Pricewell's.
Peter said quickly, ‘Anna won't mind.
She's so used to it —’
‘I thought perhaps this year, if I just rustle up a few quiches, buy some French bread —’
‘Very kind of you, Celia, but really I think Anna would like to do it.’
‘She has so much on her plate.
We all know that.’
‘No more than usual,’ Peter said loudly.
Celia looked at him.
Her face was full of sympathy.
‘I have no one to talk to,’ Peter said suddenly, without meaning to.
‘I don't think,’ Celia said softly, ‘I don't think you ought to assume that the laity doesn't notice.
Or understand.’
He looked at her, at her neat, gleaming brown bob, at her clear outdoor skin and eyes, her new-looking, well-kept clothes.
He said, ‘Do you know, I sometimes think that the laity are the only people who do understand.’
Celia began to write in her notebook.
‘Quiche, then.
Several varieties.
And some nice mixed salads.
Mustn't forget, must we, that John Jacobs is a vegetarian —’
‘Please,’ Peter said protestingly, thinking of Anna.
‘That's all right,’ Celia said, thinking of her too, but differently, ‘I'll ring Anna.
Don't you worry.’
She gave him a little glance of understanding.
‘You've got enough to worry about.
You leave what you can to me.’
On the way home, filled with an indigestible mixture of relief and regret, Peter observed that there were  removal vans once again outside Loxford Old Rectory.
The new owner — a man on his own, gossip said, a wealthy man-was plainly moving in.
He would of course require a pastoral call even if he did not — and his car did not bode well — look like the kind of man Peter might hope for, as a breath of fresh air on the PCC; as a possible churchwarden in place of old Sir Francis Mayhew who said he'd done fifteen years which was more than enough; or even as a parishioner willing to raise the £25,000 that the diocesan architect had said would have to be spent on Loxford church roof within the next three years.
Peter drove slowly past the gates — the dignified gates through which most of his predecessors had stepped on their way to the church — and, as he did so, the new owner came out of the front door and clearly observed the dawdling and curious car.
Peter pulled up.
He got out of the car and crossed the deep, luxurious gravel of the Loxford Old Rectory drive.
He felt faintly foolish.
The man on the steps was middle-aged and authoritative-looking, and wore well-pressed jeans and a brass-buttoned blazer.
Peter said, ‘This isn't really a visit.
It's plainly no time for that.
I was just passing —’
‘Patrick O'Sullivan,’ the man said, holding out his hand.
He smiled.
‘Peter Bouverie.’
‘I've seen your wife.’
‘Oh?’
‘I'd ask you in —’
‘No, no,’ Peter said, ‘not now.
Just passing.’
‘Lovely place, this,’ Patrick O'Sullivan said.
‘I hope you will be very happy here.’
‘So do I.’
Peter backed away a little.
Two removal men came past him carrying a huge painting shrouded in a blanket.
‘Goodbye,’ Peter said, ‘and welcome.
I mean, welcome to Loxford.’
Patrick O'Sullivan put his hands in his blazer pockets.
He was still smiling.
‘Thanks,’ he said.
Peter got back into his car and started the engine.
That had not been, on reflection, a successful impulse, nor a socially accomplished two minutes.
He thought of his mother-in-law.
‘What,’ Laura had said, on her first visit to Loxford, ‘what!
Put you in that — that kiosk — and expect your parishioners to admire your humility?
Why are you not where you should be?
How can you retain any kind of status in that council house?
I promise you, the village won't think you're one of them because you aren't in the proper rectory.
They'll simply think you haven't any clout.’
Patrick O'Sullivan, standing easily on the steps of Loxford Old Rectory, had looked to Peter a man on first-name terms with clout.
Patrick O'Sullivan went back into his house faintly amused.
He was not conscious of having had any contact with a clergyman since school, where religion had been regarded as an unavoidable mixed dose of discipline, cissiness and mild buffoonery.
In his address, the bishop who had confirmed Patrick and his year had urged compassion in sexual matters upon them, which had decided them all finally that the Church was a refuge for old women, and that Christianity was somehow neutering in its effect.
When he left school, he forgot entirely about the whole business, forgot about it for a couple of decades, forgot until this thin, tired fellow, looking so very much like his old school chaplain, came and hovered in the drive, the epitome, it seemed to Patrick, of the doubting kind of modern Anglican clergyman.
He went into the kitchen where his housekeeper was filling cupboards with pans.
‘I met the Rector!’
Ella Pringle, who was heavy with misgiving about the move from London, merely grunted.
A rector was, in her view, part of the traditional and comic cast list she had expected to find in the country, along with the squire and the village idiot.
‘Looks just as I expected,’ Patrick said, plugging in the kettle.
He sounded pleased.
‘Shall I go to church?’
‘You wouldn't know how to behave in church,’ Ella said from inside her cupboard.
‘I could learn.’
She came out abruptly.
‘Learn?
Whatever for?’
He was looking out of the window at his lovely new garden, at the exquisite magnolia just breaking into its goblet-like, glowing blooms which were, since Monday, also his.
He had never owned a magnolia before nor a view.
He said, ‘Because my life is going to be different here.
It is why I have come.’
Ella thought it was a fad, a passing and Toad-like enthusiasm for something novel.
She had been Patrick's housekeeper for fourteen years, through his brief and disastrous marriage, through his long and complicated liaison with a woman who had left a year ago, telling Ella that there was no point in waiting any longer for Patrick to marry her.
He never would, she said, because he didn't need to.
He only ever did things he needed to do, and someone as economical with their emotions as that was not good lifetime material.
Ella liked having Patrick to herself.
She treated him as if she were his prep-school matron.
When he said he was moving to Loxford to start another life before it was too late, she thought of abandoning him but she did not think it for long.
He was, in any case, very persuasive.
He needed Ella.
He now said, ‘Where's the tea?’
‘Honestly,’ she said, ‘honestly.
We move in seven hours ago and you expect everything to be in order.’
She got up from her knees and made shooing gestures.
‘Get out.
Go into your garden.
Come back in ten minutes, and there'll be tea.’
He went out through the glazed garden door at the back of the hall.
There was a terrace outside, with a  low balustrade and several graceful lead urns filled with early blue pansies — they don't look right, he thought.
Wonder why — and then a great green carpet of lawn, and shrubs and trees, and, way beyond them, the far hills.
He stood and breathed a bit, in and out, deeply.
Then he went across his terrace and down on to his damp spring lawn.
It was a majestic lawn.
It rolled away from the house for a couple of hundred yards, its length deceptively magnified by little outcrops of planting here and there which hid its true limits.
To the right, as he walked down it, he could see nothing but the trees of his own orchard and, beyond them, the decorative ridge of a thatched roof, crowned with a squat brick chimney.
To the left, he could only at first see his own garden, his tennis court, the old wall that screened his vegetables — to eat what one has grown, actually to eat that!— but then, across a low hedge and a fence that needed repair, he found he could see into the garden of the new Rectory, whose impersonal little back windows faced the same way as his own.
He could see grass, and a long dug strip — vegetables, too?— and a few fruit trees.
He could also see a line of washing, which included, he realized to his delight, the clerical undergarments.
He must be the only person in the village with a view, if he chose to take it, of both vest and surplice.
While he looked the back door opened, and a woman came out, calling over her shoulder to someone in the house, as she came.
She wore a swirling dress with something bright wrapped round the waist, and she carried a laundry basket.
Patrick leaned in satisfaction on a fence post.
The Rector's wife.
He watched her.
She went over to the vegetable patch and looked at the earth for a while.
Then she carried the basket to the washing line and unpegged the clothes rapidly, chucking them down in a windblown tangle (Ella folded things as she took them out of the tumble drier.
He would have to train her to a  line.
In his orchard?
He thought of his Jermyn Street shirts blowing in the orchard, with pleasure) and then, for a second or two, she stood quite still, looking down, the back of her hand to her forehead under her dark fringe.
When she stooped and retrieved her basket, and went rapidly back to the house with it, Patrick wished he had said something, that he had called out to her.
He went back to the kitchen.
‘Now I've seen the Rector's wife.
Again, actually.’
‘Thrills and spills,’ Ella said, pouring tea into a mug for him.
‘Now see if you can find the gravedigger.
Good game, this.
Might even keep you quiet for an hour or two.’
Patrick took his tea and went up to the first floor, to the long landing window which looked over the village green.
Smoke rose from several chimneys, straight blue columns in the still air, signs of habitation.
All those cottages had people in them, Patrick realized, people and televisions and plates of fried fish and dogs and Wellington boots at the back door.
He swallowed some tea.
He was charmed by his thoughts, charmed by the look of his new village, like a doll's house with the front enticingly shut.
And there, if he looked hard to the right, was the tower of the church, like a benevolent old watchdog, keeping an eye on things, protective, changeless.
He looked down at his clothes, on an impulse.
They looked wrong, suddenly, too blue, too urban.
He must buy some corduroys.
Chapter Six
Isobel Thompson had been a missionary in West Africa for seventeen years before she became a deacon.
She had loved it.
She had loved the sense of purpose and the freedom and most of the Africans, and she had always supposed that she would stay there all her life, and finally die there, and be buried, like David Livingstone's wife, under a baobab tree.
She prayed steadily, all those seventeen years, for guidance, for confirmation that she was still fulfilling divine purpose, and was only interrupted at last by her mother's voice, demanding in a querulous letter that Isobel should come home and nurse her while she died — as she had been told she soon would — of cancer.
She took five years to do it, five years of remissions and declines and suffering borne with no patience whatever.
She was furious with Isobel for preferring God to any man, and thus denying her the status of grandparenthood, and furious with her husband for dying before her.
She lay in her carefully, fustily feminine bedroom in her little house in Woodborough, and tormented Isobel.
Nothing was right, from her physical misfortune through Isobel's appearance to the strength of her early-morning tea.
Isobel began to feel that her life had been the wrong way round, that Africa had been no training at all, with its comparatively easy, impersonal requirement of Christian love, for these savagely difficult demands for daughterly love.
Praying was ten times as hard as it had ever been in Africa, so was steering clear of hatred, a problem Isobel had never encountered before.
She told herself  that she must confine herself to anger only, but it was easier said than done.
Standing at last in Woodborough parish church — dedicated to St Paul — watching her mother's coffin being lowered on to trestles below the chancel steps, Isobel was so riven with thankfulness she could hardly keep upright.
Her dedication would now be complete, an offering made from a full heart and an intimate knowledge of mental pain.
There was to be no more Africa, however much it beckoned.
Isobel would enter the Church as a deacon, would tackle the domestic problems of Woodborough.
If she had failed to love her mother, she the missionary, what must it be like for people who, without God, had not even got a Christian obligation to try?
Sometimes, in the years that followed, she longed for Africa, like a lost love affair.
Yet she also knew that if she had succumbed to her longing she would not have been satisfied, knowing what she now knew of the terrible difficulties of love.
She also came to see that, as a woman, she understood the psychology of this difficulty of human love better than most of her male colleagues who were often, she considered, almost callous in their disinclination to feel the emotional agonies in which some people laboured, shackled to delinquent children or senile parents or destructive marriages.
You could not just say, Christ will help you bear it.
That was opting out.
You had to show that you understood the suffering, knew the price it exacted, as a fellow human being, before you even thought of bringing Christ into it.
It was such a discussion that had first brought Isobel and Anna together.
The last Archdeacon of Woodborough, a genial and easy man, had invited all the priests of his eight deaneries to a fork supper laid on with great relish by his wife, a woman whose every fibre rejoiced at being a clergy wife.
In the Victorian Woodborough Vicarage, the priests and their wives milled through the ground-floor rooms with plates of  cold chicken and ham, and glasses of encouraging German wine.
The atmosphere was of an end-of-term party given by a headmaster in his study for the prefects.
Anna and Isobel, finding themselves together in front of a bright watercolour of a Cornish harbour painted by Archdeacon Neville on one of his walking holidays, fell into conversation.
It was an easy conversation from the beginning.
After a while, they left the watercolour ('Not a very adventurous subject,’ Isobel said) and found two chairs in a corner.
Isobel, who had told nobody about her mother, found herself telling Anna.
From there, they progressed to the enthralling problem of human and divine love.
Isobel said that, personally, she found the latter much easier, but that she felt that the former was, in every sense, her job.
Anna said, looking round the crowded room whose noise-level had risen considerably with alcohol-released confidence, ‘Do you think most of the men here feel like that?’
‘I do.
And what is more, I think most of them give in.
How much easier and publicly commendable it is to devote yourself to the parish, however demanding, than to a wife having a nervous breakdown at home.’
‘Oh Isobel,’ Anna said.
They looked at each other.
‘You don't even need to be having a nervous breakdown to become a burden to a priest husband, you know.
You simply need to ask to be visible, to be seen as a human being, not an unpaid curate.
That's all the amount of nuisance you have to be to drive a man into the arms of his parish.’
Isobel said, ‘Are you speaking personally?’
Anna felt herself colouring.
She had gone too far.
‘Some husbands,’ she said, pulling herself together, finishing her wine, ‘get very disheartened.
There are so many demands, so little help.
Were you lonely as a missionary?’
‘Oh no,’ Isobel said.
‘Never.
I felt like the nineteenth-century  missionary, Annie Besant, who wrote in her diary on Christmas Day, in a blizzard on a Tibetan mountain surrounded by absolutely untrustworthy tribesmen, ‘Quite safe here with Jesus.’
Africa was wonderful.
It was in every way so much easier than here, but then the love required was simpler, more childlike.
It was, looking back, a kind of holiday at times.’
Anna stood up.
‘Come and see me,’ she said, ‘any time.
Just come.
I could do with a friend.’
Isobel smiled up at her.
‘So could I.’
It was not a friendship Peter understood.
He liked Isobel well enough but she seemed to him to bring, as did most of the other women deacons in the diocese, a fussy, housekeeping approach to Christianity, a domestic preoccupation with women and children and primary schools, that irked him.
She did not, in his view, understand ritual and language, she did not speculate about theology, she used her heart too much without her head.
He could not see why Anna did not find her dull.
But he could not complain of the unsuitability of the friendship between his wife and Isobel, and at times it was extremely useful.
Isobel could be, occasionally, a channel to communicate through, with Anna.
It was obvious now that Isobel should be the person to talk to Anna about this job in Pricewell's.
Isobel objected at first.
‘It seems harmless enough to me.’
‘In itself, of course it is,’ Peter said.
They were in the sitting-room of Isobel's little house, the house she had inherited from her mother.
It looked across the street at one of Woodborough's dental practices, so that people passed the windows all day in various stages of apprehension and relief.
‘The job itself is innocent.
It's the motive, and the effect.’
‘Ah,’ said Isobel.
‘Anna was terribly shaken by Daniel Byrne's  appointment.
She couldn't bear to feel helpless, to be passive.
But there is nothing I can do, we can do.
She has relieved her most understandable feelings by taking this job.’
‘Do you think she is defying you?’
‘Yes,’ said Peter.
‘Oh dear.’
‘And possibly the parish, too.’
‘I don't mind so much about them.’
‘They mind,’ Peter said.
‘I can't go anywhere without falling over references to it.
I've even had a letter from Lady Mayhew who before she realized who it was, found herself asking Anna for the whereabouts of Dijon mustard.’
Isobel said, ‘Bother Lady Mayhew.’
‘She is my parishioner.
I have to live in such a community.
You may think Loxford light years behind Woodborough, but it is my patch, where I live and work, however anachronistic.
I've just got all the apples into the cart, and it looks as if Anna has upset the lot.’
‘Why have you come to me?
Why don't you go to our nice new archdeacon?’
‘I don't know him.
He doesn't know Anna.
He doesn't know this area.
He said he knows nothing of rural ministry.’
‘Typical,’ Isobel said.
‘All right.
I'll try.’
In the Loxford Rectory garden Anna was in tears.
In front of her, close to tears also, stood Luke with his chin thrust out mulishly.
She had taken him out into the garden to show him various easy spring tasks that must be done, and for which she would pay him, and he had refused.
He didn't want to garden and he didn't want her money.
Anna, exhausted by all she was trying to do, plummeted from fury to weeping.
‘Don't you understand, you stupid child!’ she screamed at Luke.
‘Can't you see?
I'm earning to pay  you to help me!
To save your blasted dignity since you think a supermarket beneath you!’
Luke muttered, ‘I don't think that.’
‘What then?
What do you think?’
Luke shuffled.
He put his hands in his jeans pockets and hunched his shoulders.
‘You're making Dad look a fool.
And me.
And Flora.
You're making us look pathetic.’
Anna said tiredly, sniffing, ‘We are pathetic.’
‘Well, you don't have to broadcast it,’ Luke said, gaining courage from her ceasing to shout.
‘You don't have to advertise it, do you?
Other vicars’ families manage, don't they?’
‘We aren't other families.
We are us.’
Luke said in relief, ‘Here's Isobel.’
Anna looked up.
There was Isobel, coming up the path in her fawn mackintosh.
She waved.
Isobel waved back, all smiles, then saw their faces and said, ‘Oh dear.
I thought I heard shouting.’
‘You did.’
‘Will you tell me why?’
‘Luke will,’ Anna said unfairly, turning away and looking at her beautifully dug earth, and thinking how much she would just like to lie down on it and sleep.
Isobel looked at Luke.
He wore an expression of the deepest misery.
‘No,’ Isobel said, ‘you will.
And Luke can correct you if he needs to.’
There was a silence.
Then Luke said, ‘I do want to help.
Just not this way.’
Anna put a hand out to him.
He took it awkwardly.
She said, ‘I'm so sick of being limited, tyrannized.
Whenever I turn to try and get out of the cage, someone is offended or upset, says I'm defying them or humiliating them.
I have a space to occupy on this earth, you know, I have a space with just as much validity to it as yours or Dad's or — or the Archbishop of Canterbury's.
But I don't hedge you about with my objections or complaints, do I?
I don't  criticize you for enterprise or initiative.
Do I?
Do I?’
Tears slid down Luke's face.
He said with difficulty, ‘But you've still got the power —’
Anna dropped his hand.
‘How mistaken you are.’
Luke turned and fled.
Isobel came over to Anna and said, ‘I suppose this is all about Pricewell's.’
‘Of course.’
‘Peter came to see me.’
Anna fumbled about in her pockets for a handkerchief.
‘So this is a little pastoral call to dissuade me.’
‘If it's defiance, yes.’
Anna's eyes, visible over the top of her handkerchief, were enormous.
‘Defiance?’
Isobel said steadily, ‘If you are aiming somehow to shame the Church establishment for what you see as its treatment of clergy families, and you imagine that this might be achieved by humiliating Peter, then yes, defiance.’
Anna blew her nose ferociously.
‘Go away.’
‘So I am somewhere near the truth?’
‘Isobel,’ Anna said.
Her voice was not at all steady.
‘Isobel, would you please stop being a deacon and be a human being for a moment?
If I don't do something, take some action, in our present situation, then I shall not have one atom of strength left to support Peter.
I want to support him, I am doing so, even if he refuses to acknowledge that just now because it's easier for him to bear what has happened if he pretends it is me who is more broken than he.
But I can't just play the pawn any more.
I can't just bear and endure.
And don't,’ she said with sudden vehemence, ‘don't tell me that suffering is part of the Almighty package.’
‘But marriage —’
‘What would you know about marriage?’
Isobel turned and began to walk back towards the  house.
Anna watched her, tense with the impulse to run after her, say sorry, throw her arms round her, make up, be friends again.
Isobel did not turn.
Anna did not move.
Isobel vanished round the house and after a while Anna heard the engine of her little car start up and putter away down the drive.
Ella Pringle only let Luke into the Old Rectory because he said he was the Rector's son.
He had knocked on the back door while she was kneading the first batch of bread dough she had ever made in her life — something to do, she thought crossly, with coming to the country — and she had gone to answer him with floury hands and a frown.
He said could he speak to Mr O'Sullivan and she said no.
He said please, he was Luke Bouverie, he was the Rector's son, and Ella, uncertain of village etiquette, acted out of character on the safe side, and allowed him in.
She left him in the kitchen examining the espresso coffee machine with wonder, while she went to Patrick's office.
Patrick had made it a rule that he was never to be disturbed in the mornings, but that she might bring him urgent interruptions in the afternoon.
Ella was doubtful of Luke's urgency.
She knocked and opened the door and saw Patrick asleep in his wing chair.
Ella considered daytime sleeping decadent.
She said loudly, ‘You have a visitor.’
He woke calmly.
‘I do?’
‘The Rector's son.
Shall I send him in?’
‘Of course!’
A minute later, Luke said diffidently, ‘In here?’
His face came round the door.
‘The Rector's big son, I see.
I thought you might be conker-age.’
Luke came in and looked round him.
‘Wow.’
‘How to run a business at arm's length.’
‘We do computer courses at school —’
‘Would you like tea?’
Patrick said.
The boy's face  looked faintly smeared, as if he had been crying.
But of course, boys that size did not cry.
‘Oh,’ Luke said, his face lighting up.
‘Yeah.
I mean, please —’
Patrick went out to the kitchen.
‘A vast tea,’ he said to Ella.
‘Everything you can think of.
Bunter-style.’
She looked pointedly at the front curve of his new olive-green Shetland jersey.
‘For my guest,’ Patrick said.
‘I see.’
Back in the office, Luke was standing in an attitude of longing in front of Patrick's computer.
‘Suppose you tell me why you've come, and then we'll enjoy ourselves.’
Luke said, going scarlet and looking out of the window, ‘I wondered if, I mean, do you need, I mean, would you have any job you could give me?
Anything, I mean, I don't mind what, logs, digging, you know —’
‘A job.’
Luke nodded.
‘What,’ said Patrick, ‘is the basic industrial wage?’
Luke swallowed.
‘If you're over eighteen, two seventy-five an hour.’
‘And you?’
‘Seventeen,’ Luke said.
Patrick, who was enjoying himself, eyed his visitor.
‘And what experience have you?’
‘I help Mum and stuff —’
‘Yes.’
‘Garden, firewood —’
There was a pause.
Luke spent it wishing he had never come, dreading tea, dreading having to say he didn't mind, that it was quite OK, he quite saw, shouldn't have asked…
‘All right,’ Patrick said.
‘I'll pay you two fifty an hour for as many hours as you can put in these holidays.
Does your mother know you are here?’
Luke gaped.
‘I see.
Then should we ask her?
When we have had tea, I think we should go home together and ask her.
Don't you?’
Luke said, ‘She won't mind —’
‘But I might.
I'm a newcomer here.
Don't know the rules, don't want to tread on any toes.
Now, while we wait for tea how would you like to send a fax to New York?’
‘It's four afternoons a week,’ Kitty Bouverie said down the telephone to Anna.
‘Four, and sometimes five if the owner's busy.’
She sounded full of triumph.
She had combed the shops of Windsor looking for work, and at last had found some.
‘I suppose it's a gift shop really.
Birthday cards and little ashtrays with pictures of the castle on them and necklaces and keyrings.
That sort of thing.’
‘Kitty.
You're so clever!’
‘I know,’ Kitty said, ‘but I'd never have thought of it without you, it just wouldn't have crossed my mind.
The owner's so nice, another widow.
She has a Pekinese.
She wants to open a coffee shop next door.
If she does, I could make cakes for it, couldn't I, and jam —’
‘What about the adding up?’
‘I have a calculator,’ Kitty said proudly, ‘made in Japan.’
‘Oh Kitty, I think it's wonderful.
I'd get Peter, so you could tell him, but he's out —’
‘There's no point telling him, is there?
He'll only sniff.
No, it was you I wanted to tell.
How's Flora?’
‘On the verge of seventh heaven.
St Saviour's next term.
She's practising for Catholicism.
Draws pictures of the Virgin Mary and writes, ‘Our Lady’ underneath —' Anna broke off.
Through the window, she could see Luke coming up the drive accompanied  by a strange man to whom he seemed to be talking animatedly.
She said, ‘Kitty, I think I have to go.
Luke seems to be bringing a visitor.
I'm so pleased for you.
And admiring.
I'll ring you in a day or two.’
‘I'm admiring too,’ Kitty said.
‘I'm so pleased with myself, you can't think.’
The back door opened, and Luke ushered in his companion.
‘Mum, this is Mr O'Sullivan —’
Anna held out her hand.
‘Anna Bouverie.’
‘Yes.
I know.’
‘Welcome to Loxford.’
‘Thank you.’
Anna said, ‘Come through.
Come into the sitting-room.
Luke, put the kettle on.’
‘No.
No thank you.
We are groaning with tea.
Aren't we, Luke?’
Luke looked tremendously happy.
‘It was brilliant.’
Anna looked at them both.
‘I don't understand —’
‘We have just had tea together,’ Patrick said.
‘Luke came to me looking for work, and we sealed the bargain with egg sandwiches.
Now we have come to ask if that's all right.’
Anna said, startled, ‘Yes, of course, what kind of work?’
‘Gardening, logs, that kind of thing.’
Anna looked at Luke.
‘Gardening?’
He blushed.
‘Is he no good?’
‘Oh, I think he's perfectly good.
His goodness seems to depend upon who asks him.’
Luke said hurriedly, ‘I'll go and see to the sitting-room fire.’
When he had gone, Patrick said, ‘Is this all out of order?’
‘Not at all.
It's very kind of you.’
‘I felt I should come and ask you —’
‘Thank you.’
'— but what I really wanted to ask you,’ said Patrick O'Sullivan, putting his hands in his jacket pockets, ‘is what is a woman like you doing in a place like this?’
And then Luke came in and said the fire was fine and that he'd bashed the cushions up a bit, to make it all OK for them.
Woodborough Vicarage was the largest space Daniel Byrne had ever occupied.
In Manchester, he had shared a simple, newish little house with a succession of curates, and he rather thought, pacing his new Victorian Gothic halls, that he would like a whole army of curates with him now.
The last three archdeacons had had sizeable families so that the Vicarage, though impractical to run, had at least been filled.
Yet even though Daniel had spread himself as far as he could, including making himself a primitive chapel out of an east-facing bedroom, there was still a good deal of vicarage left over.
The diocese had found him a housekeeper, a Miss Lambe, who was as small and anxious as a hamster, and who had taken a tiny, remote bedroom as her burrow, and already filled it with crocheted mats and pictures of the Royal Family.
Daniel had explained to her that he liked very simple food that he could eat with one hand, because of his inability to eat without reading, and so, for supper his first night, she had brought him scrambled egg on a piece of toast that she had already cut up into precise and helpful squares.
He thought, eating it, that he must be careful not to be too metaphorical in his instructions, since, in her anxiety to obey him to the letter, she might feed him a diet of unrelieved soup and rice pudding.
Miss Lambe helped him to unpack his books, holding each one with as much reverence as if it had been the Sacrament.
It took for ever.
In the middle, she went away to make tea, and brought it back with  digestive biscuits she had broken into quarters.
‘You will have to get used to my peculiar sense of humour,’ Daniel said.
Miss Lambe blinked at him.
‘I quite like a joke,’ she said bravely.
He pinned a huge map of the diocese on his study wall, and then outlined his own archdeaconry in red.
Eight deaneries lay within it, of which only one — Woodborough itself-had any kind of urban character.
The rest were a maze of villages with names that sounded like the refrain for a pantomime song, villages whose lives were as far removed from those Manchester lives he had known for so long that it was as if they inhabited another planet.
He had wanted this change, not least because he felt that the rural Church was being neglected, that progressive Church thinking was forgetting to take into account that huge section of the population whose rhythms were dictated by quite other influences than urban ones.
He had also felt that, contrary to popular supposition, a dangerous loneliness might afflict priests living and working in rural places, however lovely.
Looking at his map, and thinking of such men — men who were much less resilient than those to whom a more evangelical and dogmatic faith appealed — Daniel Byrne thought of Peter Bouverie.
No doubt, it was for such men as Peter Bouverie that he felt he had been called to come south.
Peter himself, robing in the vestry at Quindale for the last of the special Lent evening services — theme: ‘Can there be change without sacrifice in a Christian world?’— was not thinking of Daniel Byrne.
He was thinking instead of the twenty minutes he had spent at home between a difficult hour persuading the voluntary organist at New End (a retired primary-school headmistress who felt she was being taken for granted) to continue, at least temporarily, and this service of compline at Quindale.
In those twenty minutes, Luke  had told him that he had found part-time employment at the Old Rectory, Anna had told him that his mother had found employment at a Windsor gift shop, and his mother-in-law, Laura, had telephoned to say she had landed three lines in a television commercial for an Irish stout, dressed as a pearly queen.
Peter had heard all this, sitting at the kitchen table with a cup of tea, and a sandwich made for him by Anna to sustain him to the far side of compline.
While he ate and listened, the telephone rang three times on minor parish business and Flora badgered him to read a pious poem she had just written which began:
I love Jesus,
He's my baby brother
I love Mary
She's my Holy Mother.
('Yuk,’ said Luke with vehemence, ‘and you aren't even at St Saviour's yet.’)
Peter noticed that Luke and Flora both looked extremely happy, and that Anna looked desperately tired.
She had said that Isobel had been to see her, and that she, Anna had been horrible to her.
Peter said nothing.
He said nothing for almost the whole of the twenty minutes, until he got up and carried his plate and cup to the sink and then said, as he left the room, ‘I see.
So I am now the only one in the entire family without a job in the real sense.
So you can all do without me.’
Now, in Quindale vestry, putting on his Lenten stole (regarded as unacceptably High Church by some of his deanery) Peter was full of remorse for his petulance.
Yet, at the same time, he could not bear the feeling that, if the career tides were receding from him, then his family's response of withdrawing too, into their own remedies and inevitable independence, might leave him quite beached like an old wreck on the shore.
Celia Hooper's husband, Denis, had fixed up a little mirror for Peter to examine himself in before he emerged into the church.
Peering in it now, he thought: How grudging I look, how pinched, how disappointed.
He straightened up.
I am disappointed, he told himself, and I am quite trapped in it.
I can't think what to do next.
He went quietly out through the little vestry door — ancient, ogee, poignant — into the chancel.
There were seven people waiting for him, the Richardsons, the Hoopers, two parishioners from Snead, and Miss Dunstable from Loxford.
As he passed her, Celia Hooper raised her head and gave him a look of steady encouragement.