

SPRINGING THE TRAP
Northern Ireland
Summer, the following year
8 July
It had started to drizzle, that misty garden-spray drizzle that comes regularly in Northern Ireland.
It had been raining for over three hours, and the hide Duncan lay in was filled with water.
But he lay still, his eyes ever watchful on the white farmhouse that was at the bottom of the valley some two hundred yards away.
The men had arrived at the empty farmhouse fifteen hours earlier, just as dusk was falling.
The first squad had drifted down the hill from the south, making sure that the coast was clear.
The second group arrived in a banged-up old Ford Cortina, which was now hidden in the lean-to barn behind the house.
Duncan had seen nine in total, seven men and two women.
The first he knew that something was up was when one of the first arrivals had suddenly tripped and fallen in the undergrowth, cursing softly as he did so, only a few yards from the hide.
Duncan had already  been there twelve hours, just due for a watch-change, when the IRA gang arrived.
The hide was twelve inches deep, both wide and long enough to fit one man and his equipment in.
Covered with a tarpaulin and mud, supported by thin steel stresses, it could only be discovered by someone actually walking on it.
But, when out in open ground, as Duncan was, the occupant had to lie absolutely still so as to avoid being seen.
The small radio strapped to his hip had an earpiece and small mouth-microphone with which Duncan communicated with his command.
Once Duncan had managed to fire off a report and stop his watch-replacement from stumbling on the terrorists, he had settled down to keep an eye on the gang.
Stiff, wet and hungry, Duncan had hardly moved since their arrival.
All he could do was watch and report back.
Duncan was a member of the 14th INT, a small and select group of SAS members who were responsible for intelligence.
Whereas there were nearly two thousand SAS and SBS members, the 14th INT had no more than a hundred, of which only thirty were field-operational.
They were the ones who went in when all else had failed; they were the élite.
Each member of the team had specific duties within that group, yet was still fully capable of fulfilling all the other roles within the team.
Duncan was number two in his group.
Although his prime responsibility was transport, whether by air, road or sea, he still had to play his part as a full member of the team when it came to surveillance and attack.
The team, five of them, had been watching this farmhouse for two months.
They knew it was used as one of the staging-posts for the IRA, a safe hideaway from where they would launch an attack.
But the team had been caught unawares, their information unreliable.
They hadn't expected the terrorists to turn up for at least another two days.
‘Clear call,’ his team leader's voice came through the earpiece.
Duncan checked the area, his eyes sweeping the terrain without any movement of his head, his ears straining for any sounds from behind.
‘Go,’ he responded, satisfied that no terrorist was near enough to hear him.
‘Change of plan.
We have to get you out.’
‘I'm OK.
It'll be dark in six hours.’
Duncan was puzzled; it wasn't like the SAS to worry about your comfort.
‘Suggest wait till then.’
‘Negative.’
Team Leader wasn't in a discussion mood.
‘Strike force is moving now.
You are not to engage, I repeat, not to engage.’
Duncan lay silent; he was being ordered to keep out of the action.
‘Is that order copied?’ the voice asked again.
‘Copied,’ Duncan answered.
‘Under any circumstances.
I repeat, no action under any circumstances.’
‘Understood.’
He would follow orders, but he didn't understand.
‘Position report.’
‘One man at the front door, hidden in the porch.
One in the bushes to the right, one under the cedar tree on the left.
No known movements to the rear, but probably one or two in the garage.
Women at top right window twenty minutes ago.
Occasional movements in kitchen.
Suggest this is the main area.
All others expected in the house.
No sight of weapons.’
Duncan's report was comprehensive; even in his bewilderment his professionalism was total.
‘Stand by for further.
Report only major changes in status.’
His earpiece went dead.
Six minutes later he saw a small movement on top of the hill opposite.
He couldn't tell, but guessed it was one of the team.
Then he heard the helicopter.
He could tell from the sound that it was an army Lynx, not one of the SAS Augustas.
What was the Army doing there?
A few seconds later there were shouts from the hill opposite, from the top.
He saw an army platoon setting up position and soldiers scattering along the undergrowth.
Then, as the helicopter appeared from the left, swooping down on the farmhouse, a mortar exploded near the garage.
Duncan lay still, confused and wondering why the Army had moved in from the south.
The terrorists would break away, into the woods to the right, and escape back over the border.
He heard single gunshots from the house, followed by the chatter of an automatic.
‘Go now,’ the voice commanded him over the earpiece.
‘North, up the hill and away from the action.’
As Duncan scrambled from the hide, he saw that the helicopter was between him and the farmhouse.
He realized it was shielding him, protecting him from the gunfire.
Duncan ran up the hill, keeping low.
Two minutes later he was over the top and out of danger.
He turned to look into the valley, saw the helicopter break its position and race away as soon as he was safe.
He ran down the hill, towards the small winding road.
As he reached the road, he saw a Range Rover parked in the woods.
It pulled out to meet him, and he climbed in.
He saw that the team were all there.
‘What the fuck's going on?’ he asked his team leader, who was driving.
‘I don't know,’ he replied, gunning the Range Rover down the road.
‘We had them cold.
Sitting targets.
With that lot in, screwing it up in their size twelves, they'll all get away.’
‘Orders, Mark.
I was told to get you out and back to Belfast.’
‘Nothing's that important.
Not when we were about to put that lot away.’
‘You tell me.’
The team leader drove the Range Rover hard, squealing it on its tyres towards the main road.
‘You tell me what can be that important.’
Duncan looked at the men in the back, incongruous in their camouflage as the vehicle hurtled on down the country lane.
He turned forward again.
‘Fuck it.’
The Range Rover came into Belfast and was picked up by an army escort of two personnel-carriers on the outskirts.
The small convoy made its way to the fortified barracks, where the Range Rover went through the gates on its own, the armoured escort returning to duty in the scarred city.
Colonel Carson, the SAS commander, was waiting for Duncan as the Range Rover pulled up.
As Duncan got out, Carson signalled him to follow.
Carson led the way into the small brick and concrete building, along the corridors to the small green-painted interview-room at the rear.
He opened the door and waved Duncan in.
‘Captain Duncan.’
Carson announced Duncan to the man in the room and, once Duncan had entered the room, closed the door on the two men.
The man was sitting behind the single wooden desk that was, in addition to three chairs, the only furniture in the room.
Duncan looked at him, immediately disliking the pin-striped civilian who was obviously responsible for his present situation.
Duncan took off his pack and helmet, put them on the table, a gesture of defiance and annoyance.
‘Kto vi?’
The man spoke to him in Russian.
‘You know who I am.’
‘Izvineetye, ya plokho guvuryu po-roosky.’
The man apologized for his bad Russian.
‘All right, we both know I speak Russian.
What is all this about?’
‘Please sit down.’
Duncan pulled up one of the chairs and sat opposite the man.
‘You've been seconded to my department.
My name is Laurence Woodward, and you will be under my control.’
‘Under whose orders?’
Woodward paused, the dislike now mutual.
‘Until further notice, you are transferred to MI5.
You do know what MI5 is, I presume.’
‘Of course.’
Duncan was taken aback.
‘Well, we agree on something.
Things are looking up.’
Woodward opened the folder that was on the desk and took out a paper.
He glanced through it.
‘I want to know if all this is correct.
You are Mark Duncan, a captain in the 14th INT, based here in Belfast.
You're third-generation Russian, your grandfather escaped during the revolution and came here via Switzerland and France.
You are what used to be called a White Russian.’
‘Wrong.
I'm British.’
‘A technicality.
Please don't interrupt until I've finished.
Some of your family had already emigrated during the last century and set up as moneylenders.
Your family now control Duncan Pharsee Schiller, one of the city's major merchant banks.
You were educated at Gordonstoun, but ducked out of university to take up flying.
You have licences for both rotary and fixed-wing aircraft.
Slightly different from your grandfather.
When he came here from Russia, he was penniless, which is why he became a doorman at the Ritz.
I wonder why he didn't go and work at the bank?’
‘Probably earned more in tips.’
‘Well, your father did.
Join the bank, that is.
And very successfully.
Knighted in 1986, I see.’
‘Just tell me where all this is getting to.’
Woodward put down the sheet.
‘You're fluent in Russian, aren't you?’
Duncan nodded his affirmation.
‘Learnt, I presume, from your family.’
‘I also did a course at Leeds University.’
‘As part of your SAS training.’
‘You don't expect me to go off and spy in Russia, do you?
Your latest secret weapon.’
Duncan laughed at the absurdity of the situation.
‘In this period of glasnost , I thought we'd stopped all that.’
‘More serious than that, I'm afraid.’
‘Then, you think I'm a spy.
How absolutely absurd.
Is that what all —’
‘You do have the privilege of mixing in royal circles.
Prince —‘
Duncan stood up, angrily pushing the chair back.
‘Before we go any further, I want to know what all this is about.‘
‘In good time, in —‘
‘No.
Now.’
Woodward saw that Duncan would go no farther until he had a satisfactory explanation.
‘Whatever is said in this room must stay between us.
You accept that?’
‘For the moment.’
‘You know that the prince and the duchess are due to visit Russia next month.
That's the official state visit.
The prince's aide-de-camp, Victor Oldenburg, is in Russia now, arranging the details of the trip.
During Oldenburg's visit, it was agreed that he and his family would stay at a secluded dacha outside St Petersburg.
I believe it was once the private property of Tsar Nicholas.
I believe you are a good friend of the Oldenburgs.’
‘Yes.’
‘Godfather to one of their children.’
‘Yes.’
‘You are also both of Russian descent.’
‘So are a lot of other people.
It doesn't make us agents.’
Woodward shook his head.
‘Not everything we do comes out of a Len Deighton book, you know.’
‘Then, get to the point.’
‘Victor Oldenburg, or Count Victor Oldenburg and Hess, to give him his full title, has been kidnapped in Russia.’
‘Kidnapped?’
‘Family and all, just disappeared.
Yesterday.
And we want you to go in and find them.’
Both men stared at each other in silence.
Woodward waited for Duncan to absorb the awful truth before he continued.
‘Why?’
Duncan broke the long silence.
‘We don't know.
No ransom notes, nothing.’
‘What're the Russians doing about it?’
‘All they can.
Trouble is, both governments have agreed a total news-blackout on the situation.
For obvious reasons, after all, we don't want to upset this particular cartload of royal apples, do we?’
Duncan ignored the joke.
‘Apart from a few people at the Kremlin and at Number Ten, you and I are the only people who know of the situation.’
Woodward slid the folder across to Duncan.
‘You need to read this,’ he continued.
‘It's as much as we know, or as much as the Russians will tell us.’
Duncan opened the folder and took out the slim report.
He sat down again, skimmed it, then looked up at Woodward.
‘That's all?’
‘I'm afraid so.’
Duncan put the sheet down.
Victor had taken his family on a short private holiday to St Petersburg before attending to his duties as co-ordinator and organizer of the forthcoming state visit.
Accompanying them were two police officers to look after the security arrangements.
One of them was Inspector George Leeming, one of the royal bodyguards.
There was also an American girl who was the interpreter for the two policemen.
After two days, when the family were fishing in the river which  ran through their holiday home, a group of horsemen approached them.
The men had been dressed in traditional Cossack outfits.
They had waved and shouted greetings at the Oldenburg party, who in turn had waved back.
When the group got closer, they broke into a gallop and charged the small party.
Some carried guns and opened fire, the others brandished swords.
Before reinforcements from the police at the dacha could reach the scene, the horsemen had lifted the children and Anna Oldenburg on to their horses to ride double.
A spare mount had been brought and Victor was ordered, under the sharp blade of a Cossack sword, to mount.
The group had then ridden away across the river.
By the time the armed police had arrived, the kidnappers had disappeared with their victims, deep into the forests that surround St Petersburg.
The horses were found three hours later, wandering in the forest.
There were no other clues.
Victor and his kidnappers had disappeared into thin air.
Inspector Leeming was also abducted, and the interpreter.
The other bodyguard was being kept out of sight while the Russians decided what to do.
‘The prime minister has insisted that we are part of the investigation,’ said Woodward, when he saw that Duncan had finished the report.
‘I needn't tell you that that created a howl of protest from the Russians.
They usually like to tidy up their own mess.
He told them the only way we could agree to a news-blackout was if they co-operated with us and gave us a free hand in the investigation.’
Woodward took the folder back from Duncan.
He went on: ‘We had a choice.
Either send in a large team, which would eventually draw attention to itself; use a sleeper, which would only cause its own problems; or call in a loner.
In the end we decided on the loner.
Your advantage is that you know Oldenburg, that you speak Russian, that you're a trained professional and that you have an excellent cover.’
‘Which is?’
‘That as a member of a large merchant-banking family, with some ties to the Soviet Union, you will be over there looking at the country with a view to future investment opportunities.
You will, of course, be working with a Russian.
They've already nominated a Moscow policeman.
Odd chap, half Russian and half Muslim.
But he's one of their top men.
Apparently kidnapping is quite common.
Boosts the black economy, I suppose.
Should you, at any stage, decide you want to work on your own, then you may give this Moscow policeman the slip.
Our code of operation in this case is quite simple.
We're not worried about any potential diplomatic fallout due to your conduct.
Anything goes.
Our only concern is to find the family.’
‘Why're they getting the red-carpet treatment?’
‘Because we want to know if it is in any way connected to the prince's state visit.
Kidnapping some minor foreign royal isn't that important on its own.
But it is when it might be used as a springboard against similar action against a member of our own royal family.’
Instinctively, Duncan knew the man lied.
But now was not the time to rock the boat.
The answers were in Russia, not here in a windowless room in Belfast.
‘When do I leave?’
‘When you're ready.
As befits a member of the millionaire class, we've arranged for your family's private jet to take you to Moscow.
I suggest you fly yourself.
We've already cleared you into Russian airspace.
Your contact will meet you and transfer with you to St Petersburg.
It'll fit in with your cover.’
‘I need to stop over in Geneva.’
‘Why?’
‘My business.
I'll be there for a few hours.’
Geneva was the centre of the terrorist trade, it was the one place where Duncan would find out if there had been any international involvement in the kidnap.
‘Is it necessary?’
‘Yes, I've got to refuel somewhere.’
Woodward paused before answering.
Although he didn't trust people outside the department, this time he knew he had no alternative.
If Duncan failed, then there would be no blame attached to the department.
Woodward and MI5 were covered.
He nodded assent.
‘Time is short on this one,’ he went on.
‘You've got just over a week.
I can't see it being kept quiet from the press for too long.
In truth, it'll probably blow before then.
Oldenburg needs to be back by July the eighteenth.’
‘Has anybody got any ideas?’ asked Duncan.
Woodward shook his head.
‘Not unless the Russians are holding something back.
Ever been to Russia?’
‘No.’
Woodward pushed the folder back across the table.
‘There're maps in there, your contact's name and various diplomatic contacts.’
He took a separate piece of paper from his top pocket and handed it to Duncan.
‘Memorize those names, addresses and numbers.
They're sleepers.
If you get into trouble, or need something fast, get in touch with them.
But don't abuse it.
It could cost them their lives.
The Russians will expect us to use our agents.’
Woodward didn't tell Duncan that he had fought against giving out the names.
As far as he was concerned, the young SAS officer was going into this one alone.
Duncan read through the list, imprinting the information into his memory.
Igor Yakovlev, a school-teacher; Natasha Leonova, a secretary in Gum, the Moscow department store; Oleg Stolypin, a state lawyer Karim Ishkent, a trade union official.
In all there were eleven names, and Duncan had absorbed them all within five minutes.
He handed the sheet back to Woodward.
Woodward tore the paper into little strips, took out a Zippo lighter and burnt them in the ashtray.
‘I don't have to tell you how important these people are, how much at risk you could put them.’
‘No, you don't.’
Duncan's answer was short; he objected to being treated like a child.
He picked up the folder and stood up, the chair scraping noisily against the concrete floor as he pushed it back.
‘Who's my contact if I want to get in touch with you?’
‘Go through the embassy.
You'll find all the names you need in there.’
Woodward pointed to the folder.
‘There'll be a plane waiting to take us back to Northolt.’
Northolt was the West London RAF airport that was used for both military and VIP civil flights.
‘I'd like you at the airport an hour from now, at six.’
‘Is the plane there?’
‘Yes.
Also charts, anything you need for your trip.’
‘I need to flight-plan to Geneva tonight.
I can sort out everything I need there in the morning.
I'll be ready to leave for Moscow by twelve.’
‘Use a phone from here.’
‘No.’
Duncan was certainly not ringing Geneva from anywhere that the phone could be tapped.
Woodward held out an American Express card for Duncan.
‘What's this?’ said Duncan, taking it.
‘For expenses?
Very considerate.’
Woodward ignored the sarcasm.
‘The Americans have offered us all the help we want.
This is your safety-line.
Keep it on you and you'll be tracked by satellite.
Something they cultivated after the Iraqi Gulf War.
We'll know where you are all the time.
If you have a problem, if you need help, burn the card.
It'll trigger off a signal which means you need assistance.’
‘Who're you going to send in?
The cavalry?
And John Wayne?’
He picked up his pack and helmet, turned and left the room.
Outside in the hall, his team leader waited for him.
‘Everything all right?’
‘Yes, Tim,’ Duncan answered his superior.
‘Important enough to fuck up the raid?’
‘I'm afraid so.’
‘They all got away.
Two squaddies were hit, one's critical.‘
The two men looked at each other, the senior officer accepting that Duncan was about to enter a more serious and dangerous assignment, whatever it was.
His was not to ask.
‘I've to get you to the airport once you've changed.
Come on.’
Woodward came out as the two men turned and walked away in step.
He was unhappy.
As far as he was concerned, it was the Russians' mistake and up to them to sort it out.
After years of plotting against the Russians, he found it difficult to trust any of them.
He wouldn't be surprised if it was a KGB plot to uncover his sleepers, to trace Western intelligence in the Soviet Union.
He hoped that Duncan was up to it.
He shook his head.
There was too much riding on one man.
Too much bloody risk.
The Kremlin
Moscow
8 July
Captain Ahmed Alekseevich Myeloski sat on a wooden bench outside the minister's office.
He held a folder in his hands, similar to that which Duncan had.
At forty-six, he headed the Kidnap and Terrorist Bureau arm of the Moscow Police.
He had been a detective since he was twenty-five and, although unorthodox in his methods, had waged a successful war against the criminals he came up against.
Although respected by both his superiors and those who worked for him, Myeloski was never totally trusted.
The product of a mixed marriage, his father had been a Muscovite, his mother an Uzbek Muslim.
He fitted into neither camp.
The Muslims saw him as a Russian, the Russians saw him as a Muslim.
The matter was exacerbated by the recent troubles in provincial republics as Muslim groups fought for their independence.
His colleagues expected him to take sides; he was only interested in doing his job.
To him, there were citizens and there were criminals.
Race, religion, that's just how you were born.
It wasn't how you were made.
The door opened, and his boss, Leonid Yashkin, came out.
He sat next to Myeloski.
‘Well, what do you make of it?’
Yashkin asked him, referring to the contents of the folder.
‘Unreal.
These things don't happen.’
‘It's happened.’
The two men sat in silence for some time, each in his own thoughts.
A woman click-clacked past, her high heels dragging along as she carried a pile of heavy papers into a side-office.
‘Shoes,’ said Yashkin.
‘Shoes?’
‘The same.
I remember when we used to queue for hours to buy shoes.
To buy anything.
But the shoes, they were always plain shoes.
Now we have shoes like that.
With style, cutaway sides, thin straps on the back.
All sorts of shoes from the West.’
‘You mean Taiwan and Hong Kong.’
‘Whichever.
The other day, one of the boys wanted Reeboks.
You know Reeboks?’
‘I have a pair.’
‘You have a pair.
You're lucky.
They're difficult to find.
Anyway, I looked round the shops for some.
You know what I thought?
That we have more shoes, more choice, but still the same queues.
Did you black-market your Reeboks?’
‘Yes, tovarich.’
Yashkin shook his head.
‘Is that the way for a policeman to behave?’
‘I can get your son the Reeboks.
If you want?
They're not too expensive through my contact.’
‘If it saves standing in queues, why not?’
‘You must give me the size,’ said Myeloski.
‘Nine.
Size nine.’
Yashkin turned to his junior officer.
‘I wonder if they knew of the plan.’
‘I think they did.
You don't kidnap a whole family unless it's for a reason.
If it was just for money, then we would have had a ransom demand by now.’
‘Unless they didn't know who…
No.
They knew what they were doing.
And when to strike.’
‘There are many who would not like to see this thing progress.’
‘I agree.
Ahmed Alekseevich, when you meet this Englishman, he will not know the whole story.
It must remain like that.’
The door opened, and a male secretary called them.
The two men rose and went through the minister's anteroom into his main office.
As they entered the room, Myeloski saw the minister standing by his desk.
In his chair he saw the familiar features of the president looking back at him, the face he knew so well from his television set and the newspapers.
He stopped short, surprised to see the man.
Yashkin was also taken aback; he had not expected him, either.
The president got up from the chair and came round the table, his hand outstretched in the Western style.
Myeloski took his hand and shook it.
The same welcome was then extended to Yashkin.
He turned back to Myeloski.
‘I wanted to meet you.
To see the man I must put my faith in.
Your superiors tell me that you are the best officer they have.
That is what we need.
Your best endeavours.
Nothing is being hidden from you.
I want to tell you that personally.
All doors are open to you.
I  know you have to operate in secret, but we must keep it that way.
An office has been prepared for you in the Kremlin.
Is there anything you need?’
‘Not yet, Comrade President,’ Myeloski replied.
‘Apart from some luck.
But I will do my best.
That I promise you.’
‘Good.’
He put his arms on Myeloski's shoulders, leant forward and kissed him on both cheeks.
Then he turned and walked out of a side-door, out of the office.
‘Right, then,’ said the minister.
‘You heard.
Everything is at your disposal.
Keep me informed every day.’
And the two policemen were ushered out of the office and found themselves once again in the hallway.
‘Did you know?’
‘No,’ replied Yashkin.
‘I don't think he liked the crack about luck.’
‘That's all we have at the moment.’
‘We know that.
But outsiders, they think we have a magic formula.
Don't disillusion them.
Any ideas?’
‘Start where it started.
St Petersburg.’
‘The Englishman will be here tomorrow.’
‘That's something I can do without.
Wet-nursing a foreigner.
Still, it gives me time to see if any of my contacts has heard anything.’
‘One of the reasons you were chosen is because you speak English.
From your time in London.’
Myeloski shook his head.
His tour of duty as security officer in the Soviet embassy in London had been a miserable period of his life: He had found the English so dull, preoccupied with strikes, a falling balance of payments and high unemployment.
They were always more interested in their past than in the future.
He smiled to himself.
It was a bit like modern-day Russia since perestroika had been introduced into the Russian culture.
‘When you read his report, you will see that he is of  Russian descent.
He knows the family well.
That will help.
He is also a serving officer in the Army.
Holds a desk job somewhere.
Comes from a rich family.
Very rich.’
‘Another chinless wonder.’
Yashkin looked at him quizzically.
‘Chinless wonder?’
‘English slang.
Means no brains and no balls.
I shall look forward to meeting him,’ he sighed.
The two men walked down the hall.
‘I bet he doesn't have problems getting Reeboks,’ said Yashkin.
‘How soon can you get them?’
Hôtel Le Richemond
Geneva
9 July
Duncan sat on the terrace of the hotel looking out over Lac Leman.
It was a clear hot day, and he watched the fountain in the middle of the lake shoot its single needle-like spout over a hundred feet in the air.
He always stayed at Le Richemond, one of the few hotels still in private hands in Geneva.
Owned by the Armleder family since 1875, the hotel was where his grandfather had first come when he escaped from Russia.
It was here that he had become a doorman before going on to live in England.
As a mark of respect, and in keeping with the tradition of the family, all the Denknetzeyans stayed at Le Richemond.
He remembered the arguments he had had with his father over the years.
He'd once walked out, in a sixteen-year-old child's sulk, on a family dinner-party, and his father had always chided him about it — it had become one of those family memories that everyone always laughs at, always shares.
He smiled, remembered his ambition to have a holiday with his friends instead of with his family.
His father saw it as an act of treachery, his mother silently agreed with everyone as she saw their separate points of view.
Given the choice now, he wished the old holidays could be taken again, that things were not as different as they had become.
His parents were separated, one sister dead from a drug overdose, his younger brother on his way to becoming a merchant banker.
He shook his head.
Now was not the time for reminiscing.
He needed clear thoughts, a positive, not reflective attitude.
He had landed the night before at Geneva airport.
He was used to flying the small Citation twin jet, and it was now parked, refuelled and ready for his journey to Moscow.
Both the prince and Victor Oldenburg had flown in it with him, once to St Moritz for a skiing holiday and once to Gibraltar for an official visit.
As he watched the fountain, he remembered the flight in, over the Jura mountains and along the lake.
It had been a bumpy ride, through the tail end of a thunderstorm.
When he had got to the hotel, he had looked for Carver, but to no avail.
He had been concerned that the message hadn't got through.
Woodward, the MI5 man, had watched him closely at Northolt.
But he'd managed to get to a phone near the toilets in the operations centre.
He'd called Geneva and left a message on Carver's answering machine.
In the morning, when it was time to leave, he had paid at the desk with the American Express card Woodward had given him.
He watched the cashier ring through for a clearance and had been surprised when it was accepted.
Trust the Yanks, always covering the technical points.
He grinned, wondered if they'd charge MI5 when the account arrived on their desk.
It was now eleven in the morning, and Duncan sipped a cappuccino in a cafe at the lakeside.
He was restless, impatient in the knowledge that time was limited.
At the next table, the black African diplomat was  impressing the girl he was with.
She looked Italian, was well dressed and was probably a secretary at the United Nations.
Duncan, with nothing better to do, leant back and listened in on their conversation.
‘I really am sorry I did not call you,’ the smart-suited diplomat urged the girl on, his accent heavy Nigerian.
‘You said you would ring me,’ she chided him.
‘I did.
Many times,’ he lied, ‘but you were never in.
You have other boyfriends, no.
I know this.’
She smiled.
‘Of course not,’ she lied back.
‘But I have been so busy.
I was in Buenos Aires, then London, then I have to go back to New York, on to Montreal and then Frankfurt.
I have only just got back.
And the first thing I do is call you.’
‘Why you call me?’
‘Because I miss you.
I want to take you out, to shop with you, buy you nice presents and have a nice time with you.
Would you like to go shopping?’
She nodded, and he smiled back.
He knew he was on the home straight.
‘But I have to get back to work,’ she said.
‘No problem.
I meet you after work.
What time you finish?’
‘Three o'clock.’
‘OK.
I have a suite here.
Upstairs.
Five hundred and ten.
When you finish, you come to me.
We have a little drink, OK.’
She looked unsure; the cart was going before the horse, the extension to her wardrobe now under threat.
The diplomat eased her fears.
‘Then, when we have had a little early supper and a drink, we go shopping.
I buy you something nice.’
His dirty-intentioned words hit home.
‘OK.
I come here after work.’
She smiled, the deal done.
She rose from the table.
‘I see you later.
Ciao.’
The black man stood up, and the girl departed down  the steps.
He sat down again, took a sip from his drink and leant back.
‘You really are a dirty old man,’ said Duncan.
‘You know what they say.
Once you've had black you never go back.’
The accent was now East End London, the Nigerian one cast aside.
The two men never looked at each other, their conversation a secret between them.
‘What's the problem, Mark?’
Carver asked Duncan.
‘I need to know if there's been any action planned or executed in Russia.’
Maurice Carver was the centre of the terrorist trade.
As ‘Mr Fixit’, he arranged arms, travel, false documents and any other of the paraphernalia that is the currency of modern-day terrorists.
The authorities knew this, but left him alone.
At least this way they could keep an eye on the supply source.
Carver dealt with all the major terrorist and criminal organizations.
If he didn't know about it, it wasn't going to happen.
And he owed Duncan a favour, not once but many times over.
The SAS officer had saved his life during a raid in Northern Ireland, let him escape during a terrorist ambush.
This was the first time Duncan had called in a favour.
‘What sort of action?’
Carver asked.
‘Anything that's out of the ordinary, Maurice.
I don't want to say any more.’
‘I need to know what type.
Different groups do different things.’
‘Kidnapping.
I presume for extortion.’
‘No.
Not that I know of.
Anything else?’
‘Attacks on the royal family.’
‘They're always open to that.
There was some small group of Irish, bloody crackpots, who wanted to do it, but that never got off the ground.
Ever since the Mountbatten thing, they've all been nervous of the publicity.
It turned a lot of their own against them.’
‘What do you know about Russia?’
‘All internal stuff.
No money for the big-time operators.
Kidnapping's the main stuff, but it's all small-time.
There's a lot of brigands; yeah, that's what they call them, live up in the wilds, the forests and steppes.
The authorities can't shift them.
Place is so damn big that they can't find them.
They're pretty well armed — blackmarket stuff stolen from the Army.
I can't help you, son.’
‘Are you lying to me, Carver?’
‘Fuck off.
Come on, I pay my debts, you know that.’
The two men sat in silence, a couple of strangers to any passer-by.
‘How long're you here for?’
‘I'm leaving after this.’
‘I'll see what I can dig up.
Where can I contact you?’
‘British embassy, Moscow.
Leave any messages with George Richardson on the trade desk.
Use the contact-sign ‘Falkland’.’
‘Need any hardware?’
‘No.’
‘Be careful.
The Russians don't like outsiders bringing in their own machinery.’
‘I'll be OK.’
Woodward had cleared Duncan to be armed.
‘The Russians won't dare search you,’ he had said.
‘On this one, we're meant to be working together.’
The young soldier felt reassured when he knew he could take his American Coonan 357 Magnum pistol.
A copy of the Colt handgun, it was one of the most accurate and reliable handguns on the market.
Duncan stood up, left some Swiss francs on the table to pay for his coffee and walked back into the hotel.
Geneva had been a wasted visit and, more important, wasted time.
Duncan picked up his bag and caught a taxi to the airport.
Soviet airspace
41,000 feet
5 p.m.
‘Land of my fathers.’
As the Citation jet crossed into Soviet airspace, above the radio beacon at Myatyalyay where Poland borders with Russia, Duncan thought of his grandfather.
Looking down on the land over seven miles below from the lofty heights where jet streams vaporize behind you, it was hard to imagine the difficulties the old man must have faced.
Grandfather, the youngest son of Count Nikolai Denknetzeyan, was nineteen when the revolution broke out.
He was a cadet at the Imperial Military Academy in Moscow when he heard that the emperor, Tsar Nicholas 11, was under house arrest.
It was March 1917, and the young officer-to-be immediately went north to Petrograd (now St Petersburg) to see if he could be of help to the royal family.
A provisional government had been formed under Alexander Kerensky and the Soviet and was based at the Winter Palace.
By the time Grandfather Ilya Denknetzeyan got to Petrograd, the royal family were under house arrest in the Alexander Palace in Tsarskoye Selo.
He tried to go to see the family, but the palace was surrounded by Bolshevik guards and Russian soldiers.
After spending a futile week there, he returned to Petrograd where he found lodgings.
The revolution was based in Petrograd.
Lenin, Kerensky and the other leaders of the new order all met there.
The streets were busy all the time, great crowds milling around, all day and through the night, as the people of Russia tried to understand what was happening.
After a week in this confusion, and because the inn-keeper, a fervent anti-royalist, suspected that Grandfather  Denknetzeyan was not the commoner he pretended to be, the young cadet decided to return to his family home in Talica, a small farming community between Ekaterinberg and Tobolsk in western Siberia.
He spent the next six months travelling.
With little money in his pocket, and in fear for his life in those troubled times, he crossed the two thousand miles to the east well clear of the main highways and the great railways.
He worked on farms to pay for food and hitched a ride wherever he could.
He saw a Russia that was confused and hungry and hopeful and tired.
Times were changing, and he began to realize that things would never go back as they had once been.
He realized that because he saw the new world in the people's eyes; and if the populace wanted change, then there could be no return to what had been.
All he wanted was to return to his family, to their home in Talica, Villa Destayala.
There, he decided, he would start again with a new life and a new Russia.
When he finally got there, when he walked through the town, he sensed a tension amongst those who saw him.
When he waved or smiled at those he knew, they turned away, as if they didn't know him.
He continued to the outskirts of town and through the gates that led the half-mile to Destayala.
The fields were deserted, no workers in evidence.
Only when he came through the trees and round the small hill that sheltered the house, only then did he see the soldiers who had camped in the house and the grounds.
He pulled back, stayed hidden in the trees.
As he waited for night to fall, he saw no movement in the house of anyone who resembled his father.
Near nightfall he saw his younger sister Katya come out of the kitchens into the yard, saw her empty some slops for the few chickens who scuttled about.
One of the men called her, was rude and irreverent in his gestures and words.
Katya ignored him and returned to the kitchens.
At last, under the cover of a black moonless night, Grandfather Denknetzeyan stole over to the house and peered in through the kitchen window.
He saw Katya and their cook Esmereldi.
Once he had confirmed they were alone, he knocked on the window, startling the two of them.
It was Katya who recognized him first, excitedly letting him into the kitchen, hugging him and kissing his cheeks and his eyes.
Then they were both fearful for him and they took him into the cold scullery, where they hid him from the intruders.
Eventually, when it was safe, Katya joined him.
He demanded to know what she was doing as a kitchen maid, who were the soldiers using their house and where were their parents.
The story she told broke his heart.
The soldiers had come five months earlier.
They had commandeered the farm and the villa in the name of the Ural Soviet.
Their parents were ordered to live in one small room; the rest of the villa was shared by the officers of the new revolutionary army.
Katya had been moved into a small room near the kitchens, which she shared with Esmereldi, and she was told to cook for the soldiers.
The farm produce was now used exclusively to feed the troops.
One night their father had come down to see her.
A group of revolutionary officers had been drinking and were in the room with her, some in a state of undress.
Katya looked away at this point, the shame and embarrassment of that recollection burning in her eyes.
Her brother waited for her to collect herself.
‘It was not my choice,’ she said, ‘but there was nothing I could do.
Or else they would have killed us all, shot us in our beds.
They came most nights.
If I had refused…they threatened they would take our parents’ lives.’
Grandfather Denknetzeyan had put his hand out, held  her hand.
She drew some comfort from him and then continued.
The scene the count saw incensed the old man.
He shouted at the men, came into the room and flailed at them.
They laughed and pushed him around, from one to the other.
Then the officer who had been on the bed with Katya drew his pistol and shot the old man dead.
They had dragged the body of the count from the room and continued where they had left off, their animal lust fuelled by the smell of death and the anguished screams of his sobbing daughter.
Their mother died a month later, heartbroken by the loss of her mate.
She never knew the real reason for the count's death; it was something Katya told no one, not until that moment when her brother had finally returned.
‘Where are they buried?’ he had asked.
‘With the family.
By the chapel.’
It was the family chapel on the north side of the estate.
‘With Esmereldi's help, at night, we managed to bury them both.
They are side by side.’
He put his arm round her, held her as she cried the tears she had wanted to cry since that evil night when their father had been murdered.
When she had calmed down, Grandfather Denknetzeyan took his sister Katya away from Villa Destayala.
They visited the chapel on the north side and said their final farewell to their parents.
As they travelled west, along the same route that the young cadet had come, they met travellers who told them of the horrors of the revolution.
They tried to ascertain news of the tsar and his family, but to no avail.
When they reached Perm, to the north of Ekaterinberg, they came across a White Russian force.
They were about to attack Perm and then go on to rescue the tsar who, rumour had it, was imprisoned in Ekaterinberg.
Grandfather Denknetzeyan joined the Whites in their march on Perm.
Katya, with some other members of the group, continued on to Moscow, where she was to stay with their Aunt Elisaveta.
The brother and sister kissed goodbye, not knowing that they were never to see each other again.
The Whites took Perm and then moved on Ekaterinberg.
But they arrived too late.
The royal family, in the House of Ipatyev, had already been brutally murdered eight days earlier.
There was no trace of the bodies, only a basement room with shuttered windows where Grandfather Denknetzeyan had seen the walls smashed by the bullets of Nagan revolvers.
There were some dry stains of blood, although the room had been washed clean.
Bayonet-marks grazed the floor and walls.
No one could tell how many people had died there, just that people had been killed.
The bullet-holes and bayonet-marks bore testimony to that.
Soon afterwards the Bolsheviks retook Ekaterinberg and the Whites were finally defeated.
The young Denknetzeyan fled to Moscow, once more following the backwoods routes.
When he arrived there, he went to his Aunt Elisaveta's home.
The pretty yellow building now housed over twelve families, a sign of the socialist times.
Of his aunt and Katya there was no sign.
Nobody recollected seeing them.
Aunt Elisaveta had simply disappeared months earlier.
After living as a vagrant for several more months and getting nowhere in his search for Katya, Grandfather Denknetzeyan decided to leave his beloved Russia.
As a soldier under the Whites there was a price on his head; someone would soon discover his true identity.
He left one morning, striking out to the west.
Before he left, he went into the Cathedral of the Assumption, in Cathedral Square within the walls of the Kremlin.
It was a place he visited often, at night, a place where he always felt at peace.
He said his last prayers  there, thought only of Katya and wished her well.
He prayed for God to look after her, to protect her from any undue harm.
Eventually he crossed into Poland, and from there into Switzerland via Germany.
The Great War was over, and Europe was learning to live with itself again.
He had never been close to his son, Mark's father, but had doted on his grandson and had often talked to him of the old Russia.
One night, Grandfather Denknetzeyan sat down and told the story of his escape from Russia to his grandson.
He had never talked of it with anyone else.
He died three months later.
At the funeral Duncan had stood apart from the rest of the family.
His grandfather had never liked his own son, always felt he lacked principle and sensitivity.
Duncan understood why the old man felt like that, but he was Duncan's father and he would always be loyal to him.
After the service, when everyone had gone to the reception at his father's house, Duncan had returned to the fresh brown earth mound and prayed for his grandfather's soul.
He thought of his Katya and wondered if she was still alive, or whether Grandfather Denknetzeyan had now finally been reunited with her again.
He hadn't cried.
It was not in his nature.
Well, if Grandfather Denknetzeyan never got back to Russia, then his grandson had.
Maybe not on a white charger, as the old man had hoped, but in circumstances as strange as anything his grandfather had encountered.
And on wings of steel.
‘Welcome home, Grandfather.
I hope I meet your spirit here.’
The small jet battled against a strong headwind and took nearly an hour and a half to cover the four hundred nautical miles from the Polish border to the Gagarin radio beacon.
Even though the winds were not as strong lower down, Duncan maintained his 41,000 feet altitude so as to save fuel.
All jets burn less fuel the higher they go, and in order to fly non-stop from Geneva to Moscow he sacrificed air speed for fuel economy.
Now, with under a hundred miles to run to Moscow, he crossed the Gagarin beacon and called Air Traffic for descent.
‘Golf Charlie India Tango India is cleared to Flight Level One Hundred, to be level by Ivanovskoy.’
‘Roger,’ replied Duncan as he started his high-speed descent to ten thousand feet.
With sixty-seven miles to run he needed to lose height at nearly three thousand feet a minute.
He set his autopilot for the descent and checked his charts for Moscow's Sheremetyevo Airport.
He was glad that he didn't have along the customary Russian navigator which was the standard requirement for all private flights over Russian airspace.
They were usually minor KGB agents, and the two-thousand-dollar charge was nothing more than a way of increasing the Soviet Union's foreign exchange.
It had left him alone to think about the problems he had to face and how he would overcome them.
Less than a hundred miles away, in the small darkened room, the man at the screen watched the jet descend.
The satellite pictures were clearer than normal, and he had no trouble in tracking the fast-moving aircraft.
He reached for the phone and pressed the ‘call’ button.
The phone was a direct link to the Kremlin.
‘He should be landing in the next half-hour, comrade.’
‘And the policeman?’ a metallic voice came back at him.
‘At the airport.
We've picked up his transmitter.
He won't get away from us.’
‘Call me when they're on their way into Moscow.’
The line clicked off.
The watcher put the receiver down and went back to his screen.
Twenty-five minutes later Duncan descended through the thick-formed low-hanging stratus cloud and landed uneventfully on Sheremetyevo's Runway 23 Left.
He turned off on to the taxiway and followed the green ‘go’ lights to a corner away from the main Terminal One.
As he powered the jet down, a yellow Lada came out of the shadows and towards him.
By the time he had locked off the plane's controls and opened the door, Ahmed Myeloski was out of the Lada and waiting for him by the side of the executive jet.
Duncan climbed out of the jet as Myeloski came forward, hand outstretched.
Duncan took the hand in greeting.
For both men the handshake was warm, the eyes wary.
‘Welcome to Moscow.’
Myeloski spoke in English.
‘Captain Ahmed Alekseevich Myeloski, Moscow Police.
We'll be working together.’
‘Mark Duncan,’ replied Duncan.
‘I'll need some fuel.’
‘I can arrange that later.
I think we should go to my office and then to your hotel.’
‘All right.
But I need to be here when they refuel.’
Duncan, like all good pilots, liked to be present when others took over responsibility for his aircraft.
He turned and took out his suitcase, then locked the door.
‘I know you speak Russian,’ Myeloski said as he waited for the Englishman, ‘but it would be better if we spoke only English.
This way, not everyone will understand us.
Also, if I am not there, some people might have loose tongues if they think you do not understand.’
‘That's fine with me,’ replied Duncan.
‘It's a fancy plane.
Yours?’
‘No.
To a company I'm associated with.’
‘Yes, your bank.
It must belong to them.’
‘Not my bank.
My family.’
Duncan immediately  regretted what he said.
He never liked making excuses for his wealthy background.
Typically English, he thought.
Always bloody guilty.
The Russian smiled.
He still knew how to get under their skin.
They walked towards the car.
Myeloski, for all the seriousness of the situation, had a mischievous streak that was always present.
‘It is only a small car.
In London, I suppose, you only drive big cars.
In Russia, only big cars for big important people.’
‘How big are you?’
Duncan knew that the policeman was trying to annoy him.
Ahmed held his thumb and forefinger together.
‘This big.’
‘That's small.’
Although he pretended to share a joke with the burly captain, Duncan was concerned.
This was an important mission, yet they had sent him a minor police official who seemed to have little standing or influence.
Myeloski sensed the Englishman's nervousness.
‘It would not be good to be noticed.
We do not want them to know we are coming.’
Duncan nodded.
But the Russian saw the look in his eyes.
He knew he had not convinced him.
As Duncan opened the back door to put his suitcase in, Myeloski came round to the passenger side of the car.
‘I can open any door in Russia.’
He took Duncan's suitcase from him and put it on the back seat.
He shut the door.
‘And close them just as quickly.
I have no Rolls-Royce, no Zil.
But where I go I don't need them.
You are here because your people wanted this.
But this is my country.
This is my crime.
I tell you now, you keep up with me.
I won't be waiting for you.‘
This time it was Duncan who was pleased.
Two could play the same game, and the Russian was now riled.
When you don't have money, position matters.
The Lada pulled away from the parked jet and towards a gate at the side.
As it approached, a guard stepped forward and hit a switch.
The gate swung open and the Lada pulled through.
The car joined the evening traffic as it swung south-east towards Moscow.
The two men travelled in silence for some time.
It suited Duncan; it gave him a chance to absorb his new surroundings, to get used to Russia.
The motorway they followed was the M10.
This highway, the main link between Moscow and St Petersburg, is one of the busiest in Russia, and the traffic was heavy even at that time of night.
As well as trying to avoid the numerous pot-holes along the route, not always successfully, Myeloski was not the most accomplished of drivers, being one of those people who were never quite in tune with their machine.
He spent much of the time swerving and cursing other drivers.
Duncan wondered how long he would last in London or New York traffic.
‘I spent many years driving in London, when I was stationed there.’
It was almost as if the Russian had read Duncan's mind.
‘Your traffic is heavier, but not as well mannered.’
At that moment Myeloski lurched to the left to avoid a heavy truck that swung out in front of him.
Duncan said nothing, but remembered the words of a friend who used to have a Lada and Skoda dealership in Putney.
‘Every time I sell one of those things I'm committing a crime against humanity,’ he had told him.
Duncan decided at that moment that if things got really bad he would blitz the Russian with some of the Skoda and Lada jokes that were popular in the West.
They came into Moscow, past the vast Aeroflot Hotel which is still the main watering-hole for tourists.
Duncan was staying at the Savoy Hotel, not far from the Kremlin.
Unlike the big tourist hotels, the Savoy was for favoured and important visitors.
Originally the old  Berlin Hotel, the refurbished and renamed eighty-six-room Savoy offered air-conditioning, videos, direct-dial telephones and much more.
Although it was usually fully booked, Duncan had, with the help of the Foreign Office and probably the Soviet authorities, no problem in getting accommodation.
‘They have given me a special office in the Kremlin.
We will be there soon.’
The traffic was heavier; Myeloski was trapped in the inside lane.
Duncan looked at the people passing by, wondering if he would have been one of them had Grandfather Ilya Denknetzeyan decided not leave Russia.
He searched for any sign of recognition, of familiarity, but there was none.
The long queues outside certain shops surprised him.
‘What're they queuing for?’ he asked.
‘For vodka.
It's all people queue for now.
That and McDonald's.’
He turned to look at Myeloski, peering urgently out of the window as the traffic stacked up and made movement impossible, and knew that he had nothing in common with these people, nothing that could be shared because of his blood.
Then he thought of Victor, of what he and Anna and the kids would be feeling.
And in his silence, in that tooting impatient traffic-jam, for the first time he wondered whether they had been killed.
And suddenly he was impatient.
He knew time was short.
And here he was, stuck with a minor policeman who didn't even have the authority to use the exclusive fast-moving middle lane of the road that was available to important officials.
He began to realize the possibility that he was being taken for a ride, that he was the stooge in a deadly game in which he was not being allowed to play a part.
The traffic moved slowly forward, down the Gorkova and into Red Square from the north.
‘There — the Kremlin,’ said Myeloski proudly.
Duncan looked at it, awed by its size and beauty.
The Kremlin is Moscow's castle, the centre from which the city expanded.
First built in the twelfth century, the Kremlin is ringed with high crenellated walls and crowned with the golden domes of the cathedrals.
It had also been the seat of Soviet government since March 1918.
The Lada came past the Historical Museum in the centre of Red Square and turned right, just before the Lenin Mausoleum, into the Nikolskaya Vorota entrance.
An armed soldier, a member of the Taman guard, flagged them down at the barrier.
Behind him stood another soldier, a KGB trooper, and Duncan saw further guards hidden in the shadows.
It was not a place that was easy to get into, or out of.
Myeloski flashed his pass, and the steel arm was lifted, allowing the car into the parking area by the Arsenal.
In front of him, the young Englishman saw the splendour of the Great Kremlin Palace, the domes of the Church of the Deposition of the Robe and the Cathedral of the Assumption.
The car pulled up opposite the Tsar Cannon, one of the largest cannons ever made.
Weighing over 80,000 pounds, it has a barrel of more than 16 feet and a bore of 890 millimetres.
But the gun had never been fired.
It was as his grandfather had said many times.
‘The Kremlin cannot be described.
It has to be seen, and felt, and only then can you understand the beauty of it and of Russia.’
For a moment, for the first time in his life, he began to realize why his grandfather had never lost his love of Mother Russia, why it had always been in his blood.
But that was the past.
What would he have thought of his beloved Russia now?
The austere and dark side of the future lay in front of him.
The Palace of Congresses, where the powermasters sat.
Built in 1961, it made the rest look like what it was: a museum.
And that is how it  would remain, until such time as the people would be free to worship in their religion and be proud of their centuries-old heritage.
To the left of where they parked, there was the old Senate, itself a beautiful yellow triangular building.
And there was the Praesidium of the Supreme Soviet.
To their right was the massive Arsenal.
It was in here, on the north side of the Kremlin, that Myeloski had been given an office.
Duncan let himself out of the car as Myeloski walked round to him.
‘They have given me…us an office here.
It will be our headquarters.’
‘We won't find anyone while we're sitting at desks.’
‘But we must start somewhere.
We have files to read.
And my secretary will take messages for us.’
He turned and led the way into the Arsenal.
They climbed the steps to the third floor and walked down a darkened corridor on the west side.
The offices were small, and apparatchiks scuttled round between rooms.
At the end, to the north side, the policeman led Duncan into a small suite of offices.
The outer room was empty, but the lights had been left on.
It was obviously the secretary's room.
The office that led off it was larger, with two desks positioned so that they faced each other.
The windows had blinds, which were drawn shut.
Yashkin stood up as they entered.
He came towards Duncan, arm outstretched in welcome.
‘Welcome to the Kremlin.
I am Leonid Igorevich Yashkin, Ahmed Alekseevich's superior officer.‘
Duncan looked round the room.
‘Thank you.
I presume this is where we are to work.’
‘I hope it is all right.’
Yashkin's English was poor, so Duncan answered in Russian.
‘The office is fine.
But we won't find the prince and his family here.’
Yashkin looked at Myeloski for support.
He hadn't  expected to find the Englishman so hostile and direct.
‘I will show him all the information we have.’
Myeloski took over.
‘And then we shall decide what we have to do.’
‘That is how we must do it.
Look for the clues and then chase them.’
Yashkin held out his hand to Duncan.
‘I must have your passport.’
‘Why?’
Duncan was alarmed.
‘To stamp your visa, of course.’
Duncan took out his passport and handed it to the older man, who opened it to the relevant page and stamped it with a small stamper he had with him.
He handed the passport back to Duncan.
‘At least you won't be arrested as an illegal immigrant.
Although some would say more people are trying to get out of Russia than in, these days,’ Yashkin joked.
It was lost on Duncan, who smiled courteously at the police inspector.
Yashkin turned and went to the door, the small stamping machine now back in a small box and in his pocket.
‘I shall return this to the Immigration Department.
Everything you want is at your disposal.
We are as determined as you to find your friends.
But it is a secret matter, which gives us many difficulties.
Which is why you are in a secret office here and not at police headquarters.
But all our resources are there to be used.
It only takes Ahmed or yourself to press the button.
But remember, the more people who know, the more chance there is of it all getting out.
I wish you all the luck.’
Yashkin left the two men in the room, closing the door behind him.
‘Would you like a coffee?
Or something stronger?’
Myeloski asked Duncan.
‘No.
I just want to get on with it.’
Myeloski shrugged and sat at one of the desks.
Duncan sat on the edge of the other desk as the policeman opened a drawer and took out a bottle of  vodka.
He also took out a tumbler, poured himself a short drink and put the bottle away.
He drank some of the vodka before opening another drawer from which he took out a large folder.
He opened the folder and spread its contents across the table.
There were photographs on the top.
He handed some of them to Duncan, who recognized Victor Oldenburg's features.
The other glossies were of the family.
‘I know what they look like.’
His temper was getting the better of him.
Myeloski ignored the outburst.
‘Apart from the family there are photographs of the rest of the party.
There is a personal bodyguard, Inspector George Leeming.’
Duncan held up Leeming's photograph.
‘I know him.’
‘What do you know of him?’
‘That's he's a good man.
Very loyal and devoted to his duties.
You do know he's one of the special police force responsible for the security of our royal family?’
‘And are those his only duties?’
‘Yes.
His prime responsibility is the security of our prince.
He was here, which I presume you know, to clear the visit from a security point of view.’
‘You understand that I have to question everything.’
‘I said he's a good man.
You surely don't think he was involved?’
‘Can you guarantee that he wasn't?’
Duncan stopped.
The policeman was right.
Everyone was a suspect.
‘If we need it, I can get you any information on him, or anyone else, from London.
I don't know his background, apart from the fact that the British police are very careful in how they screen royal and political bodyguards.’
‘Do you know that, or do you presume it?’
‘I presume it.’
‘Then, we must disregard it.
I have already asked for information on all members of the party.
Your embassy has promised it for tomorrow.’
Maybe Myeloski was better than he had previously thought.
Duncan looked through the rest of the pictures.
‘I don't know all the others.’
‘The second picture is of Sergeant Thomas Williams.
He was seconded for this trip as a back-up to Inspector Leeming.
Both men, I am assured by your embassy, are trained with weapons and in unarmed combat.
They were also both armed.’
‘Who's the other girl?’
Duncan held up a photograph of a beautiful auburn-haired woman in her mid-thirties.
The picture was unusual.
Unlike the others, which were basically snapshots, this was one which would have fitted comfortably in any model's portfolio.
It had been taken professionally, in a studio, with all the lights and equipment that top photographers use.
‘That is a picture we found in the holiday dacha.
It was in her bedroom, so we included it.
The others are passport snaps, apart from those of the family.
She was their interpreter.
We have asked your embassy to see if she has any connections that may be of interest to us.
Has she an Irish boyfriend?
This could always be a terrorist attack.’
‘Or a Russian boyfriend?’
‘We have asked for a full investigation.
All this is, of course, a slow process.
Your police cannot be told why we need this information.
And your Foreign Office…’
He shrugged.
‘Like treading on broken glass.’
Myeloski knew that Duncan had not been told the whole truth.
Typical of the British.
Send a man into the field only half-armed with the facts and expect him to do a professional job.
‘The girl is American,’ he continued.
‘Louise Taylor.
From Phoenix, Arizona.
Would…uh?’
‘What?’
‘Would Oldenburg have brought her with him?
As his —‘
‘We leave that to the French.
No, she's not his girlfriend.
And that I can guarantee you.’
‘As a policeman I must —‘
‘Question everything.
I know.’
‘As well as the family, Inspector Leeming and the girl Taylor were also kidnapped.
I don't know why the inspector didn't use his gun.’
‘Probably because, in a crossfire, some of the family could've been killed.’
‘Maybe.’
The two men sat in silence.
Duncan threw the pictures back on to the table.
Myeloski collected them together, then passed the Englishman a set of larger pictures.
‘These are our pictures of the dacha and the gardens.’
He rose from the desk and came round to Duncan's shoulder.
‘That is the dacha itself.
On the eastern outskirts of the Nikolskaya Vorota Forest, near St Petersburg.
An attractive house, used by the State to entertain foreign visitors.
It has security gates and a high wall that runs along the front and side.
There were no high walls to the south, only a fence to separate the grounds from the woods and the river.
No one expected an attack from there.
No one expected an attack.
The wall is there only for privacy from the road.
There, in that picture’— Myeloski took a photograph from the pile and put it on the top —‘they came along that river-bank.
The family were all there, the prince fishing, the others playing on the bank.
Your Inspector Leeming was last seen here, by this tree.
The girl was with the children.’
‘Has nobody any ideas?’
‘No.
Unless it is the brigands.’
Myeloski went back to his desk and sat down.
He drank from the glass, then held it up to Duncan, a gesture indicating an offer of a drink.
Duncan shook his head.
Myeloski continued: ‘It is a common crime.
Kidnapping.
State officials are always under threat, always being kidnapped.
After all, only the Government has the money with which to pay a ransom.
In the West, it's the industrialists who are targets.
Here, state officials.
This  year, in St Petersburg alone, there have been an army colonel, two Communist Party officials, a university teacher and a tax collector kidnapped.
They were all ransomed and returned unharmed.
Even the tax collector.’
Duncan smiled.
‘Who are the brigands?’
‘Wild people.
Criminals who live in the forests and mountains.
The worst are in the east, in Siberia.
They hide in the birch forests and in the Ural Mountains.
Most of them are ex-soldiers, many from the Afghan campaign, who have not settled back into civilian life.
They live as outlaws, raiding the villages and towns for food and clothing, for petrol.
They are all armed, some with the most modern weapons.
I have even heard of some who have helicopters, some say even tanks.’
‘Why doesn't the Army go in after them?’
‘Because they cannot find them.
Have you any idea how big our forests are?
Some are bigger than England and France together.
And the brigands move around, never stay in one place for too long.
But it can't be them.
They're two thousand miles to the east of St Petersburg.
It may well have been local brigands, but we've found no clues.’
‘And there's nothing else?
Nothing?’
Myeloski shook his head.
‘Not even a ransom note.
If we made it public, then they might kill the family.
To protect themselves.
The only strange thing was their outfits.‘
‘Cossack clothing.’
‘Only some wore that.
When the police from the house rushed down and saw them riding away, they say some of them wore military uniform.’
‘The Army?’
‘Old uniforms.
From the First Great War.
And also the Cossack-horseman outfits were traditional, from that period.
Dressed as they would have during the revolution.’
The two men looked at each other quizzically, then Duncan handed the pictures back to the policeman and stood up.
‘When can I go to St Petersburg?’ he asked.
‘Tomorrow morning.’
‘Good.
Why did they come to Moscow first?’
‘Only one day.
They stayed in the hotel you will be in.
I have locked off their suite.
I thought you might want to see it.’
‘There must have been a reason to come here for a day.’
‘They met with the president.
Privately.’
‘Nothing else?’
‘No.
Apart from one visit at night to the Cathedral of the Assumption.’
‘Where's that?’
‘You were just looking at it, when we drove in.’
Myeloski was annoyed by his own cheap joke.
He continued quickly: ‘Here.
In the Kremlin.
We can go there.’
‘I'd like that.’
Duncan had his own reason for wanting to visit the cathedral.
Myeloski stood up.
‘I know that you must wonder if the Soviet authorities have a hand in this kidnapping.
I would, if I were in your shoes.
I have even considered it myself.
I must tell you that I see no advantage to them in this situation.
You would also expect me to say that.
But it is the truth.
We are all in the dark.’
Duncan searched his face, saw the honesty in the eyes.
But, as a soldier, he was trained to be wary.
‘I hear what you say.
But, just as you're a policeman and suspect everyone, so I'm a soldier and don't trust anyone.
I'm here to defend the royal family.
I will do that at whatever cost.‘
‘At least we understand each other.’
Myeloski walked to the door, Duncan behind him.
As the policeman reached to turn off the switch, he said: ‘You are good friends?
You and Count Oldenburg.’
Duncan realized it was the first time Myeloski had mentioned Oldenburg's Russian origins.
‘We were in the Falklands together.
We shared a common danger.’
‘I've never been in a war, but in the police we also have a need for comradeship.
It's not all parking tickets and queue-jumping.
We can eat afterwards.
I'm afraid I can't offer you fish and chips.
But we can get a pizza or a McDonald's.’
‘No, thank you.
I'm trying to get away from all that.’
Myeloski laughed, switched off the light, and the two men walked out of the room.
A small apartment
Chistoprudney Boulevard
Moscow
9 July
9.45 p.m.
General Dmitry Vashinov sat in the curtain-darkened room, the only source of light a red lamp by the bed.
He was naked, apart from his polished calf-length military boots.
He sat astride a ladder-backed wooden chair, his legs splayed out in front of him.
As he watched the young couple make love on the small bed, he lit another cigarette with the lighter that lay on the table beside him.
The two lovers who excited him with their performance were both young KGB officers.
The girl, twenty-two-year-old Vera Kasyanova, was one of the general's favourites.
She had been discovered as a fourteen-year-old Moscow prostitute when she decided to take on the whole of a KGB barrackroom who were in need of relief.
Her sexual appetite and expertise at that early age had endeared her to a senior officer who then enlisted her as an agent.
Since then she had become one of their most successful ‘pillow talk’ operatives.
Her conquests  included black African diplomats, Japanese businessmen, American studs and senior party officials.
On her odd nights off she still managed to keep some of the barracks satisfied.
The young man writhing underneath her was another of Vashinov's unnamed young officers.
They were both totally naked and exuberant in their lovemaking.
The general loved watching her; she was totally insatiable, yet capable of multi-orgasms that lasted as long as she was making love.
He could tell that the young man was near to coming, but would not dare until Vashinov allowed him to.
Vera looked over to Vashinov and grinned.
She knew she had her partner on the verge of an orgasm, but that he would have to work harder at controlling himself.
She leant down and started to lick out his ear, bit his lobes, started to tell him of all the things she had done with other men.
At that point the young man lost control and came, his white juices exploding inside her.
She came at the same time; then, as he lay there, quivering in his spent heat, she rolled off him and on to her knees.
She lifted her buttocks up into the air, taunting Vashinov as he saw the white sperm slide out from inside her.
Vashinov stood up and came to the bed, his penis erect before him.
Like its owner, it was short and stubby, not long like the young man's, but thick, so thick that it was impossible for most women to put their hand round it.
‘Turn over.
Do it,’ he commanded the man.
The young man leant in the same position as Vera; they both now offered their buttocks upwards to Vashinov.
With the cigarette between his lips, he ran his hands over both their bodies, inserting his fingers deep into them.
Vera squealed.
Who, she wondered, would be his choice tonight?
She started to come again as he tried to slide his whole hand deep into her soaked  vagina.
Then he lifted his hand from the young man's buttock and felt under his legs, squeezed his balls gently, then firmer, then hard.
The young man gasped, the pain between his legs searing through him.
Vashinov laughed, and as he brought Vera to a climax with one hand he took his cigarette from his lips with the other and burnt the young officer's left cheek with its glowing end.
Then he threw the cigarette away as the young man started to sob and mounted him, pushing his thick erection deep into his anus.
Vera had started to climax again as she saw Vashinov pump away at the young man, his breathing rapid as he reached towards his orgasm.
The phone rang.
Its shrill jangle shattered the intense silence.
Vashinov tried to continue, but the phone was stubborn, refusing to give up.
He pulled out of the young officer, kicked the sobbing man off the bed, then finally answered the phone.
‘Vashinov.’
It was the old man, Marshka.
The general tried to regulate his breath, tried to speak normally.
‘Yes, Comrade Marshka.’
‘Bring it forward twenty-four hours.’
The old man's voice cut through his sexual heat, brought him straight back to earth.
How the hell did the old man know he was here?
Only his secretary knew of this place.
How did he —?
Marshka's voice cut through him again.
‘Did you hear what I said, Vashinov?’
‘Yes, comrade.
Bring it forward twenty-four hours.’
The line disconnected.
He put the receiver down, looked round the room.
Vera grinned back at him; the young man was still writhing on the floor.
Dammit, thought Vashinov.
How did he know I was here?
And did he know about all this?
‘All right, out!’ he boomed at the others.
‘I have work to do.’
‘Aah,’ said Vera, her night's entertainment suddenly cut short.
She smiled at him as the general hurriedly got  dressed.
Whoever had called him must have been someone very powerful to make the head of the KGB jump like that.
Vashinov suddenly turned towards her, a grin forming on his lips.
‘Ready for some more action, Vera?’
‘Always ready, Comrade General.’
Even in bed she knew her place.
‘Good.
Get dressed.
Look sexy.
I've a little job for you.
And get that wimp out of here before you go, will you?
Send him back to the Army.
I want my officers made of sterner stuff.’
The Cathedral of the Assumption
The Kremlin
Moscow
9 July
9.50 p.m.
The massive Cathedral of the Assumption stands on the north side of Cathedral Square, within the walls of the Kremlin.
Crowned with five gilded domes, the cathedral is probably the most important church in Russia's long and turbulent history.
Duncan and Myeloski entered the cathedral through the copper-plated doors of the south portal.
The spaciousness and grandeur of the interior of the high domed building stopped Duncan inside the door, its beauty awe-inspiring to the young Englishman.
This was, to him, the Russia of his grandfather, the motherland he had so often been told about.
This was where his grandfather had come as a young man, to worship and to be at peace with himself.
It was here that Grandfather Denknetzeyan had spent many hours in deep contemplation while the seeds of revolution were scattered all around him, here that he spent his last  moments in Moscow before setting out on that final and fateful journey to Petrograd.
He saw the old man's face, the half-smile he still remembered so well.
Myeloski stood by his side, unaware of the emotions that raced within his companion.
‘It is magnificent, is it not?’ he said.
‘It was built in 1475 and took only four years to complete.
Only four years.
Now it would take four hundred.‘
It was not Duncan's instinct to share his innermost emotions with Myeloski.
He cleared his mind and went farther into the vast cathedral.
The policeman followed him, and their shoes clattered eerily in the stillness of the now empty cathedral.
‘Was this the only place Oldenburg visited in Moscow?’
‘Yes, apart from the hotel and the president's office.’
‘Was he on his own or with the family?’
‘With his wife.
Also the policeman, Leeming.’
‘I presume this is on the itinerary for the royal tour.’
‘Possibly.’
Myeloski shrugged, but the answer surprised Duncan.
Why else would the Oldenburgs have visited this great cathedral if not to check it for security?
The Englishman walked to the white stone, the patriarch's seat, and sat on a guide's wooden chair next to it.
Even with the few night-lights burning, the cathedral gave an appearance of lightness and spaciousness.
As he looked towards the Iconostasis, the wall that is filled with important and unique icons, he tried to re-create his grandfather's torment, his inner pain and despair.
The cathedral, for all its size, was a place where you could be alone with your own thoughts, with your soul.
He realized he was wasting time; the past could wait, the future was running on a short time-fuse.
He forced his thoughts to Victor.
Why should he come here?
Why make this his only visiting-place in Moscow?
Victor was not an architectural buff.
What did this magnificent cathedral hold for him?
He stood up and turned to Myeloski.
‘Time to go,’ he said.
‘To the hotel.’
The policeman walked to the south portal with him, and the two men left the cathedral to its history.
What Myeloski had not told Duncan was that the Cathedral of the Assumption was where the coronation of Russia's rulers had traditionally taken place, that the last of these great ceremonies was in 1896, when Nicholas was crowned as tsar and became Russia's last Romanov emperor.
The Savoy Hotel
Moscow
9 July
11.20 p.m.
Duncan slung his small case on to the bed and zipped it open.
He had left Myeloski downstairs at the Hermitage Bar, seated on a stool with a Budweiser light beer and vodka chaser.
He was surprised by the Russian's ability to absorb and hold his drink without losing any of his faculties.
They had eaten a snack together before coming to the hotel.
Myeloski had insisted on buying Duncan a pizza at the latest Pizza Hut.
Duncan, not the greatest fan of junk food, had picked at his while the policeman enthusiastically devoured his.
He had then polished off Duncan's leftovers before driving him on to the hotel.
They had agreed to have a final drink after Duncan had unpacked.
He hung a spare suit and some shirts in the wardrobe and put his washing kit in the bathroom.
He plugged in his razor to recharge it and washed his face in the gold-tapped sink.
He then returned to the bedroom and carefully folded his socks, underwear, jeans and other casual wear before putting them in a drawer by the bed.
His actions were deliberate, his trained eye looking for  any bugs that might be hidden in the room.
He didn't expect to find any as the hotel had recently been refurbished and the KGB would have used the latest available technology, burying it in the plasterwork, the heating and the plumbing.
He grinned when he picked up the phone to check the dialling tone.
The small sign beside it proudly stated ‘Direct Dial Telephone’.
Yes, direct to the KGB listening service.
As expected, he found no tell-tale clues that revealed any devices.
He left the room, switching off the light behind him.
He left the television on.
The show was ‘Happy Days’, and the Fonz grinned into the empty room, his hip American coming out in dubbed Russian.
After he had freshened up, Duncan went into the casino and watched some of the players.
One of the croupiers, a blonde girl, beckoned him to join the blackjack table.
He grinned back and shook his head.
Although he enjoyed gambling, this was not a time for such activities; he needed a clear head at all times.
The simple gambling-chamber was quiet.
It had been the first casino in modern Russia, had operated out of a converted bedroom on the second floor.
With bored businessmen and other visitors, it hadn't taken the authorities long to realize that gambling was an important source of foreign currency.
The casino now extended into what had been five bedrooms.
And you could still, as ever, pay with an American Express card.
He remembered the card in his pocket.
His sense of mischief almost prevailed; he wondered how the Americans would have dealt with his losses at the gaming-tables.
Pushing temptation aside, he left the casino and walked into the crowded bar next door.
Myeloski had been joined by a young woman in her early twenties.
She was dressed fashionably, mini-skirted with black high heels and a fawn-coloured high-necked blouse.
At the back, the blouse cut away in a big yawn down to the wide plastic-belted top of her mini-skirt.
Although there were  many attractive women mingling with the tourists and officials in the bar, she stood out as the most desirable of them all.
She listened intently to Myeloski, who was in full flow, as Duncan approached them.
Myeloski turned as he got there.
‘Good, you're back,’ he welcomed.
‘I have your whisky here.
This is Vera.
Russian and very, very beautiful.’
The young KGB girl, who only a short time earlier had been the eager recipient of General Vashinov's favours, smiled at Duncan.
It was an open smile, attractive and willing.
Duncan returned the welcome, with his eyes and his grin.
‘Her English is good,’ Myeloski continued, warning Duncan to ensure he didn't converse in Russian.
‘We were discussing politics.
Don't mock, my friend,’ he warned.
‘All Russians talk of politics.’
‘And what were you discussing?’
‘The good, or bad, of Western influence.’
Myeloski smiled at Vera.
‘She does not believe in Western culture.
She believes in communism, the way it was.
Don't you, Vera?’
‘Sometimes.
There's nothing wrong with it.
Too many people criticize, yet it has given them what they have today.
They should not forget it.’
Her answer was directed at Duncan.
‘Too-much change for the sake of change.
Not always good,’ he replied.
‘You see.’
She turned back to Myeloski.
‘He agrees with me.’
‘You can't argue politics with foreigners,’ sighed the policeman.
‘They always take the easy way out.’
He turned back to his drink, shaking his head in mock despair.
‘What are you doing in Moscow?’ she asked Duncan.
‘Business.’
‘You mean, making money.’
‘Nothing better.
What do you do?’
‘I am a secretary and interpreter.
For Intourist.
I meet many foreigners.’
Behind them, a row was developing at a table between a drunken American and two girls.
The man had asked the girls to go to his room, and they had refused.
He had obviously spent a lot of money on them and he felt cheated.
He was determined to share his viewpoint with everyone else in the room.
The girls got up to leave, and he grabbed one of them by the arm, rough in his treatment.
From nowhere, a Russian bouncer appeared, dinner-jacketed and big.
Before the American could go any farther, the bouncer had grabbed his wrist and forced him to let go of the girl.
The girls hurriedly departed, and the bouncer withdrew as quickly as he had appeared.
The American sat there, mouthed a few more obscenities before sinking into a deep sulk as he nursed his hurt pride.
The room returned to normal, the incident forgotten.
‘Gone are the days when you could buy what you wanted with a pair of Levi jeans and a Jerry Lee Lewis album,’ commented Myeloski.
‘People are too smart now.‘
Duncan looked round the room.
Drink was flowing and voices getting louder.
It was time to bow out.
‘I'm off to bed,’ he announced.
‘Nice to meet you, Vera.
I hope you don't think we're all like that.’
He indicated the slouched American.
He turned to Myeloski.
‘When can I see their suite?’
‘First thing in the morning, before we go to St Petersburg.
I will pick you up at seven o'clock.’
‘See you then.’
Duncan gave them both a farewell smile and left.
The policeman turned back towards the girl; she followed Duncan with her eyes.
Pushkin
Near St Petersburg
9 July
11.40 p.m.
The car, a 1986 Chaika that owed its style as much to the 1958 Cadillac Eldorado as it did to the people's revolution, sped along a country road.
Inside the car, there were five people, the driver and passenger in the front, a girl sandwiched between two burly men in the back.
The girl had a black balaclava over her head, and her hands were handcuffed in front of her.
She wore a simple summer dress of Western origin.
‘How long?’ one of the men in the back asked the driver.
‘We'll be there in half an hour,’ came the reply.
‘Then pull over.
Let's do it now.’
‘You're too eager.
It's not meant to be fun,’ the front-seat passenger joked, the others joining in the dirty insinuating laughter.
The Chaika pulled into a rutted cart-track and stopped.
The doors were flung open as the occupants climbed out, one of them dragging the girl behind him.
The men formed a circle round her; she didn't know where she was in her hooded world.
Then one of them, the driver, came forward and grabbed her dress at the front, just under the neck.
He pulled sharply on the material, tearing it as he did so.
The girl yelped, startled and frightened.
The other men moved in, and between them they tore all her clothes off, an intense frenzy, until she stood in front of them, whimpering naked in nothing more than her flat walking-shoes.
She tried to tear off the balaclava, but it was tied around the neck, so in her shame and fear she attempted to shield her body with her handcuffed arms.
One of the men laughed, a nervous betrayal of his obvious lust.
Three of the men moved closer, the driver stood back and watched.
Then they pushed her, from one man to another, making her stumble as each man greedily explored her body before shoving her on to the next man.
She was passed around the small circle, turned and fondled, from man to man.
Then one of them held her, threw her on to the dry dirt road and started to undo his belt.
‘No,’ commanded the driver.
‘Why not?’ came back the reply.
‘No one will know.’
‘Do you really want to risk that?’
‘It'll be her word against ours, even if she dares to say anything,’ one of the other men argued.
‘No,’ said the driver.
‘We follow orders.
As we were told.
Harm her and we're all dead.
Now, get her back in the car.’
The others looked at him, but knew that he was right.
The man who had sat in the front passenger-seat leant down and grabbed the girl's arm, dragged her through the dirt towards the car and pushed her in.
He climbed in beside her, eagerly rubbing his hands over her body, jostling her in the back seat.
The others laughed and got in.
Then, with a slam of ill-fitting doors, the Chaika drove off towards Pushkin.
The Savoy Hotel
Moscow
9 July
12 a.m.
Vera Kasyanova came out of the lift on the fourth floor.
What she liked about the Savoy was the lack of babushkas, the old women who sat on every floor in all the other hotels and recorded all the movements.
When she had first plied her trade as a child prostitute, she had always been embarrassed by their silent knowing stares.
But as time progressed, and as she became ‘official’ as a member of the KGB, it was always the babushka who averted her gaze and looked away.
Still, she knew she was being watched.
With modern technology, the KGB didn't need the old ladies any more.
In fact they now covered every angle in every room in the hotel.
And that turned her on.
Knowing that she turned the peeping Toms on with her performances — and that they could do nothing about it as they sat there, transfixed by her sex and her flagrant use of it.
As she walked down the corridor, she gave it that bit extra.
She really wanted them to burn tonight, to feel the heat between their legs as they watched the glowing monitors.
She felt good.
She had liked the Englishman, and it was always better when she was attracted to her prey.
She looked for the room and, finding it, knocked on the door.
Almost immediately the door was opened.
She smiled, warm and inviting.
Duncan stood there, naked apart from a towel wrapped round his mid-section.
She had been right.
Under his suit she had sensed a hard fit body.
It was a body shaped not by exercise machines and aerobics gyms, but by hard endeavour and an active life.
In the background she heard the nasal tones of the latest hit television show, ‘Sergeant Bilko’.
‘Can I come in?’ she asked, her smile and body transmitting her availability.
Duncan grinned back at her, then shook his head.
She was perplexed; she had sensed his interest in the bar downstairs.
‘Why not?’
‘Where's Myeloski?’
Duncan asked, ignoring her question.
‘Your friend?
Gone home.’
She didn't say that he had  drunk three more large vodkas before leaving, without even a backward glance at her.
‘I am an interpreter.
If you let me in, I can tell you what Sergeant Bilko is saying.’
‘I'm tired.
I've travelled a long way today.’
He shrugged as he spoke.
Then he shut the door in her face.
Vera didn't like that.
She was about to knock again when she remembered the peeping Toms.
No bonus points for losing face in front of them.
She knew the Englishman's type — no meant no.
Unless they were queer.
She turned and walked back down the hall to the lift.
When she was in the lobby, she went to a phone and called General Vashinov.
But he wasn't in to hear of her failure.
She returned to the bar and was soon the centre of attention.
But, for all her new-found success, she regretted not being with the Englishman.
He had got under her skin, and after half an hour she went home alone, not content with second-best.
By the time she left the hotel Duncan was in bed, the light and television both switched off.
He was annoyed with Myeloski.
The policeman should have known better than to expect Duncan to fall for a cheap trick like that.
But, if that was what he had to expect from the Russian, then that is what he would beware of.
He grinned; at least Myeloski had sent him a beautiful woman and not a dog.
In any other circumstances he would have warmed to her; he had found her especially disturbing.
He switched off from the incident, lay back and analysed the day's events.
He hadn't learnt much.
It was a confusing situation, no real clues, nothing concrete.
Maybe the Russians were screening something from him; he could only presume that they were.
The business with the whore had proved that they were up to no good.
Tomorrow was St Petersburg, and maybe that's where he should have started.
The morning visit to Victor's hotel suite would be a waste of time.
The Russians would have removed any possible clues from the suite by now.
Duncan shut his eyes and was asleep within two minutes.
The nightmare had begun when the phone rang.
It was the same nightmare, Duncan wrapped within the swirling crashing helicopter, flames reaching out to burn him.
Only this time there was no Victor, only the emptiness of his own fear and his own death.
He was instantly awake, the sweat on his face the only reminder of his terrible dream.
He reached for his watch, checked the time.
It was four in the morning.
He sat up, switched on the light and answered the phone.
‘I am sorry to wake you.’
It was Myeloski.
‘But we must leave for St Petersburg immediately.
Something has happened.
I will pick you up in twenty minutes.
Be ready in the lobby.’
Myeloski hung up.
As he swung his legs out of bed, Duncan wondered if this was the next move in the Russian's game.
If it was, he would be ready for him.
Twenty minutes later Duncan was waiting in the lobby.
He had shaved, had a shower and was fresh for another day.
When you were part of the 14th INT, sleep was something you never took for granted.
Myeloski arrived ten minutes later.
He looked terrible as he came up the stairs.
Sleep was something he obviously didn't have under control.
He beckoned Duncan to follow, and the two men left the hotel and got into the Lada parked outside, Duncan putting his bag on the back seat.
Myeloski started the engine, and the car pulled away.
‘The girl, Louise Taylor, has turned up in Pushkin.
It is a town near St Petersburg.’
Myeloski battled with the Lada as he spoke.
‘We must go there.
The local police have her.
Luckily, one of my men intercepted the message and we have kept the news quiet.’
‘Has she said anything?’
‘No one will speak to her until we arrive.
We must use your plane.
We can be there in two hours.’
‘I wanted to see the hotel suite they stayed in.’
‘A waste of time.
There's nothing there.
I'm sorry I spoilt your sleep.’
Duncan was silent.
Maybe the girl hadn't reported back to Myeloski, told him that she had failed to seduce him.
And why didn't the policeman want him to see the suite?
The two men sat in silence all the way to Sheremetyevo Airport.
One to concentrate on his thoughts, the other to concentrate on the flight ahead that was alien to his being.
The journey, at that hour of the morning, took thirty-five minutes.
This time Myeloski broke the speed limit without hesitation.
KGB Headquarters
2 Dzerzhinsky Square
Moscow
10 July
4.50 a.m.
General Vashinov, now fully uniformed, sat at his desk.
Even at this late hour, he wanted personally to ensure that the plan was carried through successfully.
Now that the old man knew of his weakness, Vashinov did not want the project to fail and thereby have the finger of incompetence pointed at him.
He knew Marshka would destroy him as effortlessly  and unthinkingly as shelling peas.
It was not a risk he was likely to take, even if it meant him staying at his desk for the next twenty-four hours.
The phone rang, its soft warble loud in the quiet of the room.
He picked it up.
‘Well?’ he barked into the phone.
‘Like clockwork, Comrade General,’ came the reply.
‘The local police rang our people in St Petersburg.
They wanted to know what to do with her, as a foreigner.
I told them to say we weren't interested.
Our head of bureaux suggested they ring the Foreign Office.
He gave them a number.
The number was, of course, our own.
We told them to contact Captain Ahmed Alekseevich Myeloski.
He is now, with the Englishman, on his way to the airport.
Officially it is a police matter, and they are dealing with it.’
‘Good.’
Vashinov scented success.
‘The girl is under lock and key.
As she will remain until the good captain arrives.’
‘Keep me informed,’ Vashinov instructed his caller.
Then he clicked the line dead with his finger and dialled the president's bedside number.
He heard the sleepy voice answer the phone.
‘There's been a breakthrough, sir,’ he said.
‘We've found one of the party.’
He waited, knowing the president was waking up.
He then told him what had happened.
The president thanked him and told him to keep him in touch with any further developments.
The call was then terminated.
Vashinov never rang Grigory Marshka.
The old man had gone to bed with instructions not to be disturbed, not unless the plan failed.
It was not a call that he would now have to make.
General Vashinov relaxed in his chair.
Things were going smoother than expected.
Pulkovo Airport
St Petersburg
10 July
7 a.m.
It was a strong cross-wind gusting to over thirty knots across the runway when the Citation touched down.
Duncan landed it on the port main wheel with the wing dipped into the strong cross-current.
As the speed bled off, he turned the aircraft on to the runway heading by kicking hard on the right rudder-pedal.
The executive jet settled on its main wheels and braked sharply as the thrust-reverse and spoilers were deployed.
As Duncan taxied off the runway, Myeloski silently breathed a sigh of relief.
Not the greatest of air travellers, the policeman had accepted Duncan's offer to sit up front in the cockpit.
He had been impressed by his companion's expertise, with the way he handled what seemed the most complex manoeuvres with a cool and detached ability.
Duncan had tried to explain what he was doing, but most of it went straight over Myeloski's head.
All he remembered was that they had flown on an invisible road in the sky called Red One from Moscow to St Petersburg at 33,000 feet.
The Englishman, not concerned with fuel-burn on such a short leg, had kept the plane at an altitude where he sacrificed fuel economy for speed.
Myeloski had enjoyed the flight, once they had taken off and the jet had settled into its smooth high-altitude cruise.
That soon changed once the jet had started to descend into its approach and landing into Pulkovo Airport.
The severe turbulence, with the jet bucking up and down as it encountered windshear, had Myeloski wishing he was sitting in the back.
At least out of the small side-windows he would not have seen the effects on the  aircraft of those gusting winds.
But what really unnerved him was the landing.
The plane had dipped wildly down on its left wing and skidded on the runway with only one wheel in contact with the ground.
Eventually Duncan had managed to slew the aircraft round before it settled on all wheels on the runway.
What Myeloski didn't appreciate was that that was how the plane was meant to be landed in such terrible conditions, that he had witnessed a superb piece of flying by a highly trained pilot.
As they taxied in, Myeloski decided he would not comment on what had obviously been a most difficult landing with a lucky outcome.
In Moscow, the screen-watcher was unaware of all this drama and emotion as he tracked the Citation across north-west Russia and into St Petersburg.
He leant back and pushed himself away from the table, sliding backwards on the castors of his typist-style chair.
It was a shift-change, and he watched his colleague take over.
Then he swivelled round to a side-table and started to write his report.
It had been an uneventful night, the bugged policeman doing no more than was expected of him.
But soon that could change, when he got closer to his prey and his detective instincts took over.
That was when the watchers would have to be at their best.
As he wrote, the new shift operator tracked the Citation towards the parking-ramp, his face lit up by the screen in front of him.
What he didn't know was that the secret military satellite launched on the Columbia space shuttle in the summer of 1989 also had the capability of following the Citation.
In Houston, over eight thousand miles away, a similar operative watched a similar screen.
The Americans were beaming in on Duncan's credit-card transmitter, his whereabouts constantly monitored by American and British intelligence.
On the ground, when they had left the parked plane, Myeloski excused himself and went to the men's room.
After he had been sick in the handbasin, which he diligently cleaned up with paper-towels afterwards, he joined Duncan for their drive into St Petersburg.
TAKING THE BAIT
Police interview-rooms
Chaykovskovo Avenue
St Petersburg
8.30 a.m.
Louise Taylor sat in the corner of the room, her legs tucked under her; she rested her chin on her knees.
She was on the small cot bed.
The rest of the room was sparsely decorated and had only two wooden-backed chairs and a small steel-legged table.
The interview-rooms were away from the main police station.
It was where informers and witnesses could be taken in private, away from prying eyes.
It was also where criminals could be questioned, with varying degree, away from the more public places.
Louise Taylor, the girl in the picture that Duncan had been shown the night before, was now dressed in an ill-fitting cheap Russian dress.
It was all that the police could find, from a caretaker's wife, after Louise was discovered, naked and handcuffed, in the Alexander Palace on the north side of Pushkin.
Her body was bruised, from the beatings she had received, and a  balaclava had been placed over her head.
She was found by the caretaker, whimpering and exhausted on the ground floor of the east wing.
The caretaker, an old man and frightened by what he saw, went to his wife who then called the police.
The Pushkin police officers had intended to take her to St Petersburg police station when they discovered she was a foreigner.
On the fifteen-mile drive, they had been instructed over the radio to stop on the outskirts of St Petersburg, where the woman was transferred to an unmarked car.
She was then taken to the police interview-rooms in Chaykovskovo Avenue, the handcuffs were finally removed and then she was left alone.
At seven-thirty an officer brought in a tray with a bowl of semolina mixed with stewed dry fruit.
She devoured it, not having eaten for twenty-four hours, and then stayed on her cot until Duncan and Myeloski arrived.
She looked up as they entered, her eyes tired but wary.
The two men could see that she had been crying, that she was still extremely distressed.
Duncan stood back, against the wall, as Myeloski picked up one of the wooden chairs and pulled it up to the cot.
He sat on the chair, perched forward on the edge.
‘I'm Captain Ahmed Alekseevich Myeloski, Moscow City Police,’ he started, speaking in English.
‘I am here to —‘
‘I'm an American citizen,’ she interrupted.
‘I want to see the ambassador.’
‘Do you have proof that you are American?
Your passport?’
‘You know how they found me.
I didn't have any clothes, let alone a passport.’
She was contemptuous in her reply.
‘When the caretaker found you, you spoke to him in Russian.
Also to the local police.
How do I know you're an American?’
‘Look, I'm not prepared to discuss this with anyone until I know you're who you say you are.
And not until I have someone from the American embassy present.’
Myeloski reached into his pocket and took out his warrant-card.
He showed it to her, but she turned away.
‘I'm English,’ Duncan spoke quietly.
‘I'm here to find the Oldenburgs.
We can either waste time or find the family.’
She swung round, her swollen eyes searching Duncan for the truth.
He realized that she wanted to believe him.
He came forward and took his passport from his top pocket and handed it to her.
She flicked through it, suspicious.
‘Before you say it's a forgery,’ he went on, ‘let me assure you that we are all after the same thing.
The safe return of the Oldenburgs.
And George Leeming.
We already know who you are.
Louise Taylor.
Interpreter.
You're over here to help organize the royal visit.’
The girl looked hard at him, then handed the passport back.
As he put it away, she turned to Myeloski.
‘What do you want to know?’
‘What happened.
Anything that can help.’
He pulled a small tape-recorder out of his pocket and put it on his lap, switching it on as he did so.
‘You were all fishing.
By the river.
Then what happened?’
She stared at Myeloski, still tense from her ordeals.
Then she shut her eyes and took a deep breath, collecting herself.
After a moment, she opened them again.
‘I was with two of the children, the baby and Jemma.
Victor and Anna were fishing; they'd just caught something and were shouting to us.
Then, from across the river, these horsemen appeared, riding along the bank and waving.
They had old clothes on — you know, period stuff.
We thought it was a display for the family; everyone started waving back and cheering.
Then they rode across the river, across the shallow bit.
That's when  George saw the guns they were carrying.
They were modern — automatics, I think.’
‘George?’ asked Myeloski.
‘Inspector Leeming,’ said Duncan, reminding Myeloski of the policeman.
Myeloski nodded, then turned back to the girl.
‘I'm sorry.
Please go on.’
‘He started to shout, warning us.
But it was too late.
The horsemen just charged forward, guns aimed at us.
By the time George got his gun out, they were right there, on us.
I don't know exactly what happened, but they seemed to lean down and grab us, just pull us up on to their horses.
One of the men came straight up to me and grabbed the kids.
I tried to stop him, but he just knocked me down.
Then another man picked me up, swung me in front of him and we rode off.
Victor and George ended up riding a spare horse — I don't know where it came from — and then we went to where they'd come from.
I saw people running down from the house, I heard some shots, but that was all.
Next thing we were in the woods and away.
All I really remember is the kids crying and no one doing anything about it.‘
She stopped, her breath now coming fast.
Myeloski leant forward and put his hand on her arm to comfort her.
She started to sob, slowly at first, then harsher.
It was a sob of relief — she knew she was finally safe; then the cries turned to ones of anguish.
The two men left her to her grief.
Neither spoke; they knew that it was a trauma she had to face.
After nearly five minutes, Louise started to calm down, her breathing slowly becoming shallower and more regular.
‘I need to know more,’ said Myeloski, his voice gentle.
‘To help find them.’
She nodded.
‘I don't know how long we rode for.
I just know we went deeper into the woods.
Then, after quite a while, we came to a small clearing.
There was a truck there, on the road.’
‘What sort of truck?’
‘Military.
Camouflaged.
Sort of truck you carry troops in.’
Duncan and Myeloski looked at each other; things were starting to take a new direction.
‘Did it have any signs on it?’
‘Like what?’
‘Like a red star, or anything that could identify it?’
‘No.’
‘Was it green or blue?’
‘Grey.
Camouflage grey.
Blue grey.’
‘Are you sure?’
Myeloski snapped at her, a dog straining at its lead.
‘Yes.
Grey.’
She was startled by his intensity, with-drawing into herself.
He smiled at her, trying to win her confidence back again.
‘I just wanted to make sure.
Different colours for different services in Russia.
Grey — it isn't used by any of the armed forces, you see.
You said it was on a road.
What sort of road?’
‘Just a track.
In the forest.’
‘A dirt track?’
‘Yes.’
‘But wide enough for a truck?’
‘Yes.’
‘So you got to the truck.
Then what happened?’
‘They put us in the back.
All of us.
I held the children with their mother.
Some of the men climbed in after us and put the cover down on the back, so no one could see us.
They made us all kneel, made us put our heads between our legs and clasp our hands behind.
Then they handcuffed us.
George, at one stage, tried to get up, but one of them hit him over the head with his rifle.
He was knocked out for a time.
We were facing the front of the truck, so we couldn't see the men.
We travelled for a long time.
Because the children were crying, they picked them up and put something in their mouths.
The kids  slept after that, on some sacks in the corner.’
‘But they were all right after that?’ asked Duncan.
Little point in saying he was godfather to one of them.
‘Yes.
We were scared for them, but one of the men said it was a small drug.
They were OK afterwards.’
‘Did the men speak English or Russian?’
Myeloski asked her.
‘They always spoke to us in English.’
‘What sort of English?’
‘Foreign.
It wasn't their natural language.’
‘Did they speak to each other, say anything?’
‘No.
Throughout the whole thing, even when they took us to the palace, nobody said a word.
Not when they were near us anyway.’
‘The palace?’ said Duncan.
Myeloski held up his hand to Duncan to silence him.
‘Tell us what happened after the truck ride.’
‘We drove for a long time.
It must have been an hour or more.
When we stopped, they came and put hoods, woollen knitted ones, over our heads.
I noticed it was dark outside when they opened the back.
I noticed, just when one of them put the hood over me, that they had changed.’
‘How?’
‘Into army clothes.
They had different boots on, modern army ones.
One of them — I didn't see his face — looked like a soldier.’
‘Officer or enlisted?’ asked Duncan.
‘I couldn't tell.
I don't know the difference.
And it was only a glimpse.’
‘They took you out of the truck?’
Myeloski took her back into her sequence.
‘Not straight away.
After maybe another half-hour.
Then they led us into a building and kept us there, all together.‘
‘They took the hoods off?’
‘Yes, but they always left the lights on.’
‘You must've seen the men, then.’
‘No.
They made us stay at one end of the room.
Then they cut small square holes, four of them, in the door opposite, which they kept closed.
They watched us through the holes, and always had two guns pointing directly at us.
We were about — I don't know — fifty feet from the door.
There was nothing we could do.’
‘Did you talk to each other?’
‘Not a lot.
We had to sit with our backs to the wall, facing the door.
Our hands were handcuffed in the front.
We had to keep at least ten feet from each other.
If they came in, with food or to check us over, we always had to put on our hoods first.’
‘You must've discussed what was happening, even in whispers,’ said Duncan.
‘We couldn't.
They always had one child with them, outside the room.
They told us they would kill them if we didn't follow orders.’
She was suddenly angry.
‘What would you have done?
Taken that risk?
Easy when they're not your kids.’
Myeloski interrupted, his tone gentle.
‘You said a palace.
What palace?’
‘The room we were in.
It was big, very ornate.
Like you'd expect in a palace.
But it was run-down, plaster missing, streaks on the walls.
There was no furniture, just sacking for us to sit and sleep on.
Even when we slept, we had to spread out, heads towards feet, always facing the door.’
‘Did you go anywhere else?’
‘No.
Then — I don't know how long we were there — they came and got me, dragged me away from the rest.
I got taken outside, thrown in a car and squashed between two men and driven for quite a while.
Then they stopped, got me out of the car, still with my bloody hood on, and ripped my clothes off.’
She looked defiantly at them both.
‘I don't know why they did it and no, don't even think it, I wasn't raped.
Then they took me to  where the police found me.
Just dragged me into the building, threw me down on the floor, made a lot of noise and left.’
‘Did they say anything, while you were in the car?’
She caught her breath, looked down in her shame.
‘Only that the reason they didn't rape me was because if they were found out they would be killed.
I know that because I heard them.’
There was a silence and then she swore, remembering the fear that had convulsed her.
‘Bastards!‘
‘There was no message to give, nothing about a ransom or anything?’
Myeloski brought her back to the present.
‘Nothing,’ she replied, suddenly washed out.
Myeloski stood up.
‘We will need to go with you to where you were found.’
‘Now?’
‘Yes.
I know you're tired and hungry.
Time isn't on our side.’
‘Can I get a sandwich and a drink at least?’
‘Of course,’ answered Myeloski.
You could sense the urgency in his tone.
There wasn't a lot to go on but, whatever little there was, he didn't want the scent to go cold.
And then he led them out of the small room.
The Kremlin
Moscow
10.30 a.m.
Marshka was late.
When he finally wheeled himself into the Politburo meeting, all the others had arrived.
They knew he was deliberately late.
It was all part of the game that he enjoyed playing.
The president sat at the head of the long mahogany table.
It had been a gift to Tsar Nicholas from Queen  Victoria.
The meeting had not yet opened, and he was in deep conversation with Boris Telskyn, former mayor of Moscow and one of the leading democrats in the Soviet Union.
It had always been the president's strength, the way he managed to keep all the different political factions under control, to keep them talking as the Soviet Union underwent her tremendous social change.
He stopped talking as Marshka entered and wheeled himself into the empty space at the table, at that end farthest, on the right-hand side, from the president.
‘Apologies, comrades,’ he said, ‘but in today's en-lightened consumer age the traffic problem seems to get worse day by day.’
‘Welcome, Grigory Mikhailovich,’ said the president.
He looked round the room, taking his time, being deliberate before he spoke.
‘This meeting has been called because of the urgency of the situation.
There is only one matter on the agenda.’
As the president spoke, Marshka looked round the room.
At eighty-two, he was the oldest there, well over the compulsory age of retirement.
But he knew his position was safe, that no one dared challenge his seat on the Politburo.
General Vashinov sat opposite him, to his left and halfway up the table.
They had carefully avoided eye-contact since the old man had entered.
But they had already spoken that morning, their plans drawn up ready to be activated.
The other twelve members were a mixture of the old and the new.
Since the loss of their monopoly as the ruling party, the communists now accounted for half the Politburo; the rest represented the different parties who now shared power.
Under the president's leadership, there were now more radicals than conservatives.
But, with his perception and wisdom, he had managed to move matters forward in a way where compromise was not a weakness but a strength.
The only odd man out was Marshka.
Yet, because of his knowledge, he had powers  second only to the president.
He was the arch-socialist, the keeper of the past, the living conscience of Lenin and those revolutionary ideals.
‘You have all seen the report from Captain Myeloski.’
Marshka had received it by fax at his dacha, as they all had.
The president waited before going on, to confirm that no one had missed the report.
‘As you can see, there is still no obvious reason as to why they were kidnapped.
No ransom demands, nothing.
The release of the girl is also confusing.
The family were here, with other security representatives, to prepare for the forthcoming royal visit.‘
‘It's a warning,’ said Alexander Alexandrovich Vasily, the youngest of the Politburo members, a writer by profession and the first non-politician on the ruling body.
He had also been a trade union official, once leading a strike of railway workers in 1989.
The president had silenced the vociferous strike-leader by bringing him on to the ruling body.
‘To stop us going ahead with the tour.’
‘Why?’
‘Because it reminds us of our past.
For all this talk of democracy, some still remember the days of the Romanovs.
And they were supported by the British.
I have to say I am amazed to find you have called a special meeting of the Politburo over a simple kidnapping.’
‘Unless there is more, something you couldn't put in the written message.’
Marshka's words hit home, all eyes turned towards the president.
‘Nothing escapes you, my friend,’ replied the president.
He waited before answering, making sure his audience was totally prepared for what was to come.
‘The family, the Oldenburgs, are also descendants of the Romanovs.’
The disbelief round the table was sudden; it was the last thing they expected to hear.
The gasps of shock  built into a cacophony of questions.
The president raised his hand to silence them before going on.
‘You can see now why this matter is so important.’
‘Did we know they were Romanovs?
Before they were kidnapped?’ asked Vasily, leading the pack once more.
‘No,’ lied the president.
‘Then, the British got us into the mess.’
‘That isn't the point.
What is important is determining why they were here, and who kidnapped them.’
‘Call in the KGB?’ asked Vasily.
‘Too big a risk.
The less people who know, the better.
The last thing we want to do is broadcast this information.’
‘What does the KGB think?’
Marshka asked.
‘Do they think it's too big a risk?’
They all looked at the president, and then at General Vashinov.
The old man was again openly questioning the leadership.
But the president was quiet.
The KGB would have to sort itself out.
Vashinov's answer was simple and direct.
‘There's no point in us getting involved at present, although we are closely monitoring the situation.
The policeman is doing the best he can, under impossible conditions.
Anyway, where would we start?
There're no real clues.
Too many investigators would all fall over themselves in the confusion.
Let the policeman go on, as he is, until he finds something which we can follow up.
Until then, we must wait and watch for something to turn up.’
Vashinov sat back, his viewpoint terminated.
He looked straight at Marshka; it was a look that could only be recognized by the others as defiant.
Marshka shrugged and looked down at the report in front of him.
He was pleased.
It was going as they had planned.
‘Does that answer your question, Grigory Mikhailovich?’ asked the president.
Marshka nodded, his gaze held in front of him.
‘I agree with the KGB,’ the president went on.
‘We  must sit and wait.
And ensure that the news-blackout remains.’
His words were leaden, heavy on the room, as truth often is.
‘Do you agree with that, Grigory Mikhailovich?’ asked Vasily of the old man.
Marshka looked round the table.
‘I agree that we do nothing.
For the moment anyway.’
The old man turned his wheelchair and left the room.
The door was opened for him by a secretary who sat alone in a corner.
As his driver took charge of the wheelchair in the hall, Marshka looked behind him and noted with satisfaction that the meeting was already breaking up.
The road to Pushkin
11 a.m.
Myeloski struggled with the Lada, making slow time even though the traffic was light and the road clear.
It was an unmarked car and it now carried the three of them towards Pushkin.
Louise Taylor was asleep in the back, a half-eaten sandwich, made of chorny bread and salad, still in her hand.
She had changed into some clothes brought for her by a clerk who had been sent out with a handful of roubles to a nearby shop.
The car smelt of fish.
Myeloski, not having had his customary oatmeal porridge for breakfast, had stopped at a shop to buy some vobla, a dried Caspian roach.
He had returned to the car, after having pushed his way to the front of the queue shamelessly brandishing his police warrant-card, with the fish in a rolled-up newspaper.
They had then rolled off towards Pushkin with Myeloski eating the vobla out of an old copy of Izvestia which was unrolled on his lap.
Duncan wasn't too concerned because he soon realized that there was little  difference in the policeman's driving whether he used one hand or two.
The girl in the back was too exhausted to worry anyway.
As he sat there, he though about the interview, about the girl's story.
‘You seemed surprised,’ he said to Myeloski, ‘about the army truck being grey.‘
‘It was nothing.
Only that it wasn't the Army.
We have no grey colours in the armed forces.
It was a private vehicle, painted to look like the Army.
That was all.’
Duncan didn't believe him.
But there was nothing to be gained by challenging him now.
He remembered the girl Vera, and how Myeloski had tried to set him up.
He probably wasn't a policeman anyway, more likely a member of the KGB.
Duncan closed his eyes, settled back.
His instincts, honed over the years as he lived continuously on the threshold of danger, warned him that things were about to change.
Soon something would open up and give him a path to follow.
Until then, he, too, would wait.
They arrived half an hour later.
Pushkin, named after the Russian poet who studied there, was once the prettiest town in Russia.
In pre-revolution times it was known as Tsarskoye Selo, which is ‘Royal Village’ in Russian.
It had been the summer home of the Russian monarchy since 1716 and housed some of the greatest imperial palaces and parks in Russian history.
It was where the court gathered in summer, and those who followed royalty built many great houses in Tsarskoye Selo.
After the revolution, the town was shortly renamed Detskoye Selo ('Children's Village') and many of the great houses were turned into sanatoria for children.
During the Second World War, the Germans destroyed the town.
Although the art treasures had long  since been taken to Moscow, many of the palaces were in ruins after the fearful fighting between the Russians and the Germans.
With the Germans finally driven out, some restoration work was undertaken.
But money was short and other priorities more important.
In this climate, it was only within these last few years that serious restoration work was initiated.
The result is that most of the great palaces are only partly restored, the parks only just beginning to take shape again.
Most of the restoration has been on the exterior of the buildings; most of the interiors are still as they were the day the Germans were defeated.
As they drove along the wide boulevards, Myeloski was expansive in his description of the history of the town.
It was the first time he had been there, but he had learnt about the town from the captain in charge of the St Petersburg interview-rooms.
Duncan half-listened.
In his mind he saw his grand-father; he must have visited here as a young man.
He couldn't recall the name, but the old man had often talked about a magical place where the family stayed in the summer months, a home that was part of the Romanov court.
He sensed it was here; this must have been the place.
He suddenly wished his grandfather was alive; how he would have enjoyed showing him all this, listening to the old man and reliving it as it must have been.
Louise was still asleep in the back, her exhaustion now complete.
They came off the St Petersburg road and into Boulevard Vasenko.
The Alexander Palace, yellow and white in its beauty, was on the left, and Myeloski turned the car into the great driveway at the front of the palace.
He parked by the entrance as a steward came up to them, signalling them to park elsewhere.
Myeloski got out and waved the man away, holding up his warrant-card as he did so.
After having woken the girl, Duncan led her into  the palace as they followed the policeman, past the small queue of tourists and other visitors who were waiting to sightsee.
The Alexander Palace was one of the imperial family's smaller homes.
Crescent-shaped, it has an austerity that is unusual compared to other palaces.
From 1904 it had been the last Romanov's main home.
It was here, on the ground floor of the east wing, that Louise Taylor had been found, in the same room that had been the royal family's drawing-room.
As with much of Pushkin, the Alexander Palace had survived the revolution but not the Germans.
Although there were some rooms open to the public, most of the interior was desperately in need of restoration.
Myeloski led them to the room where the girl had been found.
She sat at the window, looking out on the gardens, not wanting to be reminded of her ordeal as her two companions searched for any clues that might have been left.
When they had fruitlessly exhausted their task, Myeloski called the caretaker to guide them round the rest of the palace.
He led the girl, was gentle with her, wanted to see if any of the other rooms held any memory for her.
But, after nearly an hour, it was obvious that she had simply been brought to this near-empty building and left for the police to find her.
The three of them returned to the car.
It was now nearly one o'clock, and Myeloski was ready for his lunch.
He trundled the Lada into Pushkin, down the Boulevard Vasenko, looking for a restaurant, preferably a McDonald's.
At the end of the Boulevard there sits the enormous Catherine Palace, baroque and three times the size of the Alexander Palace.
Still being restored, over half the Catherine Palace is closed to the public.
Just opposite, next to the Church of the Sign, there was a new Wendy's Hamburgers drive-in.
Myeloski went for a big order while the other two ordered coffees.
The policeman then pulled the car across the road, crossed the Lycée and with a wave of his warrant-card was soon parked in the officials-only area in the palace grounds.
He said little, concentrating on his meal, but obviously deep in thought.
The other two sat in silence; there was nowhere they could go.
He broke his silence once, talking through a full mouth as the hamburger sauce ran down the side of his mouth.
‘How long were you driving for after they took you away from the family?’
‘Not long, about half an hour.’
‘In a straight line?
Or were there many corners?’
She reflected before answering.
‘The car seemed to turn a lot.
And stopped many times.’
‘Were they driving fast?’
‘No.
It didn't seem fast.
I can't remember that well; they all kept talking a lot.’
Eventually, when he had slurped his way through the two cheeseburgers and large French fries, polished off an apple pie and a strawberry milkshake, he got out of the car and walked over to a litter-disposal unit.
He trashed his rubbish, then signalled the other two out of the car.
He then led them into the Catherine Palace, once more brandishing his authority whenever an official came forward to stop them.
They found the room in the deserted area, up on the third floor.
It was where the bedrooms had been; they were later to discover that it was where the Romanovs had lived for a century and a half and had been the favourite apartments of Nicholas I.
The girl recognized the room immediately.
It was at the top of a small staircase, well away from the heart of the building.
As they entered the room, Duncan saw the four square holes in the door, big enough for men to look through and also rest the muzzle of their guns on.
Louise was at first excited; then, when the recollection  had overwhelmed her, collapsed in a corner, her body racked with sobs.
Myeloski, hands and lips greased with hamburger oil, sat beside her on the sacking that covered the floor and tried to comfort her.
Duncan searched the rooms, but found only some soiled children's clothing and their excreta.
In the room where the guards must have remained, there were no clues, no cigarette butts, no sign of anyone having ever been there.
When Louise had collected herself, Myeloski took her through her story again, this time asking her to point out where incidents had occurred, where the hostages had been held.
Her story was as before, but Myeloski wanted to make sure that he missed nothing.
After he had checked her account, he then spent nearly an hour searching, with Duncan, for clues.
But there were none; the kidnappers had taken their charges and disappeared.
As a matter of course they checked the rest of the disused area before leaving the palace.
Myeloski took some Polaroid pictures before they left, having sent Duncan to the car for his camera.
On the drive back to St Petersburg the girl once again dropped off to sleep.
Only then did Myeloski open up to Duncan.
‘They knew what they were doing,’ he said, ‘cleaning up after themselves like that.
I don't think they're common criminals.
These boys are professionals.’
‘What made you go there?’
Duncan had been surprised by the policeman's astuteness in deciding to investigate the Catherine Palace.
‘Just a hunch.
Luck, I suppose,’ he replied.
‘Are you going to call in your people to check for fingerprints or anything?’
‘We could, but I don't think they'd find anything.
If you remember, the girl said they always wore leather  gloves.
And this is meant to be hush-hush.
Put the lab boys in and…’
He shrugged.
Duncan realized he was right.
They drove back to St Petersburg in silence.
What Myeloski didn't tell Duncan was that things were slowly beginning to take shape in his mind.
There was a pattern forming, loose and ragged, but a pattern.
And the policeman wanted to check his facts before deciding to take a chance on a long shot.
It was a crazy idea, but it was all he had at the moment.
What he didn't know was that the captives had already been moved over two thousand miles to the east.
As the Lada sped towards St Petersburg, the hostages were being moved into a spacious townhouse that was now empty and had once been a district governor's home.
The prey was distancing itself fast from the hunters; the scent, as Myeloski knew, was still cold and getting colder.
Astoria Hotel
Herzen Street
St Petersburg
6 p.m.
Duncan's room was on the seventh floor.
The Astoria, one of St Petersburg's finest, had been refurbished in 1989.
Not as plush as the Savoy, it was another hotel designed specifically for visiting businessmen and other important visitors.
Part of the top floor had been sectioned off by the police and now housed those involved in the kidnapping.
The cordoned-off area, quite common in Russian hotels when special guests were being entertained and there-fore not something that would cause suspicion, was served by its own lift from the lobby.
Two plain-clothes policemen, acting as hotel security men, kept watch at  the lift.
Any unwanted guest soon found himself bundled down to one of the lower floors.
Duncan sat in his room with Sergeant Thomas Williams, the second royal policeman, who had accompanied Leeming on the visit.
Williams had received the George Medal for saving three young children who were taken hostage during a bank robbery.
He, like most of their bodyguards, was devoted to the royal family and would give his life for them.
Half an hour later Duncan was no farther in his quest.
Williams had not been there during the vital moments when the kidnapping had taken place.
He had heard shots, including the rapid fire of automatics, but when he rushed down to the river-bank the kidnappers had already vanished with their victims.
He knew nothing of the girl Louise Taylor, other than that she had arrived at Buckingham Palace three months earlier and had spent time coaching the prince and the duchess in Russian.
She kept to herself and didn't seem to act in any suspicious manner.
‘When do you think they'll let us go home?’ asked Williams at the end of the questioning.
‘When we've found them,’ answered Duncan.
‘Not until then.’
When Williams finally left the room, the phone rang.
It was Myeloski.
‘Where've you been?’ asked Duncan.
Myeloski had left him and Louise Taylor at the hotel entrance after the drive from Pushkin.
He had been preoccupied and seemed impatient to get on his way.
‘Just checking on some things.
I am at police headquarters now.
I have the replies from London.
How did your meeting with Sergeant Williams go?’
‘I didn't learn anything.’
‘I told you that!’
Myeloski's arrogance irritated Duncan.
‘Where're you off to now?’ he said, not allowing his annoyance to show.
‘To get some food.
And to do some reading.’
The phone went dead.
Duncan put down the phone.
He went to the side-table and poured himself a glass of water.
Then he waited for Louise Taylor to wake from her exhausted sleep.
KGB Headquarters
2 Dzerzhinsky Square
Moscow
9.15 p.m.
Marshka had arrived late and now sat with Vashinov in his office waiting for the latest report.
‘Have you dug up any further information on the SAS captain?’
‘Very little.
He's one of their best men, with their intelligence arm.
Russian descent, but no emotion for the motherland.’
‘What was his family name?’
The old man was suddenly interested.
‘Denknetzeyan.
White Russians, from the Tiumen area in western Siberia.’
‘Count Nikolai Denknetzeyan.
From that family?’
Marshka never ceased to amaze Vashinov.
‘That was his great-grandfather.’
‘Then, his blood will still be hot for Mother Russia.’
Marshka smiled at the general as he spoke.
‘Don't look so sceptical.
I just hope that he believes what he sees, that you don't become too obvious and make him realize that he's being set up.’
‘That will not happen.
Of that I'm confident.’
But inside himself Vashinov knew that something would soon go wrong.
That was Boris's Law.
Something would soon get buggered up.
‘Is that policeman out of that library yet?’ asked Marshka.
The general picked up the phone and dialled.
As he asked for the latest report, Marshka thought about the policeman and the Englishman.
He knew, from their records, that they could be a formidable pair, if they worked together.
He wanted them to continue to distrust each other, continue to irritate.
In that way, it would be easier to plant the clues and let them stumble on them.
He had been surprised that they had discovered the Catherine Palace hideaway.
That must have been down to the policeman.
‘He's on his way back to the hotel,’ Vashinov reported as he put down the phone.
‘Good.
I feel happier when they're all under the same roof.
I hope they go to bed early.
Otherwise they're going to have another sleepless night, and we need them fresh for the next stage.’
Dvortsovaya Embankment
St Petersburg
10 p.m.
The Dvortsovaya runs along the Neva river and in front of the State Hermitage.
It looks out where the river widens and splits at Vasilyevskiy Island.
Across the waters, the magnificent Peter and Paul Fortress looks back at the shoreline.
It was here, on ‘Bloody Sunday’, that the shooting and killing of thirty people started the First Revolution of 1905.
Twelve years later, the square at Dvortsovaya became the centre of the Bolshevik uprising.
Duncan and Myeloski walked side by side.
The view was breathtaking, and even in this period of crisis both men found time to absorb St Petersburg's beauty.
Duncan had learnt little from Louise Taylor; she had woken earlier than he expected, had wanted to eat.
He took her down to the brasserie, sat with her at a  corner table away from the main body of the room.
While she ate he sipped a Miller Lite, watched her devour the meal as her appetite returned.
Things were getting back to normal.
‘Feels good,’ she said when she had finished.
‘Returning to the land of the living always does,’ he replied.
She looked at him quizzically.
‘What're you doing here?’
‘Keeping you company.’
‘I meant in Russia.’
‘You know exactly what I'm here for.’
‘You're not a policeman.’
‘How can you tell?’
‘Easy.
Your feet are too small.’
He laughed, shook his head.
‘So what are you doing here?’
‘Helping find the family.’
‘And George.’
‘Of course.’
‘Are you Intelligence?’
‘I passed a few exams.’
‘Very funny.’
She smiled at his deliberate avoidance of her questions.
‘If you're a policeman…’
She paused.
‘If I'm a policeman…’
‘Policemen always ask questions.
Interrogate me.’
‘Were you sleeping with George?’
‘Bastard.’
She caught her breath, surprised by the suddenness of the question.
‘Policemen don't ask that sort of question.
Not straight away.’
‘Were you?’
‘No.’
He saw she lied.
Leeming's reputation with women was well known.
‘What if I was?’ she continued.
‘Makes no difference.
I was just interested.’
She shook her head, saw the humour in his eyes.
‘If  you're not a policeman, then who are you?’
‘Just a soldier.
A friend of Victor's.
And the family.
Just like I said.’
‘So why did they send you?
Why not a policeman?’
‘I don't make decisions.
I'm just here to help find them.’
‘What sort of soldier?’
‘A captain type.’
‘An officer and gentleman.’
She looked him over, cool and casual in her appraisal.
‘Not so much the gentleman.
Duncan shrugged.
‘SAS?’ she asked quietly.
‘You've been sent in case there's trouble.’
‘Just an everyday captain,’ he replied, equally quiet.
They stared at each other, she questioning in her gaze, he stonewalling her with a half-smile on his lips.
It was the girl who broke the silence.
‘I hope you find them.
Alive.’
‘I'm sure we will.’
‘Have you any clues?
Apart from those today in the palace.’
‘We'll get there.’
‘With your fat friend?’
Duncan grinned, remembered Myeloski's eating habits.
‘A clever fat friend.
He worked out where you'd been kept prisoner.’
She nodded, suddenly remembered her ordeal.
He saw the pain cross her face.
‘Sorry.
I didn't mean to remind you.’
She looked at him, warmth returning to her eyes.
She moved her hand across the table, touched his arm, squeezed it for comfort.
‘All things pass,’ she said.
‘In time.
I wish you luck, soldier boy.
You're going to need all you can get.’
When Myeloski had returned to the hotel, after the girl had gone to her room, Duncan had suggested they  go for a walk.
The policeman had been genuinely pleased by the invitation, and the two had set off for the river.
Myeloski nudged Duncan and signalled him to watch a scene farther on, just by a small playground.
A young girl, no more than eighteen months old, dressed in a pretty pink outfit, was playing with some fallen leaves.
She picked one up, stood there swaying in her newly learnt balance, and crumpled the leaf.
It sprang open again, and this made the girl laugh — a crackle of pleasure from her tiny mouth.
She did it again; once more the leaf sprang open.
She turned to her mother, a young woman who was watching her, and did it all again for her benefit.
Mother and child laughed, sharing their love and their joy of discovery.
‘Whatever the difference, children are the same the world over.’
Myeloski turned away and walked to the river-wall, leant against it.
Duncan came alongside him.
The two men stared out, their eyes searching in the dark for the brightly lit fortress on the other side.
‘The car, the one the girl was in, if it was a Zil as she says, then it was seen by a policeman,’ Myeloski told Duncan.
‘Did they get a number?’
‘This is Russia.
Policemen don't take numbers of official government cars.‘
‘Official!
Government!’
Duncan was alarmed.
‘Zils are used for visiting VIPs and government officials only.
Nobody else could afford one.
But it was night-time, and anybody could have borrowed it-a chauffeur, anybody.’
‘Anything else?’
‘Nothing.’
‘I can't go on just standing by, you know.’
‘What else can you do?
We have to wait.
Something will happen.
Have you been involved with hostages before?’
‘Yes.’
‘Tell me about them.’
Myeloski, although dealing with kidnappers in other cases, had never known how the hostages survived their isolation and their fear.
As soon as he had apprehended any kidnappers, the state prosecutor moved in on the hostages and he never saw them again.
‘It's a strange relationship between hostages and captors.’
Duncan remembered an Irish businessman his unit had rescued from the IRA two years earlier.
The man had been held for nearly four months in a blacked-out room.
He had been like an animal when they found him.
They hadn't let him go home for nearly a week; there was no way he could have coped with his freedom or his family.
‘They become dependent on their kidnappers,’ he went on.
‘Like a dog you keep chained up in a dark room.
It hates you for putting it there, but is loyal to you because you bring it food.
In all the cases I've seen, when the hostages have been freed they have always understood the kidnappers’ motives, always sympathized with them.
And still went on hating them.
‘I remember one incident.’
He recalled the businessman again, saw his face, framed in the night-light outside the small house they had kept him captive in.
‘He'd been held for four months.
Never left his room in that time.
When he saw the terrorists, the people who were responsible for his plight, he lunged forward, grabbed a rifle off one of the soldiers.
He had it up there’— Duncan touched his own forehead —‘the gun cocked, ready to blow the kidnapper's head off.
Then he just started to cry, just dropped the gun and put his arms round the man.
He just sobbed until someone came and took him away.’
‘How did the kidnappers react?’
‘Thought he was a nutter.
They don't give a damn, do they?
Just want their money.‘
‘Your friend.
Can he handle it?’
‘I think so.
It's more difficult with the family there.
He can't try anything, couldn't risk trying to get away.’
‘I don't think it will last long, this kidnapping.’
‘Why?’
‘Because when it gets into the papers, which it will, things will happen fast.
That is, if they want their money.‘
‘I don't agree.
There are terrorists who want nothing more than publicity.
You've got all these regions after independence; it could be any one of them, using the situation to highlight their struggle.
You've also got various religious freedom fighters.
They could even end up in Beirut, if some of those Muslim fundamentalists get their hands on them.
I don't think it's as cut and dried as you think.’
‘You can't blame us Muslims for everything.’
Duncan squirmed; he had forgotten the policeman was a Muslim.
Myeloski laughed.
‘But you are right.
We mustn't discount anything.’
The men turned together and started to walk back to the hotel.
Duncan knew that Myeloski had more to tell him, that he was holding back.
But he also realized that the policeman was not a man who trusted easily.
He would have to wait, and until then he would keep as close as he could to the Russian.
He regretted leaving Myeloski alone in the afternoon.
He should have insisted that he go with him.
He decided then that he wouldn't let that situation occur again.
What he didn't know was that Myeloski wanted to share his knowledge with the Englishman.
If what he believed was really happening, then he would need Duncan's support.
Myeloski was beginning to realize that he could be taking on forces that encompassed the very people who ran the Soviet Union, the powermasters who employed  him to keep the peace as a police officer.
It wasn't just a kidnapping.
It was about the future of the Soviet Union.
Astoria Hotel
Herzen Street
St Petersburg
11.30 p.m.
Duncan had left Myeloski propping up the bar, drinking his customary vodka and Budweiser chaser.
He himself had drunk one quick light beer before excusing himself for an early night.
The room was hot when he entered, and he turned down the thermostat on the wall.
Then he went to bed, having checked the room for electronic bugs and found one in the base of the lamp.
He knew it was a decoy, but could find no other.
The knock on the door came just after he had put out the light.
He got up, slipped a towel round his waist and opened the door.
Louise Taylor wore a white bathrobe that ended halfway up her thighs.
‘I can't sleep,’ she said.
To highlight her legs, she also had on a pair of black high heels.
Duncan knew she was naked underneath.
He also knew the room was bugged.
He stood back, inviting her in.
He also held his forefinger to his lips, indicating that they might be overheard.
She nodded, understanding his signal, as she came into the room.
By the time he had closed the door and turned into the room she had slipped the towelling robe off her shoulders.
She stood there, beautiful and tall, in nothing but her high heels.
They looked at each other, neither saying a word, silent in their understanding of each other .
Then she  stepped forward and pulled at his towel.
It fell away and she saw that he was already excited.
She knelt in front of him, took his manhood into her mouth.
He watched, excited yet dispassionate.
It was something they both needed, a release from the events of the day.
He leant down, put his arms on her shoulders and lifted her up.
Then he kissed her, felt her breath release as she felt the force of his passion as he put his arms around her waist, as he pulled her towards him.
Then he swung her round, lifted her with his strength and pushed her against the wall.
Then he entered her, harsh in his passion but warm in his need.
Before she could cry out, he put his left hand over her mouth to silence her.
They made love like that, standing up, silent in their lust.
She came three times before he did, her legs wrapped round him, her screams muffled against the force of his hand.
When they had finished, he still held her to him, gentle in his embrace.
She started to cry, silent sobs as the tears ran down her cheeks.
He wiped her face, licked the tears from her.
Then he led her to his bed and let her sleep, childlike in her position as she sucked her thumb.
Duncan lay next to her, his arm behind her head as he stared at the ceiling.
She woke once, nuzzled in to him.
‘I just needed someone,’ she whispered.
Then she fell asleep again.
In time, at half-past midnight, Duncan finally dropped off.
The two of them slept deeply, unaware of the camera that had watched their silent lovemaking, the camera that was so small it could be hidden in the face of the heating control on the wall by the window.
Railway marshalling-yard
Tobolsk
Western Siberia
3.30 a.m.
(St Petersburg time)
They found Inspector Leeming in a boxcar on the outskirts of Tobolsk.
Two thousand miles to the east of St Petersburg, the boxcar was part of a long train that had started out in St Petersburg a week earlier and had gone along the Trans-Siberian Railway.
In the boxcar there were also sheep.
They had been loaded on at Perm and were being shipped for slaughter and wool to Irkutsk, the great Cossack camp in eastern Siberia.
The boxcar, one of ten, had been parked in the marshalling-yards at Tobolsk for nearly twenty-four hours when the railway workers had come along to feed the sheep and hitch the cars on to a new engine.
They had heard loud banging from the boxcars, as if someone was trying to attract their attention.
Then they saw some men, running away from them, but shouting and laughing loudly.
The workers decided to investigate the carriages, to see what was amiss.
Leeming was standing in the middle of the third car, surrounded by sheep who milled round his feet.
He was warmly wrapped up in a fur coat and had gloves on.
His gloved hands were handcuffed behind his back.
When the railway workers slid the door open and saw him, they shouted at him, demanding to know who he was.
He gave no reply, just stood there, his back to them, his head tilted backwards and upwards.
The men climbed in and pushed their way through the animals towards Leeming.
When they finally stood in front of him, they realized why he had not answered.
A thin steel cord was bolted to the beam that supported the boxcar roof.
The cord hung down, straight above Leeming, and then went down his throat.
There were some fish-hooks attached to the cord higher up, tiny little fish-hooks.
One of the men swore, then came towards Leeming to help him.
The Englishman stepped back, shook his head, uttered a guttural sound.
Then he started to cough, forced himself to control the tickle he felt at the back of his throat.
The men saw the blood at the corner of his mouth.
‘They've shoved a bloody fish-hook down him!’ exclaimed one of the men.
They stepped back, examined Leeming.
‘I'm going for the police.’
The man who had tried to help Leeming spoke.
‘You stay here.
And keep him upright.
If he slips, that fish-hook will rip his guts out.’
George Leeming, who didn't understand Russian, relaxed as the other men stepped forward to support him; he knew they were going to help him.
No trace was found of the men who had left him in the yard.
The road to Pulkovo Airport
St Petersburg
6.30 a.m.
The Lada raced along the road towards the airport.
Myeloski was still half-asleep and seemed more in control of the machine in that state.
Duncan had been asleep when the policeman burst into the room to give him the news that Leeming had been found.
As Myeloski switched on the light, he had caught a glimpse of Louise Taylor before she disappeared under the cover.
He said nothing, just that he wanted to see  Duncan in the hall.
He then left the room, closing the door behind him.
Duncan had pulled on his trousers and gone into the hallway.
‘They've found your Inspector Leeming.
In Tobolsk.
We have to go there.’
‘You could've told me that inside the room, not drag me out here,’ Duncan replied, irritated by the policeman's need for secrecy.
‘The girl is an American,’ came the quick answer.
‘So?’
‘Old habits die hard.’
Myeloski shrugged.
‘She's an interpreter, not a CIA agent.
She's part of it, you know.’
‘No.
Only you and me.
The two of us.
We're the only two who're part of it.
And that's how it has to be, if we are to succeed.’
Myeloski was angry in his reply, mostly because he knew he was in the wrong.
‘Even so, there's little point in staying here.
The clues are in Tobolsk.
I'll ring my superior and get air clearance for you.’
‘I won't be long.’
Duncan turned to go back into the room.
‘Will you tell her?’
Duncan didn't answer, just went back into his bedroom, packed and left.
When the girl asked him where he was going, he told her that they had to return to Moscow.
As he spoke, as the words came out, he cursed himself.
He was behaving as irrationally as Myeloski.
She asked if she could join him; his answer was short and negative.
She decided not to push the point any further, could see he had switched off.
As they spoke, neither of them reminded each other of their passion a few hours earlier; it was as if it had never happened.
It had been a welcome respite in a cruel and anguished time.
They politely said goodbye, and Duncan left to catch up with Myeloski.
‘The Tobolsk police, when they realized they had got  an Englishman, rang Moscow.
The night-duty man had rung Yashkin at home.
He rang me,’ Myeloski explained.
‘Why a fish-hook?’
Duncan had asked, when Myeloski told him of the strange situation in which they had found Leeming.
‘It's like a warning.
Just as the girl was naked when we found her.
It's their way of telling us they're in control, that we're hooked on their line.‘
When they got to the airport, Duncan went to the Air Information Service (AIS).
He only had charts for western Russia, primarily Moscow and St Petersburg.
The AIS officer in charge was helpful, once Myeloski had shown him his warrant-card, and helped the Englishman plan his route.
It was over the Citation's flying range, and Duncan flight-planned the first leg to Kirov where he would refuel.
It was cold as they walked out to the executive jet.
Duncan unlocked the door and supervised the fuelling from a small bowser as Myeloski made himself comfortable in the rear seat.
He had decided he would not be sitting in the front any longer.
When the refuelling was complete, Duncan climbed in and started the engines.
Once the left engine was turning over at 45 per cent, he switched on the right engine, using the live engine's generator to save the battery.
While the engine was spooling up, igniting to go to full power, he saw the right-hand thrust-reverser warning-light flash on and off very quickly.
He watched it for a moment, but it stayed off.
He had never seen that happen before, and decided to get it checked when he finally returned to England.
With both engines turning, he called for his clearance and taxi instructions.
The tower, knowing the Citation was on a priority flight, gave him immediate taxiing clearance to the runway.
An approaching Ilyushin passenger-jet was told  to overshoot as the tower lined Duncan up on the runway.
He had already done his instrument checks as he was taxiing and the only warning-light that had not flickered was the right thrust-reverser one.
He pulled the cover off the switch and realized that the bulb had gone.
As he swung on to the runway, he saw the Ilyushin start to overshoot, a mile from the end of the runway.
He knew the airliner would be turning right at the end of the runway and that he would be turning left.
As St Petersburg  airport called him with take-off clearance he applied power and started to roll.
He hit V1 (the speed at which a takeoff cannot be aborted) at 97 knots and pulled the stick back for rotation at 106 knots.
Duncan enjoyed the moment of take-off, that split second when the bird starts to fly as it comes free of the land.
In the back, Myeloski shut his eyes; it was the moment he hated the most.
As Duncan left the ground, as his undercarriage started to retract, as the Ilyushin started to turn right four hundred feet above him, his right-hand thrust-reverser popped out.
Now, a thrust-reverser is there for only one reason.
It is a bucket-shaped attachment that deploys when a plane lands; it is designed solely to stop the plane flying.
When a pilot activates his reversers, he also pours on the power to create reverse thrust, to have the blast from the jet engine going forward over the wings instead of backwards.
It's like putting a car into reverse.
It is not something any pilot would wish to happen on take-off, when power is at full thrust and the plane has only begun to fly as it approaches the end of the runway.
To make matters worse, the deployment of only one thrust-reverser meant that there was a tremendous drag on the right engine.
The Citation, at the most vulnerable time of any flight, now had full forward power hurling it upwards on its left  side and full reverse power dragging it downwards on its right side.
The small jet yawed sharply to the right, upwards and towards the Ilyushin airline.
Four hundred feet may seem high, but to these small executive jets it is an altitude that can be covered in just ten seconds.
Duncan hit the emergency stow switch, next to the indicator with the failed bulb.
All jets have an immediate fail-safe switch that retracts a failed thrust-reverser.
Only this time nothing happened; the reverser stayed deployed, continuing to drag the aircraft to the right.
Duncan knew he couldn't level off.
Once he pulled the nose down, with all the power on one side and the drag on the other, the plane would simply flip on to its back and crash.
He chopped back on the right engine, closed it down.
At least he didn't have any reverse thrust left, just a bucketful of drag.
He applied hard left rudder and left aileron, attempting to pull the aircraft back to the left.
It responded slowly, now only a hundred feet below the Ilyushin.
The Citation rolled slowly on to its left side as Duncan fought to keep it flying and to keep it away from the airliner.
In the back, Myeloski suddenly opened his eyes and found himself staring straight above, straight into the great silver underbelly of the Ilyushin.
He believed then that he was going to die.
The pilots in the airliner above were unaware of the drama being enacted only a hundred feet below them.
They continued their gentle turn to the right as they cursed the tower controller for making them overshoot.
When he was only forty feet from the Ilyushin, with his right wing now pointing straight up, its tip just a few feet from the airliner's belly, Duncan pulled back on the left engine and then let the drag pull the plane level.
The Ilyushin pulled away to the right, the Citation started a gentle power-off glide.
Disaster was averted.
The whole incident, from the moment that the jet had popped its reverser, took no more than thirty seconds.
As the big jetliner continued its turn back to the airport, Duncan applied some power back to the left engine.
He waited until the Ilyushin was clear and then started a slow turn to his right, using the power on the left engine in conjunction with the rudder.
The small jet wallowed in the sky, on the edge of the envelope of control.
Duncan knew that one small move would knock the plane out of the sky.
At four hundred feet he hadn't enough altitude from which he could recover if he went into a spin.
He kept the turn going to the right, using the drag of the extended reverser to make the turn easier.
He called the tower, told them he had an emergency and that he was returning for a landing.
The tower acknowledged him, once more ordering the Ilyushin to overshoot.
Duncan could imagine their anger at being forced into another emergency manoeuvre.
He thought of all those white-faced passengers, panic-stricken as they peered out of their windows when they heard the engines spooling up again, wheels rumbling as they were noisily retracted, finally followed by the sharp upward tilt as the plane climbed out from the airport at full power.
He turned to look at Myeloski.
The policeman glared back.
Duncan shrugged and returned to his task.
He coaxed the Citation through the downwind leg and turned on to final runway heading, some five miles out from the airport.
The critical stage would be when he lowered his undercarriage.
The resultant drag could topple the plane from the sky.
His control of the power through the throttles had to be accurate.
The difference between a propeller plane and a jet is the time it takes to apply power.
A piston engine reacts immediately to power, just like a car.
A jet engine can take up to six  seconds to spool up.
That meant that Duncan had to be six seconds ahead of the plane, applying power before he needed it.
With a mile to run, he reduced power and rolled the plane to the left, counteracting the drag on the right side.
As he pushed the nose down for the final approach, he extended down the undercarriage.
The plane slewed sharply, dipping towards the runway.
He banged on the power and felt it start to right itself.
As they crossed the end of the runway, he slapped the big flaps on, chopped the power and extended the airbrakes.
The Citation rolled on to the runway for a near-perfect landing.
He kept it rolling and swerved off at the first exit on the right.
Clear of the runway he stopped the plane and switched the engine off.
He saw the emergency vehicles rushing towards him, their lights beaconing in the morning light.
Overhead the Ilyushin passed by as it set itself up for its final landing.
He turned to Myeloski.
‘What was that about Boris's Law?’ he joked.
The policeman smiled back weakly.
There is a life after death, he thought.
HOOKED
Marshka's dacha
Outside Moscow
8 a.m.
As he drank his morning tea, the old man lived in his memories.
It was something that he did regularly, a habit brought on by the onset of old age.
He thought of Andrei Gromyko, the great survivor of the different regimes that had followed the revolution.
They had been good friends, had helped each other over the years.
And yet, a few years after Gromyko's death, Marshka had proved himself to be an even greater survivor.
He recalled that the president hadn't gone to Gromyko's funeral.
Politically necessary, but a pity.
Then he thought of his own death, of his own funeral.
He hoped it would be a state occasion.
Then he smiled, laughed at himself for his arrogance and vanity.
When he died, when they found out what he had done, he would be lucky to be buried at all.
The phone rang beside him, and he answered it.
He  listened intently, trying to collect his thoughts away from the past of his dreams to the present of reality.
It was Vashinov.
The old man listened as the general told him about the incident at Pulkovo Airport.
‘I said we were to incapacitate the aircraft, not destroy it,’ Marshka said when Vashinov had finished his report.
‘And, if it had hit the airliner, Russian lives would have been unnecessarily lost.’
Vashinov sensed the old man's fury.
‘I agree that our operatives in St Petersburg were over-zealous in their work, comrade.
They will be reprimanded accordingly.’
He shifted the blame down the line, remembering to ensure that their punishment was harsh enough so that it would be noted by Marshka.
‘The other problem was the over-eagerness of the air-traffic controllers at Pulkovo,’ he went on.
‘If they had allowed the airliner to land first, there would have been no problem.
The Englishman is a first-class pilot and handled the emergency well.’
‘Where are they now?’
‘About to catch an internal flight to Tobolsk.’
‘At least they will not have the availability of their own aircraft.
Now it will be easier to monitor them.
Call me when they have arrived at their destination.’
Marshka put down the phone.
He sat back, closed his eyes.
Then he remembered the time that he had walked in on the Politburo meeting and arrested Beria.
That had been a great and memorable moment; that was when they knew he was a man of substance.
He remembered the look on Beria's face.
The hunter had finally been hunted.
Pulkovo Airport
St Petersburg
8.50 a.m.
Aeroflot Flight 366 lifted off from Pulkovo's runway on schedule.
The plane, a Tupolev 154, was a three-engined jet based on the Boeing 727.
Duncan and Myeloski sat in the front half of the plane.
All the seats had been taken, but once Myeloski had waved his warrant-card at the ticket-desk they had been given seats.
Myeloski had then insisted that they commandeer the seats on either side, thus ensuring them of privacy on the journey.
The result was that four travellers were now sitting in the airport terminal waiting for the next flight, which was probably full anyway.
Internal flights on Aeroflot are basic by nature and design, unlike the comfortable, if not luxurious, services offered by its Western rivals.
It was untrue that passengers travelled packed together like cattle.
The great Russian joke was that cattle, as part of the expanding Soviet economy, travelled in better style than people.
Within ten minutes of take-off, Myeloski had insisted on being fed.
When the sullen male attendant had ignored his request, the policeman had pulled out his warrant-card and shouted at the man, threatening him with everything including deportation.
The attendant, now adding a sulk to his sullenness, had shuffled off to the kitchen area.
Myeloski had settled back, watching hawk-like for the man's next move.
Fifteen minutes later the attendant returned with two bowls of soggy rice and boiled chicken.
When Duncan had refused his, Myeloski took charge of both bowls and set about lustily devouring their contents.
The attendant returned to the kitchen area where Duncan spotted him taking a deep swig from a bottle of vodka that was then passed round the other members of the flight crew.
Duncan hoped that the drink wasn't going to end up in the cockpit.
He knew now why Aeroflot was known as the worst airline in the world.
As he watched Myeloski eat, he thought back to the incident of the failed thrust-reverser.
After he had taxied in to the terminal and parked the plane, he had checked the right engine and its hydraulic system with one of the Aeroflot engineers.
It hadn't taken long to determine that the plane had been sabotaged.
The springs that hold the reversers shut had been loosened, the bolts securing it removed.
As soon as the plane had hit any turbulence, the springs would have popped off the arm that held them and the two buckets would have automatically deployed.
The take-off run and its resultant vibration were enough to shake the spring loose.
The bulb had obviously been hit hard so as to break its filament, to ensure no warning light came on.
It was a simple attempt to bring the plane down, but one that required sound engineering knowledge.
Duncan had wanted to wait the few hours it would take to fix the Citation and run checks on it, but Myeloski was anxious to get to Tobolsk.
As Duncan had already decided not to leave the policeman to his own devices, he had no alternative but to join him on the next available flight to Tobolsk.
After he had eaten, Myeloski settled down to sleep.
Duncan stayed awake, looking out of the window at the cloud-covered land thirty thousand feet below.
Although he mistrusted the policeman, he realized that they could have both died if the Citation had crashed.
That meant that there were other players in the game, that Myeloski was just as much under threat as he was.
Maybe it was time to start trusting the policeman.
Duncan turned and looked at his sleeping companion, now slumped in his seat, his mouth open as his snores rumbled across the cabin.
Duncan shook his head.
He wished there was someone else he could trust, someone  else to form an alliance with instead of this comic figure of a Russian policeman.
Myeloski awoke like a grizzly bear with a sore head.
Two hours into the flight, and he was hungry again.
He growled at the attendant, by now quite tipsy, and demanded another meal.
The attendant giggled and came back a few minutes later with another bowl of rice and chicken, which Myeloski despatched with his customary enthusiasm.
‘You must eat your wife out of house and home,’ commented Duncan.
‘No wife.
Divorced five years ago.’
‘I'm sorry.’
Duncan realized that this was the first time they had discussed their private lives since they had met.
‘Why?
She was a pig.
Good riddance to her.’
‘Any children?’
Myeloski shook his head.
‘Maybe, if we had had children, she would have been better.
I am a man who should have children.
The only trouble is that they grow up.
Then they end up like her.
Oink, oink.’
He laughed at his own joke.
‘You married?’
‘No.’
Duncan didn't tell him that he would never marry while he was a serving officer in the SAS.
He had seen the pressure army wives were under, had seen their faces crumple when their men went out on a mission.
He remembered when he had told a young woman that her husband was dead, killed by a sniper in the Falls Road area of Belfast.
It was not something he would want to put anyone he loved through.
‘Everyone should be married, if only once.
If only to stop you making the same mistake twice, eh?’
At that moment, on his instinct, Duncan decided to trust Myeloski.
‘The girl in the Savoy.
Why did you send her up to me?’ he asked.
‘What girl?’
‘The one you introduced me to.
In the bar.’
‘That good-looker?
So she followed you.
No taste, some people.
That's why she wanted to get away quickly.’
Myeloski laughed.
‘And you think I sent her up.
Listen, someone as good as that, you keep.’
Duncan was annoyed at Myeloski, at his dirty laugh.
‘Was she good?’ the policeman went on.
‘She looked good.’
‘She didn't stay.’
‘Because you thought I had…
To spy on you.’
Myeloski's laughter grew; other passengers now looked in their direction.
‘You missed a great night.
Because you thought I'd sent…’
He couldn't go on, his laughter turning to tears that ran down his cheeks.
Duncan leant back, not enjoying being the object of the Russian's amusement.
‘Why should I send her to you?’
Myeloski eventually asked, when he had brought himself under control.
His eyes sparkled with good-natured humour.
‘We're on the same side.
After the same fucking crooks.
Why should I spy on you?’
‘Why should someone sabotage the jet?’
Duncan's point hit home.
‘Why indeed?’
‘If I am to help on this, then I should know what's going on.
You said we're on the same side.
Is there something I don't know?’
Myeloski looked away, his mind split between his distrust of strangers and his need to share his thoughts with another.
This game was big, big enough for him to need support in the future.
‘Whoever tried to kill us in the plane, whoever that was, has put us on the same side.’
Duncan's blunt statement answered his own question.
Myeloski was about to return Duncan's trust.
But he wanted the Englishman to earn it.
‘Tell me about yourself.
You say you work at a  desk.
Why should they send me a pen-pusher?’
‘I'm an army officer.
A captain serving in the SAS.
That's a —‘
‘Yes, yes.
I know the SAS.’
Myeloski was impressed.
‘With field experience?’
‘Northern Ireland, and before that the Falklands.’
‘We could have done with you in Afghanistan.‘
‘Victor Oldenburg, as I said, is my friend.
We served together in the Falklands.
I'm also godfather to one of his children.’
‘That's all?’
‘Our people think this kidnapping could jeopardize the whole state visit.
I was seconded to MI5 to report back to them on this one.
You'll know that anyway.’
‘Old habits die hard.
These spion ’— Myeloski used the Russian word —‘have a lot to answer for.’
‘I'm not spion .
There's nothing else.‘
‘Can you kill a man?’
Myeloski knew the answer before he had finished asking the question.
‘Yes.’
‘You may have to, before this is over.’
‘Can you?’
‘I have never killed anyone in my life, never even come close to it.’
Myeloski paused and considered.
‘I don't know.’
‘Are you KGB?’
‘No.
Nor GRU.’
Myeloski referred to the smaller intelligence service that dealt with embassies and foreign missions.
‘I am, as I said, a simple policeman from Moscow.
But on this case I go directly to my superior, Colonel Yashkin.
You met him at the Kremlin.
He reports only to the President of the USSR.’
‘When the girl, Louise Taylor, and then Inspector Leeming were found, I don't believe it didn't get back to the KGB.
So why aren't they crawling all over the place?’
‘Ah, just my thoughts,’ Myeloski confirmed.
‘It's  almost as if they've been told to keep their distance.’
‘By the president?’
‘By somebody.
You remember the truck the girl said the family were transported in?’
‘After they were kidnapped?
The grey military one?’
‘Used by the KGB when they are observers during special forces’ exercises.
Or for their troop movements.
Blue grey is their colour.’
Duncan whistled through his teeth.
It looked as if he was taking on the whole KGB.
‘What's going on, Ahmed?’
He used Myeloski's first name.
‘I don't know.
But it's a big game.
Big players.
And you and I might be the only ones between your friend and the bullet.
Tell me.’
He paused before he went on.
‘What do you know about the assassination of the tsar and his family?’
Soviet airspace above the Urals
33,000 feet
1.50 p.m.
The T154 had entered high cloud and severe turbulence as it crossed the Ural mountain range on its journey eastward.
The ‘No Smoking’ and seatbelt signs were on, although this made little difference to Myeloski who had clamped himself into his seat as soon as he had boarded the aircraft.
He somehow felt safe, locked into his seat, as if no harm would come to him if he stayed like that.
He had also, as soon as the ‘No Smoking’ sign was illuminated, lit up one of the strong cigarettes he used.
At a time of stress they were his comfort, and any warning light, even the ‘No Smoking’ sign, brought on an attack of stress.
The attendant, now well into his second bottle of vodka, decided to ignore Myeloski's indiscretion.
The last thing he wanted, as the airplane  was tossed round the sky, was another of the policeman's abusive onslaughts.
He repaired to his kitchen area, flagrantly disregarding the woman who was being sick three rows behind the two men.
Duncan was unconcerned about the conditions.
He knew that planes were designed to withstand violent airwaves, that the real danger came when they were close to the ground.
Apart from the discomfort, he knew there was no danger.
Unfortunately, the onset of severe flight conditions had stopped Myeloski from continuing his discussion with Duncan about the kidnapping.
Duncan sat back, shut his eyes and went over what the policeman had said.
It was a startling and unconventional theory.
But they were in a startling and unconventional situation.
At the end of it, just before Myeloski had given in to the rough flight conditions, Duncan had come to realize how sharp the policeman was, how through his individual approach he had put together clues that most others would have missed.
‘I couldn't understand why the kidnappers should wear old uniforms, old clothes and costumes from the past,’ Myeloski had said.
‘It was as if they were trying to give us a clue, deliberately toying with us.’
‘Could the guards have been mistaken?’ asked Duncan.
‘No.
I checked that carefully myself.
Yesterday afternoon, when we came back from Pushkin, I inter-viewed the guards who were on duty when the family were kidnapped.
One of them was a student of military uniforms.
I took him to the St Petersburg library, let him show me pictures of the uniforms.
He had not made a mistake.
They were the uniforms of soldiers during the revolution, in St Petersburg where it all started.’
So that's where he had disappeared to, Duncan thought.
Then he remembered how the policeman had hurried off after leaving him and Louise at the Astoria.
‘When the guard — he was a KGB man’— Myeloski had raised his eyebrows at that point —‘had gone, I wandered  around the library.
There are many revolutionary artefacts there.
I tried, for the first time in my life, to understand what it must have been like then, under tsarist rule, where people, peasants, were no more than livestock, to be dealt with by the aristocracy as they saw fit.
‘Then I thought about the girl.
Why should she be found in the Alexander Palace?
Did it have a significance?
Now, although St Petersburg is full of some of the greatest treasures of the world, full of riches that have been handed down from the imperial days, there is very little about the tsar and his family at the time of the revolution.
‘I then went to various museums and institutes.
I found nothing; it was as if they had vanished at the end of the revolution.
Yet everyone knows they were shot and killed.
Finally, at one of the smaller institutes, one on the Restoration of Palaces, I found what I was looking for.
‘The Alexander Palace was where Tsar Nicholas and Empress Alexandra had been placed under house arrest by the revolutionaries.
The royal family had lived on the ground floor of the east wing.‘
Myeloski paused, but Duncan had already realized the coincidence.
‘That's where we found Louise Taylor.‘
‘That's where they left Louise Taylor.
For us to find her.’
‘Another clue,’ said Duncan.
‘Maybe.’
‘So what made you go into the Catherine Palace?’
‘A lucky guess.
A policeman's hunch.
But afterwards, in the Institute, I also read up on the Catherine Palace.
Guess what?’
‘The tsar's family were also taken there?’
Myeloski nodded.
‘The Bolsheviks were worried that a rescue attempt would be made on the Alexander Palace.
So they moved them to the Catherine Palace.
Easier to defend, you see.
A few weeks later they were taken away from Pushkin, away from St Petersburg and the European side of Russia where they had many supporters.
They were taken east, to an area that was a stronghold of the revolutionaries.‘
Duncan felt the hairs rise on the back of his neck.
‘Tobolsk,’ he said quietly.
‘You should've been a policeman.
Tobolsk.
East of the Urals, the mountains that were the stronghold of the revolution.’
The two men sat in silence.
The plane had started to shudder as it entered some turbulence, and Myeloski was startled by it.
‘Don't worry about it.
These planes eat up turbulence.
They're designed for it.’
Duncan had tried to calm his companion.
‘If Allah had intended us to fly, he would have given us wings, not arms,’ the policeman had replied.
‘Where were they taken in Tobolsk?’
Duncan pushed the conversation, not wanting Myeloski to stop.
‘To a district governor's house.
But they were only there a short time.
The trouble is I don't know where they went afterwards.
That is, if the kidnappers are following the same route.’
‘Can't we get that information from your people?’
‘Can't trust them!
Look, if it is the KGB, then we don't know how high this goes.
Alert them to the fact that we're on to something, if they know we've out-guessed them in their stupid game, then we don't know what they might do.
If you want your people back, then we've got to do it ourselves.’
‘What we need is information about what happened to the tsar's family.
I can try to get it from the British embassy in Moscow.’
‘The phones will be tapped.
By the KGB.’
‘I'll find a way.’
He remembered his list of contacts, stored away in his memory.
‘Let's see Leeming first.’
Duncan understood Myeloski's caution.
If the policeman was right, if it was a deadly game played by professionals with the resources of the KGB behind them, it was important that they didn't suspect their plot had been uncovered.
There was also the possibility that Myeloski was wrong, that it was nothing more than a string of coincidences.
The plane bucked sharply.
Duncan saw the panic in the policeman's eyes.
He went on, trying to keep him talking.
‘Why the game, Ahmed?
What do they hope to prove?’
‘Your people have not been honest with you.’
‘So tell me.
What is it I don't know?’
Duncan was beginning to wonder which players were playing on which side.
‘Not now.’
The plane hit an air pocket, and the crash of the wings slapping against the high pressure outside reverberated through the cabin.
Duncan saw the panic in Myeloski's face, saw he was out of control.
The policeman frantically lit another cigarette, then leant back, his eyes closed as he took a deep lungful of tobacco smoke.
‘Will you tell me?
For God's sake,’ pleaded Duncan.
‘Afterwards.
After we have seen Leeming.’
And with that the policeman shut off, into his world of foreseeable death and crashing, screaming engines.
Duncan knew it was hopeless to push him any farther.
He sat back himself, looked out of the small window at the heavy, storm-laden, bulbous clouds they were flying through.
It would be an interesting landing, if his experience of weather patterns was anything to go by.
He looked at his watch.
Twenty minutes to run.
He knew they'd be starting their descent in another five minutes.
He settled down, trying to curb his impatience.
At last, events were beginning to move.
Hospital No. 9
Tobolsk
Western Siberia
4.15 p.m.
Tobolsk is a small town that somewhere missed its way in history.
Situated on the banks of the River Ob, it developed into a great regional centre in 1584, when the Cossack adventurer Yermak, with his band of mercenaries, crossed the Urals into Isker.
Yermak concluded a deal with the then tsar which wiped out his past crimes for a surrender of his conquests.
Within six years, Tobolsk was the main fortified trading-post in western Siberia.
Then, over the centuries, as trade moved eastwards and the Trans-Siberian Railway was built, eventually linking St Petersburg and Moscow over 5,700 miles to Beijing in China, Tobolsk diminished in importance.
During the revolution, the Bolsheviks saw Tobolsk as one of their strongholds and used the town as a springboard into the rest of the Urals.
Since then, the town had once again withdrawn into a sleepy backwater.
The airport was shared between the military and civil air services.
The two sections were split by a 4,000-metre runway, with the military on the north side and the civilian area to the south.
When Duncan and Myeloski had come through the small terminal, they soon found that no car had been sent to greet them.
Myeloski, still unsteady on his feet from the effects of the flight, had weakly harangued a local taxi-driver into driving them to the police station.
The taxi, an old Moskvich with torn upholstery, had laboured its way through the gears into Tobolsk, to the square brick police station that lay in the centre.
Myeloski, now feeling stronger as he had returned to terra firma, told the driver to send his bill to the Moscow Police transport department.
The taxi-driver had given a  rude sign to Myeloski's disappearing back before turning to a bemused Duncan for support.
Duncan had simply shrugged and followed the policeman into the building, knowing that he would now be getting a repeat performance from the taxi-driver.
Once inside the building, it took Myeloski nearly twenty minutes to find the officer in charge and determine that no word had been received by the Tobolsk police regarding their impending arrival.
The senior officer, an inspector, realizing that Myeloski was an important personage because Myeloski told him so, immediately set about arranging transport for the two visitors as well as booking accommodation in one of the local hotels.
While he did that, Myeloski commandeered his office and rang Yashkin in Moscow for any further news.
There being none, the two men decided to book into the hotel and then go on to see Leeming.
The transport arranged was the same taxi-driver who had brought them from the airport.
After a short heated argument, the inspector agreed to pay the costs in cash from his local station funds.
A sulking Myeloski climbed back into the Moskvich with the sulking driver getting in the front.
Duncan, quietly amused by the whole situation, sat in the front with the driver and they drove to the hotel.
After they had deposited their bags at the hotel, itself ramshackle and run-down, they had gone on to the hospital.
It was a modern building, bright and spacious.
Leeming was on the second floor, a police officer on guard outside his room.
He was asleep when they entered.
Duncan saw that he was in a bad way, his face grey and wan.
He lay there, a saline drip in his arm, his head tilted back and held in a vice-like contraption.
Duncan felt sorry for the policeman.
He had always liked him, always respected the quiet authoritative way he carried out his duties and was fiercely loyal to his royal charges.
A doctor entered almost immediately behind them.
‘Who're you?’ he demanded.
Myeloski produced his warrant-card and showed it to the doctor.
‘We've got to talk to him,’ said Myeloski, once the doctor was satisfied with his credentials.
‘Not for some time.
He's under sedation now.’
‘What's wrong with him?’
‘You heard how he was found?’ asked the doctor.
‘Yes.
With a fish-hook inside him.’
‘That's right.
We've X-rayed him.
It's a very small hook, with a small weight tied to it.
We can't pull it out.
Could tear his throat and his insides.
All we can do is wait for it to pass through.
It's further complicated by the wire it's attached to.
When we brought him here, we put him under an anaesthetic and then cut the wire down here.’
The doctor held his finger at the base of his throat.
‘Now we just monitor him, check the progress of the hook as it passes through.
If it gets stuck, or tears anything, then we'll operate.’
‘Did he say anything?’
‘What do you expect him to say with a fish-hook down his throat?’
‘Then, how did you find out he was English?’
‘His police identity-card and passport were tied with string around his neck.
I have them, with all his clothes, next door.’
‘We'd like to see them now.’
The doctor led the two men out of the small private room and into an office next door.
Leeming's clothes, consisting of his woollen suit, shirt, underwear, white socks and black shoes, were laid out on a chair.
His gun-holster, without his weapon, and other belongings lay on the table.
Myeloski examined his belongings, went through his pockets.
There was nothing unusual there — a few receipts, a letter from a friend.
‘Where is his watch and his tie?’
Myeloski asked the doctor.
‘No watch or tie.
Everything is there.‘
The policeman looked across at Duncan.
‘Can you remember if he wore a watch?’
‘A Cartier watch.
I remember because he was very proud of it.
Gold, with a gold bracelet.’
‘Russian policemen can't afford gold watches,’ Myeloski replied ruefully.
‘It was probably stolen before he got here.’
‘By the police?’
Duncan asked, surprised by Myeloski's statement.
‘By anybody who thought he could get away with it.
But we're not here to solve the robbery of a watch.’
He turned to the doctor.
‘We have to talk to him.
As soon as possible.’
‘Not for at least an hour.‘
‘Can't wait, Doctor.’
‘I don't —‘
‘Now.’
Myeloski was firm, his authority complete.
The doctor considered before speaking.
‘I will need to be there.
In case there is a problem.’
‘No.
This is state security.
If he gets worse, I'll call.’
The doctor was concerned; he didn't trust Myeloski to honour his word.
He was about to stand up to the policeman when Duncan spoke.
‘I am an Englishman, Comrade Doctor,’ he said, pulling his passport from his inner jacket pocket.
He showed it to the medic.
‘Your patient is a colleague of mine, also a good friend.
I will not allow him to suffer.
But we do need to speak to him alone.‘
The doctor looked into the Englishman's eyes, saw that he was telling the truth.
He nodded assent.
‘I suggest we give you some paper and a pencil.
That way he can write things down,’ he added.
‘Give me fifteen minutes.
It'll take that long to bring him round.’
The three of them went into the hallway, the doctor  leaving them while he went into Leeming's room to carry out his duties.
Myeloski turned to the policeman on duty.
‘Is there somewhere here I can get some food?’ he asked.
Duncan grinned.
His companion had returned to full strength.
Twenty minutes later, George Leeming lay as they had first seen him, except that his eyes were now open and his back arched as the doctor had placed a pillow under him to make him more comfortable.
Duncan and Myeloski sat on his right side, near the bedhead so that he could see them without having to turn his head.
His discomfort was extreme and obvious, but he did his best to ignore the pain in his usual stoic manner.
The smile of recognition and welcome for Duncan had been followed by a fit of coughing.
His two visitors had sat still, waiting patiently until the coughing subsided.
Leeming tried to speak, but Duncan silenced him by putting his finger to his lips to soothe him, to help relax him.
The doctor, realizing that Duncan was as good as his word, quietly left the room to wait outside.
‘Don't speak unless you have to, George,’ Duncan started.
‘The man with me is Captain Ahmed Alekseevich Myeloski of the Moscow Police.
He's on the case and, from his actions so far, I have to say I've come to trust him.
He speaks good English, so he'll understand everything we say.’
Myeloski smiled at Leeming, a lame attempt to gain his confidence.
The man in the bed was defensive in his look.
‘I know it's difficult to talk, but I don't have to tell you that time is short.
If it'll help, I've got some paper you can write on.
Otherwise just nod or shake your head, unless you want to take a point further.
OK?’
Leeming nodded, his eyes fixed on Duncan.
‘We've been to St Petersburg already, where you were kidnapped from.
We found nothing.
Was there anything that you remember at that stage that was unusual, that made you suspect something was going to happen?’
Leeming signalled no.
‘The interpreter, the girl, Louise Taylor, turned up two nights ago.
She was alive, but in a state of shock, in an old tsarist palace near St Petersburg.
She was handcuffed and had a hood over her head.’
Duncan didn't feel the need to say she had also been naked.
‘She told us that you had all been kept in what looked like some palace rooms, about how you were all positioned, never allowed to touch or speak, and that you were watched through little holes in the door.
How'm I doing?’
Leeming nodded.
‘Good.
She said the family were fine when she last saw them.
Are they still all right?’
Leeming nodded again, tried to speak and started to cough.
‘Easy, George.
Come on, don't rush it.’
Duncan squeezed his arm to calm him.
When the coughing stopped again, he signalled Myeloski to give him the pad and pencil.
He handed it to Leeming, who wrote on it.
‘FAMILY OK.
NO ROUGH TREATMENT.
YOUNGEST HAS COLD.‘
‘Good.’
Duncan felt a wash of relief overcome him.
He knew they were in danger, but at least they were still alive.
‘Bad cold?’
Leeming shook his head.
‘Fine.
Louise Taylor said the men wore uniforms.
First of all, old-fashioned uniforms; then modern combat gear.’
Leeming nodded again.
‘We found the palace where you were kept.
Near St Petersburg.
The girl recognized it, the room, the holes cut in the door, everything.
There were no clues left at all; it was a professional clean-up.’
‘Ask him if he knows where he is now,’ said Myeloski.
Leeming shook his head, answering the question before Duncan needed to repeat it.
‘We're in Tobolsk.’
Duncan saw the look of mystification on Leeming's face.
‘Siberia.
Two thousand miles east of St Petersburg.’
The alarm in Leeming's face was obvious; the confusion that followed brought on another bout of coughing.
‘How did they bring you here?’
Myeloski said when Leeming had settled once again.
Leeming signalled for the pad and took it from Duncan.
‘TRUCK.
TROOP-CARRIER.
THEN PLANE FOR LONG JOURNEY.
THEN TRUCK.
SMALL HOUSE.
THEN TAKEN TO TRAIN.’
When he finished, he pointed to his throat, signifying that that was when they had pushed the fish-hook down him.
Duncan read the scrawl, then passed it to Myeloski.
‘Jet plane?’
Duncan asked.
Leeming shook his head.
‘Propeller,’ he said, his voice distorted by wire still in his throat.
‘Don't speak unless you have to,’ Duncan said, his voice soothing to the man on the bed.
Then he remembered their arrival at Tobolsk airport.
‘Was it a transport plane?
Like a Herc?’
‘Herc’ was a service name for the Lockheed Hercules, a vast four-engined turbo-prop that was the backbone of Western military transport fleets.
The Russians had an equivalent, a two-engined high-winged transporter known as the ‘Curl’.
Leeming nodded.
Duncan turned to Myeloski.
‘There was a Russian military transporter at Tobolsk airport when we landed.
It's called a Curl.’
The Russian had seen nothing; he had been too preoccupied with his own problems on the flight.
‘I remember it because it had grey military markings,’ added Duncan.
The drive to the airport was too slow for Duncan.
The taxi-driver, refusing to be hurried by Myeloski's threats and curses, kept the Moskvich firmly planted behind a big lorry for most of the journey.
The road, narrow as any country road, was a single-lane journey for any vehicle.
They had spent another fifteen minutes with Leeming before the doctor had come in to check on his patient.
They had got no farther.
Leeming had written that no member of the party had any idea why they were kidnapped or who the kidnappers were.
Apart from the seclusion and pressure of being watched under a gun, they all seemed in good spirits.
They used the doctor's appearance and concern as a reason for stopping the interview and made plans to return the next morning.
Duncan had taken Leeming's hand, promised him that he would do his utmost to find the family and deliver them safe from harm.
Leeming had seemed comforted; he knew Duncan's awesome reputation.
It had taken them a while to find the taxi-driver.
He eventually surfaced in the hospital kitchens, where, through his flirtatious manner with a fat lard-like female cook, he had managed to scrounge a free meal.
An hour later they arrived at the airport.
Myeloski, not trusting the taxi-driver, told him to wait until they returned.
He then followed Duncan through the small terminal to where they could look out of the window at the tarmac ramp, on to the military side, where Duncan had seen the transporter.
The aircraft had gone, the space it had occupied now filled with a small single-engined plane.
‘Fuck it!’ said Duncan.
‘Fuck it!’ repeated his companion.
‘We have to find out where it went.’
Myeloski turned and walked towards the gate.
Duncan  followed him right through the gate as Myeloski flashed his warrant-card.
They climbed up to the small tower that was perched on top of the terminal building.
There was one air-traffic controller on duty.
He sat with a small radar screen in front of him, writing up the small strips that are used by controllers all over the world, strips that have all the different aircraft information on them.
He turned as they came up the spiral wrought-iron staircase.
‘Nobody is allowed up here,’ he barked, irritated at their intrusion.
‘Police.’
Myeloski held up his credentials.
‘Where has that military transporter gone?’
‘Which one?’
‘The Curl.
The one with grey markings.
It was parked over there.’
He pointed at where Duncan had looked.
‘I don't know.’
‘Don't argue with me,’ Myeloski shouted, ‘or I'll make sure your stay in Siberia is permanent.
In a funny farm.
Where did it go?’
‘I don't know.’
The air-traffic controller was obviously frightened.
He half stood up as Myeloski came towards him, when an aircraft called him over the radio.
He started to answer, but the policeman pushed him down again, pulled the headset off his head.
‘Where did it go?’
‘I really don't know.
Look, I have no flight-plan.’
He shoved a batch of papers towards Myeloski.
‘Military planes do not have to report where they go.
We just clear them on to the runway and tell them what other traffic we expect.
Sometimes we guide them towards a beacon.
After that, military radar does the rest.’
The Tannoy crackled again as a pilot asked for landing instructions.
‘Which direction did they go in?
You had them on radar for a while,’ asked Duncan.
‘South, then they turned east.
About twenty miles out.‘
‘Did you see who got on board?
It's important.
Otherwise, I'll let my partner deal with you.’
The threat of a maddened Myeloski was too much for the controller.
He turned and pointed to where the aircraft had been.
‘They came in a military truck.
Right up to the plane.
I couldn't see too well, but it was about ten or twelve people.
The engines were already turning over.
They took off immediately the passengers were on board.‘
‘Any children?’
‘Some small persons.
Possibly children.’
‘And the truck?
Where did it go?’
‘They left it.
Over there, by the fuelling station.’
The voice on the Tannoy came again, the pilot's tone anxious.
Duncan looked at Myeloski; they had gone as far as they could with the air-traffic controller.
Myeloski turned and left the tower, Duncan following.
On the Tannoy the anxious voice continued to crackle.
The truck had nothing of consequence in it.
Painted in military grey, it was parked, as the controller said, behind the aircraft-fuelling pumps.
After a cursory check, Myeloski went off to talk to the guard at the gate and find a torch.
Duncan got in the cab and searched for anything that might have been left.
There were only three crumpled cigarette-packs, a sign that whoever had been in the truck had possibly been waiting a long time.
The key had been left in the ignition.
In the back he found nothing.
The truck was bare down to its wooden boards.
In the darkness, he felt above his head, under the canvas canopy.
Again, nothing.
He heard Myeloski returning and went to the back of the truck.
The policeman had found a torch, which he shone at Duncan.
‘The truck was left here last week,’ said Myeloski.
‘Official military business, according to the policeman on the gate.’
He lumbered into the back of the truck, pulling himself up and over the tailboard.
Duncan could tell all the exertions of the last fifteen minutes had exhausted him.
The policeman sat on the tailboard and shone the torch into the covered area, at the same time wheezing and catching his breath.
‘The police were told that the truck was to be left alone until someone came and got it,’ Myeloski went on, having regained his breath.
‘He says all he saw was two men in the front when it arrived.
He said the canopy was down; he couldn't see inside.’
He got up and, with the torch shining into the comers, checked to see if there was anything unusual.
He came to the same conclusion as Duncan.
They were empty-handed once again.
They both climbed down out of the truck and went round to the cab.
Even with the torch, Myeloski found nothing.
He disregarded the cigarette-packs, after having checked inside each one carefully to see if a note had been left.
‘I want to check where the plane was,’ said the policeman.
‘Let's use the headlights.’
Duncan climbed into the cab and started the engine.
Myeloski stood on the running-board as Duncan drove to where the transporter had been parked.
Myeloski then stepped off and walked in front of the truck, while Duncan followed, lighting up the area for the policeman.
Duncan leant out of the window and shouted at Myeloski.
‘The wash.
It could've blown something.’
‘What?’ shouted back Myeloski.
‘From the propellers.
The plane was facing that way.
When the engines were going, the propellers could have blown something in that direction.’
He turned the truck in the direction he had pointed, Myeloski once again walking in front of the two headlights that lit his path for him.
They found the baby's bootee tucked under a rubbish-bin next to the terminal.
Inside the bootee was wrapped a small gold ring.
Duncan recognized it as Anna Oldenburg's wedding ring.
It must have been blown there by the propwash.
So it was them, and they were alive, and they had disappeared once again.
Tsentralny Hotel
Tobolsk
Western Siberia
8.15 p.m.
The hotels in Tobolsk, as in all Russian towns off the tourist map, are basic in their design, functional in their service.
Duncan's small room, with a metal-framed cot, small table and two chairs, was one of the best in the hotel, having been repainted a sickly pale green only six months earlier.
‘Refurbished,’ the desk clerk had said, when Myeloski introduced Duncan as a foreigner.
Tobolsk was not a town where foreigners were common currency.
Duncan, seeing that there was no phone-extension in the room, asked if he could use the manager's.
Although this caused some small problem because the manager had gone home and taken his office key with him, a duplicate was soon found and Duncan let into the sparse office.
The phone was not direct-dial.
Duncan picked up the receiver and waited for what seemed an eternity before the operator answered.
He gave the number of the British embassy in Moscow.
After nearly five minutes the call connected through.
The operator, surly in her attitude, didn't inform Duncan that they had answered, and it was a moment before he realized that there was someone on the line.
‘Hello,’ Duncan tentatively called.
‘Trade desk.’
It was the usual nasal high-pitched voice that the Foreign Office always sent as their emissaries abroad, a caricature of the British past, a service packed with Hooray Henrys.
Duncan realized the number he had been given was a direct line to the trade section.
‘Jack Richardson, please.’
‘Who is calling him?’
It was a lazy insolent answer.
‘Kittyhawk.’
There was silence at the other end.
When the man spoke again, the voice had changed, now urgent, now conspiratorial.
‘This is not a clean line, Kittyhawk.’
That was obvious to Duncan.
He knew the call, even from Tobolsk, was probably going through a series of monitoring stations.
‘Call Woodward,’ he went on.
‘The interpreter and policeman in fine health.
Family definitely well.
On trail.
Repeat exactly as stated.’
He put the phone down.
He hoped Woodward had the intelligence to work that one out.
He would have liked to give more information, ask someone to research the final days of the tsar; but he knew that would only have got back to the KGB, and in this game secrecy was the only key he held.
He left the office and returned to his room.
Myeloski, who was in the next room, heard him return.
He, already having made his report to Moscow, banged on the thin wall.
‘Did you get through?’ he shouted.
‘Yes.’
‘Good.
I'm coming round.’
The policeman left his room and came to Duncan's.
The Englishman had already opened the door.
Myeloski sat on a chair and heaved a big sigh, a theatrical moment signifying that the day had been hard.
‘So what is it that my people didn't tell me?’
Duncan asked, now sprawled on the bed, his legs crossed and his head resting against a thin cushion that passed for a pillow.
Myeloski looked round the room, worried.
‘It's clean.
No bugs.’
Duncan had already checked for surveillance equipment.
The Tsentralny Hotel in Tobolsk was not usually what one considered a top security risk.
‘Whatever I tell you has to remain between us.’
Myeloski raised an eyebrow, quizzical of Duncan.
‘I need your word on that.’
‘I can't guarantee that.’
‘Then, I can't tell you.
Otherwise my people will have my balls for breakfast.
We're meant to be trusting each other.‘
‘OK.
But don't compromise me.‘
‘I won't.
It's a fantastic story,’ Myeloski reflected.
‘One that even I didn't believe at first.
But it's true, no fairy-tale.’
He could see the apprehension on Duncan's face.
It was best that he knew.
‘Russia, as you know, is fucked up.
Perestroika is struggling; there are groups everywhere clamouring for independence.
We have strikes, food is short, queues grow longer, the Russian spirit is strained.
This is not what the revolution was for.
‘But, deep down, every Russian knows that our strength is in our unity.
Together we are a great nation.
But we need our independence and freedom within that unity.
Perestroika , even if it is creaking, is our only hope for the future.
Trouble is, under communism, people have learnt not to look after themselves.
The State does it all for you.
It's a simple contract.
You behave yourself, and we'll feed and clothe you.
That's what they led us to  believe anyway, even if they were the ones who had most of the food and clothes.
That was Russian democracy.
Now we are having to stand on our own.
That's difficult, when you were brought up to believe you would be looked after from the cradle to the grave.
‘Anyway, what the Government want is a symbol of unity.
Something to unify the people.
Like Germany.
Like so much of Europe.
Even Europe is becoming a united country, not a continent any longer.
Communism, and the Party — nobody trusts it any more.
Not when we're moving to a democracy, not with a multi-party system.
‘The president, who is a great man, and some of the Government, some of whom are not so great, want a figurehead, a new symbol for our people.
With our long history, with our traditions, what they have decided they want is a constitutional monarchy.
‘They want to bring back the tsar.’