

The classic accident
In recent years there have been, regrettably, a number of major accidents involving large passenger transport aircraft which have attracted much public attention.
Amongst these are the Turkish Airlines McDonnell Douglas DC-10 at Paris, and the terrible collision on the ground at Tenerife between Pan American and KLM Boeing 747s which to this day accounts for the greatest number of fatalities in a single accident.
The frightening film of the American Airlines DC-10 from which an engine fell clear during take-off from Chicago must have been shown on more television screens than any other comparable occurrence, and so it goes on until we reach the most horrifying event involving the South Korean Boeing 747 which was deliberately shot down north of Japan by Soviet Russian fighters with the loss of 269 lives.
However, it is none of these that illustrates best the problems, organisation and workings of aircraft accident investigation and the world-wide implications involved.
I believe that perhaps the best example is an accident which attracted hardly more than the most casual public attention.
It was in May 1977 that a Boeing 707/300 freighter, operated by Dan Air Services, crashed during an approach to land at Lusaka, Zambia.
There were but six people on board, all of whom were killed and although the event was duly reported in the press and other media as one might expect, the world proceeded with its normal business and within a few days the matter had receded into the background.
There was little further public interest in what appeared to be just another statistic.
To the world-wide aviation community, however, it was a different matter.
There were at that time no fewer than 522 Boeing 707/300 aircraft in operation, every one of which was directly affected by the accident.
This represents a very significant proportion of the world's airline capacity, and whatever was the cause of this accident could have substantial repercussions  threatening the safety of anyone who flew in this type of aircraft, not to mention the financial implications involved.
But to the facts.
What exactly was it that had taken place?
Dan Air were operating a quite unremarkable non-scheduled international cargo flight from London, Heathrow, to Lusaka, with intermediate stops at Athens and Nairobi.
There was a crew change at Nairobi comprising the two pilots, two flight engineers (one of whom was under training) and a loadmaster.
In addition, there was one passenger on board , a ground service engineer who was to supervise ground handling at transit stops.
The major part of the flight from Nairobi was uneventful and the weather was good, if a little hazy, at Lusaka.
After a routine descent the co-pilot reported the airfield in sight and the tower controller cleared the aircraft to final approach.
The co-pilot's reply ‘Roger’ was the last transmission received from the aircraft.
The landing gear was put down and a final turn was made towards the runway, then the full flap extension of 500 was selected and the final checks completed before landing.
Six seconds later a loud ‘break-up’ noise was recorded on the cockpit voice recorder and the aircraft nosed down violently, diving into the ground at an angle of 500.
On impact the fuselage was pitched over some 100 beyond the vertical.
Eye witnesses on the ground had seen the aircraft on what appeared to them to be a perfectly normal approach when a large portion of structure separated in flight.
The aircraft pitched rapidly forward and dived into the ground from a height of about 800 feet, the major impact being about 3.5 kilometres from the threshold of the runway at Lusaka International Airport.
It caught fire immediately.
Some 200 metres further back along the flight path the complete right-hand horizontal stabiliser and elevator assembly were found, together with some small fragments of structure from the rear fuselage.
All the occupants of the aircraft were killed instantly.
The fire was rapidly dealt with by the local fire services.
The accident happened at 9.33 a.m.
GMT on 14 May 1977 (10.33 a.m.
British Summer Time) and the news was reported to the UK Accidents Investigation Branch (AIB) of the Department of Trade a little over an hour later.
Since the aircraft was registered in the UK (as G-BEBP), the UK was entitled under Annex 13 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation to participate in the Zambian investigation into the cause of the accident, so the standing arrangements for an investigating team to be despatched to the  scene was put into effect.
Heading the team was Geoffrey (Bish) Holton, a former BOAC Boeing 707 captain who was then only weeks from his retirement from AIB, and his team included engineering inspectors Chris Protheroe and Ray Davies, the flight recorder specialist.
They were accompanied by a group of pathologists from the RAF Institute of Aviation Pathology who were regular members of the AIB teams investigating fatal accidents.
They left London that same evening and got straight to work on arrival at Lusaka next morning.
It did not require a genius to discover that there had been a structural failure of the right stabiliser in down-load while the aircraft was on final approach to land and that fundamental to the failure was a massive fatigue fracture of the rear spar of the stabiliser emanating from the hole of the eleventh fastener on the forward flange of the stabiliser chord.
(For some peculiar reason the Boeing company speak of the ‘chord’ when referring to what is known in Britain as a ‘spar boom’and for which the standard American expression is ‘spar cap.’
In normal aviation parlance the chord is the distance between the leading and trailing edges of a wing or other aerofoil.)
Plate 2 Boeing 707 G-BEBP horizontal stabiliser top chord fatigue fracture.
(Photo by permission of the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough.
However, the problem facing Geoffrey Holton was somewhat less academic.
An investigation of this kind requires knowledge and experience of the technical aspects and considerable organisational capability.
It also requires money to pay for transferring important components or sections of the aircraft structure to a place where they can be properly examined and possibly tested and for the different kinds of structural tests which have to be carried out on undamaged components.
All this must be done without delay or argument because the safety of all those people flying in the 521 other Boeing 707/300 aircraft could be at stake.
In Zambia aircraft accident investigation was the responsibility of the Director of Civil Aviation and the official who occupied that position had been appointed only the day before the accident occurred.
It was obvious that the cause of the accident was totally unrelated to the facilities provided at Lusaka, yet it is internationally agreed that the State in which an accident occurs has the responsibility of instituting and conducting the investigation.
Such a burden on the State of Zambia was quite unfair and inappropriate in terms of technical resources and money requirements, so the Director of Civil Aviation invoked an adjunct to the basic rule to the effect that the State of occurrence may delegate the whole or any part of the conducting of the investigation to the State of Registry.
Such a decision would, of course, require the acceptance of the State taking on the responsibility (and its cost).
This was a case for quick and positive action.
As Chief Inspector of Accidents it was within my domain to agree or reject the proposal, so Geoffrey Holton telephoned me at my home that Sunday morning and I immediately agreed to the UK being responsible for the investigation.
Having disposed of the simple administrative matter in a commonsense way, I then spoke to Chris protheroe who told me about the fatigue failure of the right stabiliser spar.
He also mentioned that an engineer from the Boeing company had arrived and was informing his company of the failure.
Quite clearly it was for me to initiate action to ensure that all aircraft of that type were checked for similar fractures at the earliest possible moment, but the responsibility for ordering such an inspection lies with the airworthiness authorities of the States in which the aircraft were registered and not with the accident investigation authorities.
In the UK the airworthiness authority is a division of the Civil Aviation Authority and in charge of that division was John Chaplin (who was subsequently appointed  Group Director, Safety Services in September 1953).
John was an old friend who in the early 1960s had helped me greatly with my struggles to persuade the powers-that-be of the necessity of making the carriage of flight recorders in major public transport aircraft mandatory.
He was also, incidentally, a fellow sailing enthusiast.
I telephoned him at home immediately and told him about the fatigue failure, adding my recommendation that he should order the examination of all UK registered Boeing 707/300 stabilisers for signs of similar failure at the earliest opportunity.
I also asked him to get in touch with the FAA in Washington so that they, as the airworthiness authority which originally certified the aircraft type as airworthy, could take appropriate action by informing the airworthiness authorities of all the States in the world that operated those aircraft.
John Chaplin did not hesitate.
He ordered the inspection of all UK registered aircraft of the type to be carried out, before the next flight if possible.
This ensured that aircraft out on the routes at outstations lacking facilities for making the checks could fly to a place where it could be done.
I also told John Chaplin that I would inform the National Transportation Safety Board in Washington (the accident investigation authority in the USA) of the situation so that there would be no question of action being delayed because of poor communications between the UK and the USA.
Naturally, I was well acquainted personally with my opposite number in the USA, as John Chaplin was with his.
Whether or not these relationships cut through any red tape I do not know, but the red tape did not have much of a chance in these circumstances.
Nonetheless, the Americans did not immediately appreciate the urgency of the matter.
Their inspectors merely called for visual inspections and dye penetrant checks, as opposed to the ultrasonic testing called for in the UK.
However, as the results of the first inspections started to come in the seriousness of the problem was realised and the US authorities eventually went so far as to call for the use of specially made ultrasonic probes for detecting cracks round the fastener holes.
It is perhaps interesting to note that, despite the urgency of the situation, the convention that the accident investigation authority of one State communicates with the accident investigation authority of another State and the airworthiness authority of one State communicates with the airworthiness authority of another State was adhered to in the alerting procedure.
Within each State, of course, the accidents people are in close touch with their own airworthiness authorities, but it would have caused disruption if the accident investigators of the UK had contracted the airworthiness authorities in the USA thereby cutting the others out of the information loop.
At the same time this was an occasion for using the telephone, not cables, teletexes or letters which could be misdirected or might end up lying on the desks of the wrong people.
The amount of work this alerting action brought about was substantial because of the large number of Boeing 707/300 series aircraft flying in the world, all of which were necessarily involved.
Included in the 707/300 series was the 707/400 series fitted with Rolls Royce engines.
Although it was well established which major airlines were currently operating them, many others of these aircraft had been resold, sometimes several times over, to smaller companies.
Boeing had done their best to keep tabs on which aircraft had been sold to whom but some were no longer in service or had been damaged and discarded while one or two had even lost their identity, so that it was difficult to trace where they were and under whose jurisdiction they fell.
Fatigue fractures, by their very nature, are more prevalent in structures that have been subject to stress over a long period of time.
One operator will, of course, accumulate flying hours on a particular type of aircraft more rapidly than another and the ‘high time’ aircraft are the most vulnerable.
The Lusaka casualty was originally owned by Pan American and had accumulated some 54 000 flying hours with that company before it was sold to Dan Air, and then a further 2000 flying hours were added before the accident occurred.
On Monday 16 May the inspections started and British Airtours, a subsidiary of British Airways, were the first to come up with a cracked spar.
The aircraft, a well used Boeing 707/436, had spent much of its life on the trunk routes of BOAC and it had accumulated about 47 000 flying hours up to the time when the crack was discovered.
Only the top surface of the upper chord of the rear stabiliser spar is readily visible and the crack when it was shown to me looked no bigger than a human hair lying across its width, partially hidden by paint and the dirt of many years' service.
The entire stabiliser was removed to the AIB hangar at Farnborough and a new one fitted to allow the Airtours aircraft to resume service.
But this was only the first.
In the next few weeks no fewer than  thirty-eight aircraft were discovered with fatigue cracks present in the stabiliser rear spar top chord.
It is basic AIB practice that the investigating team carrying out the original field investigation follows the work right through all the stages of testing and researches to the ultimate production of the report, thus ensuring complete continuity throughout.
However, Geoffrey Holton's imminent retirement complicated the issue especially as the UK involvement had been up-graded from mere participation in a Zambian investigation to full responsibility for carrying out the investigation.
Also Chris Protheroe was still in Lusaka carrying out the more routine, though no less important, procedures in the field to ensure that all necessary information was recorded before the team left.
By now the Boeing company had realised that this was a matter of fundamental importance to one of their primary aircraft types and they sent their top rank engineers and metallurgists to participate, under the supervision of American investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board, in the UK investigation.
I therefore decided to strengthen and redeploy the AIB team in preparation for what would obviously become a major task for the next eighteen months or so.
I placed Geoffrey Wilkinson, a Principal Inspector of Accidents (who has now succeeded me as Chief Inspector and head of AIB), in charge of the investigation.
He is a former test pilot and qualified on the Boeing 707.
In support I supplemented the engineering team with more members of the AIB engineering section.
Meanwhile, Chris Protheroe cut out the sections of the fractured stabiliser chord and returned to Farnborough with the pieces for examination by metallurgists from both the Royal Aircraft Establishment and the Boeing company.
One of the significant features of the examination was the high degree of agreement achieved between the metallurgical experts in an activity where they were concerned with the most advanced aspects of fracture mechanics.
Then there was the problem of recovering the larger portions of wreckage, chiefly from the tail areas and rear fuselage of the aircraft.
The Boeing 707 is a big aeroplane, and sorting out what is important and necessary to the more detailed examination that is to follow and what can be cut off and discarded as scrap requires sound judgement.
AIB had just the man for this task — an engineering inspector with more experience of such matters than any other I have met.
Jimmy Lett joined AIB in 1944, when all  investigations were concerned with World War II military aircraft, and he had been doing the job ever since.
His brief was simple: charter a large cargo plane and bring back to Farnborough all the pieces of wreckage that will, in your judgement, need to be examined in detail in connection with this investigation, and do it at the least possible cost to the taxpayer.
Jimmy chartered two Canadair CL44 cargo aircraft and in order to get the left and right stabilisers and rear fuselage sections on board, had to cut much of the wreckage — without, of course , destroying any evidence that might subsequently turn out to be required.
This is where his knowledge and experience really paid off.
Within a couple of weeks all the important wreckage was at Farnborough and the rest was disposed of as scrap at Lusaka.
Organisationally, the investigation was under control and for the moment the focal point was Farnborough.
It had now become clear that it was necessary to understand why what had been designed and certified as a fail-safe structure had collapsed in the air in quite normal flight operating conditions.
Without wishing to get too involved in technicalities, it is worth explaining that a fail-safe structure is one in which there are one or more pieces of redundant structure (i.e. not subject to loading in normal flight) which are capable of carrying the flight loads in the event of a failure of the primary load bearing structure.
It goes without saying that once the primary structure has failed there must be provision for the failure to be detected by some means before the redundant structure itself is weakened by continuous flight loads.
The alternative to a fail-safe structure from the airworthiness certification point of view is establishing, by means of full scale testing, the fatigue life of the structure concerned and then replacing it well before the end of that life is reached.
In the case of the Boeing 707/300–400 series aircraft the stabilisers were certified on the basis of a fail-safe structure, but on the earlier versions of the (smaller) Boeing 707/100 series in which there were only two, instead of three, chords (Boeing nomenclature) in the stabiliser rear spar, fatigue testing produced cracks in the rear spar upper chord rear flange (as opposed to the forward flange in the accident aircraft) after 240 000 simulated flights.
This is something like twelve times the number of flights G-BEBP had carried out when the failure occurred.
The reason for this substantial discrepancy had to be established.
Boeing had the facilities to test aircraft structures to destruction, and they also had some old Boeing 707/300–400 series that had been  traded in for more modern aircraft from which stabilisers could be taken.
Having established that they had no signs of any fatigue cracks on the rear spar chord, the left and right stabilisers from two different aircraft were set up on the test rig.
In terms of flying hours both units had been in use for about 55 000 hours, during which something like 20 000 flights (or landings) had been made.
These components were, therefore, far more representative of the structure of G-BEBP than two brand new units would have been; indeed the period in which they had been subjected to the stresses and strains of flight was remarkably similar to that of the accident aircraft.
The tests followed a progressive programme terminating in the destruction of the tested stabilisers, and the official report on the accident states that ‘the character of the spar failure produced on test was strikingly similar to that evident in the wreckage of G-BEBP’.
The result of the tests was to illustrate that the failure of the right stabiliser on G-BEBP occurred because of an inherent inability of what was believed to be a fail-safe structure to carry the flight loads subsequent to the fracture of the rear spar top chord (a primary load bearing structure); this was a feature of the basic design and construction rather than some factor specific to G-BEBP.
I was never told exactly how much these tests cost, but I understand it was well over one million dollars and probably nearer two million.
Boeing paid for it all, and perhaps it would be well for the more cynically-minded who believe aircraft manufacturers are only in the business to make money to remember that Boeing had no legal obligation to contribute a single penny.
This indicates in a practical way that the Boeing company, at least, is sincere in its concern for the safety of people who fly in its aircraft.
Meanwhile Chris Protheroe, who spent much of the next few months at the massive Boeing plant in Seattle, was trying to discover the origin of the fatigue fracture of the stabilizer rear spar top chord.
This was a long and complicated task involving analysis of the manner in which fretting of the top skin of the stabiliser at its attachment to the chord had taken place, the elongation of the fastener holes and the shearing of the fastener.
Checking the type of materials used revealed that some lower strength aluminium ‘cherry lock’ fasteners different from the originally fitted ‘hi-shear’fasteners had been fitted during service.
This was significant, but even more important was the effect of a  stainless steel skin being used on the top inner portion of the stabiliser.
It turned out that during the initial flight test programme of the Boeing 707/300 a lack of stabiliser torsional stiffness became apparent.
One of the modifications carried out to correct this was the replacement of the light alloy material of the inner torsion box top skin with stainless steel.
This was done after the basic stress analysis work had been carried out.
The net result was that the stiffness distribution of the structure was significantly altered, creating the high fastener loadings which led ultimately to the fatigue failure in the rear spar top chord.
The reason for the puzzling way in which the structure had deformed and broken up was thereby revealed and, since the static tests had shown that the structure was not fail-safe, the separation of the stabiliser in flight was satisfactorily explained.
It only remained to write everything up in a comprehensive report.
Boeing had been kept in the picture at every stage of the investigation and were able to tell their customers what long term action was necessary to preserve the structural integrity of their aircraft and the US authorities, through the participation of the accredited representative from the NTSB, were also fully informed.
In the UK the CAA, too, had been fully involved in every stage of the investigation, and so it was that all the necessary corrective measures were taken as far as the Boeing 707/300–400 series was concerned and the respective airworthiness authorities were fully informed.
The Boeing 707 was now a safer aeroplane, but it was felt in AIB that some important matters of principle and practice needed to be changed so that the same sort of thing could not happen again with a different type of aircraft.
The safety recommendations again at the end of the official AIB report reflect this longer term view and, bearing in mind the fact that modern large public transport aircraft are now being used for fifteen or twenty years before they are discarded, the implementation of these recommendations is clearly of the highest importance.
The recommendations were as follows:
1.
When an aircraft has been certificated against fail-safe criteria, those portions of the structure considered significant in the fail-safe design should be identified in the approved inspection schedule and their relative importance defined.
2.
Defects involving the structure identified in recommendation 1 should be reported to the manufacturer and the airworthiness  authority to enable a ‘fleet picture’ to be developed and appropriate action taken.
3.
When an aircraft design has evolved significantly, a critical assessment should be made by the certification authority in association with the manufacturer as to the validity of extrapolation of the original design data when applied to a developed aircraft variant.
4.
After an aircraft type has been established in service for some years, a searching ‘mid-life’ review should be carried out by the manufacturer to the satisfaction of the certification authority when all aspects of the aircraft's structural performance should be studied in the light of fleet service experience and current design knowledge.
The accident Investigators
It so happened that it fell to the lot of Geoffrey Holton and Chris Protheroe to do the donkey work in the Lusaka accident, but it could have been any of the twenty or so investigators in AIB.
It was entirely fortuitous that the aircraft involved was a Boeing 707 and that Geoffrey had formerly been a BOAC Boeing 707 captain.
It would have been too much of a coincidence to have expected Tony Cable to be the engineering investigator at the top of the go-team list since he had worked in Seattle for the Boeing Company before he joined AIB (the ‘Branch’, as it is known by its members) and his personal knowledge of that company's products is obviously substantial.
It is just not possible to keep an accident investigation organisation at constant readiness every day and night, high days and holidays, and at the same time guarantee to be able to send investigating teams that are always personally experienced with the particular type of aircraft involved.
What you can and must do, however, is ensure that all the investigators are expert in every sense in the techniques of investigation and au fait with all aspects of operating modern aircraft, particularly the large public transport types, but they must also have access to reliable and impartial specialists in the type of aircraft concerned.
There is obviously a major point of policy involved in this matter, so let us look at the organisation and training of these people who play such an important part in the safety of the travelling public.
In the UK the investigators, or Inspectors of Accidents as they are formally called in the Regulations, belong to two distinct categories: pilots and engineers.
Officially the pilots are called Inspectors of Accidents (Operations) while the engineers are known as Inspectors of Accidents (Engineering).
Because of the difficulties involved in searching out the true cause of an accident it is important to recruit highly qualified personnel, and it is no secret that AIB has sought — usually with success — to skim the cream off  the aviation industry when it comes to personnel selection.
So far as the ‘ops’(operations) inspectors are concerned, there is one major problem.
To allow sufficient time in the post for training in investigation techniques and the all-important legal aspects and also for the accumulation of a broad experience at this fairly unusual job, it is desirable to recruit inspectors at a reasonably early period in their career, especially if they are ultimately to rise to supervisory or management positions in the organisation.
On the other hand they cannot be expected to do their job efficiently unless they have a substantial background of experience in commanding large public transport aircraft or their military equivalents.
These days it takes a long time to get into the ‘left-hand seat’ or captain's position in a major airline; indeed, as time goes on more and more airline pilots have to recognise the possibility of reaching retirement before they achieve command.
On the financial side, it is well known that airline pilots are amongst the best paid professions and until the redundancies of the early 1980s changed the picture somewhat remarkably few of their number were prepared to accept a civil servant's salary after having enjoyed a very good standard of living.
The result is that the best qualified recruits for the Branch as Inspectors (Operations) tend to be in their late forties or early fifties, rather than the middle thirties as is preferred.
Youth (a comparative term in this context) and experience do not normally go hand in hand.
Happily, however, there are exceptions to the rule and it would be difficult to find a greater breadth of overall flying experience than that which is to be found in the dozen or so Inspectors (Operations) in AIB.
The basic qualifications any candidate for one of these positions must have include the possession of an Airline Transport Pilots Licence and a wide experience of flying.
Those who can also show some engineering or other relevant qualifications are, of course, more likely to land a job.
The requirements for military or test pilots place less emphasis on the number of flying hours required and this is compensated for by the more stringent type of flying they have been involved in (though it is true that a large proportion of airline pilots learned to fly and served in military aviation before becoming civil pilots).
Nonetheless, military pilots are still required to qualify for an Airline Transport Pilots Licence soon after joining the Branch if they do not already possess one, since much of their investigating career is going to be closely concerned with civil regulations and civil operating techniques as well as with the  technicalities of flying.
On the Inspector (Engineering) side the picture is quite different.
The complexities of modern aircraft are very substantial, from the basic structure and engine aspect to the hydraulic, electric, electronic and life support (pressurisation and temperature control) systems, not to mention the more fundamental and somewhat more theoretical matters such as aerodynamics, strength of materials (and, most important, the mode of failure of materials), theory of flight in fixed wing, rotary wing (helicopters and autogyros), lighter-than-air craft, and so on.
Some aspects of the engineering spectrum are so involved that, contrary to its general policy, AIB has been compelled to employ specialists as, for example, in the field relating to the operation and interpretation of flight data and voice recorders, aircraft instrumentation and radio installations.
It is quite clear that the norm so far as qualifications for Inspectors (Engineering) are concerned needs to be graduate aeronautical engineering standard plus practical experience.
Happily, the UK is well supplied with good aeronautical engineers, chiefly as a result of the excellent training schemes of the major aircraft and engine manufacturers.
AIB is too small an organisation to have room for the pure academic whose theoretical knowledge may be most profound but whose practical knowledge is limited.
AIB engineers are not afraid of getting their hands dirty; in fact, they claim that they are lucky on most occasions if it is only their hands.
There is no place in the Branch for the engineer who sits in an office shuffling papers.
Engineering recruits are required to show that they know what it is to be exposed to the hard world of reality by gaining direct experience in day-to-day aviation practice.
So much for the basic qualifications of recruits into AIB.
But what of their training in the Branch?
Firstly, they are given a two month course covering most aspects and procedures of aircraft accident investigation, after which they spend several months assisting experienced investigators in the field until they are sent out, with full responsibility for their particular side of the investigation (i.e. operations or engineering), on one of the many minor accidents to private or club aircraft.
This may not seem to be a very daunting task, but when a man who has been flying four engine jet transports all over the world is suddenly confronted with a young pilot who has just written-off the landing gear of a light aircraft while trying to land in a cross wind, the true qualities of  the new inspector are under test.
This is especially true if the pilot turns out to be a young lady and the shock of what-might-have-been gives rise to tears during her interview with the investigator.
Similarly, the newly recruited engineer who six months previously was poring over the computer printout of a great new turbo-jet test run trying to find out why there was a short-fall in the power output will not find it at all easy if his first job is with a little four cylinder piston engine.
However, both will have started their long journey up the learning curve.
As the months go by a wider range of aviation opens up to them, and the wisdom of a systematic approach to each accident becomes apparent.
Furthermore, the individuals gradually become knowledgeable over the entire spectrum of aviation to the extent that when they are confronted with something new and different, like hot air balloons or hang gliders, or, at the other end of the scale, vectored thrust and variable geometry (swing-wing) aircraft, they are not thrown off balance on the first encounter with something different.
In other words, they become true general practitioners in aviation.
One of the most difficult problems in maintaining the efficiency of an aircraft accident investigation organisation is keeping up with, or at least trying to keep up with, the rapid rate at which aviation technology advances.
I have always been very conscious of this because the last aircraft I flew as a regular airline pilot were the old Douglas DC-6 B and the Convair 340.
Although they are by present standards very much ‘old hat’, it is surprising when you look back to realise how little change there has been in the fundamental principles of some systems.
Take, for instance, the modern totally integrated flight director systems.
Although the presentation of information on the instruments or cathode ray tubes is infinitely better than it was in those old aircraft, the basic type of ‘director’ information is little different from what we had on the old zero-reader.
Similarly, when I joined AIB in 1955 I had already flown automatic coupled approaches for some months on scheduled passenger services in the Convair 340 with the auto-pilot coupled to the instrument landing system.
With that comparatively primitive system we were able to fly down to a height of 200 feet above the runway.
It was not so different from the modern, much more refined auto-landing system we take for granted today.
At the same time, other aspects of the job had changed completely.
Turbine engines had not been introduced into regular airline use when I joined the Branch; also one's practical application of aerodynamics had to be radically modified to cope  with the characteristics of high speed flight with swept wings and all the associated developments that went with this revolution in flying.
So the challenge to keep abreast of technological developments in aviation was one I entered into with considerable enthusiasm when I was appointed Deputy Chief Inspector in 1967.
Way back in 1957 I had talked my boss into allowing me to learn to fly helicopters with the British European Airways Helicopter Unit at Gatwick and in 1960 I sat in on the first ground school course BOAC conducted for their senior captains converting to the first Boeing 707s.
However, I was not allowed to fly the aircraft because of the high cost and lack of availability of aircraft for mere civil servants when BOAC had their own pilots to train.
It was not until 1965 that I was able to do the full course and fly the Boeing 707.
Having once negotiated the hurdle of the initial course it was not so difficult to persuade those who held the money bags to allow me to fly the aircraft every six months or so to maintain some sort of standard in flying up-to-date jet transports.
It was one of my responsibilities as Deputy Chief to ensure that the standard of efficiency of all members of the Branch was maintained.
This period around 1967 was the time of the big change-over in the airline business from piston engines to jets, so it was clear that the programme I had selfishly pursued for my own good was in fact a proper course to follow for all Ops inspectors if they were to continue to be able to do their work effectively.
Of course the greatest problem was money, and flying aeroplanes is an expensive business.
But after putting the case as powerfully as I could — including some speculation about the alternative of an inefficient and out-of-date inspectorate — the point was conceded and the money found.
The result was that the Ops inspectors were not only permitted but actually put under pressure to qualify and remain current on at least one large modern public transport aircraft while at the same time flying club and private aircraft as well.
This remains the standard today — and I know of no other country in the world, including the USA, that keeps its accident investigators at such a high standard of training and efficiency.
Making arrangements for the engineering investigators to cope with the jet age posed much less difficulty.
In the first place it was not quite so expensive.
Secondly, engineering inspectors of AIB had been called upon to provide the engineering input to RAF boards of inquiry concerning accidents to military aircraft ever  since the Branch was part of the old Air Ministry and consequently their expertise in jet aircraft investigating techniques was already at a high pitch before the first civil jet airliners entered service.
It was comparatively easy for them to follow courses on particular aircraft types or their engines (which were mostly civil versions of military aircraft engines anyway) to ensure that the engineering side of AIB was also keeping up with the times.
There was, however, one area in which I felt there could be improvement.
Sometimes it is tempting for an engineer to become so preoccupied with his own problems in an investigation, particularly if he needs to delve deeply into one particular feature or component that has failed, that he loses sight of the ultimate objective — to establish the cause of the accident.
The engineers sometimes failed to appreciate the full significance of some of the things they established during their detailed examination of aircraft wreckage.
This was especially so with anything relating to stability and control or handling the aircraft in the air, since some modern aircraft have quite complicated power operated or aerodynamically assisted flying controls.
To give the engineers a better appreciation of this aspect I encouraged them to learn to fly up to private pilot standard and I am happy to say this was approached by many of them with considerable enthusiasm.
The first to come forward was Bertram Morris who, back in his student days in the 1930s, had obtained a pilot's ‘A’ licence which had long since expired.
He re-qualified and gave the lead.
(He has now retired from the Branch but remains active, instructing student investigators at the aircraft accident investigation course at Cranfield Institute of Technology.)
He was followed by Jimmy Lett who had taken up gliding initially and then progressed into powered aircraft.
It is now the norm for an Inspector (Engineering) to hold a Private Pilot's Licence as well as engineering qualifications.
The expense of improving the standards of qualification and training of both categories of investigator was high, but these days newly recruited Inspectors (Ops) usually have a current qualification on modern aircraft and the cost is concerned merely with maintaining their currency on these types and giving them the opportunity to fly light aircraft regularly.
Some of them have not handled light aircraft since they learned to fly, which can be as much as twenty years earlier.
These inspectors, pilots and engineers comprise the core of the Accidents Investigation Branch, some twenty-eight in number and  divided roughly fifty-fifty between the two categories.
There are also two specialist inspectors whose work is directly associated with flight data and cockpit (aural) recorders and every aspect of their interpretation.
This covers a remarkably wide field starting at the installation, calibration and purely functional end of flight recorders and leading on through their recovery from the wreckage and the techniques of repairing and reading damaged recordings to the ultimate interpretation of the spoken words and environmental noises in the cockpit and the determination of the aerodynamic implications of recorded data.
The lengths to which these specialists will go to extract the very last fragment of information are quite extraordinary, some of which are described in detail in chapter 7.
Very closely associated with the flight recording aspect is the computer specialist whose primary job is processing the recordings to a read-out from which positive and, most importantly, unbiased information is derived.
His equipment includes AIB's own digital computer which can be used as an information store and a calculator (very useful in solving aerodynamic problems) as well as for reproducing the recorded information in an easily understood form.
Completing the AIB complement is a small secretarial and administrative staff and an information officer who is, in reality, the custodian of all papers, reports and information generally relating to aircraft accidents of all kinds throughout the world.
All these people are, as I have mentioned, civil servants because it is a government responsibility to have a competent organisation which will establish how and why members of the public are killed or maimed in aircraft accidents and what can be done to reduce the risks of flying.
It can be equated with the inspectorates of mines, railways or atomic energy and is, therefore, a branch of one of the government departments.
When it was formed in 1919 AIB was a branch of the old Air Ministry which controlled civil aviation as well as the Royal Air Force, and it remained in that department until immediately after the Second World War when the Ministry of Civil Aviation was formed.
In due course this small department, and AIB with it, was gobbled up by the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation, after which AIB passed first to the Ministry of Aviation and then to the Board of Trade.
Subsequent re-organisations of the main government departments took the Branch into the Department of Trade and Industry, then into the Department of Trade.
Finally, after going full circle, AIB finished  up in 1983 in the Department of Transport which seems to me to be where it should have remained all the time.
Not that these changes made very much difference inside the Branch itself which just kept on doing its job, but reporting to a succession of different ministers.
The question arises whether it is really necessary to attach AIB to any particular government department.
History seems to indicate otherwise.
There is no question of any political party policy for AIB, to be implemented by a minister, any more than there is for the judiciary.
It is true that somebody has to appoint the Chief Inspector as the Lord Chancellor appoints the judges, but other than that there is not, or rather there should not be, any political interest in the functioning of AIB at all.
It may be contended that members of parliament wish to ask questions in the House when major aircraft accidents occur and so it is necessary to have a particular minister to give the answers.
Ministers, of course, give answers on a basis of the advice of their senior civil servants, and in such cases the individual concerned is the Chief Inspector of Accidents.
Although many questions in parliament about aircraft accidents are put in a genuine spirit of inquiry, it cannot be denied that others are merely tabled in an attempt to embarrass the minister or government of the day.
It is a matter of public record that when a certain accident occurred only one day after the political pendulum had swung over and a new administration had taken office, an irate member of parliament demanded to know why the government had not taken steps to prevent such things taking place.
That MP was the minister of the previous administration having responsibility at the time for the administration of civil aviation.
Such cynical behaviour and insincerity is a waste of parliamentary time and contributes nothing to democratic government.
Furthermore, it does nothing to improve the safety of flying and neither does it affect the manner in which aircraft accident investigations are carried out.
But to return to the more practical matters of the organisation of AIB.
The head of the Branch is the Chief Inspector, and it was my good fortune to hold that position from January 1974 until August 1981.
I had learned to fly in the Fleet Air Arm in 1940 and immediately after the war I spent nearly two years in South America flying for the Shell company.
I joined KLM Royal Dutch Airlines in 1948 and was based initially at Curaçao in the Netherlands West Indies.
After three glorious years in the  sunshine I was sent to Holland where I remained until I joined AIB in 1955 as a Senior Inspector of Accidents (Operations).
I mention this to illustrate the basic professional pilot background that is typical of Ops Inspectors of AIB.
My successor as Chief Inspector was Geoffrey Wilkinson, a pilot of wide experience who fought in Korea in a USAF squadron under the exchange scheme, then flew in operations with the RAF.
He is a graduate of the world renowned Empire Test Pilot School (ETPS) and subsequently ran his own small airline before joining AIB.
After joining the Branch he became qualified on Boeing 707s and later on Concorde.
The Chief Inspector is, of course, responsible for everything AIB does — the buck stops with him as far as aircraft accident investigation in the UK is concerned.
Geoffrey Wilkinson's deputy was Peter Bardon who joined the RAF soon after the Second World War and served all over the world, particularly in the Far East.
A test pilot too, he was the Chief Flying Instructor at the Empire Test Pilot School before he retired from the RAF to join AIB.
(He retired from AIB in December 1984 and has been succeeded by Don Cooper, another graduate of ETPS and a helicopter specialist.)
The Deputy Chief Inspector is responsible for the organisation, efficiency and training of all personnel in the Branch.
In other words it is his job to ensure that AIB is an effective investigating machine ready to cope with all the tasks that fall within its jurisdiction.
On the operations side the Branch is divided into two sections with a Principal Inspector in charge of each, and there are four Inspectors (or Senior Inspectors) in each section.
On the engineering side there are also two principal Inspectors and six or seven engineering Inspectors and Senior Inspectors are in each section.
The small flight recorder section is headed by an Assistant principal Inspector.
Every week a readiness roster or ‘go-team’ is drawn up with the names of three or four Operations Inspectors and three or four Engineering Inspectors who are ready to go to an accident site at a moment's notice.
It may be a light aircraft twenty miles away, in which case they will go in their own cars, or it may be on the other side of the world, in which case they will be on the next airline flight in that direction and might not be home again for several weeks.
Each day (or weekend) there is a co-ordinator, who is either the Deputy Chief, one of the Principals or the Assistant Principal, to whom all accidents are reported.
He will take the decision whether  to send an investigating team and, if so, how many inspectors of each category.
If it is a major accident to a wide bodied jet he could send them all.
Normally, though, it will be just one or two inspectors of each category.
The Principal in charge of the section from which the investigating team leader is drawn then accepts responsibility for the entire investigation.
He provides all the back up from headquarters when the team is despatched and he could well follow the ‘go-team’ to the accident site.
It all sounds a bit complicated and slightly confusing, but the system has evolved over many years and it works.
From the individual's point of view, his whole life is governed by whether or not he is on the ‘go-team’ or co-ordinator's list, and when at home, out of working hours, every time the telephone rings there is the possibility that the inspector will be on his way to any place on earth within an hour or so.
This can have a rather unsettling effect over a long period — the family man cannot promise to take his children to the seaside or his wife out to dinner more than a week ahead without the chance that he might be in India, California or Scotland at the time he promised.
When he returns, however, and becomes deeply involved in researches and investigation at headquarters, he is not placed on the readiness roster until the immediate demands of that investigation have been met.
This allows him some respite at least and his home life is less subject to instant upheaval.
The only time he can guarantee not to be called out is during his annual leave, of which plenty of notice is necessary.
I mention this only because it is one of the dominant features in an inspector's life, the shadow of which he feels at all times.
There are, of course, many occupations in which similar demands of constant readiness are made, but when it goes on for twenty years or more it is inclined to upset a good domestic relationship.
There is also the other side of the coin.
Two or three weeks away from the home environment in a tense atmosphere at the site of a recently crashed aircraft where everyone, officials and public alike, is looking to you to resolve the puzzle of how it came about can be stimulating, even exciting.
The Inspectors all know each other extremely well and sometimes have to tolerate each other 's little foibles, too.
This is the natural result of having to live and work close together, under pressure, maybe for several weeks on end.
And it is not always a matter of sleeping in a swank hotel nearby; several investigating teams have, from time to time, had to share a tent on or near the  accident site because of the remoteness of the crash.
But they are true professionals who get on with the task in a methodical manner, no matter what the circumstances.
Though they probably would not admit it if confronted directly with the proposition, most inspectors in AIB have a quiet regard for each other and one or two are even admired privately for their capability and achievements.
Such mutual respect, of course, is one of the fundamental elements of high morale, dependability and efficiency, and I count myself fortunate to have been associated with such people for over a quarter of a century.
So far I have only described what might be termed the ‘normal’, or perhaps ‘regular’, inspectors, concerned as they are with the operational and engineering aspects of the job.
There remain the specialists who look after the flight recorder side of aircraft accident investigation.
A comparatively recent sub-section, as it were, of the Branch, it only came into being in 1973 when Ray Davis joined the Branch as the sole practitioner amongst us in the use of flight recorders.
He was joined by Peter Sheppard a few years later when it became apparent that so much information was potentially available from flight recorders that it needed another man to help interpret all the data.
The trio is completed by Dick Vance, the computer ‘driver’, though his activities extend over the whole breadth of keeping the flight data read-out units in working order and developing the programs and electronics generally.
Ray Davis or Peter Sheppard are sent out with any ‘go-team’ involved in an investigation of an aircraft fitted with either a flight data or cockpit voice recorder.
No account of the work of AIB would be complete without recognition of the enormous contribution made by the pathologists of the Royal Air Force Institute of Aviation pathology.
Ever since the late 1950s almost every AIB team sent out to investigate a fatal accident has been accompanied by at least one RAF pathologist.
Indeed, it is not so much a case of them accompanying the AIB team members as of them being part of the team.
Currently the head of the unit at RAF Halton in Buckinghamshire, where they are based, is Group Captain A.J.C. Balfour.
One of the members of his staff, Wing Commander Ken Underwood Ground, has been on so many accident investigations now that he is regarded as an unofficial honorary Inspector of Accidents by AIB.
When he retired from the RAF he remained a most active civilian doctor on the staff at Halton and continued to rush off with the ‘go-team’ in response to any call from the AIB duty co-ordinator for some  years afterwards.
The work of the pathologists is very important in aircraft accident investigation and AIB regard the detailed examination of the bodies of those killed as being as important as the detailed examination of the aircraft structure or its engines.
A very simple (and true) illustration of this point arose in one accident where a BOAC pilot died flying his own privately owned small aeroplane only the day after he had landed his Boeing 707 full of passengers at Heathrow.
The AIB investigators were somewhat baffled as to the cause of the accident until the RAF pathologist rang them up from the local mortuary.
The pilot died of a heart attack in the air and he was probably dead before his aircraft hit the ground.
Accidents involving carbon monoxide or other poisoning or anoxia (possibly associated with cabin pressure failures) are other obvious cases in which the pathologists take a leading place amongst the investigators.
But it is the more routine work they do that really makes the significant contribution to safety in the air, such as the identification of the origin of injuries sustained in survivable accidents which has led to the de-lethalisation of aircraft cockpits and cabins.
This encompasses the design of passenger seats and the methods of body restraint with seat belts, the establishment of the forces they are designed to withstand and even the strength of the seat attachments to the floor of the aircraft.
It is sometimes very strange to see an AIB Engineering Inspector and an RAF doctor with their heads down inside the wreckage of a crashed aircraft in the AIB hangar at Farnborough, arguing, discussing or merely agreeing that this or that component is not strong enough to sustain survivable crash forces on a row of seats or that a part of the galley constitutes a lethal hazard against which passengers could suffer injury in a crash.
Usually a modification can be devised to eliminate the particular hazard.
It is largely thanks to the perseverance of a former CO of the RAF Institute of Aviation Pathology, Group Captain Mason (now Professor of Forensic Pathology at Edinburgh University), that there is international recognition of the contribution of the aviation pathologist in aircraft accident investigation by way of a specification recommending their positive involvement in formal investigations written into Annex 13 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation.
The participation of pathologists in the team effort of investigators  seeking the cause of an aircraft accident is but one example of the way specialists are brought in to apply their particular knowledge to the overall problem.
Another very important contribution comes from a department of the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE) at Farnborough concerned with all aspects of metallurgy and materials.
From many years this group was headed by Peter Forsyth who is also Visiting professor of Materials Technology in the Faculty of Engineering at Southampton University.
It was he who, together with the American metallurgists from Boeing, was able to derive so much valuable information from the fatigue fracture and other features of the Lusaka Boeing 707's stabiliser.
A specialist in failure analysis in that unit is Tony Jones, whose involvement in AIB investigations also goes back over many years.
The happy relationship between this department of the RAE which is of course part of the Ministry of Defence and AIB which is a branch of the Department of Transport is perhaps one of the less publicised examples of the way in which two government organisations can co-operate in a natural manner as the public would wish.
It seems that Dr Chris Peel, who has succeeded Peter Forsythe, is likely to continue this tradition to the benefit of aviation generally.
This means that the very substantial facilities of RAE for testing and examining materials are available whenever AIB need them.
There are also many other organisations which willingly provide their particular form of expertise when AlB need a more profound appreciation of a problem than their own resources can provide.
Unfortunately, the ugly threat of terrorism and sabotage has become more commonplace in commercial aviation in the last twenty years or so, and sometimes the perpetrators of criminal acts cause their own deaths as well as those of innocent passengers and crew.
The identification of fire arms is not difficult in crash wreckage but it is less easy to be certain that an explosion on board an aircraft in flight resulted from a bomb or perhaps a disintegrating turbine disc or an explosive decompression of the cabin.
In such cases the knowledge and experience of the Royal Armaments Research Development Establishment (RARDE) at Woolwich still provides the best chemical and physical analysis of suspect material recovered from the wreckage.
The very significant contribution RARDE made towards resolving the cause of the explosion in a BEA Comet off Rhodes in 1967 was followed in 1974 by an invitation from the US National  Transportation Safety Board to demonstrate their techniques to the FBI when a TWA Boeing 707 suffered a similar fate near Crete.
Many light aircraft and gliders are still made of wood, and the qualities and peculiarities of certain types of wood under stress can demand an intimate comprehension of the subject beyond the reasonable scope of AIB engineers.
Some types of wood have extremely tolerant fatigue characteristics while others are brittle, with little bending strength.
Again, relatively high tensile strength may be accompanied by very poor compression characteristics.
Then there is the question of adhesives and their deterioration with time.
Some of us remember stories about the famous wartime Mosquito, which was mainly of wooden construction, running into trouble with termites when it was operated in tropical conditions in the Far East.
I am still not sure whether these stories were apocryphal or not, but the danger was clearly present.
There is always an expert, somewhere, on any subject, if only you know where to find him.
On the subject of wood, the Timber Research and Development Association has assisted AIB engineers over many years.
Then there is the quite separate subject of radio and radar.
The questions which arise in aircraft accident investigation usually relate to the boundaries of radio technology — things such as trying to establish the radio propagation conditions in which some phenomenon or other gives rise to a kink in an instrument landing system localiser or glide slope but only on an intermittent basis, or the reliability of a radio altimeter in an auto-land system during an approach over surfaces with greatly differing radio reflecting characteristics.
The Royal Signals and Radar Establishment, which is also a Ministry of Defence establishment, provides the necessary expertise on these problems.
The greatest single factor that continues to arise in every type of accident is that which falls under the all embracing heading of ‘human error’.
The purist will point out that every aircraft accident results from human error of some kind; even the most complex technical failure has its origin in the work of a designer, manufacturer or maintenance engineer somewhere, and so-called ‘acts of God’ such as structural failure in extreme turbulence beyond the limits of airworthiness criteria are no more than failures of airworthiness engineers to assess the limits correctly.
(Alternatively, it may be the social acceptance of the 10–7 risk of encountering such violent conditions.)
But the normally accepted context of human error lies with those  people directly concerned with the operation of aircraft including refuelling crews, aircraft loaders, flight operations personnel and air traffic controllers as well as the flight crews themselves and, most particularly, the pilots.
This takes us into the nebulous area of psychological assessment, but it is also the case that the supply of information must be of the right type and in the right form to enable human beings to respond and act correctly, especially the air traffic controllers and the flight crew.
Ergonomics is very much the name of the game.
For special advice on this subject AIB turns to Roger Green of the RAF Institute of Aviation Medicine at Farnborough, where such things have been studied since the end of the First World War.
These are but a few of the principal sources of authoritative information that AIB look to when their own knowledge of a subject is insufficient to resolve the problem at hand.
In many cases it is the government experimental establishments that are asked to help.
In others, it could be the universities or even manufacturers' associations.
Every effort is made to obtain an unbiased opinion.
That is why commercial organisations are avoided if at all possible since it is quite unrealistic to expect a manufacturer to comment critically on his own product or not to view a rival's product with a jaundiced eye.
Legal aspects in the United Kingdom
When an aircraft accident occurs there must, of course, be a legal basis for the investigation that subsequently takes place.
Investigators, or Inspectors of Accidents as they are called in the UK, must have the authority to enter private property in order to examine the wreckage, whether it be a farmer's field of barley, someone's backyard or even — as has happened — the roof of somebody's house.
They must also be able to interview anyone involved in the operation of the aircraft, including the crew if they are available, and to impound all the relevant records, both documentary and electronic.
The retention of the wreckage for detailed scrutiny must not be frustrated because of the owner's wish to repair the aircraft and return it to service without delay.
This is where the law comes in.
Regulations have been made under the Civil Aviation Acts of 1949, 1980 and 1982 which empower Inspectors of Accidents to do these things.
There is however, one strange omission.
Neither inspectors nor the police are entitled to demand a breathalyser test or a blood or urine sample from a surviving pilot who has had an aircraft accident — though if he is killed the coroner will never refuse permission for the pathologist to test the victim's blood for alcohol content.
The regulations do, however, include the various objectives, procedures and rights of the people involved.
It is worthwhile taking a moment to look at regulation 4 because it governs the whole attitude of the AlB towards its responsibilities.
It reads as follows:
‘The fundamental purpose of investigating accidents under these Regulations shall be to determine the circumstances and causes of the accident with a view to the preservation of life and the avoidance of accidents in the future; it is not the purpose to apportion blame or liability.’
There, in that simple statement, lies a philosophy which has been pursued, advocated and accepted by the aviation world.
The substance of the words of regulation 4 now appear at the beginning of the document on aircraft accident investigation produced by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) in the 13th Annex to its convention.
The regulations give a definition of a ‘reportable aircraft accident’ and this is consistent with the definition used by ICAO.
When such an accident occurs the pilot, or if he is incapacitated the owner or operator of the aircraft, is required to notify the Chief Inspector of Accidents.
It is interesting that the statute states that Inspectors of Accidents will be appointed by the Secretary of State; also that it will be the Chief Inspector, not the Secretary of State, who will decide whether or not an investigation is to be carried out.
This latter point is all-important for it means that political considerations are not relevant to the decision which is, of course, primarily concerned with air safety.
What is, perhaps, even more important is that the Chief Inspector will also decide which accidents will not be investigated.
There could be nothing more suspicious than a Secretary of State or one of his administrative officials deciding for political or administrative reasons that a particular accident should not be investigated when a vital matter of air safety was at issue.
One can imagine a situation where a ministerial decision to follow a particular line of action or a government initiated economy, possibly relating to the provision of modern navigation aids like radar, was directly related to the cause of an accident.
It could then be only too convenient if the Secretary of State made the decision not to investigate the accident.
The Chief Inspector is totally impartial and disinterested, owing allegiance neither to government nor to industry, and he decides every case in relation to the air safety aspect, without fear or favour.
And his decision cannot be reversed.
For an official to be able to act in this way is probably unique in the world, and it is almost certain that the high motives of the draftees of this regulation have never been fully recognised.
But at least one Chief Inspector has noticed and appreciated the high trust placed upon him.
Some people might ask: ‘Why all this fuss about the decision to investigate?
Surely all aircraft accidents should be investigated without exception?’
The answer really lies in the degree of investigation that is justified and appropriate.
During the course of an average year, something between 220  and 250 aircraft accidents, as defined in the regulations, occur in the UK.
This is approximately the same number as occur in Australia where the population is, of course, much smaller but the number of aircraft registered is approximately the same.
In the USA something like 4000 accidents occur each year.
These numbers exclude accidents to gliders, hang gliders, microlight aircraft, para-gliders and other activities associated with sporting aviation.
Parachutes do not fall within the definition of aircraft and neither do hovercraft so they, too, are excluded.
It is obvious that a major accident to a wide-bodied jet engaged in public transport is going to demand a far greater investigative effort than an accident in which a pupil on his first solo flight makes a heavy landing and breaks a nose-wheel.
On the other hand, the structural failure in flight of a privately owned light aircraft of a type that is extensively used, possibly all over the world, must justify an investigation in depth while a four engined airliner carrying 400 passengers damaging its wing-tip on a passenger terminal building while taxying need not rate so highly.
The resources of the AIB and its equivalent organisations throughout the world are necessarily limited for reasons of economy, and the person in charge has to deploy his forces in the most effective manner he can devise while at the same time always keeping enough reserves in hand in case of a major catastrophe.
In this respect he is something like a general on a battlefield — except that the battle never comes to an end.
The almost infinitely variable situations that can occur illustrate the need for different types of investigation, with correspondingly different degrees of effort involved.
The UK practice is to carry out a preliminary field inquiry into all but the most insignificant accidents.
For this a minimum investigating team of one operational and one engineering inspector will be involved, together with a Royal Air Force consultant aviation pathologist if there is a fatality in the accident.
In more complicated cases or where a larger aircraft is concerned the investigating team can comprise up to a dozen investigators.
But to return to the run of the mill accident, the team will be occupied on average for about a week following which they will report back to the Chief Inspector.
Unless he considers that there are important aspects requiring further investigation in depth, the Chief Inspector will order that a summary of the facts relating to — the accident be drawn up and published in the next monthly issue of AIB bulletins.
The summary is essentially confined to  factual information, otherwise it would take on the shape of a formal report requiring certain strict legal procedures — of which more later.
But the facts are usually presented in such a way that the average person informed in aviation matters can easily draw his own conclusions.
It is likely, however, that ‘conclusions’ may appear increasingly in future AIB bulletins.
For the uncomplicated simple accident the matter rests there and a published account is available to the public anything between six weeks and six months after the accident.
If, however, the Chief Inspector decides there are reasons for conducting an investigation in greater depth, he will order an inspector's investigation to take place.
This is a formal investigation leading to a full report which includes the inspector's analysis of the facts, conclusions, and opinion as to the cause or probable cause of the accident and recommendations for the avoidance of similar accidents in the future.
The regulations state specifically that such investigations shall be held in private, and this sometimes leads to misunderstanding.
Probably the original intention was merely to contrast the procedure with that of a public inquiry (where, of course, the inquiry is in full view of the public) but for a long time the bogy of officials beavering away in private and then producing a report which damned some poor individual or organisation, without those officials being in any way accountable, was viewed with grave suspicion.
From a practical point of view, however, you cannot have a public inquiry into every accident — though heaven knows there were enough of them in the 1950s — so the alternative is an inquiry held in private.
The draftees of the regulations foresaw the possibility of misgivings with the inspector's investigation so they incorporated a number of safeguards which would, they hoped, ensure fair play.
Firstly, it is a requirement that public notice shall be given that an inspector's investigation will take place, together with an invitation to anyone who so wishes to write to AIB to draw their attention to any particular aspect considered relevant.
Strangely, this is a facility of which very few people take advantage.
Indeed, it is not unknown for lawyers (mostly solicitors) to decry the iniquities of the system of investigation in private, emphasising the fact that they have no means of putting their point of view.
When it is pointed out to them that they have already been invited to say what they like, they become rather sheepish.
In fact, ‘public notice’ comprised for many years a small    insertion in the classified advertisement section of two national daily papers and one local paper, jammed between husbands who were no longer responsible for their wives' debts and the liquidation of bankrupt companies.
Since 1972, however, the fact that an inspector's investigation is to be carried out has always appeared in the AIB Bulletin in which the summary of events is recounted.
Plate 3 The first page of an AIB bulletin.
The regulations then stipulate that before a report is submitted to the Secretary of State the inspector conducting the investigation shall inform everyone whose reputation is, in the inspector's opinion, likely to be adversely affected by the report, inviting them to make representations, i.e. to argue any point or signify any disagreement with his conclusions.
If the people concerned seek legal advice before responding, the correspondence and interviews can take months; but such people are entitled to do so provided they are also prepared to pay the lawyers' bills which necessarily follow.
From a practical point of view, it is usually more effective to obtain the advice of a technical expert on the particular subject and to argue the case on its technical merits rather than on legal niceties.
And it will probably be a lot cheaper too.
The inspector is required to consider all the points put to him on behalf of the person defending his reputation and to amend his report, if necessary, in the light of any acceptable argument.
However, it is still the inspector who decides what is an ‘acceptable argument’ and what is not.
The inspector's report is then submitted by the Chief Inspector to the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State has no authority to alter the contents of the report, and it is interesting that no Secretary of State has ever rejected one.
(At the same time it must be admitted that no Secretary of State has ever said that he accepts one either, though his order to publish a report might be taken as such an admission.)
But this is not the end of the matter as far as the discontented participant is concerned.
A copy of the report must also be sent to him at the same time that it is sent to the Secretary of State, and he then has twenty-one days in which to decide whether he will ask for a review board to examine the whole matter in public.
If he asks for a review board he gets it because there is no provision in the regulations for even the Secretary of State to refuse such a request.
Publication of the report is then held over until after the review, and this might mean a further six months.
The review board is usually chaired by a Queen's Counsel (a  barrister) with two technical assessors.
It has all the paraphernalia of a public inquiry and after all the necessary preparations are made it can go on for weeks.
Finally, the review board gives its own separate opinion to the Secretary of State who orders both the inspector's report and the review board's report to be published, and this is done within the same cover.
So much for ensuring that the rights of the individual or of an organisation are not disregarded by an inspector's investigation taking place in private.
The main effect of this procedure is twofold.
Firstly, it causes the time period between the date of the accident and the appearance of the report in public to be extended, usually by at least six months.
Secondly, it has a very chastening effect on the inspector who knows that everything he says in his report is liable to be critically examined by a review board and, if necessary, corrected for all to see — and this at the whim of those whose actions he is criticising.
Only the UK and countries whose legislation is based on English law (mostly former colonies) go to these lengths to get a proper balance in aircraft accident reports.
The procedure is very demanding in terms of time and trouble for the inspectors who enter wholly into the spirit of what is required.
Curiously, when you ask them how they would react to deletion of the procedure of inviting criticism of their draft reports from the regulations, their response is along the lines of: ‘If we were not required to do it we would probably carry out a similar course of action unofficially in order to ensure that we had not missed an important point.’
It is a fact that very few draft reports are not amended in some respect as a result of this procedure.
Since 1969 when the procedure was brought into effect there have only been three review boards, though AIB have conducted something like fifteen inspector's investigations each year.
On only three out of approximately 180 occasions, therefore, can it be said that the inspectors had been less than absolutely fair in the opinion of those who were criticised.
One review board chairman agreed completely with the inspector, one completely disagreed and in the third case the chairman merely rewrote the report in different words without coming down on one side or the other.
Inspector's investigations represent the mainline activity of AIB, and their reports all follow the same pattern specified by ICAO so that air safety researchers know exactly where to find particular information.
Part 1 of the reports is always concerned solely with  factual matters — the facts of the accident that were established through investigation in depth; part 2 comprises a detailed analysis or discussion of the facts; part 3 contains the conclusions and opinion of the inspector as to the cause or probable cause of the accident; and part 4 lists recommendations for the avoidance of similar accidents in the future.
It is interesting (and very helpful to the researcher) to note that part 1, the facts, is always sub-divided into numbered paragraphs which are always concerned with the same subjects.
This practice is followed by the great majority of States, thanks to the co-ordinating activities of ICAO.
The subjects are as follows:
1.
History of the flight
2.
Injuries to persons
3.
Damage to aircraft
4.
Other damage
5.
Personnel information
6.
Aircraft information
7.
Meteorological information
8.
Aids to navigation
9.
Communications
10.
Aerodrome information
11.
Flight recorders
12.
Wreckage and impact information
13.
Medical and pathological information
14.
Fire
15.
Survival aspects
16.
Tests and research
17.
Additional information
18.
Useful or effective investigation techniques
The only people who tend to disregard this very practical and helpful arrangement are lawyers appointed as commissioners of public inquiries.
Some possible reasons for this are discussed later in this chapter.
On the few occasions when a particularly serious accident involving great loss of life or a very large aircraft occurs, the Secretary of State will order a public inquiry.
This is the only occasion when the Secretary of State can direct the Chief Inspector who may in all probability have already commenced an inspector's investigation.
There is no conflict here because the investigating activity of the AIB inspectors will proceed in the same way in  either case; but instead of the inspector in charge producing the report all the factual information is passed to the Attorney General who will present the case at the Public Inquiry.
The commissioner who conducts the inquiry is appointed by the Lord Chancellor (in England) and he must be a barrister of not less than ten years' standing.
He is assisted by two or more technical assessors also appointed by the Lord Chancellor.
In the most recent public inquiry concerning the BEA Trident that crashed at Staines near Heathrow in 1972, the commissioner was a High Court judge who was also an experienced wartime pilot in the Royal Air Force.
He is currently the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Lane.
Such is the importance attached to an inquiry of this kind.
Without delving into the legal niceties too deeply, the procedure of a public inquiry generally takes the following form.
The Attorney General tells the story of what happened and indicates those aspects of the accident that are particularly relevant for close examination.
In due course he calls witnesses — eye witnesses, police, inspectors from the AIB and others — to substantiate his account.
To assist him he is supported by leading and junior counsel, the Treasury solicitor or senior lawyers from his office, and by the Chief Inspector of Accidents.
All those people and organisations who were involved in the accident, such as the operators and the manufacturers of the aircraft, the pilots and other crew members, Air Traffic Control, the Civil Aviation Authority, the passengers and anyone else who in the opinion of the commissioner has a proper interest in the accident, are entitled to be represented; usually by counsel briefed by solicitors, but laymen are not excluded.
These representatives are entitled to cross-examine the witnesses produced by the Attorney General and subsequently present witnesses of their own, who in turn, are subject to cross-examination by the Attorney General and all the other representatives.
This examination and cross-examination is seen in legal terms to be testing the evidence.
During the course of the inquiry the principal participants will be taken to Farnborough to see the wreckage, and many exhibits including the flight data and cockpit voice recordings will be produced in court.
When all the evidence has been examined each representative will sum up his particular point of view, with the Attorney General having the last word.
The court activity is then terminated and after two or three months spent busily drafting the report the commissioner and his assessors will present their report to the Secretary of State who in turn will  order it to be published.
Public inquiries have the advantage that they remove all suspicion of cover-up from any government department, and it is true that the examination and cross-examination by skilled counsel usually leads to the veracity and relevance of the evidence being established.
Furthermore, the public inquiry commands the attention of large and powerful organisations which would like to disregard or even try to belittle the findings of an inspector's report if it commented unfavourably on activities for which those organisations had responsibility.
Above all, the public inquiry system is seen to alleviate public anxiety and concern that there might be something fundamentally wrong with the way certain facets of aviation are being conducted.
But it is not all beneficial and to the good of aviation and flight safety.
Lawyers, basically, are trained for and used to an adversary system — where they act either for the prosecution or plaintiff, or for the defence — and seem always to see things in terms of guilt or innocence.
Much more to the point, lawyers are always aware that a big aircraft accident inquiry is the preliminary to much subsequent civil litigation, and that if they can persuade the court to a point of view favourable to their client they can be paving the way to considerable financial benefit at a later stage.
The primary consideration of establishing the cause of the accident with a view to preventing similar accidents in the future is not the motivating force behind the legal advocate.
In an inquisitorial process of this kind lawyers do not stand out as good investigators; they appear to be obsessed with the necessity to attribute blame.
Somehow lawyers, unlike trained technical investigators who seek to establish the cause of an accident in order to prevent a repetition no matter who was at fault, seem to be unable to disregard responsibility and liability aspects.
This is presumably because of the prospect of subsequent litigation.
Time and again one gets the impression that the lawyer is trying to persuade the court that anyone other than his client was to blame for the accident.
Other shortcomings of the public inquiry system include a presumption, by lawyers, of knowledge in highly specialist areas when in fact they often miss the very point which their technical advisers are putting to them.
Their tendency is to concentrate on the matters they understand and ignore those that they don't.
Lawyers acquire a smattering of technical jargon and by using it to  each other create the impression that they have a full comprehension of the subject.
They are, of course, very adept at absorbing everything in a brief but this is no substitute for a profound knowledge and understanding of the subject.
Similarly, lawyers can waste an enormous amount of time on irrelevant issues because it seems to them that certain trivial points ought to be important.
These difficulties arise to some extent from the inability of most technicians to communicate adequately, while at the same time a person with a lawyer's background and education is seldom capable of assessing scientific factors and natural laws without allowing personal opinions to become involved.
Furthermore, the lawyer can only respond to knowledge that has already been established; he has little scientific imagination, especially when it comes to pushing at the frontiers of advancing aerodynamics or similar matters.
If you doubt it, try discussing with a lawyer the sensory perceptions of a pilot rotating an aircraft into a climbing attitude while increasing engine power and accelerating, and whether or not the pilot can believe he is pulling the aircraft right up on to its back.
An articulate Inspector of Accidents who has personal experience of these matters is possibly better able to make an assessment of such things than a lawyer who has little more experience than turbulence in flight spilling some of the champagne in the first class section of the cabin.
Experience has shown that public inquiry reports are long and difficult to follow.
Fact is frequently mixed with opinion and it is sometimes difficult to establish whether certain evidence is accepted or is merely being discussed.
No public inquiry report has yet been written in the ICAO format, making it difficult for researchers into air safety matters to extract the information they are looking for.
This indicates the kind of attitude of mind that says ‘lawyers know best how to write reports’, but looking back, particularly over the public inquiry reports of the 1950s, the quality is pretty poor and remarkably uneven.
The modern coldly objective though clinically accurate inspector's report is a far more useful vehicle to convey the message of what needs to be done.
Since it is the consistent policy of successive UK governments to support ICAO, and ICAO has advocated a particular way in which aircraft accident reports should be written, it seems obvious that the appropriate regulations should require commissioners of public inquiries to follow the practice that is universally acknowledged as sound and practical.
An aircraft accident investigation is a long, painstaking process in which the sometimes complicated sequence of events comes to light only slowly and frequently in the wrong order.
Indeed there is, if anything, a tendency for the final events to be revealed early in the investigation while the factors which led to them remain obscure until a much later stage, and some do not ever emerge at all.
The media, of course, have an insatiable appetite for news of any kind and a major aircraft accident is as a gift from heaven to reporters.
It is also manna to lawyers looking for juicy briefs in civil litigation.
Any information available soon after a crash is avariciously pounced upon by both journalists and lawyers, and exploited to the full in order that they may derive the maximum benefit for their own particular ends.
It is, however, sometimes imprudent for the investigating authority to release every scrap of information it has gained before all the implications are examined, in case more damage results.
A very clear example was the accident to a Viscount which crashed across an auto-bahn near Munich in 1965.
The distribution of the wreckage was such that from the position of the outer wing panels more than two kilometres from the main wreckage it was clear that there had been a structural failure of both wings in the air.
What was not apparent was that there had been a total flight instrument failure because of a complete electrical breakdown while the aircraft was flying in cloud.
The aircraft went into a dive and when it broke through the cloud base the pilot saw the ground less than 1000 feet below him.
He naturally tried to recover from the steep dive before striking the ground.
Unfortunately there was so little height in which to pull out of the dive, and the aircraft was going so fast, that gross overloading of the wing structure was absolutely inevitable.
At that time there were two or three hundred Viscounts flying in various parts of the world, and to have grounded all Viscounts because the wings had come off in flight in this accident would have contributed nothing to air safety.
The investigators could see that the fractures of the wings indicated overloading, but such a technical assessment measured against the indisputable evidence that the wings had failed in flight would have been unconvincing, not to say inconvenient, to the news hawk and the potential litigant.
Incidentally, it was many months before the whole truth was  discovered and much proof was derived from the flight data recorder.
This was a wire type recorder, and it so happened that during the very substantial impact a piece of structure cut across the take-up spool presenting the investigators with something like 11 000 lengths of wire about ten inches long on which the events were recorded.
To deduce even the sequence of the pieces of wire was difficult enough, but sufficient wire was played back through a specially made read-out head to establish beyond doubt what had happened.
This is but one example of what can happen.
There are other examples where totally wrong conclusions have been drawn from the publication of early evidence, causing considerable unnecessary distress to many people in the meantime.
To advocate a policy of anything less than unlimited release of all information as soon as the investigator has discovered it represents heresy to the media, giving rise to accusations of cover-up and officials being excessively secretive, while the legal profession are liable to take on a more aggressive attitude by suggesting incompetence and serving  subpoenae requiring the compulsory production of evidence in court.
The USA even has a law under the Freedom of Information Act which requires organisations like the NTSB to make their files available to the press and public at all times.
This law has not served the best interests of air safety even though it might have satisfied a curious public.
Then there is the other side of the coin.
Some people suffer very real financial loss with the death of the family wage-earner or as a result of the failure of an aircraft or one of its major components.
In order to establish their claim against those organisations or individuals who are responsible for the failure, the courts require that notice of a claim is given within a stipulated time of the accident.
In a complicated matter like an aircraft accident it can be very difficult indeed for a lawyer, let alone a layman, to identify the party against whom a claim should be registered in the absence of a full accident report from a competent and disinterested organisation such as AIB or the NTSB.
Since it necessarily takes a long time to produce such a report, the mandatory period within which the legal claim should be registered has frequently, even usually, expired before the report is available.
Recognising this, AIB publish monthly Bulletins well within this critical period giving a summary of the relevant facts of an accident in a balanced account of what happened.
Further, it is  the current practice of AIB, at any rate, to provide more detailed factual information to representatives of those seeking to establish a claim on condition that the same information is made available to all other parties to the action including, of course, the potential defendants.
Some lawyers, particularly American lawyers, representing US aircraft or component manufacturers make unreasonable demands upon the official investigators, requiring copies of their complete files, notes, photographs and flight data, cockpit voice and radio recordings.
In the USA, because of the Freedom of Information Act, they are legally entitled to receive it all.
The surprising feature is the certainty with which American lawyers presume that they have such a right outside the USA.
However, in the UK they are required to specify in precise terms what information they require.
Every reasonable effort is made to provide it but if they merely demand ‘everything you've got’ on a particular accident they are told firmly but politely that such a request is not acceptable.
It is, of course, not the place, duty or even wish of the investigators to frustrate the administration of justice in respect of proper awards for damages but some of the awards, particularly in the USA, have got out of proportion, particularly when it comes to product liability cases brought by the representatives of dependants of those killed in an accident.
The result has been that in some cases the insurance premiums which manufacturers have to pay to protect themselves are so high as to make it no longer profitable for them to remain in business.
The amounts which are claimed are frequently out of all proportion to the loss suffered but, since damages are awarded in some courts by the jury responding to the eloquent pleas of plaintiff's counsel, the nearest million dollars seems to be not an unusual amount.
This civil litigation can and does sometimes work in direct conflict with the best interests of air safety.
When a particularly difficult and obscure accident occurs, the aircraft manufacturer may suspect the possibility of the failure of a particular component, and acting in a responsible manner and with the highest possible motives may circulate to all operators of that type of aircraft a design for modifying the component just in case it was the one that failed.
Similarly, an airline or even government operated air traffic control authority might amend a procedure promulgated in its manuals for the same reason.
Such action, taken as a precautionary measure in the interests of air safety before the investigators are able to identify the true cause of the accident, has been in the past, and might again be in the future, seized upon by lawyers involved in civil actions relating to the accident as an acknowledgement of a shortcoming (or, in their eyes, an admission of guilt) by the manufacturers, operators, air traffic control, etc.
The effect of this, quite naturally, is for even the most conscientious of organisations not to bring out modifications or amendments and to keep their fingers crossed in the hope that their suspicions of a failure or shortcoming will prove to be unsubstantiated.
In this manner the alleged dispensation of justice can be seen to be in direct conflict with the best interests of air safety.
What, then, is the answer?
The Warsaw Convention, with all its amendments, protocols and variations, seeks to limit the liability of international air carriers to a specific sum of money while acknowledging the air carrier (airline) as the only party liable; that is to say aircraft manufacturers, component manufacturers, pilots, engineers, air traffic controllers and governments who operate airports and navigation services are excluded from all liability unless negligence can be proved.
However, the USA have never ratified the Warsaw Convention so as far as air carrier liability is concerned within the USA the sky is the limit and any party whose negligence can be proved is liable.
The influence of the USA is such that American lawyers seek to impose the effect of US law (which of course varies from State to State within the Union) upon the rest of the world.
A classic example of this was an action brought by the dependants of a US citizen killed in the BEA Trident which collided with a Yugoslavian DC-9 over Zagreb.
In order to bring the action within the US courts the dependants sued McDonnell Douglas in the Californian courts for significant damages, citing the inadequate view afforded to the pilots as a result of the configuration of windows and pillars between windows in the cockpit.
Although the case did not succeed, it illustrates how American lawyers will contrive to have civil cases arising from aircraft accidents anywhere in the world heard in a US court.
The basic reason for this trend is that in general very much more money is awarded in the US courts than anywhere else; also the courts there tend to favour the individual against the big organisation.
Little heed seems to have been paid to the argument that before stepping into an airliner everyone knows a slight risk is involved.
For public transport flights it is a very small risk indeed, but it can only be regarded as a prudent action to take out personal life insurance before one voluntarily exposes oneself to the hazards of flight.
It is thus questionable whether the awards of large sums by way of compensation are justified.
The system of awarding punitive damages as a deterrent to manufacturers or operators falling below acceptable standards of safety totally ignores the huge bureaucracy of regulation and control that exists to preserve those standards.
Coroners, procurators fiscal and examining magistrates
When somebody dies of something other than natural causes almost all civilised countries, except those engaged in war or civil rebellion, have a legal procedure under which the cause of the death is investigated.
In England and Wales this is done by the coroner's court, as indeed it is in some States in the USA and in Canada, and in Scotland it is the procurator fiscal who looks into the matter and will, if he considers it to be an appropriate case, raise the matter at a fatal accidents inquiry in the sheriff's court.
Alternatively he may be instructed to do so by the Scottish Office.
Legal systems abroad vary widely but the one common in many European countries derives from the Napoleonic Code and places responsibility for investigating suspicious or unnatural death upon the local magistrate.
We have to thank the somewhat substantial conquests of that outstanding French general for a high degree of uniformity in some aspects of European law, for his armies were followed by another army of administrators who imposed their own type of law as well as order wherever they conquered.
Aircraft accidents obviously involve unnatural death, and it is necessary that both the technical aircraft accident investigator and the coroner, or his equivalent, understand each other 's responsibilities and appreciate where their duties can overlap.
There are very few professional aircraft accident investigating officials who do not appreciate the broad scope of the coroner's (or procurator fiscal's or magistrate's) responsibilities but it is remarkable how many coroners have very little idea of what the technical aircraft accident investigator is trying to do; and it is even more surprising that many do not bother to try to find out, even when an aircraft accident occurs in their area of jurisdiction.
A remarkable  proportion regard the technical investigator as an unwelcome intruder who presumes to usurp the coroner's function.
There is, however, a simple distinction between their duties.
One investigates the circumstances and causes of the death of a person while the other investigates the circumstances and causes of the aircraft accident.
The two are complementary but different aspects of public administration.
The coroner in England and Wales is appointed by the Lord Chancellor and once appointed he (or she) is technically answerable only to the Queen.
Almost all coroners are either solicitors (a few are barristers) or doctors and a very small number have both legal and medical training and qualifications.
The procedure for carrying out an inquest in England and Wales is laid down in Coroners Rules.
The manner in which coroners perform their official duties varies widely.
Some merely regard their function as a necessary official procedure best conducted with the least possible fuss and difficulty, while others regard themselves as the only impartial authority capable of investigating a sequence of events involving fatality no matter how technically complicated it might be.
One such coroner, who was both a lawyer and a doctor, presided over an inquest on the death of the occupants of a Viking aircraft which crashed on a number of council houses at Southall not far from Heathrow Airport.
Despite the fact that the minister responsible at the time for civil aviation had already ordered a public inquiry into its cause, the coroner called for evidence into every technical aspect of the accident, rejecting the assistance and advice of the AIB inspectors concerned, and finally made his own finding as to the cause of the crash.
The inquest went on for many days and it had all the appearances of the public inquiry that was to follow.
Subsequently, the minister set up a committee under Mr David Cairns QC, and including Mr Peter Masefield (as he then was) and others, to look into the law and practice of aircraft accident investigation in the UK.
Their report clearly indicated that this coroner had been wrong in his judgement of how he should conduct his inquest which, in the opinion of the committee, should have been held after the public inquiry into the cause of the accident.
While this does not appear to be such an earth shattering decision, it is one of the few occasions when a coroner's action has been criticised.
Coroners have the right to impound evidence relating to the  death being investigated and this can include the wreckage of an aircraft, radio, flight data and cockpit voice recordings, and all the navigation and technical records of the flight.
These things, of course, are the very same evidence that the Inspector of Accidents has the legal right to impound for his investigation of the cause of the accident.
In practice, the AIB inspectors know exactly what to look for in this highly technological activity while the coroner's officer, who is usually a policeman — a PC or sergeant or occasionally an inspector — is totally in the dark.
However, the AIB inspectors always try to be helpful and provide the coroner with the basic information he needs to establish the cause of death, but nonetheless, they sometimes get little thanks for the efforts they make to assist the coroner and sometimes they are treated in a rather off-hand manner.
However there are, of course, some very good coroners who say to the inspector at the outset, ‘You go ahead and do your job of investigating the cause of the accident and I will carry out my formal inquiry into the cause of death, and in those areas where our activities tend to overlap let us co-operate together but equally let us not interfere with each other in respect of those matters in which we are not qualified to make judgements.’
In Scotland there have been fatal aircraft accidents to private aircraft where the occupants were killed in their leisure time rather than while working in their normal occupation, and the procurator fiscal has decided not to take the matter on to the formal fatal accidents inquiry because he has satisfied himself that it was a matter of accidental death in an aircraft accident without suspicious circumstances.
However, in the more usual case of a fatal accidents inquiry it is more common for the sheriff to become quite deeply involved in the technical causes of the accident to the extent of making recommendations for preventing other accidents in the future.
Such technical recommendations are of little practical value and sometimes provoke vigorous protest from professional aviation people, but from the patient painstaking AIB inspector who has gone to great lengths to provide the sheriff's court with as much guidance, information and advice as he can, there will be little more than a wry smile or shrug of the shoulders.
The inspector is not bound by the sheriff's opinion and his report will in all probability put matters in the correct perspective with appropriate recommendations.
Abroad, the situation varies greatly from one country to  another.
In Europe where the Napoleonic Code is dominant the investigating magistrate appears generally to have a stronger claim on the wreckage and records (including flight recordings) than the professional aircraft accident investigator.
In France they have devised a logical system whereby senior officials of the Bureau d'Enquête d'Accident are formally recognised by the magistrate as officials of his court, thereby relieving the magistrate himself of much responsibility relating to highly technical  matters of which he has little comprehension while at the same time enabling the professional investigators immediate access to the wreckage of the aircraft and its records, etc. in their pursuit of the cause of the accident.
Such a happy situation does not, unfortunately, exist in Italy where the magistrates appear unwilling to trust any government official or technical expert.
This gave rise to one situation involving a UK registered BAC 1–11 which had crashed near Milan when the investigating magistrate seized the flight data recorder.
This was a modern device, electronic in operation, in which pulses recorded on fine wire the binary coded values of five basic flight parameters.
The magistrate refused to allow the UK accredited representative to take the recording to London for read-out and insisted that it could be done in Italy.
The UK accredited representative did not doubt the technical ability of Italian electronics experts to read-out the pulses, but without access to the particular code being used the whole effort would be useless.
Furthermore, there was a read-out machine for this type of recorder very close to Heathrow and the whole recording could be back in the magistrate's hands within twenty-four hours.
But no, it had to be processed in Italy.
A week or so later the Italian experts returned the recorder to the magistrate and told him they were unable to read the recorded information.
The accredited representative, who was growing anxious about the amount of time being wasted while the flight recording remained unread, then told the magistrate that he was concerned that another BAC 1–11 might suffer a similar accident while they remained ignorant of its cause and that if this should happen the magistrate would have to bear the responsibility.
The result was electric.
It nearly caused a diplomatic incident but it had the effect of making the magistrate agree that the recording should go to London.
He decided, however, that he would take it himself so he flew to Heathrow and with great ceremony, in the presence of AIB staff, the recording was finally read-out.
However, the automatic print-out was made with ultra-violet light on photographic paper which required exposure to strong light to fix it.
In his hurry to return to Italy the magistrate did not allow sufficient time for the necessary light exposure and, despite protests from the technicians, rushed off with the recording.
Inevitably, when he arrived home he found he had nothing but a blank sheet of photographic paper.
He was convinced he had been tricked.
In Greece, where the legal system is again based on the Napoleonic Code, there is a law that once the next-of-kin have identified the body of a relative it must be released to them for burial.
When a BEA Comet blew up in 1967 as the result of an explosive device on board and crashed in the Mediterranean between Rhodes and Cyprus, very little wreckage was recovered from the sea which was about 11 000 feet deep at that point, so the question of salvage did not arise.
However, some passenger seat cushions and a significant number of passengers' bodies were recovered and taken to Rhodes.
Fortunately the seat cushions and some of the bodies which were examined by the RAF consultant pathologist attached to the AIB investigating team were ultimately shown to contain identifiable products of the explosion, but when the pathologist was about to commence examination of another body it was identified and, without further ado, removed for burial.
At that time it was not realised that the investigating team were already in possession of the evidence necessary to determine the cause of the accident and it was entirely fortuitous that the body that was removed from under the pathologist's nose was not one containing vital evidence.
The Greek authorities made no effort, indeed it is not known whether they had the legal authority, to allow the post mortem examination to take place before the body was released, despite the scarcity of important evidence in a case of this kind.
It would seem from all these experiences that coroners, procurators fiscal and examining magistrates very seldom consider that they have a duty to act in a manner which will assist the aircraft accident investigator.
Indeed, it is all too often the case that the investigator is required to put his interests second to those of the legal investigator of the cause of death.
It goes without saying that there should be an independent official investigation, inquiry, inquest — call it what you will — into the cause of an unnatural death; but is it not time that ancient laws and practices  were brought up to date to deal with modern circumstances?
It is a matter for serious consideration whether the legal authority should be required to do anything more than establish identity and ascertain that the person was in fact killed as the result of an aircraft accident rather than deliberate sabotage.
It should then be for the official aircraft accident investigating authority to establish the cause of the accident and to make recommendations for avoiding similar accidents in the future, and it should be for the civil courts to decide who is liable to pay damages and to whom.
As to the application of legal procedures deriving from Napoleonic law, it is perhaps worth considering that arrangements formulated in the days of the horse and cart may not be appropriate to a supersonic age.
The International Civil Aviation Organization
In 1944 representatives of every allied government met in Chicago and drew up a convention containing ninety-six articles which were to provide the framework upon which civil aviation could be rebuilt after the end of the Second World War.
The convention established the International Civil Aviation Organization with its headquarters in Montreal and set up a secretariat which would become a most effective machine for ensuring that a rapidly developing civil aviation industry was not hampered by the red tape generated by the hundreds of frontiers that would have to be crossed.
Its basic objective was to stimulate the regularity and safety of international air transport.
After the United Nations was established in 1945, ICAO was accorded the full status of a United Nations Agency.
The ICAO secretariat soon established a number of bureaux to cover various aspects of civil aviation such as financial, legal, commercial and other matters, but one severely practical part of the secretariat was the Air Navigation Bureau.
This was manned by a number of highly professional officers skilled and experienced in the technicalities of flying, and they put into practical effect the policies decided on by the member States to standardise procedures, facilities and levels of safety throughout the world.
These covered among other things communications, navigation aids, regular weather forecasting and reporting, airport lighting, flight crew licensing standards, aircraft design and maintenance standards.
Almost every aspect of operating civil transport aircraft was included, besides such immediate peripherals as air traffic control and aerodrome fire protection equipment.
An important feature was the establishment of specific aircraft performance requirements, that is to say the ability of an aircraft to be able to take off in given circumstances within a specified  distance and also to come to a stop after landing in not more than a specified length of runway.
The aircraft, in their allocated categories, were required to have their climb performance before and after an engine failure demonstrated and measured.
All these matters were basically concerned with the maintenance of acceptable standards of safety and it is only fair to acknowledge the fact that the high standard of safety in public transport aircraft today results to a large extent from work done by ICAO.
To complete the picture, it was only right that ICAO should also be concerned when the system of safety failed and there was an accident.
Article 26 of the ICAO convention imposes an obligation on the State in which an aircraft accident occurs to institute an inquiry in certain circumstances and, as far as its laws permit, to conduct the inquiry in accordance with ICAO procedure.
It also entitles observers from the State in which the aircraft is registered to be present at the inquiry if that State is not the State in which the accident occurs.
Article 37 of the convention specifies that standards and recommended practices for aircraft accident inquiries should be drawn up and produced in Annex 13 to the convention.
In 1951 the first sessions of the Accident Investigation Division of ICAO took place and each member State was entitled to appoint a delegate to the meeting.
As a result, the first edition of Annex 13 was drawn up and the basic principle of one State (the State of registry) being able to participate in the investigation conducted by another State (the State of occurrence) was established.
The specifications of all the annexes fall into two groups, the ‘standards’ and the ‘recommended practices’.
The former are considered by the council of ICAO to be necessary to help bring about the regularity and safety of air transport while the latter are considered merely to be desirable .
Any signatory of the convention is required to register a formal difference with the secretariat if its own laws preclude it from observing a standard while failure to implement a recommended practice only stimulates a request that the secretariat be informed.
An experienced accident investigator working for many years in many countries soon gets to know which States are prepared to make considerable efforts to find the true cause of an accident and thereby acquires substantial knowledge of the problems and pitfalls that can be encountered.
Unfortunately, it is not always these States which exert the most influence at  ICAO divisional meetings where the policies are worked out by the national delegates that attend.
In the first place the number of States that work diligently on their accident investigation responsibilities is regrettably rather small, and although their delegates may approach a divisional meeting with the same view of the agenda items their ideas can be, and all too frequently are, frustrated by States which make little or no contribution in this field of activity.
Even worse, some States attempt to bring political prejudice into the conference room and elicit support from other delegates with similar persuasions or from similar geographical groups such as when the African States or Central American States decide to oppose a proposal, pleading encroachment upon their sovereignty.
The truth is that aircraft accident investigation should be carried out in a completely impartial and objective manner.
Political and nationalistic considerations are totally irrelevant.
Then there is the substantial influence exerted by the USA which frequently wishes to persuade the rest of the world that the American way is best.
Fortunately this is usually true, but there are occasions when the commercial instincts of the USA or their sensitivity to political lobbying are only too apparent.
It was from the USA that the ‘group system’ of investigation now advocated by ICAO originated as, to a certain extent, did the present format of ICAO aircraft accident reports.
But it was also the USA which refused to agree to limit the number of years that the old mechanical engraved foil flight recorder would be acceptable.
It is well known that the substantial cost of re-equipping the many US registered airliners with electronic digital flight data recorders was behind this opposition.
Notwithstanding such frustrations, the members of the secretariat who work in the Accident Investigation and prevention Section retain an amazingly high enthusiasm and enjoy the wholehearted support of many States.
Their work has without doubt led to higher standards of efficiency and integrity by national investigators.
The procedures of Annex 13 are realistic and practical if implemented in the proper spirit and with good will.
However, if they are applied in a legalistic or academic manner it is only too easy for the best interests of air safety to be pushed back into a position of secondary importance.
My first experience of the use of Annex 13 came very quickly.
After joining the AIB in July 1955 and doing my first investigation on an Auster that had ditched in the Bristol Channel in August of  that year, I was sent out to Tripoli, Libya in September 1955 to assist Penny Garnons-Williams (known to many in the aviation industry as Garney Bill) to investigate an accident to a BOAC Argonaut that had crashed at Castel Benito in a sand storm.
Libya was still a Kingdom in those days but it had no aviation legislation, so the entire investigation was conducted in accordance with Annex 13, though with considerable emphasis on the British interpretation of it.
It was not until many years later when I was a principal inspector in 1965 that I had my first direct encounter with ICAO itself.
There had not been a meeting of the accident investigation division for fifteen years and there had been a great deal of development in the civil aviation scene in the intervening period, so a meeting was called in Montreal in January and February of that year.
John Veal was Chief Inspector of Accidents at the time and led the UK delegation while I was its only other member as alternate delegate.
John was an old hand at ICAO meetings in his former capacities first as UK Director of Aircraft Safety and Licensing and later as Director General of Navigational Services, and I was to learn much from him.
For the first half of the meeting the division was split into two large committees to work through the agreed agenda.
However, recognising John's substantial experience of ICAO matters, the division appointed him as chairman of committee ‘A’, with the result that I was left virtually as head of the UK delegation.
This might have been all very well for my ego but it put me in the position of a complete novice, with my boss listening critically from the platform to everything I said on his behalf.
I learnt and survived.
To add to my worries, committee ‘A’ decided that there was a need to provide guidance material in Annex 13 as to the manner in which an aircraft accident investigation should be organised; to this end a working group would be set up, charged with the duty of presenting a draft report with recommendations to the committee and ultimately to the meeting.
In their wisdom (or because of the lack of it) they appointed me as working group chairman.
As things turned out it was the Americans who made the greatest contribution, drawing heavily on the practice they had adopted in the last few years to incorporate the expertise available from industry and the unions into their CAB (as they then were) investigations.
Bill Halnon was the US representative on the working group and his knowledge and experience, to say nothing of his kindness and courtesy, were quite invaluable.
The result of  this work was the ‘group system’ of investigation which was attached to the next edition of Annex 13 and which is now contained in the ICAO Manual of Aircraft Accident Investigation.
This system is now used throughout the world.
Later on during the same meeting I was attached to another working group whose task it was to revise the standard format of what was then called the ‘Summary of the Report’.
This has now become the standard internationally recognised format of the final report (see chapter 3, page 34).
One of the most important changes made to Annex 13 at this meeting gave formal recognition to the State of manufacture of an aircraft in an accident investigation.
This not only entitled the State which manufactured and certified the aircraft type to participate formally in an investigation by means of an officially accredited representative, and so make their very considerable resources and knowledge available to the investigators, but it also ensured that when an accident occurred in one of those States which did not possess a well developed aviation industry, all the necessary expertise would be forthcoming and available to the investigation.
The next meeting of the Accident Investigation and prevention Division, as it was now called, was altogether different.
It was called in 1974, just after I had been appointed Chief Inspector of Accidents.
During the years immediately preceding this meeting AIB had been involved in a number of foreign investigations conducted abroad concerning foreign registered aircraft that were not manufactured in the UK.
This meant that under the then current ICAO arrangements in Annex 13 the UK was not entitled to appoint an accredited representative to participate in these investigations, notwithstanding the fact that in each case a very significant proportion of the passengers were British nationals.
The most publicised of these was the terrible DC-10 accident to a Turkish Airlines aircraft near Paris.
The flight was from Paris to London, but because there was a strike in London affecting BEA's Paris to London service a large number of British nationals were transferred to the Turkish DC-10 flight.
They were all killed.
Another case involved a collision in mid-air between an Iberian DC-9 and a Spantax Convair Coronado over Nantes in France, in which the great majority of the passengers in the DC-9 were British.
They, too, were all killed.
A third case was an inclusive tour flight conducted in a Russian made Tupolev Tu 134 A by a Yugoslav charter company in which every passenger was  British.
This aircraft crashed in Yugoslavia.
In each case I pressed the national authorities concerned to allow me to send a UK ‘observer’ to their investigation and I am happy to say that our request was agreed to on each occasion.
However, if these States had merely applied the specifications of Annex 13 we would have remained unrepresented.
I believe my German colleagues did not enjoy the same facilities in another case of a Spantax Coronado that crashed in Spain full of German nationals on an inclusive tour.
When a large number of British nationals are killed or seriously injured in an aircraft crash, ministers have to answer questions from MPs about the event and, of course, ministers look to the government aircraft accidents investigation organisation for information on the subject.
If we had no rights of participation in the subsequent investigation, we would have no reliable means of obtaining the information.
Furthermore, what was happening to us was also happening to others, notably the Germans, and could of course happen to anyone.
I saw this as a shortcoming of Annex 13 so I wrote to ICAO asking that the matter be dealt with at the meeting of the Accident Investigation and Prevention Division in 1974.
For some reason I never understood, ICAO was not sympathetic and refused to include the item on the agenda, so I decided to attack head-on.
I got in touch with my French and German colleagues who agreed to support a UK proposal to place the matter on the agenda when it was presented for approval at the first meeting.
Now, an amendment to an ICAO agenda requires a two-thirds majority in plenary session, and we were but three European States who wished to put this through.
So I planned our campaign carefully.
The UK delegation was to comprise myself heading the delegation and two principal inspectors, Geoffrey Wilkinson and Peter Bardon, who subsequently became Chief and Deputy Chief Inspector respectively.
We already had the French and Germans with us, and we divided the remaining eighty-odd delegates between us so that on the day before the first meeting we could explain our intentions and our reasoning to as many delegates as we could find.
I think we managed to contact about half of them personally in this way.
For the rest we had to depend on such persuasion as I could muster in my speech opposing the adoption of the agenda at the first meeting.
One or two delegations pleaded that since the UK proposal that ‘the State whose nationals  comprised more than fifty per cent of the passengers should be entitled to appoint an accredited representative to participate in the accident investigation’ had not appeared on the agenda published by ICAO, they had not been briefed how to respond.
Among these was the USA, but their delegation saw the obvious sense in the proposal and while they were not authorised to approve it they would not oppose it but would abstain instead.
Finally it was put to the vote, and while I cannot recall the actual figures it was something like forty in favour of the UK proposal, about thirty abstentions and just one (Bulgaria!) against.
Even the USSR had not voted against us.
So we carried the day and the item was included, and furthermore Annex 13 now contains a specification which permits a State which has a ‘special interest in an accident…by virtue of fatalities to its citizens…to be permitted to appoint an expert to participate in the investigation, etc., etc’.
It is not quite the status of an accredited representative, but at least the door will not be shut in the face of any State which finds itself in the position that we and the Germans did in the early 1970s.
The remainder of that meeting was reasonably unremarkable except for the establishment of the Accident/Incident Data Reporting System (ADREP) on which Peter Bardon had done so much hard work with a special panel before the meeting.
ICAO now uses a large capacity computer on which the details of every notifiable accident to a public transport aircraft with a maximum weight exceeding 5700 kilos are recorded from almost every State in the world.
This is a very good reference source and is available for interrogation by any member State of ICAO.
My involvement in the last meeting of the Accident Investigation and prevention Division in 1979 was also rather significant for similar reasons.
Between 1974 and 1979 I had become concerned with the number of investigations conducted in a few States where, despite representations from properly appointed accredited representatives, the findings in the final reports were clearly less than satisfactory.
In some cases the State conducting the investigation (by virtue of being the State of occurrence) sought only to exonerate the services (chiefly air traffic control and navigational services) from any involvement in the cause of the accident while at the same time being content to attribute the cause of the accident to some shortcoming on the part of the pilots without seeking to find out why they made such mistakes.
It appeared to me that an aircraft accident investigation was fundamentally similar to any other type of inquiry, whether legal or scientific: it should establish the relevant facts, discuss the evidence and draw conclusions.
An individual sitting on the board of such an inquiry may satisfy his own conscience if he finds himself in disagreement with his colleagues by exercising his right to attach a minority dissenting view to the formal report if he considers it necessary to do so.
In these circumstances I thought it would better serve the interests of air safety generally if a properly appointed accredited representative had the right to do the same thing.
Of course the first prerequisite was that he should be able to know his colleagues' views before deciding whether or not he agreed with them, so he needed access to their report before it was officially released.
That, however, could be catered for with appropriate wording and we should then feel more confident when a UK aircraft crashed abroad.
I was also concerned at this time that if an aircraft registered in a particular State crashed in the sea outside territorial waters, it was open to anyone to salvage it.
I had in mind the possibility of a UK registered Concorde crashing into the sea just outside the three mile limit of some State while making an approach to land there and possibly the Russians or some of their friends commencing to salvage it before we could do anything about it.
As things stood then — and indeed as things still stand in 1984 — they would be perfectly entitled to do so.
I wished ICAO to take up the matter with a view to ensuring that the State of registry should have the primary right to salvage the aircraft.
My French colleagues had considerable reservations about the agenda ICAO had circulated to member States and wished to have certain other matters discussed, including the definition of an accident.
I must say I agreed with them as I agreed with some of the misgivings expressed by our German colleagues, too.
So Paul Guillevic, an old friend and head of aircraft accident investigation in France, invited me and some other European investigators to a meeting in Paris to decide how we should proceed.
I pointed out the way we had gone about it in 1974, when we wished to add an item to the ICAO agenda and were able to agree upon a concerted approach by the major European delegations towards achieving our aims.
We had, of course, suggested to ICAO beforehand that the items we were concerned with should be included in the agenda but we were informed by the secretariat that there was not time enough to consider these matters.
And so to Montreal, again accompanied by Geoffrey Wilkinson and Peter Bardon and by this time all well seasoned campaigners.
However, on this occasion the secretariat was ready for us.
We had made no secret of the fact that we would bend every effort to amend the agenda, time enough or not, and we were determined to have our way.
‘ICAO is the servant of its member States’, was my approach —not the other way round.
When we had all assembled for the first plenary session to approve the agenda, I was all ready with my dissenting speech when it was announced by the Secretary General that the additional items would be included in the agenda if the other matters already there were completed in time to consider additional ones.
They had stolen our thunder, put us under pressure to be quick with the business they wanted to complete and left us to flounder in the morass of our own proposals.
But there was more to come.
They applied the well established ploy of neutralising the troublemaker by proposing him for the position of chairman, where he is obliged above all to be impartial.
So I was elected chairman of the meeting in committee, which is where all the detailed discussion and drafting takes place.
I was, however, to have the last word.
I worked the committee hard and fast, and overtime too, cutting down on the lunch break and carrying on late in the afternoon.
We completed the agenda with time to spare and set about the ‘European’ items with a will.
The most important one in my opinion was the accredited representative's right to append a dissenting minority attachment to the official report, which is now happily enshrined in Annex 13 as paragraph 6.11.
It only has the force of a recommended practice whereas I believe it should have the full force of a standard, but at least it is there and perhaps in the fullness of time it may attain higher status.
Nonetheless, I felt it necessary to invoke the paragraph in relation to the Spanish report on the Dan Air 727 which crashed at Tenerife in April 1980 where an attachment by the UK accredited representative constitutes an integral part of the official report on the accident.
We also changed the definition of an accident to the satisfaction of my French colleague and piloted through two more of our items.
However, I am afraid we got nowhere with the salvage of crashed aircraft problem because of the legal problems of encroaching upon the law of the sea.
These were by no means the only features of the 1979 meeting  which for me, as chairman of the meeting in committee, was perhaps the culmination of my association with ICAO.
We have had our ups and downs, but I have a very great regard for the organization and great affection for the head of the Accident Investigation and prevention Section, Olof Fritsch, who, notwithstanding all the times I twisted his tail, remains for me one of the great professionals totally devoted to improving safety in the air, and a true friend.
The regulating authorities
In the UK the Civil Aviation Authority has the duty of regulating civil aviation.
The FAA has a similar duty in the USA, as have equivalent organisations in almost every country throughout the world.
The regulation of aviation comprises many different activities but perhaps the most significant is the drawing up of a set of rules and regulations and the establishment of an organisation to ensure their enforcement.
The regulatory body is also a licensing authority in respect of a wide range of activities.
Pilots and other flight crew immediately come to mind; so too do maintenance engineers and air traffic controllers.
In addition, these authorities license airports to ensure that they comply with their national interpretation of ICAO standards, and they also issue certificates of airworthiness for types of aircraft and in respect of each individual aircraft on their register, besides monitoring aircraft design and manufacturing standards.
Another substantial undertaking by regulating authorities in most countries is the provision of an air traffic control service and the licensing of the air traffic control officers who operate the service.
Then there is the operation of air navigation aids such as radar, radio beacons and landing aids, whose operatives are also licensed by the authority.
All these activities require a substantial bureaucracy to ensure that the licences and certificates are kept up to date and to enforce the regulations.
But as time goes on, people seem to lose sight of the reason why it is necessary to issue licences to these people and certificates of airworthiness for aircraft, etc., etc.
There is a tendency for those who work in the industry to regard the acquisition of such documents as a legal requirement which, once achieved, represents an end in itself — the attainment of a necessary objective.
What they lose sight of is that the only possible justification of the expense of supporting these vast bureaucratic machines is to ensure that the necessary high standard of safety is established and maintained.
If in an ideal world all these sections of the regulating authorities did their job properly there would, by definition, be no accidents.
Logically, therefore, we must conclude that since accidents do happen then either the system is faulty or someone along the line is not doing his job properly.
For some reason we do not think in such simplistic terms and did not dismiss the Director of Licensing at the CAA from office when the pilot of a Vanguard trying to land in a snowstorm at Basle failed to carry out a successful instrument approach and killed all those poor housewives out on a day shopping trip.
The fact that the pilot had clearly demonstrated his  incompetence at instrument flying by failing to pass the instrument rating test no less than eight times before finally obtaining a pass must have meant that he was incapable of meeting the required standard on a regular basis and in the circumstances ought not to have been licensed to fly a public transport aircraft.
Similarly, when an engine fell off the DC-10 during take-off at Chicago, the administrator of the FAA was not dismissed even though his organisation should have ensured that the aircraft was subject to proper maintenance practices.
Clearly, it was not.
The question therefore arises that if the system or the people operating it are not effective, should not the whole organisation be scrapped?
The answer is almost certainly ‘no’.
These are but two tragic examples of laxity in a system which has achieved increasingly high standards of safety in worldwide civil aviation.
The statistics issued by ICAO over the last three decades show beyond any doubt that, despite a vast increase in the number of people taking to the air each year, the likelihood of any public transport passenger being killed diminishes.
What may be regarded as a great bureaucracy has in fact great achievements to its credit.
Consider, for example, the introduction and successful operation of the wide bodied jets which everyone takes for granted today.
The new ground that had to be broken in terms of the aerodynamics, structure, passenger handling facilities and runway bearing strength of these weighty monsters represents only a small fraction of the problems that beset the regulating authorities not only in the USA, where most of them are built, but throughout the world in all the places where they operate.
Again, the introduction and successful, if expensive, operation of Concorde in regular supersonic passenger transport service is a European achievement of quite extraordinary proportions.
The provision of meteorological regular services forecasting winds and  turbulence, not to mention sunspot activity with its radiation hazards more than ten miles up in the stratosphere and the air traffic control problems of introducing this vehicle into the airspace still filled with less sophisticated aircraft, is another area in which the regulating authorities have shown great imagination and flexibility in their routine day-to-day work.
Few people realise what an enormous achievement Concorde represents, even after it has demonstrated its capability of flying from New York to London or Paris in about three hours over a sustained operation for many years.
With all the technological genius that can be raised in the USA to produce a B-1 supersonic bomber, they had to settle for a cruising speed of 1.25 times the speed of sound while the routine Concorde bus service across the Atlantic ticks over steadily at fully twice the speed of sound — and anyone who can afford to buy a ticket can experience it.
So many things could go wrong, and it is the job of the regulating authorities to prevent this.
When, on isolated occasions such as the tragic accidents at Basle and Chicago, things really go wrong, it is vital that the accident investigating authorities like the NTSB and the AIB are totally independent of those great and influential organisations that regulate the industry.
At the same time the regulators, too, need to know where things have gone wrong and they cannot afford to wait the year or eighteen months necessary to conduct an investigation in depth before taking corrective action.
As soon as a weakness or shortcoming in the system of regulating safety is positively identified the investigators need to inform the regulators where urgent action is necessary; indeed, it is important that unhampered liaison channels allow the flow of all relevant factual information about an accident as soon as it becomes available.
There are many examples of the quick reaction of regulating authorities and the implementation of corrective measures within days, even hours, of causal factors being identified.
This is not to say that the regulating authorities should intrude into the investigation process or seek to influence or to duplicate it.
They should never lose sight of the fact that the investigation of aircraft accidents by an independent and competent authority is just one more facet of the pursuit of safety in the air.
But this particular facet is outside the sphere of the regulating authority.
When in due course the investigation process is completed by the issue of a report, it is for the regulating authority to put into effect the safety recommendations the report contains.
It may not  always be practicable to follow exactly the recommendations as written in the accident report, but that is not an acceptable reason for merely discarding them.
Alternative methods of achieving the same objective should be sought and the problem should not be allowed to rest until a satisfactory solution is found.
The manner and extent to which safety recommendations are followed up is an area where there is considerable room for improvement on the part of the many regulating authorities who have to some extent misjudged the degree of public anxiety on this subject.
The one basic justification for the existence of all the different modes of activity of the regulating authorities — personnel licensing, airworthiness, air traffic control, aerodrome standards, etc. — is to achieve that necessary standard of safety.
Even so, there is still a strong case for the regulating authorities to maintain one office whose sole job is to seek out weakness, anticipate encroachments on the standard of safety and to take action before the hazard becomes dangerous.
Once upon a time there was in the UK a Director of Flight Safety, but this office has been abolished.
The CAA said it was because every division of the authority was seeking to prevent accidents.
The suspicion, however, is that it was an economy measure.
The one way that a positive step forward in the pursuit of air safety can be made in the UK is by reinstituting the office with a dynamic and imaginative Director of Flight Safety.
Over the last twenty years or so the regulating authorities of several States have recognised that there can be significant value in recording, and preferably investigating, the cause of near accidents.
Normally referred to as ‘incident reporting systems’, the basic reasoning is that incidents warn of shortcomings in aviation practice which will develop into possible accidents and loss of life or injury if preventive action is not taken.
The difficulty lies in the machinery for reporting incidents.
While it is usually difficult to hide the evidence that an accident has occurred, with an incident it can be only too easy in a large proportion of the cases to pretend that nothing very extraordinary has happened.
If the incident reflects badly on the operating practices of pilots, engineers or airlines — for instance, if a dangerous situation arises because the pilots failed to use their check list at the appropriate time or a supervisory engineer fails to double check the work of a mechanic on an important component such as a primary unit in the flying controls — it is unlikely that the matter is going to be reported voluntarily in view of the inevitable  consequences of disciplinary action on the part of management or at the very least a ‘black mark’ against the offender which will be likely to prejudice his career.
It was in just this situation that the FAA originally decided to take an authoritative attitude and make it compulsory for flight crews to report dangerous incidents.
Meanwhile, in the UK it was felt that compulsion in an activity where you are dependent upon the possible offender for notification of incidents was not realistic so a voluntary system for reporting incidents was adopted.
Neither system was wholly satisfactory, but during the public inquiry into the Trident accident at Staines in 1972 evidence was heard that other aircraft had suffered similar happenings (though in less critical circumstances and there had been no accident) and the question was put: ‘Why were these incidents not reported under the voluntary system?’
Since no satisfactory answer was forthcoming, much adverse comment followed with the result that the CAA introduced mandatory incident reporting in the UK.
Ironically, in the USA the opposite took place.
I am not aware of the details but the compulsory incident reporting system was found to be wanting and so was changed to a voluntary one.
In the background all this time was the knowledge on both sides of the Atlantic that one or two airlines had adopted anonymous reporting systems which had brought to light the most important and hair-raising incidents, some of which could be eliminated without difficulty by altering certain operating practices.
The very nature of anonymous reports naturally prevented any possibility of retribution against wrong-doers reporting the incident.
Recognising the success of this idea the FAA, which is of course the authority responsible for enforcing aviation regulations and imposing penalties in the USA, took the bold step of seeking out a suitable agency, totally separate from the FAA, that was technically competent to administer an anonymous type of incident-reporting system.
They settled on NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, which had the reputation of having put men on the moon and getting them back without accident.
The FAA voluntary reporting system was retained and continues to work well for routine incident reports, while the NASA administered anonymous system made great strides but suffered from the inability of its operatives to refer back to those reporting the incident to obtain amplification of the circumstances or to ask supplementary questions.
As a result, a system of confidential reporting to NASA came about whereby the person notifying  NASA of the incident was required to give his name and a contact address but received a one hundred per cent guarantee that his name would never be revealed to the FAA.
A great deal of confidence has been built up in this system and NASA regularly publish reports of incidents notified to them, though of course without any reference to the individuals involved.
Meanwhile, in the UK the mandatory reporting system degenerated into a component defect reporting system with a smaller number of operational reports on comparatively insignificant issues being brought to the fore.
However, there were no dramatic confessions of faulty flight practices for the same reason as in the USA, namely that the CAA was the organisation to whom incident reports were (and are) to be addressed and also the authority responsible for enforcement of aviation legislation, i.e. the prosecutor of wrong-doers.
The CAA realised the limitations of their mandatory incident reporting system and, looking at the success of the NASA confidential reporting system, sought a UK equivalent.
They found the RAF Institute of Aviation Medicine at Farnborough to be the answer.
The UK confidential incident reporting system, known as CHIRP, is now well established along the same lines as the NASA system, which is known as ASRS, and they are both regarded by their respective regulating authorities as a success.
But more to the point, the flight and maintenance crews have great confidence in them and regard the reports they generate as being very important, contributing significantly to improved safety in the air.
It seems, therefore, that the answer to the question of how to conduct incident reporting lies in the parallel operation of a voluntary reporting system operated by the regulating authority and a confidential reporting system operated by a competent separate agency.
In the UK it remains for the CAA to revert to a voluntary incident reporting system in place of the current mandatory one.
The airline operators
Most airlines of any consequence have their own flight safety sections or air safety officials or officers; indeed, in many States the regulating authorities require these before they permit the operator to operate public transport services.
Some airlines have a small independent air safety branch or department.
The flight safety officials receive reports from their own flight crews and engineering staff, and keep checks on operational irregularities and monitor the investigations of all the flight safety incidents such as engine shut-downs in flight, selection of emergency systems, component failure in flight and procedural shortcomings.
Those airlines with an independent safety branch conduct their own research into safety problems or commission universities or specialist organisations, both private and governmental, to research particular aspects of safety in the air.
They can have a strong influence on training programmes and the equipment used for training, including simulators.
Indeed, some of the basic policies adopted by a company's flight operations department may be related to the findings or recommendations of the flight safety section.
The everyday defects and difficulties that arise, such as the catering truck that backs into an aircraft puncturing the pressurised fuselage near the door or the mainwheel tyre that throws its tread on take-off, and the thousand and one other events that amount to a deviation from normal operation of the aircraft, are all investigated to some extent, according to how serious they might be, and a report is raised to the appropriate department which should then effect the necessary corrective action.
The safety sections or branches also collate all air safety information from sources outside the company, such as ICAO, IATA, the Flight Safety Foundation, etc.
British Airways examine every official accident report that is published by a national accident investigation authority to see whether there are any features in it which might lead to an improvement in the safety of  their own operation.
This is one good reason why every State should publish all the accident reports it raises — some other airline quite remote from the one in question may avoid a similar disaster if the details of an accident and the necessary corrective action are made available to all who care to take the trouble to read about them.
Far too many States satisfy their own little parochial requirements by confining the circulation of their accident reports to their own government departments while the rest of the world can go hang and learn its own lesson by suffering a similar accident.
In the late 1950s, BEA, BOAC, Swiss Air, KLM and Air France safety officials formed a group to exchange accident/incident details and the preventive action they had implemented.
This developed into an IATA European exchange system which was subsequently taken over by IATA HQ in Montreal during the mid 1960s.
It is now a world-wide safety information exchange system.
It is, of course, particularly helpful to airlines operating the same types of aircraft.
Company lawyers are not keen on this very good scheme because where damage or loss is suffered by a third party, as for instance where a brake failure results in damage to an airport building, the dissemination of details of the circumstances in which it happened outside the company could prejudice the defence they are going to put up for their airline when the airport puts in a claim for damages.
For this reason the exchange of information is not as comprehensive as it might be.
Those conscientious airlines that put safety before profit make the major contribution, while all the rest are only too keen to read about other people's troubles but less willing to contribute themselves.
However, the system has now been operating for many years and much good work in the safety field has resulted.
In the event of an airline being involved in a major accident with one of its own aircraft, the company flight safety section will be the main liaison link between the official national accident investigation authority and the airline.
On such occasions the airline needs to know at the earliest possible moment whether there is something inherently wrong with its equipment, procedures or training, and therefore the official investigators should keep the airline fully informed of the factual material it establishes as the investigation proceeds.
By the same token, the airline should inform the official investigators of any suspicions or failures that they have experienced in the recent past that might conceivably  have a bearing on the accident.
In this liaison there should be a great deal of give and take, generating trust and mutual respect.
It is no place for PROs to go snooping around collecting information to put out in a defensive public statement before its true significance can be established.
A good flight safety section of an airline will publish within the company the results of its own defect and incident reports, keep up safety consciousness and continue safety propaganda campaigns through a regular in-house publication.
This enables all personnel, from flight crew to the man who sweeps the hangar, to appreciate that they all have their contribution to make to the safety of the company's aircraft.
They can see what difficulties have arisen in the past and what corrective measures were taken to prevent their recurrence.
Flight recorders
The term ‘flight recorder’ is normally taken to include both the flight data recorder (FDR) which records the value of selected flight parameters like airspeed, altitude, magnetic heading, etc. and the cockpit voice recorder (CVR), the primary purpose of which is to record the crew conversation.
It is possible to record both FDR and CVR information on the same tape.
This is not usual in civil aircraft systems though it is occasionally done in some military aircraft.
There is a popular idea that when the flight data recorder is recovered from a crashed aircraft the investigator has merely to read an indicator inside it which will tell him just what the cause of the accident was, eliminating the need for all the tedious investigation practices which used to take so much time.
The truth of the matter is that the FDR provides the investigator with a very useful tool which can produce a reliable and totally impartial record of the primary flight parameters against a time base, from which it is possible to reconstruct the flight path in three dimensions.
The CVR allows the investigator to know what the members of the flight crew were saying to each other, and to some extent what they were thinking, at relevant times during the flight.
It also serves the very important purpose of providing the key for synchronising the FDR and CVR time bases with the ground based recordings of the radio communications.
The idea of fitting aircraft with FDRs is not new.
The old Imperial Airways Handley-Page HP-42 airliner of the 1930s had a crude form of FDR recording engine rpm, as did the Airspeed Ambassador used by BEA in the 1950s.
Most of the prototypes of both civil and military aircraft which followed the Second World War were fitted with both still and movie cameras for recording specially fitted instrument panels, but their use was confined to test flying and performance proving.
These were essentially flight  recorders but were not made to withstand crash forces.
Plate 4 AIB flight data recorder read-out laboratory.
(Photo by permission of the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough.)
It was with the introduction of the American ‘big jets’(Boeing 707, Douglas DC-8 and Convair 880 and 990) in 1959 that the FAA brought in legislation requiring the fitment of FDRs to turbine powered public transport aircraft.
They entered service with engraved foil type recorders, usually fitted in the landing gear bay.
These recorders were contained in a spherical case, comprising inner and outer shells of stainless steel with heat protection material between them.
They used either aluminium or steel foil, contained in a stainless steel cassette, as a recording medium.
The foil was wound on a supply spool from which it was fed over a flat surface on to a take-up spool at a speed proportional to time.
While it passed over the flat surface four hard pointed styli engraved the foil, sometimes in a continuous line and sometimes with a series of indentations, several times a second, each stylus responding to the quantity of the parameter concerned.
The distance between the engraving and the datum of the parameter  being measured and recorded (airspeed, altitude, etc.) was proportional to the magnitude of the parameter at that moment of time.
The net result was a form of graphical presentation of the flight parameters on a time base.
Being mostly mechanical in operation, these recorders had their limitations as far as accuracy was concerned.
But they served the basic purpose well enough to give the investigators a continuous record of the flight parameters, albeit on a rather small scale.
The parameters recorded on this ‘first generation’ of recorders were:
Indicated airspeed
Indicated altitude
Magnetic heading
Vertical (normal) acceleration
Using this information it is possible to make a plot of the aircraft's track over the ground when the necessary calibration and other corrections are made and allowance is made for the effect of wind on the flight path.
The starting point can be either a known position such as a radio beacon over which the aircraft has flown or, which is more likely in the case of an accident, the crash position.
The plot can then be constructed backwards.
In a similar manner it is possible to draw a profile of the flight showing its height above the ground relative to the terrain over which the aircraft was flying.
It is not difficult to derive more information from the basic recorded information by combining two or more parameters, and thus to establish things like rate of climb or descent and rate of change of airspeed.
Also the rate of change of heading can be converted into a rate of turn.
(The internationally recognised unit is that a ‘rate one turn’ involves turning through three degrees of arc in one second.)
A combination of indicated altitude plus indicated airspeed, together with atmospheric temperature obtained from meteorological records, makes it possible to establish the mach number and true airspeed.
Application of the local magnetic variation to the recorded heading will give the true heading.
These are just a few of the things that can be done with a relatively crude form of recording of four basic parameters on a time base.
Although we in the UK were behind the Americans in introducing the mandatory carriage of FDRs in public transport aircraft fitted with turbine engines, we had the advantage of learning from their  experience since some foreign registered aircraft of American manufacture which were fitted with FDRs  crashed in the UK.
It was apparent to me that a great deal more useful information could be derived from the FDR if the single parameter of pitch attitude could be added to the requirements, and I pressed this view very hard with the authorities when they drew up the UK regulations on the subject in 1964.
Not only was pitch attitude included but many British airlines, including BOAC and BEA, chose to install electro-magnetic pulse code modulated recorders rather than the American mechanical ‘scratch foil’ types.
This was chiefly because they could foresee benefits to their own company in using recorders capable of recording many more parameters to a significantly higher standard of accuracy.
Such recordings would enable them to monitor the effectiveness of certain maintenance and operational procedures by means of automatic read-out and computerised analysis.
The result was that in the UK the minimum requirement was a scratch foil type of recorder but with the additional pitch attitude parameter, but in many aircraft up to twenty-four parameters were recorded electronically.
At a later stage this was increased to sixty-four.
The pulse code modulated recorder, using either plastic or steel tape or wire as the recording medium, soon became known as the ‘second generation’ type of FDR, and in due course the USA introduced American versions in some of their wide bodied jets and called them DFDRs — digital flight data recorders.
Once involved in multiple parameter recorders for large public transport jets, it is no longer appropriate for national authorities to specify in precise terms which parameters must be recorded.
This is because the aircraft systems differ so widely.
The number of engine parameters will obviously depend on how many engines the aircraft has.
Similarly, most aircraft have flaps and the majority of these have leading edge slats too, but Concorde has none.
Indeed the supersonic airliner does not even have orthodox elevators and ailerons but elevons which operate either collectively and differentially or with a combination of both actions.
Consequently ICAO has very wisely given guidance in general terms that can be applied to all types of large fixed wing aircraft (not helicopters).
In simplified terms, this guidance calls for the following parameters:.
1.
Those necessary to enable the investigator to reconstruct the  flight-path of the aircraft in three dimensions.
2.
Those necessary to establish the attitude of the aircraft in terms of pitch, roll and yaw throughout the reconstructed flight-path.
3.
The forces and influences acting on the aircraft including engine power, flying control deflection, aircraft configuration changes, auto-pilot operation, radio navigation coupling with auto-pilot; also the values of the basic ancillary sources of power such as hydraulic, electrical and pneumatic systems.
Plate 5 The ‘Red Egg’ digital flight data recorder.
This guidance may appear to be rather imprecise but one particular application of it has resulted in the following list of parameters in two different groups.
The first group require the exact quantities to be measured and recorded every second within  predetermined limits of accuracy.
The second group require only the yes/no, on/off or up/down type of answer.
Group I
Altitude
Airspeed
Heading
Air temperature
Vertical acceleration (five times per second)
Pitch attitude (five times per second)
Roll attitude
Flap position
Engine rpm or engine pressure ratio — for each engine
Lateral acceleration
Longitudinal acceleration
Pitch trim position
Elevator position
Aileron position
Rudder position
ILS localiser deviation
ILS glideslope deviation
Radio altitude
Spoiler position
Group II
Thrust reverser deployed — for each engine
Thrust reverser in transit — for each engine
Slat positions
Auto-pilot mode
Auto-throttle engage
Pressurisation warning
Engine fire warning — for each engine
Engine low oil pressure warning — for each engine
Cargo smoke warning
Auxiliary power unit fire warning
Ground proximity warning system
Pneumatic failure warning
Outer marker beacon transit
Middle marker beacon transit
Manual event
Yaw dampers — for each unit
Low hydraulic pressure warning — for each system 
Landing gear
VHF radio transmit key — for each VHF transmitter
HF radio transmit key — for each HF transmitter
Auto-pilot modes armed
Auto-pilot modes engaged
Time GMT
This very substantial amount of information enables the investigator to have a comprehensive appreciation of what is happening during the flight.
A major advantage of the digital system of recording flight data, besides the ability to store a great deal of information for a comparatively small weight penalty, is the higher standard of accuracy that goes with it.
With the scratch foil system, the styli and the arms they are mounted on have a definable mass which must be accelerated, moved to a different position and then decelerated to the new value every time there is a change in the magnitude of the parameter.
When recording something like vertical acceleration the changes can be rapid and almost continuous, with the result that the recorded value on a mechanical system of this type is never really accurate.
With the DFDR, on the other hand, the only parts that change with variations in the value of a parameter are the electrical impulses, and since electrons have negligible mass no inaccuracies accrue from this cause.
High standards of accuracy become important if the investigator is going to employ sophisticated methods of analysing the flight recording, such as making a double integration of the vertical acceleration recording to obtain an accurate description of the shape of the flight-path perpendicular to the pitch attitude.
The same is true if he wishes to make a plot of the total energy of the aircraft to establish where there has been a significant increase or decrease in thrust or drag.
There are other processes (or what some might regard as ‘tricks’) the investigator can use, for instance establishing the effectiveness of wheel braking on a slippery runway by means of the longitudinal acceleration recording.
However, the multiplicity of parameters that can be recorded on a DFDR system have substantially eliminated the need to use complicated methods for extracting useful information from flight recorders.
The very profusion of data that becomes available from a DFDR itself poses a problem in terms of the number of data points to be considered and even the many sheets of paper containing them  that need to be handled.
It must have been in the late 1960s or early 1970s that I was bemoaning this problem with my French colleague Michel Vigier who was also disturbed at the prospect of being snowed under with an indigestible amount of data from DFDRs.
I favoured a computerised automatic read-out system which would apply all the necessary calibration corrections and instrument errors, convert indicated airspeed and indicated altitude to true airspeed and true altitude, apply wind effect, and ultimately plot out the reconstruction of the flight-path.
But the complication involved in writing the program and allowing for the high number of physical variables made it impracticable at that time.
I remember that one of us, I cannot recall which, made the cynical remark that what we really wanted was a similar type of aircraft to the one that had crashed, in which the auto-pilot could be connected up with the flight recorder — then we investigators could just sit and watch the accident happen all over again.
I think it was Michel who said, ‘It might be cheaper to connect it to a flight simulator’.
For several years that basic idea of using a flight simulator kept coming up in my mind and it was in 1974, after I had attended the meeting of the Accident Investigation Division of ICAO in Montreal, that I was discussing this same problem with Bernard Caiger of the Canadian National Research Council.
Bernie was responsible for read-out and interpretation of FDRs in Canada and I put it to him that what we really needed was the ability to watch the accident taking place in real time, preferably by means of a DFDR providing the inputs to a flight simulator instead of the usual pilot inputs.
Now that digital Hight simulators were replacing the older analogue types, this proposal should not prove too troublesome.
Bernie obviously worked on the idea and eventually came up with a much cheaper and more simple solution which would provide the investigator with a moving picture of the basic flight instruments during the period leading up to the crash.
This was done by reproducing the flight instrument panel by means of computer graphics on a visual display unit with the recorded data being fed to the display in real time.
Thus the various indications, airspeed, altitude, rate of climb, attitude and magnetic heading were seen to move exactly as the pilot's instruments had operated as the accident approached.
The Canadian team developed this into a practical investigation aid and willingly helped Ray Davis, the AIB flight recorder   specialist, to set up a similar system in the UK.
The addition of engine power indications on the visual display enhanced the value of the device.
It would be possible to add to the system indefinitely until every one of the recorded parameters that is normally displayed on an instrument in the cockpit of an aircraft was reproduced in this way.
The relative value of doing so measured against the cost of the associated hard and software, however, rules it out for the present time at least.
Also, it should not be forgotten that it is raw data that is being presented and not refined information.
Nonetheless, the original concept of driving a flight simulator by the flight data recorder can now be considered to be in its first stage of development.
Plate 6 Primary flight instruments and engine power indicator (bottom left) which move in ‘real time’ on the visual display unit as the flight data recorder is read out.
I still think the ultimate stage is just plugging the FDR into a standard attachment fitted to all flight simulators.
This would require a great deal of organisation to ensure compatibility of all  the units involved, but ICAO did a similar thing many years ago with ILS air and ground equipment and that has been working successfully now for over thirty-five years.
The duration of the early FDRs was sometimes very long — as much as 200 flying hours and more in some cases — so it was possible to check back over many flights how the aircraft had behaved.
However, experience demonstrated to accident investigators and to officials responsible for drawing up regulations governing flight recorders that access to the recordings of many previous flights was not a critical factor, though it was most desirable to examine the recording of the flight immediately prior to an accident flight.
Consequently, the duration requirement was reduced to ensure that in all but the most unusual cases the whole of the flight previous to the last one was always retained in the FDR.
In practical terms this required a duration that recorded the most recent 25 hours of flying.
The result was that it then became possible to record the data on a continuous re-circulating loop of tape that would last for 25 hours before being erased and used again.
This in turn reduced the maintenance costs of removing and replacing 200 flying hour cassettes from their positions, which by this time were required to be near the tail of the aircraft in order that they might have the maximum chance of surviving impact forces in a crash.
(Whenever there is a major aircraft accident the press and other media frequently refer to the FDR and the CVR as ‘black boxes’.
The use of this term is inaccurate and misleading because the fact is that the recorders are required by the appropriate regulations to be painted a brilliant colour so that the investigators can find them more easily in the wreckage.
Originally some of them were painted yellow but these days they are almost always painted flame-orange.)
The tail installation requirement of flight recorders has proved very beneficial over the years but the stringent crash protection requirements remain in force.
These are remarkably tough; for instance, the recorder manufacturers must demonstrate the ability of their products to withstand a temperature of 1100°C for thirty minutes and a dynamic load of 1000 g for five milliseconds.
They must also be able to survive a static crushing load of 5000 lb.
In addition, the recorders must be capable of replay after a hard steel spike with a frontal area of 0.05 square inches is dropped from a height of ten feet on to the recorder when attached to a weight of 500 lb.
So much, then, for the FDR and the DFDR.
There is also the cockpit voice recorder or CVR which can contribute a great deal to the information available to the investigator.
In principle these recorders are not so very different from a normal domestic tape recorder, but they too are installed in the tail end of the aircraft and are heavily protected from crash damage.
Also, they use four different channels simultaneously in normal operation.
The original requirement specified by the FAA and still in use today, not only by all aircraft registered in the USA but also by those States which ‘rubber stamp’ US requirements, utilises the four channels in the following manner:
Channel 1
Area microphone — usually in the cockpit roof, on the pedestal or on the glare shield.
Channel 2
Captain's microphone and headset when using the radio or intercom.
Channel 3
Co-pilot's microphone and headset when using the radio or intercom.
Channel 4
Flight engineer's microphone and headset when using the radio or intercom; or
Public address system with a two pilot flight crew.
As with the FDR, the UK was late in entering the CVR scene.
Indeed, it was not until there was a recommendation in the report on the public inquiry into the Trident accident at Staines in 1972 that the CAA made the fitment of CVRs compulsory in UK registered aircraft.
I had long been in favour of CVRs but like many other people I was very dissatisfied with the quality, particularly the clarity of the only really useful part of the recording — that from the area microphone on the first channel.
AIB had gained some experience of these recordings when investigating accidents to American manufactured aircraft fitted with CVRs to the FAA standard.
During the late 1960s I had asked the Civil Aviation Flying Unit (CAFU) to connect the pilot's boom microphones in one of their  HS 125 aircraft to a domestic tape recorder to see whether an acceptable quality of recording could be achieved.
I should perhaps explain that for many years it had been a regulation in UK registered public transport aircraft that when flying below 15 000 feet hand operated microphones were prohibited.
This led to the everyday use of microphones which were mounted on the end of a short boom extending from one of the ear-pieces of the pilot's radio headset to a position in front of his mouth.
The result of the CAFU experiment was that the cockpit conversation between the flight crew when they were not using the intercom was crystal clear.
A further refinement of deleting the side-tone, in which you can hear your own speech amplified in the headset, removed any nuisance the arrangement might cause.
This system was subsequently adopted as standard in UK registered aircraft and came to be known as the ‘hot mike’ system.
Plate 7 AIB cockpit voice recorder read-out laboratory.
To this day the FAA continue to permit US registered aircraft to use hand held microphones; consequently they are unable to use the ‘hot mike’ system and their area mike recordings remain distorted with a very high level of background noise.
In due course the CVR was made mandatory for UK registered  aircraft, with a revised channel allocation to take full advantage of the ‘hot mike’ system.
The area microphone was retained chiefly to record all those cockpit noises such as fire alarm bells, mach warnings, landing gear and flap selector operation and the hundred and one other identifiable noises that can be helpful to investigators.
The UK channel allocation is now as follows:
Channel 1
Area microphone.
Channel 2
Captain's ‘hot’ microphone and headset.
Channel 3
Co-pilot's ‘hot’ microphone and headset.
Channel 4
Flight engineer's ‘hot’ microphone and headset; or
public address system with a two pilot flight crew.
Although I demonstrated the advantages of the ‘hot mike’ system to ICAO and to the US National Transportation Safety Board in 1979, the resistance to retrospective modifications (because of the cost involved) which the US airlines are able to organise through their congressional lobbying activities has prevented its introduction in the USA.
The result is that all the other countries which buy US manufactured aircraft are fitted with poor quality CVR installations unless, like new Zealand, they go out of their way to require ‘hot mike’ systems.
All mandatory cockpit voice recording systems operate on a continuous loop with a duration of thirty minutes, so the investigator can only hear what was said during the last thirty minutes of flight.
Furthermore, if an aircraft suffers a less than catastrophic accident and the electrical system remains intact and switched on, the CVR will continue to run and will erase the recording made during the accident.
There are now strong pressures to extend the duration of CVRs to cover the whole of any flight, though it remains to be seen how long it will take to have such a standard accepted.
Not unnaturally there is considerable sensitivity amongst flight crews regarding the use, and particularly the publication of transcriptions of CVRs recovered from crashed aircraft.
In the  USA it is not uncommon for the recordings themselves to be broadcast on domestic television or radio in news or current affairs programmes, while in Australia, at the other extreme, the pilot's union has an agreement that the CVR will not even be examined by official investigators unless the flight crew are killed.
In the UK the AIB keep a very tight control over any CVR read-out since it represents a considerable intrusion on the privacy of the flight crew and, while they insist on using it whenever there is an accident, only the relevant extracts are made known to the public and the official reports contain transcriptions of only those sections which are necessary for a full understanding of the circumstances of the accident.
There can be no doubt that the development and use of FDRs and CVRs in aircraft accident investigation has led to a more precise, more accurate and quicker determination of the cause of accidents.
The FDR, and more particularly the DFDR, have enabled the accident investigator to establish in considerable detail exactly what happened in the period leading up to an accident.
The CVR, besides contributing to the fund of knowledge about the flight, has provided the investigators with an insight into the way the flight crew were thinking and interpreting the indications of the progress of the flight by means of the things they said to each other, and sometimes the things they did not say.
Quite apart from the contribution flight recorders make towards air safety as a result of the more complete knowledge of the causes of accidents which they provide, there is an additional psychological benefit that should not be overlooked.
Every pilot and flight engineer knows that the FDR is ticking away in the back of the aeroplane recording everything he does.
They are also aware that everything they say to each other is being recorded — to be used in evidence, if necessary.
This has the effect of discouraging deviation from the proper flying procedures laid down in operating manuals and State and company regulations.
The inevitable result is that the more adventurous or less safe ways of operating public transport aircraft are far less common now than they were before the days of flight recorders.
A Personal Involvement
I joined AIB on 1 July 1955 as a Senior Inspector of Accidents (Operations) and I was soon put to work, first of all on a little Auster that ditched in the Bristol Channel, then on a BOAC Argonaut in Libya under the supervision of Penny Garnons-Williams, an old hand at the job.
Then came more accidents — we seemed to have a large number of accidents in the 1950s and early 1960s and many of them finished up as public inquiries.
This meant a lot of work with the Treasury solicitor's office; but it did mean that the commissioner had to write the report and not us, so there was something to be said for the arrangement.
In 1959 I started to take an interest in flight data recorders and it appeared to me that they ought to be fitted to large public transport aircraft as a legal requirement.
My masters appeared to agree with me, but in spite of a number of recommendations in accident reports we did not seem to be getting anywhere.
It was not until 1964 and a great deal of nagging on my part that the regulations were changed to require flight data recorders to be carried.
This was chiefly because Geoffrey Stallibrass had been made Director of Aviation Safety in the Ministry of Aviation and his keen sense of the practical got things moving.
But I was told that since I was so keen to have these things I had better think about how we would use them when the time came.
So I talked Geoffrey Feltham, then a Senior Inspector (Engineering) or Senior Investigating Officer, as they were then called, into studying the theory and practical handling of flight recorders and the data obtainable from them.
He really took the matter to heart and finally wrote his Master's thesis on the subject.
This was ultimately published by the department.
By the spring of 1964 I had persuaded myself that as it was nearly nine years since I joined AIB as a Senior Inspector and I was still a Senior Inspector, I would probably draw my pension as  status of the engineering investigators to that of the operational investigators.
This, I felt, was long overdue — there had been a tendency to regard their activity as secondary to that of the operational investigators while their technical contribution was in fact of the highest importance.
Then I persuaded Vernon Hunt, who was Chief Inspector at that time, of the desirability of publishing information about those accidents on which £e had a great deal of information but which were not made the subject of a formal investigation.
That resulted in the monthly publication of the AIB bulletins which are well established today.
There was also much other work to do to improve the efficiency and modernise the methods of the Branch, including the introduction of a flight recorder specialist on to the staff.
In due course Vernon Hunt retired and I took over as Chief Inspector of Accidents on 1 January 1974.
I had a first class team of managers, with Eric Newton as head of the engineering section — he had been doing the job for years before I even joined the Branch — and Dick Westlake, who was a former colleague in KLM, as one Principal Inspector.
The two other newly appointed Principals were Geoffrey Wilkinson and Peter Bardon — both full of new ideas and enthusiasm.
My first real task was to prepare for the next meeting of the Accidents Investigation Division of ICAO in Montreal.
Then I tackled the problem of accommodating the AlB properly.
For many years we had been permitted to lay out and examine wreckage in a couple of hangars at RAE Farnborough; but we were strictly visitors, not always welcome with our requirements for hangar space, and of course our needs were always secondary to those of our host RAE.
During one of the many economy drives associated with defence cuts I made a bid for taking over the hangars and, to my surprise, it was agreed.
The deal included the offices attached to one of the hangars, so I arranged for some of these to be converted into laboratories for the processing of flight data and cockpit voice recorders.
Up to that time much of the flight recorder work had been handled under contract by a private company specialising in data processing under the supervision of our specialist, but it was an expensive arrangement and I felt the activity should be completely under our own control.
This was now achieved.
The remaining problem was that although all the physical activities of the Branch, except for the field work, were   concentrated in one place at Farnborough, our offices were still with the Department of Trade in central London.
What we really needed was an HQ immediately adjacent to our hangars at Farnborough.
There was nothing at all suitable already there so it would be necessary to build an HQ of our own.
Such things in the civil service are very difficult; budgets are tight and government economies were the order of the day.
However, I pointed out that what I was asking for was no more than would comprise a normal police station in a provincial town and that there were many economies to be made by giving up our offices in central London.
The permanent secretary, Sir Peter Thornton, saw the sense of this and gave the idea his blessing.
Plate 8 Inside the main AIB hangar at Farnborough.
The wreckage of several crashed aircraft laid out for detailed examination.
(Photo by permission of the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough.)
But that was not by any means the end of the matter.
Before any building could start new administrations came in, the first under Mr Callaghan and the second under Mrs Thatcher.
They both started by declaring a moratorium on building for the civil service, so time went by and little advance was made.
However, I kept trying and with the help of Mr Norman Tebbit, our then junior  minister and himself a former airline pilot, the project went through.
Alas, I was to reach the age of sixty and retire before even the first sod was turned, but I am happy to relate that the building is now complete and occupied by AIB.
Plate 9 AIB Headquarters at Farnborough.
(Photo by permission of the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough.)
Since becoming Deputy Chief in 1967 I had been concerned with requests, mostly from foreign governments, to provide instruction in the practice of aircraft accident investigation.
The greatest number of requests, though by no means all of them, came from developing or Third World countries.
The main difficulty from our point of view was that AIB was not organised in a manner that lent itself to giving instruction.
The best we could do was to arrange for some of our experienced investigators to spend a few days explaining how we worked, and then to attach our visitors to a particular investigation that was current so that they could experience the practical application of our methods.
This system was far from satisfactory for a number of reasons.
Some people came to us for a week, some for a month and a few wanted to be taught the essentials of the job in two or three days.
Then there was the problem of language.
English is the language of aviation and our native tongue, but some of the people we were trying to teach had a very poor comprehension of the language.
Another difficulty was their level of knowledge of aviation matters.
As I have pointed out, AIB require a very high standard of  professional knowledge either as a pilot or as an engineer before accepting someone as an investigator.
Many of these potential investigators, however, had little experience beyond that of private pilots, though some had acquired engineering qualifications of various kinds.
However, a significant proportion of them were officials already established in their own government departments who had nothing but administrative experience in civil aviation.
One or two were fully qualified lawyers!
The results were predictable.
The best of them learned the basic principles from AlB and subsequently broadened their knowledge as their experience expanded.
The majority, however, did not really understand what we were talking about and were unable to gain anything useful from us.
From the AIB point of view the exercise meant devoting the time and effort of a number of experienced personnel to activities that served no benefit to the Branch.
In a small organisation, the diversion of just two active members to such tasks could put quite a strain on its ability to maintain a twenty-four hour readiness system.
So after pondering the matter for a while I approached professor David Keith-Lucas at Cranfield Institute of Technology late in 1976.
At that time he was head of the College of Aeronautics, and I put it to him that there could be advantages both for Cranfield and for AIB if there were a two-month residential course for potential aircraft accident investigators.
A great deal of specialist aviation instruction was already available from the permanent staff of the College of Aeronautics and AIB could provide lecturers and background support when it came to teaching the techniques peculiar to accident investigation.
Professor Keith-Lucas was well acquainted with the work of AIB, having served as an assessor during one of the public inquiries in the mid 1960s.
He was also chairman of the airworthiness requirements board of the CAA, so he was able to weigh the pros and cons of the proposal from a position of profound knowledge.
He accepted my suggestion with enthusiasm.
A prospectus was drawn up and students with suitable qualifications were invited to attend the first course in 1977.
Some twenty or so students completed the first course, and it has continued every year since then.
In 1953 the first ‘short course of two weeks, designed mostly for airline flight safety officers rather than professional investigators, took place and this was particularly well received.
The close association between Cranfield and AIB continues and, except for the specialist lectures and other expertise the AIB investigators provide during the course, AIB are no longer called upon to provide instructional courses to interrupt its normal investigation activities.
It is perhaps a reflection on its success that new recruits into AIB are now required to attend the Cranfield course at the beginning of their careers in the Branch.
Of course my main concern in the late 1970s was to ensure that aircraft accidents were properly investigated and that sufficient importance was being attached to recommendations for the prevention of more accidents.
Also, there was another ICAO meeting of the Accidents Investigation Division in 1979.
There remained one area in which I wanted to improve the effectiveness of the Accidents Investigation Branch.
The regulations governing the investigation of aircraft accidents had been unchanged since 1969.
The industry, meanwhile, had moved into a different era; the international standards had changed, and it was time to bring the law up-to-date.
So I embarked upon a new draft of the Regulations.
The necessary changes involved a number of definitions in the Regulations being brought into line with those contained in the latest (6th Edition) of Annex 13.
This included such things as reportable accident’ and ‘serious injury’.
Also, the requirements for the investigation of accidents should be made to apply to incidents as well.
Some of the other changes were intended to take account of a number of anomalies that our experience had brought to light over the years since 1969.
For instance, inspectors' powers to acquire information about accidents needed to be extended to include inquiries made to determine whether an investigation was appropriate, rather than being confined to those cases where the Chief Inspector had already ordered an investigation to take place.
They also needed to be extended to permit inspectors to examine aircraft of a similar type to the one involved in an accident and to establish whether they also showed signs of the same sort of failure.
The right of the inspector to be present at a review board had been legally challenged on one occasion and it was obviously necessary that he should be permitted to attend.
Another fairly important change was that a review by a review board should be discontinued if it was established that the inspector's report did not adversely affect the reputation of the person who applied for the review.
This was to avoid all the  expense and trouble of going through the rigmarole of a full review for trivial reasons (hurt pride, for instance) and delaying the issue of the report, with the associated adverse effect on air safety.
Similarly, if new and important evidence came to light during a review which was not given at the inspector's investigation, the Chief Inspector should be able to apply to have the review discontinued, following which he should reopen the inspector's investigation.
This was to stop people from withholding information from the inspector's investigation in order to present it at review, with the intention of discrediting the inspector's report.
There were also a number of small procedural changes desirable in public inquiries.
The legal process takes a long time and the task of getting new Regulations approved remained incomplete when I retired.
However, the new Civil Aviation (Investigation of Accidents) Regulations 1983 have now been made and are currently effective.
I retired from AIB on 31 August 1981.
How to Investigate an accident
When the average intelligent person sees the wreckage of a crashed aircraft greatly disintegrated and spread over the accident site, the question he would put to the investigator is almost invariably the same: ‘How on earth can you find out the cause of that mess?’
It is not difficult to adopt an academic approach and say glibly, ‘You merely establish what was the pilot's intention, then identify where the flight deviated from that intention’.
But to leave it there is about as practical as learning to fly an aeroplane by reading a book on the subject.
When an investigator arrives at the scene of an accident there is a single golden rule: secure the wreckage.
It is surprising how many sightseers will try to take a souvenir of the crash without a thought as to whether their particular treasure might contain some vital piece of evidence for the investigator, possibly the origin of a fatigue crack or a switch position that is all important.
It is the duty of the police in most countries to ensure that only authorised people have access to the accident site, and the fire and rescue services should be properly briefed not to disturb wreckage unnecessarily when removing victims, baggage or mail.
Ground impact marks, sometimes a considerable distance from the main wreckage, should not be trampled upon or run over by rescue vehicles.
The earliest significant evidence is derived from the identification of the aircraft by its type and registration letters or numbers, and from the very position of the wreckage relative to the point of departure or destination.
It is then possible to identify whether the accident happened during or immediately after take-off, during cruising flight or when landing.
The investigating procedure is very naturally divided at an early stage into two aspects — the operational or operating circumstances in which the event occurred, and the examination of the aircraft  remains.
That is why the normal minimum AIB investigating team comprises an experienced pilot inspector (Operations) and an inspector (Engineering).
Let us first look at the examination of the wreckage on the accident site.
It is very important to be sure that the wreckage of the whole aircraft is present in case the accident was caused by a piece breaking off in flight and falling possibly a mile or two away.
A quick check of all the extremities of the aircraft will be a good indicator though not a complete one.
Total accountability for every part of the aircraft can only come later.
Next comes the establishment of the attitude of the aircraft on initial impact with the ground.
Normally you walk back through the wreckage trail to find the mark in the ground or on trees or buildings beyond which there is no other mark, and then you have to match the marks with the appropriate damage to the aircraft.
Things like coloured navigation lights on wing tips or on the pitot head, which is used for the measurement of airspeed and altitude and is usually mounted near the nose of the aircraft, can be good tell-tales.
If the left red wing tip light is on the right of the flight path and the right green light is on the left, then the aircraft struck the ground inverted.
Of course, in a large transport aircraft, all this information will be on the flight data recorder, but it must still be checked on site.
More than once flight recorder transducers have been found to be connected up the wrong way round, showing a turn to the left when in fact it was a turn to the right or showing a nose-up attitude when it was really nose-down.
Impact attitudes can vary from a skimming ground contact with a wreckage trail up to one kilometre long, such as the Turkish DC-10 near Paris, or merely a deep crater with pieces of wreckage scattered in every direction round it, as when a BEA Vanguard crashed vertically into the ground in Belgium in October 1971.
There follows the important task of recording the configuration of the aircraft.
Was the landing gear up or down, or was one leg out of phase with the other?
Were the flaps extended?
If so, how much and were all the flap sections consistent with each other?
Were associated units in the correct position, such as leading edge slats or droop, spoilers and speed brake positions?
All of these need to be checked with the positions of their respective selectors in the cockpit and the functioning (up to the time of impact) of the systems that powered them.
All items such as hydraulic valves, pumps, accumulators, electrical replays, solenoids, actuators and   pneumatic components must be mutually consistent, or the reason for any discrepancy determined.
The power being generated by each engine at the time of impact has to be established by assessing the temperature of the turbine blades when ingested material impinged on the blades during the crash and by the type of damage sustained by the compressor and turbine blades or, if appropriate, the propeller damage and the blade pitch angles.
Evidence of electrical power on main and stand-by systems has to be determined and generator or alternator functioning assessments must be made.
Estimates, or if possible measurements, of fuel on board at the time of impact contribute to knowledge of the probable weight of the aircraft and its expected performance in terms of rate of climb or speed.
The distribution of fuel in the various tanks and the fuel source of each individual engine must be traced.
Plate 10 Measuring the extension of an operating jack on the crash site high in the Alps to establish the configuration of the aircraft on impact.
It goes without saying that while all this is going on the engineering investigator will be on the look-out for any indication of a pre-crash failure or fracture of any part of the structure or  aircraft components since, although the wreckage will inevitably include very many broken units and pieces of structure, any serious defect that was present before the aircraft struck the ground is likely to be significant, if not fundamental, to the cause of the accident.
Such failures, whether they are the result of over-stressing, metal fatigue, stress corrosion, bending, tension, torsion, compression or chemical corrosion are identifiable to the experienced and alert investigator.
He will at a very early stage have taken steps to preserve evidence, possibly by photographic and other means, of an ephemeral or fleeting nature such as ice (if he is lucky the temperature on the ground since the crash could still be below freezing), or fuel leaking away from a damaged tank or fuel filter, or soot deposits indicative of fire in the air which could be washed away by rain or other disturbance.
Plate 11 A fractured crankshaft form a piston engine showing typical characteristics of metal fatigue.
(Photo by permission of the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough.)
Then the engineering investigator will be concerned to trace the integrity of all the flying controls from the initial input in the cockpit to the final deflection of the control surface, with all the correct follow-up of intervening systems and components such as hydraulic and electrical servo systems, jacks, selectors and the operation in the correct sense of the appropriate servo-tabs, anti-balance tabs, balance panels, spring-tabs and everything else associated with the pilot's ability to manoeuvre the aircraft.
In modern high speed aircraft this can include the device that regulates the ‘feel’ the pilot experiences on the flying controls, which is arranged to be proportional to the speed of the aircraft.
This ensures that the pilot does not use the immense power of hydraulically operated controls to over-stress the structure of his aeroplane.
Before leaving the accident site the investigator needs to make a wreckage plot showing where all the pieces of wreckage were positioned, in relation both to each other and to a fixed point on a large scale map.
Also he must record the position and indication of every selector, switch and instrument and supplement all his work with comprehensive photographic coverage.
The major task is now to remove the aircraft wreckage from the accident site to a hangar or similar place where it will, if necessary, be possible to lay out or even reconstruct the aircraft on a base framework.
This allows the engineers to examine every piece of structure and all the systems in detail in a methodical manner.
The exact mode of failure of any unit that has failed in the air should then be determined and the functioning of any emergency systems established.
Part of the routine is to check the passenger and crew seats for strength during the crash and the seat attachments to the floor will also be examined.
Any feature of the interior of the aircraft that has contributed to the injury or death of the occupants is recorded and the manufacturers and airworthiness authorities informed.
So much for the engineering side.
But to return to the initial arrival at the accident site, what is the operational investigator looking for?
After getting a good general impression of the state of the wreckage and as much information as he can about the aircraft configuration on impact, he will be mainly concerned in the beginning to establish the intended flight-path and all the circumstances surrounding the flight.
In a take-off or landing accident he will obviously make early contact with local air traffic control and obtain a copy of the flight plan.
He will also hear a replay of the recording of the radio communications and take a copy-tape of all the relevant radio exchanges.
A timed transcript of the tape will be made soon afterwards.
He will require a check to  be made on all the radio navigation and approach aids and reports to be produced.
Most of these things are done automatically when there is an accident, and the officials concerned are usually waiting with all the information ready to hand to the investigator when he arrives.
Secondary surveillance radar has made it very much easier to provide recordings of the radar situation at any time.
A comprehensive report of the actual meteorological conditions must be drawn up and copies of the weather forecast that were given to the crew will be included.
Depending on whether the accident happened in daylight or at night, in good weather or rain or possibly snow, the exact condition of the runways and aerodrome and approach lighting systems must be established as part of the operational investigator's accumulation of recorded facts relating to the accident.
He may be concerned with the length, elevation and slope of the runway in use or even the materials the runway is made of.
When a public transport aircraft is involved, early contact will be made with the operator of the airline in order to obtain a complete picture of what the flight was intended to do — its point of origin, route and destination, the type of aircraft, numbers of crew and passengers, fuel load and aircraft weight on take-off.
It is perhaps remarkable how predictable (though not exactly inflexible) the operation of a modern airliner is, even to the extent of it being possible to know within small limits what the pilots will be doing at any particular time.
For instance, a particular type of aircraft with specified engines in established weather conditions will, at a known weight, accelerate to the appropriate speed for take-off in a predetermined distance along the runway, following which it will be accelerated to a specified speed and achieve a pre-established rate of climb during which the landing gear will be retracted, taking a known period of time.
After reaching at least 400 feet, engine power will be reduced to a defined amount and the flaps and slats retracted (or, in the jargon, the aircraft will be ‘cleaned up’).
Once it is established in the climbing configuration it will follow a specified route, usually an SID or ‘standard instrument departure’.
Consequently, it will be known which navigation aids will be used at any particular time.
The time necessary to climb to cruising altitude will be known for the particular weight of the aircraft, and in all probability the aircraft will fly along the airways or upper airways, i.e. particular routes under positive air traffic control and substantial radar cover with radio navigation aids deployed along the airways at intervals.
All the normal operating procedures and the emergency operating procedures are written down in the flight manual of an aircraft, one copy of which is carried in the aircraft while another is always available (to accident investigators, amongst others) on the ground, and pilots are trained and required to operate their aircraft in conformity with these procedures.
Even such things as the maximum angle of bank in certain configurations are specified, so once a pilot sets out on a particular flight his actions, or at least the manner in which he should fly the aeroplane, are known in precise detail.
He has remarkably little choice of action or initiative if he is going to comply with the flight manual and his company's operations manual and at the same time carry out an economic flight.
This is all very limiting for the pilot but it does mean that the investigator is able to know exactly what the pilot is, or should be, doing at any stage in the flight.
With the aid of the transcript of radio communications, which includes time injections that can enable every word spoken to be timed within one fifth of a second, the investigator begins to build up the history of the flight.
His colleagues, working on the flight data and cockpit voice recordings, will be able to feed in much data, also recorded against a very accurate time base which can be synchronised with the radio transcript.
Then there is the all important — though very time consuming — business of interviewing and taking statements from witnesses.
Some eye-witnesses will come forward voluntarily; others will be brought to the attention of the investigator by the police who are, of course, making their own inquiries to assist the coroner.
Eye-witness evidence has to be treated with considerable reserve.
Some people are genuinely mistaken as to what they saw while others embellish their accounts with things their friends have told them since.
Many are clinically factual and accurate, particularly small boys who seem to be more observant than most.
Any surviving passengers and crew are particularly useful.
If a large number survive — hundreds, possibly, in a wide-body jet — a pro forma is used initially, with the investigator interviewing those who make particularly significant observations at a later stage.
All the information collected so far contributes to the reconstruction of the flight right up to the time of impact.
It is then necessary to go back and see where the flight path diverged from the original flight plan.
This is where some fault or other has manifested itself sufficiently to affect the flight, though the critical event might have happened quite a long time before and been  ‘cooking up’ until the divergence took place.
It might have been a technical failure or it might have been an action on the part of the operating crew or, indeed, a combination of both.
Frequently it is found that an accident is the result of a combination of adverse circumstances, each of which is normally containable but when occurring at the same time can lead to disaster.
From this time onward the greater part of the effort is concentrated on the critical event that made the difference between a routine flight and a catastrophe.
Throughout the field investigation there will obviously be exchanges of information between the engineering, operational, flight recorder and pathological investigators, and for the first few days at least there will be regular meetings for mutual consultation at the end of each day's work.
Clearly there is so much ground to be covered, particularly on the engineering and operational sides, when a large transport aircraft is involved that you will need several investigators working at the same time.
This is where the ‘group system’ advocated by ICAO comes in.
To supplement the engineering investigation there could be one investigator concentrating on the aircraft structure and flying controls, with another working on power plants, i.e. engines and fuel systems, another concerned with hydraulic, electrical, pneumatic and electronic systems, and yet another checking through the maintenance records.
Associated with these investigators, and working only under their supervision, are experts from the engine and aircraft manufacturers, the airline's flight safety engineers, airworthiness authority specialists and advisers to the accredited representatives of States entitled to participate in the investigation.
Similarly on the operational side, separate investigators can pursue different subjects.
For instance, air traffic control matters can be the concern of one investigator, possibly with a senior disinterested air traffic controller working in consultation.
The flight reconstruction task could fall to another, with help from the airline's chief pilot and from the pilot's union.
If bad weather is a significant feature in the accident, a separate investigator assisted by a qualified meteorologist might be desirable.
In almost all investigations of any size, one investigator can be occupied full time taking statements during the first few days after the accident.
These groups, too, can be supplemented with specialists and — advisers to accredited representatives of foreign States.
With all these people formally involved it is easy for one group  to lose touch or fall behind with information from other groups, and in some cases numbers become unwieldy and the investigators start tripping over each other and duplicating effort.
That is why it is essential to have a single experienced investigator-in-charge to allocate tasks, coordinate the investigation and preside over daily meetings.
The accredited representatives of foreign States participating in the investigation should be attached to him rather than to a particular group, so that they have a complete appreciation of the whole picture.
At the end of it all, the investigators of each group write up their reports to the investigator-in-charge and he in turn formulates the report on the accident.
This account of how aircraft accident investigations are conducted, or should be conducted, in the field is necessarily only a brief outline of what can take place and does not include much of the work that goes on when the wreckage is examined in detail in a hangar, or in the case of AIB at their substantial facility at Farnborough.
Neither does it mention the research and testing that can follow or the amount of time devoted to theoretical and documentary investigation.
In an accident to a private, club or general aviation aircraft the number of investigators might not exceed just one operational and one engineering investigator, with a pathologist in the case of fatalities; but the general process is broadly the same.
Strangely, small private and club aircraft accidents are frequently more difficult to investigate because compared with the scheduled passenger transport flight the route to be followed and the flight procedures carried out are far less definitive and predictable.
Consequently, in the absence of any flight recorders (they are not required to be carried in smaller private aircraft) the reconstruction of the flight path is that much more difficult.
The investigator is usually reduced to eye-witness evidence and the recording of the radio communications, and sometimes not even the latter.
Furthermore, the pilots are usually amateurs with less experience than airline pilots and their skills and knowledge of aviation are limited.
They fly piston engined aircraft for the most part which are subject, amongst other things, to  carburettor icing which will stop an engine in flight even if the ambient temperature is as much as 10°C above freezing unless  carburettor heating is selected at the appropriate time.
This happens because of the venturi effect in the air-intake of the  carburettor which lowers the air pressure with a consequential reduction of temperature, causing water vapour in humid air to  condense out and freeze on the throat of the  carburettor until it becomes blocked with ice.
By the time the accident investigator arrives on the scene, however, the ice has melted and the evidence has vanished.
Helicopters, too, are complicated things and pose many problems.
Their mechanical problems merely require diligent examination, but stress levels are high and because a helicopter's wing must rotate to maintain lift it is terribly unforgiving of anything less than good design, careful maintenance and skilful piloting.
Some of the most difficult investigations involve aircraft that crash in deep water, frequently depriving the investigator of much of his evidence.
When salvage is possible it is seldom complete and always expensive.
The combination of helicopters, the North Sea and often very bad weather constitutes an accident investigator's nightmare, though the remarkably low casualty rate of people engaged in the North Sea oil operation is a tribute to the skill, care and money devoted to their safety.
The organisational side of the investigation described here will in the great majority of cases reveal what went wrong, either physically and mechanically or from a procedural or handling point of view.
But it must be kept in mind that the investigator is required to find the cause of the accident; that is, why it happened.
He is not required to find out who was at fault, though it is possible that the explanation of why an accident occurred may point to errors or shortcomings on the part of particular individuals.
The identification of such people is incidental and they should always be described in terms of their function, as for instance ‘the duty air traffic controller’, ‘the aircraft designer’ or ‘the pilot in command’.
To identify people by name can be seen to detract from the objectivity of the report.
The question or why an accident occurred, when an investigator is in possession of all the information as to what occurred, inevitably brings him into the troubled waters of ‘human factors’.
Every accident may be regarded as the result of the action of a human being somewhere along the line.
If the aeroplane broke up in the air or the engine fell apart then the designers could be at fault; if navigation aids were not working properly a radio engineer could be responsible, or even the Director of Civil Aviation who failed to provide enough money for the maintenance of the aids.
And of course, as we know only too well, it could be the result of a particular action on the part of the pilot.
Aircraft accidents are not caused by ‘acts of God’.
Homo sapiens has chosen to venture into what is for him an unnatural environment and he does so at his peril.
He knows, or if he does not know he should find out, the features or conditions of the environment he has chosen to occupy, and he should act accordingly.
Sometimes the investigator is able to identify other features which have hitherto been overlooked — among these is the unreliability and the widely variable reactions of human beings to a given set of circumstances.
A human being responds, with his instincts, his emotions, his skill, his knowledge and his physical ability, to what he can perceive.
But he has limitations.
He has limitations of memory (is there a single pilot who can recall all the instructions in his operations manual?), limitations of response times, limitations to the amount of information he can assimilate at one time and process mentally; and everyone responds differently and at different rates.
There is no International Standard Man.
When the investigator identifies a particular shortcoming he cannot stop there.
He must find out the reason for it.
This may lie in some very personal adjunct, in which case a psychologist might be able to throw some light on the matter.
It may be that demands were made beyond the capability of a particular individual, or the person concerned may simply have been to some degree in ill health.
It could be that insufficient information was available upon which to make a correct decision.
It is even possible that nobody had ever anticipated a particular situation arising.
These are but abstract possibilities.
Translating them into actual events, there could be few people who had anticipated that a British Airways Boeing 747 would suffer loss of power on all four engines for sixteen minutes when it flew into a volcanic ash cloud at 37 000 feet.
Had anyone thought of that before?
It is perhaps instructive to look in some detail at one accident report to see if the question as to why it happened was answered as well as the question of what happened.
Let us go back to the Dan Air Boeing 707 accident at Lusaka.
The official ‘cause’ of the accident states clearly what happened:
‘The accident was caused by a loss of pitch control following the in-flight separation of the right hand horizontal stabiliser and elevator….’
The investigators knew that within an hour or so of their arrival at  the accident site, but they had to work for another year and a half to find out why:
‘…as a result of metal fatigue…’
Yes, they had confirmed that feature within a week of the accident:
‘…and inadequate fail-safe design in the rear spar structure…’
Ah!
So that is why it failed.
But does the report say why there was inadequate fail-safe design?
It says:
‘Insufficient consideration had been given at the design and certification stage to the stress distribution in the horizontal stabiliser spar structure following a top chord failure in the region outboard of the closure rib…’
Insufficient consideration by whom?
By the designers, Boeing, and by the certification authority, the FAA, presumably.
How did that come about?
The report goes on:
In the original 100 series design…the ability of the stabiliser structure to carry the flight loads following failure of the top chord was demonstrated on test…
This was considered to be the ‘worst case’…’
And later it says:
‘…the apparent lack of attention given to potential top chord failure cases outboard of the terminal fittings strongly suggests that the earlier work on the 100 series design influenced thinking on the 300 series design.’
Oh!
So that's it.
What else did the official ‘cause’ say?
‘Shortcomings in design assessment, certification and inspection procedures were contributory factors.’
What shortcomings in design assessment?
Again, in an earlier part of the report we read:
‘The replacement of the horizontal stabiliser light alloy top skin by stainless steel significantly altered the stiffness distribution of the structure, creating the high fastener loadings which led ultimately, to the fatigue failure in the rear spar top chord…’
And further on it says:
‘Post accident flight tests revealed that deployment of speed brakes during the landing roll produced an horizontal stabiliser load condition spectrum which was significantly different to that used in the original design.’
And the shortcomings in certification procedures?
Earlier in the report it says:
‘Following the failure of the stabiliser rear spar top chord, the structure could not sustain the flight loads imposed upon it long enough to enable the failure to be detected by the then existing inspection schedule.
It cannot, therefore, be classified as fail-safe.’
Also:
‘No fatigue tests were carried out on the B 707–300 series horizontal stabiliser structure prior to USA or UK certification.
Neither at the time of certification nor at the time of writing were such repeated load tests required by either US or UK legislation for structures declared to be failsafe.’
Finally, what were the shortcomings in inspection procedures?
On this subject the report states:
‘Neither the inspections detailed in the approved maintenance schedule nor those recommended by the manufacturer were adequate to detect partial cracks [which had existed for about 7100 flights]in the horizontal stabiliser rear spar top chord but would probably have been adequate for the detection of a completely fractured top chord.’
So there you have it — what happened and why in the greatest detail, reported without fear or favour, in such a way that there is no ambiguity as to what corrective measures are necessary.
The same analytical method can be adopted in identifying what happened and why it happened in an accident which is entirely operational in character, though in such a case there would be greater dependence upon some of the less precise characteristics of human behaviour in the explanation of why certain things were done.
Writing an accurate and properly assessed accident report is by far the most difficult part of the investigator's task, but it is the investigator's only end-product.
No matter how efficiently the investigation has been conducted, an inadequate report nullifies the effectiveness of the investigation.
The investigator's recommendations for the prevention of similar accidents in the future are undoubtedly very important but others in authority, well versed in all the issues involved, may consider different ways of achieving the same end.
This the investigator must accept.
He must not be drawn into the sphere of those responsible for preventing accidents, for this would prejudice his independence and impartiality in the investigation of any subsequent accident.
But history has shown that those in authority should take more notice of recommended accident prevention measures than they have done in the past.
Explosive decompression
On 2 October 1971 a BEA Vanguard was operating a normal scheduled service from London to Salzburg, and while cruising at 19 000 feet over Belgium it suddenly dived almost vertically into the ground killing all sixty-three occupants instantly.
The Belgian authorities immediately commenced an investigation with the active participation of the UK accredited representative, Geoffrey Wilkinson (who happened to be top of the list at the time), and his team of advisers comprising Geoffrey Feltham, who subsequently took over as head of the AIB engineering section, Jimmy Lett and the RAF consultant pathologists who normally worked with AIB.
The near vertical impact had made a crater some 20 feet deep with fragments of the aircraft scattered within a radius of about 300 yards, but the major units of the horizontal tail surfaces were found several kilometres from the main wreckage area, clearly indicating in-flight separation of these components.
Examination of the wreckage showed that the pressure dome at the rear of the passenger cabin had ruptured from the bottom where there was substantial evidence of corrosion over a distance of more than 18 inches.
The corrosion emanated from the joint between the bottom of the pressure dome and the fuselage and there was nicotine tar staining on the edge of the corroded area indicating that it had developed over a relatively long period.
There was evidence that a tear had progressed from the corroded area across the face of the pressure dome, initially in fourteen separate steps, after which the critical crack length was exceeded and total disruption followed.
Clearly this damage caused decompression of the pressurised cabin, but it should not necessarily have led automatically to separation of the horizontal tail surfaces.
Further research was necessary.
When the fixed horizontal tailplanes were examined it was found  that they had failed symmetrically and the upper skin on each side had completely separated in major sections.
The flight loads had then caused a rapid break-up and separation of both tailplanes and elevators.
When it was suggested that the upper skins had been forced off as a result of the inflation of the fixed tailplane by the pressurised air through the ruptured pressure dome escaping via the rear (unpressurised) part of the fuselage, I contended that it was necessary to have more reliable evidence than uncorroborated deduction before such a conclusion could be accepted.
I suggested that a full scale test should be conducted on a discarded Vanguard fuselage fitted with a similar representative tailplane unit.
(I was Deputy Chief Inspector at the time and privy to the discussions and proposals relating to the investigation.)
In due course the test was set up in England.
The rear pressure dome was fitted with a petal valve to simulate failure at 19 000 feet and released when the cabin differential pressure reached 6.25 pounds per square inch.
The pressure in the rear tailcone of the fuselage reached 5.5 psi and a sudden pressure surge of 4.12 psi was recorded inside the right tailplane.
The rivet heads pulled through the skin and there was severe distortion of the right-hand tailplane.
(The left-hand tailplane was modified to a later standard and showed no signs of distress or incipient failure.)
We were home and dry.
The rupture of the pressure dome had started the structural failures leading to the accident.
The official report states:
‘The rapid inflation of the tailcone and empennages imposed a high differential pressure across the tailplane's skins causing the upper panels to become detached from the main structure.
The existing flight loads then caused a rapid break-up and separation of both tailplanes and elevators.
The loss of the aerodynamic download normally provided by the horizontal tail surfaces in cruising flight caused the aircraft to pitch rapidly nose down with no possibility of recovery from the ensuing dive.
The criteria upon which the design of the tailplanes was based did not take into account the possibility that a substantial differential pressure could exist in the tail structure other than that caused by aerodynamic loads.
Nor in the light of experience and knowledge available prior to this accident would it have been reasonable to envisage that internal pressures could exist in the tail structure.’
So there was the lesson.
A pressurised fuselage confined a large source of potential energy and account should be taken in the design of the aircraft to ensure that, in the event of its rapid release in any unpredicted manner, the basic integrity of the aircraft structure or its control should not be compromised.
The report was published for all the world to take note — a case illustrating why aircraft accident reports should always be published if it is at all possible.
The potential hazards that can arise from cabin pressurisation are only one aspect of the many features that aircraft designers must contend with, and engineers are well able to calculate the forces involved and build in the necessary safeguards.
One of the earlier manifestations of pressurisation hazards was the Comet 1 accident near Rome in 1954 when a fatigue crack was found to have propagated from a cut-out in the top of the fuselage designed to accommodate the automatic direction finder aerial system.
It is all the more surprising, therefore, that the DC-10 was to fall victim to the same hazard when the Turkish Airlines DC-10 crashed with so many fatalities near paris.
It is relevant to recount at this juncture that when KLM Royal Dutch Airlines ordered a number of DC-10s to add to their fleet the Netherlands airworthiness authority, the Rijks Luchtvaart Dienst (RLD), became concerned during the validation process of this aircraft type about the integral strength of the cabin floor under which flight and engine controls and electrical and hydraulic lines are attached.
Any distortion or disruption of the floor was seen to be potentially very dangerous.
Apparently the RLD was not aware of the details of the Vanguard accident at that time, but the subsequent publication of the report on the accident should have reinforced their disquiet.
There followed dramatic confirmation of their worst fears.
In June 1972 a US registered DC-10 flying over Windsor, Ontario experienced a sudden depressurisation in flight when the rear cargo compartment door burst open and part of the cargo was ejected.
As anticipated by the RLD, the cabin floor was disrupted and both the flying controls and some of the engine controls were seriously affected.
It was only with the greatest difficulty that the crew managed to carry out an emergency landing at Detroit.
The National Transportation Safety Board carried out a full investigation of the affair (by the ICAO definition it was an accident, not an incident) and in a letter to John Shaffer, the Administrator of the FAA, the NTSB recommended that the Federal Aviation Administration:
1.
‘Require a modification to the DC-10 cargo door locking system to make it physically impossible to position the external locking handle and vent door to their normal door locked positions unless the locking pins are fully engaged.
2.
‘Require the installation of relief vents between the cabin and aft cargo compartment to minimize the pressure loading on the cabin flooring in the event of sudden depressurisation of the cargo compartment.’
A month later the FAA reply included the following:
‘All operators of DC-10-10 airplanes are currently performing 100 hour functional checks on the cargo door system and will incorporate necessary modifications in accordance with McDonnell Douglas Service Bulletins 52–27 and A52-35 within 300 hours.
These modifications pertain to improvements in the inspection and operation of locking and vent mechanisms.
Additional modifications to the cargo door locking and pressurisation systems are being considered as part of a continued investigation effort.
While a preliminary investigation indicates that it may not be feasible to provide complete venting between cabin and cargo compartments, your recommendations will be considered with respect to further action taken.’
Both NTSB recommendations had started with the word ‘require’, which presumably means ‘apply compulsion’.
However, the FAA response to the first one was to refer to service bulletins.
These are of a lower order of priority than airworthiness directives, which are the alternative.
So the implication was that airlines operating the DC-10-10 would be informed that they should incorporate the improvements in the inspection and operation of locking and vent mechanisms within 300 flying hours.
With regard to the second recommendation, the FAA merely said that it might not be feasible and, in the event, they did nothing but give the matter consideration!
In September 1972 (three months after the accident) the RLD sent a delegation to Los Angeles to discuss their reservations about the DC-10 with representatives of the FAA and with McDonnell Douglas.
The latter took the attitude that the DC-10 satisfied the requirements of the Federal Airworthiness Regulations but the Dutchmen stood their ground and countered that the requirements were inadequate.
The FAA responded in a formal written statement to the effect that: ‘We do not concur with the KLD views concerning the inadequacy of the FAA requirements.’
Then came the terrible accident to the Turkish Airlines DC-10 in the forest of Ermenonville near Paris in which 346 people lost their lives.
Since the accident occurred in France, the French accident investigation authorities conducted the investigation.
Participating in the French investigation were accredited representatives from Turkey, the State of registry of the aircraft, and the USA, the State of manufacture.
Although there were more than 100 British nationals killed in the accident there was no provision at that time for a State with such an interest to participate, but knowing that the minister was bound to be asked by MPs in the House what arrangements there were for investigating the cause of death of so many UK citizens I telephoned my old friend Michel Vigier in paris with a formal request that we might send a UK observer.
The decision did not lie with him because a formal commission of inquiry had been set up, but the following morning he telephoned me to say that a UK observer would be welcome and, by the way, would we please send Eric Newton, then head of AIB engineering section, to the accident site to advise the commission on whether there had been a bomb or other explosive on the aircraft.
Eric had established a worldwide reputation for detecting evidence of fire, explosion and any form of sabotage as a result of his work in AIB since 1936.
Naturally I agreed, and he set off for paris immediately with Ted Church as the UK observer.
Ted, fortunately, was fluent in (Belgian) French because he had flown as a pilot for Sabena for many years and was, I believe, highly thought of by our French colleagues.
All these arrangements are typical of the friendly, co-operative manner in which aircraft accident investigation authorities go out of their way to help each other when a high degree of trust and mutual respect exists between them.
There is no question of the representatives of the various States being in competition with each other or pursuing national interests.
There is but one objective — to find the cause of the accident — and all parties are equally interested in establishing that without distortion or national bias.
Sometimes, however, less experienced investigators take up a defensive stance, while others may find themselves under pressure from their political masters to adopt a particular approach.
But to return to the Turkish DC-10.
Eric Newton was able to  show that there was no evidence of chemical explosion or sabotage, though his participation in the French investigation put the UK in the position of being a ‘State providing information at the request of the investigating authority’ and thereby, under the terms of Annex 13, a State entitled to participate with a formal accredited representative.
This afforded Ted Church's involvement official recognition.
As all the world now knows, the commission of inquiry established that the cause of the accident was essentially the same as the one at Windsor, Ontario except that this time the disruption of the flying controls was more damaging and the crew were unable to effect a recovery.
Quite rightly all hell broke loose in the USA because the FAA had not implemented one of the vital NTSB recommendations after the Windsor accident, and 346 people had died as a result.
The French commission of inquiry found that the modification to the cargo door locking and vent mechanisms had been only partially carried out by the aircraft manufacturers before delivery to Turkish Airlines in December 1972, six months after the Windsor accident.
It was found, however, that work on this modification had begun but had not been completed.
It was also found that while the aircraft was in service a modification to the door mechanism had been carried out in a way which did not comply with the appropriate service bulletin.
But, as the French report so politely puts it:
‘Other modifications of the door closing system and methods of mitigating the effects of sudden depressurisation of the aft cargo compartment were still under study at the time of the accident.’
In other words, nothing relating to the second NTSB recommendation in the Windsor accident report had been done.
There is a suspicion amongst the European aviation community that the US authorities and, to a slightly lesser extent, the US manufacturers either do not bother to take proper account of the findings and recommendations made by investigating authorities outside the USA or else consider them to be of little or no importance.
Certainly it would seem that the FAA and McDonnell Douglas did not appreciate the significance of the Vanguard accident when considering the NTSB recommendations on the Windsor accident even though the report was available to them.
Indeed, I sometimes wonder if they were even aware that this  accident in Belgium had happened.
The Dutch should have been aware of it, but strangely the RLD gave the KLM DC-10s a Netherlands certificate of airworthiness, or rather validated the US certificate, notwithstanding their considerable reservations about the strength or ventilation of the cabin floor.
Was it a case of KLM bringing pressure, for commercial reasons, on the RLD to accept the DC-10, or did they feel unable to challenge the validity of the FAA certificate of airworthiness?
They had no reason to lack confidence in their own assessment — Holland was the home of Fokker and KLM had been established since 1919, each company producing generations of highly competent aeronautical engineers.
There was also the precedent established by the British when the ARB refused to validate the US certificate of airworthiness of the Boeing 707 in its original form and the manufacturers had to design and fit an additional dorsal fin to improve its ‘Dutch roll’ characteristics before Dai Davis, the ARB chief test pilot, was satisfied that the aircraft was up to UK certification standards.
At any rate, it was difficult to see that the FAA had any good reason not to implement the very important recommendations made by their own US investigating authority, the NTSB, after the Windsor accident, especially as the RLD had gone to the trouble of flying to Los Angeles to make their point.
I wonder whether the officials of the FAA who saw the RLD representatives were the same people who rejected the NTSB recommendation or, if not, if they were ever in communication with each other on the subject.
It must be remembered that for all its world status and the great influence it has upon the rest of the airworthiness authorities of the western world, the FAA is after all made up of fallible human beings.
There is no magic exemption from error because its members collectively make up a respected US institution.
The same is true throughout the world of course: laws and regulations are made by men, and the fact that an aircraft was built or operated in compliance with those laws and regulations is, in itself, no guarantee that it will not come to grief.
The people who make the laws and regulations relating to such a highly technological activity as aviation are as capable of making mistakes as the engineers who build the aircraft and the crews that fly them.