

Introduction and Overview
In School, Work and Equality we consider some of the major political problems of education in its social context.
The chapters fall into four sections: in Teaching and Learning we review the conflicts between various demands on educational institutions, conflicts that have become more clearly defined in recent years.
In the section on The Organization and Control of Schooling , we change the focus to a slightly wider context, considering in particular the balance between home and school and between local and central government.
In the section on Aspects of Equality , we consider some of the social divisions and inequalities which have featured in educational discourses and policies; and in the section on Education and Work , we raise some of the issues stemming from the employment problems of young people.
Below, we spell out the relevance of the readings in a little more detail.
1 Teaching and Learning
The chapters in this section of the reader consider various aspects of teaching and learning that have come under increased official scrutiny by central state agencies in recent years, particularly the curriculum of schools, the assessment of pupil performance in school and the quality of teaching itself.
The prospect of a national curriculum with prescribed core and foundation subjects covering about 70 per cent of timetabled time, marks a departure from earlier recommendations that sought to delineate a core of subject studies or areas of experience within the secondary curriculum.
Gordon Kirk's chapter (1.1) points to the variable controls over the curriculum from the centre that marked earlier historical periods; the post-war tradition that curriculum matters were largely the subject of professional decision-making and the gradual reassertion of central influence and control over the curriculum since the mid-1970s.
The part played by various DES (Department of Education and Science) and HMI (Her Majesty's Inspectorate) curriculum documents in redefining particularly the priorities of secondary schooling is examined, alongside the changes that are seen to represent a substantial shift from local and institutional control to greater central control.
The strengthening of this centralist trend, which has also been evident in other aspects of state schooling, is seen to culminate in the government's consultation paper The National Curriculum 5–16 (DES/Welsh Office, 1987) whose proposals were incorporated in a largely unchanged form in Chapter 1 of the 1987 Education Reform Bill.
The legislative route adopted by the government with respect to the curriculum and assessment procedures for schools in England and Wales, contrasts with the situation found in Scotland.
Here the restructuring of the curriculum and assessment practice has been gradually introduced, with substantial support from educationalists, following the recommendations of the Munn (SED, 1977a) and Dunning reports (SED, 1977b).
While the main pressure for a common framework for the curriculum emerged from the lead given by DES and HMI, it has also been an issue taken up by academics and some local authorities.
The moves made by some LEAs to develop a curriculum framework followed the publication of Local Authority Arrangements for the School Curriculum (DES/Welsh Office, 1979).
This was critical of LEAs in two important respects.
First it was claimed that LEAs had inadequate information about curriculum provision in schools; and, second, that they lacked a clear policy on the curriculum.
Subsequently local authorities were asked in 1981 to review their curriculum policy and to plan the curriculum along the lines suggested in The School Curriculum (DES, 1981).
It was in response to these pressures, and more particularly its commitment to enhancing equality of opportunity and tackling the problem of underachievement, that the Inner London Education Authority (ILEA) set up a committee of enquiry chaired by David Hargreaves.
Its recommendations were made in the document Improving Secondary Schools (ILEA, 1984).
Following Kirk's analysis of increasing central pressures on the curriculum, David Hargreaves compares and contrasts the government's proposals in its consultation document on the curriculum and subsequent Education Reform Bill, with the recommendations made in Improving Secondary Schools (1984).
In his chapter (1.2) Hargreaves points to some of the major contrasts in the underlying curriculum philosophies informing these curriculum proposals.
Although both Kirk and Hargreaves support a common curriculum they have major reservations about the government's proposals.
Kirk sees the national curriculum as potentially circumscribing pupil-centred learning, limiting the exercise of professional autonomy, and inadequately recognizing the cultural and ethnic diversity of our society.
Hargreaves is particularly critical of the way in which the national curriculum proposals, and associated age-related testing of pupils, will reinforce traditional subject-centred teaching and restrict pupils learning roles.
Andy Hargreaves' chapter links in with themes raised by the previous contributors.
The growing central controls on the curriculum, and other aspects of state schooling, has to a considerable extent been grounded on a concern with the quality of teaching, and the associated view that improving the quality of education is dependent on improving the quality of teaching.
In ‘Teaching Quality: A Sociological Analysis’(1.3), Andy Hargreaves critically analyses official views of what constitutes good and poor quality teaching.
In contrast with the largely psychologistic HMI accounts of teaching quality, emphasizing teachers' personal qualities, technical classroom skills and responsibilities, Hargreaves examines teachers and their practices within a sociological framework.
His focus is on teachers' understandings of, and attempts to cope with the situations they experience in schools, and the various pressures and constraints that shape the teaching environment and over which teachers have little control.
This is seen to give rise to a culture of teaching as teachers collectively evolve sets of attitudes and responses to their  tasks, the content of what they teach and the relationships they have with their colleagues.
The major features of the present culture of teaching are seen to pose particular problems for curriculum policy, especially when this is directed at changing the delivery and organization of the curriculum.
Proposals for the regular assessment of pupil performance are contained in the government's consultative document on pupil testing (DES, 1987) and now incorporated into the Education Reform Bill.
The third theme discussed in this section of the reader is changes in assessment policy.
The chapters by Rowntree, Broadfoot and Nuttall examine a number of key developments in the assessment of pupil performance, and point to the rapid speed and scale of changes that have taken place in recent years.
In Derek Rowntree's chapter (1.4) various side effects of the competitive aspects of assessment and the giving of grades are identified, and their implications for pupil motivation discussed.
In the next chapter (1.5) Patricia Broadfoot discusses the impact of the introduction of the General Certificate in Secondary Education (GCSE) and examines this alongside the simultaneous introduction of Records of Achievement.
While both initiatives are seen as bringing about a closer link between assessment and teaching and learning, and place a greater emphasis than hitherto on teacher assessment, Broadfoot points to various tensions and contradictions between these systems of assessment.
Records of Achievement are essentially formative records providing summarizing statements of pupils' personal qualities, including some element of the students own self-assessment.
In contrast GCSE remains basically a hierarchical, subject based examination that is non-formative in character and like its predecessor is shaped by the requirements of educational and occupational selection.
‘In short, the contradictions between GCSE and Records of Achievement hinges on the question of whether the priority for 16+ assessment should be the provision of reliable information which has high predictability for the purpose of selection or whether the primary purpose should be to reflect what has been achieved in relation to the whole range of goals that a school may set for itself.
In addition to this tension in the purposes of assessment pointed to by Broadfoot, we also have to consider the future impact of proposals to introduce national testing at regular intervals.
This is regarded by the present government, along with its proposals for a national curriculum, as a means of enhancing the quality of education, and making schools more accountable to parents in a system of schooling that it is intended will be more consumer oriented.
These proposals for a national system of pupil assessment are discussed in Desmond Nuttall's chapter (1.6).
Nuttall points to various difficulties with this model and some of its possible effects in narrowing pupils’ learning opportunities.
2 The Organization and Control of Schooling
The topics and issues covered in this section of the reader are in various ways concerned with different aspects of the organization of schooling, the  implications of recent changes for teachers' work, and the wider political and educational significance of moves towards more centralized, state directed systems of control.
A substantial body of educational research in recent years has sought to identify those qualities or practices that make an ‘effective’ school.
A considerable impetus behind this research has been the concern of the DES and HMI to improve the quality of schooling, allied with the efforts of educational researchers and practitioners to tackle the persistent problem of the underachievement of many children attending inner city or urban schools.
It is this concern for enhancing or widening the opportunities of children living in inner city areas which underpins Ronald Edmonds' chapter (2.1).
Edmonds defines effective schooling in terms of enabling children from economically impoverished backgrounds to acquire those ‘basic school skills that now describe minimally successful pupil performance for the children of the middle class’.
From his review of American research, and his own work with the School Improvement Project in New York City, Edmonds is convinced about the efficacy of school reform in developing and realizing the potential of pupils in inner city schools.
Contrary to some of the conclusions drawn from social scientific research suggesting that it is primarily home or family backgrounds that determines the level of educational performance, Edmonds proceeds to identify those characteristics of effective schools delivering marked improvements in children's educational achievements.
The impending changes in the funding and management of state schools in England and Wales, consequent upon the clauses of the Education Reform Bill that will extend local financial management to all schools, are discussed in the next chapter by Hywel Thomas (2.2).
These proposals contrast with the growing importance and assumptions behind ‘categorical’(Harland, 1985) or centrally  targeted funding on favoured educational projects (e.g. Technical and Vocational Education Initiative, Low Attainers project).
Such centrally funded schemes have tended to be supported by claims that it is only by central intervention that particular objectives can be achieved.
In contrast the development of local management schemes purportedly seeks to enhance local and community control of schools by bringing financial control closer to the point of professional and institutional decision-making.
In his chapter Thomas examines the origins of local management schemes, the innovatory work undertaken on this by a number of local authorities, and the objectives of the local management proposals contained in the Education Reform Bill.
Various difficulties in devising formula  budgeting for schools are pointed to and the implications of the scheme for school governors and the employment of teachers are discussed.
Although it is too soon to draw any firm conclusions about the effects of this scheme, it seems likely that it will have a considerable impact on the culture of schools, and the future structure of schooling itself.
The devolving of financial responsibility to schools, not only reduces the power and influence of LEAs, but it may well encourage schools at some future point to consider opting out of local authority control altogether.
The next chapter by Connell (2.3) analyses the work of teachers by drawing  on concepts and ideas developed in industrial sociology.
In contrast to the predominant tradition of writing that concentrates on teachers' professionalism, Connell examines teachers' labour as work.
Drawing extensively on teachers' own reflections and comments he points to various external constraints that structure the tasks teachers are expected to perform, as well as those deriving from the organization of time, space and activities in schools themselves.
What is revealed is a complex, although often implicit, division of labour that has a marked effect on the social relations of schooling.
Connell also points to the ways in which the teaching work force is also structured by a sexual division of labour.
One dimension of this is the under-representation of women in senior positions in schools.
‘The association that our society makes between authority and masculinity, more specifically adult heterosexual masculinity, is a significant underpinning of the power structure of a school system where most administrators, principals and subject heads are men’(Connell, 1985, pp. 138–9).
Stephen Ball's chapter (2.4) provides an extensive discussion of the political interrelationships between national and local government and schools.
Two specific sets of factors are seen as particularly significant in recent years: falling school rolls and cut backs in educational expenditure.
Ball examines the relationship between schools and their wider socio-political context as a dynamic one, emphasizing the variety of ways in which schools cope with and respond to increased external intervention.
External pressure for change is seen as mediated through the ‘micro-politics’ of school life, a term used to refer to the conflicts and struggles between various interest groups within schools.
This is illustrated by reference to teachers' responses to various externally sponsored innovations and the teachers' pay dispute of 1985–86.
The final chapter in this section by Anthony Hartnett and Michael Naish considers the growth and significance of increased centralized control and direction of state schooling, particularly its impact in limiting the agenda of political and educational debate.
On the basis of their commitment to an open and participatory democracy, Hartnett and Naish raise a number of major moral, social and educational issues arising from the drift to a more centralized system of control, in which managerial and bureaucratic priorities and solutions have been advanced over professional and community concerns.
They point also to the fundamental, political and enduring character of educational problems and the dangers within a centralized state of putting these beyond political and democratic scrutiny.
Importantly their chapter offers a defence of the role of educational studies in addressing fundamental educational problems and issues, and of the need to sustain independent enquiry at a time when official pressure concentrates on the technical and utilitarian aspects of schooling.
3 Aspects of Equality
In this section we consider some equalities and inequalities as they are  manifested in relation to education.
Whenever we compare two or more people, we can discover a variety of attributes in respect of which they may be equal or unequal.
In this section we outline some ways in which educational inequalities and the pursuit of educational equalities have been studied.
In Williams' chapter (3.1), we may perhaps see a justification of equality of condition or outcome on the basis of equality of opportunity.
Equality of opportunity — the idea that everybody should have a fair chance of doing themselves justice — is a notion that has been at the basis of public provision of education and indeed of much educational charity for a long time indeed.
Usually, those who have espoused it as a goal have had little interest in the idea of equalizing all the pupils of a school or an educational system, or indeed all the people in a particular country.
Williams attempts to show that if we examined the commonplace idea of equality of opportunity thoroughly, we find ourselves carried down a sort of ‘slippery slope’ towards insisting that only if everybody has succeeded to the same degree can we be sure that there has been genuine equality of opportunity.
Thus for Williams there is no difference between the right to enter a competition and the right to win that competition.
Flew (1981)(3.2), in the extract from his book The Politics of Procrustes , differs from Williams.
For Flew, the track which leads from equality of opportunity (a phrase which he finds ambiguous) to equality of outcome is not a slippery slope at all.
Rather, Flew claims that the idea of ‘open competition for scarce opportunities’ is less ambiguous than that of ‘equality of opportunity’; that it is, in our metaphor, a level piece of ground rather than a slippery slope; and that it is clearly distinct from that of absolute equality of outcome.
Williams, Flew therefore claims, has failed to show that equality of opportunity entails even a prima facie commitment to equality of outcome.
He also points out that a commitment to equality implies also a commitment to a state which will push everybody around until they are equal — Procrustes was a figure in Greek mythology who forced all those he came across to become the same height, either by chopping bits off or by using a rack to stretch their legs.
We can see that in this area of intellectual work even the analysis of concepts carries with it a considerable political and even emotional charge.
The next pair of readings are concerned with what has perhaps been the single most salient political issue in British education in the twentieth century: the issue of inequality of opportunity and inequality of outcome between social classes — particularly between middle and working class children.
Heath (3.3) sums up one influential and long-established tradition in the study of class differences in education.
He compares three studies, carried out respectively in 1949, 1972 and 1983, but reflecting the educational and social conditions of well before those dates.
Very broadly, his conclusion is that class inequalities in education — at least for boys — have changed very little since the First World War.
He suggests therefore that perhaps the return of a third successive Conservative administration might not lead to a widening of social class inequalities.
He further comments that the very increase in examination  successes which has occurred especially since the introduction of CSE has meant that educational attainment has become more, not less, associated with social class.
McPherson and Willms (3.4) emphasize somewhat different aspects of this complex topic in rebutting Heath's major claim; that the introduction of comprehensive education has had no effect in reducing class inequalities in education.
They find a process which includes both improvement — the increase in average attainment among all children in their Scottish sample; and equalization — a reduction in class differences.
In short a process of levelling up rather than the levelling down anticipated by many critics of comprehensive provision.
On the central issue — has comprehensive education led to any equalization between social classes — McPherson and Willms argue simply that Heath's time scale is too short.
Because comprehensive education has been introduced too recently for its effects to show up clearly in his Anglo-Welsh sample of boys born in 1960–65, Heath's conclusions are in their view simply premature.
The effects of the comprehensive policies of the 1960s, reforms of the 1970s and practices of the 1970s and 1980s are available for serious discussion only in the 1990s.
It may be worth noting that Heath himself in another article extends his time-scale further back to include the reforms of the first decade of the twentieth century.
Tomlinson suggests in her chapter on ‘The Expansion of Special Education’ that if selection by ability was inadmissible, so was selection by disability or inability.
Thus she ties together of the reduction of class inequality and the reduction of segregation of those children for whom special education is assumed to cater.
But who were and are these children?
She gives a wide variety of definitions: ‘feeble-minded’, ‘educable defective’, ‘educationally sub-normal’, ‘those having moderate learning difficulties’, ‘dull and backward’, ‘remedial’, and ‘maladjusted and disruptive’.
So many, so arbitrary, so variable have these definitions been, she claims, that they provide no basis at all for deciding which children need special education nor for explaining the growth of special education.
With Mary Warnock's note that all children have some special needs, the notion of special needs becomes impossible to operate, if not meaningless.
What then is special education about?
Tomlinson has an explanation in terms of the interests of particular social groups (especially professionals) and of the requirements of an advanced technological or industrial society — often simply termed capitalist.
She aims therefore to switch attention from the alleged psychological problems of ‘special needs’ children and towards the alleged interests of those whose power and influence is furthered by the expansion of such education.
Thus apparent natural and psychological inequalities are replaced by social, political and economic inequalities of power.
Considering inequalities once again leads us to consider the political machinery which is expected to deal with them — a machinery which itself contains and reinforces inequalities.
The advocates of equality, as well as those more concerned with other goals, are given a cue for reflection on the inequalities of equalization.
4 After School
In this last section, we consider what for many, especially working class pupils, has been the consummation or the release from schooling: the labour market.
Youth unemployment has since the mid-1970s been a central fact or a central fear of many young people, and has affected many others.
It is not surprising, then, that the vocational uses have occupied a central position in the assessment of education for all sectors of the political spectrum.
Yet education has never guaranteed employment, and whether it has or has not been expected to, we must also consider the other purposes it may serve.
In ‘Education, Employment and Recruitment’, Robert Moore sets out some empirical findings on how educational qualifications are used in the labour market.
He encourages us to face up to the question how useful educational qualifications really are in getting jobs.
We need to remind ourselves of the variations between different types of employer, different types of job and different types of qualification; but also of the difficulties employers may have in understanding the meaning of more than a very few qualifications.
How well qualified are employers to evaluate education, or the extent to which young people differ from their elders?
Moore does not suggest that employers are wholly blinkered: it might be, for example, that employers are finding increased educational and job opportunities have meant a less able body of pupils are applying for apprenticeships.
Thus employers' disappointment might be caused by rising educational and other standards.
Another doubt about the relevance of school work experience schemes springs from employers' low valuations of such schemes for appraising applicants.
They appear to regard them as useful for acquainting teachers and brighter pupils with industrial life, but to discount them as a means of selecting employees.
Again, Moore comments on the tendency of employers to prefer hiring or promoting those whose commitments to family and home will encourage them to be reliable.
More broadly, there does not seem to be one simple hierarchy of types of job (running from the most unskilled and casual up to the most responsible and secure), rather there are a number of different labour markets, partitioned from each other, and some operating on a sort of grapevine.
Educational vocationalism does not seem to offer much hope for the reform either of education or of the labour market.
Bailey's chapter (4.2)‘The Challenge of Economic Utility’, which comes from his book Challenges of Liberal Education (1984) sets out to distinguish the liberal goals of understanding from the goals, which he describes as both indoctrinatory and utilitarian, of ‘respect for industrial and commercial activity’, a view based on the goal of ‘helping children properly to appreciate how the nation earns and maintains its standard of living and properly (esteeming) the essential role of industry and commerce in this process’.
Bailey sums up this pair of purposes under the head of ‘instrumentalism’.
He compares various glosses on ‘preparation for adult life’ and implies that this phrase itself is unduly restricting and illiberal.
Is this wholly due to objections to using behavioural objectives or skills as the criterion as to whether pupils  have really learnt from their education?
Bailey identifies a polemical and rhetorical style which coopts creativity for commercial purposes.
Have the creativity of art, music, literature and drama always been opposed to activities responding to patronage or markets?
Or is Bailey merely articulating an ideology of Bohemianism for the arts and of undirected radicalism for social and political thought in general?
How can ‘understanding society’ be assessed?
The Further Education Unit offers us four headings: examination of what is at stake in a given issue (including vested interests and decision-making procedures); experience of membership of a decision-making group; background knowledge of national and local government; and personal legal rights.
Bailey dismisses the sum total of these as having ‘little to do with any genuine or profound understanding of society’.
But how do we recognize a genuine or a profound understanding of society?
Certainly, a consideration of what wealth is to be used for and how it is to be redistributed is an essential ingredient of Bailey's requirements (readers may be interested to contrast Flew's strictures on the notion that wealth is entirely a collective property, and that its distribution is therefore a matter for collective decision-taking).
Further, some activities cannot be judged by assessing their value to wealth-creation, when in fact they are what people use their wealth on.
Education is about ends, not merely means.
Indeed, Bailey holds up for critical scrutiny the idea that schools can prepare young people for a world of rapid technological change by concentrating on the very technology which is subject to change; rather, he suggests, the best basis for adaptability is a liberal education aimed at generating a wide understanding and the development of reason and autonomy.
The fact that the more complex realms of human action and reflection are the most important and valuable should inhibit us in assuming that all education should issue in behaviourally identifiable skills.
An emphasis on skill without understanding is an emphasis on passivity and subservience.
An emphasis on experience without general knowledge confines pupils rather than educating them.
Brown, in chapter 4.3, considers the relationship between the schooling and motivation of ‘ordinary kids’ and their prospects in the labour market.
‘Ordinary kids’(their own classification) aimed at apprenticeships or at clerical or personal service occupations.
In the 1980s this prospect became less realistic than previously.
Brown foresees an increase in educational and social inequalities arising from the provision of TVEI (Technical and Vocational Education Initiative) studies effectively dedicated to working-class pupils.
In Chapter 4.4, ‘On the Dole’, Coffield takes issue with some (relatively optimistic) views of youth unemployment expressed elsewhere by Roberts that young people suffer less from unemployment than do adults.
He suggests that to attribute extra suffering to one particular factor — age, length of unemployment, marital status, etc. — is too crude, as is the emphasis on individual responsibility; the gross disparities between the numbers of jobs and the numbers of those seeking jobs cannot be accounted for in terms of the individual psychological characteristics of the latter, nor can the rapid changes in the former.
Methodologically, Coffield suggests that explanations  must move from individualistic psychological ones to collectivistic, sociological ones (how economic explanations fit in is somewhat unclear); politically he suggests that a minimum income must be the answer.
Roberts (4.5) surveys the literature on youth, pointing out that the traditional focus on how youth cultures have functioned so as to reconcile young people to adult roles in employment and family life have lost a crucial element — the expectation that young people (especially those with only basic education) would have jobs available.
It might be argued that this function has been coopted by such purposive (indeed, allegedly manipulative) schemes as the Youth Training Scheme.
Or might the turmoil of schemes and unemployment be preparing youth more thoroughly (as has long been the case in the USA) for better adaptation to eventual permanent employment?
Is the development towards a new underclass of unemployables, or towards an enterprise culture of independent striving?
Effects on family life probably include contrary tendencies — accelerating or delaying decisions to start families, for example.
Changes in strictly (party) political attitudes and behaviour among youth do not seem salient, though attitudes to civil authority in general may be changing.
Other topics on which findings are ambiguous are the effects on leisure activity, crime, and degree of dependence on parents.
Indeed, we trust that all contributions will be judged not as predictions, but rather as means of analysing a complex and unpredictably changing sphere of social life.
Part One: Teaching and Learning
The Growth of Central Influence on the Curriculum Gordon Kirk
The Historical Context
Who should determine what young people learn at school?
That has been a keenly disputed question in Britain for more than a hundred years.
As public education developed in the middle of the nineteenth century, and as public funds were allocated for this purpose, it was considered that central government should oversee what was taught in schools.
If investment in public education was a necessary political and humanitarian response to the problems of poverty and underprivilege, if it was an appropriate means of fostering and maintaining religious adherence, and if it was calculated to equip young people with the skills demanded by a changing industrial society, then a strategy had to be found for ensuring that value was obtained for the funds invested.
According to the Newcastle Commission of 1861, the best means of obtaining that assurance was
to institute a searching examination by a competent authority of every child in every school to which grants are to be paid with the view of ascertaining whether these indispensable elements of knowledge are thoroughly acquired and to make the prospects and position of the teacher dependent, to a considerable extent, on the results of this examination.
In 1862 the Revised Code instituted a system of grants for schools: 8s. (40p) per year was to be awarded for every pupil who attended more than 200 times.
Moreover, all pupils were to be subject to annual tests in reading, writing and arithmetic, administered by HMI, and 2s. 8d. (approximately 14p) was to be deducted from the grant for each test a child failed.
Such were the main features of the strategy known as ‘payment by results’.
Through that strategy the machinery of the state was deployed to control the work of teachers, to prescribe standards of achievement in a narrow range of objectives.
Representatives of the central government were required to judge whether or not these standards had been achieved.
The system of payment by results was abolished in 1895.
Nevertheless, central control of the elementary school curriculum was maintained through a succession of codes and it was not until 1936 that these regulations were changed in a way that left responsibility for ‘a suitable curriculum and syllabus with due regard to the organisation and circumstances of the school’ in the hands of teachers.
Indeed, as far as secondary schools were concerned, the stranglehold exerted by central government over the curriculum was not relaxed until the 1944 Education Act for England and Wales and the  corresponding Scottish legislation of 1945.
While the system of ‘payment by results’ was formally abolished in 1895 it has continued over the years to represent an enormous affront to the professional consciousness of teachers and a threat to the creation of an effective educational service.
There are three grounds for this pervasive professional opposition to the system.
First, ‘payment by results’ demeaned education and reduced it to a mere cramming exercise in which all that is expected of pupils is a capacity for recall.
Secondly, the system circumscribed professional activity, constrained initiative, and demanded acquiescence in a curriculum that was so narrowly conceived as to represent a parody of education.
Finally, ‘payment by results’ has been interpreted to exemplify a state-controlled curriculum, the deliberate use of political power to mould the minds of the young.
For these reasons, ‘payment by results’ has remained anathema to teachers and their professional associations.
Consequently, any measure which seeks to strengthen central influence on the curriculum and to weaken teachers' autonomy in curriculum matters is still likely to evince the same suspicion and hostility with which teachers responded to ‘payment by results’.
This deeply ingrained suspicion of central government explains the aversion of teachers to any increase of ministerial involvement in curricular matters.
In the years between 1862 and 1944/45 there was a significant lessening of central control of the school curriculum; the years since then have witnessed an equally significant shift in the opposite direction.
The extent of that shift can be illustrated by two ministerial pronouncements.
The first, attributed to George Tomlinson, the Minister of Education from 1947 in the post-war Labour government, intimated with concise frankness that the ‘Minister knows nowt about curriculum’.
The second, uttered by Sir Keith Joseph, the Conservative Secretary of State for Education and Science in the present government, in a speech at Sheffield in January 1984 was no less frank:
I can offer an account of what the minimum level to be attained at 16 by 80%-90% of pupils would entail in a few areas of the curriculum…; in English, pupils would need to demonstrate that they are attentive listeners and confident speakers when dealing with everyday matters of which they have experience, that they can read straightforward written information and pass it on — orally and in written form — without loss of meaning and that they can say clearly what their own views are; in Mathematics, that they can apply the topics and skills in the foundation list proposed in the Cockcroft Report; in Science, that they are willing and able to take a practical approach to problems, involving sensible observations and appropriate measurements and can communicate their findings effectively…; in History, that they possess some historical knowledge and perspective, understand the concepts of cause and consequence, and can compare and extract information from historical evidence and be aware of its limitations; and in CDT [craft, design and technology], that they can design and make something, using a limited range of materials and calling  on a restricted range of concepts and give an account of what they have done and the problems they encountered.
The first statement, evoking a tradition of political non-interference in the curriculum, repudiates the locus of central government in such matters.
The second, by contrast, is a striking use of ministerial authority to influence what is taught in the schools and is indicative of the assertive pursuit of government policy to wield such influence.
This chapter seeks to chart the growth of that government assertiveness and to highlight some of the significant manifestations of its emergence.
James Callaghan's Ruskin Speech, 1976
There is evidence that, traditionally, ministers in successive governments were persuaded to adopt a neutral stance on the curriculum.
One indeed, the Conservative Minister David Eccles, is reputed to have alluded to ‘the secret garden of the curriculum’.
That metaphor of the curriculum as forbidden territory to ministers was directly challenged by Mr Callaghan's speech at Ruskin College, Oxford, in October 1976.
The Prime Minister was clearly motivated by growing public concern about education and the work of the schools.
His brief for the speech was prepared by the DES and was leaked to the press in advance.
The Yellow Paper, as the leaked document came to be called, was critical of teaching in primary and secondary schools.
It claimed that some teachers in the primary school had allowed performance in the basic skills of reading, writing and arithmetic to be adversely affected by their inadequate understanding and hence uncritical application of child-centred, or informal, methods.
With regard to the secondary school curriculum, the Yellow Paper maintained that too much scope had been given to the principle of pupil choice, with the result that many pupils were following unbalanced programmes and not enough pupils were studying science-based and technological subjects.
The antidote to these ills was thought to lie in the institution of a core or common component in the curriculum of all pupils.
The Prime Minister's speech was eagerly anticipated by the educational and wider community and it duly received the full media treatment.
However, if people expected a lucid analysis of the ills of contemporary education, together with appropriate and carefully contrived proposals for change, they were disappointed.
The speech had more modest objectives.
First, it  implicitly and explicitly asserted that the aims of education and the content of the curriculum were legitimate matters for public discussion and could not be looked upon as the exclusive concern of professionals:
I take it that no-one claims exclusive rights in this field.
Public interest is strong and legitimate and will be satisfied…
Parents, teachers, learned and professional bodies, representatives of higher education and both sides of industry, together with the government, all have an important part to  play in formulating and expressing the purpose of education and the standards that we need.
Of course, the very fact that the Prime Minister made the speech at all , and that he had rejected the advice ‘to keep off the grass’, as he put it, was a powerful reinforcement of the case he was arguing.
Secondly, the speech identified issues that, in the Prime Minister's judgement, were the source of public concern and required public debate.
Among the issues raised were the following: deficiency in the basic skills among school leavers; the reluctance of many of our best trained students to join industry; standards of literacy and numeracy; the value of informal teaching methods; the place of ‘a basic curriculum with universal standards’; and ‘the role of the Inspectorate in relation to national standards’.
Very clearly, the Prime Minister saw the speech as an opportunity to set the agenda for an extended public discussion of educational issues.
The ‘Great Debate’ followed.
The Great Debate, 1967–77
The Great Debate took place at two levels.
First, it was represented by a massive output of articles in the educational and the national press about standards, about the composition of the core curriculum, about the control of the curriculum, and about the role of the schools and other related matters.
Secondly, at a more formal level, it took the form of eight regional one-day conferences.
To each of these there were invited about 200 representatives of the world of industry and commerce, trade unions, teachers' associations, local education authorities and institutions of higher education.
The background paper for these meetings,Educating our Children: Four Subjects for Debate was prepared by the DES.
This derived clearly from the issues raised in the Prime Minister's Ruskin speech.
The four subjects for debate were:
1
The school curriculum 5–16.
2
The assessment of standards.
3
The education and training of teachers.
4
School and working life.
Among the issues for discussion of the first two subjects were the following:
1
What should be the aims and content of a core curriculum?
2
How best can an agreed core curriculum be put into effect?
3
Do we have adequate means of obtaining reliable information about the performance of pupils in schools and, if not, what further measures are required?
What value was served by these regional conferences?
According to one commentator, the format allowed little more than ‘a short canter for a stable  of hobby horses’.
Another verdict was that the Great Debate was ‘a unique exercise in contemplating the country's educational navel’.
For her part, the Minister, Shirley Williams, expressed satisfaction at this move towards open consultation on the part of the DES.
It is not beyond the bounds of possibility that the regional conferences demonstrated such a diversity of views on important aspects of educational policy that the way was left clear for a more decisive lead from the centre.
That lead was speedily forthcoming.
Education in Schools: A Consultative Document (The Green Paper), July 1977
The Green Paper from the Department of Education and Science and the Welsh Office demonstrates its relationship to the Ruskin speech and to the issues raised in the Great Debate before moving swiftly to a statement on the partnership between schools, local education authorities and ministers.
That statement includes the following justification for central involvement in curriculum matters:
The Secretaries of State are responsible in law for the promotion of the education of the people of England and Wales.
They need to know what is being done by the local education authorities and, through them, what is happening in the schools.
They must draw attention to national needs if they believe the educational system is not adequately meeting them.
Then, after alluding to current criticisms of the curriculum, and having asserted the need ‘to establish generally accepted principles for the composition of the school curriculum for all pupils’, the paper continues:
It would not be compatible with the duty of the Secretaries of State to ‘promote the education of the people of England and Wales’, or with their accountability to Parliament, to abdicate from leadership on educational issues which have become a matter of lively public concern.
The Secretaries of State will therefore seek to establish a broad agreement with their partners in the educational service on a framework for the curriculum, and in particular on whether, because there are aims common to all schools and to all pupils at certain stages, there should be a ‘core’ or ‘protected’part.
In execution of that policy it was proposed that a circular would be issued to all local authorities asking them to carry out a review of the curriculum in their areas in consultation with their schools and to report the results within about twelve months.
Enquiry into Local Education Authority Arrangements for the Management of the Curriculum
Circular 14.27 was a wide-ranging questionnaire to LEAs covering all aspects  of the planning, development, evaluation and resourcing of the curriculum in their schools.
Some of the relevant questions were as follows:
What procedures have the authority established to enable them to carry out their curricular responsibilities under Section 23 of the Education Act (1944)?
What systematic arrangements, if any, have the authority established for the collection of information about the curricula offered by schools in their area?
How does the authority help schools decide on the relative emphasis they should give to particular aspects of the curriculum, especially the promotion of literacy and numeracy?
What contribution has the authority made to the consideration of the problems faced by secondary schools, of providing suitable subject options for older pupils while avoiding the premature dropping of curricular elements regarded as essential for all pupils?
What curricular elements does the authority regard as essential?
The replies to the circular were reported in 1979.
Two significant findings emerged in relation to the questions quoted above.
First, ‘most authorities do not have systematic arrangements for regularly collecting and monitoring curricular information from their schools’.
Secondly, there was very considerable diversity of view as to what the ‘essential elements’ of the curriculum should be, many authorities regarding such matters as being the concern of the schools themselves.
Given the prevailing views about where responsibility for curricula rested, these findings are not perhaps totally unpredictable.
Indeed, one critic of the exercise considered that ‘the circular was a device which managed to make LEAs look as if they were failing in their duties, and thus allowed the DES to take the initiative’.
For their part, the ministers concerned made their intentions clear.
They proposed ‘to give a lead in the process of reaching a national consensus on a desirable framework for the curriculum’.
Such an initiative would ‘give central government a firmer basis for the development of national policies and the deployment of resources; and provide a checklist for authorities and schools in formulating and reviewing their curricular aims and policies in the light of local needs and circumstances…
Conceived in this way, an agreed framework could offer a significant step forward in the quest for improvement in the consistency and quality of school education across the country.’
As a first step in the development of such a framework, HMI would be invited to formulate ‘a view of a possible curriculum on the basis of their knowledge of schools’.
Papers from HM Inspectorate
The writings of HM Inspectorate can be seen to reinforce the commitment to  a national framework for the curriculum.
In 1977 they produced Curriculum 11–16 .
The first section of that document set out a powerful ‘case for a common curriculum in secondary education to 16’.
Such a common curriculum was thought to derive from eight ‘areas of experience’:
1
the aesthetic and creative;
2
the ethical;
3
the linguistic;
4
the mathematical;
5
the physical;
6
the scientific;
7
the social and political;
8
the spiritual.
The Inspectorate maintained their attack on the ‘unacceptable variety’ of curricular provision in their Aspects of Secondary Education (1979) and again in A View of the Curriculum (1980).
The latter document re-emphasized the need for a national curriculum framework and for the delineation of a common core of learning for all pupils.
The composition of that core was put forward, rather tentatively, as a series of ‘propositions for consideration’.
In effect, the inspectorate proposed a core that consisted of English, mathematics, religious education, physical education, modern languages, ‘arts and applied crafts’, history, and science subjects.
Finally, in The Curriculum from 5 to 16 (1985) the Inspectorate insisted that throughout the period of compulsory schooling all pupils should maintain contact with nine areas of learning — the 1977 list, except that‘technological’ learning is added and ‘the social and political’is replaced by ‘human and social’.
In each of these areas of learning schools were urged to cultivate appropriate knowledge, concepts, skills and attitudes, thus ensuring that all pupils received a broadly comparable educational experience.
The National Curriculum Framework
The government made its first attempt at formulating a national curriculum framework in the consultative document A Framework for the School Curriculum (1980).
In a somewhat terse paper — it being considered that the more substantial analysis of principles had been carried out in the HMI document A View of the Curriculum — it was maintained that throughout the period of compulsory schooling, from 5–16, all pupils should undertake study in English, mathematics, science, religious education, and physical education.
At the secondary level, the report continued, pupils should study in addition a modern language and the curriculum of all pupils should include what is called ‘preparation for adult and working life’, a varied programme of activities incorporating craft, design and technology, history and geography, moral education, health education, and ‘preparation for parenthood and for a participatory role in adult society’.
The government's thinking was further developed in The School Curriculum (1981), which was clearly seen as the culminating point of several years of public discussion.
Having reasserted the need for a national framework and having listed a set of general educational aims, the ministers set out ‘the approach to the curriculum which they consider should now be followed in the years ahead’.
As far as the primary phase of schooling was concerned, the plan of development favoured the same activities as were listed in A Framework for the School Curriculum , except that more attention was devoted to history and geography, to expressive arts, and to science, and to the need for clearly structured and progressively demanding work in these areas of the curriculum.
The framework for the secondary school curriculum was taken to comprise English, mathematics, science, modern languages, microelectronics, craft, design and technology, religious education, physical education, humanities, practical and aesthetic activities, and ‘preparation for adult life’.
The paper was seen as constituting ‘guidance for local education authorities’ and the ministers proposed to inform themselves in due course about the action taken by LEAs with regard to that guidance.
That was reinforced in a subsequent circular to LEAs later in 1981 and two years later Circular 8/83 sought a progress report from LEAs on the formation of a curriculum policy for pupils of all abilities and aptitudes.
While The School Curriculum might have been seen as the government's definitive statement on the structure of the national curriculum framework, it was superseded in September 1984 by The Organization and Content of the 5–16 Curriculum , although the wording of the latest document conveyed the impression that the final nature and scope of the national framework has not yet been determined.
The structure of the curriculum proposed for the primary phase is similar to that set out in earlier documentation but includes the following additional components:
craft and practical work leading to some experience of design and technology and of solving problems;
introduction to computers;
insights into the adult world, including how people earn their living.
The proposed structure for the secondary phase is similar to that in The School Curriculum except that specific provision is made in the latest document for Home Economics for all pupils.
There is one feature of these developments that is worth highlighting.
Throughout the official documents there is a disclaimer about the government's intention.
Repeatedly it is urged that there is no intention to introduce, through legislation, a nationally prescribed curriculum that would be binding on all LEAs and on all schools.
Thus,Curriculum 11–16 (1977) from HMI avers:
We repeat that it is not the intention to advocate a standard curriculum for all secondary schools to the age of 16, not least because that would be  educationally naive.
One of the greatest assets of our educational arrangements is the freedom of schools to respond to differing circumstances in their localities and to encourage the enterprise and strength of their teachers.
Indeed, the  government's own document,The School Curriculum (1981), includes these words: ‘Neither the government nor the local authorities should specify in detail what the schools should teach.’
At the same time, there is evidence that the government's interest in the school curriculum was not limited to the institution of a national framework.
The White Paper,Better Schools (1985), indicated that one of the government's major policy commitments was ‘to secure greater clarity about the objectives and content of the curriculum’, that being considered a necessary step towards the improvement of standards achieved by pupils.
That policy is being pursued in two ways: first, the DES is publishing a series of documents on the objectives to be sought in the different areas of the curriculum.
To date, the documentation has appeared on English (DES, 1984) and Science (DES, 1985).
Both documents seek to identify the skills and understandings which their respective subjects should seek to achieve at different stages of schooling.
Secondly, ministers have approved ‘national criteria’ for different subject areas.
These national criteria have been designed in connection with the new General Certificate of Secondary Education and are intended to ‘offer a concise account of the understanding, knowledge and competences which should be developed in the course of following the syllabus’.
Without question, these developments will impose very powerful constraints on the schools and mark a decisive shift of power in curricular matters to the centre.
It is not surprising that a leading official of the NUT should dismiss the White Paper which collates the present government's curricular initiatives as ‘a dose of centralist rhetoric’.
For its part, the government insists that ‘the establishment of broadly agreed objectives would not mean that the curricular policies of the Secretary of State, the LEA and the school should relate to each other in a nationally uniform way.
In the government's view, such diversity is healthy, accords well with the English and Welsh traditions of school education and makes for liveliness and innovation.’
Arguably, what has occurred is a reinterpretation of the traditional partnership between central government, LEAs and schools which has allowed central government, on the basis of its ‘accountability to parliament for the performance of the educational service at all levels’, progressively to nudge LEAs into a fuller appreciation of their curricular responsibilities and, through that, to influence the schools.
The strategy consisted not of ministerial diktat but the progressive application of pressure on LEAs to ensure that the school curriculum in their areas was in line with a real or imagined consensus about what pupils should learn at school.
At the same time, there were other events which very considerably strengthened the lead from the centre and made it more likely that LEAs would respond positively  to the government's initiatives.
These are considered in the remainder of this chapter.
The Demise of the Schools Council
The Schools Council (for curriculum and examinations), was established in 1964 by the Secretary of State for Education and Science as an independent body with the function of ‘the promotion of education by carrying out research into, and keeping under review, curricula, teaching methods and examinations in schools’.
It was funded jointly by the DES and LEAs and its membership was deliberately designed to achieve a majority of teachers.
Over the years, the Schools Council was responsible for a prodigious output of reports and materials on every aspect of the school curriculum.
It very definitely constituted the most significant and influential curriculum development agency in the country and many of its projects attracted international acclaim.
In keeping with its standing as an independent body with a built-in majority of teachers, the Council was committed to the thesis that ‘each school should have the fullest measure of responsibility for its own curriculum and teaching methods based on the needs of its own pupils and evolved by its own staff’.
It saw its function not to produce curricular prescriptions but rather ‘to extend the range of possibilities open to teachers, and to provide them with the most detailed research evidence on which their judgement can be exercised’.
Indeed, even when the Schools Council diverted its attention to the whole curriculum, in contrast to its preoccupation with individual areas or aspects, it maintained its non-recommendatory stance.
The Whole Curriculum (1975) and The Practical Curriculum (1981) both sought to alert teachers to the complex issues that have to be taken into account in whole curriculum planning, but both eschewed the provision of ready-made answers.
The Schools Council could therefore be seen as testifying vigorously to two principles — curriculum diversity and teacher control of the curriculum.
Over the years, the relationship between the DES and the Schools Council was characterized by what one commentator has described as ‘captiousness’.
The confidential Yellow Paper, indeed, dismissed the achievements of the Council as ‘generally mediocre’.
Reservations continued to be expressed about the power of teacher unions in the Council and there were those who felt that ‘the curriculum was too important to be left to teachers’.
In October 1981, the government's review of the Schools Council, conducted by Nancy Trenaman, concluded that, although the Council had been ‘too political, too complicated and was over-stretched’, it should nevertheless continue in existence, albeit in a slimmer form.
Notwithstanding that report, conducted on behalf of the government, Sir Keith Joseph intimated in April 1982 that he proposed to terminate the Schools Council and to institute two new bodies the School Curriculum Development Committee and the Secondary  Examinations Council — to carry out certain advisory functions relating to the curriculum on the one hand and examinations on the other.
Sir Keith made it clear that the membership of the two new committees would comprise ‘persons nominated by the Secretary of State for their fitness for this particular important responsibility’.
That was the ministerial response to Nancy Trenaman's claim that a nominated body is consistent…with a system of central government control of curriculum and examinations'.
In the Commons debate which followed the ministerial announcement, there were some MPs who welcomed the demise of ‘a nonsensical curriculum development body that has done nothing but damage education over the years’.
Others, however, objected to the replacement of the Schools Council by two unelected bodies; they saw dangers in the minister ‘surrounding himself by people of one opinion’, and in the ‘centralized patronage’ which was said to characterize the new arrangements, and they detected the eclipse of the values of curriculum pluralism for which the Schools Council had stood.
Indeed, one commentator has maintained that the very success of the Schools Council may have hastened its downfall.
‘It is ironic that the Council's projects, most of them in one way or another emphasizing the value of local initiative, teacher involvement, school-level decision-making and various innovations in pedagogy such as inter-disciplinary teaching, should lead to heightened activity nationally to control the curriculum.’
The Rise of the Assessment of Performance Unit (APU)
The APU was instituted by the DES in 1974 ‘to promote the development of methods of assessing and monitoring the achievements of children at school, and to seek to identify the incidence of under-achievement’.
While the birth of the new unit was intimated in a document dealing with educational disadvantage and the educational needs of immigrants, the work of the unit has very clearly been concerned with the more general question of standards of achievement in schools.
The proponents of the APU insisted that government is bound to maintain an interest in the quality of education in order to determine whether resources are being rationally deployed and whether the schools are serving the changing needs of pupils and of society.
To that end, ways had to be found of monitoring the achievements of pupils.
The initial strategy planned by APU was to examine pupils' performances not in the recognized school subjects but in certain areas of development — the verbal, mathematical, scientific, ethical (subsequently changed to social and personal), aesthetic and physical.
To date, surveys of achievement have been undertaken in language (with separate provision for foreign languages), mathematics, and science, but not in the three remaining areas.
Jean Dawson, administrative head of APU, summarizes the achievements of the unit in these words:
We have now carried out successfully a total of 27 national surveys without  undue disruption to schools, with the general support of the LEAs and teachers concerned…and with the enthusiastic cooperation of the children we have tested…
Many of the suspicions which existed when the unit was set up, both about the political motivation for its creation and the likely effects of national monitoring on the curriculum, have been allayed (if not entirely put to rest) by the way in which the exercise has been carried out, by the sensitivities displayed by the monitoring teams, by the way in which groups of teachers up and down the country have been involved in the development, trialling and pre-testing of materials, and by the cool, impartial way in which the results have been presented.
At the same time there were others who were resolutely opposed to the APU and its philosophy.
They doubted whether valid measures of all of the areas of development could be devised; they maintained that the tests used would have a distorting and trivializing effect on pupils' learning ('this year's test becomes next year's curriculum'): they pointed to the possibility, notwithstanding the assurances that light sampling techniques would be deployed, that superficial comparisons would be made on the basis of inadequate evidence between areas and between schools; and they detected in the paraphernalia of mass testing associated with the APU the most sinister intrusion of central government into the work of the schools and the spectre of state-controlled curricula.
The Reform of the Examination System at 16+
It is widely acknowledged that the school examination system has exerted a powerful controlling effect on school curricula, even if, in more recent times, CSE (Mode 3) has allowed schools to play a significant role on the assessment of their own pupils.
While, for many years, there has been discussion, in the Schools Council and elsewhere, about the reform of the examination system and the closer integration of CSE and GCE, Sir Keith Joseph gave notice in January 1984 of much more radical changes in the assessment of pupils at the end of compulsory schooling.
He envisaged a shift, in line with modern educational thinking, away from a system in which pupils are assessed in relation to each other(a norm-referenced system) to one in which they would be assessed in relation to certain pre-specified criteria (a criterion-referenced system).
In the latter, pupils succeed or ‘pass’ if they reach certain levels of competence: they are expected to give evidence of having reached a particular level of performance regardless of how they stand in relation to their peers.
These features will characterize the new General Certificate of Secondary Education in England and Wales.
Sir Keith Joseph has intimated that ‘national’ criteria will be established in the main curriculum areas.
This development will call for detailed research in order to establish clearly and unambiguously the skills and understandings testified by a given level of achievement.
In this way, a system is expected to  evolve in which teachers, employers, further and higher education, as well as pupils, can have confidence in what a given award actually means: it will indicate, clearly, what a pupil has been able to achieve.
Whether or not a reform of this kind will lead, as Sir Keith Joseph maintained, to a general raising of standards of achievement, it has been interpreted as a further encroachment on the part of central government into what is taught and learned in schools.
Indeed, if performance criteria are to be national , if they are to have currency throughout the system, and if they are to be as detailed and specific as the proponents of criterion-referenced testing insist, then this reform presages central intervention in the school curriculum of a most emphatic kind.
Government Policy on Standards
As has been noted, signs of a more active interest of central government in the school curriculum were apparent under the Labour administration in the 1970s.
It is arguable that this interest has intensified under the present Conservative government.
That government made standards in education a principal plank in its election platform and the action undertaken by that government in relation to curriculum and assessment is part of a wider and coherent strategy on standards in education.
That strategy incorporates a review of the content of courses of initial teacher training; the establishment of a committee for the accreditation of courses of teacher education; an inquiry into the procedures for the external validation of courses in public sector higher education; an inquiry into selection for teaching; suggestions for regular staff appraisal of teachers, and the public reporting by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of their findings on visits to schools and colleges.
Technical and Vocational Education Initiative (TVEI)
In November 1982 the Prime Minister announced the government's intention to launch TVEI, a five-year project to be conducted by the Manpower Services Commission ‘to explore and test methods of organizing, managing and resourcing replicable programmes of general, technical and vocational education for young people between the ages of 14 and 18’.
This initiative was designed to stimulate local authorities to mount full-time programmes which would be funded from central funds — to the extent of £400,000 per project — provided that they met certain centrally determined criteria relating to equal opportunities, progression, the specification of objectives, the balance between general, technical and vocational elements of programmes, planned work experience, and assessment.
Projects in Scotland had, in addition, to demonstrate their compatibility with national curriculum development initiatives for 14–16 year-olds and 16–18 year-olds.
In the first year of its operation TVEI sponsored fourteen projects; in its  second year a further 48 projects were mounted, including five in Scotland.
In 1985 a further eleven programmes were introduced in England and Wales and one more in Scotland.
While the schemes are voluntary, in the sense that LEAs are not obliged to mount them and pupils are not compulsorily involved, and while the programmes demonstrate the variety that is to be expected from vigorous local initiatives, the significance of TVEI is unmistakable.
As the responsibility of the Department of Employment, TVEI represents a determined government effort, practically by-passing the government department that has traditionally exercised responsibility for the schools and the school curriculum, to effect a swift and decisive orientation of the curriculum towards what is considered to be of immediate relevance to the skills and know-how required by a technological society.
Legislating for the National Curriculum
The discussion so far has sought to trace the progressive involvement of central government in the shaping of the school curriculum and to point to certain other government initiatives which undeniably strengthened the centralist trend.
All of these developments and initiatives culminated in the government's consultation paper of July 1987 entitled The National Curriculum 5–16 , which gave notice that the Secretary of State proposed to introduce legislation to establish a national curriculum.
The proposed national curriculum contained many familiar ingredients: However, the paper went well beyond the delineation of a framework: it proposed the establishment in each subject area of ‘attainment targets’ for pupils at age 7, 11, 14 and 16, as well as‘programmes of study’setting out ‘the overall content, knowledge, skills and processes relevant to today's needs which pupils should be taught’.
Furthermore, ‘nationally prescribed tests’ would be administered at each of the age levels mentioned to determine the extent to which the prescribed targets had been achieved.
Finally, the bodies created by Sir Keith Joseph — the School Curriculum Development  Committee and the Secondary Examinations Council — would be replaced by a National Curriculum Council and a School Examinations and Assessment Council, both appointed by the Secretary of State, with responsibility to offer him advice on the national curriculum and its assessment.
These proposals, virtually unchanged as a result of the consultation process, were embodied in the Education Reform Bill placed before parliament in November 1987.
While these features of the proposed legislation were foreshadowed in earlier government papers and initiatives it is worth exploring why it was decided to break from the practice of national consensus seeking through discussion and persuasion and to introduce legislation.
There are four sets of consideration that are relevant in this connection.
In the first place, the Conservative government had just been re-elected, in June 1987, with a substantial majority.
The opportunity afforded by a third term in office is thought to have induced a ‘triumphalist’ determination to effect even more remarkable and radical transformations in the social order than were brought about since it first took office in 1979.
And what more radical initiative in education could be mounted than one which decisively disturbed the traditional partnership between central and local government in the management of education and which exploded once and for all the myth of ‘the secret garden of the curriculum’?
A second set of factors justifying legislation are adduced in the consultation paper itself.
There it is maintained that, despite a decade of public discussion on the curriculum and the existence of widespread agreement on its main features, there were significant variations in practice which needed to be eliminated in the interests of equipping all young people ‘with the knowledge, skills and understandings that they need for adult life and employment’.
Legislation clearly was seen as the only way to bring about that objective quickly.
It was also seen as a way of raising standards of attainment: the specification of targets and the systematic assessment of pupils' work on a national basis were thought to constitute a challenge to schools and teachers to raise their expectations, and to channel their efforts to bring about enhanced standards in pupils in the key areas represented by the national curriculum.
In this way, individual schools and their teachers would be made more closely accountable for the education they provide since their work will be directly assessable against the results of other schools in the locality and against the national standards.
These developments reflect the government's acceptance of the importance of education as the key instrument in the liberation of human talent and as the principal agent of the country's economic regeneration.
Since education was such a critical service it was a responsibility of government to determine its content and to ensure that it was effective.
The third feature that needs to be considered in contextualizing the national curriculum legislation is the government's attitude towards local authorities.
While the legislation is clearly to be seen as evidence of a government's entitlement to legislate in connection with a national responsibility, it is also interpretable as evidence of the government's  impatience with local authorities.
There had been a decade of consultation and as recently as 1986 an Education Act had required local authorities to devise policy documentation in relation to the curriculum and its delivery.
Even that strategy, however, had still left too much responsibility with authorities.
The legislation reflected a judgement that local authorities could not deliver what the national interest required.
It is possible to see the national curriculum legislation as part of the government's strategy to reduce the power of local authorities.
Indeed, the years since 1979 have witnessed a continuing struggle between local and national government.
While that struggle tended to centre on financial matters — the government's commitment to effect reductions in public expenditure in opposition to local authority commitment to the enhancement of public services — what was at issue was the power of local authorities in relation to the power of central government.
Significantly, the Education Reform Bill contains two measures that will curtail local authority powers still further.
The first of these will require local authorities to delegate to governing bodies of schools very considerable responsibility for financial management and the appointment of staff.
The second allows schools to ‘opt out’ of local authority control altogether and to be funded directly by central government.
At first sight these measures appear to be interestingly decentralist in the sense that they devolve power and responsibility to the local level.
In that sense they might be seen to be moving in a different direction from the strongly centralist initiatives in connection with the national curriculum.
However, these various measures are perfectly consistent in the sense that they encroach decisively on areas on which local authorities exercise responsibility and, since the Secretary of State will have a key role in connection with financial delegation and ‘opting out’, the measures must be said to reinforce the centralism which is reflected most obviously in the measures to the national curriculum.
Finally, it is necessary to see the national curriculum  legislation in relation to the teaching profession.
For two years prior to 1987 there was unprecedented industrial action by teachers which seriously dislocated the educational service.
That dispute, which concerned, among other things, teachers' pay and conditions of service, was sustained partly because teachers could exploit contractual arrangements which were imprecise.
There have been three government initiatives which were designed to obviate any similar disruption in the future.
The Secretary of State has made regulations specifying teachers' contractual obligations; a comprehensive list of duties; he has decided to scrap the long-established machinery in which teachers' pay and conditions were negotiated and has assumed temporary powers to determine these himself; and he has introduced a national curriculum.
The last of these, with its prespecified targets, its programmes of study, and its national testing will exercise a powerful constraint on teachers' work.
While the consultation paper claims that ‘the legislation should leave full scope for professional judgement’ and while it insists that the law will provide a framework, ‘not a straitjacket’, there are many who will see the legislation as  the culmination of a strategy to whip teachers into line.
Developments in Scotland
Scotland is a compact educational entity with long experience of strongly centralized modes of operation.
The effectiveness of these centralized procedures is demonstrated in the management of the major programme of changes in curriculum and assessment currently taking place in Scotland.
Two national committees were established in 1974, one by the Consultative Committee on the curriculum, the nominated body responsible for advising the Secretary of State on curriculum matters, to examine the structure of the curriculum for 14–16 year olds (the Munn Committee) and the other by the Secretary of State himself to consider assessment at 16+ (the Dunning Committee).
Both committees reported in 1977.
Munn advocated a core plus options curriculum pattern, which required pupils to undertake work in each of eight ‘modes of activity’ as follows:
linguistic/literary;
mathematics;
social studies;
scientific;
religious education;
moral education;
aesthetic studies;
physical education.
Dunning recommended a complex pattern of ‘assessment for all’, covering the whole age range and enabling pupils to reach one of three levels of achievement — merit, general or foundation — in each area of study.
Following extensive feasibility studies into timetabling arrangements and the technical aspects of the assessment proposals, the Secretary of State produced his response to the reports in 1980 in the shape of a circular from SED (No. 10/93) which included these words:
All schools are asked to adopt the curriculum framework provided by the eight modes of study provided by the Munn Committee.
Within that framework schools and education authorities are in the best position to judge the particular form which the curriculum should take in the light of each school's individual circumstances and the needs of its pupils.
Nevertheless, there are certain overriding priorities and the Secretary of State considers that it is essential that all pupils in the third and fourth years of secondary education should study English, Mathematics and Science.
Thus, a national curriculum framework was introduced without recourse to legislation: the Secretary of State merely exercised a traditional entitlement  to influence.
The Secretary of State's authority on this matter has been accepted, not out of docility or in the belief that the Secretary of State for Scotland is infallible in curriculum matters: it has been accepted because it is very obviously based on a clear national consensus.
That consensus was reflected in the recommendations of the Munn Committee itself, which were, in turn, based on the evidence submitted to the committee.
It was also reflected in the public discussion that took place following the publication of the report.
Without probing too deeply into the reasons for the emergence of that national consensus — and the cogency of the Munn report's argument and the compactness of Scotland as an educational entity, cannot be disregarded in this connection — the existence of that consensus is beyond question and it undoubtedly made the introduction of a national curriculum framework a relatively unproblematic matter.
The Secretary of State's announcement reflected what, in the light of the consultation and public discussion, local authorities and schools wished to see.
When the Secretary of State endorsed the curriculum framework proposed by Munn he also intimated that the assessment proposals foreshadowed in the Dunning report would be implemented.
After further piloting of appropriate curriculum and assessment materials the Secretary of State intimated in 1982 that there would be a phased implementation of the proposals, beginning in August 1984.
That decision called for the establishment of joint working parties, for each of the subject areas, with responsibility for devising guidelines for the new syllabuses and specifying the detailed criteria relating to their assessment.
The activities of these joint working parties was extensive and entailed the substantial involvement of teachers in Scotland in curriculum development work.
The intention clearly was to make sure that guidelines developed reflected enterprising classroom practice.
Besides, within the central guidelines, schools and teachers themselves were expected to exercise their skills and responsibilities for determining what pupils should learn.
Unfortunately for the government's programme, for most of 1985 and 1986, Scottish teachers conducted a massive programme of industrial action which seriously disrupted the work of the schools.
Besides, since the industrial action involved a boycott of curriculum development, the carefully planned implementation of Standard Grade, as the reforms came to be known, was completely undermined.
Scottish teachers, like their counterparts south of the border, were seeking better pay and conditions; but the Scottish dispute was also a massive protest at the rapid rate of educational change and at the way in which teachers felt they were expected to carry forward developments without adequate support.
The longer the dispute continued the more officialdom in Scottish education recognized that support had to be provided.
That took two forms.
In the first place, a working party set up to simplify the complex technicalities of the original assessment proposals generated a system which was more intelligible and rational.
Secondly, before the dispute ended, for each major area of the curriculum there was established a central support group with responsibility for developing exemplar and other materials  relating to the Standard Grade programme.
Some of these central support groups worked in collaboration with local support groups of teachers and others in an effort to ensure that the centrally endorsed materials were rooted in classroom experience.
The agreement which marked the end of the dispute late in 1986 concluded that, since the preparation of teaching materials to support curriculum development had been a major burden on individual teachers, henceforth curriculum development should be supported by exemplars and other teacher materials prepared by secondees and voluntary working groups.
It is difficult not to see in that agreement what has come to be called the ‘cascade’ model of curriculum development: materials are prepared centrally and passed down the line for the classroom functionaries to implement.
One critic has described the model as ‘an unholy alliance of enthusiasts for strong management with a sufficient number of apathetic teachers’.
There are two other developments in Scotland that require to be highlighted.
The first concerns the government's 16+Action Plan.
Envisaged as a comprehensive restructuring of educational provision in further education colleges into 40-hour modules, it is rapidly finding its way into the work of the secondary school.
What is noteworthy in the present context is that it was an initiative that was energetically directed by SED and it involved the preparation centrally of curriculum materials for every area of work.
The second development represents an even more emphatic instance of the growth of government influence on the curriculum in Scotland.
In November 1987 the government produced a consultation paper entitled Curriculum and Assessment in Scotland: a policy for the 90s .
The paper proposed for each area of the curriculum for pupils 5–14 ‘a nationally agreed set of guidelines setting out the aims of study, the content to be covered, and the objectives to be achieved’.
In addition, there will be national testing of pupils at age 8 and age 12 in language and mathematics.
If required, legislation will be invoked to give effect to the changes.
The appearance of the Scottish document at the same time as the appearance of the national curriculum legislation in England and Wales can be interpreted as evidence of the government's determination to bring the educational system of Scotland into close alignment with that of England and Wales and to exercise strong control over what that educational system is expected to deliver.
Conclusion
The developments traced in this chapter demonstrate very clearly a significant shift in the control of the school curriculum both north and south of the border: whereas responsibility for the nature and structure of the curriculum once rested with local authorities and individual schools it will now rest with central government.
Moreover, that control, in England and  Wales at least, will be reinforced by legislation.
What is remarkable is that this heavily interventionist stance was developed by a government committed ‘to rolling back the frontiers of the state’ and to the values of consumerism —‘parents know best’.
Indeed, the reform bill which marks the full extent of government control has been heralded by the Minister, Kenneth Baker, as a parents charter, maximizing parental choice in education.
Apparently, parents know what is best for their children, but not as much as the Minister!
While the balance of power has decisively shifted, it is worth considering some of the educational implications of the transformation this chapter has attempted to describe.
Throughout the period under discussion, successive government initiatives stimulated vigorous public and professional debate, since even the early tentative moves were treated with the suspicion that they presaged even more decisive government ‘interference’ in what was a local or professional matter.
Reviewing a very protracted and at times heated public discussion it is possible to identify three major concerns.
It is necessary to consider these in relation to the legislative position in England and Wales and the de facto position in Scotland.
The first of these has its roots in the pupil-centred view of education.
While this view has various formulations its central stance is that the purpose of education is to enable pupils to develop with deeper insight and sophistication activities which they value or find interesting in ways and contexts which they find amenable.
On this view, educational systems need to make maximum provision for pupil choice, for curriculum negotiation, and for pupils themselves to determine the lines of their own educational development.
Government control or determination of the curriculum, it has been claimed, is a threat to pupil-centred education of this kind.
At best, it could kill interest in learning: at worst it could foster the alienation of the young.
The second concern relates to the impact of a government controlled curriculum on social pluralism.
Many see life in the modern context as being characterized by wide diversity.
Ours is thought to be a multi-faith, multi-ethnic and multi-cultural society, one in which diversity of life-style flourishes and which tolerates and fosters social and individual differences.
Schools, on this view, should protect diversity; they should reflect local variety and the features of widely differing neighbourhoods and subcultures.
By contrast, the argument runs, a nationally prescribed curriculum, rigidly dispensed to all, will be a force for dull uniformity in which the vitality and diversity of personal and social experience is homogenized.
Thirdly, the move towards a national curriculum was resisted most strongly by those, mainly teachers and other educationists, who claimed that the nature and scope of the school curriculum was a professional and not a political matter.
They defended the entitlement of teachers, by virtue of their education and training if not their professional standing, to shape the learning experience of pupils and to devise a curriculum suited to the characteristics of their own pupils.
That assertion of professional autonomy was thought to be reinforced by studies which stressed that curriculum development should be  school-based, rooted in the professional context of teachers rather than in distant centres such as Whitehall or Edinburgh.
Teachers, it was felt, were the guardians of a politically free curriculum: if they lost their entitlement to control the learning experiences of pupils, not only would their own professionalism be undermined, but, worse, schools could easily become the agents for transmitting ‘state-approved knowledge’.
How have these concerns been affected by the government's assumption of control in curriculum matters?
Arguably, the concerns highlighted could be allayed if the government initiatives were concerned with the establishment of a national curriculum framework only.
Thus, it is conceivable that, within such a framework, pupils could enjoy considerable opportunities for choice, for curriculum negotiation and for pupil-centred learning.
It is equally possible that within such a framework schools and communities could offer curricula that reflected the responsiveness and diversity that many value.
Finally, if teachers were left to enjoy full responsibility for the specific content and teaching strategies to be deployed within each of the major categories of the national curriculum framework, there would be no infringement of teachers' professional autonomy and the curriculum could be protected from unjustified political interference.
That is to say, a national curriculum framework is logically not incompatible with pupil-centred learning, with the protection of cultural diversity, and with the professional autonomy of teachers.
However, it is clear that ministerial control will extend well beyond the determination of a national curriculum framework.
On both sides of the border there is a clear government commitment to the development of curriculum guidelines, and the specification of curriculum objectives and content in each subject area, all of which will require the approval of a central government agency.
That is to say, the initiatives that are under way , far from alleviating concerns repeatedly expressed over the years, appear to be confirming the worst suspicions of teachers and other commentators.
The defenders of the new arrangements will no doubt claim that there is still reasonable scope for pupil-centred learning, for cultural diversity, and for the exercise of professional autonomy, even within a nationally determined curriculum framework.
It is too easy to slip into a mood of depression at the outset of what promises to be a period of very significant change in education but, in relation to the concerns identified earlier, it would have to be said that the omens are not propitious.
Notes
The National Curriculum and Improving Secondary Schools David H. Hargreaves
A characteristic feature of educational concerns in the 1980s has been quality and the raising of standards, especially in secondary education, combined with a political determination to introduce speedy reforms.
Among the many reasons for this are, first, a belief that the spread of the secondary comprehensive school has led to a fall in standards or has failed to lead to the heralded improvement in quality; and secondly, a raising of expectations, among politicians, parents, employers and young people, about what young people, in the light of growing youth unemployment, should be expected to achieve by the end of the period of compulsory education, especially in preparation for life, work and further/higher education.
It is against such a backcloth that the aims and purposes of both the government's national curriculum proposals and the Inner London Education Authority's Improving Secondary Schools must be set.
From the time of James Callaghan's famous Ruskin speech in 1976, an enormous amount of documentation on the curriculum has issued from the DES and HMI (Chapter 1.1 offers a brief overview of some of the key events and documents).
Teachers and LEAs could not keep track of this deluge, little of which can now be recalled by practitioners in any detail.
Very few, if any, anticipated in 1976 that the period 1976–88 would lead to a radical rethinking about both the content and the control of the school curriculum and of the relationship between central government and the local education authorities.
The first warning bell was sounded in July 1977 in Education in Schools: a Consultative Document issued when Shirley Williams was Secretary of State.
The vague and confused distribution of powers in relation to the curriculum between the various partners — the individual school, the LEA, and central government is noted.
Issues which were to influence subsequent events and eventually lead to a national curriculum are specified: first, that the curriculum is overcrowded and the timetable overloaded; secondly, that pupils who move from one school to another are penalized because of curricular variations between schools; thirdly, that curricular arrangements within each school tend to give rise to unequal curricular opportunities for pupils; fourthly, that the school curriculum is not sufficiently relevant for life in a modern industrial society; and fifthly, that there are evident weaknesses in existing assessment procedures and methods of recording pupil progress.
In November 1977 the DES issued Circular 14/77 which called on LEAs to review their curricular arrangements and report to the Secretary of State within seven months their answers to fifty detailed and challenging questions.
The results, published in 1979, demonstrate the confusion and disarray about the curriculum at the local level.
LEAs showed substantial variations in their  approach to curriculum policies and their lack of systematic knowledge of what went on in their schools.
The picture to emerge is one in which an LEA typically delegated most curricular matters to the individual school, with the advice and support of local inspectors/advisers.
ILEA's own response was probably not unusual.
There follows some examples of the ILEA answers to the questions of Circular 14/77, with a comment from me.
Q. What procedures have the Authority established to enable them to carry out their curricular responsibilities under Section 23 of the Education Act 1944?
A. The Authority delegates to governors of primary and secondary schools oversight of the curriculum, and control of it to the head teacher in consultation with his staff…
Comment : The procedures are vague and in practice delegated almost entirely to schools.
Q. What systematic arrangements, if any, have the Authority established for the collection of information about the curriculum offered by schools in their area?
A. The Authority relies mainly on the inspectorate for information…
Comment : There are no systematic procedures for collecting and reporting regularly on such information to provide a basis on which the Authority might provide coherent curriculum policies.
Q. How do the Authority help schools to decide on the relative emphasis they should give to particular aspects of the curriculum, especially the promotion of literacy and numeracy?
A. The Authority's main help is given through the inspectorate…
Comment : Though the inspectorate gives advice, it is unclear what this is, whether it is taken and what happens if it is ignored.
Q. What contribution have the Authority made to the consideration of the problem faced by secondary schools of providing suitable subject options for older pupils while avoiding the premature dropping of curricular elements regarded as essential for all pupils?
A. The Authority believes that in addition to English, mathematics, RE and PE it is desirable that all pupils should take science in some form until the age of 16.
Social studies and aesthetic subjects should also be included.
Inspectors have responsibility for ensuring a suitable curriculum and they provide relevant INSET (Inservice Education for Teachers) for senior staff.
Comment : Although there is a commitment to a broad and balanced curriculum, there are no means of ensuring its implementation to prevent premature dropping of important curriculum elements.
In short, ILEA, no doubt like the vast majority of LEAs, had some sensible ideas about a broad and balanced curriculum, but delegated the  responsibility to schools and had developed no systematic means of monitoring school curriculum policies and practice or of taking action where schools deviate from the LEA approach to the curriculum.
LEA responses to Circular 14/77 were written with sufficient and skilled vagueness that the flaws and weaknesses were not easy to detect; and a similar picture of diversity and confusion over the curriculum emerged from the HMI secondary survey published in 1979.
Circular 14/77 without doubt aroused some LEAs to their curricular responsibilities.
The ILEA published its own excellent statement on the curriculum for pupils aged 5–16 in March 1981.
But it did not institute systematic means of monitoring school curricula to check on whether or not inspectorate advice was being followed, nor did it devise systematic means for exerting pressure on schools to follow this advice.
In other words, while many LEAs became greatly sophisticated in their thinking about the school curriculum, the variety of curriculum practice between schools remained largely unchallenged and the autonomy of the individual school remained sacrosanct.
The way was left open for the initiative to be taken at the national level, since LEAs, both individually and collectively, failed to respond to the national call for change.
This is not the place to summarize the rest of the curriculum debate and many important documents, whether from HMI (Curriculum 11–16 in 1977,A View of the Curriculum in 1980) or the DES (A Framework for the School Curriculum in 1980 or The Organization and Content of the 5–16 Curriculum in 1984): Chapter 1.1 provides some detail.
The requirement of the Education (No. 2) Act 1986 Section 17 that each LEA should formulate a written policy on the range and balance of the school curriculum, and then that each school should consider but not necessarily follow that LEA policy, may be regarded as a brief, and confusing, interlude in the movement towards a national curriculum.
The more immediate background to government thinking behind the national curriculum is to be found in Better Schools (March 1985)— published precisely one year after Improving Secondary Schools and with a curiously similar title and its introductory paragraphs:
The government's principal aims for all sectors of education are first, to raise standards at all levels of ability; and second, since education is an investment in the nation's future, to secure the best possible return from the resources which are found for it…
But the government believes that, not least in the light of what is being achieved in other countries, the standards now generally attained by our pupils are neither as good as they can be, nor as good as they need to be if young people are to be equipped for the world of the twenty-first century.
Better Schools made it clear that the government intended to ‘take the lead in promoting national agreement about the purposes and content of the curriculum’.
The means of promoting consensus on the curriculum proved to be The  National Curriculum 5–16: a consultation document (hereafter TNC), where it is argued that the national curriculum will help to raise standards by ensuring that all pupils follow a broad and balanced curriculum throughout the compulsory period; by setting clear objectives of what pupils should be expected to achieve; by ensuring that all pupils, irrespective of their sex, ethnic origins or geographical location have access to the same curriculum offer; and by checking on performance and progress at various stages.
In addition there is an aim to enhance public accountability of schools and teachers by making the results of regular assessments available to parents and public, not only at the individual level for the parent, but more widely in terms of the achievement of schools and local education authorities.
The national curriculum proposals form the first part of the Education Reform Bill, which also contains proposals in relation to open enrolments, financial delegation to schools, the establishment of grant maintained schools and various proposals for higher education.
Improving Secondary Schools (hereafter ISS) is set within the context of the ILEA's determination to tackle the issue of under-achievement by pupils, within a framework of a commitment to enhancing equality of opportunity in relation to sex, race and class: particular attention was to be paid by the committee of enquiry to low achievers and disaffected pupils.
(Although ISS is concerned with the 11–16 age group, a later report Improving Primary Schools — the Thomas Report — was issued to cover the whole 5–16 age range.)
While there is important common ground between the two documents arising from a shared commitment to raising standards by the national (Conservative) government and local (Labour) government, there are significant differences in approach.
TNC consists of government proposals but these were not preceded by any kind of inquiry or the involvement of professional educationists or practitioners.
Despite the long history of previous documents from the DES and HMI, dating from Callaghan's famous Ruskin speech of 1976, TNC betrays little evidence of direct contributions by HMI.
By contrast, ISS originated in an independent committee of inquiry, chaired by an outside academic and including ILEA inspectors and teachers as well as representatives of industry and trade unions.
TNC was given an astonishingly brief period of consultation while teachers were on their summer holidays in 1987; ISS was the subject of a year's consultation in 1984–85 — perhaps too long.
Most important, TNC is clearly concerned with curriculum and assessment, somewhat artificially separated from the life and work of the school as a whole.
ISS is concerned with school organization, as well as curriculum and assessment, and devotes substantial chapters to the teacher-parent partnership and to staff development for teachers.
In this sense ISS is much more holistic in its conception than TNC.
ISS believes that standards will be raised, not just by reforms in curriculum and assessment, but by making schools generally more effective.
It is for this reason that ISS, in line with HMI views in Ten Good Schools (1977), places such emphasis on the quality of leadership.
For ISS, the head teacher is the key to improvement; the head's capacity to energize staff  and build upon known good practice (which ISS carefully sought to identify) is a prerequisite of school improvement.
TNC believes that imposed reform of the curriculum and assessment, by which schools become more accountable to the community, will serve as a powerful device to enhance school effectiveness by increasing the external pressure on the head and staff of underachieving schools.
The Curriculum
TNC adduces arguments for a broad and balanced curriculum but implies that there is no possible justification for the pattern of ‘small core plus elaborate option scheme’ that is commonly found in secondary schools.
ISS sets out in great detail (paragraphs 3.9.3 to 3.9.16) both arguments.
In brief, the arguments for a large optional element in the fourth and fifth years are:
1
pupils are able and mature enough to make choices at the age of 13/14;
2
choices are essential to maintain pupil motivation and avoid disaffection;
3
there is little evidence of parental or pupil opposition to option schemes;
4
option schemes prevent ossification of the curriculum and encourage innovation;
5
there are insufficient teachers to make subjects such as science, CDT and languages compulsory;
6
a common curriculum will mean a return to the grammar school curriculum.
main arguments in favour of a larger common curriculum are:
1
option schemes lead many pupils to follow a narrow and  imbalanced curriculum;
2
choices are made by pupils on an irrational, peer-influenced and sex-stereotyped basis;
3
there is hidden selection within option schemes;
4
in practice many pupils have their choices denied;
5
pupils should keep options open for post-16 education and not be denied opportunities at later stages;
6
a common curriculum eases movement of pupils between different secondary schools;
7
pupil motivation is maintained in any subject by high quality teaching.
The Committee concluded, on balance, in favour of the second set of arguments.
TNC has been strongly attacked for taking a very narrow and old fashioned view of the curriculum as a collection of subjects; and it is certainly true that the more sophisticated thinking of HMI on these matters appears to  have been disregarded.
However, both TNC and ISS produced controversial curriculum suggestions for the fourth and fifth years (pupils aged 14–16), as Table 2.1 shows.
Both consider the curriculum in terms of subjects , and were open to the criticism that this is an outmoded view of the curriculum.
It is, however, the way in which the vast majority of secondary schools construct their timetables.
TNC divides subjects into three types:core (English, maths and science);foundation ; and additional (or optional).
Table 2.1 A comparison of curriculum proposals made by DES (1987) and improving secondary schools (1984)
ISS also has three types:compulsory ;constrained options (aesthetic — art, music, dance, drama; craft design and technology; computer studies); and free options .
There is common ground in relation to English, mathematics, science, and technology.
TNC has a more limited view of arts subjects than ISS (indeed drama disappears in the Bill).
While languages and history/ geography and PE are foundation subjects in TNC, they are free options in ISS.
Religious education and personal and social education (broadly defined to include 16 areas such as careers education, community studies, education for parenthood and family life, health education, mass media, moral, political and economic education) are compulsory in ISS: in TNC religious education is assumed (but later given status as a ‘basic’ subject after pressure from the churches) and elements of personal and social education are to be ‘taught through other subjects’, though no advice is given on how this might be achieved.
In TNC the core and foundation subjects are held to apply throughout secondary education, and with the exception of a modern foreign language, to the primary phase also.
For both TNC and ISS the suggested time allocations have been a source of controversy.
TNC, it is said, leaves far too little time for optional and additional subjects, namely 10–20 per cent.
The new Act will not lay down time specifications, but there is little doubt that the national testing  procedures will act as a heavy constraint on time allocations made in schools, potentially to the detriment of optional/additional subjects as well as on foundation subjects which will not be the subject of national testing — the arts, religious education and physical education.
ISS is more modest than TNC in its curricular prescriptions.
The recommendation was that at least 62.5 per cent of time should be compulsorily allocated.
Within this compulsory allocation, there is room for some autonomous decision-making by individual schools.
For instance, schools might make one of the four arts subjects compulsory or might institute modular or combined arts courses to cover two or more of the arts subject.
In the technical constrained options, schools might make CDT compulsory or offer a choice between CDT, computer studies or some other technical/vocational subject.
The view was taken that, since ISS offered a five-year programme of implementation, the proposals should be ones which could be implemented within that time-scale.
Naturally there were protests from some ILEA teachers of languages, history, geography, home economics and physical education that their subjects were not to be made compulsory in the fourth and fifth years: such subjects, it was held, were thereby accorded a lower status.
But the assumption was that these matters should continue to be a subject of discussion and debate within the ILEA, leading to new proposals after the five-year implementation period.
Take, for instance, the case of languages other than English.
To have proposed that a language should be compulsory throughout the five-year period would undoubtedly have led to difficulties in recruiting sufficient teachers and have entailed a massive increase in the teaching of French.
Yet in fact ILEA pupils represent 171 different home languages and many pupils are bilingual or multilingual.
The issue of the maintenance and development of these home languages, which include many West European languages as well as those of Asia and Africa, is a real one.
A multilingual community requires a more sophisticated language policy than merely enlarged provision for French.
TNC does not help here, by talking of ‘a modern foreign language’; and one's fears of too narrow an approach seem confirmed by the Bill's reference to ‘a modern foreign language specified in an order of the Secretary of State’.
There does seem to be general agreement amongst teachers that the school curriculum should be broad and balanced for all pupils.
But attempts to define breadth and balance rapidly meet a difficult problem:all subjects wish to claim compulsory status; however, it then proves difficult to fit them all into reasonable time allocations.
As the Scots noted in their report on secondary education:
A curriculum becomes congested precisely as a book case does with the passing of the years.
New interests emerge, fresh claims are admitted, but old titles are seldom revised and still more rarely withdrawn.
That was written in 1946, since when pressure on the curriculum has vastly increased.
We are, it seems, some distance from reaching a consensus on the contents of the school curriculum.
Does TNC compose a solution too  prematurely?
It has been argued earlier that the LEAs, both individually and collectively, failed to generate greater consensus on the school curriculum, but were there not alternative means of bringing together the various partners (the LEAs, schools and their teachers, governors and parents, industry and commerce; the churches) to reach an agreement?
At the same time, there is always likely to be a gap between reaching a consensus on the curriculum and implementing the consensus once it has been reached.
The record at the LEA level is, as we have seen earlier, not a promising one, since LEAs have been much more effective at producing curriculum policies than at monitoring and implementing them at the school level.
ISS provides a useful case in point.
The ISS curriculum proposals for the fourth and fifth years have been summarized in Table 2.1.
By the end of the academic year 1986–87 I instituted, in my capacity as Chief Inspector, a survey of the implementation of the proposals that the Authority commended to schools and their governing bodies.
In my annual report to the Authority in May 1988 — and ILEA is the only LEA which receives an annual report from its Chief Inspector — I commented on the  implementation of the ISS curriculum proposals, that in years four and five science should be compulsory; at least one arts course should be followed; and a technical subject should be a compulsory option.
By 1987 10 per cent of secondary schools met all three criteria; 28 per cent fulfilled two criteria; 36 per cent fulfilled one criterion only; and the remaining 25 per cent fulfilled none.
It is evident that a relatively small proportion of schools had either chosen or felt able to implement the ISS recommended curriculum and that most schools were not following a broad and balanced curriculum for all pupils.
ISS focused on the fourth and fifth years because it is in these years that pupils tend to narrow their curriculum, as schools frequently have a very small core with large option schemes, with the result that some pupils pursue a curriculum that is neither broad nor balanced.
ISS assumed that the first three years would continue with a broad curriculum and would include subjects (such as home economics) which at present few schools consider to be compulsory in the fourth and fifth years.
Of course it requires skill in curriculum organization to cover the necessary ground, for example by use of modular schemes and carousels.
ISS thus offers a more evolutionary approach to curriculum than does TNC, whose exceptionally tight prescriptions, because they require legislation, will be difficult to change.
There is a powerful argument that if there has to be a national curriculum it must leave ample room for variation at the level of the local education authority as well as in the individual school.
It is perhaps through experimentation and experience at these lower levels in the government of education that we shall best find imaginative solutions to the problem of getting ‘the curriculum gallon into the timetable pint pot’ as well as moving towards a greater (and yet flexible) consensus on which ideally a national curriculum should rest.
That development work or experiments which involve modification of the national curriculum in a school will require the approval of the Secretary of State may well serve to inhibit some forms of school-based curriculum  innovation.
There are real dangers, as ISS noted, of curriculum ossification.
The ISS curriculum proposals aroused less controversy in ILEA than those of TNC in part because of the very different curriculum philosophy within which the proposals for the fourth and fifth years were set.
A substantial section of the report is devoted to the curriculum as a whole and to whole curriculum planning.
It examines the considerable difficulties, both intellectual and practical, of taking seriously HMI's view of the curriculum as needing to be broad, balanced and coherent.
Particular attention was paid to the concept of coherence , that is, the way in which the different parts of the curriculum, the subjects, hang together in the experience of pupils so that the curriculum has meaning for them.
It is perhaps significant that DES documents retained the concepts of breadth and balance, but dropped the notion of coherence in favour of two new concepts, relevance and differentiation; these are, of course, very important curriculum concepts, but they are not the same as, or an adequate substitute for, coherence.
It is this concept which ISS held to be fundamental to increasing the commitment and achievement of pupils who now underachieve, especially many working-class pupils.
In the same spirit, ISS drew attention to the importance of HMI work on ‘areas of experience’ which seem to have had so little influence on TNC.
Areas of experience are a valuable heuristic device for teachers in thinking about the curriculum.
In themselves, they do not lead directly to the construction of a subject timetable; but there is no doubt that, under the influence of HMI and some important academic writers on the curriculum, much teacher curriculum thinking has been considerably advanced in the decade since 1976.
Whilst most secondary schools continue to be organized in terms of a timetable of subjects, the background thinking of teachers has become wider, less conventional and less secure in terms of single subjects.
The outcome has been a major advance in thinking about the curriculum in holistic terms, in which curriculum planning is done not just in terms of subjects and their traditional labels, but also in terms of areas of experience, skills and processes as well as knowledge, and personal and affective aspects as well as the cognitive.
ISS sought to add to this by what has become perhaps the most famous aspect of the report, its philosophy of achievement as expressed in what it called the four aspects of achievement , namely
Aspect 1 — the retention of propositional knowledge and the capacity to reproduce it in written form.
Aspect 2 — the capacity to apply knowledge; the practical as well as the theoretical; the oral as well as the written.
Aspect 3 — personal and social skills; autonomy and independence; working in teams and leadership.
Aspect 4 — motivation and commitment; interest and perseverance; initiative and enterprise.
All four aspects of achievement should penetrate all areas of curriculum, ISS argued; and all four aspects should be celebrated, rewarded and recorded.
And it is here, on matters of assessment, that TNC and ISS grow further apart.
Assessment
The more controversial aspect of TNC concerns the establishment of programmes of study for each subject, with attainment targets for the three core subjects and some foundation subjects.
These targets, says TNC
will establish what children should normally be expected to know, understand and be able to do at around the ages of 7, 11, 14 and 16 and will enable each child to be measured against established national standards.
It is envisaged that much of the assessment will be done by teachers as an integral part of their normal classroom work.
This age-related assessment is thus intended to complement the usual assessment procedures of a school.
However,
at the heart of the assessment process there will be nationally prescribed tests done by all pupils to supplement the individual teachers' assessments…
The actual tests and other forms of assessment will be developed and piloted by various organizations on behalf of the government.
A task group on assessment and testing (TGAT) was quickly established and then also two subject working groups, for science and mathematics, to suggest programmes of study and attainment targets.
Each of these three groups has made a first report at the time this Chapter was written.
Parents will have a right to know, at each testing age, pupils' achievements in each subject in comparison with the range of marks of pupils in the same class.
Parents will also be able to know the school's performance in relation to other schools in the same LEA and how each LEA performs in relation to other LEAs.
This, it is said, will enable parliament and public to monitor national standards and improvement over time.
Curriculum and assessment are, as every teacher knows, inextricably interwoven.
At the practical level, a discussion of the one leads quickly to a consideration of the other.
(At the theoretical level the two are much more readily separated.
) When a method of assessment is decided upon, the teacher usually finds this affects curriculum content in various and sometimes subtle ways.
When some curriculum content is selected, the teacher has to decide how pupil learning is to be assessed, as well as recorded and communicated (e.g., to parents).
TNC is as much about assessment as curriculum, and quite properly so.
I believe, however, that it is the assessment proposals which will be more influential upon the work of schools, and more long lasting in their effects.
The assessment proposals will have greater effects upon the  curriculum than will the curriculum proposals upon assessment.
A deeper insight into this has been suggested by Professor Denis Lawton.
He argues that it is TNC's approach to assessment which has determined the approach to curriculum, rather than the other way round.
We tend not to notice this because in TNC the curriculum proposals came before the discussion of testing and assessment.
The TNC sequence, as I have already described, is as follows:
curriculum (subjects);
programmes of study;
attainment targets;
testing;
accountability.
But the sequence should really be read backwards , starting with the government's ideological commitment to accountability (see later in this Chapter).
Thus, accountability requires test results on pupils, schools, LEAs; testing requires attainment targets which are to be set within programmes of study; and these make sense in terms of the subjects which are, in the view of lay people, the essence of the curriculum.
This neatly explains why the curriculum proposals appear so simplistic and old-fashioned and constructed in apparent disregard of the professional approach of teachers, inspectors and academics, for they read the sequence in a forwards direction, each step being derived logically from the one before.
TNC is presented in the professional sequence but constructed in the opposite direction.
Not surprisingly, many teachers (and others) foresaw, when they read the assessment proposals in TNC, the possibility of a ‘national maths (or science, etc.) day’ when all pupils would take the nationally prescribed tests leading eventually to publication of results for each class (and their teacher), each school and each LEA.
The possibility of a revived 11-plus, as well as a new 7-plus and 14-plus, in addition to the existing 16-plus public examinations, loomed before an astonished profession.
Would children be designated as successes or failures at these ages?
Would assessment in the public mind become synonymous with this process, leading all other forms of assessment to pale into significance?
Would all the energies and the enthusiasm of the teachers who have taken part in the records of achievement movement be rendered pointless?
Would ‘teaching to the test’ become so commonplace that assessment determines curriculum rather than curriculum determining assessment?
It is, of course, difficult as yet to say whether or not these fears are unduly alarmist or exaggerated or even groundless.
The TGAT report is much more reassuring, for TNC is now read forwards, not backwards.
The assessment process, it says at the beginning of its report,
should not determine what is to be taught and learned.
It should be the servant, not the master, of the curriculum.
Yet it should not simply be a bolt-on addition at the end.
Rather, it should be an integral part of the educational process, continually providing both ‘feedback’ and ‘feedforward’.
It therefore needs to be incorporated systematically into teaching strategies and practices at all levels.
Following the best of recent professional practice in assessment, it argues for four basic criteria: assessment should be criterion-referenced; formative; moderated; and lead to progression.
Throughout the report there is evidence that important lessons have been learnt from recent work on records of achievement and developments in graded assessment.
They argue for an attainment profile in each subject, consisting of several components, one of which should have cross-curricular features.
More controversial is the proposal for 10 achievement levels between the ages of 7 and 16, with the top four levels bearing a relationship to GCSE grades.
The TGAT report is long and difficult in places, but has made a skilful attempt to match the best of teacher practice in the field of assessment with the general constraints imposed by TNC.
I have little doubt that, if it is broadly accepted by the Secretary of State and then implemented through the work of the subject working groups, teachers' assessment skills will be vastly improved.
On the other hand, the proposed scheme is going to be extremely costly, both in terms of money and teachers' time.
The report openly admits that this is the most ambitious assessment scheme ever attempted in the world.
It will all without question make the schools and LEAs more accountable, at least in terms of pupil performance, to parents and public.
The more important question is this: will the new approach to assessment, including the new forms of accountability, reach its central goal of improving levels of pupil achievement?
Is it also the most effective use of increasingly scarce resources to realize this goal?
The answer is, of course, unknown.
Proponents (and opponents) argue fiercely that it will (or will not), but we shall not know until the system is in operation in several years' time.
Nor is there much existing evidence, here or in other countries, on which to make a reasonable guess.
It is an enormous act of faith.
In March 1988 considerable consternation was created, not least among teachers who had generally responded very positively to the TGAT report, by the leak of a letter about the report from the Prime Minister's secretary to Kenneth Baker's secretary.
The letter expresses four concerns about the TGAT report: that the assessment proposals require an enormously elaborate and complex system; that there will be heavy reliance on teachers' judgements in addition to the nationally prescribed tests; that the costs will be considerable; and that the new system will take a long time to implement.
These ‘concerns’ place the whole TGAT proposals in doubt.
Should the TGAT proposals be abandoned for an almost exclusive reliance on nationally prescribed tests for pupils at 7, 11, 14 and 16, there is no doubt that the assessment procedures would have a much stronger impact on the taught  curriculum, and pressures for teachers to ‘teach to the test’ would be greatly increased.
The curriculum would be heavily assessment-led.
The decision on the TGAT report thus has enormous implications for the reform of the curriculum.
A specific comparison between ISS and TNC is now in order.
An immediate difference is that reforms of TNC are directed to curriculum and assessment: there is very little about pedagogy or teaching method.
ISS sees curriculum, assessment and teaching methods as closely related.
TNC believes that a clearer specification of the curriculum, combined with attainment targets which are assessed within a framework of greater accountability, is enough to raise levels of achievement — by a combination of a clearer specification of the levels of achievement to be reached, and external pressure on teachers to deliver the results.
In this sense TNC, which shares with ISS a conviction that part of the problem is teachers with too low expectations of their pupils, directly addresses the problem by means of externally imposed targets and pressure on teachers to reach them by placing the achievement of a school within a comparative framework, with results on school performance unadjusted for intake.
ISS, recognizing that the inner city contains schools in areas of intense poverty and deprivation as well as in leafy suburbs, shies away from such simple comparisons between, say, Hampstead and Hackney.
Indeed, the ILEA, precisely because its schools operate in such widely differing circumstances, has published a ‘league table’ of 16-plus examination results adjusted for intake factors, which shows that schools with a disadvantaged intake can do relatively better than a school with an advantaged intake.
It should be noted that the existence of a published league table has not led to an automatic and immediate improvement in schools at the bottom of the table.
Such a placing seems as likely to engender angry defensiveness as much as a will to improve.
Government belief that ‘public exposure’ of an underperforming school is an effective means to improvement is probably naive; once again, the importance of the head is gravely underestimated.
The ISS approach deals with low expectations more indirectly by seeking to improve in a more general and holistic way the practice of all teachers, including the head.
It is for this reason that a major part of ISS is devoted to improving the staff-development of teachers, and in the period of implementation of ISS efforts have been directed to improving the Authority's INSET and school self-evaluation procedures.
The underlying philosophy has been that schools require more INSET to be school-focused, linking the enhancement of a teacher's individual professional skills with the defined needs of the school as a whole; and further that the capacities of a school staff to evaluate their own strengths and weaknesses must be improved and result directly in more effective forward planning to remedy recognized weaknesses.
In short, enhancing pupil achievement is seen to spring from a more coherent approach to curriculum, assessment and teaching method, seen as an integral whole, and that this is most likely to arise when a school has developed more sophisticated self-monitoring that leads to holistic forward planning, of which INSET is an inherent feature.
In this  respect, the philosophies of TNC and ISS are very different indeed; TNC has no philosophy of schools as dynamic institutions.
It is within such a context that the specific proposals of ISS with regard to assessment are set.
The immediate target is the fourth and fifth years.
ISS sees the two-year journey to the public examinations as a nebulous one for many pupils, especially those from the working class.
It is a kind of mystery tour, with an unimaginable destination; not surprisingly many pupils fall asleep or jump off during the journey.
There is an evident need for a clearer definition of the destination and some significant intermediate stations.
ISS therefore proposed that all courses in the fourth and fifth years be broken into half-term units (or modules).
And such ‘modularization’ should be undertaken at school level by the teachers themselves, with advice and support, rather than being provided by outside ‘curriculum development’agencies.
In each case the aims of the unit would be made explicit and discussed with pupils.
Aims and objectives need to be shared with pupils, and on that basis the methods of teaching and learning are to be negotiated between teacher and pupil.
This is the ISS version of attainment targets, with the added element about negotiation of pedagogy.
ISS makes a pointed contrast between the curriculum and the ‘curriculum as it is taught’ and places major emphasis on the construction of more active learning roles for pupils, thus drawing upon the four aspects of achievement.
It follows that assessment procedures — the unit credit which attaches to every unit — should reflect all four aspects of achievement and involve an element of pupil self-assessment.
By encouraging teachers to assess all four aspects, which many found very difficult, ISS drew the attention of teachers to the fact that the curriculum is frequently too narrow in its definition of achievement, often assessing mainly aspect 1.
By insisting upon an element of pupil self-assessment, ISS promoted a shift in assessment from a unidirectional flow from teacher to pupil to a joint enterprise in which the pupil has responsibilities for defining his/her own strengths and weaknesses, and devising strategies for improvement.
Active learning roles for pupils, therefore, also mean active assessment roles for pupils.
These changes in assessment procedures had evident consequences for the teaching methods adopted.
In this regard, the ISS proposals for units and unit credits were consonant with other changes in secondary schools which were being developed at the same time: graded assessment, where the initial belief that it was simply a matter of devising achievement tests soon gave way to much more fundamental re-thinking about allied development work on curriculum content and teaching method; and also work on profiles/records of achievement.
Although these began as three separate initiatives, they have over the years been brought closer together.
All this work has been undertaken with enthusiasm by teachers and on a voluntary basis, in a period of severe industrial action when teacher morale and goodwill were at unprecedentedly low levels.
The result is a marked advance within ILEA schools in teachers' skills in relation to assessment as well as movement towards whole school policies on assessment.
It seems very likely that ILEA schools which have been most heavily engaged in these developments will  have a distinct advantage if national schemes of assessment are broadly in line with the TGAT report, though many teachers are likely to have reservations about nationally prescribed tests.
TNC does not seem to recognize how worthwhile changes in assessment need to be ‘slowed’ by teachers and to have a wider impact on curriculum and teaching methods if they are to have beneficial consequences for achievement levels; that such reform takes time and considerable teacher commitment; and that a heavy investment in INSET is needed.
The experience of GCSE reform demonstrates the dangers of moving too fast with too few resources.
Accountability — Consumers or Partners?
It has already been noted that TNC seeks to increase the accountability of individual teachers and schools to parents.
The underlying philosophy is one of parents as consumers , who need more accurate information about whether the teacher and the school are doing a good job.
If parents are dissatisfied, they are presumably expected to exert pressure on the teacher, the school or the LEA to obtain better results, or to seek to place the child in another school.
Information is power; and what parents (and the more powerful governing bodies) will do on the basis of their greatly enhanced knowledge of school and teacher — effectiveness remains to be seen.
It is another act of faith that this will lead to the raising of standards; it may also, of course, lead to considerable conflict between governing bodies/parents and head teachers and teachers.
There is no guarantee that a spirit of partnership will prevail.
In ISS the underlying philosophy is one of parents as partners , working collaboratively with teachers as joint but complementary educators.
ISS makes proposals to break down the barriers that often exist  between teachers and parents, to improve the extent and quality of communication between school and home, and to increase parental involvement with the child's learning.
(ISS also proposed an increase in parental representation on governing bodies.)
One of the sad side-effects of industrial action during the early years of the implementation of ISS has been that work on improving the teacher-parent partnership has been more neglected by teachers than anyone initially expected.
Parents are consumers; but they are also potential partners with teachers.
It may be that TNC proposals will raise standards by increased accountability; but I remain convinced that the creation of a true teacher-parent partnership has even more to contribute.
The wider conception of ISS is shown by the mention of parents in the section on assessment, but not simply as receivers of information about test scores.
The unit credit should in our view contain, or be accompanied by, such diagnostic and self-assessment materials, which can be made known to parents so that they can play a more informed and supportive part in promoting the education of their children.
Units and credits should be an important topic for discussion on parents' evenings and at meetings of our  proposed tutor-group parents' associations.
The more parents understand the details of the curriculum content and methods of assessment, the more likely they are to act in partnership with teachers to foster pupil motivation and hard work.
Are the TNC proposals an adequate recipe for partnership?
Continuity and Progression
The lack of continuity and progression for many pupils has been a subject of regular critical comments by inspectors in their evaluations of schools.
In my experience as an inspector I have been surprised at the frequency with which there are no or inadequate schemes of work within secondary school departments, with the effect that there is either repetition between the years, or gaps and discontinuities.
Nor is it uncommon for there to be such poor recording of achievement (as well as diagnosis of weaknesses) that a teacher has relatively little on which to build from the child's teacher of the previous year.
(Similar faults are of course to be found in primary schools.)
The problem springs from the high degree of autonomy of individual teachers, a reluctance to engage in joint planning, and a lack of detailed records.
There is no doubt that such weaknesses impede proper continuity and progression and so lead to underachievement.
Progression and continuity are particularly at risk during the period of transition between primary and secondary school, not least because poor continuity and progression in terms of the curriculum is often accompanied by even more severe discontinuities in teaching methods.
The effects on pupil achievement of poorly managed transitions between primary and secondary schools have been amply documented by Professor Galton and his associates at the University of Leicester.
Not surprisingly, ISS devoted a substantial section to this topic.
The ISS proposals are sensible, and many ILEA schools have sought to implement them, yet they remain limited in scope.
Two major problems stand out.
The first is that there are serious impediments to ensuring that full and accurate records accompany each child at the point of transfer and that the secondary schools make full use of them when the primary teachers undertake their part.
The second, and much deeper, problem is that there is still far too little agreement about the themes and content in the curriculum of top juniors so that different primary schools which will ‘feed’ a secondary school are working on a degree of common curricular ground.
And there is even less agreement among secondary teachers of first-year pupils about how they should build upon the curriculum of top juniors.
The ‘fresh start’ philosophy is still very widespread among secondary school teachers and it is a major barrier to continuity and progression.
The ISS philosophy was that the transition between primary and secondary school should be as smooth as if there were no institutional break; but the recommendations were too limited to ensure such a goal.
It is one of the greatest strengths of the TNC proposals that this longstanding and deep-seated problem may finally be adequately attended to.
Because there will be clearer programmes of work and attainment targets for 11 year olds, as well as records of their assessments, progression and continuity at the transition point are likely to be greatly enhanced.
This will apply.not only to mathematics and English, but also to areas such as science and arts, where at present progression and continuity are particularly weak.
There is real promise that the undoubted achievements of some primary schools in teaching science and the arts will be built upon by their secondary colleagues.
In the flurry of controversy that has surrounded TNC this important theme has barely been mentioned.
But nowadays there is another transition point for most pupils — at 16.
It is now a minority who enter full-time employment and there has been considerable increase in the numbers who now take some form of further education.
Ironically, it is in the best FE — and notably in courses such as CPVE — that the curriculum is likely to be integrated rather than in the form of the traditional subject-based curriculum now being solidified by TNC.
And it is in the best FE that new methods of assessment, including pupil self-assessment, are most advanced.
TNC pays far too little attention to issues of progression and continuity at this important point of transition, especially for those who (for whatever reasons) have been low attainers at secondary school and do not wish to enrol on A-level courses.
ISS proposals for the fourth and fifth years were carefully formulated to ease transition to FE, both in terms of providing students with fuller and positive records of achievement (the unit credits) and by experiences of new forms of curriculum organization, especially in modular form (the units).
It remains to be seen whether this aspect of TNC proposals will be sufficiently flexible to aid the transition of a section of the population who perhaps deserve the most attention in our common concern to raise levels of achievement and improve the quality of educational provision.
Notes
Teaching Quality: A Sociological Analysis Andy Hargreaves
In England and Wales, as elsewhere, there has of late been a good deal of concern expressed about improving the quality of teaching in schools.
Such concerns are outlined most fully in the White Paper Teaching Quality and are reiterated and developed in Better Schools .
In terms of government action, the concerns and implications of these documents have been taken up most directly through the setting-up of national criteria as a basis for controlling and ‘accrediting’ programmes of initial teacher training.
Three ‘theories’ or sets of assumptions concerning the determinants of teaching quality appear to inform the analyses and recommendations contained within these influential government reports.
One concerns itself with the sorts of personal qualities that are suited to teaching.
It calls for more careful selection procedures to ensure that the ‘right’ sort of personalities enter training for the profession.
The other two explanations appear to rest on somewhat inchoate versions of learning theory in claiming that teaching quality results from learned knowledge, skill, and other technical expertise acquired through initial training and further professional experience.
The recommendation following from this diagnosis is that more attention should be directed to developing these kinds of competence in initial training, not least with regard to teachers spending more time on becoming more skilled and knowledgeable in their own subject specialisms.
Both these explanations are broadly psychologistic in nature.
They appeal to the characteristics of individuals — to competence, skill and personal qualities — as determinants of teaching quality.
And it is on these individuals and those who train them that responsibility for the identification of such qualities and the development of such competences is placed.
Poor teaching quality, it is implied, results from an absence of the required competences and qualities.
What is being proposed here, in effect, is a deficit model of teaching where poor quality results from deficiencies in personality, gaps in learning, or weak matching of competences to tasks.
By contrast, I want to argue that much of what we call teaching quality (or its absence) actually results from processes of a social nature, from teachers actively interpreting, making sense of, and adjusting to, the demands and requirements their conditions of work place upon them.
In this view, what some might judge to be ‘poor’ teaching quality often results from reasoned and reasonable responses to occupational demands — from interpretive presences, not cognitive absences, from strategic strength, not personal weakness.
Aspects of this more sociological and humanistic interpretation of teaching quality will be developed within the chapter through a discussion of teacher cultures, careers and strategies, and their implications for the  maintenance and persistence of those ‘transmission’ styles of classroom teaching which appear to be incurring official disapproval.
But first we need to examine the ‘official’ interpretation of teaching quality and quality deficits a little more closely.
Teaching Quality and Quality Deficits: the Official View
Official views on what makes good and poor quality teaching have become increasingly apparent in Britain over recent years with the publication of a number of surveys and reports by Her Majesty's Inspectorate (HMI) on various parts of the schooling system.
In one of the first of these surveys (of the fourth and fifth year curriculum in secondary schools) in 1979, the HMI noted that secondary teachers made wide use of ‘heavily directed teaching, a preponderance of dictated or copied notes, and emphasis on the giving and recall of information, with little room or time for enquiry or explanation of applications’.
Later, in their survey of new teachers in school, they argued that teachers who were insecure in their subject material adopted
teaching approaches which maintained an often slavish adherence to the textbook, reliance on narrow questions often requiring monosyllabic answers, an inability to follow up and extend pupils' answers and an over prescriptive method whereby the teacher was able to remain within a constricted, safe pattern of work.
Such poor quality teaching has been described in similar terms in a range of reports by the HMI on different age sectors within the education service — on primary and middle schools, for instance— and continues to be a consistent feature of their ongoing commentary on the quality of the present teaching force.
What the HMI appear to be taking issue with here in a particularly strongly value-laden way is something that other writers have variously called ‘formal’, ‘traditional’, ‘product’, ‘production’, ‘transmission’, ‘class-enquiry’, ‘recitation’ and ‘discipline-based’teaching.
Similar views on such teaching have also been expressed in the USA, where researchers have voiced concern about the preponderance of what they call ‘frontal teaching’.
From her survey of high school classrooms, Barbara Tye, for instance, concludes that ‘all classrooms are discouragingly similar’.
Their physical layout and time scheduling are similar.
The pattern of teacher dominance is remarkably uniform: frontal presentation, closed questioning and desk-work being the most commonly recurring features.
There is, she says, little intellectual challenge, hardly any praise, not even much blame.
The high school environment, it would seem, is one with few peaks and troughs, undemanding and emotionally flat.
Listening and writing predominate as the major pupil activities, there being little opportunity for pupils to contribute to, or take responsibility for, their own learning, to develop self-confidence, independence and similar personal qualities.
In a parallel study of 13 junior high and middle schools, Kenneth Tye found that they too were dominated by listening, writing, quizzes and frontal teaching.
Opportunities for choice and exploration were restricted, and the emphasis on control and conformity at this vital stage of children's development was even greater than in the high schools.
In their attachment to frontal teaching and related methods it would therefore seem that the junior highs outsinned the devil highs themselves.
What is it that is seen as determining these disapproved-of patterns of teaching?
What explains these seeming deficits in teaching quality?
In Teaching Quality, Better Schools and Circular 3/84,the Department of Education and Science (DES) appear to be advancing three broad arguments in relation to teaching quality.
First, they stress the importance of the teacher's personal qualities.
Referring their readers to the HMI's survey of teachers in their first year in the profession, they repeat the survey's ‘finding’ that ‘the personal qualities of the teachers were in many cases the decisive factor in their effectiveness’.
‘Personality, character and commitment’, the DES note, are as important as the specific knowledge and skills that are used in the day-to-day tasks of teaching.
The need for teachers to have ‘appropriate personal qualities’ is reiterated in Better Schools since, it is argued, ‘the personality of the teacher and his relationships with pupils’promote high standards.
Given the importance of such personal qualities, the government have called for improvements in the selection of students for initial teacher training and have urged that only students with the ‘requisite personal qualities’ should be awarded qualified-teacher status at the end of their studies.
While government has been firm in its insistence upon the importance of personal qualities as a determinant of teaching quality, it has, however, been much less clear about what these particular qualities might be — sense of responsibility, awareness, sensitivity, enthusiasm and ease of communication being the only ones they have specifically identified, and then only in passing.
In the main, exactly which personal qualities are likely to make a good teacher are not discussed; nor is there any discussion of whether those qualities might vary according to the age group being taught, the special requirements of a teacher's subject, or the ethos of the school, for instance .
And no advice is forthcoming either on how these (largely unstated) qualities might be identified through the selection process.
The HMI certainly give no indication of the measures and procedures they themselves used for identifying the relevant qualities.
All that is recommended is that experienced, practising teachers be increasingly involved in the selection process.
It seems, then, that in the absence of more objective procedures and criteria, government is here prepared to place its trust in the process described in a well-known British idiom as ‘it takes one to know one’.
This kind of guidance places excessive faith in professional intuition.
Not only is this kind of personality-screening process likely to be chancy and unreliable, but — if change and initiative is the goal — downright counterproductive.
Qualities that might generate and recoup excellent work in the  classroom (including, for instance, risk-taking, creativity, originality, the valuing of independence and initiative, a questioning and critical approach, etc., none of which appear on the DES's own list) might not most endear new teachers to their colleagues; and qualities like ‘tidy appearance’ that may be essential for staffroom acceptance may be relatively unimportant to children.
Secondly, the government clearly places considerable weight on the technical skills of classroom pedagogy or teaching method as determinants of teaching quality.
Good teachers, they say, need to have the appropriate professional skills to teach their subject ‘to children of different ages, abilities, aptitudes and backgrounds’.
Better Schools is more emphatic in its statement that intending teachers should be given ‘training and practice in classroom skills’, and devotes some space to these — the skills of selecting appropriate materials, varying teaching styles to match the nature of the work and the type of pupil, guiding individual pupils, handling written and oral work, cultivating independent learning, using open and closed questions when appropriate, managing diverse opinions on sensitive issues, setting clear objectives, and so on.
This is a formidable (and by no means exhaustive) list of relevant professional skills.
Greater involvement of practising teachers in the professional preparation of new recruits, the stipulation that a high proportion of teacher trainers directly involved with pedagogy should themselves have recent and successful experience of teaching and should create opportunities to renew this experience, and the setting of minimum periods for teacher-training courses and the practical elements within them — all these things are seen as ways of providing new teachers with greater and more effective assistance in the development of the necessary practical classroom skills.
The formula for change and improvement in teaching quality being employed here is again both legalistic and psychologistic in nature: more teachers in training, more trainers in schools.
Most of the vital questions as to how these skills are acquired, how they are to be selected and adjusted according to context, how easily or not different kinds of school environment can accommodate them and so on, are begged.
The government position appears to be that if teacher trainers spend enough time in schools, and if student teachers spend enough time alongside experienced ones and their newly expert trainers, the requisite skills will hopefully be acquired by some kind of osmosis.
Such an acquisition of skills from existing practitioners, were it proved to be effective, might just be a defensible strategy for maintaining present levels of teaching quality (assuming we would be satisfied with that).
But it would certainly not be an effective strategy for raising those levels — for introducing new, improved and professionally challenging skills, techniques and approaches into the system.
Third, and most centrally, the government draw a great deal of attention to the need to establish a close fit or match between secondary school teachers' specialist subject qualifications, and their teaching responsibilities in school.
In their 1979 survey of secondary schools in England and Wales, the HMI had  first pointed to what they called ‘evidence of insufficient match in many schools between the qualification and experience of teachers and the work they are undertaking’.
In their subsequent survey of probationary teachers, the HMI claimed that ‘one teacher in ten revealed insecurity in the subject they were teaching’, an insecurity that was reflected in their teaching method.
And in their survey of 9–13 middle schools, the HMI argued that work was of a higher standard where there was a greater use of subject teachers, and where those subjects had been studied in a major way in higher education by the teachers concerned.
In view of such associations,Teaching Quality goes on to state that ‘the Government attach high priority to improving the fit between teachers’ qualifications and their tasks as one means of improving the quality of education'.
‘All specialist subject teaching during the secondary phase’, they continue, ‘requires teachers whose study of the subject concerned was at a level appropriate to higher education, represented a substantial part of the total higher education and training period and built on a suitable A level base’.
Moreover, they go on, even areas of the curriculum outside the specialist mainstream, like careers education, remedial work or vocational preparation, should only be undertaken by teachers who already have experience of teaching a specialist subject.
The importance that government attach to this link between subject match and teaching quality is further emphasized by their announced intentions to take subject qualifications into account in the selection of student teachers, to consider the relevance of students' subject qualifications to school subject teaching in their procedures for approving or ‘accrediting’ teacher-training courses, and to undertake five-yearly reviews of selected secondary schools to ensure that subject match is being improved within them and being reflected in the pattern of teacher appointments.
The commitment to improving the extent of subject match through the control of teacher education, and the exertion of influence over teacher appointments, is therefore clearly substantial.
There are serious problems with this subject match thesis as we shall see, but the subject match initiative undoubtedly provides one of the major thrusts behind the intended improvement of teaching quality.
To sum up, official government policy on the improvement of teaching quality in England and Wales appears to have identified three areas of influence in which intervention would be worthwhile: personal qualities, pedagogical skills and subject expertise.
Explanations in the Tyes' studies of the reasons for quality deficits in the US teaching force are remarkably similar.
Though their studies provide very little direct evidence on why teachers teach the way they do (they were not really asked this), explanations are advanced all the same.
Perhaps teachers teach badly out of habit, it is ventured, or because they have never learned the skills of mixed-ability work in training.
In this way, the personality of the teacher and the level of his or her skill are made central to the Tyes' proposed change strategy.
In fairness, it must be said that they do point to other influential factors as well— to the need to raise the status and public worth of  the teaching profession, to improve leadership skills among school principals, to restructure the curriculum, and so on .
But much of their case rests on a proposed strategy of selecting new entrants to the profession more carefully and providing better initial and in-service training in classroom skills.
These two easily (or too easily) targeted objectives of personality and performance are given much more extensive treatment than the more politically contentious issues of professional status and recognition, and the basic conditions of teachers' work.
It is not, I suspect, the authors' intention, but in their argument much of the blame for the present state of teaching appears to rest with the teachers themselves and those who train them.
All of these explanations are predominantly psychologistic in their understandings (or misunderstandings) of both teacher thinking and teaching quality; and they are particular kinds of psychologistic explanation that take very little account of how teachers themselves understand, interpret and deal with the demands that their work situation makes upon them.
Without such understandings of why teachers do what they do, it is then possible for researchers' and policy-makers' own interpretations to flood into the vacuum.
Teachers are seen not to display the observer's own preferred skills; so they are diagnosed as not being competent in their use.
Teachers are seen to display personal qualities of which the observer disapproves; so it is assumed they lack more desirable ones.
Thus, when preferred skills and qualities are not observed, it is assumed the teachers concerned simply do not have them and should therefore be supplied with them (training), prevented from entering teaching at all(screening), or restricted only to those ‘safe’ areas in which they are competent (matching).
Explanations of this kind have a certain political attractiveness — by making training, selection and deployment the target of reform, things can be done, they can be seen to be done, and they can be done relatively cheaply too.
Indeed, one wonders sometimes whether the apparent simplicity of such political remedies has, in some peculiar way, affected the diagnosis of the supposed ‘sickness’ in the first place (undesirable qualities, low levels of skill, weak subject expertise) to which those remedies were presumably a response; whether the remedies have produced the sickness, rather than vice versa.
Of course, other interpretations of teaching quality which considered how far different techniques and approaches were chosen to match the circumstances in hand, and others rejected as inappropriate or which respected teachers as active and rational interpreters of their task and the conditions in which it is carried out, might suggest policy implications that would be more troublesome to manage, more expensive to implement, less easy to evaluate in the short term.
But I would urge that in this case, as in all others, the attractiveness (or otherwise) of the remedy should not be allowed to influence the validity or accuracy of the diagnosis.
What, then, might this other diagnosis be?
What alternative framework is there for analysing teaching quality?
An Alternative Framework
The framework I want to propose rests upon a regard for the importance of the active, interpreting self in social interaction; for the way it perceives, makes sense of and works upon the actions of others and the situation in which it finds itself; the way it pursues goals and tries to maximize its own (often competing) interests; the way it pursues these things by combining or competing with other selves; the way it adjusts to circumstances while still trying to fulfil or retrieve its own purposes — and so forth.
In this view, teachers, like other people, are not just bundles of skill, competence and technique; they are creators of meaning, interpreters of the world and all it asks of them.
They are people striving for purpose and meaning in circumstances that are usually much less than ideal and which call for constant adjustment, adaptation and redefinition.
Once we adopt this view of teachers or of any other human being, our starting question is no longer why does he/she fail to do X, but why does he/she do Y?
What purpose does doing Y fulfil for them?
Our interest, then, is in how teachers manage to cope with, adapt to and reconstruct their circumstances; it is in what they achieve, not what they fail to achieve.
The different sorts of interpretation of teaching quality this sort of framework suggests can be illustrated by looking at explanations for the development and persistence of transmission teaching that have been presented within that framework.
Six such explanations in particular will be discussed (these are not intended to be exhaustive): the exigencies of cohort control, situational constraints, examination pressures, subject-related pedagogies, status and career factors, and teacher isolation.
It will be seen that these explanations of transmission teaching and its associated connection with teaching quality (or rather, its lack), suggest a very different set of policy implications than those currently in political fashion.
THE EXIGENCIES OF COHORT CONTROL
Transmission teaching, or ‘recitation teaching’ as it is more commonly called in the United States, is so pervasive within the school system that it can easily be interpreted as the ‘natural’or ‘proper’way to teach, as a network of rules and procedures special to the teaching environment which must be learned, rehearsed and developed in a practical way by the new teacher in order to gain competent membership of the teaching community, and of the classroom order in particular.
Indeed, it is interesting that a good deal of mainstream American research on teacher thinking and the improvement of teaching quality treats this particular version of transmission teaching by and large as representative of teaching itself.
‘Novice’ teachers are regarded as different from ‘expert’ones only in terms of their abilities to handle transmission-type skills — for instance, in selecting examples, illustrations and analogies that will best ‘tell the story’in relation to some part of the curriculum.
Within such studies there is a tendency also to concentrate on those ‘academic’ components of the curriculum which more easily lend themselves to didactic  modes of exposition and question-and-answer teaching.
It is as if teaching quality is only an issue in subjects like mathematics and science.
What teaching quality might look like in drama, physical education, music and art, for instance, scarcely gets a mention.
This serves only to reinforce our existing stereotypes of what ‘teaching’ and ‘good teaching’really is.
Thus, in trying to change teaching, ironically it is likely that the recommendations arising from this kind of research, like much of the research on teacher effectiveness that preceded it, will help keep teaching the same by failing to look outside the parameters of the transmission model.
Teaching is certainly a matter of competence.
But it is competence of a particular kind.
It is the competence to recognize and enact the rules, procedures and forms of understanding of a particular cultural environment.
What is involved is not technical competence to operate in a pre-given, professionally correct and educationally worthwhile way, but cultural competence to ‘read’ and ‘pass’in a system with its own specific history, a system once devised and developed to meet a very particular set of social purposes.
For Hoetker and Ahlbrand and Westbury, these purposes have their roots in the nineteenth-century American elementary school.
Grace, writing in the British context, fixes those purposes in the urban elementary context of that country, too.
For writers such as these, the quick-fire, question-and-answer strategy of the recitation simultaneously solved the problem of mobilizing attention and sustaining control among large numbers of potentially recalcitrant working-class children, while getting information and material across in an environment where resources were in short supply.
The features and functions of this recitation style of teaching have since been identified in greater detail.
The funnelling of classroom talk through the teacher effectively reduces a potentially chaotic ‘babble’ to the carefully structured, question-and-answer pattern of two-party talk where selected pupils act as proxy representatives for the whole class, where the teacher initiates lines of inquiry and the pupils merely respond, and where the teacher evaluates the accuracy, quality and appropriateness of pupil contributions, but not vice versa.
The ‘hands up’ pattern of pupil participation is carefully orchestrated by the teacher — competition is encouraged, attention sustained, some semblance of involvement secured — in the process of getting the predecided point across.
To lecture the material would bring only boredom and rebellion, which is why outright dictation is usually only practised with the most self-selected, high ability groups.
The organization of competitive pupil participation thus avoids excesses of boredom and inattention especially where false questioning trails can be set in the early stages and the ‘answer’ or ‘point’of the lesson delayed so that pupils have to work hard to discover it.
Within lesson structures of this kind, teachers do not, in fact, orientate  themselves so much to the needs of individual students, but tend to treat the whole class as a kind of ‘collective student’.
The progress of groups of students in the higher (but not the highest) parts of the class achievement  range is often monitored particularly closely by the transmission teacher and used to ‘steer’ his or her judgements about the management and development of the lesson for the class as a whole.
In these sorts of circumstances, the teacher's predominant practical concern is not with the learning experiences of individual students, but with the overall ‘instructional flow’ of the lesson with how well it is proceeding to its intended conclusion and maintaining order as it does so.
There are more or less coercive versions of this long-standing pedagogical strategy.
Webb describes the drill sergeant approach of the secondary modern teacher, with his inflexible regime of parade ground regimentation and uncompromising obedience.
Hargreaves discussed ‘policing’ strategies in an urban middle school, with their detailed control over the talk, bodily movement and gestures of working-class children.
Woods reviews the extensive use of ‘domination’ style survival strategies among secondary modern teachers where control, especially over older and larger pupils, was a salient problem.
And Hargreaves has also identified strong traces of these styles and traditions among former secondary modern teachers working in middle schools with younger children, even in middle-class environments.
These, then, are the techniques, rules and procedures which are widely adopted as part of the practical management of large cohorts of pupils.
Such patterns of classroom management are, perhaps, more common in secondary modern schools, in the lower bands of comprehensives, or in working-class elementary schools — the most direct and obvious inheritors of the old elementary tradition.
As I have already suggested, transmission styles are much more widespread than this, though: so familiar a part of teachers' experience, in fact, that their practice quickly becomes a matter of habit and routine, of taken-for-granted competence, not strategic choice.
But it should be remembered that, historically, within the system as a whole, and biographically, within the unfolding careers of individual teachers, these familiar patterns do arise from, and are adopted through, conscious strategic choice.
It is only when they have been thus adopted that conscious strategy turns into habitual rule, coping into culture.
It is at this point, where the routines become more closely aligned with the self and where they appear to be dealing reasonably successfully with the ever-present problem of control, that the habit becomes hard to break and that threats to it will be resisted.
This is especially so where ‘recitation’ or transmission patterns of teaching are strongly approved of and supported by other members of the school community, not least the pupils themselves.
Where domination strategies are a pervasive feature of the culture of teaching in a school, pupils can be remorseless in their expectations that teachers conform to the ‘normal’ pattern and can exercise powerful sanctions of disobedience and disruption against those who allow reason or consideration of personal concern to show through, against those who seem to show manifest signs of weakness or softness, that is.
Transmission teaching is indeed sustained through habit, then.
But the habit is by no means irrational.
It is a habit that has historically enjoyed a  measure of success in maintaining control over and transmitting limited knowledge to young people in large numbers in the physically restricted space of the school classroom.
If policy-makers wish to kick this habit out of the classroom, it is clear that training in new skills is not in itself the answer.
This lies, rather, in formulation and acceptance by teachers themselves of new, less control-centred educational purposes, along with an easing of the constraints and conditions in which those purposes are to be fulfilled.
This brings us to a second set of determinants of transmission teaching — those rooted in the situational constraints of the classroom.
SITUATIONAL CONSTRAINTS
All teaching takes place in a context of opportunity and constraint.
Teaching strategies involve attempts at realizing educational goals by taking advantage of appropriate opportunities and coping with, adjusting to, or redefining the constraints.
Often, the coping strategies that teachers adopt to deal with contextual contingencies can become so habitual, so routinized, that they seem like coping no more, but worthwhile and valid teaching.
In this way, provisional adaptations turn into routine commitments.
When constraints are particularly heavy and pressing, though, teaching may become not just a matter of coping, which in some senses all teaching is, but of sheer survival.
Woods has outlined some of the constraints that appear to induce survival-based patterns of teaching in the secondary school system — the raising of the school-leaving age (to which we would now add growing youth unemployment), which encourages staying-on among those not otherwise especially enamoured of their school experience; the persistence and extension of 16+ examinations against which teachers' own success will be judged (more of this later); continuing high levels of class size and teacher-pupil ratios that make individualized treatment and small-group work difficult; and declining levels of resources, which make experimentation and adjustment of learning tasks to individual needs problematic and leave teachers in the position of having to rely on their own personal resources for managing the class.
To these things, we might also add the inappropriateness of, and deterioration of standards in, school buildings — the inconvenience of stairs and galleries for those wishing to use overhead projectors and other cumbersome audio-visual aids; the unsuitability of compartmentalized classrooms for team-teaching, resource-based learning etc.; and the general discouragement that dilapidated walls and leaking roofs present to those who might otherwise take pride in improving the display and all-round aesthetic environment of their classrooms.
Material circumstances, then, do affect the standard and quality of teaching, as the HMI have themselves noted in surveys of the effects of public expenditure policies on teaching and learning.
Low resourcing and poor material support encourage teachers to adopt a ‘survival’ or ‘make-do’orientation to their work and incline them towards more control-centred, transmission-style patterns of teaching which revolve around the imposition of their own personal authority within the public setting of the classroom.
Teachers, that is, do not just decide to deploy particular skills because of their recognized professional worth and value, or because of their own confidence and competence in operating them.
Rather, they make judgements about the fit between particular skills and the constraints, demands and opportunities of the material environment of the classroom; about the appropriateness of particular styles or techniques for present circumstances.
Although, in historical and biographical terms, these judgements rapidly become ingrained and routinized as normal practice, their roots in environmental circumstances, and therefore the importance of the character of those circumstances, should not be forgotten.
The implication here for policy-makers who would wish to promote movement away from transmission patterns of teaching is that there is a need to ease and improve those conditions that currently incline teachers towards survival more than mere coping, and towards the control-centred transmission-style pedagogies that follow from it.
This suggests not policies of improved training or selection, but of more generous resource allocation to the system to improve the material environment of teaching.
EXAMINATIONS
The work attempted in the classroom was often constrained by exclusive emphasis placed on the examination syllabus, on topics thought to be favoured by the examiners and on the acquisition of examination techniques.
So wrote Her Majesty's Inspectorate in their survey of the curriculum for fourth and fifth years in secondary schools.
Their evidence for this judgement, as with those presented in most of their surveys, was loosely stated and difficult to verify, but the argument has been echoed many times in recent years in Britain by academics and policy-makers alike.
In a polemical critique of modern comprehensive school practice, for instance, David Hargreaves has expressed concern about the ways in which public examinations can come to dominate the process of teaching and learning in secondary schools.
And a study of a large group of Scottish secondary school leavers, surveyed after taking their ‘Highers’, found that ‘the most common single method of study was ‘exercises, worked examples, proses, translations’(73%) followed by ‘having notes dictated to you in class’(60%) '.
The researchers concluded that ‘one may infer that many felt there had been a conflict between studying for interest's sake and studying for examination success’.
Perhaps this inference, given its grounding in pupil, not teacher data, is a tendentious one.
Perhaps David Hargreaves's remarks are also somewhat speculative since they rest on no other evidence than that presented by Her Majesty's Inspectorate (doubts about which have already been raised).
Moreover, evidence from recent research by Hammersley and Scarth suggests that patterns of whole-class teacher-pupil talk do not differ significantly between courses that are assessed by terminal examinations, ones that are continuously assessed, and ones that are not assessed at all— even when these differently assessed courses are taught by the same teacher and within the same subject.
In claiming that terminal examinations have little effect on patterns of teaching and learning, Hammersley and Scarth's research does, however, focus on only one tightly defined area of classroom learning (overall patterns of public whole-class talk).
It does not consider other features of classroom learning that might be more strongly affected by the presence or absence of examinations.
These would include differences in the amount and type of group work and group discussions, the open or closed nature of classroom tasks, and the kinds of homework set.
Until the findings of such research become available, the weight of argument and evidence would appear to fall in the opposite direction.
Both Weston and Olson, for instance, found that teachers involved in the Schools Council Integrated Science Project (SCISP), breached the project's guidelines by teaching from the board and encouraging pupils to revise — and that these teachers referred to the presence of examinations as the reason for their continuing use of these transmission-like styles of teaching.
For some teachers, then, the presence of examinations seems to constrain them in their approach to classroom teaching; it limits innovation and inhibits their willingness to explore new teaching strategies.
Achievement conscious pupils may conspire with their teachers in this process of limitation too, drawing them back to safer pedagogical ground when exploration threatens to divert them from their examination destination.
Not all teachers are closet radicals, though, waiting for the moment when the unbolting of the examination doors will allow them to open up their pedagogical style.
As Sikes, Measor and Woods have found in their life history interviews with secondary teachers, many teachers regard examinations not as a constraint but as a resource for motivating pupils at an age when their enthusiasm for school might otherwise be waning.
Many teachers, it must be said, though, are not aware of examinations as either constraining or a resource.
For them, examinations are just a ‘fact of life’— an assumed and taken-for-granted part of the secondary school system to which their practice is routinely directed.
Constraint, resource, excuse, and fact of life — there are clearly a number of ways in which public examinations have a bearing on the maintenance of transmission styles of teaching.
Their importance for the teacher is substantial — in a work environment where few other adults directly witness the quality of the teacher's work, examination results provide one of the few public and apparently objective indicators of a teacher's competence.
Teachers ignore the importance of these results at their peril.
Indeed, since the 1980 Education Act's requirement that all schools publish their examination results, it is not unreasonable to surmise that the influence of examinations upon teaching quality (or its lack) is likely to grow in years to come.
Even so, it should not be assumed that the abolition of public examinations would necessarily put an end to transmission styles of teaching.
Such styles, as we have seen, are apparently as pervasive a feature of US high school teaching  as of life in British secondary schools.
The grade point average and the development of educational testing may in this sense have as much of a backwash effect on the teaching and learning process in the United States as does the public examination system in Britain.
So, too, might the mandated curriculum, be it set at national or provincial level, in its fixing of external curriculum objectives and its restriction of teachers' room for manoeuvre.
Clearly, examinations, the way they are perceived, oriented to and drawn upon as a source of professional justification by teachers, are but one source of influence on the continuing pervasiveness of transmission styles of teaching in the school system.
Their removal or reform will bring no automatic pedagogical shifts, only the creation of opportunity for alternatives to be explored more thoroughly.
SUBJECT SPECIALISM
For the DES, teaching quality at secondary level is enhanced by the possession of specialist subject expertise among those with responsibility for teaching the particular subjects in question.
The DES's case for insisting upon more attention to be paid to subject competence in the training and deployment of teachers rests on two kinds of evidence, both of which are somewhat insubstantial.
First, in The New Teacher in School , the HMI identified one secondary teacher in ten as revealing insecurity in the subject they were teaching (an encouragingly small proportion, one might have thought).
Moreover, as the National Union of Teachers argues in response to the White Paper Teaching Quality , the basis of and variation between different HMI ratings of teacher competence is not made clear; and interestingly, these ratings (formed on the basis of only two observations per teacher), are less generous than those provided by the teachers' heads.
Secondly, in their 9–13 middle school survey, the HMI looked at ‘associations between particular modes of staff deployment and overall standards’.
They concluded that, in schools where a high proportion of teachers spent over half their week teaching one specific subject, and in schools where a high proportion of the teaching was undertaken by teachers who had studied the relevant subject as a major element in their initial training — in other words, where there was a strong degree of subject match standards of work were better (to a statistically significant degree).
This argument, too, as the National Union of Teachers again point out, is empirically weak, however.
For one thing, the HMI leave implicit what they mean by, and measure as, standards.
For another, statistically significant associations between standards of work on the one hand and resource levels and the strength of a head teacher's influence on the other, which are even stronger than those involving subject match, are not developed through discussion or connected to policy suggestions.
Once again, it appears that the nature of the available remedies is having some effect on the character of the diagnosis.
But let us assume, for one moment, that the HMI's case is stronger than  this; that subject matter is, in fact, related to teaching quality.
Is the HMI's interpretation, resting as it does on the claim that teachers' possession of knowledge and expertise provides the basis for their classroom confidence, the only possible one?
Have they, like good social scientists, been rigorous, robust and balanced in examining alternative possible theoretical interpretations of the evidence to hand?
I want to suggest that they have not and that there are equally plausible (though less politically attractive) explanations for the associations they claim to identify.
These explanations — ones which recognize and respect the meanings that teachers take from and give to their work — are concerned, in turn, with the effects of subject-based pedagogies, subject commitment and subject fragmentation.
(i) Subject-based pedagogies
When teachers are trained and develop expertise in particular subjects, they do more than merely master appropriate content and gather relevant bodies of technical expertise.
Induction into a subject is also induction into a subject culture or community — into a set of assumptions about how school children learn, how they are best taught, how one should relate to them, and so on.
Though definitions of what is the appropriate methodology for a subject tend to shift over time, at present, teachers of certain subjects — modern languages in particular — seem strongly inclined to a transmission approach to teaching.
The adoption of this approach within certain subjects is based on what Ball calls an academic perspective, where teachers tend to be strongly subject-centred, to view their own subject as setting special intellectual demands because of its allegedly ‘linear’ quality, to favour homogeneous ability grouping, and to prefer whole-class teaching methods.
In the case of certain subjects, then, it would seem that the dominant assumptions about teaching, learning and knowledge held within that subject community actually support the spread of those very transmission pedagogies of which government appears to disapprove.
(ii) Subject commitment.
Subject membership is a hard-won achievement — a result of many years of studying and exploring that subject through school, through university and through teacher training.
Almost inevitably, then, induction into a subject brings with it the development of commitment and loyalty to that subject too (and, by implication, weakened loyalty and commitment to others).
Subject induction, that is, bestows subject identity.
Subject mastery is therefore not only a cognitive process — a matter of acquiring knowledge and skill — but a social one also, in which feelings of attachment, loyalty and identification are built up.
So strong can these commitments become that teachers not only come to feel diffident about teaching and reluctant to teach subjects very different from their own, like religious education or personal and social education, which would be likely to form but a minor part of their timetable  commitment, but some teachers may even feel reluctant to teach subjects that would appear to have a fairly close cognate intellectual relationship to their own — as when physicists are asked to teach chemistry or integrated sciences, for instance.
In these circumstances, poor quality teaching that arises from working outside one's own subject is not so much, or  exclusively , due to lack of knowledge and expertise, but to weakened commitment.
And this weakened commitment may in turn be a by-product of the intensity of the subject commitments that have been built up elsewhere in the school curriculum.
By this interpretation, the problem that appears as subject mismatch may not be due to too little specialism, but to too much.
(iii) Subject fragmentation
These first two interpretations of the relationship between subject membership and pedagogical preference suggest that weakness in out-of-subject duties may well be caused not simply by unfamiliarity with content but by deep-seated divisions within secondary teaching as a whole brought about by strongly institutionalized systems of subject separation which inhibit the development of transferable pedagogic skills, restrict teachers' adaptability and responsiveness to educational challenge and innovation, and limit their commitment to children and to learning in general as against enthusiasm for particular bodies of content.
My own work on middle school teachers provides some support for this view.
Teachers with interests in, and commitments to, humanities, English and creative and expressive arts felt ill-at-ease with teaching science and mathematics, not just because of their lack of confidence with the subject (though this was important), but also because of their discomfort with the very different pedagogies, very different ways of relating to children they felt were associated with those other subjects.
As one expressive arts teacher put it:
I think anybody who teaches in the creative arts has this [rapport]with kids, because it's emotionally based…whereas if you're dealing with a factual subject, a scientific subject, you're dealing more with things and objects and reactions.
Actually how you feel about SO&sub2;[sulphur-dioxide]coming out of a bottle doesn't come into it, you know.
Similarly, in their life history studies of secondary teachers, Sikes, Measor and Woods came across some subject teachers who felt distinctly uncomfortable with the approaches they were required to adopt in other subject areas:
Last year, I took some English.
I couldn't teach it.
I was nervous, and besides not being able to do it as well, you need a different approach to what you take in art.
You couldn't treat the kids as individuals, like you do in art.
You had to be a teacher in front of a class and tell everybody what to do.
Well, I've got two styles of teaching.
I've got the one that I deal with in the art room and the other that's formal because I teach part of my  timetable in humanities…in art, I can relax and go round and talk to them individually…with the humanities, it's a case of come in in silence and sit down…definitely teaching from the board.
Other writers have pointed to the pedagogical anxieties art teachers feel when they move from the security of their practical areas into a more conventional classroom environment — even when they are teaching art appreciation.
Nor is the phenomenon confined to art.
Ball and Lacey, for instance, have pointed to the tendency of non-specialist English teachers to be more attracted to transmission pedagogies than their specialist counterparts are.
What matters here is not so much this association between qualification and quality, but how it is explained.
The evidence I have reviewed points to the possibility that poor-quality or transmission-style teaching arises in some subject teaching, not because that subject is being taught by poorly qualified generalists, but by other specialists whose commitments lie elsewhere and whose preferred pedagogical approaches are seen as incompatible with those required in subject areas other than their own.
Falling rolls and rapid technological and social change are bringing about constant adjustments and shifts in the secondary school curriculum, demanding in turn a degree of flexibility and adaptability on the part of the teaching force.
Where subject fragmentation remains strong, where the firm boundaries and pedagogical dissimilarities between different subjects continue to be emphasized (no emotions in science, no objectivity in art, no hypotheses in history), where the subject specialist pattern of teacher training is maintained and strengthened, the chances of creating such flexibility, of developing the necessary degree of transferable pedagogic skills, will not be great.
On the basis of this kind of evidence and interpretation, which recognizes the essentially social nature of teachers' developing curricular identities, commitments and pedagogical preferences, the improvement of teaching quality would seem better met by training and deployment policies which are less rather than more specialized in nature.
STATUS AND CAREER FACTORS
I think this year I have suffered from what they call teacher burnout.
There is very, very little recognition here.
Even a dog needs to be patted on the head, but you don't get that here.
It makes you question whether it's worth it.
Competence and efficiency are closely tied to personal senses of worth and value.
Much of that worth depends, as it does for the teacher cited above, on recognition and status given to one's work by others.
The importance of this association is most evident when it is broken, when careers are truncated or ‘spoilt’, status is withdrawn and recognition seemingly denied.
Such denials of worth, whether they occur within the career structure of a particular school, or whether, through such things as pay erosion, they are seen to emanate more diffusely from society at large, lead some teachers to seek an  exit from the profession.
Where such options are not possible, though, status denial begins to have adverse implications for professional motivation and classroom performance.
One teacher I interviewed in my middle school study, for instance, felt she had not been well treated in the reorganization to a middle school set-up and had resisted the head's attempts at change ‘We don't, some of us don't change so easily!’
She went on:
I've considered doing part-time work…but its almost impossible now with things as they are in this area.
So I settled for the fact that you can't devote the time which I feel you would need to give to the job.
So I'm settled now.
I've abandoned all hopes.
I'm just watching and letting things go.
This process of role retreatism that follows from status denial has been described particularly graphically by Riseborough in his study of a group of middle-aged, male secondary modern teachers who had been reorganized into an academically dominated comprehensive.
As these teachers realized they were not to get the major posts of responsibility, that their objective career progression had come to an end, that their own subject expertise was being compared unfavourably with that of their colleagues from former grammar schools, and that they were to be allocated the ‘dirty work’ of teaching the lower-ability groups in the lower streams — they formed a staff counterculture which set about resisting the initiatives of the head, and they withdrew that commitment and enthusiasm in the classroom that had previously been a major part of their secondary modern identity:
What's happened must affect the teaching.
You can't go into the classroom and forget about what's happening to you.
I don't work as hard as I used to.
I just make sure I'm not snowed under by kids.
I've become quite mechanical.
They took away what was important, the job I could do.
Put it this way, if I had children of my own at school, I would be very, very worried if they had a teacher like me.
I'm purely a timefiller, a babysitter.
You know, I sit in my stockroom half the day with my electric kettle and a fag and a cup of coffee.
And I don't care now that everyone else knows.
In this way, we can see how intimately connected teachers' classroom strategies are to teachers' cultures and careers, how what happens in the staffroom has implications for performance in the classroom also.
This is a much more subtle (though politically more contentious) diagnosis that those which rest on notions of teacher burnout or personality deficiency and which individualize professional failure and blame individual teachers for it (or those who train and employ them).
Once we recognize how far classroom competence has its roots in status and recognition, how closely the different elements of teachers' lives are tied together in a coherent structure of meaning and motivation, then the policy implications lead us not to personality-based initiatives or more careful  selection, compulsory redundancy to remove ‘incompetents’ from the profession, or redeployment and encouraging early retirement, but to strategies which will improve the levels of reward and recognition in the system in terms of pay, planning time, in-service opportunity and the like, and in terms of positive (not punitive) systems of staff support and development.
Much of that kind of support, though, will obviously depend on greater opportunities being created for teachers to share and witness the success of what their colleagues do.
This leads me to the last determinant of transmission teaching I want to explore here: that of teacher isolation.
TEACHER ISOLATION
One of the most pervasive characteristics of teaching is that of classroom isolation — the separation of teachers with their classes into a series of egg-crate like compartments, isolated and insulated from one another 's work.
This creates an often welcome measure of protection from inspection and intrusion.
It gives teachers a kind of autonomy which they will guard jealously if pressed.
But isolation from colleagues also creates uncertainty.
It removes opportunities for praise and support and therefore serves to undermine confidence about the success or otherwise of one's efforts.
In circumstances such as these, colleagues are led to rely on the crude, more tangible and visible indicators of classroom performance to evaluate one another 's success, like examination results and noise levels.
This rather crude form of collegial evaluation tends to induce a certain kind of conservatism in teachers, an attachment to existing classroom methods which appear to be reasonably successful in keeping results high and noise levels low.
Team-teaching, exploration of new methods, collaborative approaches to improved teaching, constructive collegial criticism of classroom performance — none of these things are fostered by the isolation and individualism of the existing culture of teaching.
Where teachers are isolated in this way, working under the weighty pressure of material constraints, and immersed in the practical immediacy of the classroom environment, personal classroom experience becomes increasingly attracted to itself.
What has been done supplies the framework of justification for what is to be done.
And as existing experience, unchecked by alternative views of collective reflection, becomes sedimented into teachers' consciousness as valued and ‘successful’ procedure, so pedagogy undergoes petrification.
Once that process of petrification is complete, little new pedagogical blood can be squeezed from it.
Classroom isolation, therefore, and the culture of teacher individualism which it generates, operates to support the persistence of transmission pedagogies.
Such pedagogies appear to meet the crude, externally visible criteria for professional success, and the lack of collegial reflection or criticism provides no impetus for change in them either.
If teachers' allegiances to transmission pedagogies are to be loosened, then ways of encouraging their collaboration with colleagues must be found, along with the resources to do this.
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have examined the nature and validity of current ‘official’ explanations of teaching quality.
These, it was found, rested much of their case an the importance of teachers' personal qualities, their technical expertise and their specialist subject competence.
I argued that there was a lack of clarity (or clear research evidence) concerning what these appropriate qualities might be, an unfortunate tendency to abstract approved-of skills from consideration of the contextual circumstances in which they might need to be employed, and an inclination to present a one-sided interpretation of the implications of specialist subject expertise for teaching quality.
Most of all, it was suggested, these explanations have placed most of the blame for quality deficits onto teachers themselves or those who train them, instead of examining the characteristics of the environment in which teachers operate and trying to understand and interpret the ways in which teachers make sense of, and adjust to, that environment.
Official explanations of deficiencies in teaching quality have tended to equate such deficiencies with tendencies to adopt transmission patterns of teaching.
The chapter has also explored possible reasons why teachers adopt transmission patterns of teaching, but has looked at this not in terms of why teachers fail to do something else, but in terms of what purposes transmission teaching serves for them.
This more sociological approach to the study of transmission teaching points to the importance not of personality, skill or expertise as such, but to factors such as the following:
1
the control purposes that transmission teaching serves in managing large cohorts of pupils in restricted physical surroundings;
2
its appropriateness for circumstances of low resource levels and severe material constraints;
3
its compatibility with a mandated curriculum, whether this is governmentally set or determined by a public examination system;
4
its association with particular subject specialisms and, elsewhere, its availability as a fall-back strategy for those teaching outside the secure boundaries of their own specialism;
5
the minimal effort demands it makes upon teachers who have lowered their investment in teaching due to career blockage and status denial;
6
its suitability for, and protection by, the conditions of teacher isolation, where external criteria of professional competence are ostensibly met and inducements to change are absent.
For those who wish to weaken the hold that transmission teaching has within the educational system, this more sociological approach to understanding the conditions of teaching quality suggests not a tightening-up of selection procedures, an improvement of training, and an emphasis in training and staff deployment on the strengthening of subject expertise, but policies such as the following:
1
re-examination of the control purposes of schooling and the extent to which they pervade the system to the exclusion of other personal and social ends like collaboration, independence and initiative;
2
allocation of improved resources to the system and the alleviation of material constraints in a way that will enhance the development of new pedagogical approaches;
3
weakening of the public examination system and attenuation of its influence on the school curriculum, possibly in favour of more continuous and pupil-centred forms of assessment, recording and review;
4
weakening of teachers' attachment to particular subject specialisms, development of subject competence across a wider range of the curriculum, and development and dissemination of awareness of the similarities in learning objectives and pedagogical approach between different subjects — in short, the easing of subject loyalties and demystification of subject differences;
5
devising, extending and improving systems of staff development and collegial support (not hierarchical and possibly punitive appraisal) for teachers;
6
creating opportunities and providing conditions in which teachers can spend more time working together, sharing problems, commenting on each others' performance, and collaborating in curriculum planning.
Reforms of this kind point to the importance of attending to the purposes and social context of teaching, if teaching itself is to be changed.
In that sense, their political attractiveness is not likely to be as great as that of present policies which emphasize training, selecting and matching, and which address themselves to the individual qualities and characteristics of the teachers themselves.
It would be sad, though, would it not, if the analysis of teaching quality were to be prejudged by the availability or attractiveness of particular solutions for dealing with it?
One can only hope that, in coming years, politicians, bureaucrats and the teaching profession itself will be able to avoid being drawn into that particular trap.
The Side Effects of Assessment Derek Rowntree
The Competitive Aspects of Assessment
The side effects of learning for the sake of extrinsic rewards are bad enough.
But what when these extrinsic rewards are in short supply?
When there are not enough to go round?
The side effects are then worsened by competition.
In one sense, of course, there is more than enough knowledge available for everyone to have a sufficiency.
As Robert Paul Wolff (1969, p. 66) points out: ‘The Pythagorean theorem does not flicker and grow dim as more and more minds embrace it.’
Learning is a ‘free commodity’, but only so long as we are thinking of knowledge as a source of intrinsic, expressive rewards.
Think instead of‘approved’ knowledge, legitimated and reified as GCE ‘passes’, admissions to college, university degrees, and the like.
No longer is the supply unlimited.
For one person to get more, another must make do with less.
A great many assessment systems are competitive in that the extrinsic rewards they offer are in short supply and each student who wants them is asked to demonstrate that he or she is more deserving than others, or others are less deserving.
Contesting with others over the extrinsic spoils of learning is one aspect of competitive assessment.
Another, upon which it depends and which usually arises early in a child's educational career, before the extrinsic rewards have become so tangible and external, is his or her teacher's public comparison of one student with another.
A child will not have been in school many days before he is made aware of individual differences among his classmates.
Roy Nash (1973, p. 17) discovered that pupils as young as eight years were able to say which children in the class were better than them at reading, writing and number; and their self-perceived class rank correlated highly with the rankings made by the teacher at the researcher's request (and therefore not explicitly available hitherto for communication to the children).
Such awareness can encourage learning that is motivated (extrinsically) by what John Holt called ‘the ignoble satisfaction of feeling that one is better than someone else’.
Jules Henry (1969) describes how a classroom atmosphere of competitive assessment fosters such a tendency.
Eleven-year-old Boris is out at the blackboard publicly trying to simplify a fraction while his teacher is being excruciatingly patient and restraining the rest of the class who are bursting to put Boris right.
Boris is mentally paralysed by the situation, however.
So the teacher finally asks Peggy, who can be relied on to know the correct answer:
Thus Boris' failure has made it possible for Peggy to succeed; his depression is the price of her exhilaration, his misery is the occasion of her rejoicing.
This is the standard condition of the American elementary school…
To a  Zuni, Hopi, or Dakota Indian, Peggy's performance would seem cruel beyond belief, for competition, the wringing of success from somebody's failure, is a form of torture foreign to those noncompetitive Indians…
(Henry 1969, p. 83.)
But why should it be that Peggy gets a lift from knowing that she has ‘beaten’ Boris?
To say that she has been publicly compared with him and proved superior in fraction simplification is insufficiently explanatory.
No doubt the teacher too is superior, but she would hardly be expected to feel joyful on that account.
Why, for instance, does Peggy not get satisfaction instead from trying to eradicate the difference between herself and Boris, e.g. by helping him reach the answer himself rather than telling him?
And if she has already enjoyed the satisfaction of having climbed to a new standard of proficiency, higher than she has been before, why should she care one way or another to know that others have not yet reached this standard?
Perhaps the reason is that she has been persuaded that teacher approval, and whatever other more tangible extrinsic rewards may follow, are in short supply and to gain what she needs she must not simply (or even necessarily) improve but also get (or merely stay) ahead of others.
Students generally have been led to believe that they cannot all achieve a worthwhile level of learning.
They, and for the most part their teachers, often assume that only a few can do very well, the majority doing only moderately well, and a few doing poorly or even failing.
This expectation is seen institutionalized among teachers who ‘grade on the curve’.
(The practice is to be found in education everywhere, although the terminology is American see Terwilliger, 1971, pp. 74–100 for a discussion of this and related techniques.)
Such teachers, marking students' work with, say, the grades A, B, C, D, F, will set out with a predetermined grade-distribution in mind.
(E is often skipped over because by ‘happy’ coincidence, the next letter is the initial letter of failure!)
Among 100 students, for example, they may expect to award about 10 As, 20 Bs, 40 Cs, 20 Ds and 10 Fs.
(Figure 4.1 shows this expected distribution graphically — and also the underlying ‘normal distribution curve’ from which the method gets its name, and which we will meet again later.)
The teacher who is ‘grading on the curve’ may, on marking a given set of students, allow himself to vary the proportions slightly.
But he would likely feel uneasy if, say, twice as many students as expected appeared to deserve an A or a B. He might also fear being reproached by colleagues for lowering standards.
Some teachers guard against this by making it a principle never to award an A. According to a French adage quoted by Remi Clignet (1974, p. 349), the maximum of 20 is ‘given only to God, 19 to his saints, 18 to the professor's professor, 17 to the professor himself’— so the student of French composition can't be expected to score more than 16!
The expectation that students with A or B (or their equivalents in other systems for dispensing approval) will be in the minority has a strong hold in classrooms.
Too easily it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy: ‘We can't expect the majority of students to do very well — so don't blame us for the failures.’
When year after year the General Nursing Council failed one-third of candidates taking SRN examinations after three years of preparation, few questioned the proportion (Nursing Times , 1972).
Fear of passing too many students is still preventing the Esperanto Teachers' Association from getting Esperanto examined as a GCE O-level subject.
They are told the language is ‘too easy’.
Too many students would get top grades.
Figure 1.4 Grading on the curve
The competitive nature of public  examinations was brutally brought home to me a few years ago when I was first impressed by the instructional potential of programmed learning.
In an excess of enthusiasm I suggested to a GCE examiner that with the help of well-written programmes, we would soon enable nearly all students to pass O-level mathematics.
‘Oh no you won't,’ he said, ‘we'll just raise the standard.’
Conversely, the Black Paper pessimist (see Pollard, 1969) can accuse this same self-fulfilling mechanism of disguising the fact that standards are falling as the quality of candidates declines!
Such viewpoints I have since found elaborated in Brereton (1944) who records, almost as an educational ‘law’, that: ‘the standard of an examination adjusts itself to the standard of those taking it’(p. 43).
While suggesting the possibility that, as a result of the war, children may become more aware of and more knowledgeable about geography, he considers it obvious that School Certificate examinations should continue to give credit only to about half the candidates.
He justifies this implicit raising of the required standard partly in order to encourage pupils to continue caring about geography lessons (as opposed to reading the newspapers) and partly because it would be unfair to give pupils taking geography a better chance of reaching university than pupils taking, say, physics under the war-time difficulties caused by shortage of laboratories and physics teachers.
In such situations — where the best X per cent of students are to get the As, the next best nX per cent the Bs, and so on— the grade awarded to a student depends not on the absolute level of performance he or she attains but on how  he or she performs relative to other students.
That is, the student may improve his or her performance by 100 per cent , but if everyone else improves similarly this grade will be no higher than before.
To get a better grade the student must take it from one of the students above by out-performing him or her.
What are the side effects of an assessment system believed by students (whether rightly or wrongly) to be competitive?
For most students they are centred in the need to come to terms with failure.
The psychiatrist Ronald Laing suggested once that ‘to be a success in our society one has to learn to dream of failure’.
And Bergman's film Wild Strawberries shows us an elderly professor at the peak of his career, about to receive the highest academic honour in the land, who dreams the night before of failing an examination.
For a few to emerge as outstandingly successful the majority must fail — to varying degrees.
The failure may be only partial.
Indeed, had the student been in a different (e.g. less selective) school or college, his/her performance might well have made him/her a success.
But, by comparison with those he/she has been led to emulate, he/she has fallen short.
Of course, it should be possible for a student who has ‘failed’ at one learning task to compensate by his/her success on another task.
Unfortunately, the ethos of competitive assessment often leads the student who has failed on a few tasks (e.g. learned more slowly than other people) to feel that he/she has failed as a person .
As a ‘failure’ he/she may then become less capable of succeeding in subsequent tasks.
His/her only consolation may be that most of his/her friends will soon be those who are failing at about the same level as he/she is.
Between them they may be able to construct mutually defensive attitudes to those above them and those (if any) below them in the hierarchy.
These defensive attitudes, based on fear, envy, resentment and self-hatred, may be of various kinds.
The least active response is what Philip Jackson (1968, p. 27) describes as ‘devaluing the evaluations to the point where they no longer matter very much’.
Perhaps this attitude of ‘cooling it’, ‘turning off’, ‘keeping his head down’, ‘disengaging’ on the part of the failing student is a special case of what Roy Cox (1967) had in mind when he said: ‘It is clear that where students are assessed in a way which is not seen to be relevant to what they are aiming at they will tend to distort and degrade the assessment so that it does not become a source of esteem.’
More actively, students who cannot ‘adjust’ equably to being labelled ‘failures’may seek alternative sources of esteem.
Perhaps through their attempts to pull school (or society) apart out of hours.
As Samuel Johnson pointed out: ‘By exciting emulation and comparisons of superiority, you lay the foundation of lasting mischief; you make brothers and sisters hate each other.’
A US Senate subcommittee survey of 1975 reports the case of a seventeen-year-old Detroit schoolgirl who was awarded massive damages after being beaten up and stabbed with pencils by thirty girl classmates who apparently resented that she was more attractive than they and received better grades.
This case may be an example, more physical than usual, of what Arnold Wesker calls ‘Lilliputianism — the poisonous need to cut other people down to size.’
Who knows how much of the physical damage done to property and people arises out of the resentment and frustration smouldering on from school-days?(see Hargreaves, 1967, and Lacey, 1970, for accounts of the ‘D-stream subculture’ in secondary schools).
Peter Vandome and his colleagues (1973) neatly sum up some of the pernicious side effects of competitive assessment at college level:
Students feel they will gain through the poor performance of others and suffer by imparting their own knowledge to fellow students.
In this way, a potentially rich source of knowledge — communication of ideas among students — tends to be stifled.
To the extent that it does take place, any exchange is biased by the way in which a student's ‘self-image’ and his image of his fellows is affected by their grades.
A 50% student for instance will think twice before putting forward one of his ideas for discussion with a group of 60% students.
This is relevant not only to informal interchange between students but also to tutorial discussion.
Competitive rather than co-operative behaviour may be manifested in other ways such as the ‘illegal borrowing’ of library books.
Sadly, teachers too are sometimes caught up in a competitive assessment system — perhaps even as beneficiaries.
While the students compete for honours within their class, the teacher may be looking to the class as a whole, competing with other teachers' classes, to bring him esteem and promotion.
The following quotation from Norman Conway, a grammar school chemistry teacher interviewed by Brian Jackson and Dennis Marsden (1962), shows how the competition for scarce university places (and ultimately for a better job for the teacher), especially in the context of bureaucratic mass-assessment can allow the instrumental pursuit of extrinsic rewards to drive out the expensive ‘educational side’:
I reckon I can do ‘A’ level chem. in four terms.
Four terms flat out mind.
We have to go really fast.
We have tests twice a week, but we get the results.
For instance, last year I got an open at Pembroke, Cambridge, and an exhibition at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and then I got half-a-dozen places.
I've got fourteen places in the last two years and then these opens.
I do pretty well; my results are all right.
The way we teach, we teach for results.
I want the passes, the schols and all those things.
Tests all the time, and scrub the teaching methods, forget about the educational side…
What I want now is a head of department in a really good school, and then I'd do what our head of department has done.
I'd put on the pressure, really hard.
Really work those children, tests, tests, tests, and get the results.
Get them the results they should have, and that would establish me, wouldn't it?
It would give me a reputation.
People would know that I could do the job.
I might slacken off when I got established — perhaps after ten years or so.
I might start looking round and thinking more about the educational side.
But you've got to establish yourself first, haven't you?
(Jackson and Marsden, 1972, pp. 36–7.)
The Giving of Grades
Much of the criticism of assessment is aimed at ‘the grading system’.
Thus we might expect to find that the giving of grades has a crop of side effects peculiarly its own.
This, however, is not the case.
The side effects usually blamed on grades are, in fact, those we have already seen associated with other aspects of assessment systems — emphasis on the easily-measured, unfairness, standardization, competition, extrinsic rewards.
The giving of grades no doubt aggravates and facilitates such effects but mostly they could survive in its absence.
So are grades an empty symbol, guilty by association but harmless in themselves?
Not quite.
Their special ‘sin’ is simply less obvious, being one of omission.
(Remember Sherlock Holmes's clue of the dog that didn't bark in the night?)
Grades are more to be blamed for what they do not do than for what they do do.
And what grades do not do is tell all that is known about the student's performance or abilities.
Information is lost.
Consider the assessment process.
Someone — teacher, examiner, ‘assessor’— observes the student at work, or perhaps interacts with him/her in some way, or more commonly analyses products of the student's work.
The assessor forms impressions of the qualities and attainments discernible in the student's work — his interests and aversions, hang-ups and hobby-horses, strengths and weaknesses.
These impressions he/she could perhaps spell out, verbalizing them for the benefit of the student and anyone else who has a legitimate interest in knowing how the student is seen by people close to him/her.
Sometimes he/she will do this for an individual assessment event (e.g. in commenting on an essay):
You have shown a general understanding of the assignment, but could have improved your answers by closer attention to detail.
In the first section (music) you failed to answer the part of the question that asked why the particular form used was appropriate, rather than the other forms available.
In the second section, although you noted some of the imagery and discussed it intelligently, you often moved too far away from the imagery itself and relied on an ‘outside’ view of the poem (what you thought it must be about) to interpret it.
In the final section you did pay close attention to detail, but it remained only observation of detail.
You failed to connect the various elements together or to move through the detail to the larger issues of the painting.
See the introductory section in the Unit and its explanation of the movement from meaning to form.
It is a matter of working at, responding to the detail, exploring the ‘resonances’ of the detail and moving from this to a full appreciation of the total effect.
(Tutor's comments on an Open University student's assignment, quoted in Kennedy, 1974.)
Such comments are more illuminating, particularly for the student, but also for anyone else concerned, than is a mark or grade or percentage label.
(That student's essay, by the way, was graded C.) But when the assessor is expected merely to grade the product he/she will keep such insights to him or herself.
Worse still, he/she perhaps never articulates them at all unless he/she expects to have to spell them out.
And the tutor's impressions of one student are unlikely to remain vivid after he/she has looked at the work of a few more students.
Thus his/her students will probably receive from him/her no feedback of a kind that might help them learn from his/her response to their work.
Donald McIntyre (1970) illustrates what is missing when he suggests that the ‘result’ of a pupil's mathematics exam,instead of 40 per cent, might be recorded as a ‘diagnostic profile’thus:
Has mastered ideas of variable and one-to-one correspondence; not yet clear about functions; gets confused with problems of proportions; still has difficulty in structuring verbal problems (lack of grammatical understanding?); geometry generally competent, but has not learned terminology adequately; considerable skill in analysing visual problems.
Important qualities and features differentiating one student from another are obliterated by the baldness of grades.
Thus several students who have all got the same grade may have tackled quite different problems and in quite different ways.
As a trivial example, one student may have scored five out of ten on his arithmetic test by answering the five additions correctly and the five subtractions incorrectly while his/her friend is given the same score for precisely the converse performance!
Frances Stevens (1970) in reviewing the marking of examiners in A-level English literature, compares the gradings given to two particular scripts and reveals how much information has been lost in labelling the girl C and the boy D:
Is the more optimistic forecast to be made of the dutiful immature girl who has some mildly appreciative responses, knows her books and has paid careful attention to what she has been told to think, but who has few independent ideas and writes with neither firmness nor joy; or of the mature and independent boy, who may not have studied his notes or perhaps his texts so thoroughly, but who has a sense of relevance, whose judgements are valid, who writes with assurance and betrays in his style…that he has made a genuine engagement with the literature he has encountered?
(Stevens, 1970, p. 130.)
Whether or not the assessor's criteria were exactly the same as Frances Stevens's is neither here nor there.
They are unlikely to have been less subjective — or contestable.
Translating them into a grade is an act of reification, erecting a pseudo-objective façade on what is a very delicate personal judgement.
One effect of this façade is to repel debate.
The grade seems god-given and immutable whereas the grounds on which it was decided  might seem only too human and open to dispute.
If an assessor were to respond to the girl mentioned above in the terms of Frances Stevens's assessment, he might well find her anxious to draw his attention to other qualities of her work which had been overlooked and which might revise his overall assessment.
Certainly it could lead to a valuable teacher-learner dialogue.
In the context of bureaucratic assessment, however, it could only be regarded as ‘noise in the system’.
Whether or not we are always aware of the fact, grades act like averages .
They smooth out and conceal irregularities and variability.
One essay may have both first-class and abysmal features and yet be graded neither A nor F; instead it may get a C which fails altogether in letting us know that it differs from another essay graded C which is consistently of that quality in all its parts.
Similarly, of two 60 per cent examination scripts, one may contain answers both of failure quality and distinction quality while the other is 60 per cent throughout.
And of course, the same variability may lie behind the all concealing degree class of ‘lower second’ or a diploma class of ‘satisfactory’for all we know.
In short, numbers and labels do not allow us to discriminate even between stable performers and those not infrequently found (see Stevens, 1970, p. 125)‘in whose papers near-brilliance alternates with near nonsense.
Grades, percentages and category labels are hopelessly inadequate to convey the load of meaning that we sometimes believe we are putting into them and which other people desperately try to get out from them again.
How could a single letter or number possibly tell as much, for example, as is contained in descriptive reports or profiles like those above.
There is a well known Peanuts cartoon by Charles Schulz in which a girl is sitting at her school desk querying the C-grade she's been given for her ‘sculpture’ made from a coat-hanger.
She wants to know whether she was judged on the piece of sculpture itself; and if so is it not true that time alone can judge a work of art? or was she judged on her talent; if so, is it right that she should be judged on a part of life over which she has no control?
If she was judged on her effort, then she regards the judgement as unfair since she tried as hard as she could.
Was she being judged on what she had learned about the project; and if so, wasn't the teacher being judged on how well he had transmitted knowledge and therefore should he not share the C-grade?
And finally, was she perhaps being judged by the inherent quality of the coat-hanger itself out of which her creation was made; and if so why should she be judged by the quality of the coat-hangers on which garments are returned by the laundry her parents patronize — since that's their responsibility shouldn't they share her grade?
Her teacher's reply is not recorded.
I cannot applaud the rosy vision of a senior colleague whose spirited defence of grading (and rejection of profiles) climaxed as follows:
Grading is a method of achieving a shorthand synthesis of every possible quality that one might wish to be included in a profile, consolidated into a symbol which examiners understand pragmatically with reference to a  platonic point of reference existing in the minds of a group of examiners who have worked together, while a profile, however detailed, can never be more than an attempt to put down all those qualities.
To which perhaps the only reply is St Augustine's lament:
For so it is, O Lord my God, I measure it;
But what it is that I measure I do not know.
References
Records of Achievement and the GCSE Patricia Broadfoot
The Components of Change
Records of achievement thus rank alongside GCSE as one of the major assessment initiatives of this decade, and the two initiatives are likely to find themselves increasingly running in parallel in individual institutions.
This chapter is about the significance of such a concatenation of development activity, and of the potential for links between them.
In the first part of the chapter I shall look at some of the similarities which characterize both policies and then turn to some of the contradictions which may well result in significant problems for both of the initiatives.
This analysis will also require us to take into consideration still other developments in assessment procedures which are currently taking place.
In particular it is necessary to consider the graded assessment movement, variously called graded tests or graduated assessments, and experiments with modular accreditation techniques.
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to consider in detail the strengths and weaknesses of this whole constellation of assessment initiatives.
Rather, the thrust will be to consider not the initiatives themselves, but the interrelationship between them.
The need to evaluate the impact of particular innovations is now well recognized.
Indeed the DES has currently funded a major research project designed to evaluate the pilot schemes it has funded, for example for developing records of achievement.
What is much less likely to be recognized is the importance of considering the interrelationship between these various initiatives , and certainly there is no sign as yet that such an evaluation is to take place.
What this neglect may mean is the substance of this chapter.
A Growing Consensus
GCSE, records of achievement, graded assessments and modular accreditation schemes are all manifestations of a growing consensus that quite new principles need to be enshrined in certification procedures.
The traditional examination emphasized recall of knowledge, external assessment, the ranking of pupils one against another and, perhaps most important of all, the provision of information suitable for selection.
However the changes that have taken place in society in recent decades, resulting in the rapid growth of youth unemployment, have also resulted in a greatly reduced importance of certification at 16+ for selection purposes.
A small minority of young people  now leave school at 16 to go directly into employment.
Most will stay on for an extra year at school or go into some form of further training.
The choice of that training is often more a question of guidance than of selection.
Because of this, wide support has developed for assessment procedures which are more positive and educational in their orientation.
In particular, there is a concern to design certification procedures that:
1
allow a much wider range of achievements to be acknowledged;
2
make it possible for all pupils to have some testimony to their achievement;
3
will give information to potential customers which is relevant to both theirs and the pupils' needs;
4
enhance pupils' motivation and self-esteem by providing them with an achievable goal;
5
facilitate large-scale curriculum change by being both formative and summative in its impact.
In place of a ‘sudden death’, once-and-for-all examination, is growing support for assessment which is an integral part of day-to-day teaching and learning, which helps pupils come to understand themselves better, as well as helping the outside world, subsequently, to understand the qualities of that pupil.
Both the GCSE and records of achievement enshrine many of these principles.
They are designed to be positive in their orientation, emphasizing what pupils ‘know, understand and can do’.
For this reason both are oriented towards criterion-referenced assessment in which achievement is measured against a given level of performance, rather than simply against the performance of other pupils.
In many cases, the grade criteria of the GCSE are very similar in format to the comments and grid statements used on many profiles.
Both approaches, too, emphasize the importance of teacher assessment.
Teacher assessment constitutes a significant part of the assessment in all but one of the 20 principal GCSE subjects.
Records of achievement clearly depend fundamentally on teacher-based assessment.
Both procedures reflect current government policy concerns with increasing vocationalism and preparation for working life at the pre-16 stage.
Thus there is a marked emphasis on the assessment of skills rather than knowledge in both initiatives.
For this reason, both the GCSE and records of achievement are likely to require a much wider range of assessment techniques to be employed than was normal for more knowledge-based examinations, with oral and practical components figuring significantly.
Finally, both initiatives are capable of incorporating graded assessment information; in the case of the GCSE this is most likely to be in the form of an equation on the graded assessment certificate; in the case of records of achievement such attainment will simply be noted on the record.
Nevertheless, both provide the opportunity for such attainments to be formally recognized.
Growing Contradictions
These similarities emphasize the coherence of the contemporary assessment climate.
However, if we look a little more closely, we can also detect major contradictions between the two initiatives under discussion.
First of all, while records of achievement aim to describe individuals in a sufficiently detailed way to prevent comparison between them, GCSE results are still basically hierarchical in that a series of grades is involved and pupils will still be comparable according to the grade achieved.
GCSE, like its predecessors, remains predominantly a ‘sudden death’ examination, for which there are little or no formative components, whereas the provision of regular feedback and review is becoming increasingly fundamental to profiling schemes.
GCSE is also still largely concerned with subject learning and excludes assessment of any personal or work-related qualities and skills, which is a determining characteristic of records of achievement.
In addition, while many, if not all, children are likely to take GCSE examinations in the most popular subjects of Maths and English, the examination is primarily designed for the same population as covered by O-level and CSE, namely the top 60 per cent or so.
There will still be a significant number of young people who can hope for little success from it, in stark contrast to the commitment that all pupils should receive a record of achievement.
Lastly, the GCSE requires pupils to wait for the length of a two-year course before they can know whether they have been successful, whereas a record of achievement is only the most recent and perhaps summarizing statement of progress which the pupils themselves have monitored and recorded.
These contradictions between GCSE and records of achievement may be explained quite simply since they reflect a fundamental tension in the purpose of school assessment itself.
It is widely recognized among those involved with education that one of the most significant aspects of certification procedures is that aspects of educational endeavour which are not assessed are unlikely to be taken seriously by either teachers or pupils.
During the course of the last hundred years or so educationists have progressively sold out to those who have imposed upon the education system the responsibility for attesting attainment and selecting suitable candidates.
In the later stages of schooling in particular, examination oriented work in all aspects of the curriculum aesthetic, physical, intellectual, personal, social, moral and spiritual — and the urgent necessity to cover the syllabus has resulted in many teachers  feeling constrained in their choice of teaching method and objectives.
As a result, it is common to find many of the widely supported objectives not explicitly recognized in assessment procedures.
In consequence, these objectives have been relegated, in many cases, to the hidden curriculum and pastoral concerns.
This argument is well made by the recent report on the curriculum and organization of ILEA secondary schools, which distinguishes between four aspects of achievement (ILEA, 1984).
The first — written expression, knowledge retention, organization of material and so on— is that normally  measured in conventional examinations.
The second relates more to skills the application of that knowledge, practical, oral and investigative, which figures in some examinations to a greater or lesser extent.
The third element covers personal and social skills, communication and relationships, the ability to work in groups and personal qualities such as initiative, responsibility; self-reliance and leadership.
The fourth concerns the capacity to understand and cope with one's own experiences in terms of, for example , motivation and commitment, perseverance, self-confidence and the constructive acceptance of failure.
Neither of these dimensions are explicitly recognized in public examinations.
Yet few educationists would argue that they do not figure in their overall goals for what they wish pupils to achieve or that they do not impinge fundamentally on pupils' potential success or failure.
The point at issue is whether such affective, and essentially subjective, aspects of educational and personal development can or should be subjected to formal recognition in the certification process.
Those responsible for designing and piloting GCSE have taken the view that such aspects are not appropriate, whereas the records-of-achievement lobby would argue that they are among the most important aspects of progress to record, because in the end they are likely to be the most fundamental.
In short, the contradiction between GCSE and records of achievement hinges on the question of whether the priority for 16+ assessment should be the provision of reliable information which has high predictability for the purposes of selection, or whether the primary purpose should be to reflect what has been achieved in relation to the whole range of educational goals that a school may set for itself.
This is essentially a distinction between assessment as an integral part of the curriculum and assessment which is designed primarily to be a form of communication serving the needs of the outside world.
The question therefore arises as to what the implications of this contradiction might be.
The answer to this question needs to be couched as much in curriculum terms as in assessment terms.
That is to say, whether or not records of achievement can coexist alongside GCSE or will, in the end, be defeated by it or perhaps even itself defeat GCSE will depend very largely on the curricular developments of the next few years.
Alongside the current assessment revolution are equally radical curriculum initiatives associated with a whole alphabet soup of acronyms.
The Technical and Vocational Education Initiative (TVEI) and the Certificate of Pre-Vocational Education (CPVE) are good examples of this.
Both of these curriculum initiatives are associated with trying to increase the component of industrially and vocationally relevant education taking place in schools.
Where TVEI is designed to be only a part of a pupil's curriculum in the 14–18 age range, the CPVE has, in contrast, been designed explicitly for that section of the pupil population for whom A-levels are inappropriate, but who wish to achieve some further, more vocationally relevant qualification at school.
Despite their differences, however, both initiatives are associated with an increasing interest in modular-based curriculum provision, and with forms of  assessment which can take into account the wide range of outcomes they are designed to achieve.
There is considerable variety among different TVEI schemes up and down the country but most, if not all, involve some element of profiling.
In the CPVE this element of profiling is explicitly required in the arrangements for the course.
The effect of innovations such as TVEI and CPVE is likely to be more far-reaching than is at present possible to envisage.
If, as seems likely, the trend continues for the curricular domination of individual subjects to be supplemented or indeed replaced by a more fluid organization of learning in terms of either modular units or work-related competencies, this is also likely to strengthen the support for records of achievement with or without a component of external examination.
Having said this, the question still remains as to whether such records, particularly where associated with unfamiliar curricular approaches, can successfully challenge the status of external examination certificates in the eyes of the world at large, especially parents and employers.
Any answer to this question must necessarily be qualified in terms of the type of profile concerned.
It is relatively easy, for example, to envisage a complementary relationship between a profiling system which is primarily confined to the pastoral work of a school which will then complement the more conventional assessment procedures.
This might be in the form of a joint certificate such as that envisaged in the Oxford Certificate of Educational Achievement (Willmott, 1986), or in the form of a supplementary record such as that provided by ‘pupils’ personal recording', for example(De Groot, 1986).
It is also possible to envisage successful record of achievement schemes where these are confined to a particular course such as the CPVE or some of the other externally accredited vocational courses.
These are essentially isolated from the main curricular work of a school and for those involved in them the profile has its own validity in the same way that, for example, RSA typing examinations have always done.
However, the government initiative of 1984, in which it commits itself to a policy of records of achievement for all pupils, states:
The Secretaries of State believe that the internal processes of reporting, recording and discussion between teacher and pupil should cover a pupil's progress and activities across the whole educational programme of the school, both in the classroom and outside, and possibly activities outside the school as well.
Regular dialogue between teacher and pupil will be important for the fulfilment of the first three purposes of records discussed earlier.
The summary document or record which young people take with them when leaving school or college will need to include two main components:
(i)
Information, other than academic successes, which throws light on personal achievements and characteristics;
(ii)
Evidence of attainment in academic subjects and practical skills, including any graded results in public examinations.
The summary document will need to be short, clear and concise if employers and others are to make use of it.
It cannot reproduce all the recording and reporting which has taken place during a pupil's years of secondary education.
It should however be based on this internal recording and the final summary document should help to enhance the motivation and other benefits which pupils derive from the recording system.
(DES, Welsh Office, 1984.)
This is likely to mean that this element of coexistence hitherto possible will become increasingly problematic.
A brief review of the history of the profiling and records of achievement movement will serve to underline this point.
Going Public: Coexistence or Conflict
At the outset I suggested that there has been considerable grass-roots enthusiasm to initiate profiling schemes.
In the late 1970s the early pioneering initiatives such as the Scottish Pupil Profile and the Evesham Personal Achievement Record were subject to considerable diversification by the entry into the field of various further education bodies.
The Further Education Unit of the DES itself published a seminal curriculum document in 1979 entitled A Basis for Choice , and from this radical approach to curriculum provision for further education a considerable commitment to profiling has emerged.
The ideas pioneered in many of the courses which followed on from the ABC document are now central to much of the thinking behind records of achievement.
These include the idea of joint review of progress by students and teachers, and the idea of centre rather than pupil accreditation as the basis for the external moderation of records of achievement.
The diversification that followed the entry of further education bodies into the field of profiling was also associated with the move for a more formal institutionalization of records of achievement.
In place of the school-based, or perhaps consortia-organized, profiles of the 1970s and early 1980s, there was an increasing tendency for profiling schemes to become more formally institutionalized in either a local authority context and/or in relation to an Examination Board for the purposes of validation.
Thus, in the last year or two, many Examinations Boards have become involved with collections of local authorities to form profiling consortia, for example, the Northern Partnership for Records of Achievement, based on the five Examining Boards which constitute the Northern Examining Association and 22 northern LEAs, or the OCEA initiative already referred to.
Significant also, in the last year or two, has been a variety of moves to evaluate the impact of records of achievement.
Not only has the DES funded a major evaluation programme of its own schemes, many of the local and regional initiatives are also instituting evaluation studies.
All these data will help to inform the stage of development into which the records-of-achievement movement is now moving, namely that of nationalization  following the proposals laid out in the 1984 policy statement.
It is the escalation of the profiling movement from a diverse and essentially idiosyncratic set of initiatives into a development that looks likely to be rationalized in terms of National Criteria in a very similar way to that imposed on the GCSE itself which makes most problematic the relationship between the two initiatives.
If we were simply talking about a supplementary form of school report, with or without external validation, it might be possible to envisage GCSE results as simply one component of such a report.
If, however, as seems more likely, the current trend within the profiling movement to give increasing emphasis to the formative dimension of the process continues, then the contradiction will become increasingly pertinent.
Whereas profiles were initially envisaged as a form of school-leaving report or record, and designed to fill a gap in the existing certification procedures, it is now true to say that many, if not the majority, of those involved in such developments place their highest priority on the changes such procedures will bring about within the educational process itself.
Many of the schemes currently being developed in various parts of the country are using the establishment of a record-of-achievement procedure to engage teachers in a fundamental review of their curricular goals, their teaching methods and hence their assessment criteria, with a view to stimulating a wide-ranging review of school arrangements.
The kind of novel learning environment that is characteristic of the pilot CPVE schemes now being implemented, which breaks down the traditional barriers of subjects, compartmentalized lessons and didactic teaching, may well spread rapidly into other areas of the school's work.
Teachers are likely to find themselves increasingly required to engage in one-to-one dialogue with individual pupils as the basis for periodic reviewing of academic and personal progress.
Graded assessment and modular accreditation schemes are likely to hasten this process since they too involve the erosion of traditional subject-based teaching and curriculum boundaries and require a much greater degree of organizational flexibility and ongoing review and guidance to be provided through course tutoring if they are to be successful.
Teachers are thus likely to be faced increasingly with divergent pressures.
On the one hand, GCSE requires them to develop new ways of teaching the traditional two-year subject course and, in so doing, preparing pupils with the skills required for an external exam.
At the same time, they will find themselves caught up in moves to develop new organizational procedures, new teaching situations and new assessment techniques, many of which, such as one-to-one dialogue and negotiation with pupils, they will have had little or no experience of.
The problems this situation is likely to create are considerable.
First, and perhaps most fundamental, is the problem of finding sufficient time.
This is widely recognized as one of the biggest stumbling blocks to the successful implementation of any innovation, and particularly one such as profiling which requires teachers to find time for a new kind of activity, namely one-to-one discussion with pupils, as well as completing detailed records.
In the same  way, all examinations make considerable demands on teachers' time in terms of involvement in Examination Board work, running examinations in school and subsequently marking them; but an examination like GCSE, with radically new features, is likely to involve considerably more time over the next few years for teachers to become able and proficient in its procedures.
Thus, time taken for GCSE will erode that available for records of achievement and vice versa.
The time problem is also related to the need for in-service training.
Teachers readily admit at the present time that in most cases they have had little or no training in assessment procedures, and therefore feel they lack both the skills and the confidence to take on a more responsible role in certification.
Not only will the advent of records of achievement and GCSE together make considerable demands in this respect in terms of time, it will also require teachers to engage in in-service activities for a very wide range of different assessment procedures.
The potential for confusion therein is therefore considerable.
By the same token, most record-of-achievement schemes now are actively searching for some form of external accreditation through the validation of school procedures and pupils' overall programmes.
The model on which GCSE is based is the more traditional one of moderation of individual pupil scripts.
Thus, once again, there is considerable potential for teachers to become confused between the relative demands of these two quite different approaches to moderation and caught up in a great deal of additional work.
As a consequence, they are likely to be faced with the necessity of balancing priorities — within the various demands being made upon them by the inchoate changes which characterize the present assessment climate.
In this balancing act, a number of factors are likely to be influential.
One of these is pupils' attitudes to the various rival innovations, if they cannot be coordinated together.
For any institution, it is likely that pupils' attitudes will constitute a significant factor in the success or otherwise of the innovation.
As far as records of achievement are concerned, the attitude of pupils is likely to be even more problematic, since pupils' natural concern with the currency of their certificates, and their now well-documented tendency to see schooling largely in terms of its capacity to provide qualifications (see, for example, Turner, 1984), suggests that records of achievement may not have as immediate and enthusiastic support among pupils as they do among many teachers.
The problem is one of the continuing dominance of traditional models of assessment at the same time as trying to introduce other models based on quite different educational premises.
Conclusion
The simultaneous introduction of both GCSE and records of achievement is therefore likely to render both innovations more problematic than would otherwise be the case.
Goodwill, training, time, skill and pupil support are all  likely to be in shorter supply than would be the case if there were not such a plethora of assessment innovations taking place at the same time.
Even more fundamental than these pragmatic constraints, however, is the educational philosophy underlying the two initiatives.
While two innovations embodying quite different educational values attempt to coexist it is unlikely that both will be successful.
Either schools will have to lend the bulk of their support to the organization and teaching forms which are associated with more traditional forms of assessment, or they will have to recognize the full implications of new forms of recording achievement and adjust their procedures accordingly.
In this chapter I have made no attempt to discuss why it should be that the DES has found itself in the situation of promulgating these various initiatives, or indeed how it sees the relationship between them.
The principal explanation is likely to be that so characteristic of English educational provision, where the strength of local initiatives is also a weakness; where central government's desire to support and disseminate a variety of innovative practices at the local level can lead to confusion and contradiction in national policy-making.
More cynical commentators have suggested that the government's desire to maintain traditional examinations and to introduce records of achievement as well is a re-enactment of the ‘sheep and goats’ mentality of the earlier tripartite system, with academic exams being preserved for the scholastic elite, and records of achievement serving the needs of the rest (Ranson, 1984).
Some would go further and argue that the wide-ranging emphasis of records of achievement on recording a great variety of skills and personal qualities, as well as specific attainments, is a reenactment of the old elementary school concern with civic virtue and Godliness as well as basic competence in the ‘three R's’(Hargreaves, 1986).
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to address any of these arguments.
It is likely that there is a germ of truth in them all.
Rather, what this chapter has been concerned to make clear is that the potential impact of records of achievement, as well as that of the GCSE, cannot be determined without making reference to both initiatives.
It is certainly possible that the confluence of various tides of change in assessment policy will prove instrumental in creating a wave of sufficient magnitude to bring about a revolution in attitudes to 16+ certification: of generating a degree of momentum that no single initiative could achieve by itself.
In the wake of such a wave would come the commitment to criterion-referenced, positive statements: to teacher-assessment and to a skills-oriented curriculum, identified earlier as the elements in a new certification consensus; to the principles of curriculum depth, breadth, balance and differentiation integral to the design of GCSE and also central to much of the thinking about records of achievement.
Sadly, it seems more likely that the appeal of the existing examination tradition will remain vastly superior to that of a novel and relatively untried procedure.
If this does indeed prove to be the case, one of the most significant outcomes of the GCSE is likely to be the limitations it imposes on the parallel  development of records of achievement.
Experience with an earlier version of comprehensive 16+ examination north of the border where the cutting edge of educational policy has already elevated modular accreditation into a major component of post-16 certification (SED, 1983) suggests that the GCSE, like the Scottish Standard Grade, may already be obsolete, and that they hybrid offspring of the conjoining of the norm and criterion referencing pedigree that the search for subject and grade criteria represents will satisfy no one(Munro, 1985).
Many informed commentators in England also take this view that the GCSE relates to an approach to secondary school curriculum and selection which social change is rapidly rendering inappropriate (see, for example, Nuttall, 1985).
If it does indeed prove to be the case that the GCSE becomes outmoded almost before it has begun, for the reasons discussed in this chapter, this will represent a tragic waste of scarce educational resources.
It may also prove to be the case that failure to recognize this obsolescence sufficiently early also prevented the development potential of records of achievement being recognized.
To avoid this second and ultimately much more fundamental tragedy, the relationship between GCSE, records of achievement and other assessment initiatives needs to become as much a matter for urgent discussion and evaluation as the initiatives themselves.
References