

SONY  BREAKTHROUGH ‘COULD CRAM 1.5Gb ON 2.5″ DISK’…
Sony Corp is claiming a quantum breakthrough in magnetic disk storage capacity with a new technique for improving head positioning that it claims will enable a 2.5″ disk drive to store as much as 1.5Gb — while being cheaper to make than current 2.5″ drive storing 80Mb.
It hopes to get drives using the new technology onto the market in about two years.
The trick is to apply a technique borrowed from optical audio Compact Disks and carve a tiny spiral groove in the surface that the head can follow to improve the tracking accuracy of the magnetic head.
…
IBM HOLOGRAM POLYMER COULD STORE TERABYTES…
IBM Corp has a less than impressive record in turning developments in its laboratories into commercial products, but perhaps that will change when an outsider is installed at the helm, and IBM researchers say they have developed a polymer film that can capture and hold vast amounts of data in the form of hologram images at speeds 100 to 1,000 times faster than current Winchester disk drives.
They predict that within a decade such polymer films will be able to store Gigabits of data in a film the size and thickness of a dime.
The photorefractive polymer is able to store many holograms in the same section of the material, greatly reducing the amount of space needed to store data.
The technique has been demonstrated using inorganic crystals, but organic polymers are easier to work with and much less expensive than crystals.
The scientists — from the IBM Almaden Research Centre — say the storage capabilities of the new photorefractive polymers were on the order of 100 times better than the first polymer films, which IBM developed two years ago.
The company says that it sees the new polymers eventually being used to replace main random access memory as well as rotating secondary store.
…
AS IT ADDS PS/2 MODEL, STORAGE PRODUCTS, CUTS SOME PRICES
IBM Corp yesterday replaced its PS/2 Model 90 XP 486 machines with new models that use the 80486DX2-50 and offer enhanced graphics support and ISO-compliant fonts — but as they cost $4,135 with 8Mb and 212Mb disk, $4,665 with 400Mb, they are not likely to find too many takers.
The company also enhanced its RAID-3 disk array for HIPPI channels with RAID-1 and RAID-5 capability and announced the 2.0Gb SCSI 3.5″ disk for internal use in Micro Channel PS/2s or the PS/2 external enclosure, and is $5,835.
There is a new Model 008 for the PS/2 3514 High Availability External Disk Array with base storage capacity of 3.9Gb and a maximum capacity of 13.8Gb; it implements redundant power and concurrent maintenance as well as RAID-5 architecture.
It costs a daunting $48,100 with 3.9Gb and the additional 2Gb drives are $5,835 apiece.
The Micro Channel Array Adaptor board costs $1,600.
IBM also cut prices on some PS/2 displays by up to 16%, with the 8514 colour display now $867.
PS/2 Models 56, 57, 76 and 77 prices were also cut by up to 15%.
General availability of the System/88 FTX 2.2 Unix and FTX X25 Release 5.0 has been put back to September 24 from March 26.
BELLSOUTH TO TAKE 12.5% OF FRANCE TELECOM RADIO DATA SUBSIDIARY
In what looks rather like the thin end of the wedge for eventual privatisation of the phone company, BellSouth Corp yesterday said it had reached agreement to buy a 12.5% stake in France Telecom Mobiles Data SA, a newly formed unit of France Telecom.
The new company will be involved in building and operating a mobile data network throughout France, but terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
BellSouth Mobile Data Inc will provide help on the mobile data network project, which will use Mobitex technology from L M Ericsson Telefon AB.
Service is due to start in Paris this year and in other metropolitan areas next and BellSouth will invest more than $80m in the network, which will cover 60% of the French population.
And Mannesmann Mobilfunk GmbH has been invited to join a consortium run by Societe Francaise du Radiotelephone SA which will build a rival mobile data network; its Mannesmann Eurocom GmbH unit will have a stake of about 10%.
Societe Francaise already runs one the France-wide analogue cellular telephone networks.
CRAY EXTENDS ITS C90 FAMILY DOWN TO REPLACE Y-MPs
Cray Research Inc, Eagan, Minnesota hopes that flattery will get it everywhere in Japan, and so it chose Tokyo for the worldwide launch of a range of new models in its C90 line to replace the existing Y-MP machines.
The new models are about 20% more expensive than the models they replace, but are about three times more powerful, which it reckons works out at an average 2.5-fold improvement in price-performance.
The new line includes the first air-cooled machines in the C90 series, a two-processor C92A and a four-processor C94A, which it says were developed in response to demand from Japanese commercial users.
The other models are the liquid-cooled Cray C94, the eight-processor liquid-cooled Cray C98, and an expansion of the 16-processor Cray C916 system, which was introduced way back in November 1991 and has up to now been marketed as the Cray Y-MP C90.
MAI HANDS EURO-OPERATIONS TO BANKS TO SETTLE DEBTS
Having tried and failed to find a buyer for its relatively big German subsidiary and its other European subsidiaries, a quest that was made urgent by its need for cash, MAI Systems Corp, Tustin, California has handed the subsidiaries over to its US and Canadian banks.
The banks have accepted the businesses in lieu of the full $84m the company owed them.
MAI was also released from its guarantee of the outstanding bank loans of MAI Deutschland, its former German subsidiary, which was about $8m as of March 15.
The deal will give MAI an exceptional gain of about $65m.
The new owners of the European subsidiaries will direct operations through their control of a new company, Application Systems Inc.
MAI will now consist of four independent business units operating primarily in North and South America.
The company was a victim of the mania for leveraged buyouts of the late 1980s and has been staggering under its burden of debt.
OLIVETTI PLACES ITS BETS ON WHO WILL BE THE STANDARDS-SETTERS IN THE HANDHELD WORLD
It was amidst the glare from flash-happy Paparazzi and marauding tv camera crews that Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA announced its alliance with Eo Corp, the Mountain View, California-based developer of the 440 and 880 personal communicators (CI No 2,124).
Under the agreement, Olivetti is to distribute the two new devices and has also acquired a significant minority investment in Eo though the exact figure has not been disclosed.
It seems to be a perfect partnership for both parties.
In addition to AT&T Co in the US and Matsushita Electrical Industrial Co and Marubeni Corp in Japan, Eo has gained a European distributor and possible manufacturing partner.
Olivetti, meantime, secures a second foothold in the infant personal telecommunications market, in addition to its 80% interest in Acorn Computer Group Plc, whose Advanced RISC Machines Ltd affiliate provides the RISC chip for Apple Inc's rival Newton machine.
You could be forgiven for thinking this might present Olivetti with a conflict of interest but the company sees it differently.
Hobbit
It is keen to exploit the so-called personal communications market — supposedly destined to grow from one million world users in 1994 to 100 million by 2000 — and having a finger in both pies means it wins either way.
Though the 440 and 880 personal communicators are twice the price of the Newton — the 440 comes in at $2,000 to $2,800, the 880 at $3,000 to $3,300 — Eo reckons its use of AT&T's Hobbit RISC and telecommunications technology give it an important technical edge.
Its agreement with Matsushita and Marubeni also give it important access to Japanese methods for miniaturising circuits and other such devices.
Olivetti too will add its technology to the cocktail, adapting the communicators for the European market, by  implementing DECT and Groupe Speciale Mobile cellular networking compliance for example.
The new devices, according to Eo's president and chief executive Alain Rossmann, are designed more as a replacement for the standard telephone than for standard computer, being New Age communication tools.
The Eo 440 weighs 2.2 lbs, measures 10.8″ by 7.1″ by 0.9″ and has a 5.9″ by 43″ high contrast LCD screen.
It runs at 20MHz, has a 20Mb internal drive and 4Mb RAM.
The Eo 880 is 4 lbs, measures 13″ by 9″ by 1.1″ and features a 7.6″ by 5.7″ backlit LCD screen.
It runs at 30MHz, has a 64Mb drive and 4Mb or 8Mb RAM.
At the heart of each device is AT&T's 92010 Hobbit processor.
Access to the AT&T Mail system from EasyLink Services is also provided free, providing links to Internet, CompuServe, MCI Mail, SprintMail, Novell MHS and Lotus cc:Mail mailing systems.
The operating system, which is installed in the device's ROM to avoid the need for a hard drive, is the PenPoint system from Go Corp.
This provides what Eo calls a simple ‘pen and paper’ -style intuitive interface that requires simple writing gestures rather than keyboard skills to operate — for instance to delete text you simply cross it out rather than entering a command.
Nifty handwriting recognition  algorithms can translate the user's scrawls into print — and can shrink them to fit if necessary.
And the system's built in intelligence enables it to cross check files.
Entering a name into the diary for instance can be used to trigger an address search.
A further nine ROM-installed applications are also bundled with the system: Go Mail for message swapping and simple electronic mail connection; Go Fax for connection to any Group III facsimile machine; Eo Phone for connecting a cellular phone system; Eo Sound for recording and playing voice messages; Eo Calc; the Eo Lock security system; Go Mininote, a kind of electronic Post It note; Sitka PenTops/Pen Central enables users to communicate by cable or modem to MS-DOS personal computers; and PenSoft Personal Perspective for calendar, diary, and address book.
A built in 14,400bps modem, conforming to the V.32bis, V.42 error correction, V.42bis data compression and MNP2-5 protocols enables users to send and receive faxes and connect to telephone lines.
A cable connection to the Oki Electric Industry Co 900E cellphone will enable UK users to make wireless calls and fax connections.
Serial and parallel ports provide connection to personal computers, printers and 1.44Mb external floppy drive.
There is also a keyboard port, communications port for cellular and wireless connection and PCMCIA II slot — two slots for the 880.
The 880 also has a SCSI II and VGA connection.
The products will initially be manufactured in the US, though the possibility that Olivetti could one day manufacture them in Europe, for Europe, has not been ruled out in the longer term.
The company anticipates that the personal communicator will open up new markets and will prove an ideal base to which it can add its own technology — the Digital European Cordless Telecommunications system.
It says it is looking to provide a full range of products ranging from low end consumer devices through to those aimed at users in vertical markets such as insurance or medicine.
Its sees its involvement with Eo as in keeping with its strategy of strengthening its technological and product base through strategic alliances, and as complementary to its other activities in what it calls the ‘the new telecom world’.
Take for instance, its co-operation with British Telecommunications Plc on a so-called Personal Computer for Communication that combines a multimedia computer with videophone, facsimile capability, photofax (CI No 2,120).
Indeed, as chief executive Corrado Passera pointed out, Olivetti has a history of investment in the personal communications sector.
This includes an association with Eo chairman Hermann Hauser's initial Cambridge start-up, the Active Book Company; with PenPoint developer Go Corp; with Electronic Data Interchange company Isocar Europe Ltd; with Copenhagen-based Token Ring developer Olicom A/S; and with Wireless Access Inc, a US company that develops PCMCIA telecommunications cards.
As part of its co-operation with Digital Equipment Corp (CI No 1,952) it is also co-funding research work with DEC on the ‘Active Badge’.
This is a credit card-sized device designed to transmit signals that indicate the carrier's location and enable urgent messages to be passed on.
It is contributing to the Cambridge University-based Pandora Project, a multimedia communications system based on Asynchronous Transfer Mode technology.
And its Sixcom subsidiary, in conjunction with the European Telecommunication Standard Institute and Italian Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, has developed Net-cubed, the first wireless network system to support the European Cordless standard.
It recognises that success in this new business area will be standards-led and so is backing what it predicts will emerge as the winners.
These include Apple Computer Inc spin-off General Magic Inc with its Telescript telephony system — the ‘Esperanto’ of personal communications according to Alain Rossmann, and the means by which various types of devices should be able to connect.
Ironic
In addition there is Go Corp's Penpoint; ATAT's Hobbit RISC and signal processing technology; and then the AT&T, DECT and Groupe Speciale Mobile cellular networks, which are all supported in Eo's device.
Though there is no European analogue cellular standard, Olivetti reckons that the GSM system provides a more uniform digital standard for Europe than is available in the US — an ironic role reversal given the homogeneous US analogue market.
Of course the other important contributing factor to the success of the personal digital assistant will be software.
The advantage of the pen system in Eo's machine is that it does away with the keyboard, so enabling applications to be written for all language forms — non-Roman script like Japanese or Arabic for instance.
Alain  Rossmann predicts there could soon be hundreds of small start-up companies like PenSoft Corp and the Ink Development Corp springing up.
It is in this area that the majority of jobs in the personal communicator industry will likely be created, he said.
AT&T WEIGHS INTO THE DESKTOP VIDEOCONFERENCING MARKET WITH PERSONAL VIDEO SYSTEM MODEL 70
AT&T Co has plunged into the desktop personal computer videoconferencing business with the launch of its Visual Solutions product line, committing that the products and services for business will be based on globally accepted standards for video calls over digital phone lines — under the framework of the Consultative Committee on International Telephony and Telegraphy, companies worldwide have agreed the Px64 series of standards for video transmission over digital phone lines.
The firm's new Personal Video System Model 70 enables users working in a Microsoft Corp Windows environment to see each other in a scalable video window as they talk and simultaneously collaborate on computer documents.
Users can share Windows applications, requiring that only one personal computer holds the application and files.
Both participants can make changes and annotate files with handwritten notes as they keep an eye on each other in the video window.
The Personal Video System is the first major product developed for business customers through a collaboration of AT&T Global Business Communications Systems, NCR and AT&T Microelectronics and the first to use the AT&T AVP 4000 video compression chip set, which is based on the Px64 standards for video and audio compression.
It consists of an 8510T ISDN Voice Terminal, NCR TeleMedia Connection hardware and software, a video camera unit and connecting cables, and the initial version requires either AT&T's Definity Communications System G3i, G3r, G3s or G2.2 PABXes or a digital telephone line connection to an AT&T 5ESS public telephone exchange.
It offers motion video at 10 to 15 frames per second at transmission rates of 112Kbps or 128Kbps.
Personal Video Systems must be bought in in quantities of four, starting at $7,000 per unit, with delivery scheduled for the autumn.
AT&T also will offer promotional packages for businesses that want to install new or upgrade existing Definity systems to add video capabilities.
And a new MultiPoint Control Unit, which implements Px64 standards, can be used to manage video conferences between several locations — customers can talk together at up to 24 different sites per unit, even if the locations use a variety of video conferencing endpoints, provided they meet the Px64 standard.
The MultiPoint Control Unit will be available in the fourth quarter with prices ranging from $60,000 to $200,000, depending on features and size of the unit.
GLOBETROTTER OFFERS GLOBESUPPORT REMOTE SUPPORT PROGRAMME AIMED AT SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS
Cupertino, California-based Globetrotter Software Inc, creator of Flexlm, the network licence manager, last week introduced GlobeSupport, a remote support programme aimed at software developers, which the company calls a new product category.
It enables users to access product, application and support notes; contact customer service, development and marketing groups as well as providing on-line user registration.
Developers can include support capabilities as a module directly with their products in an Internet-based client-server architecture.
The company says it can be integrated with an application in an few hours.
NEC Electronics Corp is an early user.
It is currently available under Solaris 1.0 and 2.0.
BRITISH TELECOM TEAMS WITH SUN, HEWLETT ON NETWORK MANAGEMENT
British Telecommunications Plc says it is working with both Hewlett-Packard Co and Sun Microsystems Inc to develop products that will provide customers the ability to manage complex internetworks consisting of local area networks and British Telecom's internetwork services.
The phone company reckons that while this evolution of integrated management is seen as a critical need for users, it has yet to be fully addressed by network service providers.
British Telecom says it plans to develop links between the two companies' local network management systems — Hewlett-Packard's OpenView and Sun's SunNet Manager, and its own Concert system — and chose those two companies as its first partners because it believes that between them they control about 60% of the local network management market.
British Telecom says it is considering provision of local management services in conjunction with its portfolio of managed communications services once the new products are finished: it sees commercial products and services in early 1994.
The partners will co-operate on development of products that enable users to monitor remotely and manage in an integrated fashion, both their local and British Telecom-provided wide area network services.
The computer companies will develop interfaces between their respective management systems and Concert, which will conform to the Network Management Forum's OminiPoint specifications, based on the Common Management Interface Protocol, CMIP.
The claimed benefits include rapid identification and isolation of faulty local network segments, dynamic control of network capacity, and integrated monitoring of performance parameters of both the internetwork and the local network.
Users will be able to order additional services and report faults direct to British Telecom service centres, and its Syncordia Corp will also offer facilities management services.
INTELSAT SIGNS TO LICENSE TRANSPONDERS ON THREE PLANNED RUSSIAN SATELLITES TO MEET ASIAN CAPACITY CRUNCH
The International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation, Intelsat, owned by some 120 nations worldwide, is under such pressure to increase capacity that for the first time, it is to lease capacity on three satellites that it does not own.
According to the New York Times, Intelsat has signed with Informkosmos, a satellite company formed by the Russian Federation, to lease capacity on three new satellites that are due to go into orbit by the end of next year.
Intelsat plans to take the capacity as a stop-gap while it awaits delivery of 10 new birds over the next four years.
Intelsat has already had to stretch the lives of six older satellites over the Pacific Ocean and last summer repositioned a satellite over Indonesia to increase capacity.
But these satellites provide only patchy service in some areas, which is why it requires capacity on the Russian satellites to meet the soaring demand in Asia.
GLOBAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES MANAGEMENT ‘IS FLAWED CONCEPT’— REPORT
Global facilities management is a flawed concept, according to a new report from Analysys Ltd of Cambridge, UK, and in the future, services will be positioned as managed network services, virtual private networks or bandwidth on-demand services.
The report also suggests that multinational users now have the clout to force service providers to cut their prices.
The report, Global Service Provider Market Strategies, identifies five companies as ‘truly global service providers’— British Telecommunications Plc and its Syncordia, AT&T Co, Cable & Wireless Plc, MCI Communications Corp and Sprint Corp.
Of these, only Syncordia still positions its service as facilities management — the management and operation of all or part of a private network by an outside agency.
But the report suggests that all these companies will experience increased competition from new market entrants, such as international simple resale providers and infrastructure providers.
According to Andrew Entwhistle, principal consultant and author of the report, ‘Such organisations could undercut the global service providers by offering cheaper solutions for specific parts of the user's network’.
This applies particularly in Europe, says Analysys, where prices are higher than in North America.
The report says that European regulation has opened markets to competition, so that users are less dependent on their national phone monopolies and can insist on competitive bidding.
Analysys suggests that, in particular, users can put pressure on prices by resisting attempts by service providers to impose confidentiality on prices, and by being prepared to use information from one service provider to get a better deal from another.
The report warns service providers against offering global ‘one-stop shopping’ services, as they may then find that the more attractive routes or services are picked up by other types of provider with cheaper offerings.
It predicts that prices will continue to fall, both for basic capacity and for value-added services.
This will bring about an increase in the number of high-capacity international links, just as domestic high-capacity links have become more common in the UK and the US.
Analysys also highlights the way telecommunications operators are making formal or informal alliances to create their service offerings, and suggests that distinct groupings are emerging — the most notable being the one established between MCI, France Telecom and Deutsche Bundespost Telekom.
ZILOG OFFERS PERIPHERAL ADAPTOR CHIP FOR MAKERS OF PCMCIA PERIPHERALS
Zilog Inc, Campbell, California has come out with a new chip designed to enable manufacturers of mass storage and peripheral boards to enter the PCMCIA card market quickly.
The Z86017 general purpose peripheral adaptor provides the PCMCIA bus interface and control logic needed to implement peripheral functions such as hard disk controllers, Flash memory cards, facsimile modems, keyboards, and local area networks on a PCMCIA card; the Z86017 will function over a 3V to 5.5V power supply, includes a 256-byte attribute memory for defining which function the card is designed to implement, and costs $7 in large volumes; samples are out now.
XEROX ENGINEERING SYSTEMS IMPROVES SUPPORT FOR ITS PRINTERS AND PLOTTERS
Xerox Corp's Xerox Engineering Systems in Rochester, New York has come out with network server software that supports all industry-standard files, including PostScript, and Ethernet and non-Ethernet local networks for printing on all its raster printers and plotters.
ServeWare 2.0 is designed to facilitate client-server plotting and software rasterisation, enabling architects and engineers to use a Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstation to process Adobe Systems Inc PostScript CGM, CCITT Group IV (tiled and untiled), TIFF 5.0, HP-GL, HP-GL/2, CalComp 906/907, ASCII and VDS/VCGL files for printing on all Xerox raster printers and plotters.
PostScript interpreter
The PostScript interpreter is claimed to outperform systems using clones of PostScript interpreters and provides 51 Type 1 PostScript fonts compared with  to the 35 offered by competitors.
As well as Ethernet, the software supports NetWare, DECnet, Network File System, 3270 Coax and Token Ring networks.
It enables users to rasterise plot files on their Sparcstations for faster output on the plotter, particularly useful for dense files, Xerox says.
It also eliminates the need for an RPM or embedded controller on the plotter.
And with ServeWare, a single server can be connected to as many as three plotters and can run them simultaneously.
It is directory driven so users can customise their network, setting up separate directories for say AutoCAD files and Catia files.
A plot queue management system for batch processing organises plotting by media types or for scheduling large plot jobs during off hours.
Operation is unattended.
It requires 16Mb of memory and 207Mb of available hard disk space.
The base system is $4,150, software rasterisation is $3,000 and the VDS/VCGL, HP-GL, 907, CGM and CCITT data-file converters are sold in sets for specific plotters, at $1,000 per set.
The PostScript converter is $4,000.
The Xerox Model 6991 turnkey system bundles ServeWare 2.0 with a RISC-based server and is priced at $12,000.
The company has also added an improved parallel interface that enables users to produce hard-copy graphics on its plotters from AT and EISA architecture personal computers running networked or stand-alone.
The Model 110B, an updated version of the Model 110A supports all 80486 class machines and HP/Apollo DN3000 and 4000 workstations, and supports Windows on AT bus machines through third-party products.
The improved interface enables for faster plotting than the 110A and at a lower price — up to 4Mb per second on EISA units and 1.5Mb per second on AT bus machines.
Direct Memory Access operation is provided.
It will be out next quarter; no price.
The company also has a version, the 116, to enable users to connect Xerox Engineering Systems controllers and plotters to with Sun workstations using the Solaris operating system.
The Solaris version of Unix uses multitasking, multimedia object management facilities and is able to build true client-server applications, which can be exploited by the Model 116, which transfers eight bits of data in parallel and also performs byte-to-byte handshaking for increased data integrity.
It supports data transfer rates of up to 600Kb per second, depending on configuration.
It ships next quarter; no price was given.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
AT&T Co said yesterday that it plans to call five long-term debt issues  totalling $1,750m for early redemption and expects to use cash reserves and new debt to fund the exercise — with interest rates so low in the US, new debt is cheaper than most old debt; one-time costs associated with the redemptions are expected to reduce first quarter 1993 earnings by about $0.04 per share but interest savings in subsequent quarters will reduce the full-year impact to less than $0.02 per share.
Three issues were called yesterday for redemption on April 22 — $300m of 8.625% debentures due April 1 2026, to be redeemed at 105.79% of par plus accrued interest; $350m of 7.125% debentures due December 1 2003, redeemable at 101.59% of par plus interest; and $500m of 7% debentures due February 15 2001, redeemable at 100.75% of par plus interest.
The two remaining issues, to be called today and redeemed on April 23 are $300m of 9% Eurodollar debentures due March 17 2016, redeemable at 107.2% of par plus interest; and $300m of 8.875% Pacific Telephone & Telegraph (now Pacific Bell) debentures issued due to mature July 1 2015 — AT&T assumed financial responsibility for the payment of principal and interest on these debentures under the break-up pact, and has asked Pacific Telesis Group's Pacific Bell redeem the debentures; they will be redeemed at 104.84% of face value plus accrued interest.
Jabil Circuit Inc, St Petersburg, Florida contract board and systems level manufacturer, has filed to go public with an initial offer of 3.375m shares, 500,000 of them new, at a target price of between $10 and $12 per share.
Net proceeds of $5m or so will be used to repay debt.
Bear, Stearns & Co Inc and Unterberg Harris will co-manage the offering.
OTHER FINANCINGS
Personal Computer Products Inc, based in San Diego, California, says it has raised $500,000 with a placing of convertible notes to a group of European banks.
The notes bear interest at 5% a year, and are convertible into common stock at $1.50 a share; they are due and payable on December 31 1995.
Net proceeds will enhance its cash positions as its Laser Printer Accessories Corp unit launches its doubleRES 4 add-on product for Hewlett-Packard Co LaserJet Series II and Series III printers.
CREDIT RATINGS
Bell Atlantic Corp's Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Co of West Virginia has had a fillip from Standard & Poor's Corp, which raised its senior unsecured debt rating to double-A-plus from double-A, affecting about $265m of debt, the move being made in the expectation that the company's network modernisation and supportive regulation will help it to improve an already strong debt service capacity.
Tricord Systems Inc, building servers in Plymouth, Michigan got its initial public offering of 3m shares, 2.5m of them new, away at $11 a share, and plans to use the $25m or so net proceeds to repay debt and for working capital.
The offering was via underwriters managed by Robertson, Stephens & Co LP, and Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co Inc.
CrossCom Corp, Marlborough, Massachusetts developer of routers, principally the ILAN for linking Ethernet and Token Ring networks, has filed with the US Securities & Exchange Commission to offer 1.5m shares of common stock, 1.17m of them new, to raise an indicated $30m or so after expenses in new cash for the company.
CrossCom says that it plans to use the net proceeds for new product development and for working capital.
Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, Cowen & Co and Wessels Arnold & Henderson will be underwriting the offering, the firm said.
COMPANY RESULTS
Comverse Technology Inc has reported net profits for the year to December 31 up 99.4% to $4.9m, on turnover that rose 75.2% at $38.4m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted for a one-for-ten consolidation on February 26 rose 117.6% to $0.37 in the year.
Data Translation Inc has reported a first quarter net loss of $983,000, up from a loss last time of $603,000, on turnover that rose 10.9% at $8.6m.
Engraph Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 10.4% at $2.6m, on turnover up 11.2% at $61.5m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 28.1% at $10.2m, on turnover that rose 13.9% to $235.4m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted for a 5% stock dividend last time paid in December 1992, rose 16.7% to $0.14 in the quarter, 26.2% to $0.53 in the year.
Comparisons are with restated figures.
Ikos Systems Inc has reported first quarter net losses of $1.6m up from losses of $548,000 last time, on turnover that fell by 4.3% to $3.2m.
Mentor Corp has turned in third quarter net profit up 113.6% at $2.7m, on turnover up 28.4% at $31.1m; net profit for the nine months was up 101.2% at $8.2m, on turnover that rose 29.6% to $87.4m.
Net earnings per share rose by 100% to $0.24 in the quarter, and by 94.7% to $0.74 in the nine months.
Micronics Computers Inc has reported first quarter net profit down 28.6% at $2m, on turnover up 11.5% to $42.3m.
Net per share fell by 30.8% to $0.18.
QVC Network Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 109% at $18.9m, after $1.1m losses from payment of debt this time and $868,000 last time, on turnover up 21.4% at $341.8m; net profit for the year to January 31 was up 180.7% at $55.1m, after $1.5m losses from payment of debt this time and $2.1m last time, on turnover that rose 16.1% to $1,070.6m.
Net earnings per share rose 73.9% to $0.40 in the quarter, 103.3% to $1.24 in the year.
Scan-Optics Inc saw fourth quarter net losses of $195,000 against profits of $73,000 last time, on sales down 3.2% at $10.2m; net losses for the year to December 31 stood at $1.6m against profits of $689,000 last time, on sales down 10.6% to $37.9m.
Stanford Telecommunications Inc saw third quarter net down 13.5% at $630,000, on turnover up 4.8% at $21.6m; net profit for the nine months was down 73% at $681,000, on turnover that fell 4.5% to $66.6m.
Net earnings per share fell 13.3% to $0.13 in the quarter, and 72.5% to $0.14 in the nine months.
Torotel Inc has turned in third quarter net profit down 89.2% at $24,000, on turnover down 21.6% at $m; net profit for the nine months was down 29.6% at $474,000, on turnover that fell 10.1% to $7m.
Net earnings per share fell 87.5% to $0.01 in the quarter, and 29.2% to $0.17 in the nine months.
Varian Associates Inc has reported first quarter net profit down 13.2% at $6.6m, on turnover down 4.2% to $291.3m.
Net per share fell by 10% to $0.36.
The 1992 figures were reported at 14 weeks.
VMX Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 76.8% at $1.7m, on turnover up 22.4% at $21m; mid-term net rose 83% to $2.9m, on turnover up 19.6% at $40.5m.
Net earnings per share rose 75% to $0.07 in the quarter, and 71.4% to $0.12 in the half.
Trace Computers Plc has reported net profits for the six months to November 30 down 52.0% at £105,000 on turnover that fell 9.0% at £8.8m; at the pre-tax level, profits fell 52.5% at £105,000 and earnings per share fell 49% to 0.78 pence.
MAINFRAME SALES OVERSHADOW IBM IMPROVEMENTS
The first quarter is not even over yet, but already Merrill Lynch & Co analyst Daniel Mandresh is lowering his estimate for IBM Corp's 1993 earnings (before the inevitable charges)— and yes, his forecast has gotten from rotten to worse: he is now going for a range of 50 cents to $1.00 a share from a previous $1 to $1.50, saying poor mainframe sales continue to overshadow the improvements in other areas.
FOUR TO MODERNISE BULGARIAN TELEPHONE SYSTEM
Four companies — Siemens AG, L M Ericsson Telefon AB, Alcatel NV and Northern Telecom Ltd will share a $230m project to modernise parts of Bulgaria's telephone system: the quartet has been approved by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the European Investment Bank; the project is to digitise trunk and international telephone lines, as the first phase of a more thorough modernisation.
RETIX PROFITS LIKELY TO BE LOWER THAN ANALYST EXPECTATIONS
Santa Monica, California-based Retix Inc warns that it expects net profit and turnover to be below analysts' estimates for its first quarter ending April 3: it expects operating results to be hurt by delays in releasing product enhancements for its RouterXchange 7000 series of routers to volume production, including support for IBM's Token Ring network environment; sales may be down up to 15%, and it may only break even or even worse.
HOLDING FOR NEW PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICE
Southwestern Bell Corp and the Panasonic unit of Matsushita Electric Industrial Co Ltd have developed a new personal communication service but we all have to wait until next Tuesday or Wednesday to find out what the service will be.
IBM BOARD MEETING COULD END SPECULATION
The fact that IBM Corp has scheduled a board meeting for next Tuesday has analysts speculating like mad that the company may name its new chief executive after the meeting: the only name now being tossed about is that of Louis Gerstner, chairman and chief executive of RJR Nabisco Inc, who shot to favourite in the betting after USA Today reported that talks between IBM and Gerstner had gone as far as discussion of a compensation package.
COMPUADD CUTS PRICES ACROSS PRODUCT LINE
CompuAdd Computer Corp, Austin, Texas cut prices across its product line by as much as 23%: the EISA-based CompuAdd 466EDX2 tower unit now costs $3,800, and the CompuAdd 433DX configured in a desktop power chassis is now $2,600; the CompuAdd 466DX2 configured in a desktop power chassis is down 23% at $3,000.
CONNER REORGANISES AROUND MARKET GROUPS
Conner Peripherals Inc has reorganised around four market groups — an OEM products group to market disk drives, tape drives, storage management software and storage systems to computer manufacturers, a distribution products group to market the same products to distributors and resellers, a storage systems group, formerly Maynard Electronics, will market bundled hardware and software primarily to corporate end users, and a software products group will market storage management software to personal computer users and network administrators through retail and OEM channels and build on its product development relationships with major operating system companies.
CRAY TAKES ORDERS FOR SMALLER SYSTEMS
Cray Research Inc, which says its scaled down C90s (see front) start at $3.25m, reports that it has taken five orders for the smaller systems and is in discussions with more than a dozen other prospects; an eight-processor version C98 will be leased to the San Diego Supercomputer Center in the fourth quarter; the model starts at some $12m.
ANALYSTS BRACED FOR TULIP RESULTS
Tulip Computers NV is scheduled to announce 1992 figures tomorrow, and Amsterdam analysts are bracing  themselves for a flood of red ink.
HARRIS AND SHENZEN TELECOM EQUIPMENT FORM JOINT VENTURE
Harris Corp, Melbourne, Florida has formed a telecommunications joint venture with Shenzhen Telecom Equipment Co: Shenzhen Harris Telecom Co Ltd to manufacture and sell Harris's low- and medium-capacity digital microwave radios and will integrate them with other systems.
BULL TO RE-EXAMINE LABOUR MANAGEMENT CONSULTATION
France's Labour Inspection department has asked Compagnie des Machines Bull SA's management to ‘re-examine entirely the procedure for informing and consulting’ the company's labour-management committee on its procedure for the ‘social treatment of excess employees,’according to a report in the French business journal Les Echos: the paper says a letter dated March 19 criticises insufficient and imprecise information communicated by Bull and the absence of a plan for voluntarily reclassified employees.
MANNESMANN MOBILFUNK SUBSCRIBER BASE AHEAD OF PLAN
Mannesmann Mobilfunk GmbH says that it now expects its subscriber base to reach 200,000 next month, ahead of plan, but still expects the level to be between 300,000 and 350,000 by year-end; it is still looking for profits in 1994-95.
IBM TO CLOSE GALLERY OF SCIENCE AND ART
IBM Corp has shocked all Manhattan — or at any rate New York's chattering classes — by announcing that it is to close the Gallery of Science & Art, an extremely popular gallery for visiting art exhibitions in the basement of its tower on Madison Avenue: it says it will try to find the seven employees of the gallery other jobs in the company, without holding out very much hope.
TRACE TURNOVER FALL AS PLANNED
Trace Computers Plc blames the fall in turnover for the six months to November 30 (figures, see page five), on a planned reduction in the scale of its computer supplies business, where turnover fell by nearly £1m; the company managed to shave £122,000 from its administrative and operating costs; the original businesses of insurance broking systems, property management systems and bespoke software development have continued to prosper, the company says, and the Proteus distribution systems business, consolidated on its return to profits last year; Trace Financial also made a small profit and there was interest in the BlueChip stockbroking product; the group is still investing about £2m a year in research and development — with some contribution from its customers; the Pink networking technology company had a disappointing half year, turning in a small loss after having made a profit last year.
CABLE & WIRELESS CUTS STAKE IN DIGITAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS PHILIPPINES
Cable & Wireless Plc has cut its stake in Digital Telecommunications Philippines Inc to 25% from 40% because of problems at another local affiliate: the company recently won a contract to operate a state-run telephone system in Luzon island; an unidentified foreign group is to take up the stake.
NTT FOREIGN PROCUREMENTS EXPECTED TO SHOW INCREASE
Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp says its procurements from foreign firms in the year ending March 31 are expected to show a 23% increase to $850m, the highest since 1981.
TELEFONOS DE MEXICO TO EXTEND TELEPHONE NETWORK
Telefonos de Mexico SA says it plans to add 846,000 new telephone lines to the country's network in 1993, install 30,000 pay telephones and extend its fibre optic network.
CADAM SHRINKS TO ALTIUM
If in doubt about what to do next, keep yourself busy by going around and changing all the name plates: in a move scarcely calculated to do much to restore battered confidence in the company, IBM Corp's shrunken Cadam Inc, the Burbank, California company that now confines itself to the microcomputer versions of the computer-aided design software, has changed its name to Altium, effective immediately: it says the Altium name is part of its plan to secure the unit's position in the desktop market and ‘a part of the larger renewal’ of IBM.