

FORGET NT — WINDOWS 4 SOUNDS LIKE THE KILLER…
All the hype surrounding Microsoft Corp's Windows NT has drawn attention away from the fact that the real monster seller that for at least its first two or three years of life will relegate NT to niche product status is Windows 4.0.
Being developed alongside MS-DOS 7.0 under the code-name Chicago, Windows 4.0 is expected next year.
It will incorporate the functionality of Windows for Workgroups, and will include its own native 32-bit file system and device drivers integrated with a Windows kernel so that it will not technically require MS-DOS to run, although it may be packaged so that MS-DOS 7.0, which will also include the 32-bit features, has to be installed first.
But Windows 4.0 will support the full Win32 application programming interface, and will include pre-emptive multi-tasking, and it will also have a user interface that is similar to, if not identical to the parallel Cairo object-oriented development effort.
Windows 4 will also  include release 2.0 of Object Linking and Embedding, and should run most NT applications.
MS-DOS 7 will have full 32-bit internals but no 32-bit programming interface, InformationWeek reports, because, Microsoft says, developers have taken advantage of so many 16-bit MS-DOS features that moving to a 32-bit programming interface would be virtually impossible.
Cairo is now being described as the next major release of NT, and may well be the release that the market waits for before deciding to commit to NT.
It will include graphical interface enhancements and offer a distributed object-oriented file system.
As for NT, Microsoft is back describing it as primarily a server operating system, and acknowledging that vendors are unlikely to bundle it with more than about 10% of the desktop machines they ship.
Meantime Microsoft will launch MS-DOS 6 next Tuesday, March 30.
…
AS NOVELL PRE-EMPTS MS-DOS 6 WITH NOVELL DOS 7
Anticipating Microsoft Corp's launch of MS-DOS 6 next week, Novell Inc yesterday previewed DR DOS 7, which will include integrated NetWare client support, peer-to-peer networking, a network management agent, network installation, pre-emptive multi-tasking, enhanced memory management and desktop security, and protected mode drivers.
The company is calling the thing Novell DOS 7, and says it will be available in the summer.
The company claims that the new release will also continue to provide the best foundation for Microsoft Windows by offering Drag-and-Drop network resource capabilities.
DOS Protected Mode Services is an application programming interface that enables device drivers and terminate and stay resident programs to reside in extended memory and execute in protected mode on 80286 computers and up, greatly reducing demand for conventional memory.
The applications programming interface is available now as a Software Developers Kit at $200, and Novell DOS 7 will include several Protected Mode Services client components including disk cache and compression drivers, a peer-to-peer server, and CD-ROM extensions.
No firm date or price was given for DOS 7.
APPLE ANNOUNCES STRING OF NEWTON LICENSEES, TECHNOLOGY SUPPLIERS
Apple Computer Inc said yesterday that it is licensing its Newton personal digital assistant technologies to a number of companies in an effort to make Newton a pervasive standard’ available to the computer, consumer and telecommunications industries.
As well as Sharp Corp, companies to be involved with Newton include Motorola Inc, Siemens AG, Cirrus Logic Inc, Kyushu Matsushita Electric Co and LSI Logic Corp.
As well as the agreement under which Sharp will license the ARM chip used in the Newton, Motorola will make a handheld device running the Newton operating system, and Cirrus will develop Newton-compatible chip sets for use both by licensees of the Newton operating system and by Apple itself for use in members of the planned Newton family.
It will apply low voltage and mixed-signal technologies to liquid crystal display control, small-form-factor PCMCIA interfacing, digital wireless communications, data and facsimile modems, audio, and mass data storage.
LSI will also manufacture an application specific integrated circuit for Newton, and Kyushu Matushita Electric says that it licensed the Newton operating system for use in future products.
And as reported, Siemens Private Communications Systems Group plans to develop NotePhone, combining Siemens-Rolm telephony and Newton to provide telephone and facsimile.
OLSEN BACK ADVISING SERVER COMPANY
Digital Equipment Corp founder Ken Olsen is back in business advising Modular Computing Technologies Inc, a Concord, Massachusetts server company formed by former DEC staff.
OLIVETTI SHOWS ACTIVE BADGE IDENTITY SYSTEM, MULTIMEDIA
Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA's hot property for the Cebit computer fair in Hannover this year is the Active Badge system, an infra-red badge developed at its Cambridge research laboratory here in the UK and designed for access control and location applications.
The company also launched a line of multimedia personal computers and a bubblejet printer.
The Active Badge is designed as an interface between wearers and buildings, acting as a paging, tracking and monitoring tool.
It is about 1.5″ square and incorporates an application-specific integrated circuit developed at the Cambridge lab.
It operates by exchanging infra-red signals with a network of sensors installed around the building, which are in turn connected to an Ethernet.
The sensors are effective over distances of up to 50 feet.
Olivetti has configured the Active Badge to be MS-DOS- and Windows-compliant and is looking for software developers interested in developing applications for it.
Installing a monitoring system in a 135,000 square foot building for 50 to 70 employees would cost $200 to $250 per person.
The new M6 Suprema line of multimedia machines consists of three 80486-based Pentium-ready models with local bus-connected graphics subsystem and audio subsystem with Microsoft Corp's Windows Sound System.
The JB250 bubblejet printer for word processing and graphics does 300 dots per inch and three pages per minute and has 13 resident fonts; it is around $400 and arrives May.
LEGENT OUTLINES ITS STRATEGY TO BECOME TOP DOG BY 1997 IN AN OPEN SYSTEMS WORLD
Legent Corp is aiming to make it big in systems management.
At present the Vienna, Virginia-based company is ranked around number seven in the league table of software companies, having seen revenues of $426.7m in 1992.
But it is looking to grow by 20% each year, its sights set on overtaking arch-rival Computer Associates International Inc — presently three times its size — and taking the number three position by 1997.
Such growth, according to president and chief executive John Burton, will depend on Legent being ‘the premier technology management company — what a software company should be’.
In the down-sizing 1990s, this essentially means providing the glue that will make disparate mainframe, client-server and network systems co-function.
It is an aim that Legent recognises it cannot realise alone, and it will duly continue along the path of strategic acquisitions to broaden both its human and technological asset base.
Turmoil
We can all expect at least one announcement along this line in the next six months, followed by another two or three by the year-end, Burton said.
The turmoil caused by IBM Corp's fall from grace, Burton explained, has presented Legent with an ideal opportunity.
Apart from diehard customers in banking and insurance, few users are now content to invest enormous sums in potentially ‘unsafe’, proprietary Big Iron.
They are shopping around, they are downsizing and they are looking to integrate heterogeneous computing systems — which is precisely where Legent feels is strengths lie.
Ironically, the advent of de-centralised processing has made the work of the corporate data processing department harder.
Though no longer the sole data providers which was their previous role, data processing departments now need to function as enablers, responsible for co-ordinating various computer systems.
It is a responsibility that has resulted in the revival of the importance of the data processing department — a shift not lost on Microsoft Corp, Lotus Development Corp and Borland International Inc which have all been attempting to play down their ‘shrink wrapped’ status with corporate licensing deals and the like.
What customers need though, according to Legent, is a broad range of expertise, preferably from a single, independent source — like itself.
Admittedly, Legent made its name as a mainframe software house but, Burton says, the proportion of revenues generated from non-mainframe sales is set to rise from around 25% last year to 40% this year and 50% in 1994.
Meantime, through a successful series of acquisitions, it now has its hands on several key technologies, enabling it to interface with a broad spectrum of systems.
For instance, the Galaxy Application Environment licensed from Visix Software Inc last October provides it with the means to communicate with major graphical user interfaces such as Windows, Motif and Open Look.
The Pipes Platform licensed from PeerLogic Corp interfaces with the LU6.2, TCP/IP, IPX/STX, OSI, LU2 and LUO protocols.
And the recent deal with Tivoli Systems Inc (CI NO 2,107) has given it access to SQL and object-oriented database tools.
In addition it will continue to foster strategic partnerships, such as its system development project with Microsoft, alignment with Novell Inc being an obvious choice.
Legent has identified a number of priority areas that it will be seeking to address according senior vice-president, product development Bob Yellin.
For instance there is electronic software distribution, an area that Legent reckons is set to explode over the next five years.
‘Object viewing’, whereby users assemble compound documents from various files on the desktop and, linked to this, file transfer.
Here, Legent is to use the technology it acquired as a result of its acquisition of New York-based Spectrum Concepts, and is due to release a package capable of distributing files across 18 environments this summer.
There is terminal emulation — with appropriate security — and, similarly, scheduling.
Distributed scheduling, with departmental servers acting as individual data centres, needs to be organised at end user level, also with appropriate security.
Networked printing is another area, along with hardware and system back up, over centralised servers and stores, together with other maintenance issues.
These include communication the corporate help desk, probably with the help of remote diagnostic probes.
Such devices will relay information about the kind of hardware and software systems used by individuals and supply status reports to the help desk and will also assist with software licensing.
Kutnick
Analyst Dale Kutnick confirmed Legent's vision, talking of the eventual need for 100 MIPS performance on the desktop, through a combination of user interface, network connections, five to six applications and then the hooks into a shared operating system to help facilitate management.
Around 20% to 25% of desktop space could be use for management alone, he speculated.
He predicted that, in the next five years, distributed computing management would become a major driving force among large corporate users.
The market could well generate around $3,000m to $5,000m and grow some 25% to 30% a year.
He reckoned mainframes are likely to decline — but not fade away completely — eventually functioning as clients alongside mid range Unix systems, local networks and workstations in the greater scheme of things.
As has already happened with the recent Microsoft, Hewlett-Packard Co, Sun Microsystems Inc and Santa Cruz Operation Inc he believes vendors could well look to develop strategic interfaces and operating systems that conform to the maximum number of standards.
Helping to provide these interfaces — so-called middleware — will be crucial and signals the need for software companies to become increasingly service orientated.
Legent, he said, has a head start over Computer Associates in this respect.
If it can retain its customers' faith it could achieve the leadership position it covets by 1997.
SANTA CRUZ OFFERS PENTIUM HARDWARE DEVELOPERS EARLY ACCESS TO ITS  OPTIMISING C COMPILER
Responding to our piece on Power Now, the Santa Cruz, California company's Pentium initiative (CI No 2,129), the Santa Cruz Operation Inc says that it is less important to re-compile the operating system than the applications software, which tends to be more numerically intensive.
Santa Cruz is accordingly to offer software developers interested in Pentium an advanced technology release programme that includes an early-release version of the Santa Cruz Optimising C Compiler, designed to generate binaries taking advantage of the forthcoming Intel chip, and also run on the 80486.
Santa Cruz also says it believes Intel Corp's assurances that up to 200,000 Pentium chips will ship this year.
Santa Cruz says that run as-is on the Pentium, applications performance will be improved by up to 54%.
Recompiled applications will run up to 130% faster on the 66MHz processor.
The 80486 applications will run 27% faster when the compiler has been used.
Power Now, and the Intel Pentium, are being highlighted at Cebit Fair in Hannover this week.
BRITISH TELECOM FACES BIG HURDLES IN ITS BID FOR A US LICENCE FOR INTERNATIONAL VIRTUAL NETWORK SERVICE
British Telecommunications Plc's formal application to the US Federal Communications Commission for permission to resell international private line services and offer switched services is now under review, and approval would enable the UK company to provide International Virtual Network services in the US.
Permission to offer switched services is unlikely to be denied, but the resale of International Virtual Network services will present more problems, as US carriers feel that they have been denied reciprocal access to the UK, where interconnect, access-deficit and leased line charges are higher than in the US.
The Federal Communications Commission recently restricted dominant carrier status to operators that carry services to the US from countries where they dominate.
British Telecom falls into this category, but is looking to have its dominant carrier status revoked.
Diane Cornell, chief of international policy with the Commission's Common Carrier Bureau, confirmed, ‘There are some aspects of the application that we would expect to receive opposition — especially the request that it be treated as a non-dominant carrier’.
Approval will partly depend on whether or not the UK Department of Trade & Industry opens up the market for international simple resale to the US.
But Ms Cornell said that it was ‘not just a case of quid pro quo’.
If approval is given, British Telecom plans to provide these international service on an end-to-end basis, as opposed to the more usual correspondent basis.
The service will include features such as authorisation and account codes, customer-defined call handling and dialling plans and corporate calling credit cards and directories, as well as customised bills and reports.
The network will initially support global voice, voice band data and circuit switched digital data services via dedicated or switched access.
British Telecom says it intends to acquire the necessary international private lines from US common carriers and their overseas correspondents.
The first service would probably be Project Cyclone, the gestating international extension of the UK public switched network, over which the company would run its International Virtual Network service.
Spare capacity would be resold to other British Telecom units, which could offer a variety of services over the network.
Ms Cornell could not say how long the approvals process is likely to take.
But she said that many of the issues involved are also raised by licence applications from Advanced Computer Communications Inc and Alanna Corp, which are already being considered.
MEGATEK EXTENDS ITS X-CELLERATOR FAMILY WITH EXPRIX CL ACCELERATOR
Megatek Corp, San Jose announced the newest member of its X-Cellerator family, a $1,500 Esprix CL accelerator supporting multiple workstation users on a single Sparc CPU, enabling for independent users on a Sparcstation 10.
The CL also provides Sun's new Classic and LX boxes with a low-cost graphics accelerator.
Performance equals 1m two-dimensional vectors a second.
Megatek casts the widget as a cost-effective alternative to colour X-terminals.
It is compatible with X Window and OpenWindows applications.
Shipments will begin next month.
MCI AND SUN's SUNCONNECT JOIN FORCES TO EXTEND SUNNET MANAGER IN WIDE AREA NETWORK MANAGEMENT
MCI Communications Corp, Washington and Sun Microsystems Inc's SunConnect communications software subsidiary have announced a development agreement to target the wide area network management market.
MCI's support is a boost for SunConnect.
While SunNet Manager is widely used in local network-based and local network interconnect environments, it has so far had little support in wide area networking and telecommunications, where Hewlett-Packard Co's OpenView is seen to have won greater interest.
The system will also compete with British Telecommunications Plc's Concert and AT&T Co's Accumaster systems — although British Telecom has just announced alliances with both SunConnect and Hewlett (CI No 2,134), as well as the Hermes-based enterprise-wide management systems that is under development by Infonet Corp and Microsoft Corp.
The two companies say they plan to incorporate SunNet Manager, SunConnect's distributed network management system, into HyperStream, the name umbrella name that MCI gives to its Frame Relay, Switched Multi-Megabit Data Services and broadband ISDN networks.
The idea is to use HyperStream's customer network management service, HyperScope, with the SunNet Manager software to monitor and control high-speed wide area virtual data networks.
The two companies claim the agreement will mean that customers switching from leased line services to local network interconnect systems will be able to maintain the level of control over their internetworks to which they have become accustomed.
SunNet Manager includes a set of applications for automated fault isolation, diagnosis and network monitoring and control.
A range of third party applications is also available, providing analysis capabilities and visual displays.
X WINDOW, UNIX?
IT SCORES, BUT IT JUST ISN'T CRICKET
The English cricket season is almost upon us, and things will never again be the same.
And we're not just talking about all the matches in the venerable County Championship being four-day events — so much more of an event than a three-day match.
No, the revolution this season is much more fundamental, consigning to the annals and archives of the game all those beloved green-ruled score books with their lines and squares and numbers carefully laid out to register every ball in best pencil.
This season, the scoring system is going high-tech thanks to a joint venture between Goole, Humberside-based press agency Computer News Services and the Test and County Cricket Board.
The new system, which should be in place by the end of this month, will replace the current pen and paper score sheet method with 30 laptop computers — one for each scorer — connected to a database.
It runs on Compaq Computer Corp Contura notebooks, complete with colour screens and internal and using BSD 386 Unix with X Window software, and has been designed with user friendliness in mind since the nation's cricket scorers are largely computilliterate 70- to 90-year-olds.
Mouse clicks
Scorers will use mouse clicks to mark off, on-screen, details like where each ball bowled landed, whether a run was scored, whether a wicket fell, and which players caught which batsmen out.
This information is electronically mailed back to a central Sun MicrosystemsInc database and a Compaq personal computer, held in Computer News Services' offices.
A second copy of the database will also be held, at a secret location, to ensure security.
The new system will not only provide subscribers with up to the minute, page-ready results but will offer cricket coaches a means of analysing players' performance — for example a batsman's record against certain bowlers.
The money raised from subscription to the new service, will be used to recoup the £140,000 that was spent developing it.
WOSE MAY NOT BE FAR BEHIND COSE
With the COSE Common Open System Environment agreement only just signed, sources are saying that a further agreement may be only 30 days away on WOSE — the Windows Open Systems Environment — which perhaps will be based on the technology Sun Microsystems Inc has been fostering from Praxis Corp.
REAL POWER BEHIND COSE
Sources say there were only really four companies behind COSE: Unix System Laboratories Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co, IBM Corp and Sun Microsystems Inc: beyond that, says the source, Santa Cruz Operation Inc had to fight to get in and the Open Software Foundation was not a party to the negotiations; but the real power behind the throne, although it doesn't want it to appear that way, was of course Novell Inc.
ACTORS UNABLE TO STATE THEIR ROLE
Although some wags were touting COSE as Advanced Computing Environment II last week, the six principal actors describe their effort as neither a consortium, an initiative, a development company or a replacement for anything — and they will not set prices for anything.
SUN HAVE ACCEPTABLE MEANS TO OFFER MOTIF PRODUCTS
Adoption of Motif application programming interface specifications by X/Open Co Ltd offers a politically acceptable means for Sun Microsystems Inc to offer Motif products on its price list for the first time: its SunSoft Inc subsidiary plans to market Santa Cruz Operation Inc-owned IXI Ltd's Motif toolkit under a deal already signed and due to be revealed soon; subsequently SunSoft will offer a combined ‘MoLook’ -type COSE toolkit in first half 1994.
ALTERNATIVES FOR DEVELOPERS
Although developers will in future be able to go to X/Open Co Ltd for Motif specifications without having to pay a royalty to the Software Foundation, few, given the associated development costs and resources, are likely to choose this option — most, the Software Foundation hopes, will pick up its COSEied-up implementation of Motif.
COSE PRODUCTS UNCLEAR
Despite there being a demonstration of COSE desktops at the announcement last week — which included drag and drop between Motif and Open Look applications — what the resulting products will actually be remains unclear until the specification is released, and that is now expected to be sooner than the end-of-June timeframe that was given.
COSE ‘DASHBOARD FOR UNIX’
Drawing on an often-used analogy with the automobile industry, SunSoft Inc president Ed Zander believes that with COSE, suppliers now have ‘a dashboard for Unix.’
HP GENERAL MANAGER UNSURE OF GALILEO RECEPTION
Gary Eichorn, general manager of Hewlett-Packard Co's workstation systems group said he didn't think COSE in its initial guise would be enough to meet demands of users like the Galileo group, pressing for a generic common front end.
SCO NOT WILLING TO BE DRAWN ON SCHEDULE
Santa Cruz Operation Inc declined to put a timeframe on delivery of its own COSE-compliant products — it wants to see the specifications first — but its IXI Ltd division expects to be first to market with a compliant desktop manager; moreover, Santa Cruz is said to be toying with the idea of doing some kind of COSE implementation to run over Microsoft Corp's Windows NT.
AGREEMENT AT THE ELEVENTH HOUR
Although the idea of COSE has been kicking around for more than a year now, it was the possibility of missing the opportunity to be a part of a very public announcement on the opening day of the UniForum show that finally drove some of the parties to the table — and final agreement was reached barely 48 hours before Wednesday 17, opening day of the San Francisco event.
OSF HAS BEEN SUBMITTING MOTIF TO X/OPEN REGULARLY
The Open Software Foundation has apparently been submitting Motif to X/Open Co Ltd on a regular six monthly basis over the last three or four years, sources are saying.
COSE SUPPORTERS
Support for COSE came from across the industry, including Adobe Systems Inc, Autodesk Inc, Computer Associates International Inc, Computervision Corp, Convex Computer Corp, Cray Research Inc, Electronic Data Systems Corp, Fujitsu Ltd, Hitachi Ltd, ICL Plc, Ingres Corp, Mead Corp, the Object Management Group, Oki Electric Industry Co, Oracle Corp, Samsung Electronics Co, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG, Stratus Computer Inc, Sybase Corp, Toshiba Corp, Unisys Corp, Unix International and XSoft.
COSE INTERFACE WILL NOT AFFECT INDIVIDUAL UNIX PLANS
Hewlett-Packard Co, IBM Corp and the rest of the Common Open System Environment companies were quick to step forward and stress that their collaboration on the interface does not affect their Unix operating system plans in any shape or form.
DEC FINALLY AGREES TO MARKET MACs IN THE US
It has taken an awful long time to come to fruition — and appears to have needed the departure of founder Ken Olsen to come to fruition, but Digital Equipment Corp is finally to start marketing Apple Computer Inc Macintoshes to major companies in the US, mirroring the arrangement the two companies have had for some time in Europe.
The two say the partnership strengthens their abilities when jointly proposing systems integration projects, and provides corporate customers with a streamlined purchase path and greater support for DEC and Apple integrated systems.
DEC has added a team of Macintosh specialists to its support centres, and it will also offer consulting services, systems integration and support in compliance with Apple's Vital architecture.
They will also maintain and build on the PathWorks program and develop new services for Mac clients.
Education and government markets are excluded.
UNIVEL HALVES UNIXWARE PRICES TO COUNTER MICROSOFT
Those drastic price cuts instituted by Univel Inc last week (CI No 2,128) are being seen as response to the nervousness engendered by Microsoft Corp's Windows NT, the most threatening vapourware ever to descend on the market.
NT entered its second round of beta testing last week but could still miss its targeted June 30 shrinkwrap deadline, and remains officially unpriced.
Like a cat with its prey, Microsoft has been toying with its competition, threatening to hang a predatory $100 introductory price on the stuff.
It has talked vaguely of pricing the NT client somewhere between $200 and $500 and the NT server somewhere under $5,000.
However, it has also recently suggested a tag of only $1,000 for the server.
Microsoft is also figuring on almost immediate street discounting, since it will push NT through retail channels like the Egghead Inc chain of stores.
Apparently spooked, Univel cut its prices, attempting what it called a pre-emptive strike.
It claimed, perhaps hollowly, that NT had yet to impact its business.
However, both its UnixWare client-side Personal Edition, now $250, and its Application Server, now $1,300, are immediately affected.
Software Development Kits have been cut 40% to $600.
Microsoft's have been going at $70.
SAGE REVAMPS PEER-TO-PEER MAINLAN SYSTEM FOR WINDOWS AND MAC, ADDS MAC STERLING +2, NEW VERSION OF SOVEREIGN
Newcastle-on-Tyne-based accounting software house Sage Plc is looking to tap the Windows and Mac markets with its revamped peer-to-peer MainLan system and the promised Mac version of its mid-range Sterling +2 system.
Also has a so-called ‘super enhanced’ version of its modular high-end Sovereign package for MS-DOS, MS-DOS networks, Unix, Xenix and AIX.
These announcements were accompanied with the news that the Sovereign and Sterling +2 products now enjoy the privilege of being listed under the IT Recommended Product Scheme run by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
The arrival of MainLan Version 4 is perhaps the most remarkable of Sage's hat trick of product enhancements given that UK and European MainLan sales fell some 49% last year (CI No 2,068) and that the Florida operations of MainLan Inc were duly closed.
However, Sage feels the system has its attractions for small businesses, particularly if they intend to network Sage software and want guarantees of system compatibility.
And so it follows that most MainLan sales will likely result from software sales.
The new system will run under MS-DOS or Windows, transmits at a faster 10Mbps than its predecessor and takes up a fifth less memory space: 37Kb on a satellite, 46Kb on a server.
Re-worked for the Macintosh
Also it is compatible with Novell Inc NE1000 and NE2000 and Western Digital Corp as well as Sage's own PocketLan Ethernet boards.
It supports up to 60 people and costs £400 for a starter kit comprising operating software, cabling and two 16-bit boards; or £200 for the kit including two 8-bit boards.
The new Sterling +2 software marks Sage's first excursion into the Mac market.
The system is based on the same engine as its predecessor, and has been re-worked for the Mac in such a way that it is almost identical in processing sequences, Sage says.
The original release date had been January this year but it took longer than expected to complete the re-write and ensure there were no bugs.
The Bookkeeper version, which logs customer details — what they buy, when they buy, how much they owe and for how long, creates VAT returns and sales and overheads breakdowns is available from Sage for £150.
The Accountant version that includes budgetary control and management reports is £350.
For larger, corporate users Sovereign 4.7 now adds full European Community VAT reporting, all reporting relating to sales transactions with other Community  countries and automatic production of Community Sales Lists and monthly Statistical Supplementary Declaration.
Profit and loss reporting has been expanded to 26 available fields, stock take procedures  improved and bank  reconciliation made faster.
A pop-up Note Book is also available at any point in the system and Hint Fields for more complex data entry.
The system costs £350 per module for single users; £600 for multi-user systems.
Upgrades are available to existing users through the SageCover support scheme.
Sage now grandly claims itself Britain's largest micro software company having been listed eighth in Romtec's January 1993 analysis of the Top 15 software companies in the UK, behind seven US firms.
It reckoned to command some 52.7% of the UK accounting software market in November 1992, with Sage Sterling holding 62.5% of the integrated packages market and Sage Sovereign 12.6% of the modular accounting systems sector.
What is more, it is in the pleasant position of operating in what is now the fourth most important UK application software market after word processing, spreadsheets and graphics.
Some 8.1% of UK micro software sales are accounted for by accounting software.
Personal computer packages are a real boom area because of the influence of Windows, networks and the growing numbers of home computer users, according to technical director Graham Wylie.
Romtec forecasts that sales of the Windows version of Sage's flagship Sterling product will overtake those of the MS-DOS version by year-end.
Sales of its Moneywise single ledger package for managing household or small business accounts are also galloping.
Needless to say, the company organises its own accounts on Sovereign software, running on a network of 100 personal computers attached to an 80486 server.
Sovereign can be adapted according to customer needs and there are now 80 staff on the Sage Hotline to offer support — though it reckons three quarters of the 2,500 daily calls it receives relate to business rather than technical problems!
The company employs around 550 people worldwide, including 220 in the UK, and boasts 100,000 registered users in the UK including British Telecommunications Plc, BP Oil, Royal Mail and the Ministry of Defence.
FOCUS ON IBM's FIRST QUARTER, WARNING FROM AMDAHL, SEND IBM SHARES SPIRALLING
The period of calm after the year-end 1992 figures were out of the way and digested ended with a bang this week as Wall Street woke up to what we have been flagging over the past month — that estimates for IBM Corp's first quarter performance were far too high, and that virtually no business was being done.
The appointment of a non-computer person, Louis Gerstner, as the new chief executive, now regarded as a near-certainty, did nothing to improve sentiment, and late on Tuesday, the shares tumbled $3.125 to $51.125, fuelled by a profits warning from Amdahl Corp.
Most analysts have now cut their first quarter forecast, and the views now range from a loss of 64 cents a share to a profit of eight cents — and David Wu of S G Warburg has gone out on a limb with forecast $0.80 a share loss.
Adding to IBM's performance woes is that a demoralised workforce has clearly been freewheeling since John Akers announced in January that he was stepping aside, which will make the job of the new man at the top all the harder.
Meanwhile Amdahl says that while it believes that there is still strong demand for its mainframes, demand is proving erratic.
It expects a loss for the first quarter and the loss will be substantially larger than analyst estimates — the average forecast has been for a loss of two cents a share on turnover of $565m — a figure the company says is way too high.
Amdahl also cited intense price competition and its shares lost $1.50 to $6.50.
As for Gerstner, IBM is coming under pressure from the Securities & Exchange Commission to make an announcement to prevent a false market in the shares.
According to Reuter, he is known on Wall Street for his prowess as a cost-cutter and an asset-seller, a reputation that is likely to cause consternation among IBM employees already facing lay-offs for the first time in the company's history.
‘There no great conviction that he is the right one,’ said Michael Metz at Oppenheimer & Co.
‘My guess is there's a lot of skepticism on whether this guy can do the job.’
TULIP's $8m LOSS FOR 1992 IS BETTER THAN EXPECTED; DUTCH WORKFORCE CUT 21%
Den Bosch, Netherlands-based Tulip Computers NV reported a loss — the first in its history — of about $8m for 1992, and said it is cutting out the dividend, but the shares improved about 8% after the company said that it expected better 1993 results — and the loss was not as bad as had been feared: analysts had seen a loss of as much as $13m.
The company says it is pinning its hopes on new products and reorganisation measures that it has implemented.
‘Improvement in the economy, the level of interest rates and foreign exchange rates will be decisive for the degree to which an improvement of our results can take place,’ the company said.
Turnover fell 23% to about $180m, but that was in part because the company sold its Compudata retail subsidiary, which contributed $23m to 1991 turnover.
Tulip said it was faced with an exceptionally strong erosion of prices and margins in 1992, aggravated by currency movements.
Tulip expects the reorganisation measures it has implemented will trim its costs significantly, with 92 of the 420 Dutch staff being laid off.
It saw a slight recovery of demand for its products by the end of 1992 and during the first months of 1993.
ACORN BEGINS TO PROSPER WITH £1.3m; ARM CHIP AFFILIATE IS AHEAD OF PLAN
Reporting profits of £1.3m, up from just £300,000 last time, Acorn Computer Group Plc says that although there was pricing and therefore margin pressure across the industry, its differentiated technology and focus on value for the customer enabled it to maintain strong gross margins.
Interest charges fell to £200,000 from £700,000.
The company reckons that it maintained its position as the leading supplier of computers to UK education, and established itself as an important supplier to the home market, and made good progress in Australia and New Zealand through the subsidiaries there.
On Advanced RISC Machines Ltd, where it held 46.15% as at December 31, the Cambridge company says that it continues to meet all major targets.
The newARM 250 chip integrates the ARM 2 processor with all the other controller chips into one small device, and is at the heart of Acorn's low and mid-range machines.
The ARM 600 will of course be used to drive Apple Computer Inc's Newton and the interactive multiplayer designed by 3DO Inc.
There is a new VIDC 20 video controller, which can display up to 16m colours, and a new ARM 700 series of the CPU is now under development.
Although the company lost an indicated £35,000, Acorn says that its financial results are ahead of plan.
For the future, Acorn says that in the professional arena, powerful systems are being developed its computers, and it will co-ordinate and exploit this opportunity in key areas such as the professional publishing market.
Acorn says that major shareholder Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA is wholly supportive of its strategy and the plans developed to implement it.
COMPANY RESULTS
Computer Identics Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits down 32.5% at $351,000, on turnover up 3.7% at $6.3m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 15.1% at $875,000, on turnover that rose 6.5% to $22m.
Net per share fell 40% to $0.03 in the quarter, and rose 12.5% to $0.09 in the year.
Fibronics International Inc has reported fourth quarter net losses of $16.8m, after $9.6m restructuring charges, up from losses of $2.2m last time, on turnover down 11% at $14.3m; net losses for the year to December 31 stood at $25.2m, after $10.7m restructuring charges, up from losses of $3.3m last time, on turnover up 0.7% to $54.3m.
Marcam Corp has reported first quarter net profit down 53.5% at $658,000, on turnover up 37.8% to $22.8m.
Net per share fell by 52.9% to $0.08.
Verifone Inc saw fourth quarter net profits up 32.9% at $7.5m, on turnover up 18.1% at $62.5m; net profit for the year to January 1 was up 28.2% at $24m, on turnover that rose 20.3% to $226.1m.
Net per share rose 28% to $0.32 in the quarter, 24.4% to $1.02 in the year.
Figures were released at 14 and 53 weeks in 1992 and at 13 weeks in 1993.
Tulip Computers NV has reported a net loss for 1992 equivalent to $8.0m against a profit last time of $8.9m, after an extraordinary charge of $1.1m this time and an extraordinary gain of $2.1m last, on turnover that fell 19.1% at $177.7m.
The figures have been converted at $0.545 to the Dutch guilder.
Acorn Computer Group Plc has reported net — and pre-tax — profits for the year to December 31 up 378% at £1.3m on turnover that rose 17.6% at £48.2m.
Earnings per share rose 400% to 2.0 pence.
SIEMENS NIXDORF FOLLOWS OLIVETTI
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG indicates that it is to follow Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA in offering Eo Corp's Eo 440 and Eo 880 personal digital assistants — and presumably it will buy a stake in Eo too.
IBM HAVANT TO GO IT ALONE?
Gossip on the IBM UK Ltd grapevine has the company's Havant disk drive manufacturing operations becoming a separate subsidiary: does this mean that there are plans to float it?
EC BEGINS TALKS WITH PHONE MONOPOLIES
The European Commission opened talks with the heads of the national telephone monopolies yesterday about its plans to deregulate telephone service across the Community by 1998: after the two-day discussions, the Commission will decide whether to formalise proposals calling for and end to national monopolies over all call transmission; the usual row is expected between free traders like the UK, the Netherlands and Denmark and opponents in France, Belgium and Italy, Reuter reports from Brussels; France Telecom and Belgacom said the plans were too ambitious, the Dutch and British Telecommunications Plc indicated support ahead of the talks.
GERSTNER ‘HAS LEARNED AN AWFUL LOT ABOUT OUR BUSINESS’— AT&T CHAIRMAN
A surprising expression of regret that Loius Gerstner might get the top job at IBM Corp comes from AT&T Co chairman Robert Allen: Gerstner is on the board of AT&T and Allen said he would regret losing him: ‘I'm sorry to lose him — he's a very good director, asks good questions, has good financial knowledge and experience,’ Allen said, ‘and I'm sorry to say has learned an awful lot about our business in a short period of time,’he added.
VODAFONE TO ENCOURAGE RETAIL OUTLETS
Vodafone Group Plc said yesterday it is to encourage the setting up of retail outlets that will offer a full range of cellular phones and after-sales service: it is not allowed to sell direct itself, but will jointly fund refurbishment and shopfitting of high street outlets with service providers and hopes to have 170 stores operating across the country by summer next year; it looks to spend £10m over two years and aims for a shop on every major UK high street and up to 25 within the M25 London orbital motorway.
$27m PC CONTRACT FOR DEC
Digital Equipment Corp reports a $27m contract for personal computers and services from Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co: under the five-year deal, DEC will provide hardware, software, installation and maintenance for the next generation of the firms business management system.
BT TO GO TO SEVEN-DAY ROUND THE CLOCK WORKING
British Telecommunications Plc is seeking to introduce rolling seven-day round the clock working to improve productivity, the Evening Standard reports, suggesting the plan will meet stiff opposition.
NEC LOOKS FOR SUPERCOMPUTER BUSINESS
In face of spending cutbacks in the Japanese private sector, NEC Corp is trying to drum up business for its SX-3R supercomputers by cutting monthly rental rates on 10 models in the family by up to 38%: it says it sold only eight of the things last year, down from 14 in 1991.
CABLE TV OPERATORS TO APPLY FOR PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK FREQUENCIES
Six UK cable television operators, Comcast Ltd, General Cable Ltd, Diamond Cable Ltd and three of the Baby Bells, Nynex Corp, Pacific Telesis Group Inc and Southwestern Bell Corp are coming together to apply for the Personal Communications Network frequencies freed up by the merger of the Unitel consortium with Mercury Personal Communications Ltd: the companies want licences to offer the cellular service within their franchise areas, CommunicationsWeek International says.
DOMINO PRINTING SCIENCES TRADING BELOW EXPECTATIONS
Cambridge ink-jet printer maker Domino Printing Sciences Plc told the annual meeting yesterday that despite the strong finish to 1992, first quarter trading has been below expectations and this was bound to affect interim results: in particular, sales in the US were unexpectedly slow during the first three months coinciding with the change of administration, it said.
BOBERT BOSCH/NORTHERN TELECOM JOINT VENTURE
Robert Bosch GmbH and Northern Telecom Ltd have joined forces to establish a transmission technology joint venture, expected to include Synchronous Digital Hierarchy kit.
BOSCH PLANS 1,000 TELECOMMUNICATIONS CUTS
Bad news is that Robert Bosch GmbH said it planned to cut more than 1,000 jobs in its telecommunications division to take it to just over 37,000; 3,700 jobs went in 1992.
GERMAN SYSTEM UNDERMINES COMPETITIVENESS
Worse news for complacent Germans is that Chancellor Helmut Kohl told parliament yesterday that Germany must overhaul its social, economic and educational systems if it is to remain a leading industrial power: Germany has the shortest working week, the oldest students and the youngest pensioners among industrial countries, and that this undermines competitiveness —‘a successful industrial nation, a nation with a future, cannot be organised like a collective amusement park.’
ALACTEL LAUNCHES MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM FOR UK FREIGHT SERVICES
Alcatel Network Systems UK Ltd says it is launching a mobile communications system for UK freight services to link vehicles via satellite to their home base using its Euteltracs mobile system which provides two-way text communications between a mobile unit and its base, and position tracking and group messaging; the service is similar to electronic mail and airtime costs are similar to cellular phone costs; a mobile kit comprising antenna, the communications unit and keyboard should sell for £4,000; the system uses Qualcomm Inc's technology.
SPANISH WEATHER FORECASTERS ORDER CRAY C94
Cray Research Inc reports that Spain's national weather forecasting and climate research centre has ordered a Cray C94 supercomputer: terms were not disclosed, but a C94 starts at $6m: the system will be installed at the Instituto Nacional de Meteoreolgia in Madrid.
O2 TECHNOLOGY SIGN PARTNERSHIP WITH INGENIA
O2 Technology SA, the object-oriented database start-up in Versailles, says it has signed a partnership agreement with Paris-based Ingenia SA, a consultancy specialising in object-oriented technology, artificial intelligence and man-machine interfaces: under the non-exclusive agreement, Ingenia will sell O2 to its clients in the  defence , agro-chemical and automotive industries; O2 is an object-oriented database that has yet to make its mark as a commercial success; an O2 spokeswoman said Ingenia has great expectations of the potential of O2 to be used for a large number of its applications.
DREXLER BELIEVES SONY HAS INFRINGED ITS PATENTS
Mountain View, California-based Drexler Technology Corp says it has informed Sony Corp that it believes Sony infringed its patents with a a new eight-track Dynamic Digital Sound system to be introduced this summer in Columbia Picture's ‘Last Action Hero’ movie: Drexler has two patents on the reading of high density optical data in a strip format and believes the two patents may be infringed each time digital sound from the movie track is played back using the Sony system.
IMPROVEMENT IN ERICSSON PROFITS EXPECTED
L M Ericsson Telefon AB says it expects ‘considerable improvement in profits in 1993’: it expects the strong order intake seen last year to continue despite a recession and notes that orders for Ericsson's mobile systems, which grew by 58% in 1992, are expected to grow by around 60% in the current quarter.
PEN COMPUTING MAY BE JUST THE THING FOR MID-RANGE SYSTEMS IN CHINA
There is no great demand for pen computing from Western users of mid-range systems, but things are rather different if you happen to be Chinese — and 1,200m people in the People's Republic alone are — and are constrained to use thousands of ideographic characters, and Communication Intelligence Corp, Redwood Shores, California has gone to IBM Corp for an OEM agreement on its AS/400 computers and plans to fit the terminals with its PenDOS and Handwriter Recognition System software and integrate the machines into its pen-based computer product line being designed for China; Communication Intelligence plans to market its Chinese pen-based office automation system through partnerships with the Chinese government, with the first out in 12 months.
NEWBRIDGE AT THE FOREFRONT OF ATM TECHNOLOGY
Newbridge Networks Corp is at the forefront of Asynchronous Transfer Mode technology according to analysts contacted by Reuters: ‘No-one else is shipping true ATM switches and they've already shipped 60 switches,’ Terry Murphy, a senior analyst at Smith Barney Harris Upham & Co said, adding that because no-one will need the sort of capacity offered by Asynchronous Transfer Mode transmission systems until later in the decade, Newbridge has bought itself a virtual insurance policy by leading in deployment.
FULCRUM ANNOUNCE SQL TOOLS TO ACCESS TEXT INFORMATION
Fulcrum Technologies Inc, Ottawa, Canada reckons that it has the industry's first suite of SQL-based tools that enable corporate information professionals to access text information and make it available throughout an organisation for use as a strategic resource: Fulcrum says SearchTools offer the first means by which corporate developers, working within an open client-server environment, can build text-retrieval applications for accessing large text applications and give them a way to integrate text-intensive data into existing corporate information management, image or database systems; the tools feature an applications programming interface based on the SQL Access Group's Call Level Interface; the tools will initially be available for Microsoft Corp Visual Basic and Windows developers, as well as for C developers working in other environments, such as OS/2 and Unix; initial Unix support will be under AIX/6000, HP-UX and Solaris; the SearchTools development kit starts at $7,500 per copy and the indexing and retrieval component, SearchServer, will be from $1,000 per user.
ROMANIA INAUGURATES INTERNATIONAL DIGITAL EXCHANGE
Romania inaugurated an international digital exchange in Cluj, in the Transylvania region, as part of a long-term project with Siemens AG to upgrade communications systems: the EWSD exchange has 6,600 international lines and will be expanded to 25,000 lines next year; it was built by Emcom, a Romanian firm set up in 1990 where Siemens holds 49%.
SOUTH KOREAN DOMESTIC ELECTRONIC COMMS COMPANIES ALLOWED ROOM TO  MANOEUVRE 
The South Korean government said that all domestic electronic communications companies will be freed to operate voice mail and wireless data communications services later this half: the communications ministry said it planned to reinforce financial and tax support to foster these sectors, currently dominated by Korea Telecom before it opens the market to foreigners next year.
TANDY PLANS EUROPEAN EXPANSION
Tandy Corp's Computer City subsidiary plans to expand in Europe this year: it already has superstores in Stockholm and Copenhagen and plans at least one more in Europe this year, although it's not sure where; Computer City — one step down from Tandy's Incredible Universe fun palace stores — will open its 19th US superstore on April 1 in the Boston area and plans to open 16 new US superstores a year for the next three years for a total of 66.
TI INTRODUCES MICROWRITER
Texas Instruments Inc has introduced its microWriter light-emitting diode page printer family for MS-DOS and Macintosh users: the microWriter PS23 comes with 23 Adobe Type 1 fonts at $730; the microWriter PS65, with 65 Adobe Type 1 fonts is $1,000 and the microWriter, which offers HP LaserJet II compatibility, sells for $1,300.
NOVELL AND DEC PLAN NETWARE 4.0 FOR ALPHA
Novell Inc says that under its agreement with Digital Equipment Corp for joint development, marketing and support a native implementation of the NetWare operating system for DEC's Alpha AXP chip (CI No 2,131), the plan is to release a version of NetWare 4.0 for Alpha some time in 1994, although software development kits will be ready by the end of this year; DEC has worked with Novell since the middle of the 1980s, and the two have also worked together to integrate DEC's Pathworks personal computer integration software with NetWare.
PROGRESS RELEASE FOR ALPHA
Progress Software Corp is to release a Digital Equipment Corp OSF/1 version of Progress for Alpha AXP systems next quarter, and the Bedford, Massachusetts company has introduced a gateway to the Sybase SQL Server, including support for Sybase stored procedures and database triggers; it is out this month on Sequent Computer Systems Corp and Sun Microsystems Inc hardware, with Data General Corp AViiON, Hewlett-Packard Co HP 9000 and IBM Corp RS/6000 versions next quarter.
HP TO SELL McDONNELL DOUGLAS INTERNATIONAL BANKING SYSTEM
Hewlett-Packard Co has signed up to sell McDonnell Douglas Information System Ltd's International Banking system: the PRO-IV IBS package includes software for front, middle and back office systems and is modular and well-integrated, says McDonnell — Hewlett will offer it on the HP 9000 Series 800 Unix line.
MONEY DOWN THE DRAIN
Under co-founder Steve Hui, Fremont-based Everex Systems Inc, now trading under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, spent millions of dollars trying to produce clones of Apple Computer Inc's Macintosh and Sun Microsystems Inc workstations and an expensive computerised drafting table without ever getting them to market, according to United Press International; former managers have also complained anonymously that Everex management frequently ordered more components than it needed in order to get lower prices, the wire service says.
ITOCHU TO BUY THAI TELEPHONE STAKE
Japanese trading giant Itochu Corp, formerly C Itoh, will buy a 3% stake in Thai Telephone & Telecommunication Co Ltd from Loxley (Bangkok) Ltd for an undisclosed sum; Loxley currently holds 25% and Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp has 20% of the company, which has a 25-year concession from the government-owned Telephone Organisation of Thailand to install and run 1m lines outside Bangkok and suburbs.
WORDPERFECT 4.2 FOR AS/400 AVAILABLE THROUGH IBM UK
Wordperfect Corp's WordPerfect 4.2 for AS/400 is now available in the UK through IBM UK Ltd: upgrades will be offered in the future, along with Wordperfect 5.2 for OS/2, later this year; WordPerfect for the AS/400 can be integrated with IBM's Office Vision/400 Version 2 v.II and Query 400, is compatible with WordPerfect personal computer documents and can be merged with the AS/400 relational database; it can be integrated with Facsimile Support/400 and uses the workstation controller's text assist function to provide a more personal computer-like interface.
KAMCO HAS NEW MULTIMEDIA PC
Uxbridge, Middlesex-based Kamco Computer Systems Ltd has a new 33MHz 80486-based multimedia personal computer, available from April, and for standard personal computer users, a multimedia kit comprising Sony 31A CD-ROM drive, MX 16-bit stereo sound board, microphone, two loudspeakers and three CDs: the new machine has a Cirrus VESA local bus board, 15″ monitor, 170Mb hard disk drive, 4Mb memory and comes pre-loaded with MS-DOS 5 and Windows 3.1; it is £1,900; the kit is £400.
PSION COMPATIBLE RANGERDISK3 INTRODUCED
Northampton-based portable computer peripherals supplier Ranger Computers Ltd has introduced a new version of its RangerDisk3 personal computer compatible floppy disk drive for use with Psion Plc Series 3 handheld computers: it is intended as more convenient means of backing up or transferring Series 3 files than Psion's Comms Link; RangerDisk3 has its own version of MS-DOS and connects to the Series 3 via a Psion serial adaptor; it can be used with the 128Kb and 256Kb models; the operating software is built in so avoiding the need for program installation on the Series 3; file transfer is by the XModem protocol; it is £200 from Ranger.
IBM TAKE THE BISCUIT
They're saying that after all IBM Corp has been through, hiring a guy from RJR Nabisco Corp really takes the biscuit, and Reuter sums up the new round of IBM woes succinctly: the headline on Tuesday night read 24MAR93 USA: IBM TUMBLES ON MAINFRAME CONCERN, GERSTNER.
20:56 GMT