

DEC TO OFFER ALPHA, PENTIUM PERSONAL COMPUTERS AT SAME PRICE
With both the Intel Corp Pentium processor and its own Alpha RISC chip ready to enter the personal computer market this year, Digital Equipment Corp is expected to get around the problem by offering parallel lines of nearly identical systems based on the two chips, US PC Week reports.
But, the paper reckons, DEC will artfully slant the two lines to give the Alpha machines the price-performance edge.
DEC will invite users to choose between Pentium- or Alpha-based systems with the same configuration and prices, but the Alpha machines will offer higher performance — DEC will offer an Alpha machine with a 150MHz CPU at the same price point as a 60MHz Pentium system.
The 60MHz Pentium has been rated at 58.3 in the SPECint92 integer performance rating and 52.2 in the SPECfp92 floating-point rating.
The 150MHz Alpha chip rated 74.3 and 125.1 respectively on the same benchmarks.
The chips are expected to cost about the same when in volume production.
NOW AT&T LOOKS FOR AN INFORMATION SERVICES FIRM IN WHICH TO INVEST
For its next investment, AT&T Co says it is looking to buy into an information services company providing things like news, share price quotes and sports statistics, but the  company declined to name prospective partners, saying any deal is far from closing.
The company sees the move as complementary to its stakes in Go Corp and Eo Inc, General Magic Inc and 3DO Inc.
The company says that it wants to have a hand in computing, video, telephony, wireless and information technologies as these activities converge.
WANG COMPLETES SALE OF TAIWAN UNITS TO PRESIDENT
The President Group of Taipei, Taiwan has effectively paid about $150m for the Wang Laboratories Inc operations in Taiwan.
President has increased its stake in Wang Laboratories Taiwan to 100% from 30% and bought a 51% stake in Wang Industrial, which manufactures personal computers.
President, which includes President Enterprises, Taiwan's biggest processed food company, made the purchases through its affiliate, Rong Chen Investment.
Rong Chen will pay Wang less than $300,000 cash, but will cancel obligations of about $150m the US parent owed one of the Taiwanese units.
Wang Laboratories Taiwan has the right to use Wang's trademark in Taiwan and will make personal computers for Wang.
VLSI TECHNOLOGY TO TAKE STAKE IN FUZZY USER TOGAI
VLSI Technology Inc, San Jose is to buy a minority stake in Togai InfraLogic Inc, a private firm that builds systems that incorporate fuzzy logic technology.
The deal is part of a letter of intent between VLSI and Irvine, California-based Togai that makes VLSI its exclusive provider of custom fuzzy logic chips…pl 63
TATUNG TRIGGERS SPARCSTATION PRICE WAR: $2,800 OFF
Tatung Science & Technology Inc, San Jose is trying to extend the personal computer price war to colour workstations, and it is offering discounts of up to $2,800 on its new SuperSparc-based Super Compstation 7/30 Series.
A Super COMPstation 7/30 with a 36MHz CPU, 520Mb disk, 32Mb memory, on-board GX graphics accelerator and a 19″ colour monitor will cost $13,490 in the plan; the Taiwanese company reckons that a similar system from Sun Microsystems Computer Corp is currently list-priced at $20,500.
IBM STARTS HANDING OUT THE PINK SLIPS IN KINGSTON
Ending the decades-long full employment tradition, IBM Corp on Tuesday formally laid off 1,400 employees at its Kingston and Poughkeepsie, New York mainframe plants, as it continued to notify workers of layoffs at its East Fishkill plant, where 4,000 jobs are to be cut in a combination of layoffs, transfers and voluntary redundancy by May 31.
It will also eliminate 500 jobs through attrition and lay-offs at its Armonk headquarters.
The cuts were announced in February.
Those laid off get up to a year's salary and a year of medical coverage, counselling for those seeking new careers and up to $2,500 for job retraining.
CRAY RUSHES OUT SMALL CRAY-3s TO EARN VITAL CASH
Cray Computer Corp, Colorado Springs, says it will start shipping its first scaled-down versions of the much-delayed Cray-3 in a bid to raise cash.
Prices start at $2.95m for a uniprocessor version of the 16-processor machine.
The company has predicted that it may run out of money as early as July without new customers or an infusion of cash from the outside.
Cray-3 systems with one, two and four processors will be available for shipment in mid-1993.
Eight-processor versions will follow at year-end with 16-processor machines shipping in 1994.
The company also said it is working out details of a tentative $5m settlement of a shareholder suit filed after it lost its only Cray-3 customer.
PHILIPS ‘TO JOIN IBM-APPLE KALIEDA ALLIANCE’
Philips Electronics NV is in talks with Kaleida Inc, the multimedia joint venture of IBM Corp and Apple Computer Inc on a common standard for multimedia products, according to Het Financieele Dagblad, which quoted John Hawkins, the head of Philips' Compact Disc Interactive multimedia group.
TOSHIBA, SUN TEAM ON MULTIMEDIA
Toshiba Corp has formed a long-term multimedia technology partnership with the SunSoft Inc arm of Sun Microsystems Inc: the first step will be the development of a text-to-speech capability for workstations.
AUSTIN TO BUY MICRON MILITARY ARM
Austin Semiconductor Inc has signed a letter of intent with Micron Technology Corp, Boise, Idaho to acquire its military components group.
Completion is seen in 30 days but terms of the deal were not disclosed.
NOW GEAC GOES FOR NBI CANADA
Suddenly acquisitive Geac Computer Corp Ltd, Toronto is now to acquire NBI Canada Inc, the Canadian networking systems subsidiary of the Boulder-based former dedicated word processor builder.
NBI Canada is doing about $1.6m a year; terms undisclosed.
WHEN OTHER ARCHITECTURES EXPIRE, TRANSPUTER WILL STILL BE GOING, INMOS DECLARES
The arrival of the T9000 Transputer threatened to be an anti-climax, given that the device had been previewed back in 1991 (CI No 1,653).
But Inmos Ltd was determined to make it a high profile affair.
The chosen venue was the auspiciously grand lecture theatre at the Victoria & Albert Museum, the presentations simultaneously interpreted by a row of translators — a reminder of the event's global significance.
The whole thing kicked off with a state of the art video which introduced the T9000 as the ‘next link in the chain for ranging from supercomputers to database managers, to switching and telecommunications systems, management systems for production lines and car engines.
Burn out
The device was also hailed as the next step in Inmos's technological evolution, filling the gap between the former T2, 4 and 8 families and the proposed modular ‘Chameleon’ product line (CI No 2,137).
Inmos Transputers are unique because they combine a processor, communications links and memory on a single chip.
The power and complexity of this latest offering makes it the world's fastest single-chip computer, according to its maker.
The T9000 has 3.3m transistors.
Each of its four communications links can convey the equivalent of 20 bibles; and its internal communications crossbar can throughput the equivalent of 200 bibles per second.
Inmos sees the device as the blueprint for all future chip design.
Conventional microprocessors, the company reckons, will reach ‘burn out’ by about 1996 or 1997.
By then, performance enhancement will centre more on multiple capabilities than, say, clock speeds, which likely will have reached a plateau.
Multi-purpose chips are likely to be popular with manufacturers, because they offer the advantages of reduced chip count and board space, and faster time to market.
Indeed, Inmos has already shipped 1m Transputers and is expecting to double this number over the next year.
It will be targeting the T9000 at traditional markets such as office automation, PABX switching systems, industrial robotics high-performance computing and military and space systems, alongside existing Transputer family members.
It says it has no plans to phase these former Transputer lines out.
The T9000 replaces the T805 as Inmos's high-end offering.
It uses Tungsten Plug technology, which helps integrate the various elements in the chip in as small a package as possible.
The Pentium, explained Ian Pearson, director of Inmos's Transputer Business Unit, is 30% bigger though it has the same number of transistors.
The device's CPU combines a 32-bit integer processor producing up to eight instructions per cycle and 64-bit floating point unit and has 200 MIPS, 25 MFLOPS performance.
The memory system has 16Kb on-chip memory, configurable as cache and/or RAM; 800Mbps, four access-per-cycle workspace cache; and Programmable Memory Interface.
The so-called Virtual Channel Processor connects with four four-wire 100Mbps links, with up to 64,000 channels per link and 80M-bytes total link bandwidth.
This is all bundled into a 208-pin CLCC package which, in single chip applications will run on 3W; 5W is needed to drive large external memory systems.
Inmos says the T9000 is easily scalable with no interface or buffer logic required to link multiple devices.
Communication between up to 32 indirectly connected T9000s is possible with Inmos's C014 Packet Routing Switch.
There is also a C100 System Protocol Converter that links T9000s to previous generation Transputers and C101 Link Adapter for interfacing with standard buses in a variety of other devices.
These will be available during 1993.
Software development and programming for multiple T9000s is as easy as for single devices, according to Inmos.
ANSI C, C++ and Occam compilers are available for development on personal computers and Sun Microsystems Inc workstations.
Hardware development has also been simplified with the  availability of a range of Transputer f Modules, or TRAMs, high performance modules and motherboards.
Fabrication will initially be based in Newport, South Wales but, from 1994, this will be extended to parent SGS Thomson Microelectronics NV's Crolles facility.
This will enable Inmos to take advantage of Thomson's 0.5 and 0.35 micron fabrication techniques to produce faster, 3V T9000s.
Inevitably the news of the T9000's arrival, approximately a year overdue, was accompanied by a host of announcements from other vendors, anxious to dust off their T9000-based products.
Among them were Parsytec Computer GmbH and Parsys Ltd with their T9000-based supercomputers and Ektron Applied Imaging Inc with its Boss-9000 parallel processor.
Inmos's Pearson was philosophical about the delay, admitting it had lost the company customers, but saying he expected forthcoming T9000 generations to lure the strays back to the fold.
Work on the successors to the T9000 has been under way since 1991, he explained, under Inmos's Chameleon programme.
Chameleon
This aims to produce a new chip architecture comprising a number of interconnectable modules, that can be used individually, or in combination, in single chips.
The modules will include 64-bit processors and cache, programmable communications processors, high speed communications interfaces, link routers, floating point co-processors, re-configurable co-processors and dedicated Asynchronous Transfer Mode communication and graphics and video processors.
This modular architecture will integrate around 10m transistors and two special interfaces: an interconnect protocol for supporting scalable shared memory access, communication and control; and the so-called virtual binary for supporting sequential, parallel and distributed programming.
The virtual binary will support standard operating systems like Unix and Windows NT, and compilers and programming languages like C, C++, Fortran and Occam.
Chameleon chips will be aimed at the Transputer's traditional telecommunications markets, along with more mainstream computer markets, multimedia workstations and portables, database and computing servers.
The first Chameleon products are expected out in 1996.
TIVOLI OFFERS UP AN OBJECT APPLICATION PROGRAMMING INTERFACE TO DESKTOP EFFORT
Tivoli Systems Inc, Austin, Texas, is racing to fill the systems management void left open by the Common Open Software Environment alliance at UniForum.
Last week, the company volunteered to create a common applications programming interface based on its object-oriented framework and submit it gratis to X/Open Co Ltd as part of the COSE standard.
It says it will submit the interface in the next 90 days to the COSE work group for systems management that COSE promised to form.
The Tivoli initiative has not got any kind of endorsement from any of the COSE group.
However, through all the long years of the Unix wars, Tivoli's offering seemed to be the only thing that all the key parties could agree on.
The Tivoli framework is central to Unix International's Atlas and the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Management Environment systems management standards, hence with what Unix Systems Laboratories Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM Corp are doing.
It is also key to Sun Microsystems Inc's Project Distributed Objects Everywhere scheme.
Tivoli president Frank Moss believes it would be relatively painless to bring these three endeavours, representing the main COSE players, into alignment.
Although he has received some personal encouragement from the COSE chieftains, he cannot tell whether they will be predisposed to adopt his technology again.
Moss is concerned by what he heard at the COSE announcement that the companies aim to achieve systems management harmony at a lower level, perhaps at an applications level, than the single high-level link Tivoli is offering.
He believes such an outcome would only irk independent software companies.
COSE also has no time to go off on an invention tear, he said, if it aims to take on Microsoft Corp.
Microsoft previewed Hermes, Windows NT's systems management scheme, which is due out in the second half of the year, at InterOp two or three weeks ago.
Moss describes it as ‘sort of distributed,’ offering node-to-node management, no security and no policy.
Clearly he believes Tivoli would be a real COSE asset.
88OPEN SUPPORTERS CLUB PLANS TO FORM A SEPARATE COMPANY TO MARKET THE TESTING SERVICES IT HAS DEVELOPED
Faced with the choice of reinventing itself or hanging up its boots, 88open, the supporters club for Motorola Inc 88000 RISC vendors, is said to be finalising a plan to offer its conformance testing expertise to the industry at large, via a separate organisation that will develop and implement test suites for suppliers of other RISC architectures and consortia like PowerOpen or Sparc International it sees as potential customers.
The current schedule envisages the organisation dividing into two separate concerns from May.
With support for the 88000 RISC as a system architecture dwindling to a few hardy companies, a core 88open unit will continue to service their requirements, testing and branding system software and applications.
There is no danger of that part of 88open being lost — its members have already paid all their dues, some $3.5m, for the new fiscal year starting in April.
Most indicators — though things could change by May — point to the creation of a new private company, with another name, that will attempt to win specification, standards creation, certification and branding work from users, as well as other RISC vendors and consortia, possibly doing independent software vendor recruitment too.
As well a facing a falling roster of 88000 adherents, 88open's scheme to license its compatibility technology also stalled, having pulled in only Hewlett-Packard Co as a customer.
According to 88open chief Tom Mace, potential buyers wanted the stuff customised for them and 88open in its present form just isn't in a position to do that for them.
In addition, 88open says that software companies using its 88000 certification process have asked specifically for the group to put its stuff up on other architectures.
Issues still being worked through include who owns the testing technology already developed and how 88open's not-for-profit status will be affected by the changes.
3COM ENHANCES ITS NETBUILDER WITH WIDE AREA FEATURES, MANAGEMENT
3Com Corp has enhanced its NETBuilder family of internetworking products with features intended to simplify network administration, improve wide area networking links and add new wide area network services for remote internetworking.
The enhancements include addition of the San Jose, California company's Boundary Routing System Architecture, data compression for all major bridging and routing protocols, IPX SAP filtering, X25 connection and gateway service and low-speed line support.
Data compression
Boundary Routing — according to the company — enables up to 10 times as many remote site connections to be added without increasing administrative resources.
It incorporates data compression algorithms that are claimed to increase effective throughput of wide area networking links by as much as four times.
The company now offers data compression for TCP/IP, IPX, XNS, Vines/IP, AppleTalk, DECnet and Open Systems Interconnection as well as bridging.
The new X25 connection service enables NETBuilder to act as an X25 gateway, providing packet assembly and disassembly capabilities for Ethernet local network-attached terminals or hosts to talk via X25 to an X29 host or terminal.
This means that customers can use X25 to establish Telnet sessions, as well as concurrently routing other traffic such as IPX over X25.
The enhancements also include the ability to support the lower line speeds — 1,200Kbps to 9,600Kbps — used for wide area network connections in some countries.
Users can also group two low-speed lines as a single logical connection, so that the second line can be used for back-up or to increase overall packet throughout.
The new functions are supported on the entire NETBuilder family and are included in 3Com's NETBuilder software release 6.0.
This will ship during the first quarter of this year.
3Com has also announced pricing for three new members of the EtherLink III Parallel Tasking family of adaptors.
The EtherLink III 16-bit combo adaptor costs $225 for one unit and $200 each when sold in a five-pack.
The EtherLink III 32-bit EISA adaptor costs $350 for one unit and $300 each when you buy five in a pack.
The EtherLink III 16/32-bit Micro Channel adaptor also costs $350, or $300 each in a five-pack.
All three products are available now.
MCI REPORT SHEDS SOME LIGHT ON PLANS
MCI Communications Corp's annual report sheds a little more light on the company's plans for alliances to deliver new services (CI No 2,139), saying that the company will use its high-speed digital telephone network as the base for multimedia services in alliance with other companies —‘With one intelligent, multimedia device — part telephone, part television and part computer — consumers will call up distant relatives and see them while they speak,’ the annual report says, and the company is not elaborating further; the report says ‘a number of trends are emerging, including multimedia wireless communications and distributed processing,’and MCI plans to be a player in these trends; it says the range of companies it is contacting regarding its consortium idea spans several industries under the broad definition of communications, but it is awaiting a response from the Federal Communications Commission to its proposal that consortia rather than individual companies be permitted to run Personal Communications Network before putting any discussions onto a formal basis.
DATAMATICS AWARDED SINGAPORE AIRLINE CONTRACT
Singapore Airlines Ltd has awarded a five-year contract to Datamatics Pvt Ltd of Bombay to write software exclusively for the airline: Datamatics will develop software for reservations, cargo handling and departure control applications, and got the business because the airline found it so hard to recruit and retain computer personnel in Singapore; no value was revealed.
ESTIMATES FOR WINDOWS NT SALES CAUSING HEADACHES
Microsoft Corp says it has trouble estimating the number of copies of Windows NT it will sell, so what is the reasonable way to tell whether it succeeds?
The sensible measure to use will be market share in the network operating system market says David Smith, the company's UK systems marketing manager; Smith puts Microsoft's current share with LAN Manager at 30% and says that all of those should have switched to NT within a couple of years; the lion's share is of course held by Novell Inc, but Smith says the primary aim is not to try and win NetWare users — instead Microsoft will try to ‘grow the entire market’
ITALTEL TO INSTALL LINES FOR TELECOM ARGENTINA
Italtel SpA is to install around 400,000 lines for Telecom Argentina SA over the next three years in a deal worth $600m: it says it will install the first 58,000 lines this year and the rest of them by 1996
INTEL LAUNCH VIDEO ADD-IN BOARD
Intel Corp launched its first video add-in board for personal computer users running Microsoft Corp Windows: the Intel Smart Video Recorder enables users to play back video segments recorded from various video sources by using Intel's Indeo video technology, and  cost $700 — but the price includes software, including Microsoft's Video for Windows, that lists for about $800.
ALCATEL TAKES CONTROL OF POLISH COMPANIES
Spain's Alcatel Sesa SA has taken control of two Polish companies, PZT Telkom, which employs 640 people in Warsaw, and Teletra, which has about 1,300 employees making public telephone exchanges; Alcatel Sesa said it would guarantee jobs for 1,650 people at the two firms for the next 18 months and committed itself to increasing the capital of the two companies by another $25m within a year; it plans to start manufacturing the Alcatel 1000 S-12 exchange in Poland, where it says it has already built eight digital exchanges in Poland with a $60m credit that was put up by the Spanish government.
TOSHIBA TO MARKET PORTABLE COMPUTERS IN BRAZIL
The Toshiba America Information Systems Inc unit of Toshiba Corp will begin to market its portable computers in Brazil through local distributor Intercorp Ltda: the company says it is beginning a long-term relationship with Brazil where it will offer its full portable computer product line — and the machines will be bang up to date—‘We will not sell discontinued products in Brazil as has been the case with other computer companies,’ the company added sniffily.
CAE-LINK WIN UK MOD CONTRACT
Toronto-based CAE Industries Ltd reports that its CAE-Link Corp unit has won a contract from the UK Ministry of Defence for a higher formation battle trainer for the British Army: terms were not disclosed, but CAE-Link will develop, install and maintain a command-and-control trainer to simulate a round-the-clock battle in real time for up to six weeks, creating the battlefield communications flow between the staff being trained, higher headquarters and subordinate unit headquarters; it will consist of a central server networked to 170 controller and operator stations at two sites in the UK and Germany; it has to be transportable for use at other training sites.
RASTEROPS WARN OF OPERATING LOSS
Santa Clara, California-based RasterOps Corp warns that it will record an operating loss and take a $5m to $7m restructuring charge for the third quarter ending March 31: it says third quarter sales will be about equal to the second quarter's $25m, and it blames ‘general market softness and lingering effects of the transition from third party channels to its own sales force.
MCI BEGIN SERVICE ON PACRIM EAST CABLE SYSTEM
MCI Communications Corp has begun service this week on the PacRim East fibre optic cable system, the first such cable to link the US and Australia: the Washington company says it is the second-largest investor in PacRim East, which is used by 34 other international carriers and stretches 4,774 miles from Hawaii to New Zealand, and on to Australia via the Tasman-2 cable.
TWO NEW MEMBERS OF IBM SPEECH RECOGNITION FAMILY
IBM Corp's IBM Personal Computer Co has added two members in the IBM Speech Recognition Family, VoiceType Control for Windows and VoiceType 2: VoiceType Control for Windows offers customers with an 80386SX processor and up the ability to manipulate the Windows 3.1 environment and existing Windows 3.1 applications with spoken commands such as File Save, Font Bold and Next Window; VoiceType Control for Windows costs $130, works with Sound Blaster audio boards, and is speaker-independent; VoiceType 2 is designed for general dictation and input to MS-DOS applications, and enables users to continue to control their existing applications, such as word processing, databases or spreadsheet, simply by talking; it comes ready to use with ‘many popular software products such as Quicken, WordPerfect 5.1, dBase and more’, and users can add their own commands; VoiceType 2, with the IBM M-Audio Capture and Playback Adaptor, runs on 80386SX and above personal computers and automatically adapts to a speaker's unique voice pattern and allows for accents and other individual speech characteristics; it costs $2,200 and will be available in late May.
CTOS FROM UNISYS HAS POSIX 2 COMPLIANCE
Unisys Corp now has Posix 2 compliance for its CTOS operating system, based on the Mortice Kern Systems Inc InterOpen/Posix Shell and Utilities product; it between $663 and $10,425, depending on server size.
CITYMAX BOARD RECOMMENDS CREDIT SUISSE OFFER
The board of Citymax Integrated Information Systems Ltd has recommended that its minority shareholders accept an offer from Credit Suisse Bank of Zurich to buy the 42% it doesn't already own: Citymax believes that the bank will provide it with the necessary resources and credentials to grow its international business, by developing products and services for the global market; the London-based company, which provides systems integration, facilities management and disaster recovery services to the financial sector, became an affiliate of Credit Suisse in 1990.
PC MAKERS TO FACE CONTINUED PRICE PRESSURE
Personal computer makers are likely to face continued pressure to keep prices low for the foreseeable future, former Compaq Computer Corp chief Rod Canion told Reuter in an interview: ‘Anybody that wants to be successful in the computer business better be prepared to be very aggressive and have a lot of aggressive competition — in that environment, you can predict pricing pressure is not going to ease up;’ Canion, now chairman of the Houston-based consulting firm Insource Management Group, says that in his time at Compaq, customers were willing to pay a little more to ensure they got quality and performance but that as the market changed, they believed they could get quality, performance and low price, and now, ‘that will never change.’
COMPUTER 2000 RAGES AT POLISH MEASURE TO WAIVE DUTIES ON IMPORTS FROM OUTSIDE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY
Computer 2000 AG's European marketing manager Jan Zakrewski has accused the Polish government of ‘Banana Republic behaviour’ after the government's implementation of its plan to waive import duty on computer equipment imported from outside the European Community appeared to confirm many Western vendors' worst nightmares.
Computer 2000's partner in Poland, DHI, had initially welcomed the decision, arguing it would provide resellers with an opportunity to recoup lost margins.
However, according to Zakrewski the government has ruled that the duty-free import quotas will only be divided up among home-grown or foreign companies that have been assembling in Poland for two years, while other firms will face levies at the old rates.
The legislation has yet to be translated from Polish.
Under the scheme, Polish assemblers will be able to import computer systems and all ‘input and output devices’, as well as components, free of the 20% import duty previously applied — so long as their combined total value is less than $300m.
As the Polish computer market is valued at around $360m a year, the latter condition is not likely to prove significant.
Imports of computer equipment manufactured in the European Community are subject to lower rates of duty, but have not won a significant share of the local market.
Zakrewski commented, ‘This is the most ridiculous piece of legislation I have ever seen in my entire life.
We as a distributor never want to get into assembly very seriously, but it may be necessary for the future.
That's the first thing we don't like.
And then it will bias the market: anyone who wants to get into the Polish market will have to persuade a company that has been assigned an import quota to act as its channel.’
Zakrewski confirmed that he did expect the legislation to hurt its Polish acquisition, DHI, which currently expects to turn over $15m in the market this year, and added ‘The result will be that there will be some preferred companies who have been doing assembly that will be supported, and they will grow and make a huge amount of money by reselling imports, not by assembling; it's a scandal.
The market will be dead.
We're not talking about half a percent, it's 20%.’
As well as protecting domestic firms' market share, the obvious motivation for the Polish government legislation would appear to be its desire to induce Western firms to invest in the local high-tech industry, a policy that has also seen it pursue interventionist policies in the fields of telecommunications and electronic components — all areas for which Poland was earmarked as a specialist under mechanisms instigated by the Soviet Union in the 1960s and 1970s.
Two-year probation period
Certainly, the easiest route for companies to obtain a duty-free quota would seem to be to buy a Polish firm that has been assigned one.
However, in insisting on a two-year probation period for new assemblers, the Polish government runs the risk that firms such as Wyse Technology Inc, which have been looking seriously at manufacturing in the country, may find short-term sales opportunities unattractive.
The probation period is also likely seriously to hinder the entry of new domestic assemblers into the market.
The companies that have the highest sales in Poland and stand to lose most unless they can restructure their import channels to take advantage of the quotas, include Dell Computer Corp and Compaq Computer Corp in the personal computer market; Computer 2000 and ComputerLand Corp in distribution, and Hewlett-Packard Co, Star Micronics Ltd, Seiko Epson Co and Seikosha Corp in the printer market.
The printer market on its own was valued by International Data Corp at $64.6m in 1991.
News of the Polish plan comes hot on the heels of the introduction of restrictions on currency convertability that threaten to wipe out the Slovakian market; both developments underline the degree of risk that is still attached to operating in the region.
AST's FORMER EAST EUROPE CHIEF SETS UP SECOND AST DISTRIBUTOR
Four months after being made redundant, the erstwhile business development manager of AST Research Inc's East Europe operation, Chris Swallow, has formally launched AST's second authorised distributor in the region.
Joining Swallow in the venture are six local businessmen, including the head of AST's only accredited services centre in the country, Dragon Electronics, and the Prague-based systems integrator ICCC.
The formation of Compartners SRO puts to an end the sole distributor status of Prague-based Sofram, and Swallow has set Compartners the target of matching Sofram's 1992 revenues this year — he estimates this at $2m.
Swallow was made  redundant from AST in November, when the company closed down its East European operation, but he maintains that AST was not dissatisfied with its sales in the region, which he claims totalled over $5m in 1992.
Swallow explained ‘They had a low-key attitude to the region and had just wanted to get a foot in the door.
But they didn't have high expectations, and that done, they decided it was too early to open a full subsidiary.’
As well as selling to Czech dealers at prices within 5% of West European levels, the firm also has a handful of dealers in Slovakia.
However, Swallow was not optimistic regarding the prospects for the latter, arguing that administrative confusion on the border with the Czech Republic now made it easier to ship kit to Slovakia from a third country.
Compartners SRO is based in Mlada Eoleslav, 50 miles north east of Prague.
CZECH REPUBLIC FEARS FOR COMPUTER SCIENCE AFTER BUDGET CUTS
Milan Mares, vice-director of research at the Information Theory and Automation division of the Czech Academy of Sciences has warned that advanced computing research in the country may be at risk following a 60% reduction in the funds allocated to the Academy in the 1992-93 state budget.
In an interview with the Central European Business Journal, Miles warned, ‘the Academy must continue to fill the void left by a non-existent private computer industry, until such time as scientists can be gainfully employed in the private sector.
The alternative could be the loss of advanced computing research in the Czech Republic.’
The Academy has developed some links with foreign companies to make up for the cash shortfall; most notably, it has recently sold software to analyse gas distribution in pipelines to Ruhrgas in Germany.
Work has also been contracted in from the French firm Matra SA and the US company Rockwell International Inc as well as from Digital Equipment Corp.
SPRINT EXPANDS ITS GLOBAL PUBLIC FRAME RELAY SERVICE TO ANOTHER 25 COUNTRIES
Sprint Corp, Kansas City, Missouri has expanded its global public Frame Relay network to include Canada, France and Germany, and plans to add a further 25 countries by the end of the year.
The service currently covers the UK and US only.
The Sprint service provides a committed information rate, guaranteeing a minimum sustained throughput.
Users are charged a flat rate for this committed information rate, although the service supports sustained bursting above this level, up to the full access channel capacity, at no extra cost.
The top access speed is up to 256Kbps, depending on local network facilities.
According to Leigh Saunders, director of emerging and strategic services for Sprint International, the proprietary switches used for the network can handle usage-based tariffing, but users prefer fixed-rate costs.
‘Later, when we have more options — ISDN, for example— we may have more of a market for occasional users,’ she said.
The company has not yet announced pricing for the service.
However, Ms Saunders said that in some cases, costs will be less than half that of a leased line.
MICROPORT OFFERS SHRINKWRAPPED UNIX V.4.2 ES/MP FOR PENTIUM
Microport Inc, Scotts Valley, California, which recently became the first non-hardware licensee of Unix System Laboratories Inc's unannounced System V.4.2 ES/MP, has started shipping an ANSI C Compiler for Intel Corp's Pentium processor from Unix System Laboratories Inc.
The optimised compiler has a blended mode option for applications that will run on 80486 and Pentium boxes as well as a Pentium-only mode.
Microport thinks it is the first Unix Labs licensee to make the compiler available in shrinkwrapped form.
It is available as a $400 option on Microport's multi- and uniprocessor Unix System V.4 software.
The new compiler is said to be some 10% to 20% faster than the top-ranked GNU C Compiler.
INMARSAT HANDS OUT FEASIBILITY PACTS ON ITS SATELLITE PHONE SERVICE
Inmarsat, the International Maritime Satellite Organisation, has signed six contracts with aerospace companies and consortia to choose a satellite system for its proposed worldwide personal satellite telephone service.
The three satellite constellations under consideration are geostationary, involving a few, large, satellites; immediate circular orbit, using 12 to 15 satellites; and low earth orbit, which would require a larger number of smaller birds.
For Geostationary, it has contracted General Electric Co Inc's GE Astro unit with Matra-Marconi Espace SA; Hughes Space & Communications Inc with British Aerospace Plc and NEC Corp; for intermediate circular, the contracts go to Matra-Marconi and GE Astro again, this time with TRW Corp.
And for low earth orbit, the contracts go to Consortium of Aerospatiale Alcatel NV and Alenia SpA with Deutsche Aerospace GmbH; and Anstix Pte Ltd with the state-owned Indian Space Research Organisation.
EXCALIBUR NOW HAS PIXTEX FOR MOST OF THE MAJOR UNIX BOXES AND FULL DEC LINE
Excalibur Technologies Corp, which moves about a bit and is now headquartered in San Diego, has begun shipping its PixTex/EFS 3.0 document imaging software to a much broadened list of machines, including Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations, Hewlett-Packard Co HP 9000 Series 700s, IBM Corp RS/6000, and Digital Equipment Corp Ultrix, VAX/VMS and Alpha AXP/Open VMS servers with Windows, X Window and Macintosh clients.
The new version of the software automatically indexes, stores and retrieves digital information.
The company's fuzzy searching technology enables searches with free-form queries on full-text contents, document names and file labels, and users can find information even if documents are misfiled or queries are misspelled.
The technology also overcomes common optical character recognition processing errors, eliminating the need for cleaning up OCR-processed documents.
The software provides links to external databases including Oracle, Informix, Rdb, Sybase and Ingres and Excalibur also provides local area network support through TCP/IP to Windows and Macintosh clients in Unix environments, and DECnet to Windows and Macintosh clients in DEC/VMS environments.
No prices were given.
DTK COMPUTER OF TAIWAN OFFERS TSUNAMI BOXES: OPTION PLUS HAS THEM IN EUROPE
Taiwanese company DTK Computer Inc says it has a Tsunami-based Sun Microsystems Inc workstation compatible with three times the graphics performance of the Sun Microsystems Inc Classic.
Called the DTK Station Classic+, it comes with either Solaris 1.1 or 2.1 and an optional second 240Mb hard drive, CG3 graphics for 1,152 by 900 resolution and a 14″ colour monitor.
It's priced at $3,700 with availability starting in May.
French outfit Option Plus SA in Nanterre is selling the DTK clones as its Saturn series on the continent.
AT&T HANDS OUT FAREWELL UNIX AWARDS
AT&T Co decided as a going-away gift to present a bunch of Unix Awards at its End of an Era bash at UniForum.
Recipients included Robert Fabry of the Computer Systems Research Group at Berkeley; Deborah Scherrer, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory; and Bob Schiefler, X Consortium in the Academic Driver category; Mike DeFazio, Unix Labs, Armando Stettner, ex-DEC, Bruce Weiner, Mindcraft and Bob Marsh of Onyx and Plexus fame for Unix Evangelism; Steve Bourne, Vinton Cerf, Jon Mashey and Eric Schmidt for Technology; Jim Bell, Walter De Backer and Heinz Lycklama for Standards; Frame Technology, Informix, Oracle and Sybase for Applications; Larry Crume, ex-AT&T now Lotus, Geoff Morris, X/Open and Yoshiro Yoshioka, Fujitsu for Global Market Building; Hewlett-Packard, Santa Cruz Operation and Sun for Business Commitment; Burlington Coat Factory, DHL, Federal Express, Hyatt and Wal-Mart for using the stuff; Pamela Gray, Bill Joy and Doug Michels for Lifetime Achievement; Mike Azzara, Open Systems Today; Ed Taylor, Pencom; and our own Maureen O'Gara for Special Distinction.
Two of the crystal awards were stolen during the ensuing festivities.
NORSK DATA AGREES TERMS THAT LEAVE EXISTING SHARES  EFFECTIVELY WORTHLESS
Reporting a net loss of $56m for 1992, Norsk Data A/S, Oslo says it has obtained fresh financing from two Norwegian banks, Den Norske Bank and Fokus Bank, but that the deal effectively makes the existing shares, which are currently suspended, worthless.
The deal enables it to offer creditors a 25% cash dividend to keep the company in business.
It says it has now drawn up a refinancing plan with the banks.
‘The refinancing will place the necessary cash at the disposal of Norsk Data A/S, enabling it to carry out a private resolution in which its unsecured creditors are offered a cash dividend of 25%, but the banks ‘required as a condition for financing that the present share capital shall be written down to zero, and that a share issue shall be carried out by partly converting the banks’ debt into equity.’
Norsk Data's board will recommend the solution to shareholders and the Oslo Bourse has been informed — not surprisingly, it is now considering permanently delisting the company's shares.
If creditors turn the proposals down, the company warns that it will have to restructure under Norwegian bankruptcy laws, which would mean it would be 1994 or 1995 before anybody got paid.
‘The refinancing secures the future operation of the Norsk Data group enabling it to continue as an independent and viable group.
The uncertainty that up to now has surrounded Norsk Data's business is by this clarified,’ the company declared.
The former high-flying minimaker brought very low, now consists of computer service companies with main markets in Nordic countries and in the UK.
‘All other non-strategic businesses within the group have either been sold, wound up or closed down,’ it said.
‘This caused heavy losses to Norsk in 1992.’
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Ameritech Corp's Cleveland-based Ohio Bell is calling its 8.75% debentures due April 15 2026: all $125m of aggregate principal out will be redeemed on April 30 1993 by National City Bank of Cleveland at 107% per $1,000 bond, plus accrued interest.
Auspex Systems Inc, building servers in Santa Clara, California has filed to go public with an initial offer of up to 5.19m shares, 2.6m of them new; no target price was available.
Underwriters are Goldman, Sachs & Co and Hambrecht & Quist Inc.
Catalyst Semiconductor Inc, Santa Clara, California has filed to go public with an initial offer of up to 2.5m shares at a target price of between $9 and $11 a share.
It wants the cash to repay debt and for capital expenditures and for working capital.
The underwriters for the issue are Montgomery Securities Inc and Robertson, Stephens & Co Ltd.
Fujitsu Ltd raised $258m with the issue of a 30,000m putable Eurobond due July 23 1997 paying 3.95% and priced at 101.55%, through Nikko Europe.
COMPANY RESULTS
Coherent Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 54.9% at $1.6m, on turnover down 8% to $50.3m.
Net earnings per share rose by 45.5% to $0.16.
Colonial Data Technology Inc saw fourth quarter net profits down 17.3% at $143,000, on turnover up 16.3% at $3.1m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 561.7% at $311,000, on turnover that rose 21.4% to $9.7m.
Net per share fell 50% to $0.01 in the quarter, and amounted to $0.03 in the year.
Computer Products Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits of $1.7m against losses of $10.7m last time, after $465,000 tax credits this time and $47,000 last time, and $5.2m losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover that rose 43.4% at $29.9m; net profit for the year to January 3 stood at $2.7m against losses of $9.6m last time, after $674,000 tax credits this time and $91,000 last time and $5.5m losses from discontinued operations plus $6.3m restucturing charges last time, on turnover that rose by 37.9% to $114.8m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.08 in the quarter, and to $0.13 in the year.
Figures were reported at 14 and 53 weeks in 1992 and at 13 weeks in 1993.
DSC Communications Corp saw fourth quarter net profits of $13.1m against losses of $8m last time, on turnover up 43.8% at $162.7m; net profit for the year to December 31 stood at $11.6m against losses of $108.3m, after $41m charges from the write-down of assets and restructuring last time, on turnover that rose 16.2% to $536.3m.
Net per share amounted to $0.28 in the quarter, and to $0.25 in the year.
Inter-Tel Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits of $949,000 against losses of $4.4m last time, after $4.8m losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover down 0.7% at $19.7m; net profit for the year to December 31 stood at $3m against losses of $4.2m last time, after $5.1m losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover that rose 19.3% to $79.4m.
Net per share were $0.12 in the quarter, and $0.37 in the year.
Pronet Inc has turned in fourth quarter net profits down 34.1% at $403,829, after $2,166 gains on the sale of assets this time and $$176,131 gains last time, on turnover that rose 6.9% to $4.8m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 33.7% at $1.7m, after $108,908 gains from the sale of assets, on turnover that rose 4.7% to $18.8m.
Net earnings per share fell 33.3% to $0.10 in the quarter, and rose 30.3% to $0.43 in the year.
Siliconix Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits down 17% at $2m, after $1.7m restructuring charges this time and $675,000 last time, as well as $1.7m extraordinary credits and $2.4m gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change last time, on turnover down 1.7% at $41m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 3,242% at $4.6m, after $950,000 restructuring charges, $2.2m extraordinary credits and $2.4m gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change last time, on turnover that rose 11.4% to $156.2m.
Net per share fell 16.7% to $0.20 in the quarter, 4,500% to $0.46 in the year.
The 1991 figures were reported at 16 and 52 weeks, and the 1992 figures at 13 weeks.
Software Developer's Co has turned in third quarter net losses of $461,000 down from losses of $3.8m last time, after $200,000 gains from discontinued operations this time and $2.6m losses last time as well as $429,000 restructuring charges last time, on turnover down 22.1% at $7.9m; net losses for the nine months stood at $361,000 down from losses of $3.6m last time, after $2.7m losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover that fell 3.2% to $26m.
Comparisons are made with restated 1991 figures to reflect discontinued operations.
SSE Telecom Inc turned in $758,318 net profits for the year to September 26, down 44.1%, on turnover that increased 29.7% at $23.4m.
Net earnings per share fell 106.7% to $0.15 in the year.
Norsk Data A/S has reported a net loss for the year to December 31 of $55.7m, down from a loss last time of $123m on turnover off 43.1% at $148.6m.
Conversion at $0.1443 to the Norwegian krone.
GENEROUS TERMS FOR GERSTNER
IBM Corp's board has settled on a pay and benefits package for new chief executive Louis Gerstner, who takes up his post today, valued at over $7m: he will receive an annual salary of $2m, a one-time transition payment of $5m and a string of other incentives including a performance incentive potentially worth $1.5m a year, $500,000 long-term incentive tied to performance over three years and options on 500,000 IBM shares — far more than predecessor John Akers got.
PACIFIC BELL PLANS CALREN
The Pacific Bell Inc arm of Pacific Telesis Group Inc plans to build a communications highway connecting participating California universities, research labs, major hospitals and leading high-tech companies in the San Francisco Bay Area and Los Angeles: to be known as the California Research and Education Network or CalRen, the project will use emerging communications switching and transmission technologies such as Asynchronous Transfer Mode in a network capable of carrying voice, data, video and images concurrently between as many as 80 educational, medical and high-tech industrial organisations in the San Francisco Bay Area, and a similar number in the Los Angeles area.
MS-DOS 6 FEATURE MISSING
One expected feature of Microsoft Corp's new MS-DOS 6 was missing: it was to have incorporated a LAN Manager and Windows for Workgroup client — but corporate beta testers demanded its removal before they would install the thing saying they were worried about users getting unauthorised access to servers.
PLANS TO EASE CONGESTION IN LONDON
UK Transport Minister John MacGregor yesterday published a paper proposal to introduce road pricing to ease congestion in London: under his plan, every car would have to be fitted with an electronic identifier, and its movements within the capital would be monitored by 4,000 roadside beacons: drivers would either establish credit with the system operator or be sent a quarterly bill, the Evening Standard reports; the paper says that MacGregor has been trying to think up a snappy name for the thing, but reckless of the manner in which the Community Charge degenerated into the much-excoriated Poll Tax, he has settled on Congestion Charge.
OL400 PAGE PRINTER PRICE SLASH
The Mt Laurel, New Jersey Okidata arm of Oki Electric Industry Co is slashing the US price of its OL400 light-emitting diode page printer: it is now $800 for a 27% reduction.
GATEWAY 2000 BUNDLES CD-ROM
North Sioux City, South Dakota-based Gateway 2000 Inc is now bundling a CD-ROM drive into the $3,000 price for its 66MHz 80486DX2 system: the CD-ROM replaces the 5.25″ floppy drive — now a $60 option.
COMPUSA SALES RISE
CompUSA Inc says that March same-store sales rose 18.3%, and its same-store sales for the quarter rose 19.7%; sales for the third quarter ended March 27 increased by 68.2% to $365m, the retailer added.
EASTMAN KODAK FILE PATENT INFRINGEMENT AGAINST SONY
Eastman Kodak Co has filed a patent infringement suit against Sony Corp and Sony Corp of America over use of a magnetic recording system that was patented by Kodak which uses a record head with a reduced magnetic gap length: Kodak said it has tried to negotiate a licence agreement with Sony over its use of the patent since the late 1980s.
KOI TO SELL REMAINING STAKE IN NETAS
Turkey's Koi privatisation body says its remaining 22% stake in the partly privatised telecommunications equipment company Netas, 51% owned by Northern Telecom Ltd, will be underwritten and sold to foreign institutional investors: the decision follows low investor demand for a 20% public offer in Netas this month when only about 7% was sold.
BELLSOUTH WARNS OF REDUCED PROFITS
BellSouth Corp, Atlanta warns that first quarter profits will be reduced by about $20m to $25m or about $0.05 per share because of costs associated with the severe winter weather that scoured the south: among the extraordinary costs are labour and material costs to maintain and restore telephone service.
EVANS & SUTHERLAND AND NAMCO SIGN CO-OPERATION AGREEMENT
Salt Lake City, Utah-based Evans & Sutherland Computer Corp has signed an agreement with Namco Ltd, Japanese creator of electronic games for technical and market co-operation to explore the possibility of using Evans & Sutherland's real time graphics products to assist Namco in creating the next generation of amusement arcade games machines.
SHARP SHIFTS PC PRODUCTION
Sharp Corp says it has shifted production of low-value personal computers from Japan to companies in Taiwan and Korea: Taiwan's Twinhead International Corp will make notebook computers and while South Korea's Hyundai Electronic Industry Ltd will make desktops; annual requirement for both types is 40,000; the Nara plant in western Japan will now make mainly high value-added products such as the Newton.
INDUSTRY CONSORTIA OUT OF HAND
The mania for forming industry consortia is getting so out of hand that a group of leading manufacturers, software developers and vendors are coming together to make some sense of it and eliminate duplicated effort by creating a single consortium to which everyone will be invited to belong: there is no confirmation of suggestions that the idea was the first initiative from new IBM Corp chief Louis Gerstner, who accedes to the top job today, but we hear that the army of companies is still bogged down arguing about what to call the thing — the best they've dreamed up so far is the Consortium for Object-oriented Methods and Programming for the Unix Terminal and Enterprise-wide Recasting of Interactive Networked Database Undertakings with Software Transitioning and Revision for Y'all, but they can't find a snappy acronym to fit the words.
PORTABLE J INTERPRETER BAD NEWS FOR MAINFRAMES
That new portable interpreter for Ken Iverson's J notation of his APL language (CI No 2,138) is yet another piece of bad news for IBM Corp's mainframe business, because all the so-called rocket scientists at firms like Morgan Stanley & Co — for whom J developer Roger Hui works — that write the fiendishly clever software that is used in program trading of shares on Wall Street, use the APL language — on IBM mainframes, and J promises to enable the software to moved down to much cheaper RISC-based boxes.
SGS-THOMSON TO GET SECOND STIMULUS IN JUNE
SGS-Thomson Microelectronics BV will get its second capital injection of $500m from its backers by the end of June, its French state shareholder CEA-Industrie says: it already has the first payment of $250m each from France and Italy.
LIES, DAMN LIES AND STATISTICS
Microsoft Corp is spraying statistics in all directions to try and convince the industry of NT's success: 60,000 software development kits have been sent out, it says, 25,000 dealers and the like should be trained before the launch, and it has commitments from developers that over 500 applications will be ready by the autumn — however it absolutely refuses to comment on how many copies it expects to sell.
COMPTRONIX COMPLETES RESTRUCTURING
Fraud-ravaged Guntersville, Alabama-based Comptronix Corp has now completed the restructuring of its bank credit agreements and is ready to execute its 1993 business plan.
FOREWARNED IS FOREARMED
Discretion is the better part of valour, or forewarned is forearmed: Associated Press, writing up IBM Corp's layoffs in New York State, says ‘Company officials said there was no violence or threats at the plants, although a Kingston sporting goods store that sells guns closed up shop Tuesday morning.’