

INTEL, GENERAL INSTRUMENT AND MICROSOFT TEAM ON INTERACTIVE TV
Intel Corp, General Instrument Corp and Microsoft Corp are preparing to announce, any day now, a joint venture to develop a personal computer that will sit atop a cable television set to provide access to and control of interactive services offered via cable, the New York Times reports.
As well as up to 500 cable channels, the box would give access to extensive home shopping services and an array of databases.
Intel will supply the 80386 microprocessor, Microsoft will do a version of Windows for the new box, which will be designed by General Instrument.
Microsoft also says it is near agreements with office equipment manufacturers to create intelligent phones, copiers and facsimile machines that can be controlled by a Windows-based grapical interface.
BRITISH TELECOM WINS EUROCONTROL GLOBAL NETWORK SERVICES CONTRACT
British Telecommunications Plc has won its biggest network contract yet, a multi-million pound five-year deal to provide a communications network to the Eurocontrol European air traffic control co-ordination body.
Eurocontrol, based in Brussels, will use Global Network Services as part of its Central Flow Management Unit project.
The network will be able to transmit information about the movements of aircraft throughout Europe, providing a central overview of air traffic conditions not previously available.
The first phase of the contract runs to September 1993, and covers installation of the backbone of the network in 10 sites across Europe.
Over the next five years, implementation of links between 150 pan-European locations will be installed.
DATAPRO COMPUTERS BUYS ABS, SHORTLANDS FROM TRAFALGAR
ABS Computers Ltd, formerly the Allied Business Systems small business computer manufacturer, has long looked a vestigial part of the Trafalgar House Plc empire, too small to turn up in the annual report, and giving the impression that top management was unaware of its existence.
If that was the case, well the Hove, Sussex-based company has now come to the boardroom's attention, and it, together with sister software company Shortlands Computing Services Ltd, has been sold to Datapro Computers Ltd of nearby Horsham.
Datapro, whose name threatens endless confusion with the US market research company of the same name, was very active on the acquisition front three years ago (CI No 1,338), since when things have been relatively quiet.
The terms of the deal values the two companies at £5m, and they will operate as subsidiaries from their present locations.
Datapro specialises in the networked MS-DOS and Macintosh markets, while ABS and Shortlands serve the mid-range Unix market with products such as the Pharoah asset management system, PCMS patient care management system and Shortlands Financials suite.
The companies also bring with them maintenance and support billings worth some £3m a year.
IBM-MOTOROLA MULTICHIP MODULE FOR PARALLEL LYNX
The Center for High Performance Computing, a research and development entity based at Worcester Polytechnic Institute, has come to the rescue of the Motorola Inc 88000 RISC, commissioning a joint effort with the Military Products Operation, Semiconductor Products Sector of Motorola and the Technology Products division of International Business Machines Corp to create a four-processor multichip module based on Motorola's 88110-88410-62110 chip set and IBM's C-4 manufacturing and multichip module technology for use in its planned new Lynx massively parallel real-time multiprocessor and for future commercial operations.
The Lynx is being designed to fit on a 6″ by 9″ circuit board for embedded and mobile real-time distributed applications, and the Center plans to deliver a small number of the four-processor Lynxes to the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency in the fourth quarter of 1993 under a US Defense Department development programme.
IBM will prepare the prototype of the multichip module.
IBM REDUCES RETIREMENT INCENTIVES, BENEFITS
As IBM Corp steps up involuntary lay-offs, it is also lowering the ceiling on payments and benefits for employees in the US that are laid off or voluntarily leave the company.
The change was announced internally on April 2 and will extend to all units in the US.
From July, IBM will give departing employees a maximum of 26 weeks' pay and as much as six months paid medical coverage.
The current maximum is one years' pay and 18 months of medical coverage.
The effect is likely to be to accelerate the requests for redundancy before the boom falls on June 30.
The decision to cut the payments was one of the first made by Louis Gerstner since he became IBM's chief executive on Thursday.
But though Gerstner reviewed the move, he didn't initiate it, IBM said.
IBM will keep its retirement bridge, which allows employees that are within five years of retirement to take unpaid leave until they're eligible to retire with full benefits, but it will no longer provide benefits during the leave, or include employees' unpaid time in any of its length of service benefits.
APPLE MAKES MOVES TO EXPAND IN THE WINDOWS MARKET
Apple Computer Inc is stepping up its efforts in the non-Macintosh market, and yesterday announced that its Apple USA unit plans to create a distribution channel to sell and support Apple imaging peripherals — laser printers and scanners — for Windows, and will work with Ingram Micro Inc, Merisel Inc and TechData Corp to recruit Apple resellers over the next year.
Apple USA will create an on-site service option for the one-year limited warranty included with each printer and scanner and a support programme.
It also plans to bolster the cross-system capabilities of its QuickTime video playback software with QuickTime 1.1 for Windows, which will add capabilities from the Mac version and it will include support for Object Linking and Embedding.
Users will be able to play video in a 320 by 240 window at 30 frames per second.
WITH COMPILED FLASH BASIC, SQL, DICK PICK's OPERATING SYSTEM IS BACK IN BUSINESS
The latest round of upheavals at the ever-unstable company permitting (CI No 2,142), the beginning of May, operating system-cum-database Advanced Pick will finally slide off the fence and land on the database side.
In a flurry of announcements that the company plans to make this year, Advanced Pick Version 6.0 will be the first release to become really intimate with the Unix operating system.
In later releases this year, the company will address other shortcomings by providing SQL access to the database and a graphical user interface.
Versions for Microsoft Corp's Windows NT and IBM Corp's OS/2 2.0 are also in the pipeline, as are new releases of native Pick and Pick for MD-DOS.
Pick Systems Inc has recognised for some time that it will have to concentrate on the database side of Pick's personality in order to survive, but currently only around 40% of sales comes from Pick for Unix, with a few percent going to the MD-DOS implementation and the native Intel Corp iAPX-86 implementation accounting for the biggest part of the business.
Frenzy
The new announcements, the product of an apparent frenzy of development work at the Irvine, California company, aim to change that.
First off, the company has addressed the question of performance.
One of Pick's little idiosyncrasies is that database applications are written in Pick Basic, a superset of the programming language rather out of favour with most business programmers.
Leaving aside any general perceptions of Basic, the Pick version was interpreted rather than compiled and consequently didn't sparkle in speed bench tests.
Version 6 will replace Pick Basic with ‘Flash Basic’, a compiled version of the language.
In fact, it will be compiled twice, says international sales director Greg Shandell.
The first pass produces C code, the second pass results in machine code and bench tests two or three times faster than the previous version.
The two-stage compiler raises the intriguing possibility of gaining a direct C interface into Pick, but the company is adamant that the use of C rather than Flash Basic would be not only difficult, but also really naughty: ‘that is not the intention’ said one company official, adding ‘we only mention the C interim step so that people can understand what is going on’— at least until, version 6.1 — of which, more later.
Going all the way to machine code may speed things up, but in the process it has added to Pick Systems' implementation headaches.
Previously Advanced Pick has sat aloof, on top of Unix, but now the code has been designed to take better advantage of some Unix facilities, and different versions will be needed for different processors.
Nonetheless, Shandell says that by the end of August the company will have versions ‘for most versions of Unix’, by which he means implementations for Unix System V.4, and Motorola Inc's 88open standard plus versions for Santa Cruz Operation Inc, Data General Corp, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG and ICL Plc Unixes and IBM's AIX.
The Data General, Santa Cruz, 88open and RS/6000 versions will appear first, around the end of April, with ICL following around the middle of the year.
And look out for an OS/2 and a Windows NT implementation too.
Version 6.0 of Pick will not have a very long life, however — by the summer, versions 6.1 will be in beta test.
This will, for the first time, enable outside, SQL users to interrogate Pick Databases, making it a more acceptable part of an enterprise computing strategy.
In similar vein, a new set of application programming interfaces and library programs will let C programmers call the Pick system for the first time: until now, Pick programmers could get out to C, but C programmers could not get in.
Finally it will be bundled with a Windows-based graphical client, something that Pick has long shied away from, but which it now accepts that is on a number of users' ‘tick-boxes’.
6.1 is the first product to spring from the company's Moscow operation where about 65 staff are unexpectedly housed in offices in the Olympic stadium.
As with a number of other computer companies, Pick has discovered that there are brains to be hired that previously worked in academia, the military, government and even the KGB.
It is a mix of staff, says Shandell, which also helps get things done when dealing with ministerial bureaucracy.
Back at the products, version 6.2 should be entering beta test by the end of the year and, for the first time, Pick should become properly aware of networks and usable across distributed systems.
With more and more database engines sitting on networked servers, it has been a long time coming — the tricky bit, says Shandell is implementing ‘remote queue pointers’.
Queue pointers are one of the features beloved by Pick aficionados, enabling one database entry to point to another so that the entry in a particular field is actually supplied via a link from another database.
A remote queue pointer extends this process so that the supplying database can be situated on another machine on the network.
Idiosyncratic
But perhaps the best example of Picks System's idiosyncratic development style is happening in the MD-DOS world, where the company is beta-testing multi-user Pick for MD-DOS — to be released later this year.
This looks like a rather odd product — there is already multi-user native Pick for the personal computer, and there is single-user Pick for MD-DOS, so is there a market for a version of Pick that will support multiple users, while a person sits on the server and uses MS-DOS?
Shandell admits that he is not sure — what happened, he says, is that one of the company's distributors developed a facsimile board for Pick for MD-DOS and requested serial-port support.
Pick Systems delivered, and realised in the process that the serial-port support could equally well be used to support dumb terminals.
So the company developed it as a product ‘and we'll see who buys it,’ says Shandell — but then Dick Pick's company has always been a bit like that.
SYBASE TO INTRODUCE OMNISQL GATEWAY, THE FIRST MODULE OF ITS NEW SYSTEM 10 DATABASE RELEASE, THIS WEEK
Ahead of its international user meeting and training conference in San Jose, California on April 27, when the majority of System 10 components will be unveiled, Sybase Inc tomorrow unveils the first module in the latest release of its relational database management system products.
As reported (CI No 2,048), OmniSQL Gateway provides location, vendor and stored procedure transparency to applications, and allows for the integration of existing applications within distributed, multi-vendor database environments.
Other modules and integrated products will roll out on April 27 and over the course of the year.
At the heart of System 10 will be a new version of the Sybase SQL Server, the core database server that the company has been shipping since 1987, which is now out at around some 6,500 sites worldwide.
New features will include ANSI SQL89 compatibility, increased control and security features, and consistency checking and back-up.
Perhaps more interesting are surrounding interoperability features due in the release, which will enable object technologies like a request broker and C++ application programming interfaces to be integrated into the environment.
Moreover, Sybase's relationship with object player Tivoli Systems Inc should result in a bunch of distributed operational control tools coming on stream for System 10 next year, as well as the provision of hooks into the database for Tivoli's forthcoming object products.
The Emeryville, California-based company also plans new ease-of-use functionality layers in System 10 — advanced features of the Sybase system have in the past proven difficult to learn and use in comparison with rival database products.
Sybase expects System 10 products to kick into its revenue stream immediately — its current business is evenly split between sales to new customers and upgrades at existing sites.
Sybase is currently working on new software engineering repository front-end systems using object-oriented and multi-media technologies derived from its Gain Technology acquisition, which according to Sybase vice-president of marketing Stewart Schuster, is now focusing Microsoft Corp-based development on Windows NT rather than Windows or MS-DOS.
Microsoft will stop short of bundling the Sybase SQL Server that it plans to offer with Windows NT, but the two firms are working on a System 10-derived add-on package, with new tools, to appear in the third quarter, which will scale to personal computers, minicomputers and mainframes.
NT ‘very much a client system’
The performance monitor, event logger and control services will be fully integrated within the operating system.
It will be backwards-compatible with the Win32 application programming interface and interoperable with Sybase SQL Server 4.2 for OS/2 and offer multiprocessing support plus an SNA server gateway.
However Microsoft is expected to offer a single-user version of SQL Server for NT that will appear at the same time as the operating system which, according to reports, may cost less than $1,500, and will be targeted at value-added resellers, integrators and corporate developers.
It would provide a low-cost point of entry into the client-server world.
Microsoft may have decided not to bundle SQL Server directly in order maintain good relations with other database suppliers, ‘but why not do it the other way around?’ asks Schuster.
There's a version of SQL Server that comes bundled with OS/2, ‘why not with NT?’
Schuster says relational database performance under NT on Intel Corp boxes won't differ much from results under Unix, but doesn't know about NT on RISC.
In the short term he sees NT very much as a client system, with take-up by the server community a couple of years away.
He's more sceptical of NT's role at the high end.
Unix has managed to win space in mission-critical distributed application areas by offering its inherent diversification, customisable features and scope for optimisation as distinctive advantages for developers.
Despite these kinds of market issues, Microsoft is unlikely to allow developers to add value by tinkering with NT operating system code, ‘but it may have to change this model to win the high end,’ warns Schuster.
MOTOROLA FRETS OVER PERCEPTION OF 88000 AS 88OPEN FUNDING IS WITHDRAWN
Things  took a sudden twist at 88open last week when 19 of the consortium's 23 full-time staffers apparently had their contracts terminated.
Sources said that they have been given six weeks to finish their assignments and another four weeks' severance pay.
The dismissals, believed to be traceable to members backing out of their combined $3.5m pledge to continue funding the operation, leave president Tom Mace, technical vice-president Andy Silverman, operations manager Claudia Marshall, and a secretary, in place.
It is said that 88open will try to continue its activities with no staff and to hive off a separate company to peddle its conformance testing technology as it recently planned.
Mace declined to comment, other than to say that ‘we are in the process of trying to figure out how to set up a separate company.’
Motorola Inc is said to be concerned that the move will fuel suggestions that the 88000 RISC chip is dead even though the company may be at least partially responsible for the shortfall in 88open's funding.
Motorola did not return calls by press time.
ASCOM/TIMEPLEX OFFERS WIDE AREA NETWORKING PRODUCTS
The Woodcliffe, New Jersey-based Ascom Timeplex Inc subsidiary of Ascom Holding AG, Berne, Switzerland, last week launched a series of products aimed at the corporate networking market.
The Ascom Timeplex Time/LAN Access Router is designed to connect Ethernet and Token Ring local area networks among multiple branch sites.
The Ascom Timepac Branch Nodal Processor can integrate SNA/SDLC, X25, Frame Relay, ISDN and other wide area traffic.
It can be used in tandem with the Time/LAN Access Router to consolidate mainframe and local network applications and services over a single wide area backbone.
The company has also added Frame Relay capabilities to its existing Ascom Timeplex Time/LAN family of local network and wide area network products, as well as introducing the Frame Server System, which adds Frame Relay capabilities for other vendors' T1 and E1 multiplexers, routers and bridges.
No prices.
COMPAQ SEEKS MEETING TO LOBBY SLOVAKIA OVER ITS ONEROUS FOREIGN CURRENCY REGULATIONS
Representatives from Compaq Computer Corp's East European headquarters in Munich are trying to arrange a meeting with the Slovakian government in an attempt to persuade it to ease the currency regulations adopted by the National Bank in February.
Under the new rules, local firms importing goods valued at under $30,000 can receive only 15% of the hard currency needed to pay for them in advance, with the remainder allocated only after goods have cleared customs and value-added tax has been paid.
In the case of import orders over $30,000, no hard currency can be released until after goods have cleared customs and been in the country for three months.
The restrictions were initially adopted as a temporary measure designed to slow down the flight of foreign currency reserves from the country.
However, with the economic situation in the country deteriorating seriously, the prospects for the normalisation of trading conditions in the near future do not look promising.
The currency convertability restrictions threaten to wipe out the country's domestic base of small resellers unless suppliers opt to extend credit facilities further, but to date there has been no  indication that suppliers are prepared to take such steps.
Compaq area sales manager Bernard Schaffer commented ‘We have some flexibility, but we can't change the world,’ adding ‘the government is definitely under pressure, but the rules will hurt everybody in the market and finally they will hurt Slovakia.’
Western firms which have chosen to supply Slovakia from subsidiaries in Prague are facing the additional burden of near chaos at the Czech-Slovak border, with guards and officials struggling to understand and implement new import regulations in the context of highly ‘dynamic’ bilateral relations.
To make matters worse, the Czech-Slovak clearing system has also all but ground to a halt and simple financial transactions between companies in the two the states are currently taking one to two months to complete, according to local businessmen.
ICL NOW HAS OFFICEPOWER IN HUNGARIAN
ICL Plc has formally announced the availability of the Hungarian language version of Officepower.
Government and national accounts business unit manager Stewart Oldroyd, claimed that the company has already signed up a few orders prior to the official release, the most significant of which is with the National Bank of Hungary.
The bank took the package as part of a $3m hardware and software deal concluded in January.
In a separate announcement ICL revealed that it is considering setting up a personal computer sales operation in the country.
ICL Hungary general manager Ian Leach is currently in the UK discussing the possibilities with ICL subsidiary Technology Plc, though it may be July before a final decision is taken.
SOFTWARE 602 OF CZECH REPUBLIC BACKS DOWN OVER PIRACY SUIT
Software602, the Czech Republic's largest packaged software vendor, announced it has shelved plans to prosecute a group of Czech teenagers that it alleged had illegally copied software packages belonging to it after the Business Software Alliance refuted the company's assertions that it was backing the case.
The firm has now decided to settle for an apology from the youths, which will be published in the local press.
The Alliance contacted Software602 about the intended prosecution following adverse publicity in the East European press.
Shortly afterwards, Software602 sales manager Jan Muhlfeit announced ‘Both Software602 and BSA CS (Czech branch) would like to settle this case very mildly.’
The action was to have been the first brought under the Czech Republic's software piracy laws.
The Software Alliance's European Counsel, Brad Smith, said ‘Our policy is that we don't prosecute people who aren't adults — it's as simple as that.’
However, Smith effectively confirmed Muhlfeit's assertions that a case is to be brought against an electronic bulletin board service company, which is reported to have been distributing software for free as part of its service to its subscribers.
CODA WINS FIRST HUNGARIAN ORDER, OPENS IN BUDAPEST
After operating in the Czech and Slovak republics for the past 18 months, Leeds accounting software supplier Coda Ltd has not only won its first contract in Hungary, but also decided to open an office in Budapest, which began trading on April 1.
The deal is worth £125,000, and Coda will supply cellular phone company Westel — the joint venture between state-owned Hungarian Telecommunications Co and US West Inc — with its integrated accounting system; this runs on mid-range machines such as IBM Corp's AS/400, and Digital Equipment Corp's VAX and Alpha.
HUNGARY SEEKS TENDERS FOR SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM
The Hungarian government is inviting tenders for a project to computerise the social security system.
The project will be funded by the World Bank which is to provide loans totalling $130m over the next four to six years to pay for hardware, software, consultancy and data entry.
Front runners for this project are thought to be ICL Plc, Data General Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co.
The Hungarian tax office is also expected to invite bids shortly for the supply of a mainframe-sized central system and 20 large Unix servers destined for regional offices along with related peripherals.
This project will also be funded from World Bank loans.
DATAQUEST RALLIES SUPPORT FOR CONFERENCES IN JUNE
The Invitational Computer Conferences division of Dataquest will hold a series of exhibitions in Central and Eastern Europe this June.
The shows will take place at the Duna InterContinental in Budapest on June 15, the Atrium in Prague on June 18, and at the Marriot in Warsaw on 22 June.
Further details, including the topics of the seminars, will be made available when the Data quest unit formally announces the conference programme after the CeBit show in Hannover.
So far, 19 exhibitors have signed up for the events, including 3Com Corp, Conner Peripherals Inc, Fujitsu Ltd, Quantum Corp, Seagate Technology Corp and Ungermann-Bass Inc.
According to Kate Attila, Director of European Conferences, last year the Dataquest conferences attracted 700 visitors to Budapest, 900 to Prague and 500 to Poland.
PARSYTEC BUILDS ITS DESKTOP PARALLEL XPLORER, WITH UP TO 16 PROCESSORS, AROUND THE T9000 TRANSPUTER
Aachen-based Parsytec GmbH now has what it claims to be the world's first high performance parallel desktop system, Xplorer, based on the Inmos Ltd T9000 Transputer.
It comprises between eight to 16 Transputers, with a choice of between 8Mb and 32Mb memory on each node.
Extra input-output interfaces, mass storage subsystems and image processing modules can be added to boost performance, with users offered the choice of Inmos's High Performance Transputer Modules or Parsytec's own Transputer Image Processing modules.
Up to four Xplorer systems, totalling 64 processors, also can be connected.
Xplorer supports both the Inmos software tool set and Parsytec's Parix system.
Parsytec reckons the system offers better performance than traditional high end workstations and is anticipating that it will be used mainly for graphics, design and animation; technical and economic modelling; manufacturing and office automation systems.
An eight-processor version will cost around £17,000 and a 16-processor machine £27,000.
Pre-final spec T9000-based versions will ship in June or July followed by final spec versions in the fourth quarter.
According to Parsytec, the Xplorer offers users a migration path to its GigaCube massively parallel supercomputers which are also to use T9000s.
The company is uncertain as to whether it will phase out its current T805-based GigaCubes just yet — the decision will depend on customer demand.
Availability will be as for the Xplorer, with prices starting at £34,000 for an eight-node machine and ranging up to £4m for a 1,000-processor model.
Meantime, to help users assess the T9000, Parsytec is offering interested parties the chance to bench-test applications using a special evaluation kit.
This includes a module with T9000, 8Mb Dynamic RAM and T805 processor connected to a Sparc workstation.
The T9000 memory is laid out as a dual-ported memory and is therefore accessible for measurements by the T805.
Special software running on the workstation parallelises C-based programs using Parix, ACE compilers and the Inmos C Toolset compiler.
The kit will be made available to some customers and other interested parties for around the cost of a day's consultancy.
Parsytec reckons the tests it has done on lower clock frequencies point to a six- to ten-fold performance increase over the T805.
ASSOCIATED COMPUTER EXPERTS ADDS COMPILERS FOR THE T9000
Associated Computer Experts BV in Amsterdam has announced the extension of its Expert compiler range to include T9000 compilers for K&R, C, ANSI-C, Fortran-77, Modula-2 and Pascal.
A suite of general purpose program development tools is also available.
All Expert compilers share the same intermediate code which is processed by a common global optimiser.
The compiler has an industry standard COFF T9000 assembler and COFF linkage editor and there is integrated debug support for source level and assembly level debugging.
The compilers are also compliant with the proposed Transputer Binary Compatibility Standard for the T9000.
No prices were given.
PACIFIC PARALLEL OFFERS T9000 BOARDS FOR NuBUS MACINTOSHES
Pacific Parallel Research Inc of Cardiff by the Sea, California has a T9000 interface for NuBus Macintosh computers with its Pac8 and Pac2 boards that can accept Inmos Ltd's T9000 DevTRAM module.
This is a size six Transputer Module measuring around 3.5″ by 6.3″ with one 40MHz T9000 processor and at least 4Mb of  60ns Dynamic RAM.
It is capable of 200 MIPS and 25 MFLOPS.
The DevTram can also use T805 and T425 Transputers.
Off-board links and subsystem support for connecting several Pac8 and Pac2 boards will be available too.
High Performance Transputer Module support is offered courtesy of Pacific Parallel's Mac-T9000 NuBus interface board.
This features a single 50MHz T9000 with up to 128Mb of memory.
It can also accommodate up to three 50MHz T9000 processors on High Performance Modules, each with up to 8Mb of  60ns DRAM.
A portion of the Mac-T9000's memory is addressable from the Macintosh's main memory.
The device will also implement Apple Computer Inc's QuickRing bus protocol for data transfers of up to 200Mbps between NuBus boards.
No prices.
KODAK's EKTRON HAS PARALLEL BOSS-9000 FOR IMAGING
Eastman Kodak Co company Ektron Applied Imaging Inc, based in Bedford, Massachusetts, has announced its Boss-9000 parallel processor, based on the T9000 Transputer.
The system will available in August with prices starting at $45,000 for an entry-level, 12 processor model 9012 with 300 MFLOPS.
A 252-processor model 9252, offering 6,300 MFLOPS performance is $630,000.
Current Ektron Boss users can upgrade to the Boss-9000 without rewriting application code, the company says.
The Boss-9000 can interface with Unix workstations or real-time data acquisition systems via a VMEbus interface.
By using 64-bit data transfer rates, the system can achieve rates of over 40Mbps on the VME bus.
Each input-output  processor has an extra 4Mb of memory that is accessible from the VMEbus and node.
Programmers can access this memory from outside the parallel processor by using memory mapping.
Users can scale the Boss system up from a single node to 456 nodes, to give 114.6GFlops performance.
The T9000's built-in communications links enable the internal bandwidth of the parallel processor to expand proportionately to the number of processing nodes.
Boss systems are currently used for a range of applications including remote sensing, VLSI wafer  inspection , film editing, element analysis, three-dimensional reconstruction, molecular modelling and print-quality control.
FERRANTI-THOMSON WILL USE T9000 IN MERLIN SONAR
Ferranti-Thomson Sonar Systems UK Ltd, based in Stockport, is to use the T9000 Transputer in the Active Dipping Sonar it is developing for the Royal Navy's £100m Merlin Anti-Submarine Warfare helicopter.
Ferranti-Thomson, which already uses T200s and T800s in current sonar processing systems, will use the T9000 as the main processing engine in the sonar, handling front-end signal processing, back-end analysis and display functions.
WHITE CROSS PLANS TO MOVE TO THE T9000 NEXT YEAR
Bracknell, Berkshire-based White Cross Systems Ltd says it plans to develop a new generation of parallel database servers based on the T9000 Transputer for next year.
The company already uses Inmos Ltd's T425 processors in its 9010 Database Server and reckons that the T9000 will improve performance levels ten-fold.
ICL GERMANY BATTLES THROUGH THE RECESSION AND MANAGES A PROFIT
Despite interim turnover growth of 17.6% at ICL Technology GmbH, the German company did not hit its target for the full year due to poor trading conditions — growth was approximately 10%.
As a result, Computerwoche reports, the Dusseldorf-based company intends to spend less time and money on attending big computer shows, and in future will spend its cash on sponsoring staff and holding symposia that are more tuned in to customer needs.
The fiscal year to December 31 1992 should actually have been a year of consolidation.
About 12 months ago, ICL Technology chief Jurgen Olschewski could neither envisage revenue growth nor imagine hitting the previous year's profit levels.
But although the company managed to exceed its targets by the half year stage, it wasn't able to maintain such growth levels — turnover for the entire year grew only 10% to $253m.
Olschewski said that profits were around the two figure million mark, but wouldn't provide more specific details.
Something that he didn't take into account when working out forecasts, however, was that ICL would set up a new subsidiary, ICL PC GmbH.
This was supposed to be operational from January 1 1993, but according to Olschewski, the group had difficulties in finding premises.
Also, because of the slackening off of growth at ICL Technology in the second half, more attention than expected had to be devoted to its activities.
ICL PC was forecast to start work in Mainz-Kastell on March 1, with some 25 workers looking after both private customers and middle-sized companies.
Olschewski had no worries about competing in the difficult personal computer market, saying ‘We are not concerned about unit numbers, but about quality.
There are enough end-users that expect more from their manufacturers than just supply of hardware’.
For some time, Olschewski has also been trying to change the image of the German subsidiary from being a hardware manufacturer to a service provider.
Unfortunately, the desire and the reality don't match — the company still makes most of its money from hardware, while only $51m of the total $253m turnover comes from services.
MERCURY ONE TO ONE REVEALS MORE PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS DETAILS
The countdown to launch of the Personal Communications Network cellular mobile telephone service in the UK is well under way, and Mercury Communications Ltd's Mercury One-to-One has released further details of its planned Personal Communications service, which will include cost control features.
BillCheck, which will be part of the standard service available to all customers, enables users to call Customer Services at any time to check on how much they have spent so far in that month.
The optional BillLimit feature enables customers to budget by setting a monthly limit.
Mercury will then let customers know when they have reached that limit, so that users can choose whether or not to make further calls.
Call waiting, call divert and call barring facilities will also be included in the package.
Mercury One-to-One has also confirmed that it is to beta test the service before the launch, which is planned for this summer.
A limited number of mainly business customers will be invited to try the service out.
OUT OF THE PUBLIC GAZE, CODA SHOWS HOW UK SOFTWARE CAN SUCCEED IN THE US AND ACROSS THE GLOBE
Accounting software house Coda Plc beat expectations for its year to October 31 due to better than anticipated sales in the Netherlands and US, especially for its AS/400 product.
Pre-tax profits for the year ending October 31 rose 14.9% to £3.2m, while turnover increased 40.6% to £17.9m.
And according to managing director Rodney Potts, this was achieved despite heavy investment in overseas expansion and in developing a new Posix-compliant product, Open Accounting, which was launched last year.
Open Accounting was originally developed on Hewlett-Packard Co's HP 9000 range, but has since been implemented for the RS/6000, Sequent Computer Systems Corp boxes and Digital Equipment Corp's Alpha running OSF/1.
Publicity manager David Turner, said that Open Accounting took two years to develop because the Harrogate, Yorkshire company writes software from scratch for each new architecture.
This, he said, is in contrast to many of its competitors — they simply convert software for different environments, and it often ‘doesn't run very well’.
Another reason for the success of Coda's software, he reckons, is that its CODA-IAS integrated accounting system is an on-line, real-time system.
All ledgers are kept on one database, and are automatically updated when new information is added.
Such a system has become increasingly popular, Turner says, because companies are becoming increasingly interested in management accounting, and so need to have information at their fingertips at all times.
Conversely, most of the group's competitors offer modular software that has to processed in batch, generally overnight.
Apart from the above mentioned hardware, Coda's software also runs on Hewlett-Packard Co's HP 3000, DEC VAXes and IBM Corp AS/400s.
Revenues generated from VAXes grew 22% to £11.1m, and although Turner said that licence sales ‘have really slowed’ because people aren't buying the machines much any more, a high proportion of the £11.1m came from maintenance and services to the group's existing 500 or so VAX customers.
Japan another possibility
In 1992, VAX-related revenues made up 70% of total group turnover, but Turner expects this to drop to 60% in 1993 as AS/400 business continues to grow.
This year, sales here increased 133% to £5.6m, and made up 45% of all new licence sales.
Although Coda has offered AS/400 software since the box was launched in 1988, Turner says that sales have only taken off over the past two years, and it is now the group's fastest-growing market.
He expects a similar situation with Alpha, but says the company has just signed its first large contract in the US.
Coda's business is split between new licence sales, which generated £11.2m in 1992, professional services, including consultancy and training, which brought in £2.9m, and maintenance, worth £3.8m last year.
According to Turner, it is basing its strategy for growth on further expansion into the international arena, a necessary tactic as so many of its customers are multinationals, and require global support.
Coda Inc currently has seven offices in the US, and saw sales increase 49% to $10.6m, which, Turner reckons, makes it one of the few UK companies to have succeeded in such a notoriously dangerous market.
Holland is another major market for the company.
Turnover from this region grew 260% to £1.3m, because, Turner says, it seems to have been less affected by recession than other parts of Europe, and a lot of multinationals are based there.
This year, Coda also opened offices in Germany, Hungary, Singapore, Australia, and Hong Kong, and is in the process of opening more in Belgium and Sweden.
And by the end of the year, it expects further sites to be fully operational in Spain and Italy.
Japan is another possibility.
Meanwhile, business in Hungary and the Czech and Slovak republics is going very well, Turner says, because their respective governments have told firms they must get their financial systems up to Western standards.
Although the deadline was the end of last year, many companies still haven't done so, so there is still much potential for growth, especially as these countries have far less foreign debt than any of their Eastern European neighbours.
While Russia is an area of interest, he doesn't believe Coda will set up shop there over the next couple of years at least, until economic stability is re-established.
Coda has published its report and accounts each year since 1987 because, Turner says, its products are generally sold to the financial directors of large corporations and they always want the security of knowing how a firm is doing and if it will still be around in a few years.
But, he says, Coda has no intention of going public in the foreseeable future — it likes its independence too much.
The majority of shares are held by Rodney Potts and co-founder and financial director Chris Lennox, the rest by staff.
TEN KEY POINTS FOR GERSTNER TO ADDRESS URGENTLY, AS SEEN BY STEPHEN SMITH
IBM Corp's new chief executive is being swamped with gratuitous advice on what he should do to turn the company around, but that coming from Stephen Smith, who has tracked the computer industry for PaineWebber Inc for 11 years, is probably worth more of Gerstner's attention than most.
Ahead of the appointment of Gerstner, Smith put together a report that listed 10 key things that the new man at IBM should do, and his report has been picked up by Barron's magazine.
The first is to get a clear mandate from the board, which must include the ability to downsize further as necessary, including layoffs, and change the corporate culture, getting rid of the current organisational structure.
The second, one that we have been promoting, is to bring in a new team of professional managers, each experienced at running a multibillion-dollar business unit.
Even broken up, each piece of IBM is as big as most companies on the outside.
Remember that IBM is very inbred, says Smith — can you think of anyone who works at IBM who didn't join straight from college?
IBMers are typically lifers
IBMers are typically lifers.
Since IBM has been very paternalistic in the past, it hasn't bred the sort of independent managers that, say, General Electric Co has.
His third requirement is top-notch chief financial officer who won't see the world through the rose-coloured glasses of an ex-salesman.
The fourth is not to believe his own publicity and think that the problem is fixed if the share price goes up.
Fifth, listen to the real customers — and not just the information systems managers of IBM's 10 top mainframe customers — part of the problem is that IBM pays too much attention to their needs and not enough to what's going on elsewhere, says Smith.
Sixth, get off the ‘growth for growth's sake’ kick.
Stop asking, ‘How can we generate more revenue to cover the cost of our expensive worldwide sales and marketing organisations?’
These employ close to two-thirds of IBM's 300,000 strong workforce: remember that Dell Computer Corp's success has come from engineering the best, lowest-cost distribution strategy, not to a better product.
Ask ‘What is the most efficient, lowest-cost way to deliver and support each product?’ and downsize accordingly.
Seventh, but one of the most important, Gerstner must get a handle on IBM's debt —‘Make sure you really understand why IBM's debt has ballooned in the past five years,’ advises Smith.
‘Figure out why the mainframe business isn't the best cash cow ever made.
Is this a function of the mainframe business, or is it a function of IBM's actions in this market?’
He suggests that IBM has been using cash to offer attractive financing to help sell mainframes to generate the revenue growth to cover the cost of its 180,000-strong mainframe-oriented sales and service organisations, and needs to work out how to make the mainframe business the cash cow it should be, focussing on the near $20,000m in sales, general and administrative costs, not the $6,500m for research and development, pointing out that saying it is cutting $1,000m off this, mainly on mainframes, while not making a proportionate cut in costs, is a recipe for disaster.
His eighth point is another that we have been pushing — that Gerstner should not fooled into thinking the ‘services’ business will automatically become IBM's saviour.
‘Tell me which struggling hardware vendor isn't playing the same game?,’ he says: ‘challenge the assumption that you can effectively redeploy all your excess headcount into this catchall.
Remember, this is already a low-margin business.’
Ninth, IBM software is largely mainframe and minicomputer software.
‘Can you name a hot personal computer software product written by IBM?
Has there ever been one?
How much money is IBM pouring down the drain with OS/2?
IBM's ‘networking business’ is really mainframe networking and most of its businesses are just pieces of the mainframe and minicomputer businesses.
And tenth, Smith advises, stop protecting dying business — if you don't obsolete your own products, someone else will.
Give the IBM business units free rein to compete.
COMPANY RESULTS
ALC Communications Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits up 1,072% at $7.2m, after $2.3m tax credits this time and $700,000 last time, on turnover up 10.9% at $95.7m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 289.5% at $20.8m, after $7m tax credits this time and $2.6m last time, on turnover that rose 8.4% to $376.1m.
Net per share amounted to $0.23 in the quarter, and to $0.74 in the year.
Barrister Information Systems Inc has turned in third quarter net profits of $4,000 against losses of $434,000 last time, on turnover that fell by 4.8% to $3.8m; net profit for the nine months stood at $198,000 against losses of $597,000 last time, on turnover that fell by 10.2% to $11.9m.
BGS Systems Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 1.8% at $1.8m, on turnover up 6.7% at $8m; net profit for the year to January 31 was up 16.3% at $6.7m, on turnover that rose 19.7% to $30.3m.
Net earnings per share rose 1.9% to $0.55 in the quarter, and 15.4% to $2.10 in the year.
Capital Associates Inc has turned in third quarter net profits of $278,000 against losses of $2.5m last time, on turnover down 21% at $26.7m; net profit for the nine months stood at $805,000 against losses of $9m last time, on turnover that fell 15.5% to $101.8m.
Net per share amounted to $0.03 in the quarter, and to $0.08 in the nine months.
Comparisons are with restated figures.
Marshall Industries reported second quarter net up 48.9% at $6.0m on sales up 11.4% at $154.7m; mid-term net rose 48.2% to $12.1m on sales up 10.9% at $306.5m.
Net per share rose 45.8% to $0.70 in the quarter, 47.4% to $1.40 in the half.
Pitney Bowes Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 7.6% at $94.6m, after $5.3m gains from discontinued operations last time, on turnover that rose 2.4% at $927.7m; net profit for the year to December 31 was down 66.1% at $100.2m, after $214.6m charges from the cumulative effect of an accounting change as well as $2.7m gains from discontinued operations this time and $7.4m gains last time, on turnover that rose 3% to $3,434.1m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted for a two-for-one stock split paid in June 1992, rose 9.1% to $0.60 in the quarter, fell 65.9% to $0.63 in the year.
Timberline Software Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 2.4% at $297,000, on turnover up 2.8% at $4.1m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 1,950% at $328,000, on turnover that rose 17.4% to $14.9m.
Net per share remained at $0.13 in the quarter, rose 1,300% to $0.14 in the year.
Western Micro Technology Inc has reported net profit of $69,000 for the year to December 31 against losses of $3m last time, after $162,000 losses from discontinued operations this time and $2.5m losses last time, including net charges of $1.2m from the disposal of discontinued operations, and $189,000 gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change, on turnover that fell 6% to $78.3m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.02 in the year.
Groupe Videotron LTEE has reported second quarter net profits up 250.2% at $2.9m, after $5.7m losses from discontinued operations this time and $426,471 losses last time, on turnover up 11.6% at $112.6m; mid-term net losses amounted to $6.4m up from losses of $2m last time, after $6.4m losses from discontinued operations this time and $2m losses last time, on turnover up 12% at $226.9m.
Net per share amounted to $0.01 in the quarter, and to $0.11 in the half.
Comparisons are made with restated figures to reflect discontinued operations.
Amounts are converted at $0.77 to the Canadian dollar.
IBM CONTINUES COST CUTTING
The latest unit to go in IBM Corp's cutting loose of its surplus manufacturing plants, which started with four factories in Europe last week, is IBM Canada Ltd's Toronto manufacturing division, which is to become a separate, wholly owned subsidiary with a different, but as yet undetermined, name and logo: the Toronto division employs about 900 and has export revenues of some $800m annually; all employees will be offered positions with the new company, which will continue to manufacture products for IBM — for the time being at least, and will also seek work outside the company.
BILL GATES FRIMS UP PRICES FOR WINDOWS NT
Bill Gates has firmed up prices for Microsoft Corp's Windows NT operating system, but the first ships date has moved off into the future again, and ‘no later than’ August 1 is the new target: according to Gates, in comments reported in PC Week, large corporate customers looking to upgrade from Windows 3 to NT will be able to do so for less than $100 per desktop — the upgrade price for Windows users will be $300, which translates to $180 ‘on the street’and less than ‘$100 per system’after deep volume discounts, Gates told a meeting of the Corporate Association of Microcomputer Professionals in Chicago; OS/2 users will be offered ‘extremely low prices;’NT's suggested retail price for new — desktop — users will be $500; more bad news is that memory requirements are continuing to soar — Gates last week recommended that NT users install 16Mb on their desktop machines, even though the documentation may specify 12Mb — and no more than about 10% of 80486 machines have 16Mb; servers could require more than 16Mb, he added; initial NT buyers will need to have specific applications in mind for it —‘If you don't know why you want NT, you probably don't want NT,’he said.
MORE ON THE ‘WINDOWS LAYER’
On the subject of a ‘Windows layer’ for Unix, the Microsoft Corp chairman said that the company is considering either libraries that would enable developers to recompile Windows software, or source-code licences that would allow third parties create and sell run-time versions of Windows for Unix, a concept also used in the tool code-named Wings, formerly Alar, which recompiles Windows applications to run on the Macintosh; the strategy is to get developers to write just to the Windows programming interface, even for alternative operating systems, such as Unix and System 7.
SOFTWARE PUBLISHING WARNS OF SHORTFALL IN SECOND QUARTER
Software Publishing Corp warns that a turnover shortfall in the second quarter will yield share earnings between $0.15 and $0.17, compared with $0.32, on turnover of $43.4m in the year-ago period: second quarter revenues are expected to come in between $31m and $33m, and it blames continued price competition and soft international demand.
ASK COMPUTER SYSTEMS WARNS OF LOSS
Ask Computer Systems Inc warns that it will only break even, and may make a loss for its fiscal third quarter, adding that the poor profit forecast results from its failure to close about $10m in sales in the period but that does not necessarily mean the company permanently lost those sales; the company said a significant amount of software licence sales it had expected for the quarter did not close in time.
IBM PC BUSINESS MAY MAKE PROFIT
IBM Corp says its Personal Computer Co shipped 30% to 35% more personal computers in the first quarter than it did during the year-ago period, and vice-chairman Jack Kuehler expects it to be ‘reasonably profitable’ in 1993 — but the personal computer business is now so volatile that making forecasts more than a quarter ahead is a mug's game: following Conner Peripherals Inc's warning on Friday that it is seeing oversupply and soft demand for disk drives (CI No 2,142), observers are saying that grey market prices for 80486s are now weak; Finis Conner said on Friday that Conner would have to slash production and payrolls in the months ahead to remain competitive —‘The market is in total disarray,’he said; ‘the pricing that has occurred in the last four to five days has been something I've never seen believes the booming personal computer industry is showing signs of slowing after being fuelled for over two years by the price war.
G TSENG LABS SHIPS ET4000/W32 GRAPHICS ACCELERATORS
Newtown, Pennsylvania-based Tseng Labs Inc began volume shipments last month of its ET4000/W32 graphics accelerator for integration into the Dell Computer Corp performance series of personal computers.
ITALIAN CABINET AGREES TO CREATE SINGLE TELEPHONE COMPANY
An Italian cabinet committee has approved plans to create a single telephone company, Telecom Italia SpA by the end of 1995 out of a merger of holding company Stet SpA, Sociata Italiana per l'esercisio delle Telecomunicazioni pA, the main phone company, Italcable SpA, the international carrier, and the satellite operator Telespazio SpA, according to the Financial Times.
MICRO FOCUS SET TO CONTINUE WITH MICROSOFT AGREEMENT?
Responding to what they say are inaccurate press stories — which we have not seen — Micro Focus Plc has issued a statement with Microsoft Corp's concurrence, saying that their current agreement between will expire on September 30, but that both want to continue their business relationship into the future and are exploring the terms for the new agreement; as if to emphasise the point, Microsoft yesterday announced shipment of Microsoft Cobol professional development system version 5.0 for Windows, with support for the Visual Basic programming system for Windows and embedded structure query language; it says the new release incorporates the latest version of the Micro Focus compiler, and creates executable files faster and smaller than previous releases; it is $900, now.
MICROCOMPUTER PRODUCTS RELEASE ACCURA MODEMS
Atlanta-based Hayes Microcomputer Products Inc is now putting its Accura modems through computer stores: two modems are available at between $80 and $340, Hayes said.
APPLE COMPUTER FIGHTS INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE BACK CLAIM
Apple Computer Inc says it is fighting a claim by the US Internal Revenue Service that it owes $290m in back taxes for 1987 and 1988: issues include transactions with offshore entities, transfer pricing and the timing of deductions; Apple has appealed to the US Tax Court.
HERE TODAY, GONE TOMORROW?
In case anyone should think that some of our commentary on IBM Corp and its problems is a little apocalyptic, hear what they are saying on the other side of the Atlantic: ‘With IBM, there's a question in my mind whether the company is going to exist five years from now,’ Kenneth Heebner of Boston fund manager Capital Growth Management commented to the Wall Street Journal.
HAYES MICROCOMPUTER PRESS RELEASES…
Look out anyone not using a Hayes Microcomputer Products Inc modem but receiving Hayes press releases — and it will be hail and farewell in the middle of this item, because the company has started putting the cryptic line H-0193GB+++AT at the bottom of each page of its electronically distributed releases: the UK office says this is part of the corporate format — it is completely incidental, of course that the sequence will cause any modems that don't use Hayes's patented escape sequence to drop off-line.