

ORACLE JOINS FORCES WITH OMRON ON FUZZY DATABASE SEARCH LOGIC
Oracle Systems Corp has found a new partner in Japan in the shape of the diversifying point-of-sale terminal specialist Omron Corp, Reuter reports from Tokyo.
The two companies will team up to develop database software with fuzzy search capabilities.
Omron has already developed a system that it can use on its own Luna Unix workstations, and the joint development effort involves development of a system that can use inference based on vague concepts in a wide range of applications.
There is no target date set for completion of the new project.
SILICON GRAPHICS, GEORGE LUCAS's MOVIE FIRM ALLY
Silicon Graphics Inc is getting into the fun-and-games end of the business in a big way and has formed a joint venture with Industrial Light & Magic, a division of George Lucas's Lucas Digital Ltd special effects production company: the new venture will create digital imagery for the entertainment industry.
JEDI, the Joint Environment for Digital Imaging, will be based at the offices of Industrial Light in San Rafael, and will combine proprietary digital scanning and film recording technology with an advanced digital production facility, serving the film television, commercial and attraction industries.
The aim is to make Industrial Light & Magic's imagery to become more affordable to the entertainment industry, Star Wars creator Lucas says.
The Joint Environment will be linked through digital tie-lines to facilities in Los Angeles and Hollywood and can be delivered via satellite throughout the world so that Industrial Light can deliver broadcast-quality images directly to clients, without distortions of cable transmission.
SHARP TO MAKE SUPERTWIST COLOUR PANELS IN THE US
Sharp Corp aims to become the first Japanese company to make colour liquid crystal displays overseas when it starts manufacturing its super-twisted nematic displays — the lower-cost, lower performance colour displays — at its Sharp Microelectronics Technology Inc in Camas, Washington.
It already makes black and white displays in the US, but demand for notebook personal computers with colour displays is growing, and Sharp says it would rather make these locally than export them from Japan, where they are still subject to perverse US anti-dumping duties.
It says it plans to start US production within two years.
PACIFIC BELL EYES BROADBAND ISDN FOR ALL IN CALIFORNIA
The Pacific Bell Inc arm of Pacific Telesis Group Inc does not believe that the folks across the Pacific should be the only ones to have universally available full broadband ISDN by the year 2015, and it says it is discussing forming alliances with cable companies to help in the building of a super data highway in California over the next decade.
It has been outlining a plan to build a unified network to all California homes by 2015 that would provide the gamut of information and entertainment services — home shopping, entertainment and video telephone capability.
It will begin test marketing various services over the next 18 months.
NCR TO CUT 125 DAYTON JOBS
NCR Corp is to cut 125 jobs over the next two months as a result of organisational changes.
The cuts will come in the US Group division, which is responsible for product sales and marketing, which now has 16,000 employees.
All the job cuts will be within the Dayton, Ohio office, which employs about 5,200.
IBM, NATSEMI PUSH FOR 16Mbps MULTIMEDIA ETHERNET
IBM Corp and National Semiconductor Corp are pushing isochronous Ethernet, a new variant of the local area network standard that promises smooth multimedia communications.
Isochronous Ethernet, which can carry voice, video, image and data at speeds up to 16Mbps, will be incorporated into IBM's family of ValuePoint personal computers by the first half of next year, Joe Panella, programme manager for IBM's Entry Systems Technologies Division in Boca Raton, Florida told US PC Week.
‘We are targeting isochronous Ethernet first because there is no mechanism for 10Base-T to support multimedia,’ he said.
Around the same time, NatSemi will deliver isochronous Ethernet chips to adaptor board manufacturers for developing AT bus adaptors, and possibly its own boards and driver software.
Isochronous Ethernet adds 6Mbps of bandwidth to existing 10Mbps 10Base-T Ethernet networks, and the extra bandwidth is then divided into 96 64Kbps ISDN B channels, which provides continuous bandwidth without interruption.
Using isochronous Ethernet, users will be able to transmit low-resolution images and real-time video at speeds ranging from seven to 10 frames per second, and higher-quality videos at speeds 16 to 33 frames per second.
To enable users to share real-time video over Synchronous Optical Network, Asynchronous Transfer Mode, FDDI II and T-1, an isochronous Ethernet hub connects directly to a PABX or Centrex switch.
To get round the fact that the CSMA/CD carrier-sense multiple access with collision detection protocol prevents two nodes from transmitting data at the same time, so that video signals could get interrupted, isochronous Ethernet time-stamps the packets so they can be guaranteed to arrive at the recipient's computer at the same time.
GEAC BUYS DOWN UNDER
Geac Computer Corp, Aprkham, Ontario has made another acquisition, picking up Computer Library Services International (Australia) Pty Ltd of Melbourne for some $800,000.
Computer Library provides CD-ROM network systems and database subscriptions to Australian libraries, and distributes the LIBS 100plus products in Australia; its sales are running at some $3.3m a year.
REUTERS BUYS AMERICAN REAL-TIME
Reuters America Holdings Inc has acquired American Real-Time Services Inc, which provides information systems integration services to US financial markets on undisclosed terms.
American Real-Time's strategy is to integrate market news and price data from a variety of vendors via proprietary software that runs on a range of client hardware.
THE 88OPEN RISC SUPPORTERS CLUB LOOKS TO LIFE AFTER THE MOTOROLA 88000
88open's world shrinks painfully with every defection from the Motorola Inc 88000 RISC camp, or the adoption of a dual-architecture strategy by a formerly loyal vendor.
Members of the not-for-profit support organisation, other hardware developers and independent software vendors that have passed through its binary testing and certification schemes are nevertheless full of praise for the work 88open has done.
Now reduced to a shell with news that members are believed to  have backed out of providing their $3.5m dues (CI No 2,143), the organisation must now offer its testing services on other chip architectures if it is to survive in any form.
Last year, on the back of industry acclaim for its work, 88open took some first steps beyond the 88000 horizon by offering its binary testing suites to other  manufacturers and bodies.
Precision RISC
It netted only Hewlett-Packard Co and the Precision Architecture RISC Organisation as a customer.
Potential users apparently wanted 88open to undertake the difficult job of converting and administering the test suites for their architectures too, something not possible under 88open's current charter.
The 88open offshoot will come into being in or around May, provided it doesn't get itself bought outright before that happens.
It will bring with it some very focused ideas about binary compatibility and implementation issues that face the industry, derived from its experience with the 88000.
The problem with source code for example— even standardised and tested source code — is that it always ends up going through a variety of different compilation systems.
This process means, inevitably, that the code will get different calls when running under different operating systems.
So one of the first issues to be resolved, as Steve Heath, director of 88open operations in Europe sees it, is to define the ways in which different compilers interpret source code and how, in turn, operating systems use different compilers and compilation techniques.
At this level, the number of bits used, alignment and requirement for there being no reserved bits in the mechanisms becomes important.
This is processor-independent stuff, according to Heath, who says most Reduced Instruction Set Computing architectures already share common notions in these areas and most are now able to deal with software that is written to either Big Endian or Little Endian byte ordering styles.
Once terms of reference for the way code, compilers and operating systems work together are established, things that prevent software being implemented for different systems need to be addressed.
There is a collection of these miscreants — Heath identifies file formats, disk formats and install scripts as notable examples.
Next, Heath argues, CPU-specific issues such as register stacks and context switching need to be standardised.
Although this stuff is low-level, if instructions are correctly coded and subtitled, there's no reason why software can't be implemented across standardised, low-level mechanisms.
After all this is done ‘then you have a standard,’ says Heath.
‘That's easy.
But how do you test for it?’
X/Open Co Ltd has some two or three thousand tests for conformance to its XPG portability guide.
Static testing to check, for example, that all system calls are correct is fine, says Heath.
‘But for real compatibility, software needs to be tested dynamically,’ as it is being executed.
‘You need a test harness for testing stuff dynamically.
That's the killer.’
Lack of dynamic testing can mean that for some independent software vendors less than 20% of their application code is relevant, which can lead to any number of  unforeseen problems when the application is run under different environments.
Heath's example is a hypothetical software firm's development team, which claims to have developed the latest all singing, all dancing application, which of course is portable.
The marketing team goes out and finds 20 odd systems on which to sell it.
However, only 20% of the code gets tested and when the software is recompiled and run under these other environments, it often doesn't work properly.
The company gets burned by the cost of extra development time and resources needed to correct or re-write the application for each architecture.
Thereafter the firm might carefully choose one or two systems and do a thorough conversion job, probably thinking at the same time ‘there must be another way.’
Ever more critical
Moreover, as revenue derived from upgrades and add-on sales becomes increasingly important to the software industry's business model, binary compatibility across different systems and between old and new versions of application software becomes ever more critical.
A company needs extremely good conversion and testing tools for these jobs — of just the kind that are available for the 88000, argues Heath — even more so given that some end-user customers are even demanding certification as part of their acquisition and procurement process, 88open says.
88open uses 5,000 tests for compliance with the 88000 application binary interface and has both static and dynamic test harnesses.
Its verification programme demands a minimum 80% of binary code is tested dynamically — 100% statically — before certification is awarded.
X/Open's XPG suites test source code.
That's fine, argues Heath, for what X/Open has set out to do.
The problem is that XPG is like defining an English language.
The English will get interpreted one way in the UK, differently in the US, and in other ways elsewhere.
The point is, argues Heath, that the industry is developing more binary-to-binary compatibility and emulation techniques.
As these technologies mature, underlying architectures matter less.
Software costs a lot and it should be re-usable across different systems.
The key to 88open's future, as he sees it, is being able to test and certify binary compatibility across systems that do not include an 88000 processor or application.
The more architectures on which 88open is able to offer its testing and certification technologies, the more hardware and software suppliers will come knocking on it door.
MICROSOFT GIVES A SNEAK PREVIEW OF ITS IDEAS FOR TAPPING INTO THE GROUPWARE MARKET, INVADING LOTUS NOTES TURF
Microsoft Corp sketched out its plans for tackling the groupware market last week and explained how it is taking a completely different tack from Lotus Development Corp.
Instead of producing a specific group application like Lotus Notes, which has become virtually synonymous with the sector, Microsoft is concentrating on ‘groupware-enabling’ its existing applications.
From a technical point of view this is mainly nip and tuck stuff, but Microsoft is betting that the innovative use of existing technology will be a winner and is finally cashing in on all the application programming interfaces, dynamic data exchange, object linking and embedding facilities that it has been burying in its applications and operating systems for the last couple of years.
Two ‘products’ were previewed in a UK briefing which embody this approach.
The first such is Microsoft Workgroup Templates: these are bundles of technologies, such as macros and dynamic link libraries which can be bolted onto existing applications to turn them into a specific workgroup ‘solution’.
One template, for example adds, ‘field delegation’ to Excel spreadsheets.
It's a feature that might come in handy when building an annual report: the user selects a field and chooses the added ‘delegate’ option from the menu, and can then send the spreadsheet to a colleague with the field highlighted and instructions to fill it in.
The colleague, having done so, chooses the added ‘return’ menu option and that's all there is to it: the first person can, if required, specify a merge macro, so that when a button is hit, all of the delegated fields will be collated into the finished spreadsheet.
The same approach adds facilities to Microsoft Word, with macros setting it off to search mail directories for documents to combine and collate.
Tracking templates
Microsoft divides these template packages into three: those just described fall into the category of ‘collaboration templates’ which enable multiple users to contribute to the same document, however others fall into ‘tracking templates’such as project schedulers, which help to co-ordinate particular activities.
Finally, there are ‘form and routing templates’ which present structured documents, such as order forms or help-desk requests to users and then control the way in which they are routed.
The template packages will ship in the second half of the year, once Microsoft has worked out how to price them.
The same holds true for the other offering: Electronic Forms designer, which combines the facilities of Microsoft's Visual Basic with Microsoft Mail (or, it is claimed, any other MAPI-compliant electronic mail package) to produce an intelligent forms construction kit.
The company says that no coding is needed to develop simple person-to-person forms; instead elements and control properties are dragged and placed as required.
More complex designs presumably require tinkering with Visual Basic scripts.
With these two packages, Microsoft essentially becomes a value-added reseller of its own applications, and is also taking the first step into the world of the ‘applet’, where software authors use simpler applications as building blocks for larger projects.
More conventionally, Microsoft's UK systems marketing manager David Smith says that the company ‘will have products in the coming year’ that will compete more directly with Lotus Notes.
Though he would not be drawn on the details, Smith's presentation was sprinkled liberally with references to a Windows bulletin-board application that will appear next year.
On its own, this could prove a nice little facility for corporates to share their thoughts and ideas, but if Microsoft continues seriously to pursue the bottom-up, template approach, we can expect to see the bulletin board melded with the capabilities of electronic mail, Visual Basic and the company's various database access tools.
And if that happens Lotus may find that it has a serious competitor for the first time.
HEWLETT-PACKARD CUTS X STATION PRICES, ADDS MODEL
Hewlett-Packard Co has reduced its prices on the six members of its existing HP700/RX X Window station series by between $500 and $1,000 and has introduced a new 17Cs X-station model with 17″ colour monitor and 4Mb of memory at $4,700.
DELL DIMENSION HITS EUROPE, ACCOMPANIED BY PRICE CUTS
Dell Computer Corp finally brought its low-end Dimension range of desktop and notebooks (CI No 1,953) to Europe last week and cut European prices on its existing products by up to 18%.
It also introduced its 325SLi ‘ultra portable performance notebook’ and, at the opposite end of the market, a high-end network server; the 400/XE.
The company has also implemented a European version of its Selectcare post-sales support services, which gives users, corporates and third party maintainers a selection of offerings ranging from free 24 hour, seven day a week telephone support to four-hour on-site service, a parts-only package or a self-maintainers programme for those with a do-it-yourself bent.
Dell says it delayed the introduction of the Dimension machines until the small office and home office market picked up outside the US, but it also had to get its European manufacturing facility in Limerick, Ireland tooled up.
The European Dimensions differ in detail from their US counterparts, but are still aimed at what Roger Stone, European product marketing manager  euphemistically calls ‘the value segment’ of the market.
Prices go from £860 for the 486/25s machine with 4Mb of RAM, an 80Mb hard disk and Super VGA colour monitor.
The similarly configured 486DX/33 machine — with more expansion slots, comes to £1,160 while at the top of the bottom is the floor-standing 66MHz 80486DX2 with six drive bays, six slots and a 170Mb disk for £1,810.
Shake-out
Outside the Dimension range, the ultra portable weighs 3.5 lbs, is £1,274 and innovatively includes automatic insurance cover for a year against damage, loss, theft or  destruction — Dell reckons notebook insurance is a particular pain for most of its customers.
Bruce Sinclair, vice-president for Northern Europe, characterises the launch as the start of a big push for the European market.
Over the last six months, Dell has opened operations in Poland, the Czech Republic, and Austria.
He sees a further shake-out of European personal computer manufacturer — with half the manufacturers disappearing in the next 18 months.
In 1993 the top three will take 35% of the European market he says, by 1995 believes this share will have risen to 75%.
Dell places itself at number three.
BID FOR CGI LOOKS LIKE AN ADMISSION THAT IBMers CAN'T CUT IT ANY MORE…
What does one buy a software and computer services company for?
The usual reason these days is that the target company employs an army of people with skills of a kind difficult and too time-consuming to assemble by recruitment, and that trying to build such a team would cost much more than buying the company.
With IBM France SA's $450m — currency fluctuations have turned that to $465.6m by some accounts — recommended offer for CGI Informatique SA, yet another of IBM's bluffs have been called.
For two decades, the received wisdom in the industry was that IBM products might well not be the most technically advanced or intrinsically the best, but that that didn't matter because IBM was the best marketing organisation in the world.
After its vast spending spree on new factories at the tail end of the 1970s and in the first five years of the 1980s, IBM scared the pants off its competitors by stressing that it was by far the lowest-cost manufacturer in the industry.
And, IBM was happy to have the world believe, IBMers were an inherently superior breed, that its recruitment and training were of such excellence that man for man, any IBMer would be effortlessly superior to his counterpart in any competing company.
The market-boast died first, as one by one, IBM's hottest new products fell by the wayside, starting as early as Series/1 and the 8100, continuing through System 38, which was excellent, but scared IBM's mainframe mafia too much, to the RT, such a disaster that when it came to the RS/6000, IBM had to play new kid on the block and study and try to emulate the leaders in the Unix market to get the thing off the ground at all.
Now, with the proposed acquisition of CGI, IBM is effectively saying that despite its vast army of surplus employees, it can't find 4,000 among with the skills, or the ability to acquire the skills to be found in an unexceptional middle-ranking software and computer services company — and the move is hardly a morale-booster for all the people within IBM that ply their trade in software and services.
As for any signal of a new direction under Louis Gerstner, IBM stresses that the bid has been in the works for months.
CGI's most visible asset is the Pacbase software engineering product, which is sold around the world — but hasn't IBM been hammering away at the software engineering anvil for the past five years at no inconsiderable cost in both money and resources with AD/Cycle…
…
AS IBM CALLS IN THE HEADHUNTERS AGAIN TO FIND A NEW FINANCE CHIEF
IBM Corp has had to call in the headhunters again to find itself a new chief financial officer: it has tapped Russell Reynolds Associates, and the executive search firm says that it was actually hired by IBM prior to appointment of Louis Gerstner as chairman and chief executive.
The firm says it is doing work for IBM in other areas but declined to be more specific, although that suggests that IBM may have taken on board the message that it needs outsiders to run some of its key business units.
IBM now has 13 autonomous business units, with nine focused on specific product lines, and it is widely suggested that some of these need heavyweight industry veterans to run them effectively.
IBM also has an opening for a president, but it is not certain whether Gerstner wants a president.
TANDY's SPIN-OFF OF TE ELECTRONICS MANUFACTURING ARM SET FOR SUMMER
Tandy Corp says that the planned spin-off of its new TE Electronics manufacturing subsidiary should be completed by the summer of 1993.
The new company will have 25 manufacturing operations, with 21 of the facilities in the US, three in Asia and one in Europe.
It will also have four research and development centres, three in the US, one in Asia, and 10,000 employees.
The business will not show a profit in fiscal year 1993, which ends this June, but is expected to turn profitable in the next fiscal year, Bill Bousquette, the new company's chairman told Reuter.
For the six months to December 31 1992, TE Electronics reported a net loss of $53m, contributing to Tandy Corp's plunge in profits for the period (see below).
The company has been operating independently since January 1, and is not yet being treated as a discontinued operation by Tandy, although that should happen next time the company reports.
The consumer electronics and furniture segment of the new company is profitable, Bousquette said.
‘Our challenge is in the personal computer business.’
The company has plans to turn that around by ‘entering channels such as telemarketing mail order,’ seeking opportunities with other firms, and a new pen-based product, he said.
As for the parent TE is leaving behind, Tandy is expected to show solid profits in 1993, John Roach, chairman and chief executive said.
‘We would expect calendar year 1993, based on the early performance and based on last year, to be a good solid year from a profit perspective,’ Roach told the news wire.
He observed that the retail end of the business, which will comprise Tandy Corp after the manufacturing side is spun off, showed earnings of $2.10 a share for 1992.
Roach said while the Radio Shack stores have shown ‘strong profitability,’ sales growth in Computer City stores has been ‘nothing short of phenomenal’and Incredible Universe stores will continue to show sales growth.
‘The economy probably is better than it was a year ago, the computer retail business is strong and the general consumer electronics business at the present time seems to be running ahead of last year,’ Roach said.
Tandy's US retail sales for Aprch totalled $274.9m, up 13% on last year and stores open for more than a year rose 4%.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Computer 2000 AG is seeking to raise the equivalent of $3.25m in a two-for-nine rights issue, probably in mid-May.
The price for new shares will be announced in the beginning of May, the company said.
CREDIT RATINGS
NEC Corp has taken a hit from Standard & Poor's Corp, which has placed the A-1 commercial paper rating of the NEC Industries Netherlands BV finance subsidiary on CreditWatch with negative implications, citing intensifying competition from local and international firms in Japan's personal computer market, creating further pressure on profitability.
COMPANY RESULTS
Tandy Corp has reported a second quarter net loss of $28.3m against a profit last time of $78.8m on turnover up 6.2% at $1,322.6m.
Mid-term net profit fell 96.8% at $3.8m on sales up 5.2% at $2,228.4m.
Net per share plunged 99% to $0.02 in the half.
GOOD NEWS FOR UTICA
Xerox Corp has some good news for Utica in upstate New York, a town that is more used to news of plant closures: on Maundy Thursday, Xerox announced that it plans to locate a new manufacturing subsidiary in Utica, which could create as many as 300 new jobs, although it will start with only 50; the new plant, called the Low Complexity Manufacturing Group Inc, will supply simple subassemblies for integration into Xerox copier and printer products, and could also bring back work to the US from foreign suppliers, as well as saving Xerox $2m a year.
GANDALF TO SELL MOBILE SHARES
Gandalf Technologies Inc, Ottawa, Ontario has signed a letter of intent to sell the majority of its shares in Gandalf Mobile Systems Inc to Geotek Industries Inc: the Canadian communications equipment supplier will retain a minority interest in the company, which today represents 3% of its revenue; Gandalf also says that revenues for the fourth quarter ended Aprch 31, 1993 were slightly below expectations and a modest loss is expected for the period — strong business in the UK were moderated by a weakening of sterling against the US dollar in the fourth quarter and lower than expected revenues in continental Europe and in other international markets also hit the figures.
ALCATEL WIN $500m CONTRACT
Alcatel NV's Alcatel Standard Electrica SA has won a new $500m telecommunications contract in China: the contract is for 6m telephone lines and comes after the $300m Chinese contract already announced.
INTERGRAPH WARNING
Intergraph Corp, Huntsville, Alabama warns that while it has not yet closed its books for the first quarter, preliminary estimates indicate that turnover will be lower than expected at between $280m and $285m, and that all geographic segments were below expectations for the quarter, and price reductions on older products combined with lower sales volume resulted in reduced gross margins; the company expects a loss from operations excluding restructuring charges of $8m to $10m or $0.11 to $0.13 per share and restructuring charges and non-operating items during the quarter will increase the losses by an additional three cents a share.
APPLE USA CUT POWERBOOK PRICES
Apple Computer Inc's Apple USA unit cut prices on the PowerBook Duo 210 4/80, Duo 230 4/80, Duo 230 4/120 and Duo 230 4/120 with modem, by between 10% and 18%: it says it is now catching up with the demand.
ANOTHER SUIT DISMISSED
Another one bites the dust: Zeos International Ltd reports that a US district court dismissed a class action shareholder suit against it because the plaintiffs failed to provide specific facts that were material to the trial: the suit was filed last September, alleging that the company failed to disclose the formation of its new subsidiary, Occidental Corp, to manufacture and market lower cost computers under a new brand name, a development revealed by the Wall Street Journal.
UNIVERSE AVAILABLE TO DEC USERS
Framingham, Massachusetts-based VAprk Software Inc says that its uniVerse Pick-under-Unix database management and application development system is now available on Digital Equipment Corp's Alpha AXP under the OSF/1 operating system.
US ENERGY DEPARTMENT ANNOUNCE AGREEMENT WITH SEMATECH
The US Energy Department announced a five-year, $103m agreement with the Sematech semiconductor consortium to develop equipment for producing the next generation of chips: its Sandia National Laboratories, near Albuquerque, New Mexico will contribute the materials database and the expertise in advanced systems design needed to improve performance and reliability and Sematech will provide manufacturing expertise to the five-year programme.
GENERAL COMMUNICATION COMPLETES SALE
General Communication Inc, Anchorage, Alaska has now completed the sale of a 30% stake in itself to MCI Communications Corp for $13.3m.
CAE ELECTRONICS WINS BOEING CONTRACT
CAE Industries Ltd, Toronto reports that its CAE Electronics Ltd unit has won a contract to supply a Boeing 737-400 full flight simulator and a flight management systems trainer to Southwest Air Lines of Okinawa, Japan by Aprch 1995; terms of the contract were not disclosed.
MCI GETS FEDERAL RESERVE CONTRACT
MCI Communications Corp reports that the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago awarded it a 10-year multi-million dollar contract to provide circuits for the new FedNet communications system will combine the networks of 12 Federal Reserve district banks and three new centres into one network; FedNet will offer the banks high speed data services and is responsible for circuit installation and maintenance.
STORAGE TECHNOLOGY ADDS FURTHER CAMBEX PRODUCT
Louisville, Colorado-based Storage Technology Corp added Expanded Memory for ES/9000 Model 9021 processors from Cambex Corp to the Cambex main memory that it already sells.
FINANCIAL IRREGULARITIES
You mean to say they get paid for stuff like this?
Cursory reading of the financial pages over the past few months would have left the average reader with the impression that while the US and UK economies were laboriously but undeniable clambering out of the recessionary trough, Japan was flat on its back and looking like getting worse before it got better, and that high interest rates in Germany were plunging that economy into a recessionary black hole and dragging most of the rest of the continent with it — now comes a report from International Data Corp saying its Global IT Survey of 5,000 computer executives, 500 chief executives and finance chiefs, and 1,100 local network managers in six biggest economies indicates that growth in computer spending will rise 2% to 3% in 1993 and, surprise, surprise — the US and the UK should outperform the rest of Europe and Japan.
LEBANON $80-MILLION TELEPHONE ORDER
Lebanon is to award an $80-million order for new telephone lines to three companies, the biggest contract so far to revive war-ravaged services, Reuter reports from  Beirut : the orders for 1m digital lines in Beirut and the rest of the country will be shared by Alcatel NV, Siemens AG and L M Ericsson Telefon AB; it is hoped the lines will be open within nine months.
PSION MOVES GERMAN MD
Psion Plc, London named its managing director in Germany, David Elder president of its US Psion Inc.
PACIFIC BELL ASSESSED FOR PENALTY
The California Public Utilities Commission administrative law judge has proposed that Pacific Telesis Group Inc's Pacific Bell unit be assessed a $33m penalty and be forced to make $32m in refunds for alleged inappropriate charges made for late bill payments and service restorations from 1986 to 1991.
CORRECTION
Correction: the Technology News Ltd feature on page two of CI No 2,144 was by Hesh Wiener.
SPECTRUM SIGNALLING JOIN IBM AND TI TEAM
Vancouver-based Spectrum Signal Processing Inc has teamed up with Texas Instruments Inc and IBM Corp to develop a suite of multimedia products for the personal computer using the MWave standard: the first two will design, develop and test the first in a family of boards and IBM will apply the technology to multimedia markets such as video.
ELONEX WIN NORWEB SUPPLY CONTRACT
Direct sales computer manufacturer Elonex Plc, London N has won a two-year contract, estimated to be worth about £1m, to supply 80486-based desktop computers and network servers to the northwest regional electricity supplier Norweb Plc.
AZLAN APPOINTMENT
Wokingham, Berkshire-based Azlan Ltd has announced its appointment as distributor for Intel Corp's range of networking products in the UK: products covered by the agreement include Storage Express back-up systems, the Ether express adaptor board range, the NetPort Printserver family, facsimile modem products and a range of network enhancement software, the firm says.
LINK ENGINE FS3000 FOR SOLARIS
New York-based Linkon Corp will be developing an SBus multimedia communications board called Link Engine FS3000 for SunSoft Inc's Solaris operating system to give desktops interactive voice response with speech recognition and facsimile capabilities: claimed to be the first SBus offering supporting distributed speech processing applications, it will be generally available by June following a May beta test; there will be one-to-four port configurations for the desktop and T-1 configuration for large client-server installations; Europe will be supported by E-1.
USL PACIFIC TO MARKET VERITAS SOFTWARE
Unix System Laboratories Pacific Ltd has begun marketing of Veritas Inc software in the Asia Pacific region: the Veritas products include the Veritas volume manager, Veritas File System, Veritas Visual Administrator and the Veritas Journalling File System; technical support will be done by Unix Labs.
HUTCHISON LAUNCHES FINANCIAL SERVICES PAGER
Hutchison Telecommunications UK Ltd's Hutchison Paging has launched a financial services pager for private investors in a joint venture with the Financial Times Cityline stocks and shares information line: the pager covers 3,000 shares and within one minute of a chosen counter reaching a pre-set value, the pager automatically bleeps and displays a phone number, which can be called to hear the details; the pager costs £160 plus tax, and includes a year's subscription to the service, which will cost £100 plus tax for subsequent years.
AZLAN TO MARKET RUMBA SOFTWARE
The complete range of Rumba micro-to-mainframe communications software from Wall Data Inc is to be marketed here by Wokingham, Berkshire based Azlan Ltd, which will also provide training and support.
HONEYWELL AND CONSILIUM FORM JOINT VENTURE
Honeywell Inc formed a venture with Consilium Inc to provide a unified manufacturing execution and control system using Honeywell control systems and Consilium's FlowStream manufacturing execution systems software: Mountain View, California-based Consilium said it will receive $4m in non-refundable prepaid licence fees for its software and the two companies will have an exclusive relationship in development of a unified manufacturing execution and control system that would be marketed by Honeywell to chemical and process industries.
TECHNOPHONE OPEN NEW FACILITY
The Technophone Corp unit of Nokia Mobile Phones has opened a new facility in its joint venture with Tandy Corp: the Fort Worth plant will make Technophone's PC 305 and TD 800 cellular telephones and will make other products for sale in the US, in Canada and in Latin America.
HITACHI TIGER TEAM
Hitachi Ltd has put a tiger team from its Network Products Group in Silicon Valley on developing local network-based multisystem electronic mail products, hoping to have them all gussied up in time for a third-quarter roll-out: Hitachi reckons that it's on to a good thing because  veca:International Data Corp predicts the worldwide market will be 77m users in 1996; Hitachi is expected to make a point of integration, management and directory synchronisation likely using the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol.
VODAFONE SIGN AGREEMENT WITH KINGFISHER
Vodac, Vodafone Group Plc's largest service provider, has signed an agreement with Kingfisher Plc's Comet electrical retail chain to service 230 stores UK-wide: Comet customers that come out with a mobile phone will be able to connect to the Vodafone network immediately, subject to a credit check.
XALT OFFICE AVAILABLE ON SPARC MACHINES
Euless, Texas-based Xalt Software Corp's Xalt Office, the suite of five graphically-based integrated applications including Desk, Diary, Notes, Mail and People Manager, is now immediately available for Sparc machines priced at $200; Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM Corp versions are due any day now; the company has been circulating early development copies since last September, and adding features and functions.
DTI CHOOSE AT&T EASYLINK SERVICES
The UK Department of Trade & Industry has chosen AT&T EasyLink Services Inc's Open System-conformant electronic mail service for its Open Systems Programme Initiative: it will be used for communications between Open Systems Programme participants, including blue chip companies, suppliers and consultancies; the initiative is intended to stimulate take-up and use of open systems within UK industry; value of the pact was not  given .
VIEWLOGIC COMPLETE QUAD DESIGN ACQUISITION
Marlborough, Massachusetts-based Viewlogic Systems Inc has completed the previously announced acquisition of Quad Design Technology Inc for 872,700 new shares and options: Quad Design, which develops and markets timing and signal analysis software for digital circuits used in semiconductors and printed circuit boards, is now a subsidiary.
POWER-UP ACQUISITION COMPLETED
Cambridge, Massachusetts-based Spinnaker Software Corp has now completed the acquisition of Power Up Software Inc for $18.5m in cash, plus the assumption of some debt: the acquisition was financed through the purchase of preferred stock by Harvard Management Co, which bought $23m of series B preferred stock redeemable at the company's option and convertible into shares of common stock at a rate of $1.50 or $2.25 per share.
CREATIVE TECHNOLOGY SUING ANOTHER SINGAPORE COMPANY
Singapore-based Creative Technology Ltd is suing another Singapore company, Aztech Systems Pte Ltd and its Aztech Labs Inc arm in Fremont, California asserting that Aztech infringed Creative's copyrights in firmware and software related to the Sound Blaster line of products.
MULTIMEDIA VIEWER PUBLISHING TOOLKIT VERSION 2.0
Microsoft Corp says its Multimedia Viewer Publishing Toolkit Version 2.0 will be available early this month for $500: the new generation supports several emerging multimedia systems and brings content-based title development within reach of publishers that might not know programming languages, the firm said; Viewer 2.0 replaces the Multimedia Development Kit, the registered users of which can upgrade for $200.
TELECOM EIRANN ABANDONS PLANS
Troubled Telecom Eireann has abandoned a plan to build a new headquarters in Ballsbridge, Dublin, and the decision may cost the company more than £6m; it bought the site for £9.4m in 1990, but it is now worth only around £5m; the company may also be required to pay for a government investigation into the purchase, which is also under scrutiny from the Fraud Office.
SYNOPTICS CUTS LATTISNET PRICES
Aprlow, Buckinghamshire-based SynOptics Communications UK Ltd has cut the price of its LattisNet family of FDDI intelligent hubs: the list price of the Model 2912A Workgroup Hub has been reduced 36% to £9,950 and the FDDI Fibre Optic Host module is down 27% to £5,535; the FDDI Network Management Module now costs £9,950, a 33% reduction.
MINIPHONE NETWORK ENTERS BUENOS AIRES
The Miniphone cellular network has gone into operation in Buenos Aires and some of its suburbs: the network is expected to have 10,000 users within a year, and is being run by Movistar — set up by Telecom Argentina SA, and controlled by STET SpA and France Telecom — and Telefonica Argentina; initial investment in the project is $42m, but this is expected to rise to $100m over the next three years.
UNBELIEVABLE
No-one would believe they had a recession on in Japan when they have time and resources to devote to dreaming up and creating things like this: Toshiba Corp has just launched a line of word processors with sound effects —‘to introduce an element of fun in the workplace’ according to Reuter — they bark when you write ‘dog’, moo when you write ‘cow’and make the sound of pouring when you write ‘beer’, and if you recall a text file word-by-word at reading speed, they repeat these and 26 other pre-programmed noises, from sleigh bells to sirens, as the words come up — and it no doubt laughs like a drain when your boss sends it an electronic message telling you you're fired for being a disruptive influence.