

MICROSOFT, COMPAQ TEAM ON EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Compaq Computer Corp and Microsoft Corp came together in Washington yesterday to announce that they have entered into a comprehensive agreement to develop new products and markets and to make personal computers easier to use.
Calling the agreement the ‘Frontline Partnership’, they say they will work together to develop operating system and hardware for easy-to-use systems, adding the sorts of features Macintosh users take for granted, advance personal computer technology with pen interface and audio capabilities — Microsoft is said to be impatient at the lack of applications for its Pen Windows operating environment, and the two will promote ‘Plug and Play’ to make software and hardware easier to integrate and use.
Compaq will also back the NT operating system.
Separately, Computer Associates International Inc, which is already doing Unix versions of its mainframe software, is to do a version of its Unicenter systems management software for Microsoft Windows NT.
IBM POWER VISUALISATION KIT ENHANCED FOR MOVIES…
Starstruck IBM Corp has teamed up with Boss Film Studios to devise software tools on IBM's Power Visualisation System for key functions in the entertainment industry's evolving all-digital film studio.
Areas include compositing — merging images, colour correction, cropping and erasing the strings from special effect sequences.
IBM also announced first fruits of other Hollywood alliance, adding integrated digital video and audio input-output and factor Moving Pictures Experts Group digital video and audio compression to the Power Visualisation System.
The Digital Compression Facility — which runs at seven to nine frames a second — is designed to shorten the time taken to hours from days of encoding digital movies for rapid decompression in applications such as video-on-demand and CD-ROM recording.
It now also has multiple SCSI-2 channel support so that the system can link to a wider variety of disk, tape and other input-output devices.
…
AS IT BUYS CATAPULT
IBM Corp has bought Bellevue, Washington-based Catapult Inc, which provides training in personal computer applications.
Terms were not given.
Catapult becomes part of IBM's Skill Dynamics education arm.
MAI SYSTEMS FILES CHAPTER 11 BANKRUPTCY PAPERS
MAI Systems Corp, now based in Irvine, California has filed for protection for Chapter 11 of the US Bankruptcy Code in a Wilmington, Delaware court.
The filing comes despite the company covering key debts by handing its European subsidiaries over to its secured US and Canadian lending banks.
The small business systems company, which never recovered from its capricious attempt to acquire Prime Computer Inc, says it needs the bankruptcy protection to put together a plan to restructure its balance sheet.
CONNER SELLS CIPHER 3480 LINE TO OVERLAND DATA
Conner Peripherals Inc has decided that it doesn't want everything in its Cipher Data Systems acquisition and has signed a letter of intent to sell two Cipher product lines to San Diego-based half inch tape drive maker Overland Data Inc for $9m.
Overland says it is to merge the Cipher Model M995 nine-track tape drives and Model T480 3480 cartridge drives with its own line.
VMX ACQUIRES THE ASSETS OF VMAIL CO, LONDON
The Vmail Co Ltd of London has sold out to San Jose-based VMX Inc on undisclosed terms.
VMX wants the assets to expand its speech processing product line into client-server environments.
VMX will form a client-server software division around the Vmail technology and current employees.
Vmail's software will be modified to run with VMX's Integrated Voice Processing system.
HUNTER UNDER THE HAMMER
Hunter Systems Inc, Palo Alto, California developer of the XDOS MS-DOS emulation software for Unix and other environments, is in liquidation and its assets were due to be sold at public auction on Monday.
TELE-COMMUNICATIONS INC LAUNCHES CRASH PLAN TO INSTALL FIBRE IN US
The infrastructure to usher in the brave new world of interactive multimedia applications is being put in place at a breakneck pace in the US, and Englewood, Colorado cable television operator Tele-Communications Inc has just announced plans to invest $1,900m to install fibre optic cable in 250 cities, towns and counties by 1996.
The company calls the project its Infostructure Network, and it will involve it laying 7,000 miles of fibre this year alone, which it sees being used for home shopping services, software delivery, movie offerings and interactive educational programming as well as up to 500 television channels.
It currently has four hubs in Pittsburgh, Miami, Denver and the San Francisco area and plans to start other hubs in Chicago, Salt Lake City, St Louis, and Hartford, Connecticut in 1993.
GESTETNER LASERS: LEXMARK'S FIRST ACQUISITION
Getting more confident by the day, Lexington, Kentucky-based Lexmark International Inc has now made its first acquisition, buying Gestetner Lasers Pty Ltd, which manufactures and distributes laser printers.
The acquisition puts Lexmark's Australian business group into the number two position in the local laser printer market.
The former Gestetner Holdings Plc unit, doing some $20m a year with 80 staff, works with technology suppliers to develop laser printer products and controller boards.
It will share new Sydney premises with Lexmark.
ZEOS GETS INTEL TO MAKE ITS MOTHERBOARDS…
Minneapolis-based Zeos International Ltd has decided to get its local bus upgradable personal computer motherboards made for it by Intel Corp.
Intel will make the Zeos-designed motherboards at its Hillsboro, Oregon facility and ship them to Zeos's manufacturing facility in Minneapolis for system integration.
…
AS INTEL CUTS OVERDRIVE TAGS
Intel Corp has cut up to $100 off the price of its OverDrive Processors.
The 33/66MHz OverDrive Processor is now $700, off 12.5%; the 25/50MHz and 20/40MHz versions were reduced by $50 to $550 and $400.
DEMYTHOLOGISING THE MAINFRAME — WHY THE DOWNSIZING TIDE IS UNSTEMMABLE
Yes, we've all seen all the reports — distributed open systems end up costing downsizers more money than the mainframe ever did, that there are many applications that can be handled only by the mainframe, that the mainframe has a bright future if only IBM Corp can get over its present problems.
The volume of hot air and waffle is suffocating — and it's all rot, and is doing users no service at all.
Yes, there is a future for the concept of the mainframe — the centralised repository upon which the whole enterprise  needs — but to say that is not at all the same thing as saying that the centralised repository has to be — or even should be — a $50,000 to $100,000 per MIPS machine that runs MVS — or 1100 OS or MCP or BS2000 or GCOS come to that.
User-hostile
Already Hewlett-Packard Co has gone about 70% of the way to fitting out its HP 9000 as well as its rapidly ‘opening’ HP 3000s with the facilities that mainframe users expect and demand, and machines like Sequent Computer Systems Inc's Symmetries and NCR Corp's multi-80486 machines are offering the performance that mainframe users need at a fraction of the price IBM has traditionally demanded, and are not blind to the fact that to win mainframe users' hearts and minds, they will have to offer the stability and functionality and versatility of the mainframe.
And just over the horizon is a host of commercial massively parallel processors: the jury is still out on whether machines from the likes of Kendall Square Research Inc will really be able to slip into the mantle discarded by the mainframe, but all the evidence suggests that they will.
The most irritating assertion of the anti-downsizing lobby is that distributed open systems end up costing more because of all the hidden training and support costs.
All the evidence suggests that no-one has properly quantified the cost of educating end users in all the user-hostile features of a dumb 3270 attached to a mainframe application, let alone any of the other hidden costs of the mainframe.
Many of the alleged ‘hidden costs’ of distributed systems are are estimates of the informal training and problem-solving given to end users — yet in most companies, end users learn the in-house-preferred word processor or database program as they go along, asking one of their colleagues when they get stuck.
That approach builds teamwork and self-reliance and far from being a cost to the company is a benefit — unless it happens to be the kind of company that requires its employees to operate as autonomous automata.
Mae West
All the analysis ignores the fact that the product that is intrinsically the best almost never comes out as the winner in the market: in the immortal words scriptwriter Vincent Lawrence put into Mae West's mouth, when it comes to the market success of MS-DOS or the IBM Personal Computer standard, goodness had nothing to do with it.
MVS was never objectively the best mainframe operating system: all the cognoscenti insisted that Burroughs Corp's Master Control Program knocked it into a cocked hat.
Few would seriously argue that Cobol was the best business programming language and adherents of APL can never understand why anyone should want to use anything else.
The 80386 was almost certainly inferior to the NS32000 and the Z80000 in the 32-bit microprocessor stakes and there were several 8-bit operating systems much superior to CP/M.
As for Unix, as we said way back in 1984 when we forecast that it would come to dominate the mainstream market, it is fundamentally quite inappropriate as the basis of a robust commercial operating system because it is designed for free sharing of resources and code between users, where one of the most important requirements of a mission-critical operating system is that the crass behaviour of some idiot won't bring the system down.
Warning of the dire peril IBM faced at the hands of Unix, we suggested that so many parties were working on the thing that over time it would accrete to itself all the missing features that commercial users demanded, and that instead of simply trying to muddy the Unix waters as IBM did for so long, it should recognise that its most convincing answer to Unix was right there under its nose in the form of VM.
As a starting point for a full-function open operating system, VM could scarcely be bettered, but IBM in its wisdom poured money into MVS and allowed VM to wither on the vine.
It is not to be doubted that there are still thousands of mainframe users that want nothing more than to continue with the kind of computing they have always known, using the environment with which they are familiar, and in which they have invested a large part of their lives.
Tragic
Their situation is tragic.
Because the flight from the traditional mainframe is now irreversible, and the central repository of the future will be something new.
The latest survey, from International Data Corp, shows that only 39% of users polled have no plans to move any applications off the mainframe — but once that 39% reads the results of the survey, the majority will quickly realise that with that rate of defections, the status quo will simply no longer be an option, and next year's survey will show that that 39% has shrunk dramatically.
The famous $18,000m black hole that Gartner Group so memorably spotted opening up in the heart of IBM's business will suck the entire company into oblivion if it doesn't embark on a crash programme to save the AS/400.
It has to tell the world openly that the mid-range machine is its chosen contender as the central repository for the 21st century, and above all make convincing its commitment to the AS/400 by rushing out top end machines that are much bigger than the present top model while instituting a crash programme to slash the costs of manufacture — and then slash them again, work out how to make money out of the machine while charging much less for the software — and making all the remaining System 36 users an offer they can't refuse to convert to the AS/400, even if every sale to that base is a dead loss to IBM.
The mainframe will soon be history, the AS/400 is still worth saving, but time is desperately short.
MICROSOFT ‘TO CHALLENGE SUN's WABI WINDOWS-UNDER-UNIX FACILITY FOR SOLARIS: SEE YOU IN COURT’
Microsoft Corp may be preparing to take Sun Microsystems Inc to court over the WABI Windows Applications Binary Interface that SunSoft Inc is expected to bundle with Solaris x86, the new Solaris-on-iAPX-86 operating system, sources tell our sister paper Unigram.X.
It is said that Sun's SunSelect, the unit that picked up WABI when it acquired Norwood, Massachusetts-based Praxsys Technologies Inc, has already received a letter from Microsoft complaining that WABI violates its intellectual property rights.
Microsoft chairman Bill Gates has already made similar complaints in public to the US press.
Microsoft wants Sun to pay a licence for WABI, specifically $50 a copy, and has been saying so to Sun since at least December.
At a meeting in January at Microsoft headquarters in Redmond, Washington with Sun vice-presidents Eric Schmidt and Carl Ledbetter, Microsoft executive Paul Apritz told them that they faced a business decision.
‘You'll have to compare the cost of staying current with us and defending litigation against the cost of paying us royalties.’
Apritz also promised to make Windows such a moving target that Sun could not keep up.
WABI is expected to be announced as a product on May 5.
At the introduction, Unix System Laboratories Inc will likely be trotted out as a key WABI partner, providing a direct conduit to Univel Inc, its joint venture with Novell Inc, as well as an implicit conduit to the Common Open Software Environment.
It is believed that Sun and Unix Labs, which are said to recognise the potential hiccups with WABI, may try an advanced game of one-upmanship with Microsoft, putting AT&T Co's patent portfolio, containing such things as Backing Store, in the balance against Windows.
SunSelect has repeatedly maintained that Microsoft doesn't have a legal leg to stand on, and that it will not pay the licence.
It has said WABI was created in a clean room, an argument that some sources say implies there was a ‘dirty room’ somewhere.
Sun's other weak point may be the fact that WABI's Praxsys creators come from BIOS house Phoenix Technologies Ltd, where they would have had access to MS-DOS, although Phoenix was one of the pioneers of the concept of the clean room, where no-one that has any inside knowledge of the code being emulated is allowed to come into contact with the developers of the emulation.
At that same January meeting, Apritz tried to sell Sun on the notion of putting Windows NT onto its Sparc RISC.
He told Schmidt and Ledbetter that Sun, ICL Plc and Fujitsu Ltd ought to do it ‘defensively for the insurance.’
The price was between $250,000 and $500,000 for the source code and a royalty of $100 to $200 a copy in royalties, enhancements included.
DIGITAL INSTRUMENTATION HAS NEW FILE SWAPPING SOFTWARE
Albuquerque, New Mexico-based Digital Instrumentation Technology Inc has announced TransferPro, software that enables users to do file operations such as copying, moving, deleting, renaming and creating, between workstations, MS-DOS and Macs.
It is a non-network system and is said to enable Unix systems to read and write both MS-DOS and Mac data seven times faster than Sun Microsystems Inc's PC/NFS.
It can also transfer files to SCSI devices.
The software is available for Solaris 2.1 and Motif on Silicon Graphics Inc kit, priced at $350 for single users and $850 for a floating licence.
It will be sold through distributors and retail operations.
ERICSSON TEAMS WITH INTEL AND LAUNCHES MULTI-MEDIA MESSAGING
L M Ericsson Telefon AB has launched a multi-media messaging system, MXE, and also announced an agreement with Intel Corp to work together on a personal computer-based communications system.
The idea behind MXE is to combine the flexibility and storage capabilities of a computer with real-time call processing and signalling.
The company claims that the hardware-software system provides an infrastructure for messaging applications across all types of network.
MXE will handle applications such as voice mail, facsimile mail, electronic mail and wide area paging.
An applications generator tool enables providers to customise voice and data services.
MXE is Unix-based, and uses standard software interfaces such as Posix, the Distributed Computing Environment with X Open Co Ltd Portability Guide compliance, providing an interface to all common analogue and digital protocols, says the company.
The message-switching kernel, on which the system is based, is an X400 Message Transfer Agent which provides access to the messaging applications via specialised user agents.
The agreement with Intel provides for the integration of telephony, video and data transfer applications.
At the CeBit show, the two companies demonstrated a personal computer running Microsoft Corp Windows, and equipped with a communications interface board jointly developed by Ericsson and Intel.
The personal computer was linked by an ISDN 2B+D interface — as used by a digital telephone — to an Ericsson MD10 digital PABX.
Ericsson has also signed an agreement with Cisco Systems Inc, Menlo Park to resell Cisco's complete line of internetworking routers, as well as other internetworking hardware and software.
The agreement expands on an existing deal under which Ericsson sold Cisco kit only in conjunction with its own Telecommunications Management and Operations Support Unix application.
Under the new agreement, Ericsson will now supply the Cisco products to end-users worldwide.
DOCUMENT IMAGE MANAGEMENT CONSORTIUM IS FORMED
The new industry body du jour is DIM, the Document Image Management Consortium, founded last week at the AIIM show in Chicago.
Members include Sun Microsystems Inc, Xerox Imaging Systems Inc, Access Graphics Inc, Excalibur Technologies Inc, Frame Technology Inc, Fujitsu Computer Products of America and Laser Magnetic Storage International Inc.
The idea is jointly to develop a complete Document Image Management implementation for converting, storing, retrieving, editing and distributing documents in the Unix environment.
The system demonstrated runs on a Sparcsystem and consists of Xerox's ScanWorX Optical Character Recognition software, Fujitsu's M3096G scanner, Frame's publishing software, Excalibur's document imaging software and Laser Magnetics's optical storage.
Access Graphics will distribute it.
HEWLETT-PACKARD ANNOUNCEMENTS
Banging the drum for the Precision RISC Organisation supporters' club
One year after its inception, the members of the Precision RISC Organisation supporters' club say they have successfully built and delivered a new business model for industry consortia, Hewlett-Packard Co reports.
Individual members are cross-licensing technologies and developing new Precision Architecture RISC-based products, and are actively developing standards and compliance-testing technologies, and are forming special-interest groups, councils and task groups, the company claims.
Examples of technology exchanges include the agreement between Hitachi Ltd and Oki Electric Industry Co to align on standards for embedded control chips, and the agreement between Hewlett and Convex Computer Corp to cross-license compiler technologies.
As a primary objective, the establishment of standards-based hardware and software interfaces to enable users to move software easily among different vendors' systems using the RISC family, has advanced significantly, Hewlett says.
The board of the club is expected to approve the Precision Architecture RISC application programming interface this summer and the applications binary interface by the end of the year.
Compliance-testing technology is being developed to help ensure the adherence to the Organisation's standards and thus compatibility of Precision Architecture hardware and software products from multiple vendors.
The club has been looking at the 88open test suites, and the testing technology will be available in late 1993.
A special-interest group is developing standards for Precision Architecture RISC embedded control applications.
Councils meet to focus on technology and promotional topics, Hewlett-Packard adds.
Task groups are formulating standards for the areas of multiprocessor technologies, compliance technologies and native language system localisation.
Precision RISC Organisation sponsor and senior members are Convex Computer Corp, Hewlett, Hitachi, Hughes Aircraft Co, Mitsubishi Electric Corp, Oki, Samsung Electronics Co, Sequoia Systems Inc, Stratus Computer Inc, Winbond Electronics Corp and Yokogawa Electric Corp.
Together, these companies have aggregate electronics-related turnover exceeding $70,000m and total revenues of more than $160,000m, Hewlett-Packard reckons.
It also cites RISC Management Newsletter, which suggests that Precision Architecture RISC is the industry leader in RISC-system and related software sales, saying that analysis of 1992 RISC-system revenues said that Precision Architecture RISC has achieved more than 30% of an estimated $17,500m market.
Coming down to the wire with FileNet imaging, WorkFlo products
Hewlett-Packard Co has finalised its agreement with Costa Mesa, California-based FileNet Corp for implementation of FileNet's document imaging and WorkFlo software products on the Precision Architecture RISC-based HP 3000 and HP 9000 business systems and servers.
The Image Management Services software, a set of application modules that control the processing, storage, retrieval, and printing of document images, is expected to be available on the computers by the end of the year.
The two say they have already begun joint marketing activities in the US, France, Germany, the UK and Australia.
Ask calls in Hewlett to market
Ingres in Eastern Europe, Russia Hewlett-Packard Co has taken a licence from Ask Computer Systems Inc to distribute the Ingres relational database and application development tools throughout Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States.
The countries covered by the agreement, which allows for joint sales and marketing activities, include Bulgaria, the countries of the former Soviet Union, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovakia.
Use of Ingres products has been expanding rapidly in Eastern Europe over the past few years through local distributors in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia, the company says, with customers including the Polish Central Statistical Office and the Stock Exchange in Budapest, Hungary.
Hewlett takes Micro Resources' phone company software products
Hewlett-Packard Co is working with Micro Resources Inc to offer the latter's applications and service for the telecommunications industry on the HP 9000 Unix family.
Target customers include the regional Bell operating companies, independent phone companies, and network software suppliers.
Micro Resources will provide its SwitchTerm software throughout the US and Canada, and will provide systems integration services in the midwest.
Micro Resources' SwitchTerm is an X Window and Unix-based tool that enables network managers to consolidate multiple operating systems onto a single console, where they can be viewed in windows on the screen.
No indication of prices.
Walker Richer to the rescue with communications software for HP 3000 users
Hewlett-Packard Co has turned to Walker Richer & Quinn for terminal emulation, networking and client-server software for the HP 3000.
Under the expanded relationship, the two companies will work together to offer HP 3000 users a trade-in programme from HP AdvanceLink to Reflection for terminal emulation (HP will continue to support HP AdvanceLink customers).
More cost-effective client-server solutions implementations and better communications via software bundled on a new HP client, and communications for the HP 95LX palmtop.
Walker's Reflection 1 for MS-DOS and Reflection 1 for Windows are alternatives to HP AdvanceLink products, and are available to AdvanceLink users as trade-ins at $100 per user.
And later this year, Hewlett-Packard will ship a new client intended to be a universal Windows client.
Bundled with the client will be Windows-based Reflection software for concurrent access to HP 3000, Digital Equipment Corp VAX, and Unix servers.
And users of the 95LX palmtop will get access to remote HP 3000 applications when Reflection-To-Go ships in July.
Reflection-To-Go is a customised version of Walker's Reflection 1, which emulates HP 700/92 and 2392A terminals.
The palmtop edition will offer enhanced modem dialling and screen handling and will be streamlined to conserve memory.
A full-featured modem will be integrated with Reflection on the same PCMCIA card.
No prices were given for anything.
COMMON OPEN SOFTWARE ENVIRONMENT
IBM-Hewlett alliance aims for Unified Unix
From the outset, it has been clear that COSE, the Common Open Software Environment, would have to be more than just a unified desktop interface, and this week, two more pieces of the COSE puzzle appear to be dropping into place (CI No 2,142).
These are to be COSE II for networking, interoperability and distributed computing, and COSE III for systems management, and there will be more where those are coming from.
COSE, it turns out, is part of a much wider recipe that was originally cooked up by Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM Corp, prime movers in the effort to meet the threat to Unix — and OS/2 for that matter — posed by Microsoft Corp's forthcoming Windows NT operating system, and probably two of the firms with potentially the most to lose.
The objective of their ‘Unified Unix’ vision is to put together a cost structure for open operating environments that can match NT on the desktop.
The two appear to be working through a shopping list of NT's ingredients, ticking off those features and functions that can already be found in their own, or equivalent, open systems products that are already on the market, or are on the way.
The simplest way of getting the outstanding items on board as cheaply as possible is by means of technology exchange and cross-licensing agreements, and COSE was seen as forum for effecting this.
The other COSE companies — principally Sun Microsystems Inc with Unix System Laboratories Inc and Santa Cruz Operation Inc — were approached to support an effort that became bigger than Hewlett and IBM could handle alone.
Common kernel not necessary
IBM and Hewlett-Packard decided — or were persuaded by independent software vendors — that a common kernel was not a necessity for competing with NT, which is why COSE does not address the issue, even though some observers still believe that the perceived lack of a common Unix kernel will hand Bill Gates a propaganda advantage.
In Hewlett-Packard's view, ‘users don't give a damn about the kernel anyway, what they need is application programming interfaces,’ says European computer systems marketing manager Bernard Guidon.
He says the COSE process is just a way of breaking ‘Unified Unix’ down into attainable goals.
Although inspired by the threat of NT, Guidon claims that COSE also grew out of pressure on Hewlett-Packard and IBM from large end users and independent software vendors demanding Unix standardisation.
Novell Inc's imminent acquisition of Unix System Labs made the COSE desktop effort easier, he says, and — with the exception of NT supporter Digital Equipment Corp — agreement with the other Unix suppliers was relatively painless.
Guidon, who describes COSE (I) as the ‘tactical execution’ of an agreed set of desktop strategies, says that COSE II and COSE III will follow because ‘it doesn't make sense to unify the desktop if you don't do the rest.’
Just how COSE II and COSE III will turn out remains unclear, although a systems management working group initiated by the COSE firms will likely be a vehicle for these developments.
According to Guidon, COSE II will include everything related to networking, distributed computing and interoperability.
An alpha specification — described as the Distributed Computing Environment plus a ‘broader set of distributed computing services’— with an application development environment, is now doing the rounds.
The more shadowy COSE III should result in a standard distributed systems management environment specification that may include the Tivoli Systems Inc object-oriented applications programming interface.
Guidon says meetings are going more or less constantly — the X/Open Co Ltd-hosted COSE get-together in Menlo Park on Tuesday was likely used to take stock.
Digital Equipment Corp, left out of the COSE initiative, has been invited, and it says that it will send its X/Open representative as an observer.
Microsoft refuses to be phased by emergence of united Unix front
Tough talk?
Officially, Microsoft Corp is greeting all this COSE business with a shrug of the shoulders.
According to unimpressed NT product manager Richard Greenberg, COSE will have no impact whatsoever on anything Microsoft is doing.
Apparently Microsoft was concerned that the Unix camp might rally round the kernel, which he says would have been a ‘much more powerful statement…a substantive agreement.’
However, the way it reads COSE, the Unix people are ‘not saying they are going to unify’ and dismisses it as ‘just a bunch of hype.’
Microsoft also maintains that it is focusing on interoperability and if something concrete eventually does come out of COSE, well that consolidation will just make it easier for Microsoft to interoperate with Unix.
Besides which, Greenberg claims, anything COSE delivers ‘is not going to make Microsoft less attractive.’
Greenberg also warns the Unix contingent not to try to hoist NT on same petard Microsoft is using against Unix.
NT will not be fractured into a bunch of different versions simply because it's run on different microprocessors.
The company is moving literally to a single-code structure for iAPX-86, Alpha and R-series, and licensees are restricted from changing the code.
INTERNATIONAL MULTIMEDIA ASSOCIATION IN DISCUSSIONS WITH INTEL CORP
Apparently the International Multimedia Association, a party to COSE, is having discussions with Intel Corp about how to handle Intel's own multimedia standard: perhaps that too will become part of the broadening COSE specification.
USL BELIEVES IN KERNEL AGREEMENT
Unix System Laboratories Inc still harbours the belief that COSE will eventually result in agreement on the kernel, namely System V.4 or its descendent.
COSE SPEC TO INCLUDE IBM COMMON USER ACCESS  STANDARD 
The COSE specification is to include IBM Corp's Common User Access ‘93 interface standard, which isn't out yet; other things that could be addressed by COSE include a data interchange format — product naming conventions would be useful too, some say.
USL AND SCO BUY SUN ONC+ LICENCES
Unix System Laboratories Inc and the Santa Cruz Operation Inc have both bought licences to Sun Microsystems Inc's ONC+ for inclusion in UnixWare, as part of their commitment to COSE.
COSE SPENDERS
Party manners — Hewlett-Packard Co hosted all the COSE meetings and picked up the pizza tab; Sun Microsystems Inc then threw a celebratory dinner for the COSE teams on  April 16, the night before the announcement: now it's IBM Corp's turn, unless Lou Gerstner decides to sit it out, pleading poverty.
ICL OPENS MANCHESTER VERIFICATION CENTRE, PLANS 12 WORLDWIDE BY YEAR END
ICL Plc's Openframework Division — which aids migration to open systems — last week opened its second UK Verification Centre in Manchester.
The centre will test for interoperability between ICL and non-ICL hardware, software and operating systems at the request of customers, and ICL says that it will have 12 similar centres open worldwide by the end of the year — rising to 50 by the end of 1994.
It also introduced Systemswise, a CD-ROM package that lists 5,000 hardware and software configurations based on the results of interoperability tests.
It is updated quarterly and annual subscriptions are priced at £1,000.
The firm also launched a series of books entitled ‘The  Openframework Architecture,’ which explain systems integration and open systems.
The books are published by Prentice Hall and cost between £20 and £25.
ENTROPIC RESEARCH LABORATORY OFFERS SPEECH RECOGNITION TOOLS FOR UNIX
Washington, District of Columbia-based Entropic Research Laboratory Inc says it has HTK, the Hidden Aprkov Model Toolkit, providing the software tools needed to build Hidden Aprkov pattern classification and continuous speech recognition systems.
The company claims the product, originally developed by the Cambridge University Engineering Department Speech Group and available through an exclusive alliance with Cambridge University Technology Transfer Co, marks the first time these capabilities have been available in a single commercial product.
Users do not need to write computer programs, it says.
The software is currently offered on Sun Microsystems Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co, Digital Equipment Corp and Silicon Graphics Inc workstations.
SPSS UNVEILS CLIENT-SERVER PACKAGE
SPSS Inc, Chicago, Illinois, has introduced SPSS 5.0, a client-server version of its statistical data analysis software.
Enhancements include support for the Open Software Foundation's Motif interface, increased data access, statistical analysis and six add-on software modules.
Data access improvements include a data editor in spread-sheet format, support for Ingres, Oracle, Informix and Sybase databases and new transport and file formats.
Additional statistical analysis functionality includes modularised statistical procedures, such as time-dependent co-variates and probability functions; high resolution labelled charts and chart manager; hot keys between charts and related numerical data; object-oriented chart editing and a choice of 30 different chart types including boxplot, pie and bar charts and scatterplot matrix.
Optional add-on modules include SPSS professional statistics, SPSS advanced statistics, SPSS tables, SPSS categories and trends.
SPSS 5.0 is available now on IBM Corp RS/6000s and support for Hewlett-Packard Co HP 700s, Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstation 10s and Digital Equipment Corp's Alpha workstations running the OSF/1 operating system will follow in the third quarter.
Support for DEC's Alpha Windows NT will be out in the first quarter of 1994.
SPSS 5.0 costs $700, and it will be sold direct and through existing distribution channels.
THE OPEN SOFTWARE FOUNDATION's GRENOBLE ARM GETS PENTAGON BACKING
The Open Software Foundation's Research Institute has won a three-year multi-million dollar research contract from the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the Air Force Material Command to develop a distributed operating system for high-performance computing.
It will produce a series of prototype versions of the Mach microkernel it has been working on with experimental extensions for real-time and high-trust portable working across a range of hardware architectures, especially non-shared memory supercomputers.
FIBRONICS OFFERS KIT FOR DEVELOPING GRAPHICAL SNMP MANAGEMENT
Hyannis, Massachusetts-based Fibronics International Inc's main launch at Cebit was what the company claims is the industry's most powerful development engine for graphical management of SNMP-based devices.
Fibronics InterView/PowerMIB Toolkit is designed to make it easier to integrate new SNMP devices under Fibronics' InterView Network Management System, by eliminating the need for code development.
The company claims that the time taken to generate and integrate the management of, for example, a network hub can be cut to a few hours.
Features of the Toolkit include a WYSIWYG Windows Generator for the generation of management windows.
A graphical subsystem enables the import of close-up pictures of a device and its sub-elements that can be defined as a mouse-sensitive area.
Any SNMP network device can be integrated: toolkit definitions are imported automatically into InterView's device-definition database and the enterprise management system is immediately operational.
Since no external coding is required, only minimal debugging and testing are required for application generation, according to the company.
InterView/PowerMIB Toolkit will be available in July at from $15,000.
MUST SHIPS FIRST VERSION OF ITS NOMAD APPLICATIONS GENERATOR FOR UNIX
Paris-based Thomson-CSF SA's Must Software International SA has announced the first versions of its Nomad applications generator for Unix, starting with IBM Corp systems.
Later this year it will add a Sun Microsystems Inc version, next year one for Hewlett-Packard Co.
Shipping now, Nomad for Unix offers an environment for client-server application development and reporting.
It provides a windowed user interface, non-procedural proprietary language, procedural language, reporting and data management facilities, a developer's workbench and a syntax-free reporting front end.
It comes with a Sybase SQL Server interface, enabling full read-write client-server access to Sybase from AIX, OpenVMS, MS-DOS and OS/2 clients.
The company plans to add Motif support in the first half of 1994 and communications support via TCP/IP by the second half of 1994.
The single-user price is $2,500.
Multi-user pricing ranges from $10,500 to $120,000, depending on the class of machine and the number of users on it.
CGI PRESSES COMPUTER HORIZONS TO AMEND ITS POISON PILL DEFENCES
Computer Horizons Corp's largest shareholder, CGI Informatique SA, itself under agreed offer from IBM Corp, is seeking to persuade other shareholders to overturn corporate policies that it thinks deter potential acquisition offers for the Mountain Lakes, New Jersey company.
CGI Corp, US subsidiary of the Faris company, will present a resolution at Computer Horizons' May 5 annual shareholders' meeting to ‘modify or terminate’ Computer Horizons' shareholder rights plan and the golden parachutes in place to give the top officers a handsome pay-off should the company be acquired.
CGI, which has 13.3% of Computer Horizons, and is regarded by the board as a hostile shareholder, argues that the company's plans make it extremely difficult and expensive for another company to acquire Computer Horizons, and must be eliminated to make management accountable and maximise shareholder value.
Computer Horizons' directors are opposing the proposal.
INTEL STORMS TO $2,000m SALES FOR THE QUARTER AS PROFITS NEAR TRIPLE…
Intel Corp's near 200% increase in first quarter profits was way above market expectations and the shares rose $3.50 to $116.75 on the surprise news.
Intel credited lower computer prices — which triggered a consumer buying spree — for the rise, and the company says that as well as storming sales of 80486 microprocessors, there was also good demand for standard semiconductors, and networking and system level products.
Intel also said that record first-quarter orders indicate a positive outlook for second-quarter growth.
‘It took us 22 years to get to a billion  dollars a quarter in revenues and, thanks to the explosion in demand for the 80486 chip, less than three years to get to two billion dollars a quarter,’ said president Andrew Grove.
‘Fortunately we have been investing heavily in new plant and equipment, so we have been able to respond quickly to this rapid demand growth.’
Intel says it saw strong demand in the US and Japan, where orders rose significantly as the market was stimulated by lower personal computer prices.
…
AND MOTOROLA's BUSINESS SHRUGS OFF THE CELLULAR TELEPHONE SCARE
Commenting on its figures (see alongside), Motorola Inc said the growth in turnover and profits reflects continued worldwide demand for its products — including cellular telephones, despite the recent safety scare.
Motorola's portable cellular telephone business is a part of its General Systems Sector, which also includes infrastructure equipment, cellular portable and car phones and mobile phones.
The sector's sales rose 33% to $1,060m in the quarter; orders increased 26% and operating profits were higher.
The Semiconductor Products Sector's sales rose 20% to $1,280m, underlining the importance of a hot chip to Intel Corp's figures.
Orders rose 35% to an all-time high, and operating profits were higher, the company added.
The Communications Segment's sales rose 19% to $1,090m; orders increased 24%, and operating profits were higher.
Government and Systems Technology Group's sales fell 12% to $125m and orders dropped 29%; the group had a larger operating loss.
The unit includes the proposed Iridium global communications system that will  use 66 low earth orbit satellites.
COMPANY RESULTS
Automatic Data Processing Inc has reported third quarter net profit up 16.0% at $92.5m on turnover up 12.4% at $612.9m; net profit for the nine months rose 15.4% at $214.5m on turnover that rose 14.3% at $1,626.7m; net per share rose 14% to $0.65 in the quarter, 13% at $1.52 in the nine months.
Bloc Development Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits of $743,000 against losses of $263,000 last time, on turnover up 65.4% at $18.7m; net losses for the year to December 31 stood at $9.9m, after $250,000 gains from insurance proceeds and a non-recurring write-down of $2.4m, up from losses of $2.1m last time, on turnover that rose 115.2% to $61.4m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.04 in the quarter.
Comparisons are made with restated 1992 figures to reflect discontinued operations.
Cognex Corp saw fourth quarter net profits down 68.6% at $821,000, on turnover down 16.4% at $7.1m; net profit for the year to December 31 was down 35.8% at $6.1m, on turnover down 9.2% to $28.6m.
Net per share, adjusted last time for a two-for-one stock split paid in February 1992, fell 66.7% to $0.10 in the quarter, 35.2% to $0.70 in the year.
Cypress Semiconductor Corp has reported first quarter net profits down 37.5% at $2.4m on turnover off 5.5% at $69.7m.
Net per share fell 30% to $0.07.
Data-Design Laboratories Inc has reported second quarter net profits of $4.5m against losses of $15.5m last time, after $163,000 gains from the sale of assets and $5.8m gains from payment of debt this time and $11.6m restructuring charges and $296,000 losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover down 4.7% at $13.1m; mid-term net amounted to $2.9m against losses of $19.6m last time, on sales down 17.9% at $26.2m.
Net per share was $0.60 in the quarter, to $0.39 in the half.
Digital Communications Associates Inc has reported a third quarter net loss of $66.6m after a pre-tax charge of $59.9m from writing off the goodwill in its Pacific Data Products unit and $3.2m from the costs of reorganising that company, and $3.2m from settlement of a class action lawsuit, and a tax credit of $583,000, against a profit last time of $6.0m on turnover that rose 8.9% at $55.7m; net loss for the nine months was $58.0m against profit last time of $13.3m on turnover up 9.0% at $104.4m.
Genrad Inc has turned in fourth quarter net profits of $114,000 against losses of $5.3m last time, on turnover that rose by 29.1% at $44.2m; net losses for the year to January 2 stood at $7.4m down from losses of $39.1m last time, after $23m restructuring charges and write-offs last time, on turnover that fell by 8.8% to $142.6m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.01 in the quarter.
The 1993 figures were released at 14 and 53 weeks.
Intel Corp saw first quarter net profit soar 197.7% at $547.9m on turnover 63.0% ahead at $2,023.5m.
Net earnings per share jumped 188% to $2.48.
Motorola Inc has reported first quarter net profits of $204.0m, up from just $2.0m, which included a $123m charge for implementing the post-retirement benefits accounting change, on turnover up 18.7% at $3,626m.
Net per share was $0.75 against $0.01.
Perception Technology Inc has turned in first quarter net losses of $92,202 against profits of $130,260 last time, after $40,000 tax credits last time, on turnover that rose by 7.3% to $4.5m.
SynOptics Communications Inc saw first quarter net profit soar 334% to $21.9m on turnover up 123.2% at $157.7m; net earnings per share rose 296% at $0.95.
IBM BENEFITS FROM $400m CONTRACT
IBM Corp is a major beneficiary of a $400m 10-year contract won by El Segundo, California-based Computer Sciences Corp from the US Department of the Interior's Bureau of Land Management: the contract, which includes the installation and integration of about 7,000 IBM RS/6000s, is to provide a new automated land and mineral record system at 221 offices of the agency at 156 sites, primarily in the west.
MOTOROLA LOOKING FOR WIDE MARKET FOR POWERPC
Motorola Inc hopes to capture a broad market for the PowerPC processor by pricing the first versions well below Intel Corp's fastest microprocessors, US PC Week reports: preliminary pricing for the PowerPC, due in volume in the third quarter, has been listed at $280 for the 50MHz 601 and $374 for the 66MHz version of the chip in quantities of 20,000 or more, according to sources familiar with Motorola's plans — significantly below the Pentium and the 66MHz 80486DX2, although the Pentium will outperform the PowerPC chips; systems that use the PowerPC are expected to be priced at from $3,000 to $4,000.
IBM HOPE TO PLUNDER HP DOMAIN/OS CUSTOMER BASE
IBM Corp has teamed up with Enabling Technologies Group Inc, Atlanta in an effort to plunder Hewlett-Packard Co's Domain/OS customer base: it will offer Enabling's Arpus collection of tools and services to assist organisations moving from Domain/OS systems to IBM's AIX/6000 Unix systems ‘while protecting the customer's investment in business-critical applications;’ the two will particularly go after the 15,000 Domain/OS customers that use Mentor Graphics Inc's electronic design automation tools.
APPLE ADDS THREE TO PERFORMA LINE
Apple Computer Inc added three models to the Performa personal computer line aimed at first time computer buyers: the Macintosh Performa 405, 430 and 450 are expected to cost between $1,300 and $1,850; the Performa 400 models include a facsimile modem from Mountain View-based Global Village Communication Inc, automatic bill paying and Apple Club Performa support services.
LEGENT EXPECTATIONS CAUSE SHARE DROP
Vienna, Virginia-based Legent Corp warns that it expects to report net profit of about $18.4m or $0.52 per share for the second quarter ended Aprch 31, compared with the $0.44 before charges that it reported last year; turnover will be about flat with the $102.5m a year ago: the news caused a bloodbath in the Legent share price, which slumped 16%, $6.125, to land up at $33.25.
INTEL FIGURES NOT FAVOURED BY ALL
Intel Corp's storming first quarter figures (see page seven) have not gone down well everywhere, and Hancock Institutional Equity Services analyst Eli Sayegh reckons that there is not much more to go for in the stock: he yesterday downgraded Intel to sell from hold, saying he thinks the company is near peak operating margins at just over 40%, double the historical norm; he said the company's margins have been driven largely by a shift from the 80386 chip to the 80486 chip ‘and this cannot go on for too long;’ he reckons that Advanced Micro Devices Inc will immediately take 10% of the 80486 market with its planned clone, and could take as much as 25% over time; his damper wiped $1.75 off Intel shares at $115.75.
PRIZE PERFORMANCE FROM GRESHAM TELECOMPUTING
There are few stocks on the London Exchange that have beaten the performance of transaction processing software specialist Gresham Telecomputing Plc: selling for just 14 pence last June, they added ninepence in the last day's trading before Easter, to close at 143 pence.
CYPRESS RESTRUCTURING SHOWS IMPROVEMENT
Commenting on its figures (page seven) Cypress Semiconductor Corp, San Jose, says that its return to profitability in the first quarter shows that its restructuring efforts are working: headcount has been reduced to 1,394 in the quarter from 1,529 at the end of 1992.
BACHMAN EXPECTS LOWER THIRD QUARTER REVENUES
Burlington, Massachusetts-based Bachman Information Systems Inc warns that it expects revenues for its third fiscal quarter to Aprch 31 to be below analysts' expectations and that the operating loss for the quarter will also be greater than financial market expectations — it notes that some analysts had forecast revenues of about $10m.
APPLE GOES TO MICRO FOCUS FOR COBOL
Apple Computer Inc has turned to Micro Focus Plc — who else?— for Cobol products for its A/UX Unix: the Micro Focus Cobol development environment, available under MS-DOS, Windows, OS/2, Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix/386, RS/6000, AIX and over 500 other Unix systems, will be available under A/UX later this quarter via Micro Focus.
BELLSOUTH AND WELLFLEET MARKET HIGH-SPEED NETWORK SYSTEMS
BellSouth Corp has teamed up with Wellfleet Communications Inc to market high-speed network systems and services to link multi-vendor local area networks over BellSouth's Frame Relay and its Switched Multimegabit Data Services.
NEC ENTERS AGREEMENTS WITH DEC AND HP
NEC Corp is entering systems integration agreements with Digital Equipment Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co in Japan, and plans to offer the two companies' RISC-based servers alongside its personal computers: it says its primary focus will be the market for multimedia systems.
LSI LOGICS RUSHES INTO BROADCASTING PRODUCTS
LSI Logic Corp is joining the rush into computer-aided broadcasting products and has teamed up with Philips Consumer Electronics Co on several chip development projects aimed at compressed digital video broadcast applications: LSI Logic and Philips have worked together for more than a year designing a number of digital demultiplexing and video and audio processing chips for upcoming Philips digital receiver applications and they plan to develop future products for the digital television industry, which involves nearly all video transmission and pre-recorded media; LSI also announced a new family of dedicated video and audio signal processors — a Motion Pictures Experts Group audio decoder, an MPEG video decoder, and a family of Reed Solomon error correction encoder-decoders, which together form a complete compressed digital television implementation; the products, designed to be installed in the cable or satellite television receiver, are used to decode CD-quality digital audio and studio-quality digital video signals that have been compressed and modulated.
MORE CUSTOMER SUPPORT CONSORTIUM MEMBERS
IBM Corp, Legent Corp, Candle Corp and KnowledgeWare Inc have joined the 19 founding members of the Customer Support Consortium, which was announced last November: founding members of the Redmond group include Intel Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co, NCR Corp and Silicon Graphics.
IBM TO BUY STAKE IN GENEX
IBM Japan Ltd is to buy an 18.2% stake worth $172,000 in Genex Corp, one of the largest commodity future information service firms in Japan: Genex is an information services unit of Tokyo General Corp and Taiyo General Corp, which are the two biggest commodity brokers in Japan.
CANON LAUNCH NOTEJET 486
Canon Computer Systems Inc has now launched its NoteJet 486 notebook with built-in micro Bubble Jet printer in the US at from $2,500.
JAPANESE MADE EARLY DECISION
We reported a couple of years back that just as leading US companies like IBM Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co were adopting Total Quality Management with messianic zeal, the Japanese had decided that it was not good enough and had moved on to Zero-Defects Management, and the Financial Times' Observer column offers an example of just why: it has a release that flags ‘the first major conference on Total Quality Management for Pension Finds’.