

DEC BURNS WORKSTATION RIVALS TO WIN BACK SHARE
As expected (CI No 2,150), Digital Equipment Corp yesterday wheeled out three new members of its Alpha AXP RISC-based workstation family, claiming they are respectively the fastest Unix workstations available for under £5,000, £10,000 and at any price.
The 64-bit machines are pitched aggressively at competing offerings from Sun Microsystems Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM Corp.
The low-end DEC 3000 Model 300L desktop uses a 100MHz Alpha CPU and is rated at 44.9 SPECint92 and 63.3 SPECfp92.
It comes with from 32Mb to 64Mb RAM (256Mb by the end of the year using 16Mb DRAMs) and is available as a diskless system or configured with 426Mb storage, with HX8Plane two-dimensional graphics.
A diskless model with a 17″ monochrome screen lists at £4,900 — $5,000 — £5,300 with 426Mb disk — or £6,500 with a 16″ colour screen and 426Mb disk.
DEC is pitching the diskless system against Sun's SparcClassic, Hewlett's 715/33 and the IBM RS/6000 M20.
The desktop Model 300 uses a 150MHz Alpha part and is rated at 66.2 SPECint92 and 91.5 SPECfp92.
With 32Mb to 62Mb RAM (again, 256Mb by year-end), it is priced at £9,700 with 1Gb disk, a 19″ monochrome screen and HX8Plane graphics.
With a 16″ colour screen prices start at £10,000 — $10,000 — a 19″ colour system is £11,950.
DEC compares this system with the SunClassic LX, HP 715/50 and RS/6000 355.
The high-end desk-side Model 500X uses a 200MHz Alpha CPU and is rated at 110.9 SPECint92 and 164.1 SPECfp92.
Described as the world's fastest uniprocessor workstation, it comes with from 64Mb to 256Mb RAM (1Gb by the next quarter using 16Mb DRAMs) and up to 4.2 GB disk.
With 64Mb memory, 1Gb disk, 19″ colour screen and two-dimensional graphics it is priced at £39,000.
With 96Mb RAM, 2Gb disk, 19″ colour screen and HX8Plane, PXG three-dimensional graphics, prices start at £47,600 — $70,000.
DEC sees Hewlett's 755 and IBM's Model 580 as nearest rivals for the 500X.
All three systems are available from May 1 and come with a two-user licence for OSF/1 1.2, Motif and TCP/IP or Open VMS Alpha AXP base licence, Open VMS one user licence and NAS 250 licence.
DEC claims 100 applications up on its OSF/1 implementation now.
A further 400 are promised within six weeks, whilst a total of 2,000 are now committed, it says.
PixelVision, a three-dimensional graphics subsystem is due later this year.
A level one implementation will be £5,000, level 2 is £12,000.
Also coming on stream is Kubota Pacific Corp's Alpha-based Denali graphics subsystem.
Existing DEC 3000 stations are mid-range models 400 and 500.
NCR TO INVEST $12m IN DAYTON
NCR Corp plans a $12.1m remodelling of its Dayton, Ohio headquarters complex: $9.1m will go to turn its former financial terminals plant into office and support services space, $1.4m to tart up US Marketing Group headquarters, $1.6m to demolish a building.
IBM FIRST QUARTER LOSS IS $285m
IBM Corp yesterday reported a precipitous plunge of 19.4% in first quarter hardware business, with the AS/400 off between 10% and 20% on top of the expected decline in mainframe and big disk business.
Loss for the quarter was $285m, but services business was up 48%.
CONNER TO TRIM WORKFORCE BY 10%
Reporting a first quarter loss of $22m, Conner Peripherals Inc said yesterday that it it will reduce its worldwide employment by about 10% through attrition, scaling down its production operations and eliminating job duplication and overlap.
It aims to consolidate facilities in a number of areas worldwide.
Resources will be reallocated to future products and technologies, and new products brought on stream faster.
STORAGETEK TURNS TO MATSUSHITA FOR HELICAL SCAN
Storage Technology Corp has had to turn to Matsushita Electric Industrial Co Ltd for helical scan subassemblies for planned new tape drives.
It has signed a multi-year production agreement with the Japanese company and Matsushita will provide D-3 helical-scan subassemblies, initially for StorageTek's RedWood helical-scan storage subsystem, which is expected to go into production in late 1994.
The contract is valued at more than $200m.
The RedWood effort involves integrating tape subassemblies from the Panasonic arm of Matsushita with the transport and host attachments from the StorageTek tape library.
The subassemblies include a tape path, helical scanner, front-end read-write electronics and tape servo system.
StorageTek contributes the computer front-end channel, compression and compaction technology, buffer and buffer management and is working on a new data format for helical-scan tape, which originally was designed for video.
Each RedWood cartridge will hold an estimated 25Gb of uncompressed data against the 800Mb uncompressed of a 3490E cartridge.
TEXAS TO BUY A STAKE IN PEERLOGIC…
Texas Instruments Inc's Information Technology Group will buy a minority stake in PeerLogic Inc as part of a four-part agreement with that company under which Texas becomes a worldwide licensed distributor of PeerLogic's Pipes Platform distributed computing software with the Information Engineering Facility, and on its own, will use it internally, and provide global support and maintenance.
TEXAS INSTRUMENTS HAS NEW CHIP PACKAGE
Texas Instruments Inc has developed a new low-cost multi-chip packaging technology it calls Multichip Module Laminate/Overlay in which the key element is Polyimide plastic.
AVNET $485m WINS HALL-MARK
In a major consolidation of the US distribution business, Great Neck, New York-based Avnet Inc is to acquire Hall-Mark Electronics Corp in a $485m cash and share exchange.
It will pay $20 cash and 0.45 of a share of common for each Hall-Mark out.
PEEK BUYS IN CHINA
Peek Plc has paid an undisclosed sum for a 41% stake in Chinese traffic control firm Sichuan Modern Control Systems Engineering Co Ltd, part-owned by the Chinese government.
It was formed in 1990 to develop traffic control and surveillance technology for China's plan to build 65,000 miles of new highways over the next five years.
THE AWARDS SHOW THEIR WORTH AS COMPUTER COMPANIES COME UP TRUMPS IN THIS YEAR's LIST
An above average number of companies in the computer, telecommunications and microelectronics sectors appear in the lists of Queen's Awards to Industry, published this morning.
The awards are for Export, Technological and Environmental Achievement — a new category introduced this year — with ICL Plc one of the three elite ‘doubly honoured’ applicants.
A total of 118 British firms were granted awards for export achievement this year; 25 were rewarded for technological achievement; 12 won awards for Environmental correctness.
Winners are entitled to display the appropriate Queen's Award logo on their stationery, other printed materials — and to fly the flag outside their premises.
TECHNICAL ACHIEVEMENTS BY ICL, INSIGNIA, BRITISH TELECOM NOTICED
Among the technological award winners was ICL's Corporate Systems Division, West Gorton Manchester, commended for the Series 39 SX mainframe, which packs four times as much power into the same space as the Series 39 machines.
Also honoured was the Optical Research Division of British Telecommunications Plc's BT Laboratories in Martlesham Heath, near Ipswich in Suffolk, for developing metal organic phase epitaxy, an advanced production technique for fabricating optoelectronic semiconductor devices.
Oxford Applied Research Ltd of Witney, Oxfordshire, was commended for its reactive atom-radical source which is used to produce thin film devices such as high temperature superconductors and also thin film Gallium Nitride for semiconductors.
SoftPC
High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire-based Insignia Solutions Ltd was recognised for developing its widely-used SoftPC program that emulates the MS-DOS environment used on the IBM personal computer on incompatible Apple Computer Inc Macintoshes, and workstations from the likes of Sun Microsystems Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co and Digital Equipment Corp; and S&S International Ltd, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, gained an award for its Dr Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit, which employs fuzzy logic to combat the most complex computer viruses.
Ashford, Middlesex-based NextBase Ltd was rewarded for its nifty multi-lingual, computerised route planning system that runs on IBM personal computers; Solid State Logic Ltd, based in Begbroke, Oxfordshire received its pat on the back for its swift and compact digital audio post production system for video and film; the Integrated Display Systems division of Smiths Industries Aerospace & Defence Systems in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire gained an award for its multi-purpose colour display for high performance aircraft; and Swindon, Wiltshire-based Raychem Limited Corporate Technology Europe came good with its heat shrinkable, fabric, composite technology for sealing and protecting splice joints in telecommunications networks.
RICOH FROM JAPAN SHOWS THE WAY WITH THE ENVIRONMENT
The new environmental award category has been established to credit products and process developments deemed  significantly beneficial for the environment as well as commercially successful.
Ricoh UK Products Ltd came through here in recognition of elimination of the use of Chloro-Fluoro-Carbons during the production and recycling of Selenium drums for photocopiers.
UNIX LEADS THE WAY ON THE EXPORT FRONT WITH ICL'S DRS 6000, IXI's X.DESKTOP, AND UNIPLEX
The biggest category by far in this year's list is the one for which the awards were originally created back in the 1960s, the Export Awards.
ICL's second trophy went to its Bracknell, Berkshire-based Mid Range Systems division for the volume of DRS 6000 series systems and associated Unix products and services shipped abroad — its revenues are reckoned to have trebled over the past three years to over £250m; Cambridge-based IXI Ltd was recognised for its success in the open systems software arena with its X.desktop product for Unix, and Chalfont, Buckinghamshire-based Madge Networks Ltd, which ships its high performance Token Ring networking products across the world, and finds it necessary to kid the locals that it's an American company when it is doing business in the US, also wins an Export award.
Liverpool, Merseyside computer games company Psygnosis Ltd, which has quadrupled its exports in the last three years — and has taken Japan by storm, was another winner as was Ipswich, Suffolk-based BT & D Technologies Ltd, the joint optoelectronic manufacturing venture between British Telecommunications Plc, E I du Pont de Nemours & Co Inc of Wilmington, Delaware.
Pilkington Micronics Ltd of Deeside, Clwyd was rewarded for selling its flat glass, used in liquid crystal displays, optical and magnetic disk substrates into Europe, the US and the intensely  competitive Far Eastern markets.
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire-based Uniplex developer Redwood International Ltd, which reckons to have trebled its exports in the last three years to become the leading Unix-based office automation system supplier, won due recognition.
So too did CADCentre Ltd in Cambridge — where ICL gets in again as a shareholder.
It was the first export award for the company, which supplies its software products to North and South America, Europe, the Middle East, Japan and Pacific Rim.
Chesham, Buckinghamshire-based Advent Communications Ltd which designs and manufactures portable terminals for television and data transmission was given recognition along with St Mellons, Cardiff-based Epitaxial Products International Ltd.
This company, funded by Shell Ventures (UK), ships its epitaxially-coated semiconductor wafers to the US, Europe and Far East.
You don't have to be high tech, even in a high tech industry, to bring home the bacon, and Lion Cabinets Ltd of Leeds repeated its 1991 success with yet another award for the export of its mild steel enclosures and mountings for computer peripherals to the US, Germany, Italy and Israel.
Northern Telecom Ltd's Greenwich, London-based STC Submarine Systems has added another award to its collection from 1977, 1983 and 1990, for the installation of its turnkey submarine telecommunications systems.
And the final winner in the category was North London-based Autovalet Systems International Ltd which manufactures microprocessor controlled automatic dispensers.
The company supplies a range of customers — hospitals, hotels, the leisure and garment industries.
It has won an important contract with Eurodisney and has substantially increased its exports which now account for over three-quarters of its sales.
— Lynn Stratton
INTEL PENTIUM ‘IS DEFINITELY COMPLEX, NOT RISC,’ BUT IS FASTER THAN IBM, SUN RISC CHIPS ON INTEGER WORK…
The Microprocessor Report has put together a table of results comparing the performance of Intel Corp's new Pentium processor against the leading RISC suppliers.
It concludes that Pentium is not, as Intel would have us believe, a RISC in complex instruction set clothing.
The fact is that ‘the complexity of the iAPX-86 architecture — the variable length instructions, complex instruction formats, multifunction instructions, and so forth— has a pervasive effect on the chip's design.
It is accurate to say that the 80486 and Pentium processors use many of the same implementation techniques as RISC processors, but there is nothing in either processor that can be called a ‘RISC integer unit’ without distorting the term beyond any usefulness.’
Although Pentium has roughly the same performance as MIPS Technologies Inc's R4000, a mid-range RISC processor, Pentium ‘is going into production more than a year after the R4000, and it has about 2.5 times as many transistors, even though the caches are the same size.’
The Report believes Pentium will cost ‘substantially’ more than the R4000.
On the benchmarks themselves, Pentium outstrips IBM Corp and Sun Microsystems Inc's fastest processors on integer performance, and is closing the gap with the RISC chips on floating point, although all are still comfortably ahead of the Intel processor with the exception of SuperSparc, which has only a 10% advantage over Pentium.
PENTIUM DOES WELL ON A FREQUENCY-ADJUSTED BASIS
Meanwhile, ISC Management newsletter has produced a table that compares the integer performance of various processors against the clock speed at which they are driven.
It notes that if Intel Corp were able to come up with a way to drive 3.8m transistors without frying the chip to a frazzle, Pentium would look pretty good.
NATSEMI COY ON ISOCHRONOUS ETHERNET PLANS
National Semiconductor Corp claims that the isochronous Ethernet technology for multimedia communications is gathering support, and that Apple Computer Inc has given its backing, with other manufacturers ‘reacting very favourably’ to it.
NatSemi and IBM Corp are both planning products next year (CI No 2,146).
Dubbed isoEnet, the technology enables speech and video traffic to be carried over 10Base-T networks by adding 6.144Mbps of isochronous bandwidth to the existing 10Mbps 10Base-T Ethernet.
NatSemi in the UK is remaining cagey about its implementation plans.
Daniel Hung, product marketing manager for data communications products would not directly deny that the company is pressing ahead, but said that the exact implementation strategy would depend on the progress the proposal makes through the IEEE.
He did stress that the company is anxious to make sure that it is a realistically workable solution, and to that extent conformant products would have to be forthcoming.
Indeed, the companies have been at pains to demonstrate the technology's feasibility: the CeBit show saw a demonstration of isoEnet in action on NatSemi's stand and it has published a White Paper on it.
INGRES LAUNCHES INGRES/ENHANCED SECURITY RELATIONAL DATABASE TO THE EUROPEAN SECURITY STANDARDS
Ask Computer Systems Inc's Ingres Corp is claiming a world first for its Ingres/Enhanced Security relational database, which has picked a Information Technology Security Evaluation Criteria E3/F-B1 security rating.
ITSEC is the classification used by in the UK, France, Germany and the Netherlands.
Ingres reckons that its rating is comparable with a US Department of Defense Orange Book B1 Trusted Database Interpretation rating.
The company is still waiting in line for US certification — as is every other database vendor.
The fact that the UK launch presentation attracted around 260 people from the Ministry of Defence and around 10 from commerce indicates the potential market, and in fact the first customers for the product come from the military.
However Ingres reports increasing interest from other sectors and goes so far as to suggest that the Enhanced Security features may become an optional part of the standard Ingres database in the release after next.
In fact the company says that making Ingres secure involves only around a 3% addition to the product in terms of code.
The additions bump up the mandatory and discretionary access controls, give each piece of data held a security level label and implement the sophisticated system auditing capabilities that the certification requires.
It is the maintenance of these audit logs that generates most of the system overhead according to the company; at the most basic level the extra security imposes a 2% to 3% speed reduction, but as the system records become more complete, this rises.
Though the Enhanced Security product is the culmination of a five-year development effort, the company says that the really tough part was providing the documentation and analyses to convince UK testing house Secure Information Systems Ltd that it had actually done the work.
The secure version of the database is initially available for Digital Equipment Corp's security enhanced VMS and SunOS Compartmented Mode Workstation operating systems.
THE SLOW DECLINE IN IBM's TURNOVER BEGINS AS IT LOSES $285m IN QUARTER
One aspect of IBM Corp's business has been in a state of suspended animation throughout its woes so far: its turnover has not declined significantly.
However that changed yesterday when the company reported first quarter figures showing turnover off 7% at just over $13,000m.
And given that total hardware sales plummeted by 19.4% to $5,740m in the quarter, keeping the overall decline to 7% was an achievement in itself, even if within a quarter or three, turnover can be expected to start declining at an accelerating pace.
Software revenues rose by 1.1% to $2,520m, but maintenance was off 5.1% to $1,800m; services were the star performer, rising 48% to $1,900m, but the jury is still out and there is a great deal of scepticism that the company can actually make money on all those facilities management contracts.
Rentals and financing revenues fell 12% to $1,087m.
IBM said it continued ‘aggressively’ to seek ways’to improve profitability, but admitted that sales of the AS/400 as well as of the mainframes declined as users wait for the new models.
Chairman Louis Gerstner said that while demand was week and the company, which once dictated the terms of trade to the whole industry, suffered continued competitive pressures on its hardware products, demand in personal computers, workstations and service businesses remained strong.
Personal computers up 40%
The loss for the quarter of $285m, $0.50 a share, was in line with analysts' estimates, which averaged at a loss of $0.49 a share, and cost controls are seen to be improving.
In its conference call with analysts yesterday morning, IBM said that its outlook continues to be difficult and uncertain in light of the destabilisation of its hardware business, and that sales of mainframes declined in a ‘high double digit’ rate in the first quarter on a year-to-year basis and that sales the AS/400 declined in all major geographies.
Stabilisation of high-end systems is several quarters away at best, and the mainframe and storage declines contributed to a $1 per share decline in first quarter gross profits.
The double-digit fall in AS/400 business was ‘in the teens.’
Quarterly cash flow was at break-even.
IBM also said unit sales of personal computers were up 40% on a year-to-year basis and the IBM Personal Computer Co was profitable in the first quarter — but does that mean simply that as a quasi-autonomous company, a load of corporate overhead has been lifted from it and dumped elsewhere?
IBM also said that demand for the RS/6000 continued to be strong and pointed out that its operating costs are declining and that total operating expenses were down 8.9% on a year-to-year basis and that sales, general and administrative costs fell 10.1%.
IBM said that first quarter revenues were down slightly in the US — where the economy was perceived to be improving until the first set of statistics in April, and in Asia, while revenues from IBM's European operations fell by 13.8%.
That seems likely to be primarily down to Germany because the UK was flat on its back a year ago and Italy has not bubbled for some time, while the French recession is only now gathering pace.
Costs and expenses rose 14.4% to $7,896m and gross profit margin was 39.5%, a few percentage points below expectations.
In the year-ago first quarter, gross margin was 50.8%.
The immediate effect of the announcement was to lift the shares a smidgen, and they were up 25 cents at $49.50 at the opening.
ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS LANDS $1,000m ‘CO-SOURCING’ AGREEMENT IN SWEDEN
Dallas-based Electronic Data Systems Corp yesterday announced a letter of intent for a 10-year, $1,000m information systems services contract, its largest to date in Europe, with Sweden's fifth largest conglomerate, Kooperativa Forbundet AB.
As a result, 600 computer systems staff from Apiron Information AB, KF's information systems company, will go to work at EDS's Swedish location, said Geoffrey Carroll, president of EDS' northern European operations.
EDS says it hopes to complete the agreement before summer.
The fusing of EDS Sweden and Apiron, which reported revenues of $97.6m in 1992, effectively triples EDS's size in Sweden, to $150m in yearly revenue from approximately $50m, Carroll said.
Carroll added that the contract ‘is not a one-shot deal.’
‘There's quite a bit happening in the IT services area here.
We should have another announcement in a couple of weeks,’ he said.
In the meantime, yesterday's contract sets up EDS as KF's partner in managing the Stockholm-based company's computer systems, making it more of a ‘cosourcing’ than an ‘outsourcing’contract, Carroll said.
‘Outsourcing would just be data processing.
Strategic planning
This is not much concerned with processing, although we'll do that.
It's more joint development of the applications and systems they need.
Basically we become part of the strategic planning process of the company,’ Carroll said.
‘We'll be putting together an oversight group with the top EDS and KF people, which will determine on a regular basis the business needs of the company.
They want to have control over where they're going, but they are looking for us to make suggestions and give guidance [on the technology].
It's up to us to wrap our technology around their business,’ Carroll said.
As the national organisation of Sweden's cooperative societies, KF's business has historically been myriad, including oil refining, hotel management, distribution, and a variety of manufacturing, from chocolate to bathroom equipment and plastics.
KF's core business, however, has always been retailing, although its rank in the market was slipping in the last ten years.
Since the arrival last June of Lars Hjoth, managing director of KF's Retailing Division, the conglomerate has undertaken a restructuring programme to focus the company exclusively on retailing and reverse the negative trend.
It has already boosted its market share by 0.2% last year, he noted.
The agreement with EDS is part of narrowing the company's focus to retailing, Hjoth said.
‘We think we can best define our core business ourselves, but it's difficult to be £1 in information technology,’ Hjoth said.
KF chose EDS because ‘we were convinced they will focus on our real needs, not just try to sell us something,’ Hjoth said.
He added that EDS was competitive in price and that his staff was impressed with the results of meetings with EDS retail users in the US, including Del Monte and Smith's Foods.
KF, which owns nine retail chains, wants to use information technology to increase its market share, Hjoth said.
Currently, KF's market share depends on the segment; it holds a 20.2% share of the daily goods (food) market, he said, and 16% of the total speciality retail market.
Hjoth noted that the General Motors Corp computer services subsidiary will not be the only computing supplier to KF.
Apiron, the company EDS is taking over, handles 70% of the company's information systems in the retailing sector.
The rest will be provided by ‘competitive suppliers,’ he said.
KF is just implementing, for example, an advanced distribution and inventory management system developed by Andersen Consulting, which EDS will operate once it is deployed.
It has also started developing a debit/credit card handling system.
‘We expect EDS will take part in its future development and hope they can help in bringing down its processing costs,’ Hjoth concluded.
NEW UK OLYMPIC COMPANY RISES FROM THE ASHES OF ONE THAT CRASHED IN JANUARY
Budget personal computer manufacturer OCT Systems Inc of Seattle, Washington has lined up a new UK distributor, following the demise of Olympic Technology Ltd, which went into liquidation in January.
Colchester, Essex-based Climate Changer Computer & Concessionaires Ltd will be selling OCT's Computers under the trading name Olympic Computers, having bought the moniker from the liquidator.
Climate Changer is an intriguing choice, since its business to date has been developing applications for the air-conditioning industry — its previous link to OCT had been as a large user of the machines.
Olympic Computers is offering support at preferential prices to the 18,000 Olympic Technology customers, but it will not be honouring service warranties made by the old company.
Olympic Technology is currently under investigation by the Fraud Squad and HM Customs and Excise.
Its biggest creditor was OCT Systems itself — the manufacturer says that it lost around £1.6m.
The liquidator, Chris Ashurst of Brighton-based Neville Russell, says that he is still looking for a missing £1m of stock and is keen to hear from anyone who bought OCT machines from anywhere other than the London direct-sales team, or the liquidators' auction held in Bristol.
COMPANY RESULTS
Ask Computer Systems Inc has reported a third quarter net loss of $674,000 compared with a profit last time of $2.0m, on turnover that declined 7.1% at $100.5m; the net loss for the nine months was $4.6m, down from a loss last time of $55.9m, which was struck after a $54.8m writedown of goodwill in acquisitions, on turnover up 2.7% at $297.7m.
Conner Peripherals Inc has reported a first quarter net loss of $22.5m against a profit last time of $24.6m on turnover that rose 26.5% at $558.3m.
Century Telephone Enterprise Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits down 63.3% at $4.5m, after $2m gains from the sale of assets and properties and $15.7m charges from the cumulative effect of an accounting change this time, on turnover up 34.5% at $100.6m; net profit for the year to December 31 was up 18.4% at $44.3m, after $2.6m gains from the sale of assets and properties, on turnover that rose 27% to $356.8m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted last time for a three-for-two stock split paid in December 1992, fell by 65.4% to $0.09 in the quarter, and rose by 15% to $0.92 in the year.
Chipcom Corp saw first quarter net profit up 85.6% at $3.4m, after $723,000 gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change, on sales up 84.8% to $30.6m.
Net per share rose by 76.2% to $0.37.
Data I/O Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits up 15.4% at $1.1m, on turnover up 2.6% at $18.8m; net profit for the year to December 31 was down 60.6% at $1.2m, after $1.7m extraordinary charges, on turnover that rose 2.9% to $69.3m.
Net earnings per share rose 14.3% to $0.16 in the quarter, and fell 61.4% to $0.17 in the year.
Digital Sound Corp has reported first quarter net losses of $740,000 against profits of $1.1m last time, on turnover that fell by 30% to $6.7m.
Energy Conversion Devices Inc saw second quarter net profits up 178.3% at $1.2m, after $192,000 losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover down 1.5% at $5.4m; mid-term net losses amounted to $1.5m up from losses of $1.1m last time, after $1.8m losses from discontinued operations this time, including $1.7m charges from their disposal, and $56,000 losses last time, on turnover up 2.6% at $8.6m.
Net per share stood at $0.11 in the quarter.
Comparisons with restated figures.
Fastcomm Communication Inc saw third quarter net profit of $323,000 against losses of $470,000 last time, on turnover up 78.1% at $1.7m; net profit for the nine months stood at $559,000 against losses of $792,000 last time, on turnover that rose 8.6% to $4.4m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.05 in the quarter, and to $0.10 in the nine months.
Intelligent Electronics Inc has reported fourth quarter net losses of $1.4m against profits of $10.6m last time, after $3.3m losses from early payment of debt and $4.8m losses from discontinued operations this time and $1m gains from discontinued operations last time, on turnover up 10.5% at $570.2m; net profit for the year to January 30 stood at $1.3m against profits of $38.6m last time, after $20.2m losses from discontinued operations this time and $684,000 gains last time, on turnover up 9.7% to $2,016.7m.
Comparisons are with restated figures to reflect discontinued operations.
International Business Machines Corp, IBM, has reported a first quarter net loss of $285,000 against a profit last time of $2,540m, which was struck after a gain of $1,900m from an accounting change, on turnover that fell 7.0% at $13,058m.
LanOptics Ltd has reported first quarter net profit up 121.5% at $3.4m, on turnover up 135.2% to $7.7m.
Net earnings per share rose 112% to $0.78.
Amounts are converted at $0.37 to the Israeli shekel.
Mathsoft Inc has turned in third quarter net profits of $551,000 against losses of $31,000 last time, on turnover up 244.5% at $7.7m; net profit for the nine months was up 225.3% at $1.1m, on turnover that rose 173.9% to $18.4m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.08 in the quarter, and to $0.17 in the nine months.
Share earnings for 1992 are not shown as the company only went public in February 1993.
The 1993 figures are restated.
Media Vision Technology Inc has turned in fourth quarter net profits of $3.9m against losses of $1.2m last time, on turnover that rose by 591.8% at $32.9m; net profit for the year to December 31 stood at $3.2m, after $1.3m pre-tax charges from the settlement of litigation, against losses of $5m last time, on turnover that rose by 727.2% to $3.2m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.36 in the quarter, and to $0.34 in the year.
Micropolis Corp has reported first quarter net profit down 47.1% at $1.5m, on turnover down 3.8% to $94.6m.
Net per share fell by 47.4% to $0.10.
Molex Inc has turned in third quarter net up 5.9% at $17.6m, on turnover up 7.5% at $206m; net profit for the nine months was up 10.1% at $52.7m, on turnover that rose 9.8% to $623.7m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted for a five-for-four stock split paid in November 1992, rose 3.7% to $0.28 in the quarter, and 9.1% to $0.84 in the nine months.
Standard Logic Inc saw first quarter net down 98.2% at $7,626, on turnover that fell 82.4% to $151,515.
Alias Research Inc saw fourth quarter net profits of $274,000 against losses of $9.5m last time, after $1.7m restructuring charges and $182,000 losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover up 19% at $8.5m; net losses for the year to January 31 stood at $15.6m down from losses of $17.4m last time, after $650,000 restructuring charges this time and $3.2m last time as well as $9.3m losses from discontinued operations this time and $135,000 gains last time, on turnover that fell 4.1% to $26.9m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.03 in the quarter.
 Comparisons are with restated 1992 figures to reflect discontinued operations.
LOUIS GERSTNER TAKES $95M TAX CREDIT
The expectation was that IBM Corp would throw everything including the kitchen sink into its fiscal first quarter figures in order to give Louis Gerstner as clean a platform as possible on which to build — but the company unaccountably dressed the figures up a little, by taking a $95m tax credit in the quarter, without which the net loss would  have been $380m; interest charges in the first quarter declined by 12.5% to $305m.
SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY REACHES AGREEMENT WITH CORNING INC
Seagate Technology Inc says it has reached a multi-million dollar agreement with Corning Inc which will enable it to produce a hard disk drive that is sturdier and stores more than conventional drives: it will use Corning' glass-ceramic dubbed Memcor and developed over six years of research and development; shipments of the material, which is thinner, stronger and more rugged than traditional  aluminium substrates, and enables the recording head to be placed much closer to the surface of the disk, will begin shortly and output of drives will start in the third quarter.
CONCURRENT COMPUTER TO EXPAND WORLDWIDE SALES
Oceanport, New Jersey-based Concurrent Computer Corp says it intends to expand its worldwide sales force by 10% next month: it has strengthened its industry and product marketing and professional services staffs over the past six months.
APPLE COMPUTER OPENS OFFICE IN MEXICO
Apple Computer Inc opened a marketing and channel development office in Mexico City: a market forecast has estimated that the personal computer market in Mexico should grow 29% to near $1,000m this year.
WORLDWIDE WORKSTATION MARKET GROWS 9.9%
The worldwide workstation market grew 9.9% last year to reach $9,540m, International Data Corp reckons: the Framingham, Massachusetts-based research outfit judges that Sun Microsystems Inc took 38% by value, Hewlett-Packard Co had 17.4%, Digital Equipment Corp 11.1% and IBM Corp 7%; DEC was the big loser, dipping 14.5% by value and 3.6% in number of units shipped.
IBM RS/6000 BUSINESS IS $2,000…
The problem with the International Data Corp figures is that they try to treat Unix workstations as a separate market rather than bundling Unix workstations and Unix servers together, which is presumably the reason for the implied figure for IBM Corp sales of only $558m, where IBM has implied total 1992 RS/6000 business of $2,000m.
BT TO FINISH CABLE NETWORK IN  WESTMINSTER IN 1995
British Telecommunications Plc says it is to complete its cable television network in the Westminster district of London by 1995 under undertakings given to the government as part of a review of its licence for the area: some 120,000 homes in Westminster, the only area in the UK where the company is licensed to offer television service over its phone network, will have access to the service on completion, Reuter notes; the company hopes to be allowed to run TV throughout its network from 1997.
MCI CAPITAL SPENDING TO PEAK AT $1,6000M
MCI Communications Corp says capital spending will peak at about $1,600m in 1993 versus $1,400m in 1992, and return to about the 1992 level after it completes construction of its long-distance link between Chicago and Salt Lake City.
ADVANCED MICRO DEVICES EXPECTS TO MAKE 600,000 AM486 CHIPS THIS YEAR
Advanced Micro Devices Inc is expected to be able to produce up to 600,000 Am486 chips this year, and it could produce some 4m — where Intel Corp is expected to produce some 26m 80486 chips this year and another 31m of the things in 1994.
BOOKTREE AND LSI PRODUCTS REACH PATENT SETTLEMENT
San Diego-based Brooktree Corp and TRW Inc's LSI Products Inc say they have reached a settlement of the patent infringement lawsuit filed by Brooktree in 1991, and that terms of the agreement are favourable to both parties; the settlement marks the end of all Brooktree's current patent litigation.
POWERGEN CHAIRMAN TO RETIRE
Electricity generator PowerGen Plc said Sir Graham Day is to retire as its chairman and that Sir Colin Southgate, chairman and chief executive of Thorn EMI Plc, will succeed him; Sir Colin has been a non-executive director of PowerGen since the firm was created in 1990.
OKI ELECTRIC INDUSTRY TO SUSPEND OPERATIONS AT TWO FACTOIRES IN EAST JAPAN
Oki Electric Industry Co Ltd will suspend operations at two factories in Takasaki and Tomioka, east Japan, for a total of three days in May and August because of falling capital investment by banks: for those three days, Oki will pay 90% of wages to the 3,100 employees; the Tomioka plant produces computer systems and equipment for financial institutions while Takasaki makes general information and communications equipment and printers.
FKI PLC SELLS FKI COMMUNICATIONS LTD
FKI Plc has let the FKI Communications Ltd arm of its Process Control Group go in a management buy-out backed by ECI Ventures for £5.4m, £4m in cash, £1.4m by the issue of 1.4m preference shares in the firm.
SHARP ELECTRONICS TO WORK WITH AT&T TO SELL MOBILE COMMS SYSTEMS
Sharp Electronics Corp, Mahwah, New Jersey is to work with AT&T Co's Easylink Services to sell mobile communications systems based on the Wizard electronic organiser and AT&T's EasyLink messaging services.
DATA SCIENCES APPOINTS NEW CHIEF EXECUTIVE
Data Sciences UK Ltd appointed Andy Roberts, formerly ICL PLc's mid-range systems manager to be its new group chief executive with immediate effect: Roberts replaces Mike Smith, who resigned from the firm.
IBM CHOOSE FLORIDA FOR ANNUAL MEETING VENUE
Could it be that John Akers and the IBM Corp board have a malicious sense of humour after all?
Of all the places to choose, they picked the retirement capital of America, the Sunshine State of Florida, to hold the company's annual meeting next week, which suggests that the blue rinse brigade, beside themselves with rage at the way the company has frittered away the value of their investment in it — and cut their dividends, will be able to turn out in force without having to travel and give poor Loius Gerstner the handbagging of his life.