

MOTOROLA IS PLANNING TO SAMPLE THE 68060 IN JULY
Motorola Inc's semiconductor division will begin sampling the 68060 next generation 32-bit microprocessor in the third quarter.
Motorola killed its intended predecessor, the 68050, last year after it decided the development wasn't advanced enough to justify the expenditure preparing it for production.
The 68060 will initially be offered in two versions, running at 50MHz and 66MHz.
The company claims that the thing will execute 100 MIPS and 15 MGFLOPS, processing more than one but fewer than two instructions per cycle.
The 68060 is a static, modular, superscalar and superpipelined part built using 0.8-micron CMOS technology — BiCMOS techniques will be incorporated in the planned 68080 and 68100, Motorola says.
The 68060 operates at 3.3V, features an integrated floating-point unit and it has two 8Kb caches on the chip.
According to Motorola UK's 68000 marketing manager, Neil Martin, the firm will ship 100,000 to 200,000 samples as early as July, with a suggested price tag of around $500 for the 50MHz part.
There are no plans for a 64-bit 68000 design.
Apple Computer Inc has already declared its interest in the chip and plans to introduce a 68060-based machine in the second quarter next year.
Also expected in the 68000 complex instruction set family of microprocessors is a 250 to 350 MIPS 68080 due by 1995 and an 800 MIPS — probably the 68100 — by the year 2000.
CONCURRENT GEARS UP FOR MIPS R4400-BASED SYSTEMS
Concurrent Computer Corp, Oceanport, New Jersey has launched a Series 7000 Investment Protection Programme under which its customers can buy and install a new Concurrent Series 7000 system and then order the compatible upgrade to the next generation system, which will be introduced later this year.
Customers would have to pay only the difference between the price of the Series 7000 System and the new-generation system, which for a low-end system would be minimal.
The programme runs to August 31 and customers must agree to take delivery of the new-generation system by March 31 next year.
The planned R4400-based system will be one of the first available system implementations of the highest performance line of RISC chips developed by MIPS Technologies Inc, Concurrent claims.
It will run the same version of Concurrent's RTU Real-Time Unix as the existing models.
Series 7000 systems range from $14,000 to $70,000, depending on the number of main processors.
HEWLETT-PACKARD WINS BIG DOWNSIZING PACT WITH TELEVERKET
Hewlett-Packard Co has beaten both the incumbent mainframe supplies, IBM Corp and Unisys Corp to a contract with Televerket of Stockholm to an initial $4.6m contract that could grow to $100m by 1996.
The contract is with Hewlett's Telecom Industry-Consulting Practice and is to modernise the phone company's mainframe-based infrastructure.
The initial pact includes client-server software from Sybase Inc and Applied Information Sciences Inc, and CA-Unicenter from Computer Associates International Inc, all running on HP 9000 Series 800 Unix machines.
In a phased migration, Hewlett will offload IBM and Unisys mainframe applications to HP 9000 servers; Televerket wanted support for 1Tb databases and 10,000 concurrent users with subsecond responses.
BORLAND, WORDPERFECT TO TEAM TO CREATE BORLAND OFFICE BUNDLE…
Borland International Inc and WordPerfect Corp are getting together to challenge the Microsoft Corp Microsoft Office with a bundle of their own, bringing together the Windows versions of the Wordperfect word processor, Paradox database and Quattro spreadsheet and offering it as Borland Office at a bargain basement $600 or less.
The version of WordPerfect in Borland Office has been modified to work more closely with Paradox and Quattro and similar joint developments have been planned for the future, although privately-held Wordperfect Corp is not thought likely to sell out to Borland.
WordPerfect is entirely owned by its top two executives, but is considering going public later this year or in 1994.
…
AS NOVELL IS SEEN AS PARTNER ON APPLE's MAC-ON-INTEL PROJECT
Meantime the Wall Street Journal has now picked up on that story we reported last month that Apple Computer Inc and Novell Inc are working together to build the Macintosh System 7.1 look and feel atop Novell's MS-DOS-compatible DR DOS to run on iAPX-86-based machines (CI No 2,133).
The Journal has not got very far in finding out where the applications are expected to come from — or how the thing will be marketed.
It suggests either that Apple and Novell only would market the software with Intel Corp-based machines, or that other manufacturers would be licensed to sell machines bundled with the software.
Enabling Mac applications to run on the Intel architecture would be a major task, and it is suggested that the pair may look primarily to the base of Windows applications because while software emulation is feasible, the only efficient way to run Mac applications would be to include a 68000 co-processor.
XT-COMPATIBLE CELLULAR ORGANISER SET BY START-UP
A seven-employee Minneapolis-based start-up company, Radio Computer & Telephone Corp, is developing a pocket-sized personal communicator that combines the functions of an XT, a cellular telephone, a pager and tape recorder, US PC Week reports.
The Pocket Office, due to ship in quantity in the autumn, is aimed at mobile workers who need to receive, store and transmit speech and data over wired and cellular telephone lines.
Where most of the planned personal communicators support pen input, Radio Computer has eschewed this in favour of the capability to exchange messages with pagers and run MS-DOS applications.
The idea is to collapse the functions of the personal organiser, the cellular telephone and the pager that many travelling employees now tote with them, into a single device.
It will accept data vie the serial port or via a 40Mb disk that fits into the single PCMCIA Type III slot.
The $2,000 2 lbs device will come bundled with telephone book, calendar, memo pad and facsimile software.
WIENER ON IBM
So who is this Gerstner, and where is he coming from?
Louis Vincent Gerstner Jr turned 51 on March 1.
His birthday present from IBM's board was an offer to become the company's chairman and chief executive.
Nice present.
In return for his services he will be paid four times as much as his immediate predecessor, John Akers: up to $16m over three years.
Akers earned about $1.3m during 1992, about half the $2.6m he got in 1990, his peak year.
(Both executives have also received considerable stock options that cannot be accurately valued until exercised).
Gerstner got $4m last year for running RJR Nabisco Holdings, which had been the object of the largest leveraged buyout in history.
Gerstner came to RJR from American Express, where he had spent more than 10 years, the last four as president.
He began his career — after education at Dartmouth and Harvard Business School — with McKinsey & Co.
McKinsey is widely regarded as one of the top business consulting companies in the world and Gerstner has been characterised as one of its stars.
Death blows
About the time Gerstner left McKinsey for American Express, Itel, a leasing company run by former McKinsey consultants, received its death blows from IBM.
The strokes came in the form of the 303X mainframe family, announced in 1977, which hurt the residual values of 370 and 370-compatible mainframes leased by Itel…followed by the 1979 announcement of the 4300 series that destroyed the remaining hopes of lessors like Itel that had bet too heavily on the lasting value of older computers.
Itel wound up in Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
Those who believe Gerstner is a good choice for IBM point to his skill at cutting corporate expenses and willingness to pare payrolls, implying that IBM is a good but bloated company and conveniently forgetting that Akers cut IBM's payroll by 25% and still ended up with unacceptable results.
Clearly, returning IBM to a position of financial leadership is not simply a matter of reducing personnel.
Gerstner's biggest problem may stem from the sources of his success.
His rise to the very pinnacle of the business world is evidence not only of academic and managerial skills, but of social skills as well.
Besides sitting on the boards of prestigious companies (Caterpillar, The New York Times Co, AT&T and Bristol-Myers) he also contributes considerable time and energy to charitable organisations.
Gerstner is a director of Memorial Sloan Kettering Hospital, United Negro College Fund, Lincoln Center and a trustee of the New York Public Library.
Another aspect of his important role in the American Establishment involves participation in societies aimed at shaping global policies, such as the Japan Society, the Center for Strategic and International Studies and the Business Council.
By every indication, Louis Gerstner is poised to win in a battlefield where IBM has lost considerable ground of late: the corporate boardroom.
It is in this rarefied atmosphere that IBM may find the key to once again making itself the preferred partner of big business — a role that it has not recently played to sufficiently enthusiastic reviews.
The error of 1987 that led to the 1990s depression
There was a time — 1987, to be specific — when IBM could have easily made a shambles of the mainframe leasing business, decimated makers of IBM-compatible equipment and put its large systems on the road to rapid growth.
Well, it didn't happen that way.
The potential key to IBM's success was the Crash of 1987.
It wasn't quickly followed by a depression, like the Crash of 1929.
The 1987 stock market debacle warned of and ultimately led to the worldwide slump of the 1990s.
But in the immediate wake of the October 19 crash, IBM's most serious rival, Comdisco, disclosed that it had lost $100m in a business that had nothing to do with its main occupation of leasing and trading IBM equipment.
Comdisco had been playing in a high stakes financial game known as risk arbitrage, hoping to get ahead of the rapid run-up in a company's share price when it became the object of a takeover (or the reversal of fortune that occurred when a takeover fell apart).
It was, in fact, the speculative atmosphere of the times that led to the takeover of RJR Nabisco by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, at the time one of the leading leveraged buyout firms.
Until the crash, Comdisco's chairman, Ken Pontikes, had every reason to believe he could serve his shareholders well by putting some of his company's wealth into risk arbitrage.
The takeover game was played in part with junk bonds, the very instruments Comdisco had earlier used to raise considerable capital of its own.
(Comdisco's bondholders made out OK).
Pontikes also had direct personal experience due to a $500,000 investment in Saul Steinberg's Reliance Capital Group Limited Partnership, a buyout and arbitrage firm with a roster of investors that amounted to a Who's Who Among The Self-Made Rich.
Damaged by its losses — which were reduced by $80m by the time the quarter ended — Comdisco had its credit rating chopped and reported a net loss for the quarter ended December 31, 1987, of $56m…despite a growth in revenue to $327m from $268m.
Risk arbitrage
Comdisco got out of the risk arbitrage business and shortly thereafter went to the somewhat less receptive credit markets for $100m to boost its liquidity.
At the time, Comdisco was busy taking advantage of IBM's 3090-E systems, which would eventually become the foundation of today's ESA architecture base.
If it had faltered, it might soon have been overrun by competitors, including IBM Credit Corp.
But Comdisco made a bundle leasing 3090-Es, upgrading its base of original 3090s and navigating past most of the rocks and shoals of the mainframe disk business, which was adjusting to IBM's impressive 3380-K drives.
IBM had priced the Es relatively high when they were announced and did not fully appreciate the impact aggressive pricing might have had.
Among the effects of IBM's judgement — correct in the short term, disastrous in the long run — were:
a rapid replenishment of Comdisco's coffers with mainframe leasing profits;
the creation of a large target for Amdahl, which was able to field the much faster machines that forced IBM to rush from E to S models;
the entrapment of IBM Credit Corp in a portfolio of costly machines that put pressure on IBM to make subsequent upgrades to 3090-S and -J machines expensive;
the prolonging of the life of the base 3090s, which helped not only Comdisco but all IBM's other rivals in the used mainframe business; and
the undermining of IBM's image as an understanding vendor to big business as the inevitable wave of data centre consolidations swept the world in late 1988 and into 1989.
By the time IBM completed its 3090 generation and began shipping 9021s, market forces had brought about so much price erosion that the company's mainframes were routinely offered to big customers at half of list.
In other words, the very development by which IBM could have gained enormously had it been the initiator led, a few short and bumpy years later, to the same results.
Except now IBM, not its competition, is being knocked silly.
LETTING IN THE ENEMY HORDES?
SIEMENS NIXDORF TO PUT COMET BUSINESS SUITE UP UNDER HP-UX, AIX UNIX
In what looks strangely like an open invitation to the competition to plunder what is left of the 8870 base, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG's Comet mix-and-match business management software, which previously ran only on the company's Unix boxes and its proprietary 8870 and Quattro ranges, will soon run on IBM Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co Unix machines too.
According to Computerwoche, version 3.0 of the software is due to be released this month and an AIX version will follow in May, and an HP-UX release will be available later in the year.
The company will sell the product both direct and through agents, but not via OEM channels — a marketing strategy that those in Comet circles doubt can and should be maintained.
Siemens Nixdorf wants its agents to operate purely as software houses.
But the problem is that they may not be able to deal adequately with operating systems and computer environments that they don't know and are not allowed to market; especially given the financial position many of them are in.
Comet is written in Basic, and although it has been around for about 20 years, is still widely used.
Siemens Nixdorf has guaranteed that it will continue developing the software until 1996, and will offer maintenance into the next century.
EXPERT PARALLEL DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM FOR TRANSPUTER
Two Dutch companies, Associated Computer Experts BV of Amsterdam and Delft-based Parallel Architecture and Compiler Technology, or PACT BV, have joined forces to produce the Expert Parallel Development System for Transputer-based applications.
Expert combines the Expert Transputer compiler family from Associated Computer with PACT's Parallel C Compiler and run-time system to provide a stand-alone, or complete, set of tools for T400, T800 and T9000 application development.
The system comprises Parallel C, K&R C, ANSI C, Fortran 77, Pascal and Modula 2 front-ends; a global optimiser; T400, T800 and T9000 code generators; source level debugging; full library support including virtual channel communication and Inmos Binary  Compatibility Standard-compliant run-time system.
A converter for Inmos's TCOFF run-time system interface to the COFF industry standard, which enables Occam modules and libraries to be linked in is also provided.
The system costs around $2,200 for an MS-DOS version and $6,600 for a Unix C-based version and is available from Associated Computer Experts, PACT and their respective distribution chains.
INTERGRAPH LAUNCHES INTERPRO 2700, 6700 CLIPPER C400 WORKSTATIONS
Huntsville, Alabama-based Intergraph Corp has released new InterPro Series 2700 and 6700 workstations based on its C400 Clipper RISC chip which run Unix but can also be configured for Microsoft Corp Windows NT.
A 2700 desktop with 32Mb memory, 426Mb disk and 19″ screen costs £15,000 — with 1Gb disk and two 19″ monitors, the price rises to £21,000; 21″ and 27″ screens are also available.
The 6700 deskside, with more expansion features, is priced at from £18,000 to £53,100 configured with twin 27″ monitors and Edge 2+ graphics.
ARES FONTCHAMELEON TAKES A BIG STEP TOWARDS ALLEVIATING THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY-RAPACIOUS TYPE FONTS
One of the biggest problems in desktop publishing is that to archive a finished newsletter or whatever takes up an entire floppy disk for one issue — and it's even worse if you want to squirt the thing down the wire for someone else to print out.
An ingenious approach to handling fonts and type-faces was unveiled last week that is claimed radically to reduce storage requirements, simplify portability and enable users to design their own fonts.
Boston-based Ares Software Corp is hoping to licence its FontChameleon technology to operating system designers, application developers and printer manufacturers, and it may have some success since FontChameleon is supposedly compatible with existing PostScript and TrueType standards.
Conventionally, each font is encoded from scratch, to produce a file anywhere between 30Kb or 50Kb.
FontChameleon takes a radically different approach: a master outline file about 200Kb in size stores generic descriptions of characters, digits and punctuation marks.
This information base is then manipulated using a font descriptor file to generate a particular font.
The beauty is that the font descriptor files take up only 2Kb, so once the  initial overhead has been recouped, adding fonts is relatively painless.
The 200Kb master file covers only Roman faces — italic fonts need another file, bringing the overhead to 400Kb.
Nonetheless Ares believes that for users with even a moderate number of typefaces in use, FontChameleon will save storage space.
The technology should also help users move documents around since it will enable fonts to be ‘embedded’ in text files more easily.
Moreover the company claims that FontChameleon can read the metrics from TrueType and PostScript Type One and Three fonts; so if the user receives a document containing a font that he or she does not have, the intelligent Ares software will be able to construct a close match.
There are limitations of course— dingbats and other specialised marks cannot be generated from the master file and will have to be stored conventionally.
Additionally, there is a slight degradation in the quality of the letters compared with those  individually generated from scratch.
However Ares' Chairman Rob Friedman says that this will be noticeable only by the typographic elite and that the output is more than acceptable for most publishing applications.
Ares hopes to sell the technology through a variety of channels — most obvious, lucrative and difficult will be persuading an operating system manufacturer to incorporate the code into its offering, however the company also hopes to tempt printer manufacturers with the prospect of shipping more ROM-held fonts, or alternatively cut their memory requirements.
In the meantime the company is concentrating on application software for the Apple Computer Inc Macintosh and Microsoft Corp Windows machines which enables users to construct their own fonts.
This should be ready by the middle of the year and cost $300.
It will ship with 200 fonts bundled in, and users will be able to use the tool to combine the characteristics of these to generate new fonts that can be saved in either PostScript or TrueType format.
HIGH-DEFINITION TELEVISION IS A CHIMERA, APPLE's SCULLEY SUGGESTS
Apple Computer Inc chief executive John Sculley has controversially entered the high-definition television debate, saying that he reckons the outlook for digital compression television is far brighter than that for high definition television, Reuter reports.
‘I think there's a big question now about the commercial viability of HDTV,’ Sculley told reporters after addressing the National Association of Broadcasters annual convention in Las Vegas this week.
Digital television, which makes more efficient use of the broadcast band, is a more interesting prospect, he said.
For instance it would enable broadcasters to offer interactive services — such as the ability for viewers to call up statistics while watching a baseball game.
Sculley said he did not believe anyone had been able to build an HDTV set at a reasonable price.
He added that the movie quality pictures offered by HDTV would not necessarily make it better or more satisfying to the viewer — instead they could well expose the cheap and cheerful sets used for soap operas for instance.
He told the broadcasters to urge the Federal Communications Commission, now considering an industry standard for HDTV, to examine the possibilities for offering multimedia — also a hot topic at the Las Vegas Conference — through digital compression.
PHILIPS PLANS TO EMBED MACROVISION's ANTI-PIRACY TECHNOLOGY INTO ITS COLOUR ENCODER CHIPS
Macrovision Inc, Mountain View, and Philips Electronics NV's Philips Semiconductors came together at the National Association of Broadcasters trade show this week to announce that Philips' new NTSC and PAL colour encoder chips will include Macrovision's patented pay-per-view anti-copy system.
The system will enable manufacturers of digital compressed video set-top decoders to buy off-the-shelf components implementing copy protection, ‘securely embedded inside a single integrated circuit’ so that there is no way to bypass it without screwing up the decoder.
Macrovision plans to license the technology for use by hardware manufacturers and pay-per-view distributors such as cable, satellite, and  telecommunications operators, making it easier for the home entertainment industry to control the home piracy threat against video-on-demand services.
The Philips digital NTSC and PAL encoder chips are designed to convert decompressed digital video input into an analogue video output compatible with all current video  cassette recorders and televisions.
Philips sees the parts being used wherever digital video is recorded or transmitted to the home and there is a requirement to play the video on a standard television.
The company says it believes that Macrovision may be applicable in interactive video products such as Philips' Compact Disk-Interactive, games machines and multimedia computers.
To copy-protect a particular programme, the rights owner directs the distributor to turn on the Macrovision circuit in the individual decoders by inserting encrypted codes into the video transmission.
Each set-top decoder would then have its Macrovision-component circuitry individually addressed and activated through the network's addressable access control system.
ALIAS RESEARCH MAKES ITS SOFTWARE AVAILABLE ON MACs, IRIS WITH OPEN DIGITAL STUDIO ENVIRONMENT
Alias Research Inc of Toronto, Canada is making its digital media creation software easier to integrate with other industry-standard digital media formats under its ‘Open Digital Studio’ environment.
The company has also signed with special effects company Industrial Light & Magic Inc, which produced the award-winning effects in Death Becomes Her and the liquid Cyborg in Terminator 2.
The new Open Digital Studio format provides open interfaces to the Alias modelling format and rendering systems — Alias OpenModel and OpenRender — enabling users to develop custom effects and interfaces between Alias and other digital applications.
Initially, it will be offered with Alias Animator and Alias PowerAnimator Version 4.1. for Silicon Graphics Inc workstations, RISC personal computers and digital media servers, including the Iris Indigo and Indigo2 Extreme.
The new environment enables Alias software to integrate with Apple Computer Inc's QuickTime; Pixar Inc's RenderMan Interface Bytestream; and Avid Technology Inc's proposed Open Media Framework Interchange standard for sharing digital media information among multiple applications and types of production and post-production equipment.
QuickTime support is offered via AliasTime, a Macintosh utility that converts Alias-format animations to QuickTime movies.
This enables users working in mixed environments to preview animations developed on the Animator or PowerAnimator on either Silicon Graphics or Macintosh machines.
The conversion of Alias modelling and animation files to Pixar files enables distribution via existing RenderMan libraries and across the multiple systems supported by RenderMan and NetRenderMan.
Another extension offered with Open Digital Studio is OpenModel, an Applications Programming Interface that enables users to write custom software to manipulate Alias-created models and import them into other digital media applications.
Also there is ODS OpenRender — previously called ProRender.
This is used to develop rendering effects like special shaders — brushed aluminium for example; textures such as butterfly wings; and lighting effects.
Open Digital Studio will be available with V4.1 of Animator and PowerAnimator, scheduled for release in June 1993.
Upgrades are free to existing customer with maintenance agreements; OpenModel is $500.
Dinosaurs
Meantime, under the agreement with Industrial Light & Magic, which formalises an established five-year working relationship, Alias is to incorporate feedback from Industrial Light into future software releases.
Alias will provide on-site engineering resources at Industrial Light, potentially tripling the number of Alias users via a site-wide software licence.
Industrial Light is currently using an Alias system to create computer-generated dinosaurs for Steven Spielberg's upcoming Jurassic Park film and has also used it for commercials.
Future applications include video game software and theme park rides.
Other Alias three-dimensional animation customers include Walt Disney Pictures, Pixar, Metrolight Studios, Video Image, Sierra Online, Telezign, National Boston Video Center, Broadway Video, Post Effects, The Moving Picture Co MediaLab, RIFF, Apple, Sony Corp, Volvo AB and Northern Telecom Ltd.
NIPPON DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP STRIPS FOR ACTION IN THE JAPANESE MARKET UNDER NEW PRESIDENT
Nippon Digital Equipment Corp is to go after the client-server market in Japan, using the bilingual DOS/V operating system on its personal computers and the VAX series of machines as servers.
DEC says it is also working with Microsoft Corp engineers on creation of a Japanese version of Windows NT.
Nippon DEC has named a new president to replace Edmund Reilly, president of the Japanese subsidiary since its formation in 1980, who is to move to Hong Kong as the president and managing director of DEC Asia Region.
Yojo Hamawaki, currently honorary chairman of BMW Japan after serving as its president since 1981, will take over.
Hamawaki started his career at Kawasaki Motors and headed various Kawasaki subsidiaries in the US, before moving to BMW in 1981 where he directed the luxury automaker's entry into the Japanese market.
He has no background in the computer business but extensive experience in marketing and management according to DEC; he is also Japanese, in an age when US companies are increasingly moving management to Japanese executives.
DEC is hoping to expand its OEM outlets and diversify its sales channels, while increasing its focus on the customer.
Nippon DEC has also teamed up with four software companies to develop its software reseller business.
Each of the companies will sell DEC-developed multi-environment software to its users, which are currently mainly SPARCstation users.
The software in question includes DEC FUSE, a Unix programming support tool, the EasyWin Windows application development tool, Electronic Distribution Management for the system management of software distribution, and DEC messageQ middleware for the distribution of data and messages.
The four companies are Nissho Electronics Co and Sumisho Electronics Co, both larger software sales subsidiaries of trading companies, and ASR Ltd and Map Systems Inc, two smaller companies.
Nippon DEC also announced the other day that it has developed and will be distributing software that interfaces the DEC VAX series with NEC Corp's APEX 2400 and APEX 7400 series of PABXs.
DEC expects the software to be used in growing applications such as telemarketing and in customer service.
NEC's PABXs have over 30% of the Japanese market, putting the company in the number one spot.
The product will be known as the DEC CIT API for NEC/OAI.
MATSUSHITA DEFECTS FROM FUJITSU CAMP, LAUNCHES FIRST IBM-COMPATIBLE NOTEBOOK
Matsushita Electric Industrial Co has started marketing the Panacom Pro-note V IBM-compatible notebook computer.
The Pro-note V is the first IBM-compatible machine that Matsushita has offered on the Japanese market — until now it has manufactured and sold only personal computers compatible with Fujitsu Ltd's FMR series — all the leading brands run incompatible versions of Japanese MS-DOS — indicating a major change in strategy as IBM-compatible machines become more acceptable in Japan with the advent of the DOS/V bilingual operating system.
The notebooks incorporate an 80386SL chip and a thin film transistor colour screen, and are available at $5,840.
FIRST JAPANESE CLONE OF THE 80386 READY AT LAST AT NISHI's COMPANY
It has been an awful long time in the development, but V M Technologies, the semiconductor development affiliate of ASCII Corp, the software development company run by Kazuhiko Nishi, which has been having a rough time of it of late, has finally announced that it has completed the preparation to sell its long-promised home-grown microprocessor fully compatible with Intel Corp's 80386, the first 80386 clone developed in Japan.
Development began two years ago, but marketing was delayed because of bugs, which president Nishi says have now been completely dealt with.
The chip went on display at the Microsoft Computer Show which opened on April 20 in Tokyo.
Fujitsu Ltd, an investor in V M Technologies, will be handling fabrication of the new device.
NEC HAS ANALOGUE 13″ COLOUR THIN FILM TRANSISTOR FLAT PANEL DISPLAY
All the signs are that we are going to have to put up with far from satisfactory liquid crystal diode displays if we want portability, and recognising that the things are far from ideal, Japanese manufacturers are pulling out all the stops to improve the things.
NEC Corp has announced a full-colour analogue 13″ thin-film transistor liquid crystal diode display that uses an analogue red, green and blue interface to achieve natural colour.
Graphics and television pictures  displayed at the launch were excellent.
NEC believes its totally analogue interface beats the  analogue-digital to-analogue conversion of many of its competitors such as Sharp Corp and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co's Panasonic.
The 13″ module will be available for shipment from this summer, and NEC is looking to the development of larger screen modules, between 15″ and 21″.
Initially 90% of the production will go for use in NEC products; to date demand is highest for the 9.4″ screens used in laptops, although NEC expects the market to grow to a $8,900m market by 2000, when it hopes to have a 25% market share.
HITACHI OBJECTIQ ORDER IN BELGIUM
Hitachi Ltd has won an order from Belgium's an Bank Krediet for its Object IQ artificial intelligence software.
The bank will use the Hitachi software to develop a fund investment system to come into operation from 1994.
The order is worth around $4.2m.
The software, which was developed in-house, is marketed internationally on Hewlett-Packard Co workstations.
FUJITSU PRINTER HANDLES THICK CARD
Fujitsu Ltd has developed a 600dpi high resolution laser printer, the SLB-6200J1 which became available in late March.
Its particular feature is that it can print name cards and handle thick paper up to 300 microns, and is also supplied with a cutter.
Fujitsu plans to sell the printer OEM through a major stationery supplier King Corp at $34,000.
IBM DEUTSCHLAND TALE OF WOE: IBM BAILED IT OUT WITH $580m; 4,500 JOBS MUST GO
It seems as if the reason that IBM UK Ltd couldn't get any cash from its parent to bail it out at the end of last year and reportedly was told to go factor its receivables, is that IBM Corp was too busy bailing out IBM Deutschland GmbH.
Reuter reports from Berlin that the German subsidiary received the equivalent of $580 from its US parent last year.
Management board chairman Hans-Olaf Henkel said that transfer reduced its extraordinary loss to $562m last year when it had extraordinary expenditure of $1,134m.
The company made a whopping net loss of $279m, down from a loss last time of $298m, and operating profit slumped 61% to $171m.
Turnover fell 6.7% at $8,696m.
The company intends to cut about 4,500 jobs by the end of 1995, leaving it with some 20,000 full-time employees, compared with 24,651 at the end of 1992; 3,500 jobs are to go this year.
It expects lower extraordinary spending this year, since it has taken charges for job cuts as well as depreciation already.
It made no forecast for its business this year, but given the state of the German economy, it is likely to be worse than last year at the operating level.
NCR POSTS AN OPERATING LOSS ON FALLING SALES, BUT AT&T SAYS OUTLOOK IS BRIGHT
Commenting on the company's figures (see opposite), AT&T Co chairman Robert Allen says the first quarter results, excluding the accounting changes, auger well for the rest of the year.
AT&T says long distance calling volume increased 5% from a year ago.
Long distance margins rose 2% to 37% from a year ago.
Revenues from telecommunications services rose $94m and sales of products and systems increased 2.9%.
Sales of network telecommunications products increased $76m to $1,750m, and business from communications products and systems were about even with a year ago.
NCR Corp's total revenues, including sales to other AT&T units, fell 3.9% to $1,480m, but the company is said to be seeing strong orders for its products.
It reported an operating loss $20m, including a $50m restructuring charge, for the first quarter, compared to a profit of $46m a year ago.
Financial services revenues, including lease and finance revenues from AT&T Capital Corp and Universal Card revenues, rose 40% to $570m, and at the end of the quarter, AT&T's total workforce stood at 312,500 against 316,400 a year ago.
The company says earnings growth of 10% in 1993 is on target, excluding the accounting changes.
Robert Allen says he is confident that the company's proposed investment in McCaw Cellular Communications Inc will close in this quarter, ‘hopefully sooner rather than later.’
Allen told a conference prior to the company's annual meeting that March calling volumes were strong, ‘even discounting for some weather which popped it up a bit.’
He also said he is ‘very optimistic’ about the NCR computer division, where orders from Europe recently have picked up after a period of extreme softness.
He also noted that former US trade representative Carla Hills will be nominated for a seat on the board.
The company sees China, where AT&T recently signed a memo of understanding opening the way for a wide variety of deals as ‘a huge opportunity’ for AT&T although prospects depend on political stability and the country's continued ability to obtain most-favoured-nation trade status.
SUN PUTS A BRAVE FACE ON FALLING PROFITS AS ITS SALES CONTINUE TO RISE
Commenting on some rather storm-damaged third quarter figures (see opposite), Sun Microsystems Inc chief financial officer Kevin Melia said ‘Profitability was below the year-ago level due to gross margin declines that were partially offset by tightly controlled growth in operating expenses.
The gross margin percentage declined from the prior-year quarter due to a heavier mix of upgrade shipments, as well as increased shipments of non-systems components such as memory and storage.
We also experienced weakness in several European countries.
However, our continuing commitment to control headcount and spending enabled us to increase turnover per employee above $300,000 for the first time, and reduce our operating expenses as a percentage of revenues.’
Sun says that its computer systems subsidiary, Sun Microsystems Computer Corp, shipped more than 90,000 Sparc processors during the quarter, 57,000 of which were systems, and the balance of which were upgrades and multiprocessors.
SunSoft Inc, the company's system software subsidiary, distributed 136,000 Solaris and Unix licences, 116,000 of which were Solaris 2.
‘We achieved volume shipments of the Sparcstation 10 Model 41 systems, and continued to establish the Sparcstation 10 as the most successful new product family in Sun's history,’ Melia commented.
‘Through the third quarter, we have shipped nearly 45,000 Sparcstation 10's.
‘In addition, we shipped more than 13,000 of our low-cost MicroSparc-based desktop workstations, and we made our initial shipments of the new Sparccenter 2000 enterprise server products.
Melia concluded, ‘We have solid cost and asset management, and will continue to emphasise keeping the business lean, focused and financially strong,’ and noted that the company was due to launch those new machines and price cuts (CI No 2,152), late yesterday.
COMPAQ TURNS IN A MAGNIFICENT QUARTER AS ITS SALES SOAR TO $1,600m
Compaq Computer Corp's first quarter earnings were better than the highest of Wall Street estimates and some analysts said that if it were not for a negative impact from currency translations, profits would have been a bit higher still.
Compaq reported first quarter earnings of $1.23 a share, and the highest estimate on Wall Street was $1.20 a share, according to First Call.
Needless to say, sales were a record at $1,600m.
‘They were fabulous numbers,’ said Marianne Wolk, a Prudential Securities analyst told Reuter.
‘It was so strong that they hit my March 1994 revenue estimate.’
Compaq said operating expenses as a percentage of revenues were 13.4% for the first quarter, a record low.
Compaq said demand is very high for its new generation of personal computers, launched in March, and the new generation of ProLinea and the Contura notebook line are backlogged with resellers.
It said that during the quarter it greatly improved product delivery time to its resellers, and recorded the highest volume quarter in its history.
When it first launched the Prolinea last summer, Compaq had a hard time meeting demand for the box.
Worldwide unit volumes in the quarter more than tripled from levels in the first quarter of 1992, and ‘expenses are firmly under control,’ it said.
The Houston company said it was closely managing gross margins and tightly controlling expenses.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Fiserv Inc, the Brookfield, Wisconsin facilities manager, has filed with the US Securities & Exchange Commission to offer up to 3.85m common shares, 1.4m of them new, and says it plans to use the net proceeds for debt repayment and possible acquisitions.
The underwriters to the issue are Morgan Stanley & Co Inc and Merrill Lynch & Co
Creative Technology Ltd, Singapore sound board maker, says said it plans to file with the Securities & Exchange Commission for a public offering of about 5m common shares, 2m of which will be new.
COMPANY RESULTS
AST Research Inc has reported third quarter net profits down 34% at $11.0m on turnover that soared 53.3% at $370.2m; nine-month net profit fell 33.3% at $33.3m on turnover that climbed 84.6% at $1,002.9m; net earnings per share fell 34% to $0.35 in the quarter, 33% to $1.05 in the nine months.
AT&T Co has reported a first quarter net loss of $5,641m after a $7,020m charge for the accounting change on post-retirement benefits, and a gain of $383 for a tax accounting change, against a profit last time of $883m on turnover up 2.2% at $15,719m.
Boston Technology Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits of $1.2m against losses of $180,000 last time, on turnover up 93.4% at $16m; net profit for the year to January 31 stood at $3.1m against losses of $2.4m last time, on turnover that rose 35.9% to $49.5m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.05 in the quarter, and to $0.13 in the year.
Compaq Computer Corp has reported that first quarter net profit soared 125.8% at $102.4m, on turnover more than doubled, up 105.7% at $1,611m; net earnings per share leaped by 132% to $1.23.
CSP Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 36.4% at $558,000, on turnover up 24.6% at $5m; mid-term net rose 39.7% to $974,000, on turnover up 18.5% at $9.2m.
Net per share rose 33.3% to $0.20 in the quarter, and 34.6% to $0.35 in the half.
Data General Corp has reported a second quarter net loss of $7.6m, down from a loss last time of $55.3m that was after a $48m restructuring charge, on turnover down 2.3% at $267.4m; the mid-term net loss was $6.8m, down from a loss last time of $51.3m, on turnover that fell 3.8% at $547.1m.
Diebold Inc has reported first quarter net profits of $8.6m against losses of $11.6m last time, after $17.9m losses from the cumulative effect of an accounting change last time, on sales up 10.6% to $134.5m.
Net per share, adjusted for a three-for-two stock split paid in February 1993, was $0.43.
Go-Video Inc has turned in second quarter net profits of $60,220 against losses of $622,705 last time, on turnover that rose by 186% to $8.6m; mid-term net profits amounted to $81,383 against losses of $1.1m last time, on turnover that rose 121.5% to $14.7m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.01 in the quarter, and to $0.01 in the half.
GTE Corp has reported first quarter net profits of $460.0m against a loss last time of $2,048m which came after charges of $2,441m for two accounting changes, on turnover that was flat at $4,826m.
Net earnings per share were $0.48 in the quarter.
H&R Block Inc saw third quarter net up 68% at $8.6m, on turnover up 20.3% at $308.9m; net losses for the nine months stood at $2.5m down from losses of $3.7m last time, on turnover up 12.4% to $711m.
Net per share rose by 60% to $0.08 in the quarter.
Intergraph Corp has reported a first quarter net loss of $7.7m after a gain of $2.5m on a change in the way tax is accounted for and a pre-tax restructuring charge of $2.6m, against a profit last time of $2.9m, on turnover that rose 1.8% at $282.1m.
Octel Communications Inc saw third quarter net up 5.2% at $6m, on turnover up 32.8% at $63.8m; net profit for the nine months was up 2.2% at $14.7m, on turnover that rose 27.7% to $173.1m.
Net earnings per share rose by 3.3% to $0.31 in the quarter, and fell by 1.3% to $0.76 in the nine months.
Seagate Technology Inc saw third quarter net profits down 4.1% at $39.0m after pre-tax restructuring charges of $15m this time, $18m last, on turnover down 3.3% to $754.1m; net for the nine months was $161.9m, up from just $3.9m last time, which came after a $33.9m pre-tax restructuring charge, on turnover that rose 8.5% to $2,273m.
Net earnings per share fell 5% to $0.55 in the quarter and was $2.24 compared with just $0.06 in the nine months.
Sun Microsystems Inc has reported third quarter net profits down 15.9% at $51.7m on turnover that rose 19.9% at $1,141.3m; net profit for the nine months slumped 40.6% at $80.6m on turnover that rose 16.5% at $3,048.1m; net earnings per share fell 22% to $0.60 in the quarter, 42% to $0.77 in the nine months.
Sunward Technologies Inc has turned in third quarter net up 112.7% at $3.5m, on turnover that rose 56.9% at $33.4m; net profit for the nine months was up 505% at $10.8m, after $1.2m gains from the sale of stock and $617,000 gains from payment of debt this time, on turnover that rose 89% to $94.1m.
Net earnings per share rose by 100% to $0.08 in the quarter, and by 400% to $0.25 in the nine months.
Wells-Gardner Electronics Inc has turned in fourth quarter net profits of $80,000 against losses of 41.3m last time, after $992,000 restructuring charges last time, on turnover that rose 10.4% to $11.1m; net profit for the year to December 31 stood at $1.55m, after $528,000 tax credits, against losses of $1.46m last time, on turnover that rose 26.1% to $48.9m.
Net per share amounted to $0.02 in the quarter, and to $0.40 in the year.
Zycad Corp has reported fourth quarter net losses of $4.7m, after $814,000 restructuring charges, against profits of $3.1m last time, on turnover down 33.4% at $10m; net losses for the year to December 31 stood at $2.8m against profits of $5.2m last time, on turnover that rose 3.9% to $45.2m.
Rogers Cantel Mobile Communications Inc has reported fourth quarter net losses of $48.3m, after $18.8m pre-tax charges from the write-down of an investment, up from losses of $6m last time, on turnover up 21.7% at $109.2m; net losses for the year to December 31 stood at $139.2m up from losses of $33.6m last time, on turnover up 23.9% to $394m.
Amounts converted at $0.80 to the Canadian dollar.
Rogers Communications Inc saw fourth quarter net losses of $56.1m, after $18.8m pre-tax charges from the write-down of an investment, up from losses of $30.2m last time, on turnover up 15% at $250.1m; net losses for the year to December 31 stood at $144m up from losses of $47.9m, after $42.7m pre-tax gains on the sale of stock this time and $74.9m gains last time, on turnover up 15.4% to $91.7m.
Amounts converted at $0.80 to the Canadian dollar.
Oce-Van der Grinten NV saw fourth quarter net profit down 44.5% at $9.5m, on turnover down 7.1% to $371.3m; net profit for the year to November 30 fell 13.5% to $48m, on sales up 3.4% to $1,463.9m.
Amounts converted at $0.55 to the Dutch guilder.
PROFITS WEAK DESPITE IMPROVEMENT
Despite the improvement from IBM's personal computer business, overall profits were weak in the company's hardware operations: the gross profit margin on hardware sales for the first quarter was a dismal 29%, compared with 48% a year ago (a decline of 19% has been bandied about, but that came from someone that doesn't understand percentages — it's a fall of 19 percentage points or 39.6%); the overall gross margin was 39.5% in the first quarter, down from 50.8% a year ago; IBM's tax rate was 25% in the first quarter, below the 45% rate IBM had indicated earlier; IBM told analysts to continue to expect the 45% rate for the rest of this year.
DATA GENERAL DISSATISFIED
Commenting on its reduced second quarter loss (figures, page seven), Data General Corp said that while it wasn't satisfied with its overall results, it was encouraged by the continued success of its AViiON family of Unix computers, which showed significant growth over the year-ago quarter, and it remains cautious for the short-term because of the weak worldwide economy and because it sees no evidence that industry-wide pricing pressures will abate in the near future; the Westboro company is able to shrug off the small but steady and grinding losses because it still had $196.2m in cash and marketable securities at the end of the quarter.
HP CHIPS IN
Hewlett-Packard Co yesterday entered the emerging digital video- and wideband communications markets with announcement of products for video production, editing, broadcast, transmission and distribution: the new products are the first in an extensive line planned by the company, and include professional studio equipment and systems to monitor transmission quality; they are being introduced by the company's newly formed Video Communications Division in Santa Clara.
LEXMARK FLOURISHES
Lexington, Kentucky-based Lexmark International Inc says that operating profits more than doubled in its second year as an independent $2,000m-a-year company, but unhelpfully doesn't provide any numbers: worldwide shipments of IBM personal printers made by what used to be the typewriter arm of IBM grew 20% and the typewriter and supplies businesses both substantially exceeded their financial targets, it says; debt is now below $700m from the $1,150m in March 1991, and this year's portion of debt obligation has already been paid in advance.
COMFORTABLE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
Unisys Corp chief executive James Unruh says he is comfortable with Wall Street  forecasts that the company will earn $1.15 to $1.40 a share this year, and told Reuter that the rise in the value of the US dollar and the slow economic growth in Europe and Japan were making any revenue growth in 1993 unlikely: Unruh and other Unisys executives also said that one of the top 10 US banks was installing a new Unisys retail banking system, but refused to identify the bank.
AT&T THINKING ABOUT INCREASED DIVIDEND
AT&T Co chief financial officer Alex Mandl told the annual meeting the company is ‘thinking about’ an increase in the dividend it pays: AT&T has not raised its quarterly dividend since March 1990, when it rose to $0.33 per share from $0.30.
GRUMMAN UTILISES CASH PILE
Bethpage, New York-based Grumman Corp may be looking for computer-related acquisitions, but in the meantime, it is to use up some of its cash pile by spending up to $100m buying in its own shares.
SIEMENS WINS BULGARIAN CONTRACT
Siemens AG says it won a Bulgarian contract worth more than $6.3m to modernise and expand the country's telephone systems: Siemens will deliver more than 80,000 EWSD digital exchange lines and fibre cable: its Digicom Bulgarian joint venture set up last year with a local partner, will install the kit in Sophia and in northern Bulgaria by 1996.
WORLD'S BIGGEST SOLAR CELL MANUFACTURING PLANT
United Solar Systems Corp, a joint venture of Canon Inc and Energy Conversion Devices Inc, Troy, Michigan, is to start building the world's biggest solar cell manufacturing facility in Newport News, Virginia this year: the $30m plant will start operating by the end of next year and create more than 300 new jobs by 1995, producing photovoltaic panels and systems with a total capacity of 10MW per year.
SOFTWARE PUBLISHING NEXT UP
Santa Clara, California-based Software Publishing Corp has been hit by a shareholder class action lawsuit alleging securities violations between January 21 1993 and April 2 1993, which also names two of the company's officers as defendants: the company says the suit has no merit and will fight it vigorously.
AT&T WIN UNITED ARAB EMIRATE ORDER
AT&T Co has a $22m order from the United Arab Emirates' Emirates Telecommunications Corp for an Intelliverse Wireless System to create a network for all the seven emirates.
IBM GIVES UP?
Sounds as if IBM Corp has thrown in the towel and acknowledged that it will never make it with a word processor of its own: it has become a member of Wordperfect Corp's Customer Advantage Programme, a fancy name for a company-wide licence for IBM to distribute and use Wordperfect products throughout the company with ‘significant savings’ and simplified licence administration.
HONEYWELL TAKES ACTION
Honeywell Inc says it is taking action to counter a shortfall in European markets and that they will enable the company to achieve its business goals, including making earnings of $2.40 a share in 1993.
RACAL-HONEYWELL UNVEILING
Racal Electronics Plc and Honeywell Inc have unveiled a new Satcom multi-channel, in-flight telephone system that will enable several calls to be placed and received aboard an airliner simultaneously at their Racal-Honeywell venture.
JWP SELLS CANADIAN ARM
Rye Brook, New York-based JWP Inc has sold the Canadian arm of its information services business to EDS Canada on undisclosed terms: JWP/Businessland Canada, had 1992 sales of about $27m and has 60 employees, who will move to the unit of Electronic Data Systems Corp.
IOMEGA TO DISTRIBUTE NOMAI CARTRIDGE DISKS
Opportunistically, Roy, Utah-based Iomega Corp has signed a letter of intent to become exclusive worldwide distributor for Nomai SA's cartridge disks that are compatible with SyQuest Technology Inc drives and over which SyQuest has sued Nomai, trying to prevent the French company from manufacturing and selling cartridges for its drives.
CORELDRAW 3 PRICE CUT
Corel Corp, Ottawa cut the price on CorelDraw 3 to $200 from $400 in preparation for the launch of CorelDraw 4: it says it plans to market both versions simultaneously.
BELGIAN REGRESSION
Pace the  unjustified slur, naming 10 famous Belgians is easy, even if the Singing Nun, the Mannekin Pis and Hercule Poirot are declared ineligible (and Jacques Brel counts five of most other countries' famous people in our book)— and there could just be another one soon, in the person of Finance Minister Philippe Maystadt, who could become the father of a whole new economics after his proposal that Belgium levy a robot tax on factory machines to get humans back to work: it's a great idea, and why not take it further and ban construction machinery from the roads to get the shovels back into navvies' hands — and no doubt computers can be included under the tax, so that in no time, in a dramatic return to Victorian values, while the Belgian economy may not actually start booming, the country will have the world's biggest quill pen industry.