

NOVELL BIDS $26m FOR FIRM WITH INTRIGUING SOFTWARE
Provo, Utah-based Novell Inc is making another infilling acquisition with definitive agreement to acquire Software Transformation Inc, Cupertino, California for 800,000 new Novell shares, valuing the company at some $25.8m.
Software Transformation's technology provides a framework of software programming tools that is claimed to transcend differences in graphical user interfaces and varied operating system characteristics such as memory allocation and file systems so that applications need be developed only once to run on a variety of systems — currently Apple Computer Inc's Macintosh, Microsoft Corp's Windows, Novell and Univel Inc's UnixWare and Unixes from Digital Equipment Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co and Sun Microsystems Inc, with versions for OS/2, AIX and NT on the way.
The basis is a standard set of application programming interfaces and object classes to provide an application framework across the major operating systems.
The tools are designed to provide developers with a superset of features from the varied operating systems, so that they gain the value of unique operating system characteristics, yet still deliver portable applications — for example, a common programming interface set enables a programmer to write a single application that supports the Macintosh, OSF/Motif, Presentation Manager, Windows, or future graphical user interfaces.
The Universal Component System application development environment has been shipping since March 1992 at $3,500 to $10,000.
AMDAHL TO CUT ANOTHER 13% FROM ITS WORLDWIDE WORKFORCE
Saying that it suffered a sudden drop in demand during last year's third quarter, an upsurge in the normally strong fourth quarter, and another significant decline in early 1993, Amdahl Corp yesterday announced a big new round of cuts, saying that 1,100 jobs, 12.9% of its worldwide workforce, must go in response to current market conditions.
It employs 5,000 people in Northern California.
Following the earlier reduction of similar size Amdahl says it has been able to restructure or consolidate a number of operations and the new cuts represent a further streamlining.
AT&T CUTS 113 IRISH JOBS; DONEGAL PLANT TO CLOSE
AT&T Co announced in Dublin that it is closing its plant in Donegal, northwest Ireland, at the cost of 63 jobs, and is also cutting 50 jobs at its plant in Bray, in the east.
The reductions will trim its workforce in the Republic to 235 people.
AT&T blamed a downturn in demand for the products made at the Irish plants and increasing competitiveness in international markets.
ADVANCED MICRO GOES FOR SIMPLIFIED PRICING WITH ITS FIRST Am486 PARTS
Good as its word, Advanced Micro Devices Inc yesterday announced that it has begun shipments of the first members of its Am486 microprocessor family with 33MHz, 40MHz and clock-doubled 50MHz versions, all of them full clones of the Intel Corp 80486 with maths co-processor on board.
The current parts include Intel  microcode , the planned clean room parts will be announced on July 4 — the date is no coincidence.
Production ships of the 33MHz and 40MHz parts have begun at $306 for 1,000-up; the Am486DX2-50, set for June, is $417 for 1,000-up.
AMD is also sampling a 3.3V 33MHz Am486DXLV with power management for volume in July at the same price as the 5V versions.
The Am486 is manufactured in Sunnyvale in 0.7-micron, three-layer metal CMOS process technology; Am386s are made at the Austin, Texas plant.
MOTOROLA 68360 IS ITS FIRST 32-BIT MULTIPROTOCOL ENGINE
Motorola Inc's 68000 family may be losing market share to RISC in the workstation world at an alarming pace, but the applications-specific variants derived from the part, while much less visible represent big and growing business, making it fully worth Motorola's while continuing to develop the family.
The company's Austin, Texas-based Microprocessor and Memory Technologies Group Monday has now moved up to the first 32-bit version of the multiprotocol communications engine derived from the 68000.
Dubbed the 68360 Quad Integrated Communications Controller, the part is described as architecturally similar to its 16-bit predecessor, the 68302.
The 68360 combines a 68020-based 32-bit central processing core and a RISC-based communications controller managing four high-bandwidth serial communications channels, each of which can support up to eight major communications protocols.
The company sees the part being used in T1 line card controllers, PABXs, cellular base stations and industrial control networking.
It has also further refined the part to create the 68EN360, described as the first communications controller to combine a processor with Ethernet and wide area network functionality on a single chip for internetworking applications such as Ethernet bridges and routers.
The core of the 68360 is the new CPU32+, based on the 68020  microprocessor .
The 25MHz CPU32+ is fully compatible with the CPU32, the processor integrated on other 68300 family parts, but has an external 32-bit data bus, compared with the CPU32's 16-bit bus.
A 33MHz version is planned for late 1993.
A separate RISC-based processor is dedicated to the control of the 68360's four serial communication channels and operates independently from the main CPU, transferring information, handling serial channel interrupts and performing built-in protocol processing functions, enabling the core processor to handle high-level tasks.
The serial channels, which interpret and process the communication protocols, each support eight different protocol modes and a built-in time slot assigner routes data to and from any of the channels, to and from a Time Division Multiplexed Channel such as a T1 or CEPT line.
The 68EN360 implements all of the media access control layer of the Ethernet IEEE 802.3 Standard on the first channel, and Motorola is also offering the MC68160 Enhanced Ethernet Serial Transceiver for a two-chip Ethernet implementation; it supports IEEE 802.3 Access Unit Interface and 10Base-T Twisted Pair Interface media connections.
The part is currently being evaluated by Advanced Computer Communications Corp, Alcatel NV, Bell Northern Research Europe, L M Ericsson Telefon AB, France Telecom, Motorola itself, Philips Electronics NV and Tekelec Inc.
The 68360 is available now in 240 pin-count quad flatpack for $49.90 in 10,000-up quantities.
The 68EN360 will be available for sampling in September in the same package at $59.50 in 10,000-up quantities.
Production shipments of the 68160 are of set for the fourth quarter; no pricing at yet.
WHO IS NUMBER ONE WORLDWIDE IN WORKSTATIONS?
IT DEPENDS ON WHAT YOU MEAN BY THE TERM
IBM Corp with only a 7% share of the workstation market, translating to some $670m looked decidedly odd in International Data Corp's worldwide market share figures for workstations in 1992, which we reported in CI No 2,152.
The figures imply that up to 80% of Sun Microsystems Inc's total revenue was derived from workstation sales alone in 1992 — when Sun claims to have sold some 10,000 server systems in the last year or so — while IBM Corp's $668m share is only around a third of the business it claims to have done on the RS/6000 line over that period.
Discrepancy
The apparent discrepancy is down to the way IDC defines the workstation market.
Its workstation figures do include sales of server systems, but only servers that are dedicated to workstation environments, plus tools and utilities software such as operating systems, compilers, software engineering tools and graphics libraries, certain peripherals — such as personal computer co-processor boards and laser printers — service, maintenance, custom consulting and systems integration fees.
Specific requirements are that Unix or VMS is usually the primary operating system and that primary distribution is via direct or OEM sales to technical markets.
Technical requirements include virtual memory, the inherent ability to connect to a distributed network and run two- and three-dimensional graphics applications, 3 MIPS to 40 MIPS of integer performance, 1,024 by 1,024 pixel resolution, 14″, 16″, 17″ or 19″ monitor, multitasking and a price range of between $3,900 and $100,000 plus.
Systems that do not meet the IDC workstation criteria include the Compaq Computer Corp Deskpro, IBM's PS/2 — whether running MS-DOS, OS/2 or AIX — and Apple Computer Inc's Macintosh II whether running MacOS or A/UX.
Those are considered to be high-end personal computers and single-user systems.
Additionally, workstations that meet the criteria, but run only one vendor's software and are sold exclusively as turnkey systems for one or more applications — such as the Computervision Corp CADDstation — are not included.
Workstations that have been bought in OEM by the likes of Mentor Graphics Corp, Valid Logic Inc, Control Data Systems Inc and Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG are also not included, nor are board-level components, multi-user systems that act as hosts to two or more terminals, such as the VAX-11/780 and IBM 9370 or parallel processing systems — or even the ICL Plc DRS 6000.
Sun's traditional association with the scientific and technical workstation community means that most of its installed servers — and associated software and services — fall into IDC's workstation bracket.
The majority of IBM RS/6000 servers however, are installed in commercial environments, or are linked to systems that do not meet IDC's technical criteria for workstations and are therefore not counted in workstation market figures, the Framingham, Massachusetts research outfit says.
The same applies to related RS/6000 software and services.
Furthermore, IDC's definition of the workstation market includes both Unix and non-Unix environments and means Microsoft Corp Windows NT boxes which meet the criteria will be included in future surveys.
DEC workstations running VMS or OpenVMS are therefore included in the latest figures.
However, IDC says that DEC is the only vendor in its report that derives significant revenues from sales of non-Unix workstations.
IDC says DEC's own forecast of 2% or 3% compound annual growth in its workstation business is a tad conservative for a company that claims to have launched the world's fastest workstations.
It believes DEC is more than capable of meeting its goals at the top end of the market — in the same way that Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM capitalised on the performance of their respective HP 9000 Series 700 and RS/6000 lines when they were introduced.
Even though‘OSF/1 is a strange strategy,’ IDC says that users at the top-end of the market are less interested in what operating system their boxes run than what the machine can do.
DEC hasn't yet said which Alpha systems will run the Windows NT operating system it has picked up, but the workstation range looks to be the most likely candidate.
Meantime according to IDC Europa figures, DEC took a 15% — £52.5m — share of the £350m UK workstation market last year, although more than 50% of those workstations it shipped were configured with VMS or OpenVMS, and few if any Alpha-based models would have been included in this total.
IDC definition
That's slightly up on 1991 when the firm sold a total of 5,225 workstations worth £47.9m — 3,855 of which were VAX/VMS workstations worth £33.1m, against just 1,470 Unix systems valued at £47.9m.
Like DEC, IBM took a 15%, £52.5m share of the 1992 UK workstation market, Hewlett-Packard accounted for 11% — £38.5m — Sun took the lion's share with 41% or £143.5m, while other vendors accounted for 18% — £63m.
The worldwide market for the IDC definition of a workstation grew by 9.9% to $9,540m in 1992, according to IDC.
DEC's share of this market declined 14.5% in revenue and 3.6% in volume terms over the previous year, to $1,059m.
Sun, Hewlett and IBM all grew their shares over the same period.
Sun workstations were valued by IDC at $3,625m — a 38% share, Hewlett-Packard had 17.4% — $1,660m, and IBM 7%, or $668m.
THE SQL ACCESS GROUP FINALLY GETS ITS FIRST  SPECIFICATIONS OUT THE DOOR
The SQL Access Group has published its first three specifications, which set guidelines for database interoperability and communication, after more than three years in development (CI No 2,148).
The lack of SQL Access Group documentation has caused customer and database vendors a significant amount of frustration and in a number of cases has forced them to turn to alternatives, such as IBM Corp's Distributed Relational Data Architecture.
According to SQL Access Group chairman Jeff Balboni, the organisation is aware of the discontentment and hopes to soothe disappointment with the publication of these first few specifications.
However documentation on further specifications are not scheduled for release for another 18 months or so.
The SQL Access Group will sell the Call Level Interface, a high level language application programming interface for C and Cobol, which defines a set of calls for interfacing to a variety SQL implementations.
It is priced at $70.
Other specifications include the SQL Access Group's own implementation of Structured Query Language, which costs $70; and Remote Data Access, which defines communications between SQL Access Group-compliant clients and remote servers, and that is priced at $62.
PARYSTEC OFFERS PARALLEL TRANSPUTER-BASED IMAGING SYSTEM FOR ROBOTICS, PROCESS, MEDICAL WORK
Aachen-based Parsytec GmbH has launched its high performance Transputer-based Imaging system for use in robotics, medical imaging, process control and industrial inspection.
The system harnesses the power of up to 48 Transputers — either T805s or the new T9000s — housed in a single 19″ chassis.
It performs at a maximum 1.2GFlops and is powerful enough to handle target recognition and other image analysis in real time.
It has been under test in Germany for a year where it has been used to control a Mercedes test vehicle on the autobahn.
The modules in the system are linked by a a 100Mbps data bus that is used to download video data in a single operation.
The processors themselves are linked by a mesh of point-to-point connections, which carry localised traffic between co-operating processors far more efficiently than a shared bus.
The system is arranged in a rack-mounted chassis with universal backplane.
This accepts 14 or 28 Eurocard-style boards with a range of UniLink modules for all automation and data acquisition functions.
Analogue-to-digital and digital-to-analogue converters, digital input-output, SCSI interface, high resolution graphics, signal processing modules, signal processor, colour and monochrome frame grabbers are also available.
The system connects to any MS-DOS personal computer or Sun Microsystems Inc workstation via an Sbus or VMEbus.
Real Time Systems Manager software, optimised for parallel processing applications, is also provided.
The system is available worldwide through all Parsytec channels from around $12,000.
NCR ADOPTS NETLABS' OVERLORD SOFTWARE FOR USE IN ITS AT&T-INHERITED STARSENTRY PRODUCT LINE
AT&T Co's NCR Corp has signed an OEM contract for NetLabs Inc's new Overlord network management technology for use in its StarSentry product line.
The deal is worth $5m to NetLabs.
NCR says it will develop applications on top of it starting later this year.
The software enables multiple users to manage the entire network from any point.
NetLabs and NCR will integrate client-server environments, data-oriented internetworks and speech-oriented wide area networks onto a single management system, according to NetLabs.
The relationship between the two goes back three years to when NCR built its Systems Manager product on NetLabs' first-generation product, NetLabs/Manager.
PAUL FREEMAN ASSOCIATES READIES SNMP 2 UNIVERSAL AGENT
Following the announcement of approval of elements of the SNMP2 proposal (CI No 2,149), Westford, Massachusetts-based consultancy Paul Freeman Associates says that a combined SNMP 1/2 version of its Universal SNMP Agent will be announced very soon.
Agent sources will cost $8,000; existing customers will be able to upgrade to the joint version for $800.
Announcement of a version of the Agent characterised for Unix System V.4/386 is also imminent.
Evaluation versions are available now; the company says, and the extensible binary version will cost $50 for single copies with volume reductions.
The Universal SNMP Agent is designed for companies that want ‘to manage net nodes in a reliable, predictable way’.
The Intel version shares the capabilities of the portable source Unix version and is said to be easy to install.
The next target operating system is any Unix with a network subsystem derived from BSD 4.3.
This version should be available in a month or so and will possibly be followed by a Solaris version.
As a means of encouraging customer and third party Management Information Base development, the consultancy has available MIB2 source code for System V.4 available free of charge to existing Agent customers.
This code enables users to produce a complete working Agent for installation in an System V.4 environment in minutes.
By midsummer, Paul Freeman hopes to offer run-time Management Information Base loading and unloading.
Disk-resident MIBs will be able to be loaded and activated dynamically as well as unloaded and de-activated in order to free memory.
SPAIN's GSI TECSIDEL OFFERS X400 PRODUCTS FOR UNIX, IBM USERS
Barcelona, Catalonia-based GSI Tecsidel SA has launched a new range of X400 products for Unix environments and IBM proprietary systems under the name of Ositel/400, and consists of a package advising on requirements and problems involved in addressing messages in internal electronic mail systems, a set of user agent software packages with a user interface or application programming interface, and a set of Message Transfer Agent packages.
The user interface will be available under OSF/Motif, OS/2 Presentation Manager and and on VT100 terminals, and before long under Windows.
The API will be available under OS/2 and will soon be available for MS-DOS, AIX, OS/400, CICS and IMS, and both for ONDS X400 and  Unix/Ositel/400 servers.
Any C or Cobol application can produce X400 messages with this API.
The MTA Ositel/400 will be available on 80386 and 80486 systems running Unix, and Sun Microsystems Inc and HP 9000 Series 800 systems.
Possible X400 applications include Electronic Data Interchange, file transfers, electronic mail, voicemail and distributed applications.
DEC AND THE MUSEE D'ORSAY IN PARIS SHOW OFF FIRST FRUITS OF THEIR  COLLABORATION — BUT WHERE TO NOW?
Digital Equipment France SA and Paris's showpiece impressionist museum, the converted railway station Musee d'Orsay, has been demonstrating the first piece of their collaboration on a worthy prototype application of multimedia technology, ‘Learn to See.’
In an unfortunate sign of a shortage of cash in both the computer industry and museum world, however, it was unclear how much further the prototype system would evolve and whether the money could be found ultimately to deploy it in the museum.
The three-year collaboration on this multimedia workshop aims to create two prototype multimedia applications for various categories of visitors and to experiment with putting such applications on media such as CD-ROM and Compact Disk-Interactive.
The two applications are Learn to See, which aims to teach museum visitors how to analyse an artwork, and an encyclopaedia, which aims to provide visitors with complementary information on the artists and their creations, techniques used, and historical contexts, among other items.
In 1987, the staff at Orsay realised the need to provide more help to visitors to ‘see better the works we were proposing for their viewing,’ said Francoise LeCoz, director of the multimedia workshop.
Having made requests for proposals, the museum chose DEC for its ‘global approach’ to the research project, said Roland Schaer, director of the museum's cultural service.
After some seven months work, the group showed today one example of the 40 painting analyses it would like the Learn to See system to include.
The system is also intended to include 20 ‘idea studies,’ which discuss various artistic concepts.
The system is not multimedia in the classic sense of the term; it uses only fixed images.
It provides tools for breaking down a painting into the light, colour and space used by the painter.
Eventually the museum would like to incorporate moving images, but sound is a less likely objective.
‘Sound would be a good means of access to the system for the visually impaired, but I don't see it as obligatory.
Multimedia needn't use all the technologies
Just because a system is multimedia doesn't mean one must, by force of definition, use all of the technologies; rather only those that apply best to the application,’ said Pascale Buttaud, one of the system designers.
Buttaud said the Learn to See system will be on show in the museum in September, but will still be in the test phase.
No one from either DEC or the museum could seem to give a clear idea of how complete the prototypes will be at the end of the research contract in April 1995.
The text for other painting analyses has been finished, but the images of paintings have not yet been added to the system, Ms Buttaud said, implying that the money to do so was already in short supply.
‘We are looking for significant financing; this is an expensive project,’ she said.
‘We won't have all 60 scenarios, but we should have more than one.’
At that time, the museum will have a Learn to See system that ‘will be complete from the point of view of showing how well the Musee d'Orsay can develop a multimedia system,’ said Herve Lebec, the Orsay account manager for DEC France.
It will also have a multimedia interface to the encyclopaedia, he said.
‘The prototypes will enable us to evaluate how the public receives multimedia systems and whether they bring the cultural advantages we're seeking,’ said LeCoz.
As for deploying the system, however, both Lebec and LeCoz acknowledged the uncertainties.
‘It's not yet clear how much money will be needed; that's something we'll be defining in the coming months,’ Lebec said.
LeCoz noted that ‘museums everywhere, even one as well known as the Orsay, are always in need of financing for their projects.’
— Marsha Johnston
LONG ARM OF SPARC BODY REACHES UK AS SPARCDIRECT BECOMES SDIRECT
Emulating its action against Hirac Inc in the US, Sparc International, the evangelising supporters group for Sun Microsystems Inc's RISC has come down like a ton of bricks on a small UK start-up trying to carve a living out of the Sparc-compatible space.
As a result, Sparcdirect Ltd, Standish, Lancashire, will have changed its name to Sdirect by the end of the month.
Founder and managing director Simon Goodfellow — a refugee from Solbourne Computer Inc's UK operation — thinks Sparc International was unnecessarily aggressive in the way it handled the use of the Sparc trademark, given that its mission is to encourage the development of a Sparc marketplace.
Sparcdirect has been selling specialist utilities software OEM — plus packages like Frame and Lotus 1-2-3 — to UK Sparc system users since last November.
Goodfellow believes that there are at least 50,000 (and possibly up to 70,000) Sun users in the UK for the firm to target.
It currently has 70 packages on its price list, including Digital Instrumentation Technology's TransferPro file format exchange software (UX No 431), which has an end-user price of £300.
With just four employees now, Goodfellow hopes that Sdirect will turnover £1m by the end of the year, 30% of which is expected to come from reseller deals.
MERCURY OFFERS ACCESS TO ALL WITH ITS NEW CALLINK SERVICE PACKAGES
Mercury Communications Ltd has announced that for a monthly subscription of £135, any customer, whether a subscriber to British Telecommunications Plc or Mercury, can now use two of the latter's range of Callink services.
The subscription enables customers to offer a Freephone 0500 or LocalCall 0645 service without altering their current telecommunications set-up.
Even if they are not Mercury subscribers, indirectly-connected customers of Callink will be offered the same level of service as those who subscribe to Mercury.
For example, large corporate customers have the option of volume usage discounts.
Customers can also choose from a wide range of numbers, enabling them to keep a memorable number or one that is associated with their business.
With Freephone services, the call is free to the caller; the company called foots the bill.
With LocalCall services, the caller pays a local call charge regardless of the distance called, and once again the call's recipient pays the difference.
Call charges are the same as for Mercury customers.
Both services can be tailored to customer requirements, according to the company.
Calls can be routed to selected locations according to factors such as the time of day, the day of the week or the location.
HEWLETT PACKARD ANNOUNCEMENTS
Hewlett-Packard extends its high-end HP 5000 PCL printer family with four additional models
As well as its new LaserJet network printers and network boards launched at the beginning of the month, Hewlett-Packard Co added four new high-end production-capacity printers, the HP 5000 series.
They print at up to 210 pages per minute, and are supported on HP 3000 Series 900 and HP 9000 Series 800 business systems and servers.
The printers are compatible with HP LaserJet printers, using the same HP Printer Command Language.
At the same time, I-Data International A/S of Bagsvaerd, Denmark, announced a software product that enables mainframe customers to print IBM Corp's Advanced Function Printing-formatted applications on any HP 5000 printer.
The ida820 PSS package runs on an IBM host, offering a user interface very much like IBM's Print Services Facility-2, and translates AFP output to PCL and routes the output to an HP 3000 server and the print server then can print the converted AFP output on any HP 5000 or HP LaserJet printer.
Similar product
A similar product is under development for HP 9000 Unix systems.
At the high end of the new line are the HP 5000 models F135 and F135XP.
The Model F135 prints letter-sized forms at 135 pages-per-minute and can handle continuous forms up to 14″ wide.
The Model F135XP extends the print line to 17″, so that customers can print two letter-sized pages side by side, yielding an effective ‘two-up’ throughput of 210 pages-per-minute.
Two-up printing also saves operating costs by squeezing more pages per linear foot of paper running through the printer.
The other models are the HP 5000 F100/Turbo and F100XP.
The model F100/Turbo includes a faster PCL formatter, designed for all the new higher-speed models, and is for those that have the most demanding PCL formatting requirements.
The F100XP, like the F135XP, extends the print line to 17″ inches wide.
Two-up printing on the F100XP can achieve an effective 154 pages-per-minute.
The new printers join the HP 5000 model F100, which began shipping in 1992.
All the HP 5000 printers incorporate remote diagnostics with a built-in modem interface so that Hewlett-Packard service and support personnel can check on the status of each printer regularly from a Response Centre.
Field upgrades from the F100 through the line are also offered.
The new printers can be ordered now; the Model F100/Turbo is $200,000; the F100XP is $250,000, the F135, $240,000, the F135XP, $300,000 and the F100, already out there, costs $190,000.
Adobe's Photoshop bundled with ScanJet IIc
Hewlett-Packard Co has signed with Adobe Systems Inc, Mountain View to bundle the Adobe Photoshop Limited Edition software for the Macintosh with the HP ScanJet IIc grayscale and colour desktop scanner.
The combined package with the basic function of Photoshop Version 2.5, enables users to input and edit images with their computer.
The combination is $1,600.
New C1716T erasable optical disk drive stores 1.3Gb on a single 5.25″ optical platter…
Hewlett-Packard Co, which originally got into the erasable optical disk drive business with help from Sony Corp, has launched the C1716T 5.25″ multifunctional optical-disk drive that stores 1.3Gb of storage capacity on a single platter, double the capacity of the previous generation of 5.25″ drives.
Sony launched a similar drive at the same time.
The drive uses European Computer Manufacturing Association media standards, which increase capacity through zone-bit recording techniques, increased linear recording density and decreased track spacing.
Offered on the OEM market, the drive is regarded by Hewlett as suitable for imaging, computer-aided design, so-called near-line storage and the generality of applications that involve large files.
The 1.3Gb optical drive is jukebox-ready, and the company plans to integrate it into its line of optical disk libraries by late summer, and to offer it as an upgrade to its existing jukebox customers.
The drive can also read and write to the 650Mb platters.
The C1716T incorporates a signal processor-based servo and split optics, for an average seek time of under  25ms .
The erasable and write-once formats used in the multifunction drive are based on ANSI/ISO standards for continuous-composite, magneto-optical disk and recording format, and the drive is made at Hewlett-Packard's Greeley Storage Division, in Greeley, Colorado.
The drive costs $3,950 and the 1.3Gb platter is $189 per disk.
The company also cut the price of the 650Mb optical drive to $3,150 and platters for it to $159.
Evaluation units of the Model C1716T are available now and volume ships are planned for early summer 1993.
…and Hewlett-Packard offers an optical jukebox to extend storage capacity of NetWare servers
Hewlett-Packard Co also announced for the reseller market a new HP Optical Jukebox Storage Solution optical-disk library storage system designed to extend hard disk storage on a  personal computer network server running Novell Inc NetWare by up to 10.4Gb.
The idea is that users with high storage demands should achieve continuous free disk space by enabling large files to be stored off-line while keeping them easily accessible.
The jukebox connects to the magnetic disk drive of a NetWare 3.11 file server, and when the server disk reaches a set capacity, files are automatically migrated from the server to the jukebox.
If the user needs a file on the jukebox, it is automatically brought back to the server disk for faster access.
The product consists of the HP Model 10LC optical jukebox, and an interface kit.
The Model 10LC contains a 5.25″ 650Mb optical drive that supports both rewritable and write-once operations, and can take up to 16 of the exchangeable platters.
The interface kit facilitates connection of the Model 10LC to a NetWare 3.11 server, containing the SCSI host adaptor, the jukebox-management software and diagnostics.
Kits are customised with either an EISA board, an AT board or software only.
The 10LC comes with one platter, and 16 platters are offered in a specially-priced pack for those that buy the Optical Jukebox Storage Solution.
The jukebox sells for $9,500, the pack of 16 disks costs $2,320, the kit is $1,100 for the EISA bus, $750 for AT, and the software-only kit costs $300.
GRANADA COMPUTER SERVICES REORGANSISES TO BUILD ON ITS STRENGTHS IN NEW PUSH FOR EXPANSION
Granada Group Plc's third party maintenance provider, Granada Computer Services, believes its new React Centre and reorganised customer services operation will enable it to take the big manufacturers head on.
Moreover, international operations director Richard Ferry claims that the Bracknell, Berkshire-based company's services are unique — although most rivals can offer centralised expertise, he says, no-one else can monitor computer systems remotely, or keep an eye on such critical issues as temperature and air conditioning levels at any given customer site.
Another advantage Granada has over the competition, he says, is that unlike the big vendors now scurrying onto the marketplace to boost revenues, Granada — structured around the Data Processing Customer Engineering Plc acquisition and sundry add-ons — has been in the game for years and knows its strengths and weaknesses.
This, he believes, has taught the group to be flexible — after 15 years of looking after multivendor systems, it doesn't simply have to rely on managing subcontractors unlike many of its rivals.
Long a problem child, Granada Computer Services is now thriving and as of April 15, it restructured its customer support functions into two separate divisions with the aim of providing a more focussed and efficient service: enterprise support looks after IBM Corp, Digital Equipment Corp and ICL Plc mainframes; and distributed systems support tends to networked personal computers and workstations.
The company chose to divide its business in this fashion, Ferry says, because not only is the market going down this route, but Granada's business is too.
Both divisions are based at group headquarters, as is the React Centre.
The React Centre is run by ‘10 of our best calibre people’, and houses an unspecified proprietary mainframe.
This undertakes the remote monitoring of a customer's equipment 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
It also incorporates a ‘known problem’ database.
The mainframe is linked to detection boxes developed by Granada, which are based at each customer's site.
These monitor and diagnose any problems  occurring in a particular computer system, drops in temperature and changes in air conditioning levels.
If a problem does occur, a signal is automatically sent to the mainframe, and according to Ferry, Granada can respond within two hours, by sending out mobile engineers from one of the 15 local support centres that span the UK and continental Europe.
There are about 230 such engineers in total.
The service is also available to those mainframe clients that have on-site engineers.
Remote monitoring service
The detection boxes mentioned above are also linked to a stand-alone personal computer, loaded with with Granada's own Fixed Site Management System software.
FSMS logs every call that a customer makes to the company; tracks and manages the spare parts inventory; manages organisational logistics; and generates reports, which are submitted regularly to the customer.
Granada uses these reports to see how well it is performing in relation to its contract.
Although the two systems are not integrated at the moment, they will be eventually.
The remote monitoring service was originally put on trial about a year ago in the retail sector — one of Granada's biggest markets — and its success prompted the firm to adopt the scheme company-wide.
As a result, it has spent £100,000 on hardware and software, reallocated staff, and centralised both core management and administrative staff.
There were no job losses or gains.
So, Granada Computer Services now comprises four divisions in total, including the two mentioned above.
The other two are fourth party repair, which looks after both internal equipment and external customers, and software services, which was launched in January 1993 (CI No 2,087).
Although the company has subsidiaries in 10 countries, it still generates about half of its revenues, or about £70m, in the UK.
Another 40% comes from Europe, although it does aim to expand here via acquisition, and the remaining 10% is earned in the US.
 Granada's main markets are retail, the government and the Ministry of Defence.
FRANCE TELECOM PABX OPERATIONS UNIFIED IN NEW UNIT
France Telecom and its subsidiary France Cables et Radio have regrouped three of their units to create Expertel, a company charged with every aspect of the design, installation and operation of PABXes in large French organisations.
Expertel comprises Cables et Radio's Enterprise Networking and Marketing and Development department, and France Telecom's Multi-service Engineering and Consulting Service and Center for Construction and Maintenance for Ministries and Public Services.
With a team of 500 people, the new company handles PABXs and PABX networks, cabling systems, multiplexers, commercial and industrial local area networks, video and multimedia networks and X25 and ISDN equipment.
France Cables et Radio's departments have specialised in enterprise networking since 1976, with a team of 160 people.
SECIM was created in 1936 to serve the engineering and internal communications needs of government ministries.
In 1985, it opened up to the market, competing largely for the architecture and installation of PABX voice networks.
CCEM, which was also created to maintain and operate the government's communication networks, has also been providing the same services to private customers.
THE SPANISH ELECTRONICS MARKET DECLINED BY 17% IN 1992
The business done in the Spanish electronics sector dropped a disconcerting 17% in 1992 according to figures produced by Aniel, the electronics sector employers organisation.
It fell 17% to $10,550m, returning to the level of five years ago.
Production reached a value of $5,337m — a fall of 14%.
Imports were also off at $7,313m, although the level of the decline was not given.
Exports were up 4% at $2,787.
Narrowing the focus down to the telematics sector, the results are even more gloomy: the market value and production value both fell 21%, to $5,434m and $2,790m respectively.
Imports were down 15% at $4,125m.
Exports fell 1% at $1,480m.
Looking at telecommunications alone, it gets worse still: the production figure is down 27% and the market figure down 30%; however, exports were up 19% here.
Looking at the computer sector alone, the market was down 15% and production down 7%.
Aniel president Jesus Banegas, commented that 1992's drop was unprecedented, and disturbing with regard to union with Europe: ‘there is a risk we will be classified as a nation that is a consumer, but not a producer of electronics’, he said.
On telecommunications, Banegas took the opportunity to criticise the government for the little interest it has shown in putting an end to the import of unauthorised pirate telephones, 3m of which are now in Spain.
He also commented that Spain's integration into Europe was unthinkable until the country had a telecommunications network on a par with the networks existing in the rest of the European Community countries.
Finally, he suggested that that if Telefonica de Espana SA could forecast its investment more effectively, Spanish companies would in turn be able to plan their production better.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Lam Research Corp, Fremont, California semiconductor capital equipment maker has filed with the US Securities & Exchange Commission to offer $50m principal amount of convertible subordinated debentures due 2003.
The net proceeds will be used to buy capital equipment, fund leasehold improvements and facilities expansion, and for working capital.
The underwriters will be Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co Inc, Cowen & Co and Montgomery Securities.
Recognition International Inc, the Dallas company whose International was formally Equipment, got its offer of 2m new shares away at at $13 a share and will use the $24m or so net proceeds to repay bank debt and for working  capital , product development and acquisitions.
Bear, Stearns & Co Inc managed.
TEL TO SELL 1 MILLION COMMON SHARES
TEL Electronics Inc, American Fork, Utah, has agreed to sell one million TEL common shares at 60 cents per share plus warrants for 500,000 more shares at $1 to a group of institutional investors.
The company will receive $300,000 on the effective date of the registration statement and an additional $300,000 within six months of the effective date, and will use the money for working capital, research and development and acquisitions.
CREDIT RATINGS
Automatic Data Processing Inc, Roseland, New Jersey, has found favour with Standard & Poor's Corp, which raised its rating on the giant bureau's subordinated debt to double-A from double-A-minus.
The implied senior rating is double-A-plus and about $285m of debt is affected.
The upgrade acknowledges  successful integration of three recently acquired businesses, enhancing an already strong business position and builds on the company's existing processing capabilities, the rating firm said.
Avnet Inc's proposed acquisition of Hall-Mark Electronics Corp has not gone down to well with Standard & Poor's Corp, which said it may cut the distributors $100m of A-plus-rated subordinated debt.
 Although the merger — for an indicated $485m, is positive for Avnet's business fundamentals, credit quality measures will weaken from levels appropriate for the company's implied double-A-minus senior debt rating, said the ratings agency.
COMPANY RESULTS
Chips & Technologies Inc saw a third quarter net loss of $4.1m, down from a $10.3m loss last time, on turnover down 30.9% at $21.6m; net loss for the nine months was $39.7m, down from a loss last time of $48.5m, on turnover that fell 29.3% at $76.3m.
Communications Satellite Corp, Comsat, turned in first quarter net profit up 26.5% at $19.6m, after $1.3m gains due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change on turnover 30% ahead at $166.3m.
Net earnings per share rose 21.3% to $0.97.
Control Data Systems Inc has reported a first quarter net profit of $1.3m against a loss last time of $6.7m on turnover that fell 13.0% at $102.7m.
Net earnings per share were $0.10.
Cray Research Inc has reported first quarter net profits up 287% at $15.0m on turnover that rose 39.6% at $202.6m; net per share 314% to $0.58.
Iomega Corp has reported first quarter net profit down 32.7% at $1.2m, after $982,000 restructuring charges and $2.3m gains due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change, on turnover up 11.8% to $37m.
Net per share fell by 27.3% to $0.08.
IPL Systems Inc has reported a first quarter net loss of $1.4m after a $121,000 gain for the effect of an accounting change, against a profit last time of $1.4m, on turnover that crashed 47.6% at $5.9m.
Kendall Square Research Corp has reported a first quarter net profit of $250,000 against a loss last time of $4.5m, on turnover of $11.4m against just $1.9m last time; net earnings per share were $0.02.
Lotus Development Corp has reported first quarter net profits down 40.9% at $12.3m on turnover flat at $227.0m; net per share declined 38% at $0.29.
MicroAge Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 69.8% at $2.1m, on turnover up 56.9% at $364.6m; mid-term net rose 51.6% to $3.9m, on sales up 44.7% at $692.5m.
Net per share rose 40% to $0.35 in the quarter, 18.2% to $0.65 in the half.
NetFrame Systems Inc has reported first quarter net profits up 359% at $1.8m on turnover that rose 71.1% at $13.6m.
Net per share rose 225% to $0.13.
Nynex Corp has reported first quarter net profit down 1.5% at $331.1m, on turnover up 2.5% to $3,320.2m.
Net per share fell by 3% to $1.60.
Pacific Telesis Group Inc saw first quarter net losses of $1,727m against profits of $279m last time, after $418m restructuring charges this time and $1,729m charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change last time, on turnover up 3.9% to $2,525m.
Comparisons are with restated figures.
Phoenix Technologies Ltd has reported a second quarter net profit of $1.2m, up from just $38,000 last time, on turnover that rose 5.0% at $17.0m; mid-term net rose 266% at $2.3m on turnover that rose 4.7% at $35.8m.
Net earnings per share, $0.09 in the quarter, rose 325% to $0.17 in the half.
Radius Inc has reported a first quarter net loss of $5.3m, against a $2.3m profit last time on sales that crashed 28.1% to $30.8m.
Silicon Graphics Inc saw a third quarter net profit of $22.0m after a $1.5m tax credit, against a loss last time of $497,000 on sales up 30.3% at $270.7m; net for the nine months was $60.0m against a loss last time of $9.5m after a $23.4m restructuring charge, on sales up 23.2% at $771.9m; net per share was $0.30 in the quarter, $0.83 in the nine months.
Sprint Corp has reported a first quarter net loss of $23.6m, struck after a $12.3m loss from discontinued operations, against a profit last time of $106.3m, on turnover that rose 8.7% at $2,728m.
SyQuest Technology Inc has reported second quarter net profits down 1.6% at $3.6m, on turnover up 20% at $51.5m; mid-term net rose 36% to $8m, after $300,000 tax credits last time, on turnover up 24.2% at $102.2m.
Net per share fell 3.3% to $0.29 in the quarter, rose 18.5% to $0.64 in the half.
Tandem Computers Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 26.0% at $11.1m on turnover that rose 3.4% to $425.1m; the mid-term net profit was $51.1m after a gain of $22.5m from cumulative effect of an accounting change, against a loss last time of $85.8m, on turnover that rose 4.3% at $814.2m.
Net earnings per share rose 25% tp $0.10 in the quarter and were $0.25 in the nine months.
US West Inc has reported first quarter net profit of $316.1m against losses of $1,476.1m last time, after $1,793.4m charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change last time, on turnover up 3% to $2,617m.
Net per share amounted to $0.76.
IBM CREDIT PROFITS RISE, UNLIKE PARENT'S
One sometimes gets the impression that IBM Corp is more solicitous over the needs of its Stamford, Connecticut-based IBM Credit Corp subsidiary than it is over its own, and yesterday, in the wake of the parent's big $285m loss, IBM Credit was able to announce that profits actually rose 0.3% at $58.3m; the return on average equity was 20.2%, compared with 21.3% in the first quarter of 1992 and in the first three months of 1993, IBM Credit originated financing for $1,700m of equipment, software and services for IBM's customers and distribution channels, down 22% on the figure for the first quarter 1992 — financing for end users decreased by 45% to $600m while financing for distribution channels decreased by 1% to $1,100, the company noted.
IBM RECRUITMENT CONTINUES
Looks as if the message that an army of outsiders is needed to turn IBM Corp's disparate businesses around is beginning to get through: yesterday the Personal Software Products division announced that it had recalled William Rich to be general manager, worldwide sales and marketing — he had left the company but had been acting as a consultant to it; it has also tapped David Proctor as vice-president of products — Proctor is formerly president of Xerox Computer Services and had been president and chief executive of Ashton-Tate Corp; before he took that position, he had served 23 years with IBM.
LONDON TO BIRMINGHAM CABLE LINK
National Transcommunications Ltd, the buyout of the Independent Broadcasting Authority's engineering and transmitters arm, is to build a cable link between London and Birmingham capable of carrying television and telephone services and has signed a 10-year contract in which the UK's largest cable television operator, Birmingham Cable Ltd, is to take up the initial capacity; the line from Birmingham to United Artists' London South in Croydon will link the two cable-franchise areas, according to the Daily Telegraph.
CRAY COMMENTS ON IMPROVED FIGURES
Commenting on its much improved figures (see page seven), Cray Research Inc said order backlogs during the first quarter of rose to $381m from $354m in the same period a year ago, adding to positive overall quarterly earnings: John Carlson, the new chairman and chief executive, said that the contract value of orders signed was some $124m compared with just $86m in the first quarter of last year.
CRAY SIGN OEM AGREEMENT WITH CORAL NETWORK
The Cray Communications Ltd arm of Cray Electronics Holdings Plc, and its Cray Communications Inc arm in Annapolis, Maryland have signed a $10m three-year OEM agreement with Coral Network Corp, Westborough, Massachusetts under which Cray will resell the Coral Backbone Xpress 1000 and 2000 fault-tolerant internetworking systems for collapsed, campus and corporate backbone applications through its worldwide distribution channels under Cray's own brand name starting on June 1; privately-held Coral and Cray will also conduct joint development on the BX architecture to provide additional functionality, such as the addition of wide area network interfaces and support for speech; the Backbone Xpress Series supports Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI, T1, E1 and V35 network interfaces; and TCP/IP, Novell Inc IPX, AppleTalk II, DECnet IV, RIP, OSPF, EGP, BGP, Frame Relay and PPP protocols, and is also designed to support future high-bandwidth network interfaces, such as Asynchronous Transfer Mode.
OKI ELECTRIC INVESTMENT
Oki Electric Industry Co says it will invest £3.7m to manufacture electronic components for use in cars at its Oki (UK) Ltd printer plant in Cumbernauld, Scotland.
TELEFONICA DE ESPANA MUST DISCARD STAKE IN ONE OF TWO
Telefonica de Espana SA, with stakes in Chile's leading telecommunications firms, must discard either its 43.6% stake in Compania de Telefonos CTC or its 20% stake in Entel SA within the next 18 months, the Supreme Court ruled.
READ-RITE ALLIANCE WITH MITSUBISHI KASEI
Milpitas, California-based Read-Rite Corp has formed a product development alliance with Mitsubishi Kasei Co for the development of magnetic heads and disks: the companies will co-operate to develop thin film heads and disks using inductive data detection for data densities of 500M-bits per square inch of disk, and magnetoresistive products, enabling 600Mb to be crammed onto a single 3.5″ platter; high capacity drives have several platters in the disk-head assembly.
PLATINUM SOFTWARE BUYS AUTOMATION ONE
Irvine, California-based Platinum Software Corp has bought Automation One Pty Ltd, an accounting software supplier in New Zealand and Australia, on undisclosed terms: Automation One, a 75-person firm founded in 1983, will be renamed Platinum Software (NZ) Ltd in New Zealand, and Platinum Software (Aust) Pty Ltd in Australia, the company said.
GERMANY AWAKES
Germany is at last waking up to the what has been clear to outsiders for the past year or so, that there is going to be no quick fix to the recession it is facing and that it will be long and grinding: this week the BDI industrial federation admitted that the downturn could develop into Germany's worst recession since the end of World War II, saying that the western German economy will continue to decline, and the fall will be deeper than previously thought, so that in important sectors such as the capital goods industry the downturn will represent a new post-war record; the body blames weak foreign demand for German goods, the now over-valued mark and rising costs for German industry and now admits it is the result of structural problems that will have long-term economic effects.
BORLAND AND WORDPERFECT FINE TUNE MARKETING
Borland International Inc and Wordperfect Corp say they've not yet sorted out marketing of their Borland Office for Windows $600 Wordperfect Paradox Quattro bundle outside the US, but are working on it.
AMERICA ONLINE ISSUES CHALLENGE
America Online Inc is challenging Prodigy Services Co, which just announced plans to charge usage fees for the most heavily-used databases on its viewdata service, by cutting prices to its own 250,000 subscribers: the company says it deliberately waited until after the Prodigy announcement to disclose its new pricing, hoping to maximise attention for its move and woo subscribers away from the IBM Corp-Sears, Roebuck & Co joint venture; under its new plan, subscribers will pay $9.95 a month for five hours of access to all its services, a rate that it claims is less than half the price of Prodigy's new  tariff ; extra hours will cost $3.50 each; at Prodigy, subscribers pay $14.95 a month for unlimited access to many of the features but from July 1 will pay surcharges after spending two hours on widely-used bulletin boards.
FORMER DEC PLANT PROVIDES SPRINGBOARD HOME
The former Digital Equipment Corp plant in Springfield, Massachusetts is host to a new company formed and staffed by former DEC staffers, SpringBoard Technology Corp, which will specialise in the refurbishing and low-volume manufacturing of tape drives, disk drives and modules: SpringBoard is scheduled to open on May 24 and is expected to grow to over 100 staff.
DEFINITION OF A CONSULTANT
Management consultants are not quite in the American lawyer category when it comes to vilification, but they attract their fair share (well almost…): the Financial Times defines a management consultant as someone who sees something working in practice and wonders whether it will work in theory…