

INTEL SUES ADVANCED MICRO AGAIN; CYRIX FAILS TO WIN INJUNCTION…
Intel Corp duly launched a new copyright infringement case against Advanced Micro Devices Inc over the latter's just-announced Am486 parts that include Intel microcode.
The new suit goes back over old ground, again alleging that AMD broke copyright agreements by using Intel's microcode in the new chip.
Intel also filed a motion asking Judge William Ingram to reconsider or to certify his April 15 ruling demanding a retrial of the case over the microcode in the 80287 maths co-processor, which Intel says Advanced Micro was not entitled to use.
Without such action by the judge, Intel would have to wait for the new 80287 trial to be completed before the company could file any appeal.
Intel's new suit extends to what Advanced Micro says is cleanroom microcode, and other copyrighted programs, as well as the microcode that is acknowledged to come from Intel.
Intel also notes that Cyrix Corp, Richardson, Texas, has been denied its request for a preliminary injunction on Intel's patent 4,972,338.
The denial of this injunction confirms Intel's right to enforce claims two and six of its ‘338 patent against Cyrix's customers, which cover systems in which a 32-bit microprocessor is combined with external memory and paging software such as Windows or OS/2 operating systems.
…
AS CYRIX GEARS TO SHOW SECOND GENERATION Cx486
Attention in the chip market may be focused on Intel Corp's current tussle with Advanced Micro Devices Inc, but on May 24 Cyrix Corp will start rolling out its second generation of 80486-compatible chips.
The Cx486S is designed to be pin-compatible with Intel's 80486SX and will come in 33MHz, 40MHz and 50MHz versions, as well as a clock-doubled 25/50MHz version.
Other features include a 2Kb on-chip write-back cache.
A low power, compact version dubbed the Cx486Se requires only 3.3V, but consequently has a maximum clock speed of 33MHz.
Both can work with the new Cx487S maths co-processor.
Prices will be set at the May announcement.
The Richardson, Texas-based manufacturer also gave a hint of its future plans: in the third quarter the company plans to launch its first full 80486DX pin-compatible processor, currently nicknamed the M7.
This promises unspecified higher clock speed, a on-chip floating point unit and 8Kb cache.
DEC BRINGS FORWARD ITS INCREASED INVESTMENT IN OLIVETTI
Digital Equipment Corp is bringing forward to next month its agreed purchase of a further 4.03% stake in Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA, doubling its 4.03% stake, which was bought directly from Olivetti's controlling shareholders.
DEC is also expected to buy a further 1.89% on the open market as part of the agreement that gives Olivetti privileged access to the Alpha RISC.
Chairman Carlo De Benedetti told Olivetti shareholders that DEC would also subscribe to its part of a planned Olivetti capital increase ‘entirely in shares,’ rather than the convertible bonds option.
ORACLE TO TEAM WITH US WEST ON PUBLIC MAIL SERVICE
Oracle Corp's new division set up last year to explore new technologies said that telecommunications was one of the first areas of interest, and good as its word, on May 11, it will announce an alliance with US West Inc aimed at providing a variety of electronic services to business, schools and homes, including mail and voice messages, according to the Wall Street Journal.
The paper hears that Oracle will supply technology to manage large pools of messages and data and link together at least 1m electronic customers, and US West will provide marketing muscle, a large customer base and communications skills.
In an interview last month Oracle chief executive Larry Ellison said that technical advances now make it possible to create relatively inexpensive public databases, with telephone companies acting as the backbone for what he termed ‘a huge emerging market,’ enabling subscribers to store and recall voice messages and receive what he calls ‘home mail’electronically, and that by matching the latest parallel processors with Oracle's software, new data services could deliver information at a tenth the current cost.
MACHINES BULL UNVEILS ITS ANSWER TO IBM's AD/CYCLE
Compagnie des Machines Bull SA yesterday presented what it says is the ‘last major component of the Distributed Computing Model,’ an integrated software engineering environment called PCTE-based Integrated System Development.
The first version comprises a repository based on Portable Common Tools Environment technology from GIE Emeraude, Louveciennes, and the Neutral Information Model, which in turn is based largely on the Exchange repository interfacing technology from Software One Ltd, Marlow, UK It also includes a control integration system based on IBM Corp's SDE WorkBench/6000, which is derived from Hewlett-Packard Co's SoftBench.
Integrated System Development is now available for pilot and beta test; another update should be ready by the end of the year.
Among the primary analysis tools the first version supports are those from Bachmann Information Systems Inc, KnowledgeWare Inc and Intersolv Inc.
To start small, a Cobol Cobol application development environment with compiler, development and debugging tools would be about $15,000, and can grow to include a repository.
A beginner's repository plus two tools would cost $50,000 or so, which includes a workstation and the software; then the user would need between one to four weeks of consulting.
There was also a new release of Bull's Integrated Systems Management software, which includes new Unix functions such as back-up and restore facilities, trouble ticketing and Bull's BOS/TP Tuxedo-based transaction processing monitor.
It also supports Oracle7.
BOS/TP extensions include upgrades to Tuxedo 4.2, GCOS 7 mainframe support, Oracle7 and the Informix Corp transaction tool kit.
The O2+ object database is now supported on the Rios-based DPX/20 Unix systems.
And Bull also has new DPS 7000 702 and DPS 9000 500 mainframe models.
HAMBRECHT & QUIST HIGH TECH CONFERENCE
All this week the great and the good of the computer and microelectronics industries — or many of them — have been in San Francisco at the annual Hambrecht & Quist industry conference.
Not too much has appeared in the public prints on the conference, but Reuter reporters Russell Blinch and Judith Crosson have been on the spot taking it all down; this page is compiled from their reports.
MAC-ON-INTEL PROJECT IS COMPLETE, NOVELL SAYS
Apple Computer Inc and Novell Inc have successfully completed their project to bring the Macintosh system to mainstream computing, but no decision has yet been made on a commercial follow-up, Novell chief financial officer James Tolonen told the Hambrecht & Quist conference.
Tolonen said the companies wanted to see whether Macintosh System could run atop a different operating system and on a different chip, yet still maintain the user-friendly features of the Apple system.
‘Several months ago it resulted in the proof — yes, you can do that,’ Tolonen said.
The original plan did not envisage a commercial use, he told Reuter after speaking at the conference.
Apple has not officially commented on the project, although market sources have said it is interested in bringing the product to market.
He said Novell was interested in exploring the possibility of offering links to all operating systems and Apple wanted to start penetrating the corporate environment; it was up to Apple whether to take the project to the next step.
No decision has been made to do any follow up,’ he said, but ‘you could stay tuned.’
Tolonen also said Novell has high hopes for its recently launched NetWare 4.0 project.
Because 4.0 is very complex it is not yet known how quickly users will upgrade.
‘You could install it and with five minutes of training you could use it.
But you may not be able to take maximum advantage.’
Tolonen said Novell is not feeling any competitive pressure from Microsoft Corp's Windows for Workgroups.
‘I just don't hear about it at all from the sales force,’ he said, adding that he's heard it referred to by some as Windows for Warehouses —‘because it sits on shelves.’
INTEL's GROVE BEMUSED AT SLIDE IN SHARE PRICE…
The outlook for Intel Corp's microprocessors is strong, and only misconceptions are leading investors to believe the company's dominant position supplying the personal market is threatened, president Andy Grove told the conference.
Saying business around the world has never been better, Grove said he is puzzled by Intel's steep stock market fall.
‘There has been immense turbulence in our stock,’ Grove said.
‘It has been immensely frustrating and puzzling to us.
The gist of it is, Intel's position have never been better,’ Grove said.
He said Advanced Micro's announcement it plans to ship ‘hundreds of thousands’ of 80486 chips this year amounts to about one week of Intel's total productive capacity, and as for the latter's plans to line up a manufacturing partner to boost production in 1994, he said he doubts the company will find much excess capacity in the industry — and any company acting as a partner with Advanced Micro could face legal action, but he would not say what Intel might do.
Grove said Motorola's PowerPC chip will fit the niche workstation market without the mass appeal of Pentium because it does not immediately run Microsoft Corp software.
Because of the raging personal computer price war, the European market started to expand strongly in 1992 and now the Japanese market, despite its general economic sluggishness, is also expanding.
…
AS SUPER-BULL SANDERS BOOSTS ADVANCED MICRO
Advanced Micro Devices Inc chief Jerry Sanders is not at all phased by Intel Corp's excoriation and he told the conference his company was off to a good start for another year of record revenues, with a target of $1,650m in 1993, $2,000m in 1994 and $3,000m by 1997, and expects to ship 4m Am486 chips in 1994 for a 15% market share.
The shipment estimates may prove to be conservative and production levels will depend on how much manufacturing capacity can be brought on stream, he said.
Advanced Micro will have a fifth generation microprocessor on the market in 1995, and other areas were also performing well, with strong sales in non-volatile Flash memory products, where he expected revenues to jump to $200m in 1993 from $45m in 1992.
‘The opportunity in Flash memory is spectacular,’ Sanders said.
APPLE SEES MUCH BETTER SECOND HALF AS ITS SHORTAGES START TO EASE
Apple Computer Inc should post earnings and revenue growth in the second half of the year due to strong demand, chief financial officer Joseph Graziano told the conference.
He said the products shortages that hurt the company in the first half are virtually behind it now, and Apple will be better able to meet demand in the second half.
He sees turnover accelerating from the 15% growth recorded in the 1993 fiscal second quarter to March.
Earnings will also increase, he said, with no specific estimate, and sales will be helped by the introduction of a range of new products.
The Performa line for the consumer market is selling strongly, and it is now in 2,300 retail outlets, up from 1,300 last October — and over 90% of the Performa computers are being used in the home, he added.
The company is launching a hard-hitting advertising campaign to promote its PowerBook line of portable computers, Graziano said.
He said most PowerBooks models are available except for the top-end 180 and the new colour model 165C, still in short supply.
INFORMIX IS NOT GREEDY: 20% MARGINS ARE QUITE HIGH ENOUGH
Informix Corp does not want to raise its stated goal of a 20% pre-tax gross margin, even though it has exceeded that goal in recent quarters, chairman and chief executive Phillip White told the conference.
‘Our plan has always been aimed at 20%.
We think we can be in the high teens or 20% going forward.’
In the fourth quarter last year Informix had a 25% pre-tax profit and in the recently completed first quarter it posted 23%, White said.
‘We have to continue to invest in the field organisation and in research and development,’ White said.
Informix exceeded its stated goal during times when it undershot its hiring figures or revenues were greater than had been expected, White told the conference.
AST READY TO REVEAL ALL ABOUT THE SITE FOR ITS PLANNED EUROPLANT
We're not going to have to wait much longer to learn which country and town have won AST Research Inc's long-promised European personal computer plant.
Chief financial officer Bruce Edwards told the conference that choice of manufacturing site will be announced this quarter.
The plant will enable it to cut down on shipping costs which Edwards said had affected its results in the past.
While some high tech executives have forecast a drop in personal computer demand, Edwards said the industry's top tier companies will continue to do well.
‘We see the volume just getting down to that core set who will see increased demand,’ he said, adding that the industry's top 10 companies had 58% of 1992 sales.
AST is third in US market share among portable computer makers, Edwards said, and overall unit growth was up about 65% in the first nine months of the current fiscal.
AUTODESK BANKS ON MULTIMEDIA
AutoDesk Inc's multimedia revenues, which grew by 76% last year, are expected to duplicate the same success this year, president and chief executive Carol Bartz told the Hambrecht & Quist technology conference.
The non-traditional multimedia business grew to $40m last year.
‘We believe this is a very exciting business for us.’
IBM NOW PROMISES ITS HEAVILY MODIFIED AD/CYCLE DEVELOPMENT SCHEMA BY MID-1994
Having announced the thing way back in September 1989, IBM Corp is finally promising to have a completed version of its AD/Cycle software engineering-based application development environment by the end of the year and ready to ship to end users by the middle of 1994 — although it will bear little resemblance to the 1989 conception.
The all-embracing AD/Cycle combines a set of standards and interfaces to speed up application development.
The object-oriented framework will support IBM's System Application Architecture systems as well as its AIX Unix systems.
AD/Cycle comprises a view of the application development lifecycle, methodologies and tools to support the lifecycle plus software services such as languages for application development.
Each tool can support one or more phases of the development lifecycle.
AD/Cycle components include Information Model, which provides a common description of how data should be presented and used by tools.
Also included is a set of workstation services — common routines used by tools and interfaces — library services, including a configuration management and application generator and a repository, which stores and manages the transformation and exchange of data.
AIX Unix support will provide AD/Cycle developers with a common user interface — such as Presentation Manager or Motif — and task management services, which insulate the user from the details of tools within the framework.
Other features include a message server network which controls the distribution of data among tools and services, data integration services, syntactic and semantic data descriptions, a data repository that maintains and manages data entities as well as objects and the relationship between them.
IBM is also integrating parts of Hewlett-Packard Co's SoftBench technology into AD/Cycle to provide a data control tool.
AD/Cycle will be Open Software Foundation Distributed Computing Environment- and Object Management Group Common Object Request Broker Architecture-compliant.
It says AD/Cycle development kits will ship in the fourth quarter.
Meanwhile to garner further third party support for AD/Cycle, IBM has signed Bayerische MotorenWerke AG affiliate Softlab GmbH, Munich, to its International Alliance programme, which now has eight members including KnowledgeWare Inc, Micro Focus Plc, Sapiens Software Inc, Digitalk Inc, Easel Corp, Viasoft Inc and Synon Inc.
Each will bring its respective application development tools into line with AD/Cycle.
PENCOM READY WITH NEXTSTEP FOR INTEL DEVICE DRIVERS
Austin, Texas-based Pencom Software Inc has kicked off a programme to offer prototype device drivers for NextStep 486 expeditiously, to help hardware and peripherals vendors to be set for NextWorld next month.
The drivers, said to go for a small fixed-price fee, will be delivered in a binary-only distribution and are not covered by a warranty or any maintenance agreement, and may not be sold.
The products can be fully developed later for an additional charge.
The deadline for scheduling development is May 15.
The programme will launch Pencom's object-oriented driver design business.
MAJOR ALLIANCE BETWEEN MICROSOFT AND SAP SEEN FOR TODAY…
German software products company SAP AG, Walldorf, and Microsoft Corp have scheduled a press conference in Munich today, at which they are expected to announce ‘something beyond’ the agreement to put SAP's R/2 and R/3 suites up under Windows NT, which they announced this week.
At the press conference in Paris on Wednesday, Microsoft chief executive Bill Gates said, ‘SAP will be one company with whom we will be working very closely, because the client-server work they are doing is leadership work.’
…
AS GATES FORECASTS NT SALES OF A MILLION IN THE FIRST FOUR MONTHS
Bill Gates also predicted that Microsoft will sell 1m copies of Windows NT in the first four months after it is released this summer, but that the time between NT's introduction and its arrival as ‘the dominant operating system’ will be as long as three years.
‘We're not trying to set unrealistic expectations.
Now if you come from the Unix world, 1m is a huge number,’ he said.
‘It's five times what Sun has ever sold as the most successful Unix vendor.
If you come from the world of MS-DOS or Windows, 1m is not that big, because we sell over 1.5m copies of Windows and over 2m copies of MS-DOS every month.’
SUN INAUGURATES ITS MULTIPROCESSING ON THE DESKTOP CAMPAIGN WITH NEW LINE, CUTS SPARCSTATION 10 TAGS
In the name of multiprocessing on the desktop, the company's new buzzword, Sun Microsystems Computer Corp last week went ahead as expected and unveiled its latest Sparcstation 10s (CI No 2,151).
The additions include what it calls the fastest volume desktop on the market, the high-end Model 512MP, as well as the industry's lowest cost multiprocessor, the new Model 402MP.
Sun also cut prices on Sparcstation 10 models 41, 52 and 54 by up to 21% and up to 25% on the model 30, which now costs $14,000.
The 41 is down to $22,745, the 512 $33,745 and the 54, $45,745.
The expected price reductions of 40% mentioned last week are in fact price-performance improvements.
Sun found out immediately before it was due to announce the new boxes that it would not be able to deliver four-processor TAB-packaged 50MHz SuperSparc modules in volumes by this summer.
That belated discovery caused Sun to cancel the intended roll-out of the expected 514 model.
That machine has now gone back to being called the Model 54 and will appear as a 45MHz TAB-packaged four-way, as had already been intended at one time.
The dual-processor 512, once called the Model 52, will come out with 50MHz chips which perform at 65MHz to 68MHz Specint92 and 80MHz to 85MHz Specfp92.
Sun has added the Model 402MP, the industry's cheapest multiprocessor at $24,745 featuring a dual 40MHz CPUs, 36Kb on-chip cache per CPU, 32Mb main memory and 1Gb storage.
It also has a new entry-level desktop configuration, the 30LC, which it calls the lowest cost multiprocessing-capable machine available at $16,000.
It includes a 36MHz CPU and an upgraded 16-inch mid-range colour monitor.
The Model 40 has a single 40MHz CPU with 36Kb on-chip cache per CPU, 32Mb main  memory and 1Gb storage for $20,745.
Shipments of all models are to begin this quarter.
BROADVIEW UK MONITOR — 1
UK market undervalues smaller quoted information technology companies
In the UK, large information technology companies are over-valued by the market compared with the smaller concerns that are outperforming them, a survey by information technology financial advisers Broadview Associates suggests.
The ‘Broadview UK Barometer’ showed telecommunications to be the leading industry sector with, as should be no surprise, software and services growing and hardware in decline.
The information technology industry as a whole was seen to lag behind other industries, a trend which, Broadview suggests, is largely driven by the depressed hardware sector.
The conclusions were drawn from the analysis of the latest audited final year results and share prices from some 127 publicly listed information technology companies, as they stood on January 21 1993.
Public market data along with Broadview's own database provided the source figures.
Broadview defined information technology companies as those organisations deriving at least 50% of their revenues from computer and/or telecommunications hardware, software and services, excluding those with under £1m turnover.
The 127 were then divided into three sectors: information services, telecommunications services and hardware.
Of the total, 42 firms were defined as ‘information services’ operations and were further subdivided into the following segments: software; services; and multiple services — a combination of both.
And 30 of them had turnover of below £35m.
Another 79 were classified as hardware companies, spread across the following areas: application hardware manufacture; communications — production of networking and transmission equipment; components manufacturers; computer vendors; hardware, software and value added distributors; peripherals manufacturers.
Of these, the Communications hardware and Computer segments were not considered to have comprised enough companies to justify.
Of the 79, 35 had turnover of below £35m.
The remaining six telecommunications services companies, all of which had over £35m revenues, were not subdivided.
Each sector and the separate segments were then analysed according to performance — pre-tax and turnover — and market valuation.
This was based on net price to earnings ratios and total market capitalisation — equity market value plus total debt, less cash, to turnover ratios.
Median values were then quoted in each case.
Trading performances belie relative market valuations
Despite the fact that small companies promise substantially faster growth, the survey revealed that for large companies the median price to earnings ratio was a heady 20.6, compared with 15.4 for smaller firms.
The median total market capitalisation to turnover ratio was also higher for larger companies at 0.96, against 0.81 for smaller ones.
But those companies with over £35m annual revenues saw a zero increase in turnover with an average 5.8% rise in pre-tax margins last year, while those with under £35m revenues, grew their turnover by an average of 4%, with pre-tax margins up 7.2%.
Putting figures to the faces
The largest information technology companies were primarily telecommunications and hardware companies, and were listed as follows:
The strongest year to year turnover growth was seen among the following hardware and information services companies:
The highest pre-tax margins were achieved by the following firms, spanning all sectors:
Of all the sectors, Telecommunications was the most highly valued with a 25.5 price to earnings ratio and 1.57 total market capitalisation to turnover ratio.
Hardware yielded a price to earnings ratio of 17.9, above Information Services at 16.5, but had the lowest total market capitalisation to turnover ratio of 0.77, below Information Services at 1.15.
Growth in the Information Services sector, which Broadview noted to be stabilising and  benefiting from the cost cutting implemented in 1991/2, was driven primarily by the Software and Services segments.
Software achieved the best pre-tax margin growth rate — 18.2% followed by Services at 12.6% and Multiple Services at 5.6%.
Services had the best turnover growth of 8.3%, followed by Software at 5.1% and Multiple Services at 4.4%.
Services was also the the most highly valued segment, sporting an 18.2 price to earnings ratio.
BROADVIEW UK MONITOR — 2
Small software and services companies appear to be most undervalued
The disparity between different sized companies mentioned opposite was found to be more pronounced in the software and services sector than for hardware companies.
The price-earnings ratio for the larger software companies was 24.7 against just 15.1 for smaller companies, while total market capitalisation to turnover came in at 1.24 for large and 1.11 for small companies.
The price-earnings ratio for larger hardware companies was 19.7 compared with 16.5 for the smaller firms, with total market capitalisation to turnover ratio almost even at 0.73 against 0.78.
This is probably explained by the largely commodity-based nature of many hardware businesses, which tends to blur the differences between large and small companies, say Broadview's researchers.
Annus Horribilis? 1992 was certainly not a very good year
Predictably, the survey showed 1992 to have been a flat year for the UK's information technology businesses.
The cumulative turnover, including figures from British Telecommunications Plc, rose just 0.3% to £39,200m, with the total equity market value standing at £59,800m.
Information Services, including Reuters Holdings Plc, saw 5.5% cumulative annual turnover growth to £3,100m.
Hardware, meantime, saw revenues decline 4.7% to £17,900m.
When compared with Financial Times-Stock Exchange FTSE 100 companies, excluding figures from banks and insurance firms, information technology was seen to be lagging behind with flat 1.4% annual turnover growth 4% compared with the FTSE median of 5.2%.
Pre-tax margins also trailed at a median 6.4% rate against the FTSE's 11.1%.
Of the three information technology sectors telecommunications services was pack leader with 7.7% turnover growth and 13.1% median pre-tax growth.
Next in line was information services with 6.4% median turnover growth and 12.3% pre-tax growth.
Hardware faltered in last place with median annual turnover having dwindled 3.1% and below average pre-tax growth of 5.4%, but the companies in the hardware sector that survived the 1980s bubble are more soundly based.
UK services companies seem to be valued more highly than their US siblings
According to Broadview, services companies in the UK tend to be more highly valued than their US counterparts, partly because of the greater demand for bespoke development here.
A clear split between high value added services providers and so-called ‘body shops’ was noted within the services segment.
In keeping with the general trend, the larger services companies were seen to have underperformed compared to smaller ones.
Turnover growth came out at only 3.5%, against 8.2% for smaller companies; pre-tax margins were 5.7% against a healthy 12.9% for smaller companies.
But again larger concerns generated higher market valuations — the median price to earnings ratio was 24.7 against 15.1 for smaller firms.
The total market capitalisation to turnover ratio for larger companies was 1.24 against 1.11 for smaller ones.
Mixed fortunes seen among the industry's top ten companies
The top ten largest information services companies reported mixed fortunes.
For instance ACT Group, in fourth position, and Micro Focus, in ninth position, achieved around 20% turnover growth.
Cray Electronics in fifth position saw a 21% decline in turnover.
Reuters Holdings had the largest turnover, up 7% at £1,467m.
The strongest turnover growth was reported by Gresham Telecomputing, up 200% to £6m; Lynx, up 84% to £7m; Instem up 42% at £16m; Sage Group up 36% at £27m and Kewill Systems up 34% to £42m.
The weakest performers were Pegasus Group with turnover down 35% to £9m and BBB Design where revenues fell 34% to £2m.
The Information Service companies that reported the highest pre-tax margins were Macro 4 at 46%; Micro Focus and Sage Group level at 33%; Barbour Index at 31% and Total Systems 27%.
Sheep and goats of the hardware world: specialised versus commodity
Within the Hardware sector a clear divide was noted between specialised and commodity manufacturers, as reflected in both performance and valuation statistics.
Bolstering the otherwise flagging figures was the Application Hardware segment that achieved 8.6% pre-tax growth and 1.9%. turnover growth.
Valuations for this segment were similar to that of the IS sector at 1.1 total market capital to turnover, and 18.8 price to earnings.
Distribution is top of the tree for growth while peripherals perish
The best annual turnover growth was achieved by Distribution at 2.7% while Components declined 3.6% and Peripherals sank 9.2%.
After Application Hardware, Distribution had the best pre-tax margins of 5.0% followed by Peripherals at 3.6% and Components at 2.3%.
Distribution had the highest price to earnings valuation of 20.1 followed by Components at 19.2, Application Hardware at 18.8 and Peripherals at 7.3.
It was noted that the price-earnings ratios rose significantly as growth rates increased in the Hardware sector.
Hardware comes top, peripherals bottom on market cap to sales ratio
Comparison of market capitalisation to turnover ratios saw Application Hardware with 1.1; Components with 0.63; Distribution with 0.38; and Peripherals with 0.31.
The difference in performance between large and small hardware firms was less marked than for the other sectors.
The median decline in turnover for larger companies was 3.1% against 2.8% for smaller ones; pre-tax margins were 5.7% for larger companies, 5.4% for smaller ones.
Most of the top 10 hardware companies suffered from the recession.
The only ones to see growth were Gestetner with turnover up 4% to £898 and De La Rue up 12% to £415.
The strongest growth in turnover came from Druck Holdings, up 60% at £27m; Microvitec up 57% to £37m; Oceonics Group, up 42% at £29m; Molynx, up 41% at £22m; and Densitron International up 39% at £36m. — Lynn Stratton
BRITISH TELECOM ENGAGES IN BATTLE OF WORDS WITH AT&T
British Telecommunications Plc yesterday came out fighting in its ‘we are more liberal than what you are’ playground war of words with AT&T Co, saying that opposition to its application to offer services in the US attempts to exploit regulatory procedures and distort the issues in order to delay the application, Reuter reports from Washington.
‘Opponents of our efforts are attempting to deny customers in the US the benefits of competition that a strong and experienced global competitor would bring to the marketplace,’ company vice-president of government relations Jim Graf said.
British Telecom wants to set up a global framework which can offer a complete telecommunications service package to multinationals by reselling spare capacity on the international private line circuits of other US carriers.
Jonathan Rickford, British Telecom's director of government relations, said in a telephone briefing from Washington, ‘There has to be a little give and take…there's no reason we can't resolve the whole thing.’
Rickford attacked what he described as the hysteria of the opposition to BT: the fear is that the US is being ‘opened up to a conspiracy of foreigners against which the US needs to defend itself.’
The UK and US markets were the two most open in the world and regulators and phone companies could not allow emotive objections to block increased competition.
Graf's statement said BT's opponents had tried to impose impossible standards of market reciprocity between the US and UK.
Unrealistic
‘But the Federal Communications Commission has recognised that mirror equivalence is an entirely unrealistic standard because telecommunications systems, markets and regulatory regimes are constantly evolving and cannot be identical.’
He pointed out that the FCC has a policy of broad equivalence for markets, taking as factors open entry and even-handedness with competitors.
‘BT strongly believes that the UK market meets the standard on all these criteria and that the UK government, like the US government, is firmly committed to open markets and competition.’
BT North America's proposed services are in the public interest and none of the arguments justify delaying or denying approval, said Graf.
The clash is expected to be resolved via government pressure and the spat is more sound than substance, say analysts.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Ameritech Corp's Ohio Bell Telephone Co issued $100m of 5.75% notes due May 1 2000, at $99.85% to yield 5.776%.
The notes, noncallable for life, were issued through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
Interlinq Software Corp, Kirkland, Washington developer of MortgageWare personal computer-based mortgage lending software for mortgage brokers and bankers, banks, credit unions and savings institutions, filed to go public with an initial offer of 2.5m, 1.5m of them new, at $8 per share.
The $11m or so net proceeds will be used to fund product development, working capital, and possible acquisitions of technologies and businesses.
The managing underwriter for the offering is Piper Jaffray Inc.
Nynex Corp's New England Telephone & Telegraph has filed a shelf registration with the Securities & Exchange Commission to offer up to $400m of debt securities.
Net proceeds will be used to repay short and long-term debt, refinance long term debt and for working capital.
No underwriters named.
Nynex Corp's New York Telephone Co issued $100m 20-year 7.0% debentures, non-callable for life, at $99.419% to yield 7.15% via Salomon Brothers Inc.
ENCORE CREDIT FACILITY INCREASED
Encore Computer Corp, Fort Lauderdale, Florida has persuaded the Gould Inc subsidiary of Nikko Kyodo Co Inc — which wanted to be shot of Encore altogether when it bought Gould, but has had to keep the company in the fold and bankroll it to have a chance of realising any value from it — to increase its revolving credit facility by $20m; the pact also extends the maturity dates of Encore's $50m term loan agreement to April 2 1995, and the $35m increased revolving credit pact to July 3 1994.
SynOptics Communications Inc, Santa Clara, California has completed a private placing of $110m of convertible subordinated debentures due May 15 2003, paying 5.25% and convertible into 800,000 SynOptics shares at a conversion price of $139 per share.
No plans for the money were given.
Morgan Stanley & Co Inc managed the placing for the firm.
COMPANY RESULTS
Computer Horizons Corp saw first quarter net profit up 10.9% at $858,000, on sales up 21.1% to $29.4m.
Net per share, adjusted for a three-for-two stock split paid in April 1993, remained at $0.20.
Computervision Corp has reported a first quarter net loss of $10.4m, down from a pro forma loss last time of $26.1m, on turnover down 19.3% at $220.9m.
Concurrent Computer Corp saw third quarter net profit up 15.2% at $1.0m on sales up 2.2% at $56.1m; net for the nine months was $2.7m, down from $60.1m, but last year's figure was after a $61.1m gain on early repayment of debt, on sales off 3.1% at $164.8m.
Net per share, up 11% to $0.10 in the quarter, fell 97% to $0.28 in the nine months.
Dallas Semiconductor Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 54.7% at $5.6m, on turnover that rose 40.4% to $35.5m.
Net per share rose 50% to $0.21.
Easel Corp has turned in first quarter net losses of $489,606 against profits of $769,975 last time, on turnover that fell by 26.4% to $6.7m.
Comparisons are made with restated 1992 figures.
Electronic Data Systems Corp has reported first quarter net profits up 13.7% at $151.4m on turnover that rose 3.9% at $2,073.2m.
Net earnings per General Motors Class E share rose 14% to $0.32.
Raytheon Co has reported first quarter net profit up 9.8% at $157.5m, on turnover up 3.6% to $2,204m.
Net earnings per share rose by 8.4% to $1.16.
SCI Systems Inc has turned in third quarter net up 428.6% at $7.4m, on turnover up 75% at $455.6m; net profit for the nine months was up 2,471.4% at $18m, on turnover that rose 74.3% to $1,255.7m.
Net earnings per share rose 328.6% to $0.30 in the quarter, and 2,466.7% to $0.77 in the nine months.
Silicon Valley Group Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 215% at $441,000, on turnover up 7.1% at $51.6m; mid-term net  amounted to $1.1m against losses of $1.1m last time, on turnover up 15.1% at $105.7m.
Net per share remained at $0.01 in the quarter, and amounted to $0.04 in the half.
SoftImage Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 61.9% at $790,000, on turnover up 81% to $4.8m.
Net earnings per share rose by 23.1% to $0.16.
Stratacom Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 232.6% at $1.7m, on turnover up 40.9% to $17m.
Net earnings per share rose by 150% to $0.10.
Structural Dynamics Research Corp saw first quarter net profit down 39.6% at $2.9m, on turnover rise 2.9% to $39.1m.
Net per share fell 37.5% to $0.10.
Summagraphics Corp has turned in third quarter net losses of $1.3m up from losses of $832,087 last time, after $1.5m non-recurring charges last time, on turnover that fell by 17.1% to $16.8m; net losses for the nine months stood at $1.3m, after $411,247 gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change, down from losses of $2.3m last time, on turnover that fell by 1.3% to $52.7m.
Supermac Technology Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 75% at $2.1m, on turnover up 73.4% to $43.7m.
Net per share rose by 38.9% to $0.25.
Telematics International Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 112.9% at $1.9m, after $887,000 gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change this time and $435,000 tax credits last time, on turnover that rose 5.7% to $16.1m.
Net earnings per share rose 120% to $0.11.
Timberline Software Inc has turned in first quarter net profit of $13,000, compared with a loss last time of $134,000, on turnover that rose by 14.8% to $4.1m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.01.
Triad Systems Corp saw second quarter net profits up 52.2% at $927,000, on turnover down 5.3% at $37m; mid-term net rose 41.8% to $1.3m, on sales down 3.8% at $71.1m.
Net per share rose 20% to $0.06 in the quarter, stayed at $0.08 in the half.
TRW Inc has reported first quarter net profit of $51m against losses of $313m last time, after 4350m charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change last time, on turnover down 0.2% to $2,029m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.78.
Weitek Corp has turned in first quarter net losses of $1.4m down from $2.1m losses last time, on turnover that was flat at $7m.
Zilog Inc has turned in first quarter net profit up 83.8% at $5.8m, on turnover that rose 63.4% to $48m.
Net earnings per share rose 60% to $0.32.
Comparisons are made with restated 1992 figures.
Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA has reported a net loss for 1992 of $437.7m, up from a loss last time of $309.6m, on turnover that fell 6.8% to $5,405m.Conversion at $0.0006735 to the Italian lire.
US RECOVERY STALLS
Those green shoots of economic spring here in the UK are beginning to feel a mite lonely as the gross domestic product figures from the US yesterday brought more evidence that the recovery there seems to have stalled, and analysts are redoing their sums on IBM Corp in light of recent information: Furman Selz removed the company from its recommended list and analyst Peter Lieu said he lowered his 1993 and 1994 earnings estimates because of the extreme gross margin pressure on the mainframe business; Bear Stearns & Co analyst Cliff Friedman cut his 1993 and 1994 earnings estimates on IBM, but bravely maintains a hold rating on the stock; he trimmed his 1993 estimates on IBM to break-even from $1.25 a share and cut his 1994 estimates to $2.25, from $3.25, again citing weak mainframe demand.
IBM FINANCE CHIEF SPECULATION
When Christopher Steffen, reportedly a slash and burn merchant when it comes to cutting costs and staff, quit Eastman Kodak Co on Wednesday after just seven weeks in the job of chief financial officer of Eastman Kodak Co, saying that the team was agreed on the objectives, but had irreconcilable differences on how to get from here to there, IBM Corp shares jumped for joy in  anticipation that he was about to be named finance chief — but the joy subsided and so did the share price, off 87.5 cents at $49 when nothing happened yesterday; word out of IBM is that there is an appointment already to be announced, but unless the fact that Steffen is now at a loose end causes a last-minute re-think, he is not the man that IBM has in mind.
RIZZO POWER INCREASE
Now that Jack Kuehler has persuaded Louis Gerstner to let him go in August — we should have pointed out in yesterday's issue that he reached retirement age last year and only stayed on because he was pressed to stick around awhiles longer by John Akers, returnee and vice-chairman Paul Rizzo gets additional powers, at least temporarily: four parts of IBM that had reported to Kuehler — its semiconductor, software, AS/400 and personal systems operations — will report to Rizzo.
PERCEPTION TECHNOLOGY TO BE ACQUIRED BY BRITE VOICE SYSTEMS
Canton, Massachusetts-based Perception Technology Corp has now signed definitive agreement to be acquired by Brite Voice Systems Inc: Perception holders get one share of Brite common for each Perception held.
OLIVETTI TO BREAK EVEN AT OPERATING LEVEL
Presenting the final 1992 results (figures, page seven), Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA said that sales in lire terms rose 5.5% in the first three months of 1993 from a year earlier, but they didn't give any absolute revenue figures; in terms of volume, Olivetti said personal computer sales in Europe jumped 72% in the first quarter from a year earlier, printer sales rose 42%; the firm will break even at the operating level this year but will not return to profit until 1994, chairman Carlo De Benedetti said.
P&P TO MARKET NORTHERN TELECOM PRODUCT
In a significant departure for P&P Plc, the company is to market Northern Telecom Ltd's Visit multimedia communications system, which combines telephone and personal computer: Visit, Visual Interaction Technology, will start at under £3,000 for camera and boards, including training, maintenance and support; compatible with Mac and MS-DOS machines, Visit has an attached video camera to enable videoconferencing freely and cheaply.
PEEK SIGNS OF IMPROVEMENT
Inveterate trafficker in traffic systems Peek Plc told its annual meeting yesterday that it saw signs of a trading upturn in March: ‘Although trading conditions in the first two months of the current year continued to be difficult, we have seen signs of improvement in March — there is currently a significant amount of enquiry and bidding activity and it is expected that this will translate into firm orders,’ chairman Ken Maud said.
TOLL-FREE 800 NUMBERS BECOME PORTABLE IN THE US
All the sudden excitement in the US among AT&T Co, MCI Communications Corp and Sprint Corp about toll-free 800 number business is that from this weekend, the numbers become portable so that subscribers can change from a carrier they don't like to one that might appeal more, without changing the number.
IBM AND DIGITAL DOMAIN COMPLETE CONTRACTS
IBM Corp says it has now completed its contracts with Digital Domain Inc to build a special effects studio in the Los Angeles area.
CONCURRENT TAKING  FINANCIAL ADVICE
Concurrent Computer Corp says it is continuing to work with its financial advisers on a series of initiatives to strengthen further its capital structure, improve profitability and provide financial flexibility, but only if it does not dilute shareholders' interests in the company, which reported better than expected third quarter figures — in Company Results, page seven.
INTERTEL COMMUNICATIONS TO REINCORPORATE IN THE US
Intertel Communications Inc, currently legally a Canadian company, says from its Teleport Denver Inc base in Colorado that it plans to swear allegiance to the flag and become a naturalised American: it will reincorporate in the US to meet a condition set by the Federal Communications Commission, which gave plenty of ammunition to the Europeans that say that the US market is not as open as Uncle Sam likes to think, by insisting that only American companies could hold earth satellite station common carrier licences — there is no comparable restriction on US companies applying for licences in the UK.
ROMANIA REQUIRES HEAVY TELECOM INVESTMENT
Romania's telecommunications development will require $7,000m to $8,000m in investments, according to a senior Ministry of Communications official quoted by Reuter, which notes that that is despite the fact that it is seeking only a modest 25% phone penetration rate by the year 2005; Siemens AG and Alcatel NV had offered credits of more than $85m for switching equipment manufactured in Romania and the country aims to install 500,000 new phone lines, 3,125 miles of fibre optic cable, setting up a private television channel and obtaining between 5,000 and 10,000 mobile phone subscribers over the next three years.
APPLE GETS BRAND NAME IN BRAZIL
Apple Computer Inc has persuaded Brazilian computer manufacturer Dismac Industrial SA, Sao Paulo to hand over the Apple brand name, which it registered in 1979: Apple says ‘We reached a friendly agreement under which the Dismac Group will grant, with no cost incurred for Apple Computer, its registered Apple brand name; we are pleased with this gesture — Brazil is a promising market and Apple is interested in fixing its image’ there.
NYNEX  ACQUIRES THREE CABLE FRANCHISE COMPANIES
Nynex Corp's Nynex CableComms Ltd in Wimbledon, London SW has acquired three more companies holding cable franchises in the UK North West and Midlands, making it the UK's largest combined cable television and telephone operator: the companies, bought from Maclean Hunter Cablevision Ltd, add 499,000 premises to Nynex CableComms' holdings in the Manchester area and ups its holdings to 17 franchises that cover more than 2.5m homes and businesses; the new franchises are in Cheshire, East Lancashire and Staffordshire; the company plans to invest more than £1,000m to provide local communications networks in all franchise areas; it employs 700 in the UK with more jobs to be created as franchises are developed.
PHONE COMPANY TO TRY VIDEO ON DEMAND
New Haven, Connnecticut-based Southern New England  Telecommunications Corp says it plans to try video-on demand services in 500 homes later this year: the phone company says that it intends to charge up to $6 per month to connect to the network, but will it during the trial.
VIDEOCART PERSUADE IBM TO RESTRUCTURE DEBT
Chicago-based advertising screens on shopping trolleys specialist VideOcart Inc has persuaded IBM Corp to let it restructure its $42m debt to IBM, to provide the company with relief from near term debt payments and enable it to attain its business goals: a $22m debt would replace the existing debt, giving VideOcart a one-time balance sheet gain of $20m; terms of the new agreement include waiving all principal and interest payments until July 31, and VideOcart retains its rights under a previous agreement with IBM that allows early repayment of the new $22m debt at any time for $17m in cash; VideOcart also agreed to cancel a warrant granted last year to IBM to buy 540,000 VideOcart shares and grants a new warrant to buy 600,000 shares at $1.75 each; from August 31 to December 31, interest only payments will be due, but payments of $500,000 a month will be due beginning on January 31 1994 and will continue for 35 months, and a balloon payment will be due on December 31 1996, although IBM has the option to convert the balance of the debt into VideOcart common shares at $8 a share on that date.
MCI SIGNS DEAL WITH VIDEOCART
And MCI Communications Corp said it signed a three-year multi-million-dollar deal to provide voice and data services to VideOcart Inc.
TERADYNE ESTABLISHES JERUSALEM SUBSIDIARY
Boston test equipment specialist Teradyne Inc has established a subsidiary in Jerusalem, Israel as a joint venture with A M Engineering Ltd, which is a major shareholder in AMT Data Processing Systems Ltd, a quoted company that distributes Sun Microsystems Inc gear in Israel: called Teradam Ltd, the new subsidiary will develop support software for Teradyne Inc's product line — a series of tools for quality assurance and testing of printed circuit boards, the field in which Teradyne is a leader with annual sales currently running at $530m.
SOFTWARE PRODUCTS ANNOUNCES RPG400 DEBUGGER
Santa Ana, California-based California Software Products International Inc has announced the RPG400 debugger which is included in the new version 3 of its Baby/4XX Report Program Generator for AS/400s and personal computers: the debugger has been designed to improve applications development based on the Baby/4XX system, which enables stand-alone personal computers to emulate the AS/400; the debugger is free to current users — version 1.3 of the Baby/4XX system is £2,500.
GRAPHICS ACCELERATOR SUPPORTS PCI LOCAL BUS
Sunnyvale, California-based Weitek Corp says its Weitek Power 9000 graphics accelerator now supported Intel Corp's PCI Peripheral Components  Interconnect local bus, bringing workstation performance to machines using 80486 and Pentium.
CIRRUS LOGIC SHARES PLUNGE
Shares of Cirrus Logic Inc plunged 30% on heavy volume following the company's disappointing fiscal  fourth quarter figures (CI No 2,158): Cirrus reported earnings of 10 cents a share, and the mean estimate of seven analysts surveyed by First Call had put fourth-quarter earnings at 31 cents a share; Cirrus said it experienced a decline in profitability because of demand fluctuations in the disk-drive industry, where inventories are high; analysts said its earnings won't improve until the September quarter; disk guru Jim Porter, president of Disk/Trend, said some of Cirrus' earnings shortfall is likely coming from Conner Peripherals Inc, which also recently disappointed Wall Street with its own results, because the rest of the disk drive industry is still healthy; analysts also told Reuter that Cirrus is facing tougher competition in disk controllers from Adaptec Inc, Milpitas, California.
MEIKO INTSTALLS PARALLEL PROCESSING SYSTEM AT SOUTHAMPTON UNIVERSITY
Bristol, Avon-based Meiko Ltd has installed one of its expandable 3.2GFlops CS-2 parallel processing systems at Southampton University: the system will initially be used by the University's Concurrent Computation Group to evaluate the portable programming system being developed under the European Community's Esprit-3 research programme, but is to be expanded to provide a central computing resource for molecular and computational dynamics research and for developing applications with the university's industrial partners.
BELL ATLANTIC CHOOSES COMPRESSION LABORATORIES
Compression Laboratories Inc, San Jose, says Bell Atlantic Corp has chosen it to supply technology for the phone company's video-on-demand trial for up to 400 residential homes: Compression Labs will provide digital video encoders and decoders which convert standard analogue video signals to a compressed digital video format; terms of the pact were not disclosed.
VITESSE SEMICONDUCTOR CUTS G-TAXICHIP PRICES
Camarillo, California-based Vitesse Semiconductor Corp cut prices of its G-TAXIchip chip set for implementing data communication links based on Fibre Channel point-to-point communication, and proprietary links at up to 1.25Gbps, by 40%: the price reduction applies to both the 1.0625Gbps and 1.25Gbps chip sets: the Gallium Arsenide pioneer said the price cuts reflect higher yields and growing volumes.
TEXAS INSTRUMENTS GETS WHAT IT WANTED
Texas Instruments Inc has won what it wants from Hyundai Electronics Industries Co Ltd, and the South Korean company will pay royalties to use Texas Instruments semiconductor and personal computer system patents under a cross-licensing agreement between the two companies: Texas said the portion of the agreement covering the semiconductor patent is for 10 years, and the personal computer part is for five.
KEYBOARD FAULT?
Not everyone holds IBM Corp's PS/2 product line in the highest possible regard, but few would put it quite the way Reuter did: ‘the PS/2 Server is a faulty tolerant server system designed for Novell NetWare environments’ it declared roundly.