

INTEL ‘TO LEASE IBM SPACE TO MAKE MORE PENTIUMS, 80486s’
Intel Corp shares were bouncing late Tuesday, closing up $4.375 at $101.375 on excitement generated by a suggestion from Alex Brown & Sons analyst Erik Jansen that he believed Intel was negotiating to use an IBM Corp chip plant in order to boost production of 80486 and Pentium computer.
Neither side was prepared to comment on the suggestion, but given IBM's surplus manufacturing capacity, such a deal would be good sense.
The analyst reckons that such additional manufacturing capacity could boost Intel profits by some $0.50 to $1.00 per share, as early as the last quarter of 1993.
Separately, US PC Week highlights Intel's unhappiness with the cavalier way in which IBM has been offering to all and sundry the iAPX-86 chip variants it has designed under its second source agreement with IBM, and suggests that the agreement is being renegotiated, and that IBM may get the right to make enhanced versions of the Pentium only if it agrees to strict limits on how many it can make for itself or sale.
SUN, MICROSOFT FIRE FIRST SALVO IN WINDOWS WARS…
The first salvos in what is threatening to develop into the Windows Wars were duly fired yesterday when Sun Microsystems Inc's SunSelect formally announced its Wabi Windows applications binary interface which enables Windows applications to run under Unix without MS-DOS or Windows being needed, and Microsoft formally announced its alliance with Insignia Solutions Ltd, High Wycombe, to create Windows applications programming interfaces for the Apple Computer Inc Macintosh and Unix and other operating systems.
Microsoft duly licenses Windows source code and associated intellectual property — the Windows user interface, Windows APIs, and the Windows trademark and logo to Insignia Solutions.
It is also supplying tools that will provide developers with the flexibility to access interfaces specific to Mac System 7 to take advantage of unique System 7 features.
Sun has the backing of ICL Plc and Fujitsu Ltd as well as Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM Corp for Wabi and for its proposal for a Public Windows Interface specification that would bring the Windows applications program interface into the public domain and make it harder for Microsoft to alter it to trip up the competition.
…
MICROSOFT HANDS COBOL BUSINESS TO MICRO FOCUS
Microsoft Corp yesterday also announced that it will stop selling its Cobol Professional Development System product on June 30 and instead reinforce the strategic alliance it has had for five years with Micro Focus Plc.
This has been based on an OEM pact for the Cobol compiler and debugging technology in the Development System, but Microsoft is withdrawing that the better to address ‘the needs of corporate Cobol customers with a broader range of Micro Focus products that both companies will promote.’
The new relationship will focus on marketing as well as technology and Microsoft will work with Micro Focus to move its existing Cobol customers to Micro Focus products, and the two will try to establish a range of Micro Focus Cobol products as the best Cobol workstation implementations for Windows and for NT.
TWO FASTER EISA BUS SPECIFICATIONS ARE AGREED
Leading lights in the EISA bus world have come together to agree an extension to the specification called EISA with Enhanced Master Burst Addendum, which defines enhancements compatible with existing EISA products that enable the input-output performance needed for emerging high-end server applications.
The extensions support transfer modes of up to 66M-bytes per second or 133M-bytes per second for bus master expansion boards.
The first mode doubles the 32-bit burst transfer rate from the present 33Mbps, the second widens the data path to 64 bits.
EISA-EMB uses the same connector to maintain full compatibility with existing EISA products and existing AT and EISA boards will operate in the new systems.
The addendum describing the enhancements is available from BCPR Services Inc in Spring, Texas at $200, but buyers must already have version 3.12 of the EISA Specification.
Manufacturers involved include Adaptec Inc, AST Research Inc, Compaq Computer Corp, Corollary Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co, Intel Corp, NEC Technologies and Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA.
FRENCH MATISSE OBJECT DATABASE FOR KENDALL SQUARE
A new French contender in the object database stakes has emerged in the shape of Matisse, from Intellitic International SA, of Saint Quentin en Yvelines — and Waltham, Massachusetts-based parallel computer systems manufacturer Kendall Square Research Inc and says that after an extensive vendor review to select an object-oriented database developer whose technology would best complement the KSR1 architecture, it concluded that Intellitic's Matisse was the most suitable.
The KSRI implementation is being done jointly with Intellitic staff at the US headquarters of Kendall Square Research.
Shipment of a pre-release version of Matisse 2.2 on the KSR1 is planned for fourth quarter 1993, with the final release to be shipped in first quarter 1994.
Kendall Square's object oriented tool suite includes C++, C++ development tools, and the company's Presto parallel run-time environment extended for object-oriented parallel programming paradigms.
Intellitic has US offices in Cambridge, Massachusetts and customers include the US Air Force and the National Institute of Standards & Technology; its European user base includes ‘a nuclear fuel reprocessing plant’ which runs ‘one of the largest production object-oriented database applications in the world’.
IBM TO HAND POINT-OF-SALE SUPPORT OVER TO KODAK, EYES WIDENING TIES
IBM Corp has decided to hand over support of its point-of-sale systems in the US to Eastman Kodak Co, Rochester, New York: the two will ‘develop a dedicated store systems service organisation to provide maintenance service on current and future IBM point of sale products’.
The alliance will also study the possibility of providing service to other high-volume products, such as IBM and multi-vendor workstations, and will explore creation of a joint venture between IBM and Kodak to pursue the business; the aim is to exploit Kodak's existing infrastructure and service expertise in the US.
SGS THOMSON GEARS TO PROMOTE THE JOYS OF FUZZY LOGIC WITH FUZZYTECH
New from the programmable products division of SGS Thomson Microelectronics NV is the STMA2000 family of mixed signal arrays, and a new low-cost fuzzy logic compiler for its ST62 microcontroller family.
The STMA2000 series is targeted at users wanting to design high performance devices, and combines a so-called ‘sea-of-gates’ approach for digital and ‘sea-of-components’approach for analogue elements.
The new fuzzyTECH ST62 Explorer Edition compiler, co-developed with Aachen-based Inform GmbH, marks Thomson's entry into the fuzzy logic tools market.
The software is optimised for the basic 6-bit ST62 chip family, which is suitable for control devices in washing machines and other domestic appliances.
A new version of FuzzyTECH is also promised for the 8 to 16-bit ST9 microcontroller by the end of the year, and support for the 16-bit ST10 is already offered by Inform.
Research on a new microcontroller with built-in fuzzy logic co-processors is also under development.
Corimme
The so-called Weight Associative Rule Processor, Warp, is being co-developed with researchers from the University of  Catania in Sicily as part of the Corimme project.
This device will be targeted at applications such as character recognition, process control, signal processing and neural learning.
The fuzzyTECH compiler is a Windows-based development environment for personal computers.
It provides tools for applications design from the initial concept, to the editing stage, debugging, simulation and then code generation.
It has several graphic editors for handling rules generation, linguistic variables and system structure, with 8-bit resolution for all internal and external data.
It offers designers up to 125 rules per module and up to seven labels per variable and provides waveform display and three-dimensional block diagrams that help simulate applications.
These graphs and can then be displayed side by side in multi-windows enabling designers to compare various elements of their application such as power input and distance and then edit them, on screen, in a debugging Window.
The integral code generator is then used to produce optimised ST62 assembly language code that can be assembled and linked with other application modules and loaded into an ST62 microcontroller.
Thomson believes this code compiled approach to be a major advantage of the fuzzyTECH system, and one of the most important factors in the decision to team with Inform GmbH.
Both companies are to distribute the system, which is priced at $400.
On to the STMA2000 family.
According to Dataquest, the BiCMOS and linear array sector is one of the fastest growing groups within the world semiconductor market — a trend Thomson's Analog Cells and Arrays group, Anaca, intends to exploit with its new mixed arrays.
The devices, which are produced at SGS Thomson's Grenoble facility, includes seven members.
These range from the STMA20700, which is around 0.25 square inches and contains only analogue and input-output tiles, to the STMA23800, which measures 1.5 square inches and boasts 228 analogue, 1,781 input-output and 3,424 digital tiles.
They are based on the same 10V BiCMOS process as Thomson's STKM2000 analogue-digital series.
This has the advantage of combining analogue's high speed and precision with the digital speed, density and low power consumption of the CMOS world.
Thomson says the new family is easier to customise however, since it uses prediffused master slices that require only four mask levels compared with the 15 needed for standard cells.
The new arrays have digital, analogue and input-output tiles; pad tiles for package connections; and dedicated power-on-reset, bipolar switch, and start up tiles.
The analogue tiles contain bipolar and metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors, polysilicon capacitors and both 1K and 25K resistors.
Device level routing is carried out using the same tool as for cell level routing, which gives near 100% routing density.
The digital tiles, also with a high routing density, have 10V compatibility and the input-output tiles house PMOS, NMOS, PNP and NPN transistors, a capacitor, high and low resistors.
These enable digital input-output buffers, RC or crystal oscillators and analogue buffers to be implemented.
Each input-output tile has a 5mA drive capability and is not dedicated to a particular input-output pad.
ESD protection and ‘Zener zapping’ for on-chip parameter adjustment is built into each pad tile.
A range of library cells, between 2.7V and 11V are also available to help reduce design times.
The digital library offers Boolean gates, internal buffers, latches and multiplexers; the  analogue , amplifiers, comparators, oscillators, power-on-reset, voltage references, switches and bias generators.
All are available now on Cadence Design Systems Inc's Sparcstation systems, with Mentor Graphics Corp to follow by the end of the year.
Coffee machines
Thomson's computer-aided design tools for mixed circuit development are also available to provide, the company says, a safe, low cost design environment.
Average cycle time design cycle ranges from around 22 to 30 weeks depending on the nature of the array.
Thomson offers customers its services through a number of design centres it has across Europe, the US, Asia Pacific and Japan and will collaborate with customers from the schematics design stage through to prototyping if required.
Mixed arrays can be used for a wide variety of possible applications ranging from monitors for electricity, gas and water metering, sensors for metal detectors and intelligent tags for factory automation systems to heat controls in hair dryers, and power and timing controls in domestic appliances like microwave ovens and coffee machines.
They can also be used for controlling hard and floppy disk drives and ink-jet heads in computers and for power supply management, line interfacing and filtering in telecommunications applications.
The STMA2000 family is available now, with pricing dependent on size, complexity and design input.
CANDLE PREVIEWS THE OMAGAMON FOR SYSTEM MANAGED STORAGE IT WROTE TO IMPROVE ON IBM's OFFERING
Los Angeles-based Candle Corp picked the UK May Day holiday to announce Omegamon for System Managed Storage, and painted a picture of mainframe system administrators who are understaffed, overworked and desperate for system software that will advise and take decisions for them.
The new product then attempts to pick up where IBM's SMS software leaves off.
IBM's SMS philosophy is simple enough, letting the system, rather than the operator worry about the best way to spread the data around the disks.
However Candle believes its current incarnation — Data Facility/System-Managed Storage — does not go far enough: gathering statistics from the Gartner Group, International Data Corp and Xephon Plc, Candle suggests that mainframe disk requirements are growing at 28% per year, while at the same time only around 50% to 75% of the space is actually used.
IBM's DF/SMS improves on these figures, but nonetheless Candle says it was approached by ‘several large corporations’ including AT&T Co, with disk farms containing many Terabytes of storage who asked them to help out.
Omegamon II for SMS is the result, building on and interfacing to DF/SMS.
The main requirement, says Candle was for a system that could intelligently suggest answers to bottlenecks or problems, and if required implement the necessary changes.
To this end Omegamon provides a status advisor that graphically display of the overall health of the storage environment, by application if necessary.
At the same time the SMS Manager checks that the various storage groups and classes have been set up properly, while the Hierarchical Storage Manager keeps an eye on the way in which data is migrated across media types, avoiding the thrashing that can occur when, for example an application accesses some data every four days and the system is set up to dump unused data to tape storage after three.
These can be set up to take action automatically if a human is not about.
Other facilities include complete cache analysis, ensuring frequently accessed data gets priority treatment and disk and space management statistics.
AT&T is the first company to get its hands on the product, which runs on MVS.
It will be joined in June by five European and five more US companies with general availability pencilled in for fourth quarter.
The company did not offer any prices for it.
RABBIT HAS UNIX ADD-ON FOR NOVELL's NETWARE FOR SAA
Designed for Unix users of Novell Inc's NetWare for SAA, Open Advantage Unix version 5.3 from Rabbit Software Inc, Malvern, Pennsylvania complements the existing range of stand-alone Unix gateways that support 3270, RJE and APPC connections.
The product can use SPX/IPX connections as well as Unix TCP/IP communications and can provide access to multiple hosts through multiple NetWare for SAA servers.
Open Advantage Unix for SAA is available from Burgess Hill, Sussex-based Accent Computers Ltd in the UK at £500 for a single user version, or up to £2,950 for support for up to 254 SNA sessions.
DEC SETS OUT ITS ROADMAP FOR FUTURE ITERATIONS OF ALPHA RISC
Digital Equipment Corp has previewed future plans for its Alpha AXP RISC in a roadmap which describes increased clock speeds and further superscalar enhancements.
Development will continue on very high-performance Alpha iterations, and the chip will also appear in more integrated desktop versions as well as in 0.35 micron, 2.5V implementations for portable computing.
New systems and upgrades are planned around the next EV45 Alpha release due in September which will go to 250 SPECmarks89.
As well as faster, smaller versions of the existing 21064 part, there will be a second-generation 21164 line — EV5 and EV56 — that will start out at from 200MHz to 300MHz.
Performance will go to 500 SPECmarks89 and are due a year after EV45 and into 1995.
A third generation 300MHz part called EV6 is set for 1996: it will integrate up to 30m transistors and reach 600 SPECmarks89.
Integrated Alphas with Peripheral Component Interconnect bus and on-chip memory controllers will appear as the 21066 series.
IBM DEUTSCHLAND OUTLINES PLANS TO TURN GERMAN OPERATIONS — CHIPS, DISKS, AS/400 — INTO SEPARATE GmbHs
As of July this year, IBM Corp intends to spin off its German manufacturing facilities into three subsidiaries.
And it also plans to set up a mid-range company by the end of 1993.
Computerwoche reports that the semiconductor plants in Bblingen and the factory in Mainz will, in future, trade as GmbHs, and as subsidiaries of IBM Deutschland Produktion GmbH.
From January 1 1994, the Mainz factory, which makes platters and disk drives for mid-range and large systems, will become part of the mass storage subsidiary of IBM Corp, as IBM Deutschland AdStar GmbH.
According to IBM Deutschland, this step should ensure that the semiconductor firm is in a position to build up its OEM business.
Also, setting up both companies should also create a ‘better starting point for possible partnerships’.
IBM said this does not mean equity exchanges, but rather co-operation — using the factories to full capacity.
Over the past two years, the two semiconductor factories in Sindelfingen, and Bblingen especially, were  renowned for their high production costs.
The threat to their continued existence increased when IBM decided to produce the 64M-bit chip in the US rather than Germany.
The chip was jointly developed with Siemens AG.
Because factory managers Klaus Kuhnle in Sindelfingen and Walter Meizer in Mainz are carrying out the restructuring, they both stand a good chance of becoming managing director of their respective companies.
At the end of last year, some 6,400 staff were employed in manufacturing-related activities, but there should be about 1,100 fewer by December 1993.
As of July this year, approximately 800 of the remaining employees will work at the semiconductor firm, some 2,200 at AdStar and 1,500 will stay with the manufacturing company.
According to IBM, the latter will offer technical production services, both internally and externally.
The fourth new subsidiary will be IBM Midrange GmbH.
From January 1994, it will have total responsibility for the mid-range market and, with a ‘broader range of offerings and a better combination of specialised expertise, IBM's share of the small and mid-sized company market should increase perceptibly’.
IBM veteran Horst Rose is responsible for transforming the former mid-range business into a GmbH.
The new company, which is based in Stuttgart and deals mainly with AS/400s and RS/6000s, will employ 600 staff.
By spinning it off, Rose hopes to improve its image: ‘IBM was formerly associated with big companies and large accounts.
But today we already generate a thousand million marks a year from small and middle-sized companies’.
The managing director designate hopes the more flexible, made-to-measure organisation that the GmbHs could create, will result in a reduction in the cost base and a more customer-oriented approach.
GENERALE DE BANQUE, BRUSSELS REVELS IN BOON OF ELECTRONIC DATA INTERCHANGE SERVICE
Brussels-based La Generale de Banque SA expects to save at least 50% on its yearly administrative costs once all of its telephone bills have been incorporated into the Electronic Data Interchange system it has been developing with state telecommunications operator Belgacom, says Thierry Gilmont, process manager at the bank.
‘I say 50%, but in fact I expect more [savings],’ he said, but would not speculate on the exact amount he would save in processing the bank's total 30,000 phone bills.
In operating partially without paper, the bank is the first of a pilot group of 10 Belgacom clients, which have been experimenting with the phone company's as-yet-unannounced Electronic Data Interchange service for the last 18 months.
Paper
Belgacom expects to announce the service, Electronic Interchange With Standard Edifact, officially, in about a month, says Belgacom's information services director Alphonse Raes.
He says that approximately 50 Belgacom customers, including the nine other experimenters, are interested in moving to electronic billing this year.
The bank began eliminating the paper back-up system in January, after the passage of a new law in December authorising the ‘progressive disappearance of official paper documents’— in other words, the use of electronic billing systems.
The bank still receives only 1% of its total telephone billing, or for 500 of its 6,000 lines, via the system, Gilmont says.
He adds, however, that the system should comprise 30% of its billing within the next two months.
‘To integrate the information for each line, we have to take the time to make sure we have all of the elements necessary to verify the bills electronically,’ Gilmont said.
Customers signing up for the Electronic Interchange With Standard Edifact, EIWSE, service will receive their electronic phone billing into either the electronic mailbox or, if they have X400 service, directly into their computers, Raes said.
Gilmont says the bank decided not to use its X400 network for Electronic Data Interchange to avoid mixing the pilot project with the bank's operational, administrative applications.
The bank has no plans to put the EDI application back onto the X400 network, because it uses a program developed by Brussels-based systems integrator Acse SA, which collects the information from the X25 mailbox, stores it on magnetic disk, checks it for the Binary Condensed Algorithm code number, and checks it against internal and external data.
The Binary Condensed Algorithm number, which is used throughout the financial world, is also received by facsimile from Belgacom, Gilmont said.
The code, he says, ‘assures us that, at the moment we read the bill, it has not been modified since the issuer sent it.’
The initial check, Gilmont says, is designed to determine if the bill is coherent; if in fact, it belongs to the bank, and if it shows an amount that corresponds to what the bank expected to be billed.
The bank uses magnetic media to archive the disks today, but is studying whether to employ optical, ‘since we know magnetic is not terribly reliable after four years, and we must conserve these for 10 years,’ Gilmont said.
Acse's program then adds information particular to the bank's accounting procedures to the Edifact message, translates it into a format usable by the bank's accounting system, and batch-loads it into that application.
‘Edifact messages must be adopted to each company's standards.
It's like when one guy speaks Chinese and the other French, they have to be translated in order to speak to each other,’ Gilmont said.
The bank chose Acse because, while ‘other companies told us they could provide us with an Electronic Data Interchange translator, Acse was the only one who said, ‘EDI is not a problem of technology, but a problem of integrating it into your existing systems,’’ Gilmont said.
Cost savings will come, he says, from three levels — logistical, administrative and payments.
The first, corresponding to the ‘just-in-time’ theory of inventory management, comes from the rapidity with which information is transmitted and, thus, acted upon.
The second accrues from less time spent on billing.
Gilmont said he did not expect the bank to lay off personnel as a result of increased EDI use; rather, they would be redeployed to more ‘value-added’ jobs.
Savings on bill payments are more minor than from the other two levels, but are a factor nonetheless, he said.
The project began approximately two years ago when the Belgian Ministry of Finance seemed to know little about Electronic Data Interchange, Gilmont says.
‘The dialogue between us began like this: ‘Of course, you can begin your [EDI]project, but just keep sending the bills on paper as well !’,’ he said.
‘The eternal problem for the Ministry is discerning which is the original document and which is the copy.
Copies
We had to get through to the ministry that in informatics, you don't have originals and copies, you just have the information issued at a certain time by the sender.
Now they accept the idea,’ Gilmont said.
The ministry's acceptance of EDI technology was reflected in its support for the law passed in December.
The goal at the bank, says Gilmont, is to use EDI for its other billing.
‘We're in the process of targeting the other areas where we can use it,’ he said, noting that others should be added sometime during this year.
Before a billing procedure can be transformed into an electronic procedure, Gilmont stressed, every detail of the relation between the two parties must be perfectly understood.
‘It's even more important with EDI, because the spirit behind EDI is one of working together,’ he said.
RASTEROPS' TRUEVISION ARM LAUNCHES DESKTOP VIDEO PRODUCTION SYSTEM, ADD-IN BOARDS, VENTURES
Indianapolis-based RasterOps company Truevision Inc has announced its new VideoVGA 16 Desktop Video Production System and a new pair of personal computer add-in boards, with software.
Also, it has a joint promotion with Avid Technology Inc, offering its 6,000 registered NuVista+ videographics engine users a $1,500 discount on Avid's Media Suite Pro desktop video production system.
The VideoVGA 16 Desktop Video Production System, is a hardware-software bundle designed to provide complete production capabilities to personal computer-based video producers.
It combines Truevision's VideoVGA 16-bit colour add-in videographics board with four software packages: Gold Disk Inc's two-dimensional animation system Animation Works Interactive, and Video Director editing tool; Zuma Group Inc's Curtain Call for character-generation and painting; and the Digital Graphics Library, from the Digital Graphics Library Inc.
All come in their original packaging and supported by their original manufacturer.
The system will be available in both NTSC and PAL versions this month, priced $1,500.
The new add-in VIDI/O Analyst board and its companion, the VIDI/O Pattern Generator are AT bus add-ins for monitoring NTSC and PAL video signals.
Both are supported by bundled Truevision software and so are Microsoft Windows 3.1 compatible.
The VIDI/O Analyst combines a waveform monitor and vectorscope — both standard pieces of video test equipment.
As well as the VGA adaptor, the board uses a personal computer's VGA colour monitor for all user controls and display of video signal data.
The Pattern Generator board provides more than 20 video test patterns.
Typical applications for these boards include video production, quality control, equipment inspection and testing, equipment maintenance and calibration, and troubleshooting.
Captured waveforms
They are also useful for inserting captured waveforms into documentation and remote video monitoring via modem.
Target markets include broadcast and desktop video facilities, technical trade schools, repair centres and quality-assurance inspection sites.
The VIDI/O Analyst is $1,500 and the VIDI/O Pattern Generator is $1,000; both are bundled in the Truevision VIDI/O Workbench at $2,000.
All will ship this summer.
Finally, under the promotion offer, which lasts until July 31, users of the NuVista+ board for Macintosh IIs and Quadras will be able to lay hands on Avid Technology's Media Suite Pro desktop video system for $8,500.
Media Suite Pro combines software and Macintosh add-in boards and, Truevision claims, is the only digital desktop video system to produce professional-quality videos.
It comprises four tracks of 16-bit, CD-quality audio; an anti-aliased title tool supporting PostScript and TrueType fonts; transition effects, including wipes, dissolves and digital video effects; 32 levels of undo/redo; instant full-screen playback of edits.
It requires a Macintosh IIfx, Quadra 900 or 950 with four available slots, 16 MB of RAM, multi-sync colour monitor, 2Gb Avid-approved drive, and external speakers.
IBM SHOWS OFF ITS ULTIMEDIA TOOLS SERIES WITH HELP FROM ITS FRIENDS
IBM Corp made its debut at the National Association of Broadcasters Exhibition with its Ultimedia Tools Series, an integrated suite of over 60 software tools.
The Ultimedia series includes software from IBM's Personal Software Products division and 30 other vendors, including computer-based video editing systems from the Montage Group and TouchVision Systems, and a wide range OS/2, Windows and MS-DOS-based video, audio, animation and graphics tools.
The Ultimedia Tools Series and is available through MediaSourcery Inc, Mountain View, California.
An interactive CD-ROM tool guide is also available.
Information International Inc of Culver City, California is to assist IBM Corp market its two-dimensional Power Visualization System to its customers.
WAVEPHORE UNVEILS TVT1 2.5Mbps DIGITAL WIRELESS TRANSMITTER
WavePhore Inc unveiled at the National Association of Broadcasters Convention its new proprietary high speed TVT1 data wireless transmitter.
The device will enable broadcasters to transmit data as well as video signals across television networks, at a rate of 1.5Mbps per second.
This makes it useful for applications like electronic publishing, advertising, software distribution, interactive games, interactive television and distance learning.
The TVT1 decoder is expected to retail for under $300.
WavePhore said it is also joining the National Data Broadcast Committee, set up by the Association of Broadcasters to encourage entry into the high speed information market.
SUPERMAC TEAMS WITH DIGITAL F/X TO OFFER ITS USERS UPGRADES TO PROFESSIONAL DIGITAL VIDEO EDITING SYSTEM
Californian companies SuperMac Technology Inc of Sunnyvale and Digital F/X Inc of Mountain View have announced a cross-vendor upgrade strategy that lets users of Supermac's DigitalFilm video production system migrate to the Digital F/X Hitchcock professional digital-video editing and authoring system for $3,000.
DigitalFilm is a single-slot, QuickTime-compatible system that provides real-time capture of full-screen, full-motion video and audio, using hardware-accelerated JPEG compression to record to disk at high compression ratios while preserving image quality.
It also plays back full-screen, full-motion video with synchronised audio on any display with up to 17″ timing.
Its integrated video encoder enables users to record finished work to videotape.
DigitalFilm is bundled with Adobe's Premiere 2.0; the CoSA After Effects special effects package; Alsoft's DiskExpress II for optimising the user's hard disk for smooth recordings; and Diaquest's DQ-TimeCoder for fast, accurate SMPTE or EBU time-coding on DigitalFilm video frames.
The Hitchcock system combines DigitalFilm's hardware technologies and the Digital F/X Advanced Productivity Software.
It provides digital-video editing and authoring with full-motion and full-screen playback.
It also integrates PostScript graphics and fonts, supports PICs animations and QuickTime, and has digital audio.
Hitchcock enables users to generate QuickTime movies, print directly to videotape from hard disk, export a professional edit decision list for compatibility with high-end post-production suites, or integrate with Video F/X for tape and disk-based editing.
LONDON MARKET GETS ITS FIRST VIRTUAL REALITY PLAY AS DIVISION PREPARES TO GO PUBLIC VIA PLACING
Virtual reality systems supplier Division Ltd intends to go for a full listing on the UK stock exchange, with the share placing expected to take place next week courtesy of Manchester-based broker, Henry Cooke Lumsden.
The transaction should be complete by May 17.
According to The Independent, the placing, at about 40 pence a share, is likely to value the Almondsbury, Bristol-based company at approximately £14m, and should raise £5m.
The cash will be used for research and development  purposes , and to promote growth both in the UK and overseas.
Division has an associate company in the US, Division Inc, and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co Ltd acts as its distributor in the Far East.
For the year to October 31 1992, Division made an estimated loss of £100,000, on turnover of about £1m.
But Lumsden's Jim Warburg does not believe that this will deter the City.
He says there has been a great deal of interest shown in the firm because virtual reality is seen as an exciting new technology with a lot of potential.
Division was formed in 1989 by current managing director, Charlie Grimsdale from Perihelion Software Ltd, and Phil Atkin, Stephen Ghee and Ray McDonnell from Inmos International Plc — Iann Barron, founder of Inmos is Division's non-executive chairman (CI No 1,751).
It started life as a consultancy in parallel processing and then branched out into virtual reality, after seeing the potential of the technology.
Its products are based on a parallel, distributed architecture: the ProVision range comprises workstations, running under Unix System V; and SuperVision, a scalable supercomputer.
And IBM Corp lists among its ‘blue-chip customers’(CI No 1,888).
Division has implemented its software on the RS/6000, creating RS/UniVRS, designed to enable real-time interaction between a user and three-dimensional computer-generated images for professionals in computer-aided design, mechanical engineering design, and chemical research.
CHASTENED ASCOM SAYS IT IS TIGHTENING UP CONTROLS THROUGHOUT COMPANY AFTER SHOCK LOSS FOR 1992
Zurich-based telecommunications equipment manufacturer Ascom Holding AG will cut its workforce by another 1,000 this year, chief executive Leonardo Vannotti said yesterday.
‘Even if such measures are painful and certainly should not be the only way to cut costs, an analysis of the present economic situation in our most important markets leaves no other choice,’ he said.
The annual report for 1992 showed the workforce was cut to 16,982 at the end of last year from 18,215 a year earlier, Reuter notes.
The company said business in the first quarter was not fully satisfactory but it expects results for the full year 1993 to show an improvement over 1992.
The company last week reported a surprise $30.9m (CI No 2,158).
Vannotti forecast turnover in the company's most important — home — market, Switzerland, was likely to decline this year, but this should be compensated by expansion of Ascom's international business.
The level of orders received in the first quarter worsened compared with a year earlier, but turnover in the first quarter was up to the high levels of the year-ago quarter.
The chastened company admitted that the shock loss showed that it had been guilty of poor financial controls and a badly-timed shareholders letter — Vannotti said the board was convinced up to March 22 when the shareholders letter was sent that it would record a profit for 1992, but he and the chairman subsequently ordered a special audit, after financial controllers warned of problems with the accounts for Ascom's cable television and mobile telephone businesses in Germany, and a closer examination revealed the German results had to be corrected by $41m — $28m of extraordinary depreciation and $12.8m of adjustments to inventory values, Vannotti said.
A further $4m correction was needed in accounts relating to the group's US business — Ascom owns Timeplex.
‘The whole affair has shown deficiencies in our controls, which are now being removed with considerable effort,’ Vannotti said.
Finance director Klaus Ruetschi said financial controls and auditing would be strengthened both at the Swiss headquarters and plants abroad.
IONICA SIGNS NORTHERN TELECOM FOR RADIO BASE STATIONS, TERMINALS
Secretive UK would-be telecommunications operator Ionica Ltd has signed up Northern Telecom Europe to develop and produce the residential and base station equipment for its radio-based local telephone network.
The development work will be carried out at Northern Telecom's radio technology centre of excellence at Paignton in Devon, formerly the part of STC Plc which produced the Ptarmigan radio system for the UK Ministry of Defence.
The manufacturer reckons that the deal will be worth in the region of £100m over the next few years as Cambridge-based Ionica rolls out its UK network.
On top of that, Telecom Finland announced last month that it is adopting Ionica's technology.
While the current agreement does not cover sales of the resultant kit, Ionica managing director Nigel Playford obviously has sees that as the next move: he cites Northern's ability to exploit overseas markets through its international support and distribution operations as ‘key factors’ for choosing the Canadian manufacturer.
CHIP BUSINESS PROPELS PHILIPS TO BETTER-THAN-EXPECTED FIRST QUARTER
Reporting a 36% drop in first quarter profits (see opposite) yesterday, Philips Electronics NV declined to make any forecast of full-year results.
The results were at the top end of analysts' expectations.
The first quarter figures showed that problems remain in its key consumer electronics market, which used to account for about half the group's total revenue.
A breakdown of the latest figures shows that the consumer electronics division made an operating loss of $31.1m, similar to its shortfall of $33.4m in the same period last year.
‘I would hate for any of you to go away and say the first quarter is an indication and multiply that by four,’ Reuter quotes finance director Dudley Eustace as saying.
‘In Europe we're seeing no relief at all,’ he said.
Average prices had fallen by about 2% and, despite cost-cutting, were continuing at these levels in April.
He said that the consumer electronics division intended to reduce sharply the range of products offered.
‘The estimate is by the end of the year they should have reduced their product range by about 20%.’
Eustace said Philips was ‘about two-thirds dependent on Europe’ which made the continent-wide recession a potentially serious drag on results.
A strong performance by the components and semiconductors division helped the better than expected overall results and a surge in chip sales helped propel the components division to operating profits of $122m, up 67%.
The volume of semiconductor business was up 8% on last year after product line pruning.
The telecommunications business in Germany had been hit hard by the economic downturn there, pulling professional products and systems into a first quarter loss of $5m against a $72m profit a year ago.
Communications systems, based mainly in France and Germany, suffered falling sales and price pressure, particularly in Germany; medical systems improved slightly but industrial electronics did worse; cash from the Matsushita Electronics Corp deal is due this quarter.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Lam Research Corp issued $60m of 6.00% convertible subordinated debentures due May 1 2003, increased from the previously announced $50m and the debentures are convertible into the common stock of the semiconductor capital equipment maker at $37.50, which represents a 26.6% conversion premium over the closing bid on May 4.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co Inc was the lead manager for the issue.
CREDIT RATINGS
MCI Communications Corp has found favour with Standard & Poor's Corp, which upgraded the Washington phone company's senior debt to triple-B-plus from triple-B and the subordinated debt to triple-B from triple-B-minus.
The commercial paper was affirmed at A-2, the outlook is stable, and about $3,300m of long-term debt is outstanding.
The ratings agency says the action reflects the improving trend in MCI's earnings and cash flow, which resulted from the company's market share growth.
It reckons MCI now has about 18% of the US long-distance business, up from about 14% three years ago.
COMPANY RESULTS
CACI International Inc has reported third quarter net profits up 4.9% at $1.1m, after $242,000 charges related to litigation, on turnover up 3.7% at $36.3m; net profit for the nine months was down 35.8% at $2m, after 42.5m charges related to litigation, on turnover that rose 4.3% to $108.6m.
Net earnings per share rose 10% to $0.11 in the quarter, and fell 34.4% to $0.19 in the nine months.
Cincinnati Milacron Inc saw first quarter net losses of $47.9m against profits of $1.3m last time, after 452.1m gains due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change this time and $200,000 tax credits last time, on turnover up 38.1% to $221m.
Compressions Labs Inc has reported first quarter net losses of $3.3m against profits of $758,000 last time, on turnover that rose 18.1% to $25m.
Computer Sciences Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits up 10.2% at $26.1m on turnover that rose 0.8% at $650.3m; net profit for the year to April 2 rose 14.6% at $78.1m on turnover that rose 17.3% at $2,479.8m.
Net earnings per share rose 9% at $1.55 in the quarter, 13% to $4.66 in the year.
Emulex Corp saw third quarter net losses of $1.5m against profits of $1.4m last time, after $2.3m losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover down 10.8% at $26m; net profit for the nine months stood at $2.7m against losses of $3.9m last time, after 410.2m losses from discontinued operations last time, on turnover that rose 9.1% to $79.2m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.24 in the nine months.
Comparisons are with restated 1992 figures to reflect discontinued operations.
Gates/FA Distributing Inc saw third quarter net up 103.9% at $1.7m, on turnover up 28.6% at $81.9m; net profit for the nine months was up 96.5% at $3.8m, on turnover that rose 29.2% to $220.3m.
Net earnings per share rose 52.9% to $0.26 in the quarter, and 52.5% to $0.61 in the nine months.
Integrated Device Technology Inc has reported fourth quarter net profits up 1,009.6% at $2.5m, after $700,000 restructuring gains last time, on turnover up 26.4% at $64.4m; net profit for the year to March 28 stood at $5.3m against losses of $32.8m last time, after $4.5m restructuring charges last time, on turnover that rose 16.5% to $236.3m.
Net earnings per share rose 700% to $0.08 in the quarter, and amounted to $0.18 in the year.
Comparisons are made with restated 1992 figures.
InterTan Inc saw third quarter net losses of $5.4m against profits of $4.4m last time, after $1.2m tax credits this time, on sales down 12.9% at $172.7m; net losses for the nine months were $13.2m against profits of $6.2m last time, after $1,006m charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change last time, on turnover down by 3.4% to $524.6m.
Komag Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 153.1% at $7.6m, on turnover up 31.6% to $93.6m.
Net earnings per share rose by 150% to $0.35.
Microtest Inc has reported first quarter net profit down 69.4% at $230,000, on turnover down 3.7% to $5.5m.
Net earnings per share fell 75% to $0.03.
Network General Corp has reported fourth quarter net profits down 6.6% at $2.8m, on turnover up 26.2% at $23.6m; net profit for the year to March 31 was up 21.1% at $10.3m, on turnover that rose 31.9% to $83.3m.
Net earnings per share fell 16.7% to $0.15 in the quarter, 3.8% to $0.55 in the year.
Comparisons are made with restated 1992 figures.
PeopleSoft Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 99.3% at $1.2m, on turnover up 82.9% to $10m.
Net earnings per share rose 66.7% to $0.10.
Platinum Software Corp saw third quarter net up 412.9% at $872,000, on turnover up 100.1% at $9.3m; net profit for the nine months was up 114.3% at $1.8m, on turnover that rose 110.7% to $22.9m.
Net earnings per share rose 266.7% to $0.11 in the quarter, and 73.3% to $0.26 in the nine months.
Rochester Telephone Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 17.8% at $18m, on turnover that rose 9% to $211m.
Net earnings per share rose 11.1% to $0.50.
The 1993 figures reflect  changes in the method of accounting for post-retirement benefits.
Comparisons are made with restated 1992 figures.
Software Publishing Corp reported second quarter net down 49.5% at $2.1m, on turnover down 25.3% at $32.4m; mid-term net fell 23.4% to $6.3m, on sales down 18.4% at $69m.
Net per share fell 50% to $0.16 in the quarter, 24.6% to $0.49 in the half.
Tandy Corp saw first quarter net profit up 0.2% at $35.1m, after $13m gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change, on turnover that rose 51% to $881.4m.
Net per share rose by 4.9% to $0.43.
Verifone Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 20.2% at $4.2m, on turnover that rose 16.6% to $54.7m.
Net earnings per share rose 20% to $0.18.
Walker Interactive Systems Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 78.3% at $1.1m, on turnover up 23.4% to $15.1m.
Net per share rose 33.3% to $0.08.
Comparisons are with restated figures.
Xicor Inc has turned in first quarter net losses of $2.3m down from losses of $4.5m last time, on turnover up 12.2% to $23m.
Zenith Electronics Corp has reported first quarter net losses of $21.8m down from losses of $28.6m last time, on turnover that rose 9.5% to $290.5m.
BCE Mobile Communications Inc has reported first quarter net losses of $1.8m down from losses of $3.9m last time, on turnover up 14.1% to $89.1m.
Comparisons are made with restated figures.
Amounts converted at $0.80 to the Canadian dollar.
Philips Electronics NV has reported first net profit down 36.4% at the equivalent of $58.3m on turnover that fell 2.2% to $7,780m.
Net per share fell 38% to $0.19.
Conversion at $0.565 to the guilder.
GEAC CONTINUES BUYING SPREE
Ravenous Geac Computer Corp Ltd, Markham, Ontario, hyperactively busy buying up the foreign subsidiaries of moribund computer companies, has now bought NBI Canada Inc for under $800,000; the networking company does some $1.6m a year.
GATES/FA ADDS IBM RS/6000 TO PRODUCT LINE
Greenville, South Carolina-based Gates/FA Distributing Inc is to add IBM Corp's RS/6000 to its product line under a Managing Industry Remarketer agreement which positions the company as the largest wholesale commercial distributer.
GOVERNMENT SET DATE TO RELEASE REMAINING BT SHARES
The UK government yesterday set mid-July as the date for the sale of its remaining 22% holding in British Telecommunications Plc.
AMD TO CONSOLIDATE SPACE
Advanced Micro Devices Inc is to sublease three buildings with a total of 175,000 square feet, enabling it to consolidate all of its Silicon Valley operations at one contiguous campus in Sunnyvale; the three buildings formerly housed MIPS Computer Systems Inc and AMD will sublease them from Silicon Graphics Inc, now parent of MIPS.
NORTHGATE REPORTS LOSSES UP MORE THAN 40%
Northgate Computer Corp, reporting losses up over 40% at $2.1m on sales off 47% at $18.3m, said James Goetz, president and chief executive, had resigned; pending a decision by the board, Khaled Ibrahim, chief financial officer, will supervise the company's operations.
GATEWAY COMMENTS ON SALES LOSS
Commenting on its $474,000 first quarter net loss on sales halved to $3.3m (CI No 2,161), Gateway Communications Inc says the figures reflect a reduction in demand and continuation of tremendous price competition and margin pressure in the local network adaptor market; ‘Our operating results reflect higher than normal legal and professional fees associated with defending and settling pending and threatened litigation, and restructuring costs associated with additional staff reductions,’ it said.
COMPUTER SCIENCES EXPECTS FIRST QUARTER GAIN
El Segundo, California-based Computer Sciences Corp says it expects to record a net gain of about $5m in the first quarter of fiscal 1994 on adoption of a new accounting rule covering income tax reporting.
IBM CANADA CUTS PS/2 PRICES
IBM Canada Ltd cut PS/2 prices by up to 14%, effective immediately.
CSEE TO BUY 80% OF SECRE
CSEE SA is to buy 80% of Secre SA, the telecommunications and radio communications subsidiary of Schneider SA's Merlin Gerin unit.
ENYNEX BUILDS ON STATUS
ENynex Corp has extended its status as the biggest cable television operator in the UK by buying out US Cable Corp and Morgan Cable Ltd to take control of the Bury and Rochdale and Oldham and Tameside cable franchises: the New York and New England phone company now holds 19 franchises  surviving a potential 2.7m homes and offices, and says it plans to invest over £1,000m in the next six to seven years to provide cable and telephone services; at present it is providing cable television services to only 35,000 customers and 20,000 telephone lines.
BCE TO INVEST IN TELECOMMUNICATIONS
BCE Inc says it is ready to invest about $1,600m in telecommunications activities over the next five years in Asia, Latin America and Eastern Europe, and is interested in wireline privatisations, investment in wireless cellular licenses and joint ventures in both in different countries in those regions; it has active negotiations with Mexico, India and Moscow for cellular licence investments, and is Cable & Wireless Plc's partner in Mercury Communications Ltd; BCE president L R Wilson also criticised Canada's ‘uncertain and confused’ telecommunications regulatory framework, describing it as BCE's biggest challenge, and calling for change; at the annual meeting, he hit out at the policies of the Canadian Radio television & Telecommunications Commission, saying it is too slow in considering new products, services and rates —‘To be truly competitive, we need government policy and a regulatory framework which is clear, responsive and internationally relevant,’he said.
TOSHIBA SHIPS DYNAPAD T100X PEN COMPUTER FOR $3,000
Toshiba America Information Systems Inc, Irvine, California is now shipping the Dynapad T100X pen computer at $3,000: the 3 lbs 5 oz machine uses a 4Mb Am386SXLV CPU and has a 9.5″ VGA-compatible black and white transreflective display with 16 gray scales, 40Mb disk, two PCMCIA 2.0 slots and user-installable credit card-sized memory slot.
XILINX AND ACTEL ENTER CROSS LICENSING PACT
Xilinx Inc entered a cross licensing pact with fellow field programmable gate array maker Actel Corp, ending the litigation between the two that began in March 1992.
MANNESMANN MOBILFUNK LOSSES DEEPEN
Mannesmann AG said yesterday that losses at it digital cellular mobile telephone subsidiary Mannesmann Mobilfunk GmbH widened to $212m, up from the loss of $147m for 1991.
HIGH TECH SECTOR SITS ON THE FENCE
The sturdily independent high tech sector had naught for the comfort of either major party in the run-up to today's by-election in Newbury, Berkshire when the big guns from party headquarters showed up for photocalls during the build-up: Labour chose Vodafone Group Plc and tried to commiserate about the recession, only to be told that business had been going gangbusters for several months, the Tories went looking for green shoots at Micro Focus Plc, only to be told that the UK market was flat on its back, and that it was only foreign sales that were keeping the old Coboller busy.
AT&T AND McCAW CONTINUE TALKS
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc chairman Craig McCaw says talks are continuing with AT&T Co on an expected June signing of the deal for AT&T to acquire 33% of McCaw: he expects the deal to be completed by year-end 1993 at the latest; issues still under discussion include how to resolve the future of the Cellular One marketing brand name, which McCaw shares with Southwestern Bell Corp; McCaw will use AT&T's name and it will have access to the skills of Bell Laboratories.
FISERV AGREEMENT TO ACQUIRE DATATRONIX FINANCIAL SERVICES
Facilities manager and financial bureau services operator Fiserv Inc, Milwaukee said it had definitive agreement to acquire Datatronix Financial Services Inc, San Diego for $31.75 a share, but did not say how many shares the cheque and financial item processor for financial institutions had out.
VODAFONE SHARES RISE WITH SUBSCRIBER FIGURES
Shares in mobile phone operator Vodafone Group Plc rose fivepence to 379p yesterday after the company said that subscriber figures for April gave the company its best month in three years for connections to its network, with net new connections standing at 18,766; for the first time since LowCall was launched in October, net new connections to the business base exceeded net new LowCall connections.
ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT
Enterprise Computer Holdings Plc said on Tuesday that when its accounts for the 15 months to end-March 1992, were signed last year, the group's accountants, KPMG Peat Marwick, had not signed the audit report of its principal subsidiary, Enterprise Computer Services, the Daily Telegraph reports: the subsidiary's accounts for that period are now in the process of being filed and will be qualified by KPMG Peat Marwick on a going concern basis; Louis Kemp, new finance director, wants to know how it happened.
BILL GATES, ALL HEART
Novell Inc chief Ray Noorda's contribution to Bill Gates ephemera is the comment after their two companies had had a disagreement: ‘To have a heart-to-heart with someone, you've got to have two hearts…‘