

UNISYS OFFERS PARALLEL CLUSTERING FOR 2200 SERIES MAINFRAMES…
Unisys Corp has introduced a clustering system for its 2200 series mainframes that it describes as a highly parallel processing technology yielding significantly higher levels of system performance for mainframe servers.
The Unisys Extended Processing Complex is claimed to enable nonstop-class multi-host processing and to optimise critical database processes by linking multiple Unisys Open 2200 Systems, using fibre optic interfaces, microprocessors in a parallel architecture, and complex software algorithms.
The XPC system used with new Unisys Open 2200 XP enterprise servers is claimed to offer system throughput improvements of up to 30% and to speed the recovery of critical corporate information by 10 times — at significant reductions in overall operating costs.
A Unisys Open 2200 XP System consists of an XPC integrated with a single host or with any combination of up to four Unisys 2200/400, 600ES or 900 systems.
The XPC can be added to existing 2200s without any modification to existing application programs and will come in three implementations.
The base implementation, called the Virtual Storage Manager, increases data throughput.
The Distributed Systems Manager and Recovery Manager implementations add features for fault-tolerant running in a clustered environment.
XPC configurations range from $230,000 to $3m.
…
ADDS FAULT-TOLERANT COMMUNICATIONS PROCESSORS
Unisys Corp's DCP line of Distributed Communications Processors for the 2200 mainframe line have moved into a new generation with launch of the DCP600 family of intelligent network processors, including fault-tolerant models.
Centerpiece of the DCP600 is a system architecture that provides dual buses for fault tolerance.
Dual-bus line modules can be shared by multiple partitions in a DCP600.
Two new models in the three-model family, DCP624 and DCP628, feature dual partitions.
Each partition is a functioning DCP providing in one cabinet the resiliency that up to now required paired individual DCP systems.
Models DCP614 and DCP624 are available immediately and the DCP628 follows in December.
The DCP614 and DCP624 Models use four CPUs per partition, while the DCP628 uses eight, and users can upgrade through the line.
New 68040-based intelligent line modules offer high-speed links to local area networks.
The new dual-bus line modules offer options of FDDI, ISO 8802/3 and 8802/5 local network, RS-232/V24, V35 and X21; no prices.
UK FIRM EYES IBM MONTPELLIER
A unidentified UK company is negotiating with IBM France SA in Montpellier to lease spare space at the plant to produce tape-bonded components for surface-mounting.
It is likely to take six to 10 IBM staff.
ELONEX TO RATTLE WORKSTATION WORLD WITH UNIXWARE
Having conquered the UK personal computer market, Elonex Plc is the first European personal computer producer to strike an OEM deal with Univel Inc, the Novell Inc-Unix System Laboratories Inc venture.
The North London firm plans to take the open systems market by storm with a range of ready-configured, built-to-order UnixWare workstations and client-server systems that will heavily undercut Sun Microsystems Inc and Hewlett-Packard Co.
SUN SPARCSERVER 1000 FILLS 500 AND 3,000 USER GAP
On May 11 at the SunWorld Expo Sun Microsystems Computer Corp is to complete its Enterprise Server family with the introduction of its scalable Common Open Systems Environment-compliant 1,500-user, eight-way Scorpion, now officially tagged the Sparcserver 1000, a mid-range multiprocessor.
The departmental application server fits between Sun's 500-user Sparcserver 10 and the high-end 3,000-user SparcCenter 2000.
The Solaris 2.2-based system, whose profile resembles a ‘deep dish’ or ‘Chicago’pizza box, expands to eight 50MHz SuperSparc+ processors and up to 2Gb of memory with 200M-bytes per second input-output bandwidth, 12 expansion slots, 100Gb disk capacity and built-in high-availability fault-resilient commercial features.
It will be field-upgradable to next-generation Sparc microprocessors.
List prices start at $36,700 for a uniprocessor with 32Mb and 1Gb disk going to $46,700 for a two-way with 64Mb and 2Gb disk or $75,700 for a four-way with 128Mb memory and 2Gb.
The single-image 350-TPS maximum Sparcserver 1000 tops out at $110,000.
Sun is expected to claim that the unit is a ‘hot box,’ taking the number one position in benchmarks such as MIPS, Database TPC-A, Specint92 (could go to 9,000+), Specfp92, AIM III and Laddis.
It will compete against Hewlett-Packard Co's G, H and I series, IBM's 570, 580 and 980 and Digital Equipment Corp's Alpha 3500 AXP 4000 AXP.
Sun will claim the Sparcserver 1000 sets a new standard for configured systems, comparing one of its fully configured four-ways at $76,500 to an HP H50 at $105,475, an IBM Corp 580 at $107,522 and a DEC 4000/620 AXP at $151,544.
On upgradability.
The Sparcserver 1000 is scalable and modular so upgrading from a base system to the high end is by simple addition and is $96,400 in upgrade charges.
At Hewlett-Packard it would require a minimum three systems swaps and cost over $500,000.
Sun has also bundled a one-year on-site warranty into the system to attract business users.
It is going after manufacturing, retail, teleservices, decision support, information publishing and branch automation as well as its old standby, engineering, scientific and electronic design automation.
Oracle7, Sybase, Ingres and Informix are said to have been tuned for the 1000.
DEC PREVIEWS RDB 6 AND LAUNCHES INTERIM RDB 5.1 RELEASE
Digital Equipment Corp has previewed the Rdb 6.0 version of its relational database, saying that at $6,643 per tpsA on an Alpha AXP DEC 7000 Model 610, it is the first production database to go below $7,000 per tpsA; it ships December.
An interim Rdb 5.1 release adds Open Data Base Connectivity and costs $1,130 to $349,800 from August.
DEC also has EDA/SQL enhancements for the Accessworks client-server integrated data access server family, and new versions of the RdbAccess product family.
ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS GETS TO GRIPS WITH A DIFFERENT CULTURE IN LATIN EUROPE…
Industry analysts consulted about the failure of the deal to sell up to 30% of Electronic Data Systems Corp to British Telecommunications Plc unanimously concurred that the deal was more critical for EDS owner General Motors Corp than for EDS and would have no short-term impact on the world's largest systems integration company.
Certainly, EDS's flurry of activity in Italy and Spain over the last few months is proof that it had no dire need of BT to capture the interest of new customers and business partners in the southern reaches of Europe.
Intent on fattening its meagre $20m Italian business — in a total computer market of between $20,000m and $30,000m — EDS has been negotiating with a number of companies, including Rome-based Database Informatica SpA, Italy's third-largest systems house after Finsiel and Olivetti Information Systems, say sources at EDS and Database Informatica.
‘We are talking to a small number of selected companies with the aim of making an acquisition, a partial acquisition or an alliance,’ says Xavier Ribas, EDS director of marketing for southern Europe.
‘We aim to own a company by the end of 1993.’
Today, EDS has only one office in Milan, which combined the activities of SD-Scicon/GFI Informatique and of McDonnell Douglas Information Systems, and one in Rome, which is strictly a commercial office for GM Italia.
‘We were late starters in Italy; we have only a minute presence,’ Ribas says.
‘And, of course, EDS is not satisfied with that business in Italy, it was all inherited.
IBM Italia
We want a major presence that corresponds to the size of that market.’
Furthermore, says Ribas, ‘We don't want to spend 30 years, or even six years, going around knocking on doors to build a business.
It's a buyer's market right now; everything is for sale, but we don't want to rush anything.’
In early March, Robert McCashin, corporate vice-president and director for EDS Southern Europe, said EDS was ‘very close’ to acquiring an Italian software and information services company with revenues in excess of $100m.
It appears McCashin was referring to Database Informatica.
A spokeswoman for Database said the company was in negotiations with EDS until IBM Italia, which holds 22.5% of the company, found out and put a stop to them.
As a result, IBM Italia is negotiating with Database Informatica's other shareholders to determine whether IBM will invest new money in the company.
An IBM Italia spokesman in Milan said, ‘Database Informatica needs additional capital and we are discussing with the other shareholders whether to do it, who will do it, and when.
But IBM rules out the possibility of taking a majority share or of buying the entire company.’
Database's other shareholders are Assitalia SpA, an insurance company, Fime SpA, a leasing and finance  company based in Naples, and private investors.
The spokeswoman says Database, which reported consolidated group revenues last year of $95.7m, needs approximately $24m in new capital.
She noted that, if the shareholders decide against the increase, ‘we have other offers,’ and did not rule out a return to EDS.
Ribas says EDS is interested most in Italy's manufacturing sector, ‘which is huge, because studies show that computers are still not used strategically.
There's a substantial window of opportunity for us,’ he said.
EDS has stayed out of the public administration market in Italy because, ‘up until now it's been risky,’ Ribas says, adding that ‘until the system of favours [bribes and kickbacks]is brought under control, we're more comfortable in the private sector.’
One of the windows of opportunity in Spain is in telecommunications, where EDS has an agreement in principle with Telefonica de Espana SA, the state-controlled operator, to provide ‘substantial systems integration services in the billing area,’ says Ribas.
Although an exact figure is not yet available, Ribas says it would be ‘probably one of largest software and services contract ever signed by Telefonica.
The contract, which Ribas expects to sign by the end of June, is to provide a system that will enable Telefonica to provide itemised billing.
‘There is a lot of public pressure for better service, especially in this area.
Our piece is part of a more complex modernisation program being undertaken by Telefonica, including the installation of digital lines,’ Ribas says.
The system will be installed gradually, according to geographic areas, he said.
He adds that EDS is one of a handful of Telefonica's ‘preferred vendors,’ which include IBM and the state-owned software company Eritel SA.
‘Some years ago, Eritel had a captive market, but that's opening up to non-state owned companies,’ he said.
Since 1980, EDS has built up its business in Spain from nothing to $65m, Ribas says.
He adds, ‘Whereas in other countries in Europe, EDS has grown through acquisition, in Spain it's been through knocking on doors and selling the business.’
Ribas said EDS started out in Spain with a joint venture with one of Spain's better-known management consultancies, Bedaux SA.
EDS subsequently bought out Bedaux's share of EDS-Bedaux and it became EDS Spain.
EDS built its business on three early contracts: with La Caixa, Spain's largest savings bank; the national railway; and financial institution Caja de Madrid, he said.
Today, EDS Spain's business covers three sectors: manufacturing, finance and some public and government sectors, such as telecommunications.
For the future says Ribas, ‘We want to grow faster than the market, because that means we gain market share.’
That seems to cry out for acquisition.
Indeed, McCashin did not rule that out in a recent interview: ‘We have a nice bit of business in Spain.
It's growing but it's not so big a piece of business that we couldn't afford to do an acquisition, if it made sense.’
…
WHILE THERE IS STILL A HOLE IN FINLAND IN THE NORTH
Meantime at the other end of the continent, the only country in northern Europe which doesn't have an EDS presence is Finland, says Geoffrey Carroll, president of EDS's northern European operations.
Even there, though, ‘we have one client, but we support them remotely.
We plan to be there in six to nine months.’
Carroll insists that EDS is not pursuing a ‘have it all’ strategy.
‘We don't want to be the biggest player in all of the local markets, that's a false God to chase.
We want to be the leader in cross-border opportunities, in taking customers from proprietary systems to independent standards.
That doesn't necessarily mean biggest, although it requires some critical mass in each country, and only in selected industries in each country’ Carroll said.
To help acquire the market lead in environmental information management systems, for example, Carroll's division has concluded a major joint venture agreement with Environmental Resources Ltd, Europe's largest environmental consulting company, which has offices in six countries and 300 consultants.
‘We'll be taking our computing skills and combining them with their pure environmental knowledge.
We haven't set up a company, we're just going to work on each other 's customer base and then take the value proposition to the market.
We had both targeted the environmental computing systems market, but neither of us knew how to get there,’ Carroll said.
‘We're already talking to customers.
Every single one of our customers, at least in the north, are being dragged and pushed into it; they also want to do environmental systems.
They know the costs, but still want to do it,’ he said.
OPEN SOFTWARE FOUNDATION TO SPELL OUT DISTRIBUTED MANAGEMENT FUTURE AS IBM TAKES THE REINS
Under pressure to clear up the confusion surrounding the direction of its Distributed Management Environment, Open Software Foundation DME technology manager Kathryn De Nitto says the group will make a statement within two weeks which should answer some of the questions on many lips.
The Foundation had planned to do the work on integrating the various DME components itself after members were scared off by IBM Corp's experience of integrating DME's companion piece DCE, the Distributed Computing Environment.
The Software Foundation and Tivoli Systems Inc — source of the DME framework — are said to have appealed to IBM and Hewlett-Packard Co after seeing a loss of interest in DME due to the slow progress.
It says final contracts specifying who is responsible for re-working and integrating which pieces of DME have yet to be exchanged, although Tivoli Systems boss Frank Moss says ‘we now report to IBM, not the Open Software Foundation.’
Aside from integration difficulties, the Open Software Foundation has also been bogged down trying to figure out how to implement a standard version of the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture mechanism for managing objects across distributed systems.
The fact that the DME framework was not interoperable with other Software Foundation founders' object broker technologies has meant that some layers of DME have had to be re-designed and/or re-written using donated parts of Hewlett-Packard's Distributed Object Management Facility and IBM's System Object Model.
DME can succeed
IBM is apparently now convinced that DME can succeed — it will get a distributed object application development environment and Corba-compliant object dispatcher — and because of the resources available to it, will take over the role of key integrator.
Tivoli continues in its role as a sub-integrator of the systems management portion of DME.
Its framework object model will become more interoperable with the Hewlett-Packard and IBM environments as a result.
Although IBM's System Object Model has only some 10% code in common with Tivoli's technology, only a small percentage of Tivoli source is replaced in DME's re-worked systems management component.
Indeed, Tivoli says it may even adopt the Object Model as a subset of its own future offerings.
Moss says once the Object Management Group declares the results of its request for object services, then all this stuff should become a lot more standardised.
The Foundation decided to split DME into two manageable sections some time ago.
Ms De Nitto says the third snapshot of the distributed services module was frozen last Thursday and will go out to members in September, following testing.
It will include most software distribution and networking technology, though print services will lag some two months behind.
DME's framework component includes the object management and network management systems.
Work on integrating the Hewlett-Packard, Siemens AG and Compagnie des Machines Bull SA-derived network management pieces will be complete by the end of the year.
The Foundation won't put a date on when the re-worked Tivoli-based object management system will be delivered until its announcement later this month, though observers speculate it may be as late as the middle of next year.
EOS TECHNOLOGIES SHIPS SPARCSTATION CLONE IN FIVE GUISES
Having abandoned Sparcsystem-compatibles as  unsaleable , EOS Technologies Inc, Santa Clara, has just started shipping the first full production fabrication of its new third-generation EOStation 1030L, a performance clone of Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparcstation 10 Model 30.
It is the first member of the company's L-Series SuperSparc line using LSI Logic Corp's ASIC chip set and Texas Instruments Inc's 36MHz chip on an EOS-designed circuit board layout.
It comes in five configurations: System Upgrade Kit, Base System, Server Ready System, Supermini Desktop Server and Standard System Package.
The L-Series motherboard fits into the Sparcstation 1, 1+ and 2 formats so EOS can provide a plug-in upgrade path from older Suns.
The Standard EOStation 1030L comes with 32Mb ECC memory, 424Mb high density drive, 1.44Mb floppy, 19″ colour monitor, GX graphics, Sparc 2-style chassis and shrinkwrapped Solaris 2.1.
Transportable
The Base System loses the disk, monitor, GX board and ECC memory.
The Server Ready comes with the Base features plus 32Mb ECC memory and 424Mb disk.
The Supermini Desktop Server replaces the 424Mb disk with a 1Gb disk.
EOS is also getting its first 40MHz 1Mb Supercache SuperSparc CPUs ready to ship this month.
The EOS 1041L models will be the same configurations as the 1030L.
EOS is still  tussling with the fact that shrinking the board's size cuts the number of memory banks it fits from eight to six.
Also while L-Series boards were designed to provide two Mbus and four SBus connections, when using the SS2 chassis, the height restriction doesn't allow for the second bank of Mbus and SBus slots.
EOS is currently designing a new chassis to provide full mechanical functionality, looking to ship it in June.
Also in the works and due in June are LS-Series EOS SuperSparc+ workstations.
These models (1030LS, 1040LS, 1041LS, 1052LS) are to be exact duplicates of Sun's Sparcstation 10 line in performance and mechanical functionality.
The L-Series systems are to list at 20% less than Sun on all models.
EOS is selling largely direct in the US; via resellers in Europe, Canada, Asia and Australia.
It has a preliminary EOS Europe office and EOS Korea has been in full operation for six months.
It also has a Sparcstation 2 clone, the EOStation 10L, not a focus product.
Pet research and development project is a slickly designed prototype transportable, 1,280 by 1,024 16″ diagonal gas plasma monochrome flat panel display SuperSparc box weighing under 20 lbs with desktop footprint of about 9″ by 6″ and depth of 3.5″  minimum to 5″ maximum.
It won't go into production until EOS can design a colour version too.
SEQUOIA CALLS OFF QUEST FOR BUYER, WOOS HEWLETT AGAIN
Financially troubled Marlborough, Massachusetts-based Sequoia Systems Inc says it is no longer looking for a buyer — it didn't get any acceptable offers in the first place — and is talking to minority investor Hewlett-Packard Co about new funding to get development its Precision Architecture RISC-based fault-tolerant machines back on the tracks: Hewlett has hitherto seemed doubtful about further involvement.
SYBASE RALLIES ITS FRIENDS TO SING THE PRAISES OF ITS EMERGING SYSTEM 10 DATABASE PRODUCT FAMILY
At the conference called by Emeryville, California-based Sybase Inc to announce the availability of seven components of the 11 System 10 database server family products (CI No 2,161), three companies were enlisted to back up Sybase's pitch: Andersen Consulting, up and coming US client-server personnel and financial applications provider PeopleSoft Corp, Bachman Information Systems Inc and BP Exploration Ltd, the first representing value-added resellers or system integrators and the last end-users.
All outlined how fab System 10 was, and how it would help them, with PeopleSoft rooting for database cursors and the new Open Client because it wants to offer customers better performance, distributed data management, system administration tools and very large database support, and Bachman promising to support System 10 — well, because it just liked Sybase so much.
Its presentation was a sales pitch for the relatively  beleaguered ex-AD/Cycle company, and was the most content-free).
Andersen's Mark Miller described the Passenger Revenue Accounting System built by Andersen for North West Airlines between 1987 and 1990 and now being customised for Delta and three other US carriers — a huge mainframe and workstation system with the North West application handling around 90Gb of data (80% of which is host-based DB2, the rest Sybase).
Miller described how the original system uses 1,000 mainframe Cobol programs and 75Gb of data on a DB2 disk data farm, with 400-plus Sun Microsystems Inc Sparc workstations running C application code and 15Gb of Sybase-held data.
The new carriers are being offered a slimmed down, mainframe fat-free version: between 10 and 20 Sparcstation 10 Sybase database servers with up to 18Gb per server) replacing the mainframe, a set of batch servers with up to 4Gb of flat file space per server and range of on-line application server Sun workstations running Sybase Open Client.
Delta will have about 180Gb of data, all in Sybase, for its implementation; the other three combined, again all Sybase, 320Gb.
The North West application is said to handle 200,000 transactions a day — Delta wants 400,000.
Phew.
How can System 10 help?
Miller picks out data back-up and integrity enhancements as areas where System 10 can make the system easier to manage.
Two hours of every night can sometimes be spent backing up data: Miller demands System 10 improve this by an order of magnitude.
And since every table in the application has triggers for primary and foreign keys and last update ID and data information, he thinks that 80% could go if the promised integrity enhancement features work.
So with System 10 offering high performance transaction processing support, standards transparency and distributed large database application control, roll over Oracle Corp, hand in your keys Informix Software Inc, lights out Ingres Corp?
Figures are fabulous
Well…not quite.
Though no-one can deny that Sybase's recent figures are fabulous, Informix is doing well, too, and Oracle is still several times as large.
For a reminder of some market realities, look at Sybase in the UK.
In an eerie reversal of the situation in the North American market, Oracle's next biggest competitor isn't the plucky standards-hot Sybase but virtually a legacy operation, Ingres, currently owned by Ask Computer Systems Inc.
Sybase has done very well in financial markets and companies in Wall Street and the City, mostly because for a long time it could offer facilities such as triggers and stored procedures that Oracle couldn't.
Outside of the Square Mile, it's practically invisible in the UK relational database market, where Oracle runs unchecked, Ingres still does well on the back of its ICL Plc agreement into local and central government, and Informix, while selling like hot cakes, still mostly shifts its C-ISAM and Standard engines, not the high ticket OnLine.
Changing that is partly the job of recently headhunted former Oracle staffer John Spiers, now marketing director for Northern Europe.
He's got a lot to do.
System 10 may well help change that, but Sybase can't play the triggers now: everyone else, even Oracle in Oracle7, has caught up with such features now.
Moving the game to a new playing field is a great idea, but you need not only another team to play against, but some spectators to pay at the gate.
But at the moment, technologically, Sybase can do no wrong.
Let's hope for its sake that the customers really do want to build the huge and ambitious downsized applications for which System 10 has been designed.
— Gary Flood
NOVELL REVEALS THE DETAILS OF ITS NETWORK REGISTRY
Novell Inc has now announced how it intends to organise the Novell Network Registry.
Customers can register their organisation names or apply to the Registry for a unique set of IPX addresses — or both.
Registration fees are from $100, depending on the number of IPX addresses required.
The fee covers the costs of processing requests and maintaining the database.
No special software is required and the Registry is an optional service.
NetWare will continue to operate with independently assigned names and addresses.
Once a suitably-sized range of IPX addresses is assigned, the network administrator allocates those numbers according to local need and individual network numbers are assigned to servers, routers and network segments.
The top level organisation name is allocated by the Registry and the network administrator then manages the names of departments, users and servers in the enterprise.
The naming structure is hierarchical, helping share the administrative workload.
The latest version of DataClub — version 3.0 — has just been announced by Novell, which acquired the technology when it bought International Business Software Inc a year ago.
Version 3.0 enables Macintoshes on a DataClub network to contribute unused disk storage space to the network, creating virtual file server technology.
Version 3.0 also helps with network management by relocating and balancing files.
Any Macintosh can be designated to back up the network.
SIZE OF BABY BELLS' US ISDN TRIAL EXPANDS
The US regional telephone companies involved with the National ISDN project are to make more Integrated Services Digital Network lines available than had been previously forecast.
By the end of 1994, the group plans to have 62% of lines equipped to provide ISDN service, up from a projected 55% in June of last year, while this is expected to rise to nearly 68% by the end of 1995.
The figures are contained in a newly-released special report from Bell Communications Research, ISDN Deployment Data, which also includes the deployment plans of others not involved in the project.
MMT COMPUTING LOOKS TO THE ACQUISITION OF OPEN SYSTEMS SKILLS TO PUT IT BACK ON GROWTH TACK
While software house MMT Computing Plc is still ticking over, it believes that attempts at broadening its skills base to cover open systems as well as its traditional mainframe business will help restore margins to pre-recession levels.
While turnover was flat at £3.2m, pre-tax profits rose 23.8% to £535,000.
But this was after gains of £225,000 from selling part of its stake in Total Systems Plc.
This has now been cut from to 3% 6.7%, but according to chairman Mike Tilbrook, the remaining holding ‘continues to show a useful paper profit’.
Moreover, director Paul Haines said that one of the London-based group's tactics for boosting profits was to look for bargains among the competition — the stake in Total was bought at a very low price, he says — then buy a small stake, and cash it in.
This not only generates extra profits, it also helps build relationships, with other companies, so, for example, MMT may be able to use a partner's staff if necessary and vice versa .
And the group is well placed to do this, he adds, because with £4m in the bank, it is ‘cash-rich’.
So, because the board is ‘quietly optimistic’ about the future, it is recommending an interim dividend or 1.25 pence per share, a 14% increase on last year.
This optimism is based on several factors.
Although the period from Christmas to the end of February — MMT's accounting period for the first six months of its fiscal year ends then — was very quiet because a lot of orders were completed around that time, Haines says trading has now picked up again.
Significant new business includes contracts won from Mercury Communications Ltd, the Ministry of Defence and The Rank Organisation.
Furthermore, competition has reduced somewhat because a number of the smaller software houses have disappeared due to the recession; and the group is recruiting again, after having frozen this activity for the past couple of years.
During the past couple of weeks, MMT has taken on three or four extra staff, and plans to add one a month for the  foreseeable future, as needs dictate.
The new recruits have specialist skills in open systems, particularly fourth generation languages such as Oracle Corp's and Ingres Corp's, as well as in networked personal computer systems.
The group has also set up an in-house Oracle development facility at a cost of £15,000.
Open systems
In the past, it had to use customers' own equipment to develop applications.
While approximately 80% of revenues still come from mainframe-related work, Haines sees open systems as a major growth area because, he says, MMT's customers are generally drifting in that direction.
Although margins have been hit over the past few years by competition from contractors and because the company has kept its prices fairly constant, he said the decision to ‘cross-skill’ employees should result in increased margins.
Before the recession, staff utilisation levels were between 95% and 99% at any one time, but during the recession, this fell to about 90%.
But, if staff develop skills in multiple environments, productivity should rise again.
Also, Haines reckons that fair play has helped it win repeat orders.
While much of the competition charged more for ‘new skills’, for example in distributed computing, MMT's policy, he said, was to charge the same rates for all types of expertise.
So, because it didn't ‘take advantage of customers when times were good’, it now has the long-term advantage of customer loyalty.
Important for a firm that focusses on generating repeat business from big blue-chip companies rather than one-off jobs from smaller organisations.
MMT has two main lines of business: developing, implementing and supporting custom applications; and software facilities management, where it looks after the day-to-day operation of a customer's software.
In-house facilities management and development generates about 25% of revenues, £1m comes from long-term software support, the rest comes from on-site time and materials consultancy and development work.
MMT's main business, based in London, specialises in retail and finance.
Traditionally the major revenue earner, it was adversely affected by difficult trading conditions, particularly in the retail sector.
Of the branch companies, MMT Computing South East Ltd, which is more consultancy-oriented than its big brother, benefited from a buoyant insurance market.
MMT Computing AS Ltd, the only one to deal in a vertical market — AS/400 software — saw a lot of new work because, Haines said, many users are converting from mainframes to mid-range systems.
The 47%-owned Reading business made a modest contribution, much improved on last year, but the training division continued to make a loss.
MMT operates purely in the UK South East where Haines claims 2% to 3% market share, and has no plans to set up a regional office up North until this market is saturated, although an acquisition is possible.
RIVAS OF BLOOD STEMMED AT LAST Point of sale systems supplier Riva Group Plc has succeeded in stemming its losses for the year to December 31 by drastic cost-cutting and leaving unprofitable market sectors.
Headcount was cut 13% in 1992, resulting in savings of more than £3.5m a year.
This led to redundancy charges of £400,000, or half the 1991 figure.
Pre-tax profits were £134,000 against losses of £3.2m last time, on sales flat at £59.4m.
But according to chairman D J Dace, without exchange rate variations, sales would actually have fallen from £2.7m to £54.6m.
The board is not recommending a dividend because cash management remains a priority.
Payment will only be resumed once the group returns to greater profitability and cuts its bank borrowing significantly.
But the trading turnaround, £282,000 gains from the settlement of litigation following liquidation of the company's Swedish subsidiary, and a series of refinancing agreements (CI No 1,906) that reduced group debt by £4.2m, combined to substantially strengthen Riva's balance sheet.
The re-financing has greatly reduced the group's interest burden.
Some £1.6m of the Westhoughton, Bolton-based company's total debt will bear interest at only 1% per annum until January 1994 — this has led to interest savings of more than £500,000 a year at 1992 reduced interest levels.
The litigation issue, on the other hand, concerned action taken against KPMG Peat Marwick and former executive directors of Hugin Sweda Group Plc (CI No 1,834).
After buying Hugin Sweda, Riva found that some of the quoted assets did not exist, and had to plug the gap by restructuring, borrowing, and cost-cutting.
Although KPMG and the directors denied liability, an out of court settlement of £1m was agreed.
Proceeds of the claim, less the legal costs, have been directly credited to a special reserve.
While Dace said that recession continued in the UK and became more visible in continental Europe, exchange rate movements meant that revenues were maintained in all sectors of Riva's business.
Product sales generated £31.1m up from £30.1m in 1991, some 58% of which came from overseas subsidiaries.
Revenues from services were £22.6m, a rise of £1.3m on the previous year, while the sale of consumable supplies increased by £900,000 to £6.8m.
Still, Dace believes that the recession now affecting Europe will result in no significant growth in turnover during 1993.
Therefore, reorganisation and cost-cutting wherever possible will remain a priority.
On February 1, John Berry, former director of technology at Boots Plc's retail division, came on board as a non-executive director, enabling the group to adopt the code of best practice recommended by the Cadbury report and Audit and Remuneration Committees have now been set up.
EIT GROUP INTO ADMINISTRATION
Reading-based data communications equipment company EIT Group Plc, whose shares have been suspended since February (CI No 2,101) yesterday went into administration but hopes to return to the stock exchange by late July or early August.
According to John Bridges of EIT's stockbrokers Keith Bayley Rogers the new administrators appointed by the Court, have the support of 75% of the company's creditors which, it is hoped, will soon lead to the settlement of the creditors voluntary arrangement.
VENTURE FUNDING
Kalpana Inc, the Sunnyvale, California pioneer of Ethernet switching, whereby an Ethernet is recast as a star network with a central switch, so that each user gets the full 10Mbps Ethernet bandwidth, reports that it received $9.1m in mezzanine financing.
The proceeds will be used to fund research and development and to expand the business.
The lead investor in the fourth round financing is Canaan Partners of Menlo Park and existing investors Merrill Pickard Anderson & Eyre, Menlo Ventures and Mohr Davidow-Ventures, Advent International, Kleiner Perkins, and Philadelphia Ventures were joined in this round by Interwest Partners, Needham & Co, Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA, and Weiss, Peck & Greer.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Cincinnati Bell Inc reports that its Cincinnati Bell Telephone Co has filed with the Securities & Exchange Commission for a shelf registration covering up to $120m of debt securities; net proceeds will be used to reduce, in part, the company's debt, to replace short-term debt which will be maturing later in 1993, and for working capital.
Easel Corp, Burlington, Massachusetts has registered an offering 647,878 shares, all from holders that accepted the shares in connection with the acquisition by Easel Corp of Enfin Software Corp.
Electronic Retailing Systems International Inc, Wilton, Connecticut developer and marketer of electronic shelf labelling systems, reports that it got its initial public offering of 1.6m shares, 1.3m of them new, away at $13 a share.
Montgomery Securities Inc was the lead underwriter for the offering.
MCI Communications Corp, Washington is to redeem $135m principal amount of its 10% subordinated debentures due April 1 2011 on May 14 at 108% of the principal amount, for an aggregate redemption price of $145.8m plus accrued interest.
After the redemption, about $292m principal amount of the 10% debentures will remain outstanding.
The early redemption will result in an extraordinary charge of about $9m after tax against second quarter figures.
Pittencrieff Communications Inc, Dallas Specialised Mobile Radio communication services subsidiary of the Edinburgh-based oil company Pittencrieff Plc (CI No 2,110), has filed with the Securities & Exchange Commission to go public with an initial offer of 4.2m shares at a target price of $11 to $13 per share.
The company provides telephone interconnect, dispatch and paging services to some 28,000 subscribers on 135 Specialised Mobile Radio systems providing coverage in Texas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Colorado, Utah and Arizona.
The offering is via an underwriting group led by Raymond James & Associates Inc and Southwest Securities Inc.
Daewoo Electronics Co has set a conversion price of 14,400 Korean won on its par-priced $70m issue of convertible bonds due December 31 2008 and callable after May 18 1994.
Lead managers for the offer are Baring Brothers & Co Ltd and Hyundai Securities.
KOMAG INC GET NEW CREDIT LINE
Komag Inc, Milpitas, California thin-film disk head and platter maker has won a $60m syndicated, unsecured two-year revolving line of credit with First Interstate Bank of California serving as the lead bank for the syndicate, with Comerica Bank-California, ABN AMRO Bank NV, Union Bank, Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd, and Standard Chartered Bank Plc.
The new credit line brings the company's total unsecured facilities to $100m, of which it has so far drawn down $20m.
The company wants access to the cash for working capital and capital expenditure.
COMPANY RESULTS
Bytex Corp has turned in first quarter net losses of $1.2m against profits of $145,000 last time, on turnover down 9.6% at $9.8m.
Measurex Corp has reported first quarter net profit down 52.1% at $1.7m, after $2.4m non-recurring pre-tax gains last time, on turnover down 0.4% to $61.8m.
Net earnings per share fell 50% to $0.10.
Nashua Corp has reported first quarter net profit of $2.6m against losses of $10m last time, after $10.1m charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change last time, on turnover up 16.8% to $141.1m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.42.
Comparisons are with restated figures.
Southern New England Telecommunications Inc has reported first quarter net losses of $183.7m against profits of $40.1m last time, after $220.2m charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change this time and $1m gains from discontinued operations last time, on turnover that rose 1% to $402.3m.
Comparisons are made with restated 1992 figures to reflect discontinued operations.
Stac Electronics Inc saw second quarter net profits down 76.3% at $1m, on turnover down 4.3% at $11.2m; mid-term net fell 37.8% to $3.2m, on turnover up 37.5% at $23.5m.
Net per share fell 76.5% to $0.04 in the quarter, and 42.9% to $0.12 in the half.
Symantec Corp has reported fourth quarter net losses of $1.4m against profits of $5.5m last time, on turnover down 18.8% at $51.3m; net losses for the year to April 2 stood at $11.5m against profits of $17.6m last time, on turnover that fell 6% to $206m.
Comparisons are with restated figures.
Western Digital Corp saw third quarter net profits of $1.6m against losses of $18.6m last time, on turnover up 41.9% at $325.4m; net profit for the nine months stood at $12.7m against losses of $76.9m last time, after $15.8m gains from the sale of a business last time, on turnover that rose 45.8% to $940m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.05 in the quarter, to $0.39 in the nine months.
Williams Cos saw first quarter net up 218% at $5.4m, after $95.4m pre-tax gains from the sale of assets this time and $14.6m gains last time, on sales up 26% to $751m.
Net per share rose 184.7% to $2.42.
Comparisons with restated figures.
MMT Computing Plc has reported net profits for the six months to February 28 up 23.8% at £535,000, after £225,000 gains from the sale of fixed asset investments, on turnover that rose by 5.2% to £3.2m.
Pre-tax profits were up 21.5% at £865,000.
Earnings per share rose by 23.1% to 4.8 pence.
Riva Group Plc has reported net profits of £102,000 for the year to December 31 against losses of £3.2m last time, after £397,000 restructuring costs and £282,000 gains from the settlement of litigation following the liquidation of the group's Swedish subsidiary this time and £789,000 restructuring costs last time, including £365,000 costs due to  re-financing arrangements, on turnover that rose 3.7% to £59.4m.
At the pre-tax level, profits stood at £134,000 against losses of £3.2m last time.
Earnings per share amounted to 0.2 pence.
Corrected Result: Tandem Computers Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 26.0% at $11.1m on turnover that rose 2.9% at $517.6m; mid-term net profit was $28.6m after a gain of $12.6m from the cumulative effect of an  accounting change, against a loss last time of $85.8m, on turnover that rose 4.6% at $1,001.5m.
Net earnings per share rose 25% to $0.10 in the quarter and were $0.14 in the half.
APPLE CUTS RETAIL PRICE
Apple Computer France SA has cut retail prices of all its products by up to 33%, and says the impact 3, should show up quickly because of the fiercely competitive nature of the computer industry: ‘we aim to increase the number of our users and conquer new markets,’ it said, adding that it intends to establish a new pricing policy for resellers; ‘the demand for our products is still strong, with a worldwide volume growth rate of 18% in the second half of our fiscal 1993, compared to the same period in fiscal 92,’said Giancarlo Zanni, managing director of Apple France.
IBM CULTURE NEEDS CHANGING
Seems that Louis Gerstner has decided that the IBM Corp culture has to be changed from the top down as a priority, and he has again gone outside the company — and the computer industry — for a senior appointment, hiring Gerald Czarnecki, chairman and chief executive of the Bank of America Hawaii unit of BankAmerica Corp to be the new senior vice-president in charge of human resources and administration.
FOUR MORE COMPANIES AWARDED TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENCES
UK Technology Minister Edward Leigh awarded telecommunications licences to four more companies, three of them in international satellite communications: one goes to City of London Telecommunications Ltd, planning to build a Metropolitan Area Network in the City, the other three to Satellite Information Services Ltd, E-Sat Telecommunications Ltd and PanAmSat LP, all to operate international satellite services.
GPT WIN PART OF BT CONTRACT
GEC Plessey Telecommunications Ltd is doing rather well with its Synchronous Digital  Hierarchy transmission equipment, which enables phone operators to reconfigure circuits in seconds: yesterday it won part of a £20m contract for the equipment from British Telecommunications Plc, sharing it with L M Ericsson Telefon AB, and won all of a £17m contract for similar equipment from Deutsche Bundespost Telekom.
ERICSSON TELEFON GETS $470m CONTRACT
L M Ericsson Telefon AB has a $470m contract for Groupe Speciale Mobile equipment from Mannesmann Mobilfunk GmbH: the contract covers infrastructure, services and telephones and is the largest the company has yet received for mobile phone kit.
ORACLE AND IBM JOINT DEVELOPMENTS
Oracle Corp and IBM Corp are joining forces for co-operative development and marketing of database products and applications on the RS/6000, including the multiprocessor and parallel configurations.
IBM FILES LAWSUIT AGAINST NUTRI-SYSTEM
IBM Corp has filed a $7.3m federal lawsuit against Nutri-System Inc, saying the debt-ridden diet company failed to make payments on 500 personal computers it had leased — but it sounds as if the Armonkeys will have to sing for their money: the suit accuses the Blue Bell, Pennsylvania, company of making no payments since December and of refusing to allow IBM to repossess the machines, but some of Nutri-System's major franchisees have filed an involuntary bankruptcy petition against the company under Chapter 7 of the bankruptcy laws — Chapter 7 means curtains — and last week, banks seized all its cash and bank accounts, forcing the company to close its 283 company-owned weight-loss centres across the US; while Nutri-System has failed to pay only $965,380 due under its lease with IBM, a default entitles IBM to recover the full lease sum of $7.3m.
COMPUTER SCIENCES ENTER AGREEMENT WITH SUN
Computer Sciences Corp, El Segundo, California entered a joint sales and marketing agreement with Sun Microsystems Inc to market client-server systems in the global aerospace manufacturing industry and the two are looking for combined revenues from the partnership to total about $80m over 18 months.
BOCA RESEARCH TO ACQUIRE COMPLETE PC
San Jose-based the Complete PC Inc is to be acquired by Boca Research Inc, Boca Raton, Florida: the Complete PC, a privately held company, develops, manufactures and markets facsimile modem and voice messaging products; terms were not disclosed; Boca Research recently raised some $13.6m from its initial public offering and designs, manufactures, and markets worldwide board-level enhancement products directed primarily for the MS-DOS micro market.
3DO SHARES RISE
Sell on a strike they say, so no doubt the time to sell 3DO Co Inc's shares are as soon as the first marketable interactive multimedia home entertainment centres to the company's standard are announced: the shares, floated at $15, rose to $20.125 on the first day of trading going to $24 on the second day.
OKI ELECTRIC TO STOP TELECOM EQUIPMENT PRODUCTION AT TAIWAN SUBSIDIARY
Oki Electric Industry Co Ltd will stop producing telecommunications equipment at its Taiwan subsidiary in August because of increasing labour costs: Far Eastern Electric Industry Co Ltd of Taiwan, in which Oki has a 69% stake mainly produces key telephones and sells facsimile machines and printers from Japan.
INTEL CHIP BUSINESS REMAIN STRONG
Intel Corp president Andy Grove told the annual meeting that the company's chip business remains strong and that it is ready to fight new competitors in the market place, Reuter reports: ‘Our response to all these competitors has been to concentrate on getting better and faster products into the hands of our customers,’ Grove said, adding that Intel was meeting demand for the 80486 but dealer and customer inventories were tight; capital spending this year is now likely to hit $1,800m, up from the previously planned $1,600m; executive vice-president Craig Barrett said the next generation P6 microprocessor will probably be unveiled in late 1995 or early 1996; Intel holders also approved a two for one share split to take effect in June.
MICROSOFT FOLLOW ON IN 1994
Microsoft Corp chairman Bill Gates said he expects to ship the follow-on to Windows 3.1, codenamed Chicago, in 1994 but declined to say at what point in the year the upgraded system will be launched: ‘We should debunk any notion that Chicago is around the corner,’ Gates told an audience of developers sponsored by Microsoft —‘All we can say is we expect it will be in 1994 and we'll keep people in touch on that.’
TELUS AND CUC BROADCASTING ENTER PARTNERSHIP
Edmonton, Alberta-based Telus Corp has entered a partnership with CUC Broadcasting Ltd to develop UK cable television and telephone operations at half a dozen franchises in the London area: Telus says that it plans to invest about $100m in the effort in the next five years.
ENTERPRISE COMPUTER HOLDINGS FEARS MISUNDERSTANDING
Enterprise Computer Holdings Plc fears it has been misunderstood: the company is keen to stress that Finance Director Les Kemp has the unhappy confusion over last year's accounting figures under control (CI No 2,162) but wants to know how accountants KPMG Peat Marwick managed not to sign the audit report for subsidiary Enterprise Computer Services; apparently there was confusion at the time over the verification of certain bank loans; all should be clear in the next report and the company says it expects to show a return to profit.
WINDOWS NT DELAY
The talk now, based on suggestions from Microsoft Corp, is that Windows NT won't be delivered before August: it's doubtful, however, that a few weeks delay in its schedule will diminish its impact very much — NT is exerting enormous pressure on the industry as it is.
OVERSEAS BECHTEL TO SELL KANJI VERSION OF O2 PRODUCT
Overseas Bechtel Inc, a Bechtel Corp subsidiary, will sell a Kanji version of O2 Technology SA's O2 object-oriented database system in Japan, a market the French firm sees as strategic territory for its product.
SHL SYSTEMHOUSE PURCHASES CLIENT-SERVER CONSULTANTS
Canadian systems integrator and facilities manager SHL Systemhouse Inc has purchased client-server consulting firm Advanced Management Systems CA, Caracas, Venezuela, for an undisclosed sum: AMS specialises in the petroleum, minerals extraction, finance and public utilities sectors, and has worked with SHL for the past year on a joint project for Maraven, a state-owned Venezuelan oil company; the two companies developed and implemented a Domestic Marketing System to deal with order entry, distribution, and accounting issues for petroleum products in Venezuela; the Ottawa, Canada-based SHL says that it is keen to expand into the rapidly developing Latin American market.
QUANTUM SOFTWARE SYSTEMS CHANGES NAME
Quantum Software Systems Ltd, the 10-year-old Unix-like Kanata, Ontario firm has changed its name to mirror its software: it is now called QNX Software Systems Ltd.
KAPITI EXPANDS ELEMENTS OF EQUATION PRODUCT
Banking and dealing room software house Kapiti Ltd, London has expanded the retail banking elements of its flagship wholesale banking and treasury product, Equation, and released it as a separate but fully integrated module, Retail Advantage: like Equation, Retail Advantage is a client-server-based package, but has enhanced facilities for producing customer profitability reports, on-screen or in report form, for quality management purposes; it incorporates a real-time automatic teller machine gateway to provide on-line validation and updates of such transactions as cash withdrawals, and cheque book requests; it includes an updated version of Kapiti's front-end office automation ‘cashier system’, which undertakes point of service validation, and includes a transaction definition toolkit for up-dating such items as commission or exchange rates; it has a fund management capability, which can map onto clearing rules worldwide; and it has multi-lingual capabilities, such as being able to generate multi-lingual customer reports; the company gave no prices for it.
BILL GATES BOOKED FOR PC EXPO
Bill Gates is booked as the keynote speaker at PC Expo in New York from June 29 to July 1 at the Jacob Javits Center, speaking on ‘New Technology for the Information Age.’
IBM APPLIES FOR SOFTWARE PATENTS
IBM Corp has been doing it for some time, and now Wordperfect Corp is doing it too — applying for patents on their software rather than relying copyright law: reason is that, as the Wall Street Journal explains, a patent can provide a company with exclusive use of its patented programs for a fixed number of years, even if another company develops the idea independently; copyright, which is created as soon as an idea is expressed in an original way, protects only the expression of the idea, not the idea itself, and it doesn't confer exclusive use if someone else develops the same software independently; downside is that getting a patent costs big — in both time and money — and once it expires, the technology it describes is free for all.
WINDOWS TELEPHONY VERSION 1.0 AVAILABLE NOW
Version 1.0 of the joint Microsoft Corp-Intel Corp Windows Telephony application programming interface is available immediately: some 40 companies are supporting the new standard which will enable users to gain direct access to telephone networks from database managers, personal information managers, spreadsheets, and word processors.
SCOTT MCNEALLY WEARYING OF JOINT ROLES
Now that the transition into a string of planets is well-established, we suspect Scott McNealy is wearying of playing the dual and sometimes conflicting roles of chief executive of parent company Sun Microsystems Inc and president of the company's systems planet Sun Microsystems Computer Corp, having to go to both sets of meetings and deal with other planets as an equal who is also their boss, and he could well be on the look-out for a president for the hardware unit; some say he's being urged to split the company up even further by some of his lieutenants.
ACER CLAIM
Acer Inc claims to have the ‘world's first single Pentium chip multiprocessor upgrade technology,’ the engine for the fastest entry-level server ever developed: details of what it means are scarce.
GESCAN INTERNATIONAL FINDS MORE PLATFORMS
Gescan International Inc, the Research Triangle Park, North Carolina-based General Electric Co Inc spin-off, has moved its turnkey or customisible document and workflow  management systems for newswire and real-time message handling to Sparcs, HP 9000s, RS/6000s, Alphas and Digital Equipment Corp MIPStations: the company, whose existing product line is used in US government sites, is looking for exclusive geographic and vertical market value-added resellers for the code.
COMDEX/COMEXPO MEXICO IN MARCH
Reed Exhibition Cos and Comdex's Interface Group Inc are pairing to produce Comdex/Comexpo Mexico down in Mexico City next March 8 to 11.
CARL LEDBETTER LEAVES SUNSELECT FOR AT&T
SunSelect Inc general manager Carl Ledbetter has cashed in his chips at Sun Microsystems Inc in favour of becoming president of AT&T Consumer Products, the division that is responsible for corded and cordless telephones, videophones, cellular telephones, answering machines — and AT&T first personal communicator, its Hobbit RISC-based widget.
AUTODESK ENTERS HOME CAD MARKET
Sausalito, California-based design automation specialist Autodesk Inc, which has its UK base in Guildford, Surrey, has entered the home computer market with the launch of a new range of computer-aided design modules for Do-it-Yourself enthusiasts, interior and exterior designers as well as small business home renovation contractors: ‘The Home Series’ comprises four modules — one for designing landscapes, one for bathrooms, one for kitchens, and one for general home improvements; the software was released in the US 18 months ago, and into Australia and the Benelux countries between six and nine months ago, but is now available in the UK via Solihull, West Midlands-based distributor, Force 2 International Ltd, at £60 per module including value-added tax; the decision to release into the UK was taken after research from Banner & Co indicated that the UK home computer market was growing 25% per year, and a study by market research company, Jordans, indicated that the UK DIY market was growing at an average 3%; according to marketing communications manager Karen Hiscock, ‘the time was right’because people now want to do more with their personal computers than just play games or use the things as word processors.
ZENITH TO BUNDLE BORLAND SOFTWARE WITH PC PRODUCTS
Compagnie des Machines Bull SA's Buffalo Grove, Illinois-based company Zenith Data Systems is to bundle Borland International Inc's Paradox for Windows database and Quattro Pro spreadsheet with its personal computers under a special European agreement: the special offer, which will last for the summer, covers all Z-series Z-Stations desktops and Z-Notes notebooks.
THSTYME OPENING THIRD EUROPEAN SUBSIDIARY
Chuck Peddle's THStyme Inc is to open its third European subsidiary in Giessen, near Frankfurt in Germany: the new operation is to be headed by Gunter Gotta a veteran of both Tandon and Victor in Germany; THStyme reckons it will soon be shipping products to Europe from its Russian manufacturing base.
UK TO VIEW COSE DEVELOPMENTS
The UK's Solutions with Workstations Show at London's Olympia between May 11 and 13 will be a good chance for the UK and Europe to catch up with the latest Common OpenSoftware Environment developments: Peter Idoine of IBM Corp, Steve Raby of Sun Microsystems Inc and Mike Shelton of the Santa Cruz Operation Inc will hold interactive sessions on COSE at 11am on each of the three days of the exhibition.
 MICROSOFT WORD FOR OPEN MINDS
Stop that sniggering down there in the typing pool — what do you suppose the spellchecker in Microsoft Corp's Word word processor suggests when it comes to Pentium and doesn't recognise it?
Up at HM Systems Plc in North London, they innocently ran a letter through the thing, and once they had stopped chortling, they rang us to advise that people should stick to calling the new chip the 80586 in any correspondence they give to their secretary unless they're confident that, in the words of Larry Hart, she's a broad with a broad, broad mind.