

STORAGE TECHNOLOGY TO BUY AMPERIF TO COMPLETE ARRAY LINE
Storage Technology Corp sprang a surprise after the markets closed on Thursday last week when it announced that it would be buying privately-held would-be competitor in the disk array business, Chatsworth, California-based Amperif Corp.
Amperif, a long-time player in the Unisys Corp storage subsystems business — it has not always enjoyed an easy relationship with Unisys — has been developing its own disk array product under the code-name Viking.
Comparex Informationssysteme GmbH put up some money for the development of Viking, and Memorex Telex NV had been planning to market the product too, but is understood to have pulled out.
StorageTek says that it too had put some money up for the development and would have marketed the product even without buying the company — although the Viking was seen as a direct competitor to its own Iceberg, Viking is in fact a simpler device with fewer features.
Under the letter of intent, StorageTek agreed to issue 1.3m new shares Amperif shareholders and will set aside about 600,000 shares for warrants and employee stock options, valuing the company at $75.3m at the time of the announcement — but that valuation quickly improved to $83.6m as Storage shares shot up $4.375 to $44 even in after-hours trading on the news, and hovered round there on Friday.
StorageTek said that the Amperif acquisition is part of a three-tiered strategy to enhance market coverage.
The primary element will remain its Iceberg RAID 6+ design for performance-intensive, continuous-operations environments.
The Iceberg subsystem ‘will provide unique storage management capabilities to address the mission-critical segment of large-scale, information-processing systems and networks,’ the company says.
The second offering will be Amperif's Viking, ‘cost-effective, high-performance’ systems for the emerging RAID 5 segment of the IBM-compatible mainframe disk market.
It also highlights the scalability of Viking, which will be able to offer a range of performance characteristics from those of solid-state store to the new offerings of very large capacity disk drives.
The low-end product is Nordique, a StorageTek-designed product planned as a medium-scale RAID 0/1/5 device for varying levels of fault tolerance in the mid-size segment of the large-capacity disk drive market for both IBM Corp and non-IBM attachment.
Nordique uses a variable high-speed memory in the control unit to provide greater throughput than normally seen in conventional disk units, the company said.
Viking is way behind schedule: it had been intended for this quarter, but StorageTek said that based on the present status of the product and schedule estimates it expects IBM-compatible products based on Viking architecture to be available in the second half of 1994.
Nordique should appear late this year.
The firm also says it is continuing to make steady progress on Iceberg, and that it expects to enter the internal beta test portion of the programme in July or August, and hopes to ship production units a year late, in the fourth quarter of this year.
DAUPHIN SIGNS IBM AUSTIN TO MAKE ‘SMALLEST’ 80486 BOX
The Lombard, Illinois-based Dauphin Technology Inc company developing the DTR-1 ‘world's smallest 80486 computer’(CI No 2,085), has signed IBM Corp to a $150m contract to make the handheld device at its Austin Industrial Business Center in Austin, Texas.
The 80486SLC box with 4Mb to 6Mb, disk and facsimile modem, weighs 2 lbs 8 oz, and it is to be launched this week at $2,500.
TANDBERG, MACROTEK SIGN UP FOR POWERPC RISC
Motorola Inc has won two more adherents in Europe for the PowerPC: Tandberg Data Display A/S of Norway will use it in its high-end desktop products — future X-terminals, presumably, and MacroTek GmbH of Dortmund, has developed a line of High Bandwidth Resource Interface Controller support chips for PowerPC.
And Ford Motor Co has confirmed that it is dumping Motorola's 88000 RISC and is switching to the PowerPC for future generations of its Electronic Engine Control Modules.
LOTUS ‘APPROACHES APPROACH FOR ITS SIMPLE DATABASE’
Lotus Development Corp is declining to comment on a report in the US edition of the Wall Street Journal on Friday that it is in talks to add a database management system to its product line by buying privately-held Approach Software Corp.
The Redwood City, California company's eponymous product is a stand-alone relational database that runs under Windows and can also act as a transparent front-end to dBase III and IV, Pardox and Oracle SQL 6.0, and is claimed to require no programming (CI No 1,915).
The Journal suggests that while the companies have not yet come to an agreement, and that Approach has had several approaches, the combination could give Lotus a hot new product and a defensive weapon against recent moves by Borland International Inc and Microsoft Corp.
If terms for a takeover cannot be reached, another option under discussion is a licensing agreement in which Lotus would sell Approach's software, but Approach would remain independent.
If the talks fail, Lotus may seek a licensing deal with Apple Computer Inc's Claris unit, or another database maker, the Journal was told.
Lotus is believed to have devoted $30m over four years developing a database that it cancelled in 1989 — just before it bought a 15% stake in Sybase Inc, sold again in 1992.
Approach is expected to have sales of nearly $20m this year; it was founded in 1990 by former executives of Claris and Oracle Corp.
IBM UK INCREASES JOB CUTS TO 2,000 FROM PLANNED 1,200
IBM UK Ltd expects to have shed a further 2,000 jobs by July after accelerating its cost-cutting programme, the Daily Telegraph reports.
It had planned to shed 1,200 this year, but to avoid further ‘bit by bit’ cutbacks the company decided to bring forward further redundancy programmes and two weeks ago, 1,400 staff left on a single day and the company will be down to 12,000 by mid-year.
Chief executive Nick Temple said ‘We are now at staff levels we want for 1994 and 1995.’
SETTING OUT THE POTENTIAL AND THE LIMITATIONS OF IBM's AS/400 FAMILY
Feeling lost in the fast-moving world of IBM?
Here's the state of play of the AS/400 as laid out by UK AS/400 Business Manager Malcolm Haines.
The move to a RISC-based architecture for future AS/400s has been widely reported, but Haines says that the current BiCMOS processors will suffice for around another two years yet, with the company pushing up the clock speed.
At which point RISC will have to take over.
At first glance that might look surprising since the AS/400 architecture is theoretically capable of running 14 processors and the current top of the range model F95 has only four.
However Haines says that the processor count is unlikely to grow since the overheads become prohibitive.
Perhaps more  worryingly , it is not yet clear whether the future generation of RISC-based AS/400s will be any more amenable to parallelisation.
Clustering
In the meantime, the company is thinking about clustering AS/400s, perhaps via the new fibre adaptor, so that multiple machines can work co-operatively — although ‘clustering’ is probably not a term that IBM will use, says Haines wryly.
As for application portability between the CMOS and RISC versions, he points to the Integrated Language Environment, ILE, that was released as part of OS/400 version 2 release 3.
A brand new ILE-compatible C compiler has been announced, though it is yet to ship and there are statement of directions regarding REXX and Cobol Compilers.
ILE will be key in ensuring applications work on the new hardware, as well as providing performance enhancements, according to Haines.
The Application Systems Line of Business used to work under political constraints that made sure that it didn't tread too heavily on the mainframe business.
Those constraints have gone now, and yet Haines says for various reasons we should not expect to see future AS/400s challenging the top-end mainframe market, although it will become a stronger challenger around the low-end and middle of Enterprise System's territory.
Despite being a self-confessed ‘AS/400 zealot’, Haines is not blind to the product's weaknesses, and readily recites a list of its shortcomings: not terribly good at compute-intensive tasks; a maximum disk capacity of 165.2Gb (effectively halved with the use of disk mirroring); a paucity of tools for managing large networks, and finally a lack of fault-tolerance.
The last point is already under attack with the Rochester development team looking to see whether the multiprocessor AS/400s — such as the four-way F95 — can be made more robust.
Currently if one of the processors fails, the machine collapses in a heap, but Haines says that work is in progress to let the others take over, more neatly.
Gale force
When it comes to total processing power, however, the AS/400 will always be limited by the commitment to remain air-, rather than water-cooled — despite the fact that IBM's rivals in the mainframe world seem to be able to deliver performance matching that of IBM with air-cooled machines, even if the air does have to be gale-force.
Finally there is the question of the future merging of the RS/6000 and AS/400 CPUs, first reported in IBM System User (CI No 2,165).
Haines obviously finds the idea of one machine for all, possibly based on Taligent, conceptually attractive, but says he has not heard anything in IBM about a merging.
LONDON PARALLEL APPLICATIONS CENTRE PUTS ITS MASPAR TO THE TEST ON OPTIONS PRICING
Fiendishly clever computer trading of financial instruments using hideously complex algorithms is all the rage on Wall Street and increasingly in Tokyo, and now researchers at the London Parallel Applications Centre, based at London's Queen Mary & Westfield College, are developing special library tools for financial modelling with the support of Digital Equipment Co Ltd and Oxford mathematical library supplier Numerical Algorithms Group Ltd, or NAG.
Their two-year project initially involves the implementation of software on a massively parallel Single Instruction, Multiple Data system, with a view to converting it for Multiple Instruction, Multiple Data systems at a later date.
The finished result will be a Fortran-90 mathematical library tool that NAG will likely market and that it is hoped will encourage the use of parallel machines in non-linear programming such as scheduling, planning and optimisation.
A version of the software will also be developed in parallel C++.
After consulting with financial experts in the City of London, the researchers, who are from University College London, Queen Mary & Westfield College, Imperial College and City University, have decided to take options pricing as a starting point for their project.
This can then be extended to more complicated options such as Asian options and conditions, baskets of options and eventually portfolio evaluation and hedging.
The researchers will first develop demonstration programs to show which routines are required and how they will interact.
It is expected that the first demonstration will compute the exercise boundary of US options with continuously paid dividends and will be tested using a simulated data feed.
The project will use the Centre's recently delivered DECmpp 12000Sx massively parallel computer — from Maspar Computer Corp marketed by DEC — which has 8,192 CPUs.
And it is hoped work will continue after the initial two years, perhaps with support from the business community nearby.
HM SYSTEMS SET FOR PENTIUM AS USER PUTS NOTEBOOK TO THE TRUCK TEST
London-based HM Systems Plc which, with its Minstrel workstation was one of the first vendors to ship an 80486-based machine, says it also plans to be one of the first off the mark with Pentium machines.
It is presently working on a Pentium-upgradable board for its Expresso line of personal computers which it intends to have ready by the summer.
Some new ‘business computing products’— it will say no more than that — are also planned for the end of the year.
In the mean time, HM Systems has recently launched a new range of upgradable, modular notebooks that can take 66MHz 80486DX2 chips.
The machines have built-in fans — which should come in handy for any Pentium-based cousins no doubt— and come with removable 80Mb, 120Mb or 200Mb 2.5″ disks.
A 450Mb drive version is promised soon too.
Module options include a trackball, facsimile modem, scanner interface, local area network adaptor, SCSI and PCMCIA slots.
There is also a choice of monochrome, passive and active colour displays.
The XP weighs 6.38 lbs including battery and measures 11.7″ by 8.85″ by 1.77″.
Prices start at £1,250 and rise to £3,500.
One HM customer recently tested his ‘rugged’ notebook to the limit when a lorry driver reversed a 10-ton truck over it.
Apparently the machine's screen and the motherboard survived intact — but alas not the floppy drive.
OLIVETTI KILLS OFF TRIUMPH-ADLER's WALKSTATIONS AND SETS NEW PORTABLE FAMILY OF ITS OWN
Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA intends to launch a new line of notebook computers in the summer to replace its German Triumph Adler subsidiary's range of Walkstation portables.
As a result, Triumph Adler will cease all production at its Nuremburg plant, although its factory in Frankfurt will continue to build desktop personal computers, and its Scottish site will still supply components.
The new Olivetti range will be manufactured in Italy.
Discussions are currently under way as to whether Triumph Adler will resell the products in Germany under its own name or under the Olivetti tag.
Triumph Adler's Walkstation family and Olivetti's Quaderno portable range currently compete in the German market.
While Olivetti did say it was a joint decision with TA to manufacture the new line of products, it would appear to be based on several premises.
First, because its core business consists of manufacturing personal computers, it wants to control what it sees as a strategic market.
Second, because Triumph Adler is not doing very well, the move would seem to make sense in public relations terms.
As regards Olivetti's OEM agreement with Digital Equipment Corp, a spokesman at Olivetti said, although DEC was selling Olivetti desktops throughout Europe — it sold approximately 60,000 in 1992 — portables were only included in the agreement at the start of this year; much later than Olivetti decided to create a new line.
Therefore, DEC has sold very few machines in anticipation of the new range, but sales and marketing activities will be greatly stepped up when it arrives.
OPTICAL DATA MIXES FDDI, ETHERNET AND TOKEN RING
Through its UK distributor, Basingstoke, Hampshire-based Dataguild Ltd, Optical Data Systems Inc has announced a new hub family claimed to integrate Token Ring, Ethernet and FDDI in a single chassis.
The integration was achieved through a strategic alliance with Wellfleet Communications Inc under which Optical Data incorporated the latter's Link Node router technology into the new Infinity hub family, said to combine switching, advanced management and full bridge-routing capabilities.
According to Optical Data, the Infinity chassis can support up to 576 Ethernet, 384 Token Ring and 60 FDDI ports, which can be configured to use any one of 44 Ethernet or Token Ring networks.
Each can be switched using software into the desired network.
The hub has no single point of failure, and incorporates intelligent systems that automatically prevent network failure.
Available immediately in the UK through Dataguild, a full SNMP managed Ethernet — 10Base-T — system costs from £156 per port, while the Token Ring version costs from £215 per port.
In addition to the strategic alliance, Dataguild is also to distribute Wellfleet's multi-protocol bridge-routers.
SUNPRO INTEGRATES SPARCWORKS C WITH SOFTWARE THROUGH PICTURES
Mountain View, California-based Sun Microsystems Inc's SunPro unit is integrating its SparcWorks Professional C and C++ development environments with San Francisco, California-based Interactive Development Environments Inc's Software through Pictures software engineering tools using SunSoft's ToolTalk application integration system.
The two companies claim that it will enable developers to reverse- and forward-engineer C code without having to update information manually in each environment.
SparcWorks C developers will be able to generate structure chart and data diagrams in Interactive Development's C development environment to prototype their C code, which can be analysed, debugged and compiled from SparcWorks.
Developers can generate C++ code  from Interactive's object-oriented design C++ graphical editor for use in SparcWorks C++.
The work will be complete by the second half of 1993.
GOVERNMENT GIVES NOD TO USE OF 2.4GHz, SO NCR LAUNCHES ITS WAVELAN WIRELESS NETWORK IN THE UK
NCR Ltd has announced the UK launch of its personal computer- and point of sale terminal-based wireless local network system, WaveLAN.
The launch follows the Department of Trade & Industry's decision to approve the 2.4GHz frequency band for such systems, which means that an operating licence is not required to use it.
The system consists of a 16-bit full-sized AT/EISA or Micro Channel expansion board with built-in radio transceiver, an external omni-directional antenna measuring 4″ square, diagnostics and network server drivers.
Running under MS-DOS, OS/2 or Unix, it is claimed to support all major networks including NetWare, Microsoft LAN Manager for MS-DOS and Unix, IBM LAN Server, Vines, Lantastic, and other NCR System 3000-based networks including TCP/IP, Open Systems Interconnection and SNA Workgroup.
It includes Novell Inc's Open Link Data Interface and Microsoft-3Com Corp Network Driver Interface Specification network drivers.
Other options include a Novell NetWare boot ROM for diskless workstations.
It is also available for NCR 7052xc point-of-sale terminals.
The company has also announced WavePoint, claimed to provide a bridge between WaveLAN and existing wired networks, which is due for launch next month.
WaveLAN uses low power — 100mW — 2.4GHz spread spectrum technology and is claimed to have a 600 foot operating radius in open plan offices, with a 2Mbps data throughput.
The company also says that a wide area network option, with five-mile line of sight connections, will be available later in the year.
Conscious that security may prove to be a major concern for users, NCR has been pushing the system's in-built security features: it says that three levels are provided.
The Spread Spectrum transmission technology used is claimed to provide secure error-free transmission, while the company has also incorporated a four digit hexadecimal local network segment identification code into the system.
Additionally, NCR says it has two optional plug-in ASIC devices for highly secure situations, the Data Encryption Standard for financial institutions, or the Advanced Encryption Scheme, both of which are claimed to provide virtually unbreakable data encryption.
Qudis Networks Ltd is to be the primary distributor for the system in the UK and the list price is £700 for each personal computer.
WaveLAN is also approved for use in Switzerland, and NCR says that it expects to gain approval in France next month, with other countries following afterwards.
BLACK ELSEWHERE, BUT IBM EASTERN EUROPE HAS GOOD FIRST QUARTER
A spokesman at IBM Corp's East European headquarters in Vienna claimed that the company exceeded the internal sales targets set for the first quarter of 1993, and succeeded in increasing its turnover in the region by around 30% when compared with the same period last year.
The increase would be broadly in line with overall market growth, but IBM's exact results — which the company will not publish — are still being compiled, he added.
The upbeat account of the firm's local fortunes may be regarded as somewhat surprising given the fact that IBM Eastern Europe has not announced the conclusion of any major contracts so far this year.
Spokeseman Robert Mandl, said ‘Overall it was a good first quarter.
There was not so much business from significant large single customers, but it was basically well balanced both in the personal systems area and in the mid-range.’
Mandl confirmed IBM had not attracted any new clients for its mainframes.
IBM's last major win in the region came in the closing weeks of 1992, when the Slovak Ministry of Finance placed an order for 120 RS/6000s and 1,050 PS/1s along with system software to manage tax administration and collection.
The contract, which was announced internally on January 1, was valued at $8.5m.
UNISYS TO ESTABLISH JOINT VENTURE WITH SYSTEMS HOUSE SYSLAND
Unisys Corp is to establish a joint venture in Hungary via a partnership with the Budapest-based systems house Sysland Kft, according to Sysland managing director Endre Parlagi.
Parlagi said that the new joint venture would be called Unisys Hungary and that initial founding capital would amount to $110,000.
According to MTI, the Hungarian press agency, Sysland will hold a majority 55% stake in the firm, but the agreement has not yet been signed.
Sysland Kft did $1.9m profit on sales of $19m in 1992.
DATA GENERAL's PARTNER MICROSYSTEM REPORTS SALES 20% DOWN ON 1991
Microsystem Computer Engineering Rt, the Budapest-based distribution firm, announced a 1992 turnover of $22m.
The revenue figure is 20% down on 1991 and the company revealed it did make a loss last year, though the size was not disclosed.
However it claims the first three months of 1993 have proved profitable and reported that debt amounted to less than $3.3m.
Data General Corp took a 5% stake in Microsystem in November 1992 (CI No 2,077).
TANDEM OPENS HUNGARIAN SUBSIDIARY
Tandem Computers Inc has opened a new subsidiary in Budapest, increasing the company's presence in Central and Eastern Europe.
It has installed a NonStop CLX system for the Hungarian Savings & Commercial Bank, running Base24 software from Tandem's Applied Communications Inc subsidiary.
BUDAPEST STOCK EXCHANGE SHOWS LONDON THE WAY WITH NEW SYSTEM BASED ON THREE DEC VAX SERVERS
The computer system at the Budapest Stock Exchange has now been up and running for about two weeks, and according to chief system analyst Andrei Bagi, there has been only one minor teething problem.
This occurred when a broker attempted to undertake a single transaction involving 2,000m Hungarian Forints — $22m — in the government bonds market only to discover that the appropriate field in the application didn't have enough space for the zeros.
The Budapest Stock Exchange spent $2.25m on the system for which Digital Equipment Corp supplied a system based around three VAX 4000/200s, along with 23Gb of distributed storage, terminals and printers.
DEC also subcontracted the London-based software house Transvik Ltd which had previously developed the software for the Nordex exchange in the City of London; it was its foundation on the pound sterling that caused the failure of the bond transaction, but contrary to local press reports, the system did not crash and an update to overcome the problem should be in place in a few weeks time.
Touche Ross and GMA secured the consultancy contracts and their $1.2m fees were paid from the British Know-How fund.
Finance for the computer system itself came from the European Community PHARE programme.
According to Bagi, DEC secured the stock exchange contract due to its good references in Hungary, its ability to replace any component in eight hours, and the size of its local presence.
Logica Plc, which offered its Oslo system as a model was also a strong candidate, but the firm lost out as it was reportedly unable to tender a window-based system.
Bagi concedes opting for Transvik software was a risk, given the company's small size, but argues the advantage is that the firm is dependent on the success of the contract and is more willing to share its expertise than Logica might have been.
At present the system is specified to support 128 users, of which 63 are now connected, and to handle 1,000 trading instruments while storing 10,000 lodged orders.
The three VAX servers are said to be able to cope with 1,000 transactions an hour, though so far they have been tested to only a few percent of their capacity.
Indeed, given the fact that there are only a couple of dozen companies quoted on the exchange, the opportunity for follow-on business for DEC is looking limited in the short term, despite its apparent enthusiasm to off-load a VAX 6000.
Transvik, on the other hand, is likely to be asked to develop software to manage the options and future exchange in the near future, pending the results of an internal feasibility study.
This would replace a Novell Inc NetWare-based system which was developed in-house and which is still in operation today.
Any lessons for the City of London to draw on after Taurus?
Bagi notes: ‘Our brokers have been very supportive.
They helped specify the system and we had regular meetings so nothing got out of hand.
It probably slowed down the whole process a bit, but it made it all much safer.’
PERSONAL COMPUTER MANUFACTURER MUSZERTECHNIKA IMPROVES ITS PERFORMANCE BY SOURCING FROM FAR EAST
Muszertechnika Holding Rt, which claims to be the largest manufacturer, distributor and retailer of IBM-compatible personal computers in Hungary, reported a group turnover of $39m for 1992 — up from an estimated $30m in 1991.
Post-tax profits amounted to $500,000.
The company's computer-related business is carried out through a subsidiary, MT Computer Rt, in which IBM Corp took a minority stake in April 1992.
MT Computer Rt in turn, owns sales operations in Poland, Albania, Romania, the Czech and Slovak Republics and some former-Jugoslav Republics via its wholly-owned subsidiary Procom.
Muszertechnika recently  switched its MT and Procomp branded personal computer assembly operation from Budapest to subcontractors in Singapore.
Muszertechnika is also the sole distributor Fujitsu Ltd's printer and disk drive products in Hungary.
In a statement, it attributes its market position to ‘skilful blend of off-shore financing, outsourcing of components from the far-East, exploitation of tax and tariff arrangements and co-operation with major Western partners’.
EUROPEAN PERSONAL COMPUTER MARKET GREW 19% — BUT IT CAN'T CONTINUE — DATAQUEST
Recession may be burying the major continental economies, with the likelihood that things will get much worse before they start to get better, but the European personal computer market continued to prosper in the first quarter, the Wall Street Journal reports.
According to the quarterly Wall Street Journal Europe-Dataquest Europe Ltd report on the market, sales of personal computers rose 19.4% to 2.5m machines, just shy of the 20.8% rise in the fourth quarter of 1992 — but volume ain't all, and the price war meant that total industry revenue slipped 3.3% to $5,100m.
As might be expected, the biggest winner was Compaq Computer Corp, which nearly doubled its share of shipments to 10.7% from 5.6% a year earlier, and increased its share of industry revenue to 13.7% from 8.9%.
IBM Corp, Dell Computer Corp and Siemens-Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG also gained market share, but Apple Computer Inc and Commodore International Ltd were losers in the share stakes.
The top 10 companies tool 60.5% of the market, up from 50.7% a year ago.
For the rest of the year, Dataquest counts on recession to put a damper on growth, and it forecasts that shipment growth rates will slow to an average 13% to 14% for the full year, while total revenue increases very slightly.
Eric Cador, marketing  centre director for Hewlett-Packard Co's personal computer division in Grenoble, France is a contrarian and expects his own company to ship 2.4 to 2.5 times as many Vectras in Europe in the current quarter as it did a year earlier and he forecasts that revenue will double from the year-ago level.
Machines using the 80486SX accounted for 26% of the total, and saw dramatic price reductions over the 12 months — 60.3% in France to $2,446, 67.8% in Germany to $2,567, and 49.2% here in the UK to $2,421.
The figures are Dataquest estimates of what a buyer actually pays after standard retail discounts, as opposed to list prices.Prices are now seen to be about 10% higher in Europe than in the US, against 25% a year ago.
In smaller markets, the number shipped in Sweden was 82,910 in the quarter, up 41.8%, but in Spain, where the dead hand of the European Monetary System is wreaking havoc, ships rose only 9.7% to 143,380.
PROPRIETARY AND NETWORK SYSTEMS, NOT UNIX, TO LOSE OUT TO NT — INFOCORP
Unix will continue to maintain its grasp on the high-end multi-user server market for the foreseeable future, according to a report by InfoCorp.
It says Windows NT — launched today — will only have a 12% share of the server market — 11% in revenue — by 1997, by which time Unix should have 64%, 62% by value.
It says Windows NT revenue will be won primarily at the expense of proprietary systems — which will slip from 29% to 22% revenue market share — and other network operating systems such as OS/2.
Proprietary systems will lose slightly in terms of units shipped — Unix will drop from a high of 70% in 1992 to 64% in 1997, while other network operating systems will slide from 20% to 15% in 1997.
InfoCorp sees shipments of multi-user systems with an average selling price between $15,000 and $1m to grow from 509,000 units in 1992 to 643,000 units in 1997 — a compound annual growth rate of 6%.
The server market is expected to have a compound annual growth rate of at least 21% up to 1997 — growing from 34% of the total number of systems shipped and 18% of manufacturers' revenue in 1992 to 67% and 34%, respectively, by 1997.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Arrow Electronics Inc, Melville, New York distributor, got its offer of 4.9m shares, 500,000 of them new, the rest from Lex Service Plc, away at $32.50 and will use the $15m or so net proceeds for working capital.
The underwriters for the offering were Goldman, Sachs & Co, Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp and Morgan Stanley & Co Inc.
MFS Communications Co, formerly Metropolitan Fiber Systems, got its initial public offering — which it increased to 11m shares from a planned 8m, away at $20 a share, compared with the prospectus target of $17 to $19.
Proceeds will be used to expand existing networks and to build new ones, the company said.
The joint underwriters for the issue by the Omaha, Nebraska metropolitan area networks operator were Salomon Brothers Inc and Bear, Stearns & Co.
IBM Brasil Leasing Arrendamento Mercantil SA duly raised $120m with the issue of a $120m two tranche Eurobond due December 1995.
The $90m fixed tranche pays a semi-annual coupon of 8.5%, and the $30m floating-rate tranche pays 400 basis points above the six-month London interbank offered rate.
The issue was handled by Citibank International Inc.
TelecomAsia Corp Public Co Ltd, which is installing 2m telephone lines in Bangkok and its suburbs, will offer 222m shares to the public by October this year.The company plans to apply for the public offering with the Thai Securities & Exchange Commission; Salomon Brothers is the firm's foreign underwriter.
CREDIT RATINGS
Telecom Corp of New Zealand Ltd's $1,100m of long-term debt has come under scrutiny from Moody's Investors Service Inc, which says it may cut its triple-A ratings after the company changed its financing policy: Moody's examination will focus on whether the change will significantly reduce the company's debt protection measurements over time.
ULTIMATE CORP NEGOTIATES NEW CREDIT FACILITIES
Ultimate Corp, East Hanover, New Jersey Pick-popper, says it has negotiated new credit facilities with availability of up to $7.5m with Los Angeles based Foothill Capital.
The facilities include both a three-year term loan and a revolving credit facility, both secured, with interest at 3.5 points above prime.
For its trouble, Foothill received a warrant to purchase up to 300,000 shares of Ultimate common.
Ultimate said the new facilities, the company's first after nearly four years of restructuring, are for general working capital purposes.
COMPANY RESULTS
Autodesk Inc has reported first quarter net profit up 65.8% at $15.4m on turnover that rose 34.9% at $101.7m.
Net earnings per share rose 59% to $0.62.
Dotronix Inc has reported second quarter net losses of $181,331 against profits of $212,710 last time, on turnover down 21.6% at $4.3m; mid-term net losses amounted to $138,101 down from losses of $333,250 last  time , on turnover down 5.4% at $10m.
Nationwide Cellular Services Inc has reported first quarter net profit of $286,000 against losses of $220,000 last time, on turnover that rose 56.1% to $42.6m.
Net earnings per share amounted to $0.01.
Comparisons are made with restated 1992 figures.
Nintendo Co Ltd has reported net profit for the year to March 31 up 2% to the equivalent of $750.9m on turnover that climbed 13% to $5,471m.
Net earnings per share rose 2% to $5.40.
The figures have been converted at $0.00896 to the Japanese yen.
INLAND REVENUE FINALISTS
The finalists for the enormous 10-year facilities management contract on offer from the UK Inland Revenue tax-gathering authority are Computer Sciences Corp with IBM UK Ltd and Electronic Data Systems Corp with its UK subsidiary Scicon Ltd: final award is expected to be made in October, and work on the contract will begin in January 1994.
EDS LOOKS FOR TELECOMS RELATIONSHIP
General Motors Corp's Electronic Data Systems Corp unit has talked to a ‘number of’ telecommunications companies about establishing a business relationship, the automaker's general counsel Harry Pearce told Reuter: Pearce confirmed that talks between the computer services giant and British Telecommunications Plc have ended, and said that the company has talked to ‘all the obvious suspects’in telecommunications.
EMC COMMENT ON AMPERIF ACQUISITION
Commenting on Storage Technology Corp's proposed acquisition of Amperif Corp (see front) EMC Corp chairman said the development, and IBM Corp's new storage products pose no threat to his company: ‘We're two years ahead of everybody,’ Egan told Reuter in a telephone interview from his Hopkinton, Massachusetts headquarters; he said that EMC has shipped 2,000 of its disk array storage devices over the past two years — and the Amperif deal means ‘one fewer competitor.’
PLANS FOR IBM'S ADSTAR SUBSIDIARY
Ed Zschau, chief executive of IBM Corp's AdStar subsidiary, says the company plans to become known as a consumer products company as well as the leader in commercial storage products, and would pursue all of the market opportunities in which it could offer unique products; he says AdStar aims to become the lowest cost producer in the industry, taking advantage of its technology, scale and commitment to quality; speaking at the product launch in San Jose, he said that AdStar would also become known, more than it is today, as a software company; it expects to have personal computer-oriented products in the retail market before the end of the year.
NT LAUNCH FILLS SPIDER SYSTEMS WITH CHEER
The Spider Software unit of Spider Systems Ltd up in Edinburgh will be quietly cheering as Microsoft Corp launches Windows NT at Comdex this week: its SpiderTCP TCP/IP protocol is included in NT and Microsoft is also using SpiderStreams as the environment for running parallel protocol drivers; the Scottish firm says it won the contract after Microsoft put the communications work out to international tender.
PACKARD BELL ESTABLISHES EUROPEAN HQ IN THE NETHERLANDS
Chatsworth, California-based personal computer manufacturer Packard Bell Inc has established a headquarters facility in the Netherlands to handle manufacturing, distribution and service for Packard Bell products throughout Europe: the new unit includes 250 employees; last year, Packard Bell did about $100m in Europe, 10% of its 1992 worldwide sales of $925m, and looks for $200m or 16% this year.
BELGACOM TO PICK MOBILE PARTNER BY JULY 15
The Belgian state-owned Belgacom says it hopes to pick a partner by July 15 to help it develop its activities in the digital cordless phone market, Reuter reports from Brussels: if the partnership works well, the firm involved might be offered equity participation in a Belgacom mobile telephones company.
US WEST MAY SELL FINANCING UNIT
US West Inc says it may sell its US West Capital Corp financing unit, which is based in Stamford, Connecticut: analysts say that the business could well fetch $1,000m.
KOPIN CORP DEVELOP TRANSMISSIVE ACTIVE MATRIX LCD
Taunton, Massachusetts-based Kopin Corp says it has developed a transmissive 640 by 480 active matrix liquid crystal display formed from a single crystal of silicon: the AMLCD Smart Slide imaging device has a resolution of about 500 lines per inch, the level seen as necessary for high resolution imaging.
MCI AND INTERTELCOM INAUGURATE NEW DIGITAL FIBRE OPTIC CABLE SERVICE
MCI Communications Corp and Intertelcom, the telecommunications operator for the Russian federation, have inaugurated digital fibre optic cable service: the new fibre cables can support over 60,000 concurrent calls across the Atlantic.
R R DONNELLEY BUY SOFTCOPY INC
Chicago-based R R Donnelley & Sons Co says it bought SoftCopy Inc, which duplicates floppy disks in Orem, Utah; terms were not disclosed; founded in 1984, SoftCopy has about 200 people and provides floppy replication, inventory management, order processing and distribution for computer hardware and software manufacturers, it added.
SEIKO EPSON MAKE PCs TO ORDER
Osaka, Japan-based Seiko Epson Co has started a new made-to-order personal computer business in the US: it will custom-build machines to customer specifications at a factory in Indiana, but production of high-grade machines at the Portland, Oregon, factory will be scaled down gradually from some 2,000 a month because of the weight of competition in the US market.
CRAY RESEARCH CHAIRMAN WITHDRAWS HIS NAME
Former Cray Research Inc chairman John Rollwagen has withdrawn his name from further consideration for the number two post at the US Commerce Department after the Securities & Exchange Commission asked him to participate in an insider trading probe  centring on sale of shares in Cray Computer Corp ahead of that company's announcement that it had lost its only Cray 3 order.
AUTOCAD RELEASE 12 BOOSTS AUTODESK FIGURES
Commenting on storming first quarter figures (page five) Autodesk Inc, Sausalito, California says the improvement was primarily due to continued strong worldwide demand for AutoCad Release 12, especially in the Americas and Asia-Pacific regions — revenues in the Far East rose more than 25% compared with the year earlier, while revenues in the Americas rose more than 50%.
JWP SELLS SOFTWARE SUBSIDIARY
Rye Brook, New York-based JWP Inc has sold its Software House subsidiary to an investment group comprising management and Morgenthaler Ventures, on undisclosed terms.
US COMPANIES UNABLE TO BENEFIT FROM JAPANESE EXCHANGE RATE
With the US dollar buying only 116 Japanese yen, US companies should be slashing their prices in Japan — but they claim that they can't — Apple Japan Inc and Sun Microsystems Inc say they are not  benefiting from the strong yen because they buy so much from Japan, and that has become more expensive in dollar terms as the yen has risen.
IBM CUTS PS/2 SERVER PRICES
IBM Corp cut prices on five models of its PS/2 Model 85 and 95 servers: the 95-OMT is cut $700 to $12,365; the Model 85-OX6, dropped to $3,800 from $3,875, IBM said.
APPLE NAME ON KAO FLOPPIES
Apple Computer Inc has signed to put its name on 3.5″ floppies made by Kao Corp's Kao Infosystems Canada Inc under a licensing pact.
SCREEN SAVER ADVERTISING
Hey, wait a minute, shouldn't they be paying you to advertise their wares?
The humble screen saver, which cause electric toasters to fly across the screen, or turns the tube into a virtual aquarium in order to prevent the WordStar menu getting burned into the phosphor when the machine is left on but unattended for long periods, is the latest battleground for the advertisers according to the Wall Street Journal, which reports that PC Dynamics Inc of Westlake Village, California is actually giving Everready free publicity for its Energizer Bunny because it wanted an animated character to spur interest in its program — so users are expected to pay $25 not only to advertise Everready batteries but to suffer the exasperating experience of having the damn rodent make special appearances, popping on screen in the middle of their work, so that they have to press a key to zap it.