

AMDAHL, ICL, FUJITSU POOL SPARC UNIX RESOURCES
Fujitsu Ltd and its ICL Plc and Amdahl Corp affiliates will next week announce details of a strategic technology alliance, first fruits of which will be the creation of yet another common Unix application environment, to be supported across their respective (yet-to-be-announced in Amdahl's case) Sparc RISC-based systems.
The plan is to combine elements of their current Unix offerings — ICL's DRS/NX Server, Fujitsu's UPX implementations and Amdahl's UTS mainframe Unix — and cross-license key value-added products, in a bid to win customers for a new breed of mid-range and high-end Sparc servers aimed at scientific and commercial Unix customers.
Binary Unix compatibility across their respective systems — plus support for all SparcWare applications — will, the three say, offer independent software vendors a rich target environment.
Amdahl says its own effort will do for the top-end of the Unix market what Novell Inc and Unix System Laboratories Inc are doing for low-end and desktop Unix.
The chief executives of the three firms have been discussing the plan for five months and have now handed over the task of implementing the grand design to their operating systems managers.
The plan should at once cut costs and overlapping and research and development efforts, but ICL (80% owned by Fujitsu) and Amdahl (in which Fujitsu has a 42% stake) stress that the impetus is ‘not Fujitsu banging heads together.’
Other cross-licensing and manufacturing deals are expected to emerge from the new-found synergy in all product areas, the three have hinted.
Fujitsu's other Sparc system-building concern, the non-computer computer company, HaL Computer Systems Inc, was involved in the discussions but will play no part in the initial effort as it focused exclusively on 64-bit Sparc development.
Under this latest Unix axis, Amdahl will offer Unix System V.4.1 ES/MP, XPG4 and Sparc Compliance Definition 2.1 compatibility, Sun Microsystems Inc's Open Network Computing system, Open Software Foundation Distributed Computing Environment, Unix Labs's Tuxedo transaction processing monitor, TCP/IP, SNA support, a new measurement package for getting system information into system management environments, a graphical performance monitor, support for various graphical user interfaces and Storage Technology Corp tape silos, UniTree file manager and Network System Corp's Network Access system — much already featured in its UTS Unix.
ICL and Fujitsu will create their own variants, adding lower-end features such as local area networking.
No time-scales for introduction are set, but Amdahl does not plan an integrated application environment until its two lines of long-awaited Sparc machines are out — they're now set for year-end and early next year respectively.
The environment won't be offered on Amdahl's IBM Corp 3090-comppatible 5995M mainframes, although applications will be portable via UTS, which runs in a partition, and its Huron application development environment, which it supports across all its systems.
UTS 4.1 is due next month, UTS 4.2 will coincide with release of Amdahl's Sparc systems — the common Unix application environment will roll into UTS releases thereafter.
SUN TEAMS WITH FUJITSU ON MICROSPARC II
Sun Microsystems Computer Corp and Fujitsu Microelectronics Inc have teamed to design the next-generation highly-integrated, cheap Sparc for low-cost desktop and server, portable and high-end embedded markets; the first microSparc II is a three-level metal design in 0.5 micron CMOS due to sample late 1993.
MicroSparc II has a new floating point unit, enhanced integer unit and larger cache.
It uses 3.3V and includes on-chip power management.
AS YOU WERE: TANDY WILL NOW SELL PERSONAL COMPUTER ARM TO AST
AST Research Inc is determined to come out as one of the winners in the bitter battle for share in the personal computer market, and yesterday it announced that rather than let the business go in the spin-off of the TE Electronics manufacturing operations, it had made an offer for Tandy Corp's personal computer manufacturing operations, which had been accepted.
The Irvine, California company says that the price envisaged in its letter of intent should not exceed $175m.
The Tandy assets to be bought include GRiD Systems Inc, Tandy-GRiD Europe and the computer manufacturing plants in Texas and Scotland.
The purchase price will be paid in either cash and three-year promissory notes or all cash, but it expects to pay a significant portion with the three-year notes.
Tandy said it expects to take a $70m charge against current quarter figures to cover the shortfall between the price to be paid and the value in its books — it says the sale has the potential to increase operating earnings and provide more cash for debt reduction, retail growth or share buy-backs.
The TE Electronics spin-off is now moot, and Tandy says it is likely to sell most of its other manufacturing assets instead.
The deal seems to mean that with the Scottish base, AST no longer needs the European plant it had planned.
BULL ‘SEEKING PARTNER FOR ZENITH’
Bernard Pache, chief executive of Compagnie des Machines Bull SA, yesterday formally denied a report in La Tribune Defosses that Bull plans to sell Zenith Data Systems, describing it as ‘fantastical’.
La Tribune said the government would not be against Bull selling Zenith outright, naming Hewlett-Packard Co, Canon Inc and NEC Corp as possible candidates to buy it.
‘The propagation of such rumours, accompanied by particularly negative comments on the future of Groupe Bull, seriously prejudice its activity and its image,’ Bull said.
Bull sources nevertheless told Reuter some kind of partnership was being sought for Zenith.Bull is included on the list of state-controlled companies France wants to privatise.
LEGENT BUYS NATIONAL LIFEGUARD
Vienna, Virginia-based Legent Corp bought National DataGuard Technologies Inc, Cleveland, Ohio author of the Lifeguard automated disaster recovery product for corporate data centres, on undisclosed terms.
It is to merge with Legent's DR Strategic Business Unit in Woodland Hills, California
DISTRIBUTED MANAGEMENT — THE DISEASE FOR WHICH TIVOLI SYSTEMS ALONE HAS THE CURE?
Conceived as an open, shared environment for academics and scientists, Unix was not designed with the goal of running commercial businesses in mind.
Nevertheless, it has become established as the only real alternative for organisations seeking to avoid or escape proprietary, single-vendor systems.
Features and functions enabling commercial data processing across distributed systems are or have been added, while holes and voids in the system have been plugged and patched.
Apart from basic, but effective system administration facilities, Unix has lacked a proper mechanism for managing the overall application environment as a single entity.
While the benefits and opportunities presented by distributing tasks and applications across high-performance, inexpensive Unix processors are being realised across the industry, commercial users expect well-proven systems management utilities such as Digital Equipment Corp's Enterprise Management Architecture and proprietary systems from the likes of IBM Corp.
Tivoli Systems Inc, based in Austin, Texas, has a growing band of acolytes supporting its effort to bring a framework for distributed systems management to Unix.
Tivoli's boss, ex-IBMer Frank Moss, believes that in many organisations up to 40% of the cost of owning Unix kit can be attributed to managing systems that are distributed across networks.
Disease
While technological advances and competition are driving hardware, operating system and application software prices down, systems management costs are rising, he says.
Tivoli's aim is to cut the cost and complexity of managing heterogeneous distributed environments which include Unix systems and personal computers.
Systems management is ‘the disease for which we have the cure,’ he believes.
As well as a basic management framework, a variety of applications are required to suit different commercial environments, including change and configuration management, security management, inventory monitoring and analysis, client-server application management and operations management.
To get independent software vendors interested in its technology, Tivoli first had to get a system management framework and basic services established for applications to reside on.
The Tivoli Management Environment, TME, includes Tivoli/Works — a framework and installation facility, administrator facilities and services.
There are add-in applications for software distribution, system monitoring and configuration and change management for file systems — known respectively as Courier, Sentry and FSM — plus an application development environment and extension facility toolkits.
The technology has already been picked up in one form or another by many sections of the Unix vendor community.
Tivoli was chosen to provide the framework for the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Management Environment — which will provide another application development environment to the industry when it comes on stream — has Unix System Laboratories Inc, SunSoft Inc and others backing it too.
TME is already available under SunSoft Inc Solaris and Hewlett-Packard Co HP-UX operating systems.
Versions for Unix System V.4 and IBM AIX are due this year.
A Microsoft Corp Windows NT version is almost ready — while Tivoli investor, mainframe system management software house Legent Corp will take the technology into the MVS world.
Although most of these implementations will be layered on top of the operating systems, Moss believes users will turn to Tivoli for systems and applications.
If the Unix suppliers are able to agree on a consistent systems management application programming interface — and each also uses a similar implementation of the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture — Corba — independent software vendors would be able to offer binary system management applications running across a variety of machines.
Vendors need a ‘more intimate relationship than they're getting in Corba,’ to get this together, believes Moss.
One way would be for the Common Open Software Environment firms, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Sun Microsystems Inc, Santa Cruz Operation Inc, Unix System Laboratories Inc and the Open Software Foundation — plus arbiter X/Open Co Ltd — to endorse an Application Programming Interface that Tivoli has already offered up for their use.
Providing a ‘fast path to systems management,’ wouldn't be the only benefit to Tivoli —‘TME Inside’would undoubtedly prove a powerful marketing tool.
The goal of Tivoli's own ‘united framework theory’ is to realise a consistent graphical user interface, application portability and intermanageability across emerging Unix systems management systems such as Unix Labs's Distributed Management system, SunSoft's Distributed Objects Everywhere and OSF DME.
Moss favours COSE establishing a combined superset of Object Management Group standards plus the Tivoli Application Programming Interface that could be quickly implemented by its adherents.
Moss says Tivoli could have TME source re-written in the Corba IDL language within six months and says there is only around 5% difference between the object technologies in the Open Software Foundation, SunSoft and Unix Labs systems.
Tivoli will offer TME Application Programming Interfaces that comply with whatever COSE comes up with in the way of systems management.
Once systems management technologies start coming on stream, operating system suppliers are expected to begin integrating system management programming interfaces into existing and future, object-oriented versions of their executives.
Moss says independent software vendors don't need to wait for Unix suppliers to release integrated offerings to begin application development and conversion work — if they develop to TME now, applications should move across to integrated operating systems ‘almost intact,’ he claims.
Ideally, Moss would like the open system vendors to go one step further and take over development of Tivoli's distributed management framework entirely —‘because they should be doing the standards and API work.’
However, with the current uncertainty over COSE's plans and all the systems management and other options being considered by various open systems bodies, it is ‘no time to bow out now,’ says Moss so Tivoli will continue to develop the framework alongside systems for now.
On current form, Moss thinks the transfer of development responsibility for its framework technology to the vendor community is at least two years off.
Although Tivoli has the open systems distributed management market pretty much to itself, Moss knows that the providing a standard to the industry cannot generate a revenue stream much further into the future.
Indeed he does not expect the firm to derive any long-term revenues from object services, common management services or common interface layers.
His plan is to establish the Tivoli framework as a standard technology by licensing — and creating Application Programming Interfaces — for as many vendors as possible and attract others to create a systems management application market on top.
Once the standards and interface issues have been ironed out, Tivoli will concentrate on developing applications for configuration and change management, security management and inventory monitoring and analysis.
More than happy
In addition, Moss expects to form third party relationships with firms doing things like client-server application management tools, data centre management packages and operations management systems: niche markets he will leave to others.
He says several start-ups — plus some established firms — are expected to follow in the footsteps of Canadian firm Open Vision and begin developing for and on the Tivoli framework.
Moss says he has negotiated with the unnamed firms to ensure they won't be duplicating each others' efforts.
The Unix systems management market is thought to be worth some $40m now — its  expected to top $1,000m by 1997-98.
Moss says he'll be more than happy if Tivoli can take 50% of an enlarged market.
Last year saw half of privately-held Tivoli's revenues come from Tivoli Works, the framework, toolkits and services.
The rest came from end-user applications.
This year Moss expects less than 20% to come from sales of framework technologies and hopes end-user products will be 80% — and only 5% or 10% during 1994.
Tivoli isn't looking for any more investors and should soon start generating cash.
It has 100 or so customers worldwide and is looking for an OEM deal in the Far East by year-end, when its internationalisation efforts should be complete.
Distributed computing systems supplier Protek Ltd, Maidenhead, Berkshire, has an exclusive on Tivoli products in the UK and provides training and support.
SUN IS PLANNING A RACK-MOUNTED VERSION OF ITS SPARCSERVER 1000 LATER THIS YEAR
Following the launch of its eight-way Sparcserver 1000 machine, with UK pricing going from £35,000 for a uniprocessor model with 32Mb RAM and 1Gb disk to £72,300 for the eight-processor version, Sun Microsystems Inc will offer a rack-mount version of the technology combining five Sparcserver 1000 units later this year.
The server uses XDBus — co-developed with Xerox Corp — which is also employed in the high-end eight- to 20-CPU SparcCenter 2000.
The packet-switch bus uses slight changes in Voltage to determine binary 0 and 1 and operates at a sustained rate of 200Mbps on the Sparcserver 1000.
Sun expects to ship around 1,000 of the new servers by the end of the calendar year — several hundred by the end of its financial year in July.
Sun will continue to manufacture the existing 600MP series multiprocessors servers until the end of the year.
The company claims that servers will account for $1,000m of its business by the end of the year — they account for around a third of Sun's revenue now.
The multithreaded, multiprocessing Solaris 2.2 operating system which is to run on these and other Sun Sparc systems is due this month.
Applications re-written specifically to take advantage of multithreading will begin to appear in the second half of the year, Sun says, but argues that customers can derive significant performance benefits from running existing applications on multiprocessor machines with Solaris 2.2.
Solaris x86 for Intel Corp architectures will move to release 2.2 later this year — from 2.1 now — Sun admits only to Compaq Computer Corp and AST Research Inc having taken the release for their iAPX-86 multiprocessors.
The company's SunPro unit will deliver an MP Developer early access kit for developing multithreaded applications in Fortran, C or C++ for multiprocessing environments — including automatic parallelising compilers — next month.
DATAPOINT LAUNCHES SPEECH-INTERACTIVE VOICE RESPONSE SYSTEM
San Antonio, Texas-based Datapoint Corp — its operational headquarters are in Paris (France, not Texas) these days — has launched a speech-interactive voice response system designed to translate telephone input into database software instructions.
Called the Interactive Voice Processor, the system can recognise tone, alphabetical and numeric input, responding to callers' requests and input commands.
The system is targeted at applications such as banking and catalogue sales.
It includes a range of protocols and host links as standard, including Digital Equipment Corp VT100 emulation and a ‘vast array’ of IBM Corp protocols, according to Rennie Bellamy, Datapoint's voice processing product manager.
He says Datapoint will write the front-end for the package as part of the price.
Interactive Voice Processor costs from £40,000 for a six-port system, which Bellamy claims is good value compared with the cost of employing six staff just to answer the phone.
It is available immediately.
OBJECT DESIGN HAS OBJECTSTORE NETWARE LOADABLE MODULE SERVER
Object Design Inc of Burlington, Massachusetts, has released ObjectStore NetWare Loadable Module Server, a version of its object-oriented database designed for use on Novell Inc NetWare networks.
NetWare is already available with HyperDesk Corp's Distributed Object Management System, HD-DOMS, which in turn is being integrated with ObjectStore, and is based around the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture.
Meanwhile, Cadence Design Systems Inc, San Jose, California, says it plans to use ObjectStore, to develop the next generation of its electronic design automation tools and its Design Framework II product, and Digital Equipment Corp has also taken ObjectStore with plans to use the database as a data repository with its PowerFrame software.
PowerFrame is an electronic design automation-oriented data management system running on Sun Microsystems Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co, IBM Corp and DEC machines.
MICROSOFT PUSHES WINDOWS TELEPHONY AS ACTIUS IS FORMED TO PROMOTE COMPUTER-INTEGRATED TELEPHONY
Redmond, Washington-based Microsoft Corp does not want to see any part of the digital automation process that is not touched by Windows, and the company has developed a specification for computer integrated telephony for the MS-DOS personal computer, with which, needless to say, it is aiming to set the industry-standard.
Meanwhile, a group of computer-telephony users and suppliers have formed a group to push the technology's benefits.
Called Windows Telephony, Microsoft's Applications Programming Interface has won the support of around 40 switch manufacturers, network providers and personal computer and software suppliers.
It is initially intended for desktop personal computers, although Microsoft says it will later be extended to server environments and other computing systems.
It provides for visual call control through the Windows interface, for call forwarding, conferencing and call transfer.
It should also enable the integration of electronic mail, voice mail and facsimile, as well as desktop audio and video conferencing.
The programming interface is available now, and has won the support of suppliers including Intel Corp, L M Ericsson Telefon AB, Siemens AG, Alcatel NV and Lotus Development Corp, which are expected to start bringing out products based on it by the end of the year.
Meanwhile vendors and users including Aspect Telecommunications Inc, Envoy Systems Inc, Ericsson, IBM Corp and Logica Plc have formed a group called the Association of Computer Telephone Integration Users & Suppliers or ACTIUS.
According to Envoy Systems' Peter Krall, the group's aim is to create awareness of computer-integrated telephony rather than to make standards.
Krall is cautious about Windows Telephony's ability to win enough industry support to become a standard.
‘There are a lot of proprietary interfaces, and it will need an awful lot of work to integrate them,’ he said.
‘And there are already rival specifications, such as IBM's CallPath, Digital Equipment Corp's CIT and Envoy's TeleLink’.
ACTIUS is to hold its first open meeting in association with the Call Centre Management Conference, and is inviting members and prospective members along to help direct the group's future direction.
FIRST ONE IS FOR DEVELOPERS; DEC PLANS CHEAPER, POWERFUL ALPHA PCs LATER THIS YEAR
Digital's Equipment Corp's new DECpc AXP 150 is not the machine for people that want to run shrink-wrapped Windows applications quickly.
Although the Insignia Solutions Ltd-sourced MS-DOS and Windows emulation enables users to run existing iAPX-86-based applications without modification, they run on the £5,350 Alpha RISC based machine at Intel 80386 or 80486 speeds.
It is not intended as a mass-market machine, says Dennis Saloky, DEC's marketing programmes manager for NT.
Instead he positions it as a developers box and claims that demand is strong.
It is these developers, of course that DEC will depend on to produce the the Alpha-compiled NT applications that will deliver the high performance promised by the processor.
For the mass-market boxes, wait until the autumn, says Saloky, when the company is likely to launch lower priced Alpha PCs with comparable or perhaps higher performance.
The cheaper RISC-based machines are likely to impinge directly on the territory occupied by the company's newly announced Pentium machines.
In fact, assuming that Pentium pricing stays constant, the new machines will offer comparable pricing and higher performance, says Saloky.
DEC IT SHOWS INTEL-TO-ALPHA DIRECT BINARY CODE TRANSLATOR
Digital Equipment Corp is contemplating producing a translator that will take the binary code from shrink-wrapped Windows applications and spit out Alpha code.
The result is faster than the standard SoftPC-based Windows and MS-DOS emulation, but slower than code specifically compiled for the RISC chip.
The company launched a a direct VAX-to-Alpha binary translator last November and has been shipping an R-series-to-Alpha translator for the last three months.
Nonetheless it still has qualms about the Intel Corp equivalent according to Richard Sites, the Alpha CPU architect who is demonstrating the technology at Comdex.
He is trying to gauge the interest from developers, and also which set of Windows application programming interfaces it makes most sense for the translator to support: the old Win16 standard, or the intermediate Win32s version.
Sites' demonstration takes a simple piece of  Mandlebrot-plotting code written for the Intel machine and runs it in variety of ways on the Alpha machine.
The times to complete give a rough guide as to what users can expect from heavy computation work:
VMARK HAS UNIVERSE FOR WINDOWS NT
VMark Software Inc, Framingham, Massachusetts, has wasted no time in getting its Pick-derived uniVerse ‘postrelational database management system’ up under Microsoft Corp's Windows NT and has been demonstrating it in Atlanta.
UniVerse software provides Windows NT users with immediate access to more than 1,000 proven applications that serve a broad spectrum of individual markets and enables NT users to develop new ones easily, the company claims.
It offers Structured Query Language and transaction management capabilities with multi-valued fields, variable length records and dynamic re-structuring.
The product is available now and is $435 per user for licences of four to 63 users and $365 per user for licences of 64 or more users.
IBM SHOWS OFF PERSONAL COMPUTER YOU ORDER ABOUT
IBM Corp is particularly proud of its advanced speech recognition personal computing system, which it is showing off at Comdex this week.
The system can be totally operated by spoken commands, eliminating the need for mucking about with rodents or using the keyboard.
The company says its researchers took six months to extend the concept from a client-server system — as shown at the last Comdex event — to a personal computer.
The system has a 20,000-word vocabulary and can take dictation at 70 words per minute with 97% accuracy, once it has been trained to a user's pronunciation.
MICROSOFT, APPLE, OTHERS DO GIVE A JOT ABOUT SHARING HANDWRITTEN NOTES
Once we have mastered a keyboard, most of us flinch at the idea of having to write a lot of stuff out in longhand, but there are still poor benighted souls that find the keyboard impossible to master, and for their benefit, Microsoft Corp, Apple Computer Inc Lotus Development Corp, General Magic Inc, Go Corp and Slate Corp came together at Comdex to announce Jot 1.0, a standard that they hope will enhance the use of pen-based computers.
The concept they are promoting is that of ‘electronic ink’— a magic ingredient that will enable scribbles written on one pen computer to be used by other systems, even those without pen-aware technology.
The Jot 1.0 specification is designed to enable applications to share handwritten notes, sketches, signatures and other free-form data across the generality of computers from hand-held devices to mainframes, so that if someone scrawls a note and sends it over a modem, it will turn up at the other end as handwriting, regardless of the sending and receiving machines, provided only that they both implement Jot 1.0.
The brainchild of applications developer Slate Corp, Jot will also store information, such as the type of pen tip used, the colour of the ink and the angles used to write, in such a way that an application unfamiliar with a particular property can ignore it.
If a system or application understands the electronic ink, it can also convert the scribbles received into editable text.
Apple says it has not decided which products will include Jot, although the technology will be part of the Macintosh in the future, it promised.
According to PC Week, while the Macintosh will use Jot, Newton may not take advantage of the ink standard.
Jot will be supported in Go's PenPoint operating system by year-end, and Microsoft will implement it in Windows for Pen, while General Magic will make it part of Telescript, its cross-system communications standard.
Operations it makes possible include displaying and scaling ink for a range of applications and devices from palm- to wall-size, translating ink to other computer formats, deferring handwriting translation, compressing ink and analysing ink for content.
Common methods of ink sharing include embedding ink in existing documents, files or databases and sending it via electronic mail; providing clipboard operations; and supporting inter-application transfers.
ACE LIVES, SORT OF, AS NEC ANNOUNCES CHIP SET FOR ADVANCED RISC MACHINES
The Advanced Computing Environment lives on, sort of, or if it is dead, NEC Electronics Inc has not heard about it and the Japanese company's contribution to the festivities at Comdex/Spring in Atlanta is the launch of a new reduced instruction set computing chip set, the MCT-DP/MCT-ADR designed to facilitate development of high-performance systems based on the R-series architecture.
The company also announced the ARC100 and ARC150 manufacturing kits that include the Advanced RISC Computing chip set as well as all of the hardware and software necessary to develop systems to run Microsoft Corp's Windows NT.
The highly integrated three-chip set acts as an interface to NEC's highest performance microprocessors, the Vr4000 and Vr4400.
The set consists of two types of devices, the MCT-DP data path controller and the MCT-ADR address path controller, each running at speeds up to 50MHz.
Two MCT-DP chips are implemented to provide the system's data path for input-output and memory.
One MCT-ADR chip is required for the address path and system control logic.
The ADR chip also includes the memory (DRAM) controller, slave mode Vr4000/Vr4400 bus interface, input-output device control logic, video interface controller, interval counter and direct-memory access controller.
The ACR chip set features a 64-bit path for graphics and a 128-bit path for main memory.
Average power dissipation for the MCT-DP is less than 1.2W and for the MCT-ADR less than 1.5W.
The ARC100 manufacturing kit features all of the necessary hardware and software for a system based on the Vr4000PC or Vr4400PC primary cache CPUs.
The ARC150 manufacturing kit uses the Vr4000SC or Vr4400SC secondary cache CPUs.
The kits include an ARC chip set, Vr-Series microprocessor, paper schematics of the system and associated documentation, read-only memory and hardware abstraction language binaries.
Gerber tapes for the mother and daughter boards are also included.
The three-chip set is out now at about $100 in quantities of 10,000.
Both the ARC100 and ARC150 manufacturing kits are planned for July at $5,000 each.
NEC also expects to provide manufacturing support for the Acer Inc PICA chip set, another Windows NT system design for manufacturers of low-cost machines.
NEC plans to sample the Vr4200, first member of its low-power line formerly called VrX, by the end of 1993.
COMPUTONE ROLLS IN FROM ROSWELL WITH INTELLISERVER FOR TCP/IP ETHERNETS
Computone Corp didn't have to travel too far to make it to Comdex because the company is based in Roswell, Georgia.
It zoomed in to introduce the IntelliServer terminal server for local area networks.
The IntelliServer connects directly to a TCP/IP Ethernet using BNC or AUI connectors and is designed to provide a cost-effective means of connecting serial printers, modems, personal computers running terminal emulators, terminals, and high-speed serial X terminals to a local net.
Connected devices can communicate with multiple local network hosts at speeds up to 115.2bps, the company claims.
The IntelliServer appears to the network as a single Ethernet node, and supports Telnet, rlogin, and RCP protocols and has a menu-driven interface for new users.
A built-in IntelliView multi-session feature enables users to hot-key between up to eight sessions per user.
An IntelliPrint feature enables data to be routed transparently to attached printers.
The 16-port IntelliServer — $3,000, August — grows to 64 ports in 16-port jumps at $1,100 a time.
OBJECTIVITY ALSO HAS THE FIRST OBJECT DATABASE FOR WINDOWS NT
Poet Software Corp reckons it has the first object database for NT (CI No 2,176), but Objectivity Inc is stomping at its heels with the Objectivity/DB Starter Kit for Windows NT, also claiming it to ‘the first object-oriented database management system for Microsoft Corp's Windows NT operating system’.
It claims that the kit will enable companies to develop distributed, high-performance object-oriented applications that harness the full potential of the 32-bit Windows NT environment — and do it cost-effectively — and it can also be used to develop and deploy object-oriented applications under Windows 3.1.
The starter kit will be followed by full communications to provide transparent access, storing and sharing of objects distributed in multiple databases and mixed networks of Unix, VMS and Windows NT that use the Network File System protocol; it will be available in August at $3,000.
TIVOLI SYSTEMS TO DEVELOP VERSION FOR NT
It is hard to find much at Comdex and the companion Windows World show that is not NT-related this year, and Tivoli Systems Inc winged in from Austin, Texas to announce that it will develop a version of its product for NT, and brought along enough gear to demonstrate the Tivoli Management Environment for Windows NT in an early form: it says the product will make it easy for systems administrators to manage, configure, change, monitor, and enforce security of NT systems across large networks, and enable systems managers to manage Windows NT and Unix systems, as well as Windows and MS-DOS client machines, from a single, integrated systems-manager's desktop; it will start trickling out at the end of the year with a developer's toolkit, and management applications will follow in early 1994.
FRAME TECHNOLOGY CLAIMS FIRST FOR NT
Frame Technology Inc, San Jose is right in there pitching with FrameMaker 3.0 for Windows NT, needless to say claiming it to be the industry's first document publishing application for Windows NT: it will be available customers within 30 days of Microsoft's first customer ship of Windows NT at $800.
INFORMIX SOFTWARE GETS ON NT BAND WAGON
And Informix Software Inc is also determined not to be left behind should any  rush to NT develop — it says it will first make available Informix-SE, its mid-range relational database management system, under the Windows NT Advanced Server operating environment — just as soon as Microsoft can start shipping the operating environment; no price given.
HP, IBM, MICROSOF, AND NOVELL AGREE TO SUPPORT SIMPLE NETWORK MANAGEMENT PROTOCOL
One development that did not have too much to do with NT was the coming together of Hewlett-Packard Co, IBM Corp, Microsoft Corp and Novell Inc to announce that they will work together to establish, support and implement open standards for network printing management: the four agreed to support Simple Network Management Protocol as a standard for managing peripherals on a local area network.
WORDPERFECT ANNOUNCES FORMATION OF CONSUMER PRODUCTS GROUP
Orem, Utah-based WordPerfect Corp used Comdex as a  springboard to announce the formation of a Consumer Products Group to focus on developing consumer products for the home, small business and personal productivity markets, saying that it sees a $1,500m market in 1996, up from just $430m or so in 1991.
IT NOW LOOKS LIKE FULL STEAM AHEAD FOR US DIGITAL HIGH DEFINITION TELEVISION PLAN
News that the US Federal Communications Commission's Advisory Committee on Advanced Television Service, is now to review a single digital high definition television standard proposed by a a Grand Alliance of all four contending consortia is raising hopes that by mid-decade, all the key technologies and infrastructures will be in place for a full-scale merging of television and computer technology.
Important aspects of the Grand Alliance technical proposal include the replacement of the present interlaced scanning technique, where two scans of the screen make up each frame, to progressive scan transmission, where entire picture frames are transmitted sequentially, and the use of so-called square pixels, where the dots on a television screen are arranged in equally spaced rows and columns.
Both these design aspects are important for the interoperability of television with computers, telecommunications and other media and applications.
Interlaced scan transmission used today would be accommodated in the initial deployment of the system so as not to obsolete current sets too quickly.
The proponents agree that all large-screen receivers — 34″ and up — will incorporate a 60 frame per second 787.5 line or higher progressive scan display mode, while progressive display would initially be optional for smaller screen sets.
It was agreed that all transmission of film material will be in a progressive scan format from launch of services.
And all partners endorse the objective of migrating the standard to in excess of 1,000 lines progressive scan transmission, and will work together to eliminate interlaced scanning format from the transmission path in the future.
To handle multiple transmission formats, the merged system will use source-adaptive processing — so that the set will handle the signal appropriately according to its type.
The merged system also will feature a prioritised, packetised data transport structure.
One dissenter is the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which maintains that a standard using progressive scan transmission only from the start would be best.
HEWLETT-PACKARD SEES FURTHER RAPID GROWTH IN PRINTERS, BUT COST OF SALES IS A WORRY
Hewlett-Packard Co sees no prospect of cutting its cost of sales further, but says it will continue to work to cut operating expenses.
President and chief executive Lewis Platt was talking to the company's half-yearly meeting with analysts in New York.
Hewlett-Packard is beginning to look increasingly like a printer company that also makes and sells computers, so much of the focus was on printers, with Douglas Carnahan, vice-president and general manager of the printing systems group saying that the company hopes to beat the industry's compound annual growth rate in sales dollars in the printer market over the next five years.
He told the analysts that Hewlett-Packard estimates the total industry market for its ink-jet printers will grow 20% on a dollar basis compounded annually, and 25% on a unit basis.
Growth in laser printers is somewhat slower, and the company sees that market growing 9% on a dollar basis, and 17% on a unit basis.
On the personal computer business, Platt said the company is ‘gaining a lot of recognition’ in what he called a ‘ruthless’business, adding that cost-cutting had improved profitability, ‘but it is not quite where we want it to be.’
On the computer systems business, Platt said orders for Unix systems grew more than 40% compared to the previous quarter's level.
AT&T GEARS UP TO TAKE SYNCORDIA HEAD ON WITH ITS WORLDSOURCE SERVICE
AT&T Co is chasing after British Telecommunications Plc and its Syncordia Corp initiative at breakneck speed with its WorldSource seamless telecommunications service for multinationals and its WorldPartners Association of supporting phone companies (CI No 2,176).
So far only Kokusai Denshin Denwa Co and Singapore Telecom have signed up as WorldPartners, but Unitel Communications Inc of Toronto, Canada says it has agreed to become a member and Korea Telecom and Australian long-distance company Telstra Pty Ltd also plan to join the venture.
It is open to additional carriers that meet criteria set by AT&T, which is particularly keen to win support from some Europeans and is no doubt knocking hard on the door of Unisource BV, the joint venture between Sweden's Televerket and Koninklijke PTT Telecom Nederland NV, which so far has proved the most successful among such ventures — and already has loose links with both AT&T and Kokusai Denshin in Eastern Europe and points further east.
Least successful so far in winning customers has been the Eucom joint venture between France Telecom and the Deutsche Bundespost Telekom, but even they may well be welcomed as WorldPartners by AT&T, despite the heavy whiff of state bureaucracy that hangs over both of them.
AT&T says it has plans to expand the service to nine European countries in 1994 and plans to invest $350m over five years to deliver the services but may spend less if it can form ventures.
To start with, WorldSource will simply enable a multinational to call its offices abroad more easily by eliminating technical disparities that arise when more than one carrier is needed to complete a call.
It will also provide a single bill in a single currency of their choice.
Virtual network services
AT&T says it expects ‘several hundred’ of its 11m million business customers in the US to ‘express interest’in the new services in the first year or so — but will that interest be turned into contracts?
It does already have PaineWebber Inc, United Parcel Service, Unisys Corp, Motorola Inc, Honeywell Inc, Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co and LSI Logic Corp signed up.
The service will initially be available only across North America and the Far East — the company is promising a ‘family of customised business communications services’.
The company plans virtual network services for speech and data communications, highly reliable private line services for data or speech, voice, and Frame Relay service for high-speed data transmission.
The WorldPartners association will be headquartered in New York, and AT&T, Kokusai Denshin Denwa and Singapore Telecom also agreed to create an operating organisation within WorldPartners to provide a range of support capabilities for association members, including clearing house functions for billing, ordering, provisioning, maintenance and customer support.
In Europe, AT&T plans to add to its existing network management centres here in the UK and in the Netherlands by installing systems in key European commercial centres to provide the service for multinational customers in the UK, France, Germany, Spain, Italy, Belgium, Switzerland, the Netherlands and Sweden, and plans to hire or redeploy more than 650 technicians and sales personnel in Europe to provide customer support for the new services that are to be available in 1994.
ROLFE & NOLAN PULLED BACK BY US ACQUISITION BUT STILL UP 12% AT £1.2m
Although full-year profits at futures and options computer bureau and software specialist Rolfe & Nolan Computer Services Plc were hit by losses from US counterpart Brokerage Systems Inc, the rest of the group achieved ‘record’ growth.
And as expected, Rolfe took the plunge in April and acquired the remaining 80.1% of shares in Brokerage it didn't already own.
As a run up to this, the London-based group devoted a good deal of  management time to restructuring the US operations, mainly in the sphere of sales and customer support.
According to chief executive Michael Warburg, it is also running ‘a tighter ship to keep costs under control’, and is trying to improve the company's image by ensuring that software and services are delivered and implemented on time.
Although he said he would be happy to see Brokerage break even by the end of the 1993 fiscal year, he did add that this would depend on the timing and amount of licence sales made.
Group pre-tax profits for the year ending February 28 fell 12.5% to £1.2m.
But if Brokerage's £493,000 losses are not included, these actually rose 23% to £1.7m.
Turnover increased 66.7% to £11.2m, some £8m of which came from the US company.
Even though Rolfe only held 19.9% of BSI at the fiscal year end, accounting rules dictate that it include 100% of BSI's turnover and profit figures in the group total.
This does not translate into earnings per share, however, which rose 11.3% to 17.7 pence.
The board is recommending a final dividend of 4.65 pence per share.
Taken together with the interim payment of 2.55 pence, this makes a total of 7.2 pence for the year — a rise of 16%.
The final dividend also includes an element of compensation to shareholders for the UK government's decision to reduce tax credits from 25% to 20%, announced at the 1993 Budget.
Currency turmoil
The rest of Rolfe's business experienced patchy, but sustained growth.
Some 62% of European turnover comes from the UK, the rest from Germany, Austria, Switzerland and Italy.
Overall revenues from licence sales for the year increased to £1.7m in 1992 from £1.3m in 1991.
This also led to a 38% rise to £1m in turnover from software support.
But while seven new licence sales were signed in the first half, this dropped to only two in the second due to currency turmoil, recession and political uncertainty in mainland Europe.
Sales of additional modules and upgrades remained steady, though.
Nonetheless, the same uncertainties that caused a slowdown in licence sales brought about a record increase in the volume of business processed at the London data centre as customers speculated on currencies in the futures and options market.
This, together with the addition of six big new unnamed customers and a lower than usual number of client losses, led to an 11% rise in turnover to £4.5m from the bureau and facilities management services division.
Revenues generated from repeat business now account for 74% or £5.9m of total Rolfe sales.
Finally, Warburton is quite optimistic about prospects for the year ahead.
Bureau trading volumes and sales of additional modules in both Europe and the US remained healthy in the first quarter, he said, while prospects for new licence sales are good.
Although orders are slow to come through, a large number of European licences are due for renewal within 18 months, ‘which represent a significant source of potential revenue’.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
Cyrix Corp, Richardson, Texas developer of iAPX-86-compatible microprocessors and co-processors, has filed to go public with an initial offer of up to 2.0m shares at a target price of $13 to $15 a share, and says the $25m or so net proceeds will be used for capital expenditures and potential investment in manufacturing facilities — it may buy a minority stake in a wafer fabrication plant owned by SGS-Thomson Microelectronics NV.
The underwriters are Montgomery Securities Inc and Cowen & Co.
Dataware Technologies Inc, offering software and services to the CD-ROM market in Cambridge, Massachusetts, has filed for an initial public offering of 2m shares at a target $10 to 12 per share.
No word on plans for proceeds.
Managing underwriters are Hambrecht & Quist Inc and Volpe, Welty & Co.
FIserv Inc, Milwaukee, Wisconsin got its issue of 3.85m shares, 1.4m of them new, away at $19.25 per share.
Most of the existing shares came from First Financial Management Corp, Atlanta, Georgia, which acquired 2.4m shares in connection with FIserv's acquisition of Tomahawk Holding Inc and its Basis Information Technologies Inc unit.
FIserve expects $23.5m from the offering and will use it for working capital, possible repayment of debt and acquisitions of complementary businesses.
The offering was managed for FIserv by Morgan Stanley & Co Inc, Merrill Lynch & Co and Robert W Baird & Co Inc.
IBM Corp has finally confirmed the elusive story that gained a little currency about a month ago that it planned a massive borrowing spree (CI No 2,151).
It says it plans to issue depositary shares representing $750m of perpetual preferred stock, adding that full details of the offering will be announced when pricing is completed.
More to the point, in its registration statement with the Securities & Exchange Commission, IBM said it intended to issue up to $3,000m of long term debt and preferred stock during the next year or so.
The issue of perpetual preference shares is being offered by underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
OTHER FINANCINGS
Measurex Corp, computer-integrated test and measurement systems specialist living in Cupertino, California reports that it has signed a $20m fixed-rate loan with The Bank of New York.
It says the five-year term loan will be used principally to support the company's US equipment lease portfolio.
COMPANY RESULTS
Novell Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 31.2% at $80.5m on turnover up 24.8% at $280.7m.
Mid-term net rose 33.4% at $151.3m on turnover up 25.8% at $540.9m; net earnings per share rose 30% to $0.26 in the quarter, 32% to 0.49 in the half.
Kokusai Denshin Denwa Co Ltd has reported that net profit for the 12 months to March 31 rose 4.3% at the equivalent of $141.7m, on turnover that declined by 1.7% to $2,268.8m.
Net earnings per share rose by 4% to $2.20.
The figures have been converted at $0.0090497 to the Japanese yen.
Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp has reported net profit for the year to March 31 down 12.2% at the equivalent of $1,516m on turnover that rose 1.6% at $58,823m.
Net earnings per share fell 12% to $97.19; figures converted at $0.0090497 to the yen.
Rolfe & Nolan Computer Services Plc has reported net profits for the year to February 28 up 13% at £998,000, on turnover that rose 66.7% to £11.2m.
At the pre-tax level, profits fell 12.5% to £1.2m.
Earnings per share rose by 11.3% to 17.7 pence.
CYRIX HAS DISPUTE WITH TEXAS INSTRUMENTS
The Wall Street Journal has been going through Richardson, Texas-based Cyrix Corp's prospectus for its proposed initial public offering (page seven) and finds that the company has a hitherto undisclosed dispute with Texas Instruments Inc over licensing and manufacturing issues — Cyrix says it has received limited supplies of chips from Texas, and as a result ‘assumes it will not receive any products from Texas Instruments in the future’; the dispute could give Texas, which has a licence to sell Cyrix-designed chips under its own name, the right to sell all current and some future Cyrix products through the term of the five-year agreement, making it harder for Cyrix to develop its own brand name identity; the current manufacturing agreement with SGS-Thomson Microelectronics NV would be able to meet its needs to the end of the year, after which it would need to buy its own manufacturing facility, expand its contracts with the two firms, or do a deal with another chip maker; earlier this month, SGS-Thomson signed a new contract agreeing to supply chips to Cyrix to the end of 1994, and gets the right to sell Cyrix-designed chips under its own name.
COMPAQ LOOKS FORWARD TO STRONG SECOND QUARTER
Responding to concerns raised by Dell Computer Corp's fiscal first quarter report (CI No 2,176), Compaq Computer Corp says it looks forward to reporting a strong second quarter: ‘With the first signs of economic recovery in Europe and the surge in demand generated by the introductions of our powerful new 486SL-based Compaq Contura and Compaq LTE Lite notebook families in March and this month, we see a strong second quarter,’ it said.
CONNER PERIPHERALS WARNS OF LOSS
San Jose, California-based Conner Peripherals Inc warns that it expects to report a loss from operations for the second quarter ending June 30, adding that the expected loss reflects ongoing price competition, excess capacity and a transition in product demand to 200Mb and higher capacity drives; a continuation of factors affecting the second quarter, as well as a seasonal slowdown in the summer, could also lead to operating losses in the third quarter, the firm said.
LARRY ELLISON IS TO JOIN BOARD OF NEXT
Next step for Oracle Corp founder Larry Ellison is to join the board of NeXT Computer Inc, alongside Daniel Case III, president and co-chief executive of Hambrecht & Quist Group Inc; they join Steve Jobs and Keiichi Uno of Canon Inc.
LUCIE FJELDSATD TAKES EARLY RETIREMENT
Seems like only yesterday (well it was earlier this year) that Lucie Fjeldstad, 49, was boasting about the $100m IBM Corp had given her to lay the foundations of a multimedia business: now she is taking the IBM shilling, also known as early retirement incentives, and quitting her post as vice-president and general manager, Multimedia; she was behind the Blockbuster agreements.
ACORN SHARES UP
Shares in Acorn Computer Group Plc, which stood at 38 pence at the start of the year, put on 29 pence at 112 pence on the strength of its 46%-owned affiliate Advanced RISC Machines Ltd's significant agreement with Texas Instruments Inc (CI No 2,175) before settling back sixpence on Tuesday to close at 106p.
NINTENDO WINS COUNTERFEIT CASE
Two Taiwanese companies have been ordered to pay over $24m in damages for selling counterfeit Nintendo Co Ltd cartridges, Nintendo said.
IBM PAYS OUT FOR SERVICES OF NEW CHAIRMAN
The IBM Corp board found itself paying out rather more for the services of its new chairman and chief executive: it had to guarantee Louis Gerstner the value of stock and options he holds in RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp; Gerstner is still an RJR Nabisco director and is not under any deadline to exercise his options, which run another 11 years; the guarantee covers 300,000 shares of RJR stock and options for an additional 3.2m shares, with a guaranteed price of $8.125 a share.
DEC, COMPAQ AND NCR OFFER NEXTSTEP
NeXT Computer Inc, Redwood City, says Digital Equipment Corp, Compaq Computer Corp and NCR Corp are to offer NeXTstep for Intel processors on some of their 80486-based personal computers, pre-installed or bundled by reseller organisations.
KALEIDA INC WINS SUPPORT FROM HITACHI
The Kaleida Labs Inc joint venture of IBM Corp and Apple Computer Inc has won the support of Hitachi Ltd, Toshiba Corp and Mitsubishi Electric Corp for its ScriptX format; Creative Technology Ltd, parent of Creative Labs Inc, is also a charter member of the alliance — membership gives priority access to the technology and support services for three years, but no equity stakes.
COMSTAT MOVES HQ
Comsat Corp, which just changed its legal name from Communications Satellite Corp, is moving its headquarters to Bethesda, Maryland from Washington, DC on June 1; all operations at the Washington office are to move to Bethesda or Clarksburg.
NEW SCIENCE WHITE PAPER
Minister of Science William Waldegrave, may have released the first major UK government White Paper on science and technology for over 10 years yesterday, but information technology professionals needn't hold their breath: while Waldegrave seems to think we should count ourselves lucky because we've got our own research council for the first time, it would be more truthful to say we've been stuffed into the miscellaneous section of the Engineering & Physical Sciences Research Council, along with the electronic, electrical and communications  industries ; our body, together with the Particle Physics and Sciences Research Council, will replace the Science and Engineering Research Council; as a result, we will benefit ‘from the same building of bridges between research bodies and industry’ as the rest of the reorganised bodies and should experience interaction at an earlier stage — on the Japanese and German model.
COMPAQ  RECEIVES US GENERAL SERVICES ADMIN SCHEDULE CONTRACT
Compaq Computer Corp says it is the first major personal computer manufacturer to receive a 1993-1994 US General Services Administration Schedule contract, which runs to March 31 1994 and makes it easier for the federal government to buy Compaq products at pre-set prices.
NETWORK SYSTEMS COMPLETES ACQUISITION OF BUS-TECH
Minneapolis, Minnesota-based Network Systems Corp reports that it has now completed its previously announced acquisition of Bus-Tech Inc, Burlington, Massachusetts manufacturer of interconnect controllers, paying out $24.5m in cash.
AT&T TO SUPPLY TELEWAY WITH INTELLIGENT NETWORK SOFTWARE
AT&T Co reports from its base in Morristown, New Jersey that it has agreed to supply long distance carrier Teleway Japan Corp with intelligent network software and equipment, in a deal worth over $20m.
INFORMATION & BUSINESS SYSTEMS TIRANA WINS $480,000 TENDER
Information & Business Systems Tirana, a subsidiary of Hewlett-Packard Co, says it has won a $480,000 tender financed by the European Community to computerise Albanian government institutions: the project consists in supplying and installing 350 base units to the government offices, Reuter reports; the company says it has already donated a Precision Architecture RISC Unix system worth $250,000 to the Tirana Polytechnic University and it hopes to sell another system in Albania within the next year.
CORRECTION
Correction: Tuesday's issue was incorrectly numbered on the front — please change it to Number 2,175.
‘MOSTLY OUR OWN?’
Justifying IBM Corp's move into systems integration and facilities management, Jim Cannavino says that IBM has unrivalled experience of making quite incompatible systems work together —‘mostly our own…‘