

NEWS
Inspectors rush in to check reforms
The government's monitoring of community care implementation started last week amid claims it is sending in the inspectors too soon.
SSI inspectors visited the London Borough of Croydon, the first of six authorities where the new assessment regime is being monitored to gauge the effects of the care reforms on the ground.
The others are Oxfordshire, Sheffield, Barking & Dagenham, Coventry, and Lancashire.
But David Townsend, director of Croydon SSD, has complained to Herbert Laming, SSI chief inspector, that inspectors should wait a few months for the reforms to bed down.
‘All they have been able to look at is the basic framework,’ Townsend told Community Care after the inspectors ended their five-day visit on Monday of this week.
‘I told them to come back in September.’
Townsend pointed out that few new users are available yet to comment to inspectors on the reforms.
However, Laming is understood to be keen to start detailed monitoring.
The visits will be followed in September by inspections of other selected SSDs to look at hospital discharges and other aspects of the reforms, and a major national joint monitoring programme, conducted by the SSI and RHAs.
Care staff given powers to restrain by force
Staff in local authority children's homes are being given new powers to restrain young people in their care physically, and in some cases to lock them up overnight.
Detailed guidance for SSDs, due to be launched by ministers this week after months of delay, seeks to plug gaps in the Children Act.
When the guidance was issued in draft form last year it was ridiculed by professionals for failing to give care workers specific advice on action to deal with particularly difficult children, such as those who become violent or persistently abscond.
The 20-page revised document,Guidance on Possible Forms of Control in Children's Residential Care , describes forms of permissible restraint, including holding a child's arm or holding the child against a wall, but says such force should never be used punitively and should reflect the needs of individual situations.
The guidance emphasises that restraint should be used as a last resort within a caring and disciplined home environment.
Workers should first seek to persuade a child, warn him or her of possible restraint, and use such methods only when the child is believed to be at risk of harming him or herself, others, or damaging property.
Care workers could also ‘accompany’ particularly difficult children, by building relationships and more closely supervising them.
New powers to lock up children overnight may reflect the concern of Home Office ministers about crimes committed by some young people in care when they persistently abscond from children's homes.
Hoghughi: ‘Wording is crucial
Although the guidance may provoke some concerns over children's rights, it is likely to be widely welcomed.
Masud Hoghughi, director of the Aycliffe centre and a strong critic of last year's draft document, said the particular wording of the guidance was crucial because of the risk of legal action being taken against workers who exercise restraint.
But he said legal challenges were unlikely.
‘Adult care workers have a duty of public protection as well protection of children.
But powers of restraint must be counterbalanced by intense, high quality training and supervision of staff to prevent possible abuses,’ Hoghughi said.
The guidance emphasises the importance of staff training, and monitoring by managers, and covers children with learning difficulties, those on remand or detained by police.
Dispute over mental health
After completing phase one of his project, mental health task force leader David King insisted this week that psychiatric hospital closures were on target even though far more money is still spend on institutional care.
As mental health charity MIND produced a report criticising ‘continued over-reliance on hospital treatment’, King said: ‘It looks as if hospitals are being replaced at a reasonable pace.’
And he said that community services had already been set up to replace hospitals in many areas.
‘Considerable amounts are being spent on replacing them with better services, and have been for the past few years.
The notion that patients are being thrown out on to the street is not borne out,’ he said.
King: ‘Closures on target’
In stark contrast to King's upbeat message, a joint survey published today by MIND and the Roehampton Institute found 84 per cent of people with mental health problems are offered no alternative to hospital treatment.
MIND national director Judi Clements said: ‘There must be urgent action to redress the balance between hospital treatment and care in the community, which is preferred by almost everyone.’
She added: ‘If David King is saying substantial community services are being built up, I can only say that quite the opposite picture is being painted to me.
I don't get the impression from MIND's local network that the hospital closure programme is going at a reasonable pace.’
More than 500 mental health service users were interviewed for the survey, called People First and completed in 1990.
The next stage of the task force's work will be to establish what users expect of services.
‘These community services are in place, but the real issue is how are we going to convince users of their suitability,’ King said.
Call for changes on youth remand
The practice of locking up young people in remand prisons should end immediately, according to an independent inquiry into four suicides at Feltham prison, Middlesex.
A report, launched last week by inquiry chairman Anthony Scrivener QC, says local authorities should be given the cash to provide more bail support schemes.
The inquiry was set up a year ago by the Howard League for Penal Reform following a spate of suicides at Feltham since August 1991.
Among them was 15-year-old Jeffrey Horler, who was sent to Feltham, 200 miles from his home in Great Yarmouth.
Horler was not in local authority care, but his family was known to Norfolk SSD.
The report criticises the authority for not giving help to the family and ensuring that it maintained contact with Horler.
Complaints procedure goes awry in Islington
EXCLUSIVE
Islington SSD has been accused of failing to follow the complaints procedure specified under the Children Act after allegations of abuse in a home for refugee children.
According to the advocacy group Black and In Care, the borough had still not initiated the independent inquiry to which residents are entitled two months after protests about abuse were received.
Under the complaints procedure action should have been taken within 20 working days.
It is the latest controversy to hit Islington's children's homes, coming just after an independent inquiry found serious shortcomings in two other homes in the borough (News, 25 February).
Fifteen formal complaints were lodged against a care worker and the superintendent of the home by the 11 residents, all of whom were Ethiopian refugees.
Verbal protests to the superintendent about the care worker's aggressive behaviour went unheeded, although the worker was suspended after the formal complaints.
Perlita Harris of Black and In Care, called in by the young people as an advocate, told Community Care : ‘The borough has treated these vulnerable young people appallingly.
They think they can get away with it because the residents are new to this country and don't know their rights.’
Islington responded to the formal complaints by appointing the superintendent's immediate line manager to investigate the allegations in December, which Harris says resulted in a lack of objectivity.
‘It shows a lack of commitment to their own complaints’ procedure,’she said.
One ex-member of staff at the home said: ‘During the investigation no members of staff were called to witness even though many were present when the incidents occurred.’
Islington appointed a foster mother, Margery Thiman, to carry out the independent inquiry in February — more than two months after the original complaints.
Islington was unable to comment on Thiman's inquiry but it has completed its own internal inquiry.
‘The complaints have been investigated and the results will be made known this week,’ said a spokeswoman.
Violence victims face homelessness
Social workers need more training in housing legislation to protect victims of domestic violence being made homeless.
Research carried out at Bristol University's social policy and social planning department says women are sometimes made homeless because some housing departments follow the letter of the law too strictly.
Report co-author Ellen Malos said: ‘Social workers need to be aware of the gap between the law and the more generous government guidance on the law.’
She said housing policies in local authorities varied enormously, with some ‘cutting their legal responsibility to the bone’.
The report calls for improved co-ordination between police, housing, and SSDs.
Malos also said social workers needed to realise children were indirect victims of domestic violence: ‘A lot of evidence is coming to light about the effects of domestic violence on children even if they are not the objects of the violence.’
The report questioned 80 women in seven local authorities.
Kirk's furore over government's financial care gap
The Church of Scotland has hit out at local and central government for failing to bridge the care gap.
In a report to next month's General Assembly, the Kirk's Board of Social Responsibility — the largest voluntary social work agency in Scotland — says it spent £1.5 million from its own reserves in the past 17 months to keep its 42 eventide homes going.
Total losses amounted to £5 million over three years.
‘Strathclyde and others have indicated they will meet the full cost of £280 per person per week in their own homes, but only contribute £185 towards the cost of the same care in one of the board's homes.’
This is discrimination against the poorest elderly people,’ said Andrew Mac Lean, convenor of the board.
Baillie: ‘Kirk used as a punchball
Director of social work Ian Baillie claimed the Kirk was being used as a ‘punchball’ between central and local government.
‘Local authorities have an independent responsibility from 1 April and it is less than satisfactory for them to say they will pay the same rates as central government,’ he said.
Strike aversion
Hopes rose this week that further strike action at north London's Alice Hoffman Homes could be averted after a meeting between NALGO and management at ACAS.
Staff at the voluntary organisation held strikes in protest at the dismissal of Paul Knight, who managed a home in Barnet.
His dismissal was later confirmed by an appeal panel.
NALGO branch secretary Mike Swinburne said a compromise proposal would be put to members this week.
‘There won't be any more strike action until all the possibilities with ACAS have been exhausted,’ Swinburne said.
Project closure
A project run by the Richmond Fellowship in north London has been earmarked for closure because of high renovation costs and ‘changes in referral patterns’.
Refurbishment costs for Holly House in Camden, which houses ten young adults with mental health problems, had been put at £450,000, said Richmond Fellowship chief executive Owen Ingram.
DipSW setback
Numbers of students emerging from courses for DipSW, or its equivalent, are still fewer than 5,000 a year, according to CCETSW's annual report for 1991–2.
Part of the blame lies with the shortage of high-quality practice placements, says CCETSW, which helped prepare 37 new NVQs for submission to the National Council for Vocational Qualifications.
DoH grant
A ‘substantial’ three-year grant has been given by the DoH to the National Association for the Protection from Sexual Abuse of Adults and Children with Learning Disabilities.
NAPSAC, which has just ended a successful pilot year, aims to establish links between agencies and individuals working with people with learning disabilities who are at risk.
GLAD start
A project on the issues affecting disabled women has been launched.
Run by the Greater London Association of Disabled People, it will look at a broad range of disability issues as they affect disabled women.
Black staff welcome antiracist stance
Black social workers expressed concern this week at the government's criticisms of the social work training council's anti-discriminatory policies.
In a statement released shortly before its annual conference this weekend the Association of Black Social Workers and Allied Professions welcomed the growing prominence of race.
Supporting CCETSW's anti-racist guidelines, the association said it deplored the actions of those ‘seeking to destabilise the process.’
Junior health minister Tim Yeo has complained of CCETSW's emphasis on anti-discriminatory policies.
ABSWAP deputy chairman Fabian Best (left), and chairwoman Pennie Pennie: ‘Concerned at the government's reaction to CCETSW's positive steps’
Homeless plan succeeding
A Scottish Office initiative to help homeless young people is showing positive results, health minister Lord Fraser revealed last week.
But the Scottish Rooflessness Initiative still has some way to go, especially in preventing young Scots becoming homeless and at risk in London, he told a seminar in Edinburgh.
‘Young people who were homeless or likely to become so have been helped, but…it is more difficult to help those sleeping rough,’ he said.
Under the initiative, voluntary agencies have received grants totalling £150,000.
Girl's death ‘not preventable’
The London Borough of Lambeth says its SSD could do nothing to prevent the death of a 15-year-old girl on her return from Ireland.
The girl, Kelly Fitzgerald, was put on Lambeth's at risk register in 1989 but was removed soon after she went to live with her grandparents in 1991.
A spokeswoman for the council said Lambeth SSD had been ‘confident that she was well and sage’.
But in August last year she returned to her parents, who had moved to County Mayo in Ireland.
When she came back to Britain earlier this year she was admitted semi-conscious to hospital, suffering from malnourishment and signs of physical abuse.
The girl's uncle, Garry Fitzgerald, a former social worker with Lambeth, had previously made complaints about the girl's treatment by the SSD when she was living with her parents.
But Lambeth insisted last week it acted properly and had been backed by an SSI inquiry.
Report slams youth treatment centres
A new report on the government's two youth treatment centres says conditions have barely improved since earlier critical reports, and calls for both centres to be brought into line with the Children Act.
In its first annual report the government's advisory group on the Youth Treatment Service condemns the regimes at Glenthorne and St Charles, for running unacceptable punishment systems.
‘It is our view that the ‘levels’[punishment]system at Glenthorne would, if it were in any other secure facility, contravene the Children's Homes Regulations,’ says the report of the advisory group, chaired by Winifred Tumim.
It also criticised St Charles for not having a clear system of sanctions, making punishment appear ‘arbitrary and unfair’ to the residents.
Rachel Hodgkin, of the National Children's Bureau, welcomed the criticisms.
Neither institution is regulated by an outside body, nor are they obliged to comply with the Children's Homes Regulations.
‘Any criticism against the centres by this independent body surely confirms the view that they should be covered by statutory regulations,’ said Hodgkin.
In a report that describes in detail ‘poor physical conditions’ the Youth Treatment Service group lists 23 recommendations still needed before the centres can provide proper treatment.
Attention was first drawn to them in 1988 when a 17-year-old resident complained she had been held in continuous confinement for seven weeks and forcibly injected with a sedative.
The advisory group, set up as a result of the SSI's criticisms, said: ‘We were disappointed to find that there seems to have been very little improvement.’
The report catalogues poor catering at Glenthorne, the lack of specific treatment programmes, inadequate psychiatric and psychological input at both centres, and limited monitoring.
The report continues: ‘Our repeated requests for information have been largely unmet.
If we are to…safeguard the rights of young people, we need to be routinely given information essential to that task.’
Strathclyde seeks abuse guidelines
The Scottish Office has been urged to issue guidelines to help small authorities like Orkney deal with suspected multiple sexual abuse.
The call comes in Strathclyde's detailed response to the Orkney inquiry report, finalised by the region's social work committee this week.
Strathclyde welcomes most of the 194 recommendations, but rejects Lord Clyde's call for a central resource to ‘provide a high level of expertise for guidance, advice and support in particular cases’ as unnecessary.
‘There is a tradition in Scotland of local authorities assisting one another.
Given the continued existence of small authorities, there requires to be established a mechanism for providing support from among the larger authorities,’ it said.
Experienced social workers from Strathclyde were drafted in to Orkney to help remove the nine children alleged to have been sexually abused from South Ronaldsay.
Although Strathclyde's operational costs were met, the region is still negotiating with the Scottish Office and Orkney Council over the subsequent legal and administrative costs of the inquiry, estimated at about £450,000.
‘Cheap’ assessment lands Avon in court
The first major legal challenge over community care assessments is likely to emerge next month when a 22-year-old man with learning difficulties goes to the High Court.
Mark Hazell has been granted a judicial review of Avon County Council's decision not to place him in the residential home of his own choosing, Milton Heights in Oxfordshire.
This is despite the recommendation of a complaints review panel that his needs would best be met at Milton Heights, a Home Farm Trust home which charges £9,000 a year.
Instead the council wants to place Hazell in Berwick Lodge near Bristol, which costs almost £3,000 a year less.
The home was recommended in a joint report by a specialist social worker and an independent advocate, and the council maintains this cheaper option would satisfactorily meet Hazell's needs.
It was on this basis that the social services committee in January overturned the finding of the complaints review panel that Hazell had a ‘psychological need’ to go to Milton Heights for three years.
The outcome of the judicial review, which is now expected on 24 May, could have major implications for SSDs on account of the present ambiguity surrounding DoH guidance on assessments.
The guidance, while encouraging social workers to share information with clients about their needs, warns them against recording this on the assessment form because clients could go to court over any assessed needs which are not being met with services.
Most SSD directors believe sharing information on unmet need could open their authority up to judicial review, according to a Community Care survey (News, 1 April).
Next month's High Court judgement may settle the issue one way or the other.
Backlog of abuse deters complaints in North Wales
Young people in care in North Wales are being deterred from making complaints about abuse because of an alleged lack of progress in investigating allegations of widespread physical and sexual abuse in children's homes in the 1970s and 1980s, it has been claimed.
Alison Taylor, the former Gwynedd social worker who says she was sacked for speaking out about the abuses in care, told Community Care last week that she was concerned both at the slow progress of the investigations and the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to prosecute certain individuals on grounds of insufficient evidence.
‘What we have seen across the board is a failure of justice,’ she said.
The fact that many of the young people involved had convictions meant their evidence was not being taken seriously, which raised a serious issue about the treatment of young offenders who have been in care.
Liverpool solicitor Rex Makin, who is acting for at least seven young people in actions for damages against Gwynedd and Clwyd county councils, said last week there was ‘no progress’ on the claims.
RADAR to act over SSD failure on clients' needs
A leading disability charity is seeking legal go-ahead to launch two judicial reviews against SSDs which it says have failed to meet clients' assessed needs.
More than 400 people with disabilities have asked RADAR to take up their cases since beginning its campaign last year to ensure SSDs provide adequate services, as defined in section 2 of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act.
Taylor: ‘Lack of DoH guidance
John Keep, who heads RADAR's section 2 project, said there was a ‘90 per cent chance’ the charity would seek judicial reviews of the two cases.
Keep said RADAR had been able to resolve 130 of the 418 cases which had been brought to it, ‘most of them satisfactorily’.
Another dozen cases were nearing the final stages of SSDs' internal complaints procedures.
In one of the cases up for judicial review the SSD withdrew a home help service because of a change in eligibility criteria, despite the fact the client's condition had not altered since his assessment.
‘Moving the goalposts like this is unfair,’ Keep said.
‘Once a need has been established it is unlawful remove a service even though the need has not reduced.’
One third of the cases reaching RADAR have concerned grievances about home adaptations and equipment, while another third have involved home care.
ADSS disabilities committee chairman Roy Taylor said directors wanted to learn from RADAR's project.
‘This has been a live issue for a long time, but it has been brought into sharp relief by the lack of clear guidance on assessment from the DoH,’ he said.
An interim report on RADAR's two-year project is to be published in June.
Poverty cutbacks
Families living on income support are being forced to cut back on food and do without basic items, according to a survey by the Children's Society.
The report,People and Poverty in the North East , says that the cost of living for people on income support is three times as high as it is for those on an average wage.
The society is calling for higher income support, more incentives for parents to return to work and restoration of benefits to unemployed 16- and 17-year-olds.
Report £4.99, tel:
Homes closure
Three Birmingham children's homes are to close as the council attempts to bolster its foster service.
As a result Birmingham expects to divert £700,000 from its residential budget to improve its fostering services and staffing levels in its remaining residential homes.
The social services department says the three homes are surplus to requirements.
New MIND guide
MIND has published another guide in its series Making Sense of Treatments and Drugs .
The booklet deals with lithium, the drug used for manic depression.
It gives information about adverse effects and gives diet guidelines as well as a list of do's and don'ts when taking the drug.
Price £2, tel:
Telecom award
Tunstall Telecom has launched its annual caring award in conjunction with the charity Help the Aged.
Nominations for outstanding professional or volunteer carers of elderly people can be made either by individuals or organisations and must be in by 30 July.
Nomination forms from 
A Trust first
The Princess Royal Trust for Carers has opened its first carer centre in London.
Based in the London Borough of Greenwich, the centre is the first in the Trust's plans for a national network of centres providing information, advice counselling, advocacy, outreach support and a helpline for carers.
The trust hopes to have 25 centres by the end of 1994 with the aid of a £1 million donation from British Telecom.
Lesbians win foster battle
A lesbian couple has won a three-year battle with Hampshire County Council to foster a child after being denied permission on the grounds of their sexuality.
Earlier this year the council said the two women were rejected as foster parents because ‘it was not in the interest of children…to be placed in the care of a lesbian couple’.
But social services chairman Peter Maxwell said last week the decision had been made before the council drew up its policy on gay and lesbian foster parents.
The issue had been complicated by unclear statements from the DoH.
Maxwell said: ‘We were uncertain of government guidelines in relation to particular groups on this issue.’
Although the government's consultation report on the Adoption Law Review supported gay and lesbian adoption, junior health minister Tim Yeo has consistently opposed it.
After the couple's victory this week Yeo said: ‘There is no room for political correctness or ideology in fostering.
No one has a right to foster or adopt.
Children's rights not gay rights must drive the policy.
In the vast majority of cases this means giving them a mum and dad.
His views were echoed by the sub-committee which twice rejected the couple's application.
Ruth Hyson, a Labour councillor and a member of that committee, said: ‘I'm a great believer in a family unit.
Every child, whoever they are, deserves to have a mum and a dad.’
The Hampshire case and Yeo's reaction have sparked off fears that the Adoption Law Review, which is expected to go before Parliament next year, will sideline single parents or gay couples, although the consultation document stressed many such placements were successful.
But Karen Walker, director of Parents for Children, an organisation which pioneered the adoption of children with special needs, said there was nothing new in placing children with gay parents.
She added that any attempt to restrict the availability of parents could have a detrimental effect on children.
She said: ‘We would view with great concern any policy that limited the availability of families who can parent children.’
Living conditions for elderly people have worsened, says Help the Aged
Elderly people in residential care live in conditions which would not be out of place in prison, according to Help the Aged.
Speaking at a conference organised by The Community Research Centre, Help the Aged UK director Wally Harbert said government policy over the past 14 years had promoted institutional care at the expense of individual needs.
He said: ‘The car of elderly people is marginal to other government policies and we have services that are rooted in the past when social control was more important to care.’
He said elderly people were often forced to use commodes in shared rooms with no screening.
Elderly people were caught up in a political, financial and staffing web in which services were run according to the needs of service providers, Harbert told the conference.
And the revolution in the structure of services and management meant elderly frail people found it increasingly difficult to assert their rights.
Harbert said elderly care in Britain needed a massive re-think.
He added progress would be limited until housing and social services merged and acted on the advice of clients.
At present, he said, money was being channelled into inappropriate services for them.
Until then however, Harbert warned, elderly people would be inadequately cared for at great cost to the taxpayer.
CRIME ALERT: A scheme to steer young people away from trouble has been opened in Peterborough.
Pioneered by National Children's Home and co-funded in partnership with Cambridgeshire council, the scheme homes to deter children as young as five from crime by alerting them to the long-term consequences to their victims and the effect of crime on their own future.
Young people will, for example, act the roles of young offenders, their mothers and their victims.
Project leader Dave Southwell (pictured) said the scheme would work closely with schools, social services, and the police
SSDs face legal action by private home owners
At leat five local authorities are now facing legal action by private home owners' associations over ‘unreasonable’ contracts.
Private home owners in Cleveland have been given leave to take their local authority to court over the contracts.
And home owners in Tameside, Gloucester, Oldham, and Newcastle are also planning legal action, claiming SSDs are enforcing contracts on which they have failed to consult.
Solicitor for the National Care Homes Association Robert Campbell said: ‘We believe the associations are abusing their positions of power.
They have a virtual monopoly and are taking advantage of it.’
Tameside home owners claim opportunities for contracting with the SSD have been markedly reduced because block contracts have been established with the controversial Tameside Enterprises Limited care homes trust, the company which bought the council stock of residential homes.
But Cleveland's case is the most likely to reach the high court.
Campbell described the authority's attitude as ‘wholly intransigent’ and said that the county refused to acknowledge the need for negotiation.
Cleveland SSD has said it will ‘defend strongly’ its arrangement for drawing up contracts.
Social services chairman Bob Pitt said: ‘We have put a great deal of effort into preparing contracts, which we believe are both fair to the homes and ensure that resources are used effectively.’
Campbell said the threat of legal action in Cheshire may have been averted now that the SSD had substantially re-drafted its contract.
Both the Cleveland and Oldham cases are expected to be heard on 5 May.
NEWS FOCUS
Clinics drying up
DRUGS FUNDING
Community care for drug and alcohol misusers is under pressure, reports Bob Cervi
When the government did a U-turn last October on its pledge to provide separate, ring-fenced funding for drug and alcohol hostels, ministers dismissed suggestions that SSDs would not be able to take on the task.
But DoH-backed research published last week shows local authorities and drugs bodies were ‘ill-prepared for the changes ahead.
Most had given little attention to the assessment and care management of people with problem drug or alcohol use’.
The study, produced for the Standing Conference on Drug Abuse and Alcohol Concern, indicates SSDs must catch up if they are to assess misusers and stump up the cash for community care.
Drugs charities have warned catching up may come too late for some clients and hostels.
Evidence shows that some residential projects are coming under financial strain as money and clients dry up.
Some projects have reported drastic falls in demand for beds (News, 22 April).
One rehabilitation centre in North Yorkshire had only two of its seven beds occupied because of falling referrals.
It is among several which fear possible closure within months unless the new assessment and funding procedures move up several gears.
The problem is not just slow assessments by local authorities: counselling agencies appear reluctant to refer clients because of uncertainty over who will pay.
Hostels are being ignored by neighbouring authorities which are tying up their funds in block contracts with other projects.
‘Few local authorities have assessment procedures properly in place,’ said Alison Chesney, director of the Cranstoun Projects.
Eddie Killoran, area manager with Turning Point, said: ‘It's an appalling mess.
A lot of local authorities which have not set up criteria for assessments don't have staff specifically to do them.’
Robin Latimer, community care officer at SCODA, rejects any notion that drugs charities are scare-mongering: ‘It is worrying because residential services depend on the flow of clients.’
Noel Towe from the Local Government Drugs Forum hopes new advice on assessments for local authorities and the commitment of cash from SSDs will begin to shore up the problem.
A survey by LGDF has found all SSDs have a contact officer for drug and alcohol assessments.
‘Most knowledge and experience is located with independent providers.
Local authorities have a minimal track-record of provision and many have to build up their expertise.’
Dorset SSD director Robin Se-Queira, who attended a national conference last week, hopes local authorities will earmark funds out of their community care grant for drug and alcohol care, though no extra funds have been given by the government for this new responsibility.
‘I have a sneaking feeling that some independent organisations are seeking a blank cheque.
But the blank cheque days are over,’ he said.
‘Any authority which sees abrogation of responsibility to drug users as an option is badly advised.’
New advice on ‘fast-track’ assessments was issued last week by LGDF, and SCODA has produced a practice guide based on the lessons of the national survey.
The DoH is committed to monitoring the new arrangements until July, but the findings will not be released until then.
Meanwhile, hostels face a bleak few months as the assessment system grinds into action.
The sky's the limit
SSD PURCHASING
Competitive tendering of social services is increasing.
Susan Clark looks at developments
Last week Westminster's social services committee approved a plan to ‘externalise’ services work £12 million, about 20 per cent of its SSD budget.
It follows restructuring last year which created business units to run departments.
Many will now be contracted out.
It would appear Westminster has seized the purchaser/provider split wholeheartedly.
One area of contention is nursery care.
Part of the programme includes contracting out seven nurseries while the remaining three become day centres.
The contracts are to be let in two blocks.
But one company could win both and manage all seven.
‘A monolithic service will still remain,’ said Peter Westland of the Association of Metropolitan Authorities.
Opposition members accuse the council of acting purely ideologically, following party dogma.
Ann Windiate, Westminster director, denies this: ‘It is the most logical, rational and sensible way of ensuring a mixed economy without compromising services.’
The Laming/Foster circular of last year held back from legislating on the purchaser/provider split, leaving it up to authorities to restructure services as they considered feasible.
Few authorities are likely to follow Westminster, although many will keep an eye on developments.
Tony Harrison of the King's Fund Institute believes the pull towards two levels of service is inevitable.
‘It may not be mandatory but authorities will find strong pressure from the government,’ he said.
‘It is against the spirit of the reforms to retain the provider in-house.’
The Labour-dominated Association of London Authorities concedes there is a trend to develop a form of provider and purchasing separation.
Kent SSD has been at the forefront of restructuring social services over the past few years.
Thirty-six per cent of its budget is contracted out and 46 per cent is in-house.
Director Peter Smallridge claims this was less to do with ideology and more for the benefit of service users.
His vision is for a truly mixed service.
‘Certain aspects must be directly provided to ensure cartels are avoided and centres of excellence encouraged,’ he said.
‘But good practice means running public services alongside private and voluntary sectors.’
Knowsley SSD will continue to develop its purchaser/provider split, new director Jeremy Ambache said.
‘The separation has been achieved over the past year, but any contracting out of the providing side will be done slowly to retain stability.
That may be unnecessary if the in-house service runs efficiently.’
Last year, the Audit Commission revealed many SSDs were failing to develop the purchaser/provider split.
The consensus now seems to suggest the changes are inevitable.
Next week, Leeds University's Nuffield Institute will begin a study into purchasing intentions which should highlight the extent to which provision and purchasing have been restructured.
PEOPLE
Improving the image of practice
After six years with NISW,Barbara Hearn has left to become the director of NCB's newly established practice development department.
From there she intends to lead the Bureau and child care professionals into the next century of user-led services.
This includes improving the face of social work through better professional procedure rather than just portraying a positive media image that has no substance.
To begin with, her department is launching a three-year project on residential child care.
The initiative will work in partnership with local agencies to address local community problems.
The bureau will provide development time to these groups to improve and expand upon good practices.
‘It is important that the service is not imposed upon the users from above,’ said Hearn.
‘We must always involve the user to develop best practice.’
Hearn is well placed to communicate with the multitude of groups involved.
She is a member of the Institute of Marketing and well versed at getting her ideas over to the public.
‘I decided the changing culture of the welfare system demanded a broader view of the kind of service needed.
Studying business management and marketing gives me the tools to ensure social work issues get positive publicity,’ she said.
But Hearn also has extensive social work experience, especially in the area of child care.
She first entered the field in the late seventies, fresh from college.
She was immediately thrown in at the deep end when one of her young clients, Lucy Gates, died.
Hearn: Better professional procedure will help improve the face of social work
The inquest which followed proved to be an intensive training ground for the young Hearn and she emerged strong and more confident, with the sort of knowledge that takes years to acquire.
She remained in generic social work for nearly ten years before being headhunted into NISW's management development department.
At NISW, Hearn carried out a study into the provision of care in Iowa, America.
The state has the ultimate nightmare scenario, where the providers dominate the market and name the price.
‘It is now costing up to $100,000 per child in Iowa,’ said Hearn.
Her brief from the state there was to resolve the dilemma.
She began by bringing progressional groups and users together on a localised basis to develop a community level of provision.
But NISW will now have to carry on this study without her.
Her new brief is to build up the NCB's department.
Next week she begins interviewing for the post of principal development officer.
By the end of the year Hearn hopes to have in place six development officers and two principals.
‘There has been practice development activity for a long time within the bureau.
However the new department will pull all this together and provide a public front, hopefully making it more accessible to new initiatives,’ said Hearn.
Stephen March has been made divisional finance officer for West Sussex County Council.
He will be in charge of financial arrangements for community care in Chichester, Bognor Regis and Midhurst.
He will be joined by Michael Robinson , a chartered accountant, who will take responsibility for finances in Worthing, Shoreham, Storingham and Littlehampton.
Steve Plank has become West Sussex County Council's first male home care manager.
Based at Southland hospital he will manage the hospital discharge scheme, organising support for people returning home after treatment.
OBITUARY
Megan Browne had no time for professional snobbery, but she was adamant about the need for professional skills.
When she came to teach those at Edinburgh University in 1948, there was only a handful of trained workers in Scotland.
Megan set about raising standards wherever they were needed, using her political skills and considerable personal charm.
Her most significant role was in shaping the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, along with Richard Titmuss and myself.
She died last month in her 80th year, knowing — as we all do — that the practice has not lived up to the vision, but still believing that some day it might.
Megan's contribution to the development of our profession was unique.
In 1970 she co-founded, with Jock Sutherland and others, the Scottish Institute of Human Relations, playing an even more active role after retiring from university in 1973.
Here she created opportunities for social workers to train in more advanced skills and set up a variety of support and counselling groups.
She was most involved with social workers who had small children and this, like all her other groups, gradually came to include a wide range of professions.
Megan's vision of a more loving world touched all who knew her.
PRACTICE FOCUS
SCHOOLS INSPECTION
Culture clash
The government is to bring in new guidance on how SSDs should inspect independent schools following complaints of heavy handedness.
Gerry Tissuer looks at what can go wrong
The Children Act gave SSDs new responsibilities for ensuring children's welfare in independent schools.
Eighteen months on, some head teachers are complaining that inspectors are fulfilling their duties with a zeal which smacks of prejudice.
The SSI's practice guide on the welfare of children in boarding schools advised: ‘There is no perfect way to bring up children and care must be taken to avoid value judgements and stereotyping.’
The government apparently believes inspectors have been ‘over-reaching’ themselves and is to issue new guidance.
More than 20 schools have complained of interference in school life and criticism of long established customs.
A DoH spokesman said the new guidance will clarify where inspectors can play a legitimate role.
He admitted drawing the dividing line will be hard.
Arthur Hearnden, general secretary of the Independent Schools Joint Council, said the current guidance is too general, leaving scope for interpretation.
He believes the inspector should ensure children are reasonably well looked after, not change a school's culture.
He said relationships between inspectors and schools have broken down several times.
‘Inspectors can play a children's rights role, which interferes with parents’ rights,’he said.
‘Some support children who won't conform to school regulations.
Others ask them fatuous questions such as whether beds are comfortable or whether they like their teachers.
It's not their business to make such inquiries, to put thoughts into children's minds.’
Hearnden said corporal punishment, though rare, is still legal, and added that people of all religious beliefs send their children to certain schools because of the Christian values taught.
‘It's not social services’ business to reinterpret the law on corporal punishment or to manufacture conflict between home and school religions.’
Hearnden believed that elaborate inspections of schools are unnecessary.
It is sufficient for schools to have payphones for children and for inspectors to have right of access when concerned.
Heather Wing, chairwoman of the National Association of Inspection and Registration Officers, said most inspectors have good relationships with schools, but conflicts can occur.
‘These schools have long been a closed shop and many haven't been inspected for ages.
Nobody likes to be inspected and we've had to get over that initial hurdle.’
Inspections must be approached with sensitivity.
‘It's a matter of good sense and courtesy.
You can't expect to change things overnight.
It's no good saying something is unacceptable.
You have to convince the head teacher of your arguments.’
Inspectors must develop a protocol for approaching problem areas.
‘It's a complex process inspecting a large boarding school and no inspector has received training to undertake this work.
Mistakes will be made.’
Though inspectors have no enforcement powers, Wing believed they should be free to point out difficult areas of practice.
‘They should make it clear that corporal punishment is outmoded and that children have a right to be brought up in their own religion.
If they're not, it can cause unhappiness.’
She also felt it was important that inspectors looked into relationships between children and teachers.
She said the present structure of ‘regular, structured and systematic’ inspections must be kept, and said considerable abuse had been found in schools.
‘You can't pussyfoot around with children's welfare.’
Berkshire has developed model relationships with the county's 30-plus independent schools.
The SSD's head of quality assurance Hugh Dunnachie said the inspection team has tried to work the whole process through with schools.
‘At the start, we set up an advisory group with some head teachers.
This group ironed out potential difficulties, such as what to look at and where to see pupils and staff.
This gave credibility to our relationship with other schools.’
The team ran two dummy inspections, testing the effectiveness of forms and learning how to get access to the information.
‘We then had a joint launch.
In the first year, we inspected all schools, picking up on things which needed remedying.
We reviewed our reports in November, asking for feedback from schools, and set an agenda for this year.’
Dunnachie said neither inspectors nor schools impose standards on the other.
‘If we give a hard message it's based on a good knowledge of their world.
We move through dialogue rather than through our power and authority, which is very limited anyway.
I don't believe this compromises us,’ he said.
‘The team helps schools use inspections positively.’
Dunnachie said inspectors and schools are still developing ways of working together.
‘We've set up a sub-group on child protection and invited schools to further training and seminars.
We're looking at how to plan inspections, get information from pupils and involve governors and parents better.
We haven't got this all buttoned up yet.’
POLITICS
SOCIAL SECURITY
Benefits on the block
Rumours abound Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley is poised to chop into benefits.
Diana Sutton reports on his evidence to the social security select committee
Michael Portillo's announcement of a public expenditure review covering the departments of social security, health, education, and the Home Office sent the usual anticipatory shivers about forthcoming cuts through the various lobbies.
One senior civil servant commented: ‘A government review is only ever about one thing — the need to save money’.
Ministers are more subtle, describing the review as ‘seeking to identify areas where better targeting can be achieved or from which the public sector can withdraw altogether.’
Clearly the agenda for Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley will be to prune the £80 billion the DSS spends on various welfare benefits, as this now accounts for 29 per cent of the government's social security budget.
The burning question for the poverty lobby is from where and how, particularly given the Fowler reviews in 1986 which made wide-ranging cuts and changes to the social security system.
Lilley: Nothing will be spared as he scrutinises social security expenditure
Furthermore there seems to be widespread concern about how the review is being carried out.
One leading poverty campaigner says: ‘With the previous reviews at least they did consult outside bodies.
This one seems to be internal.
We would have thought with something this important there would have been proper consultation.’
Last week, Lilley was subjected to the scrutiny of the highly respected social security select committee, as he gave evidence on the public expenditure review and the government's recently announced proposals to levy VAT on fuel.
Cynics might doubt his commitment to social security, as he introduced himself as the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry (his previous job), but in his usual good-humoured style, Frank Field simply thanked him and said they would recommend him to Downing Street for a new job because of his social security knowledge.
Lilley stated that nothing was ruled out in his review.
It would appear that Child Poverty Action Group director Fran Bennett's fear that ‘it looks as though it's a two-pronged attack.
One might be means-testing and one might be privatising’ may well be justified.
Lilley stated that there was a clear shift in the balance between state provision and self provision and that it was right to shift this balance towards self provision as the wealth of the nation increased.
Clearly the review might shift this balance making pensions the obvious target.
When pressed by Jeremy Corbyn (Labour) about the department's perceived shift towards means-testing and away from the universality he replied this was expected as the Labour party was also re-examining its commitment to universality — as John Smith has said ‘nothing was ruled out and nothing was ruled in’.
Child benefit may be another obvious target for the departmental review.
Bennett expresses the fears of many: ‘We thought we had saved child benefit and now it's under threat again.’
The government's manifesto commitment was to increase benefit in line with prices but this does not guarantee its future after the next election, and presumably any proposals on child benefit would have a long lead-in time.
Another feared target is invalidity benefit.
Lilley was blatant about the government's intention to tax the benefit, saying it was simply a matter of timing and overcoming the practical difficulties involved.
Jane Kennedy (Labour) pressed him on the recent article in the Independent , which stated that ministers had privately said they intended to issue new guidelines to family doctors to tighten up the eligibility criteria for the benefit.
Lilley said they had no plans to do so at present, but everything would be looked at in the review.
However, he stressed they were looking at how to change existing guidelines, for example how to use existing medical staff most efficiently.
One of the disability lobby's persistent fears is that people will be pushed off the invalidity benefit into disability working allowance if they can do some work.
The list of reforms the Conservative government has undertaken in social security is long: the Fowler reviews; the removal of young people from the benefits system, and Lilley's categoric assurance that the youth training guarantee works; the recent changes to the system of disability benefits; and changes to the system of child maintenance.
It seems difficult to imagine the next target.
Many believe it would be political suicide to restrict criteria for unemployment benefit in a time of recession and high unemployment, and income support is already so low that there seems little scope for cuts there.
To introduce means-testing is expensive because of the higher costs associated with administering means-tested benefits.
The government may also have difficulties with its proposal to levy VAT on fuel, judging by the committee's questioning.
Clearly compensation for people on low incomes is to be aimed only at those on income support, even though many disabled people have extra heating costs associated with their disability, and many others on low incomes, such as pensioners, may narrowly miss out because of small savings or because they do not qualify for means-tested benefits, but still live at income support level.
People on lower incomes spend a disproportionate amount of their income on fuel.
Lobby groups must wait until the autumn to see what is proposed on VAT and fuel, and on the public expenditure review in general, not to mention Labour's social justice commission, which means the parties' ideological battle lines are looking blurred.
One campaigner commented: ‘Labour are making it easier for the Tories to shift the debate before the next election.’
LETTERS
SEEK MINIMUM LEVELS OF RISK
Your news report (4 April) on the NCB findings about residential special schools for children with emotional and behavioural difficulties highlights the concerns which this small scale research identified.
However, some further points must be made: NCB itself will acknowledge that these concerns relate only to some parts of the overall provision made by the four schools which offered themselves freely and fully as subjects for enquiry.
It is always risky to generalise from particulars.
Therefore, the concerns raised do not apply necessarily or equally to all residential schools working with such children.
What is apparent, even from this small slice, is just how diverse that sector is.
I certainly do not wish to be an apologist for the whole of any sector; nor will I accept that every establishment within it, including the one of which I am the director, is flawed fundamentally simply by existing.
Residential placements, even those at considerable geographic distances, do not mean social, educational and emotional isolation, with the inevitable consequence of further damage and even abuse.
We know already that in crucial ways children and adults can feel miserable and alone in families and communities, particularly when their needs are not recognised or when, even if recognised, they cannot be met properly.
Some local authorities may simply be colluding in a ‘process of social exclusion’.
I am familiar with a good number which use criteria much more sophisticated and diagnostically relevant than this when deciding to place children away from home.
In fact I am more concerned about authorities which do not place children and decide by using no criteria beyond barely-concealed and crude financial ones.
On the basis of these small but important findings, a case could be made to close down the whole of the provision in this sector.
That would be ill advised and, I am sure, is not the intention of the NCB.
I am not convinced, despite contentions by some, that even with increased resourcing this positive provision could be recreated for many children in their home and community settings.
Therefore it seems clear that the real issue is neither closure nor business as usual.
The focus of further enquiry and activity by the NCB and those with an interest as providers, users, and regulators of residential schools should be twofold.
First, accept the reality of some risk in the placement of children in such schools and continue to work to determine just what is an acceptable minimum level of risk, especially as compared to not placing a child away from home.
Second, identify the conditions of the internal organisation and external relations of residential settings which will ensure the safety and welfare of the child while simultaneously helping growth and development.
MORE RIGHTS FOR EX-PATIENTS, MORE DUTIES FOR STAFF
Ian Bynoe's article ‘Rights and duties’(INSIDE, 25 March) lists the powers and duties of local authorities.
I would like to point out that the powers under section 21 and schedule 8 of the NHS Act 1977 were converted to a duty by Circular 22/59 (Ministry of Health), updated in circular 19.74.
All patients leaving psychiatric hospitals have a right to after care services, not just those who have been detained under sections 3, 37, or 47 of the Mental Health Act.
The circular on discharge planning also states, as does the circular on care programmes, that all patients leaving hospital should have their needs assessed before discharge and services provided to meet them.
The Disabled Persons Act is also relevant in this connection.
The NHS and Community Care Act 1990 includes in its definition of ‘community care services those services referred to in Schedule 9.
(S46 (1)(a) and (3)’.
Unfortunately, many publications omit reference to this, so it is no wonder social workers and their managers have a limited view of their duties, as well as those of local authorities.
BASW STUDIES GENDER
As two of the speakers at the BASW annual conference we would like to respond both to the conference and to its reporting in Community Care .
The conference was a welcome and vital opportunity for women and men, both black and white, to share information and their experiences, to use these to identify and challenge oppression and to begin to build a vision of how the personal social services might and can be different.
In the opening address our message was that external and internal oppression need to be challenged and that as men and women, white and black, we have different tasks and opportunities for doing this.
Many of the changes in community care have massive and largely unrecognised implications for women, both as workers and service users, and vigilance and action are needed to ensure oppression is not perpetuated.
We included poetry to highlight different ways of understanding the issues, to celebrate our differences and the power of working together, and to provide encouragement and inspiration.
We are saddened to learn that for some people, the conference failed to develop strategies for action.
We were also surprised and disappointed that some of the reporting of the conference seemed to trivialise the issues in a way that is only too familiar us — these are age old techniques which help oppression remain and flourish.
Editor's note:The writers seem to have missed the extensive coverage of the conference in our issue of 8 April.
INFORMATION PLEASE
I am seeking information, ideas, and examples of literature regarding complaints procedures accessible to clients with learning difficulties .
I am a member of a multi-disciplinary group which is considering undertaking an audit of children with learning difficulties who have challenging behaviour.
I would be grateful for any information on previous or proposed studies in this area.
I am part of a group of individuals from various professions who are interested in developing a National Children's Legal Centre in Ireland.
We would welcome contact from practitioners, advocates, academics and others who may be able to help us with their advice, ideas, articles and experience; in particular correspondence from local authorities' children's rights officers.
I would like to hear from anybody who has undertaken the DipSW.
I would welcome support from past students from any authority to help to strengthen our cause to persuade our authority to recognise the diploma as a professional qualification.
I am concerned that many young people with learning difficulties are not taking up the assessment offered in their final year of education.
One reason may be they way the information is presented to them and the way the offer is made.
Standard letters seem inadequate.
I would be interested to hear from anyone who has developed other means of communicating with people with learning difficulties.
Has anyone developed a symbol for ‘learning difficulties’ comparable with those already in use for sensory or hearing impairment?
I have a close friend in Croatia who is a professional social worker with excellent English and a doctorate qualification who wants to work in residential or day services or something similar in the UK.
She has considerable experience in working with people with learning and physical disabilities.
Anyone who might be interested in employing her should contact me.
I would like to hear from anyone who has worked with a group of parents or carers of people with learning or difficulties in preparing them for their son's daughter's move from the family home into a group home.
I am investigating alternative day care provision for elderly adults with learning difficulties.
I would be especially interested to hear from anyone who has experience of setting up provision for such people.
I am researching community health councils and their work on race and ethnicity issues in the four Thames regions.
I am keen to hear from researchers, practitioners and black and ethnic minority people who have been directly or indirectly involved with a CHC.
COMMENT
Myopic mindsets
When it comes to the state of mental health services, you ‘pays your money and you takes your choice’.
In the past few days (see News page 1) we have had to contradictory testaments to the way psychiatric services are surviving in a post-Griffiths' world.
For David King, head of the Mental Health Task Force, most of the infrastructure for a community-based service is in place, and there is a fair degree of optimism that, in Mr Micawber's terms, ‘something will turn up’.
But these comments need to be viewed in conjunction with a new MIND report which paints a different picture, further asserting that whatever turns up in the community is often too little, too late.
What remains at the heart of this conflict is the government's reluctance to accept that community care is not a cheap option.
As the MIND report highlights, between 80 per cent and 85 per cent of NHS spending on mental health goes on hospital treatment, despite the overwhelming fact that the majority of people want and prefer community-based alternatives.
By providing evidence from the first user's survey, it is possible to match the official rhetoric with clearly stated preferences.
We have become so obsessed with dowries and transfer payments that we are unable to look comprehensively at the needs of users
It is doubtful if even after so many years of revolving door policies or community mental health teams, SSDs do have an infrastructure for attractive community-based services.
So far as service delivery is concerned, the gap is wider than the traditional division between medical and social needs.
What continues to characterise mental health is the compartmentalism of care.
The Italian movement for democratic psychiatry proved so attractive and drew such European interest purely because in its attempts to place services fairly and squarely in the community it acknowledged that it was essential to involve not just health and social services, but also employment, leisure, housing, the trade union movement, and the whole panoply of services.
In the UK we have become so obsessed with dowries and transfer payments that we are unable to look comprehensively at the needs of users, let alone ask their views, and community care encourages this approach to service delivery.
As the MIND report concludes, not only must the system be made more user friendly, but it must move away from a supply-led to a consumer-oriented approach.
Isn't this, after all, what the reforms and Mr Major's much-vaunted Citizen's Charter are supposed to be all about?
CHILDREN ACT: TRAVELLERS
TRAVELLING IN A NEW DIRECTION
Working with travellers under the Children Act provides lessons for other areas of social work.
But proposed tough legislation threatens the opportunities the Act provides.
Sarah Cemlyn reports
The Children Act requires SSDs to give much greater weight to the context of people's lives.
It offers great potential for services for gypsy and traveller children, whose circumstances are often affected by intense and extensive discrimination.
The extent to which this potential is developed could have implications for other clients and for developing anti-discriminatory practice.
Key areas of the Act are the underlying principles of partnership, the provisions relating to children ‘in need’, the consideration of racial and cultural background, and the duties in relation to homeless young people.
There are many different groups of travellers and gypsies — and the terms which describe them have social, cultural, and legal connotations.
‘Travellers’ is the generic term, but others include Romany gypsies, Irish travellers, and New Age travellers.
These groups can also have different experiences of authority and welfare services.
Only broad generalisations are possible, drawing on Romany and Irish traveller history, which can sometimes apply to other groups.
Most important is the historical relationship between travellers and the rest of society and the firm it takes today.
Since Romanies first migrated from northern India in the tenth century, travellers have been persecuted everywhere they have lived and journeyed.
Many have a soundly-based suspicion of authority generally and the actions of welfare agencies have often reinforced their experiences of hostility.
Travellers' contact with social work services frequently resulted in the loss of children into care and an alien culture.
In Europe this has sometimes been part of a systematic attack on their lifestyle.
Attacks on gypsies elsewhere in Europe are currently grabbing headlines.
But in the UK, travellers are persistently denied basic conditions to live in safely.
This has occurred particularly through the non-implementation of the Caravan Sites Act 1968.
Its proposed abolition and replacement with more punitive measures would further criminalise travellers for their way of life.
Many travellers are subjected to acute discrimination and harassment.
Nearly half of all families have no authorised site.
This can mean severe insecurity, frequent evictions, distressingly harsh living conditions and lack of access to social, educational, health, economic, and political rights.
Children's development opportunities suffer in consequence.
This had been documented in health studies, and is the daily experience of any worker with travellers on unauthorised sites.
Another theme concerns differing and somewhat competing trends within social work.
SSDs face increasing demands, more public scrutiny, and diminishing resources.
These emphasise trends towards a highly structured, reactive service based on individual protection, especially in child care.
Meanwhile, aspirations towards partnership with users and anti-discriminatory practice require active consideration of the context of users' lives.
This includes inequality and discrimination and the social and political causes of individual problems.
Work with travellers exposes tensions between these developments.
Some aspects of travellers' lives, of the collective context in which individual problems arise, can be very visible.
Travellers are often forced to live in exposed public situations where social inequality and harsh conditions are not hidden from more affluent members of society as they would be in an outlying council estate or an inner city back street.
Such visible inequality may be one reason prejudice against travellers is so virulent.
Over the past two decades, health, education, and welfare services have started to respond to travellers but social work has tended to lag behind.
Generally, it seems the response of social services has been at individual crisis level, rather than reaching out to travellers.
There are several reasons for this.
Pressures on SSDs mean they are barely placed to seek out work.
The usual pattern of referral and case allocation is unsuited to highly mobile families.
Travellers' suspicions of authority in general and social work in particular have not encouraged them to seek help.
There have been some localised social services initiatives within a community social work model and some education welfare services for travellers have developed extensive outreach work.
The Children Act has opened up many possibilities and obligations to make the relationship between travellers and social work services more productive.
There are two perspectives: individualised services for children and families in difficulties; and a more collective approach.
Some of the Act's underlying principles can support efforts to overcome suspicion between travellers and welfare authorities.
Parental responsibility, partnership, non-intervention, attention to the wishes of the child and the necessity for a full assessment may mitigate the perceived threat of children being separated from their families because of their lifestyle.
The requirement to consider the child's religious, racial, cultural and linguistic background has significance for travellers.
It can validate their way of life as appropriate for children's upbringing.
This is given added weight by the Court of Appeal judgement of July 1988 which applied the Race Relations Act 1976 to travellers.
Section 17 of the Children Act is particularly important for travellers.
Its definition of need means a number of traveller children become eligible for its provisions because of the living conditions imposed on them and their families.
The section 17 provisions are not clear-cut duties and their implementation is impeded by limited resources.
But ways in which these provisions can help casework with families are emerging.
For instance, local authorities now have some liability for the acute physical danger traveller children can face because of site conditions.
In a recent case, section 17 was used to put pressure on a county council to offer a new location for a family on a particular day.
Section 20 — the duty to provide accommodation for young people whose welfare is ‘seriously prejudiced’— could benefit some traveller young people.
For instance, young people on the streets but seeking to take to the road might need help to acquire a serviceable living vehicle.
Development of children in traveller families often suffers because of harsh living conditions and lack of access to social, health, economic and political rights
Similarly, some travellers born-and-bred are effectively homeless when their parents' caravan becomes too crowded.
But poverty arising from lack of training, employment, and benefits prevents acquisition of their own home.
The Children Act could also open up much wider possibilities, affecting whole groups of travellers.
In particular, the section 17 provisions could have far-reaching potential.
Lack of sites and the resulting conditions in which children have to be raised are primary factors impeding children's development and creating their ‘need’.
Though a few traveller families and children will continue to require individual services, as in the rest of the population, a generally increased level of surveillance and individualised casework will not provide the answer.
This would be undermining and discriminatory.
There is the possibility of considerable tension between the response the Children Act requires and policies and practice amounting to neglect or harassment of unsited traveller families.
If the government's proposals on sites are implemented, these tensions will spiral.
Similar possibilities and contradictions surround many other groups of children affected by inequalities based on class and race and who experience poverty, poor housing and a lack of adequate developmental opportunities.
The case of travellers is something of a litmus test.
Which way is implementation of the Children Act going?
Sarah Cemlyn is lecturer in social work, University of Bristol
MENTAL HEALTH: ALCOHOL MISUSE
MASKING THE PROBLEM
Heavy drinking can be mistaken for a symptom of depression, rather than its cause.
Graham Fanti describes the link between alcohol and mental illness
When Geoff came into the staff room on the alcohol problems unit I assumed he had come to the wrong ward.
It is easily done as both his acute psychiatry ward and the alcohol unit looked similar and were on the same site, but he was adamant he wanted our service.
It turned out he was escaping a planned course of ECT because no one on his ward believed he might have a drink problem.
After some discussion and later negotiation with the acute ward, Geoff was transferred to the alcohol unit and with action on his heavy drinking his severe depression lifted.
No prior drug therapy had that effect and neither had any previous course of ECT.
Geoff's psychiatrist and other staff had made the mistake of dismissing his reported drinking as being a symptom of his depression rather than checking out its true origin.
Thanks to Geoff's example, as a social worker specialising in alcohol problems I started to learn about the interaction between alcohol and depression.
This dual presentation, or co-morbidity, of alcohol misuse and mental health problems can be crucial to the effectiveness of any social work help.
A number of factors divert mental health workers from identifying the role of alcohol in their initial interviews.
First, the absence of specialist alcohol training on qualification courses means there is no emphasis on screening, so little occurs in later practice.
Second, there is the misbelief that alcohol problems come from an exclusive group requiring a specialist response which the worker feels unable, or does not wish, to offer.
As a psycho-active drug alcohol can be a primary cause of mental health difficulties.
Its depressant action on the central nervous system affects emotional states in the short-term — such as during a drinking session — and long-term — where there is regular heavy drinking.
Some alcohol difficulties will be primarily and directly linked to alcohol use and some will be secondary, a complication but not the causal agent.
A detailed history from the service user and, where possible, those who know him or her well will indicate the hierarchy of problems: whether alcohol problems or the mental health difficulty came first, and whether heavy drinking was present before the development of mental health difficulties.
Alcohol can create depression, anxiety, confusion, and psychoses.
Those with mental health difficulties linked to alcohol tend to improve within seven days of abstinence.
Should the mental health state continue, then the condition is likely to be primary, with the alcohol problem being secondary.
Suicide is an area with a strong association with alcohol misuse.
One in three men and one in seven women who try to kill themselves also have physical and social alcohol-related problems.
The Mental Health Act 1983's exclusion of compulsory admissions for alcohol detoxification alone has led many to believe that alcohol related mental health problems are outside the Act, but this is not the case.
For instance,delirium tremens is a relatively rare, but potentially dangerous, psychotic state induced by a reduction in alcohol consumption.
This withdrawal state may be life-threatening and under the terms of the Act is grounds for compulsory admission to hospital.
The Act gravely lets down problem drinkers who have serious, alcohol-related ill health and decide to continue to drink despite their awareness of the harm they are causing themselves.
This is, in effect, gradual suicide.
They know they are drinking themselves to death and in such an instance the social worker has no legal powers to intervene.
Few training courses for approved social workers consider the influence of alcohol on mental health problems in any depth.
CCETSW, in a survey of social work qualification courses, found one in nine did not include anything on substance problems, and only one in 20 students was given practice training with specialist alcohol or other drug services.
The recently issued CCETSW guidance notes for DipSW courses on the inclusion of substance problems are a long overdue but welcome development.
As a student social worker, I recall accepting a depressed client's statement that ‘if I didn't drink, I would go mad’ as a rationale for his continued drinking.
I felt them, if I was in the same position, I would probably drink heavily as well.
Now I know it was likely the alcohol was causing his depression and may well have been the major influence on the poor family relationships involved.
I later realised I had missed a major opportunity for helping change the situation.
LAW: JUDICIAL REVIEW
LEGAL STORM BREWING
Local authorities are nervously anticipating a flood of judicial review challenges over community care.
Mike George explains the process and where it applies
In recent years more people have begun using the judicial review process to challenge the performance of local authorities and other public bodies.
While it may not provide a specific remedy for the complainant, it can force public bodies to alter policy and procedure.
For many, judicial review is the final stage in a lengthy battle to bring authorities to book, following complaints procedures, tribunals, and health or local government ombudsmen hearings.
The past decade has seem a dramatic growth in the number of complainants trying to use judicial review, from about 500 applications a year in the early 1980s to 2,439 last year.
Reasons for this increase are not entirely clear.
Two factors may be that review decisions have a high standing in public law and that many lobbying groups use the process to clarify points of law.
Judicial review is the key mechanism by which the decisions of public bodies or officers can be challenged.
Actions start in the High Court and cases may also go to the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords.
The High Court has overturned decisions made by secretaries of state.
Community care looks likely to be fought over by judicial review throughout the rest of this decade.
The chief problem is needs assessment and challenges by clients or their advocates over unmet need.
In a recent Community Care survey of SSDs, 82 per cent of departments said they will record unmet need and 59 per cent said they would inform clients of it.
Eighty per cent fear legal challenges from clients as a result.
Junior health minister Tim Yeo has referred to clients and assessors drawing up a ‘wish list’, ‘without any thought for resources or priorities’.
However, he has said: ‘If social services want to keep some kind of data about the additional services which may not immediately be necessary, I don't think the process is going to open them up to a legal threat.’
Meanwhile, the SSI and DoH have confirmed guidance issues before Christmas which appears to recommend caution over recording users' preferences for planning purposes.
But it makes no such specific point about assessed needs.
Further, it affirms authorities' responsibilities to meet their legal obligations where users have been assessed as requiring particular services.
Eight charities have obtained the expert legal opinion of Alan Moses QC on the meaning of section 47 of the NHS and Community Care Act.
He makes it clear that both the official guidance and Yeo's public statements are not supportable in law.
Local authorities are legally obliged to record unmet needs and disclose details of these.
BASW general secretary David Jones says the government has a legal problem over the Act's interpretation.
At BASW's recent AGM, its chairman Graham Thompson said it would be scandalously wasteful for the legal position to be clarified through judicial review.
But others believe that is the right way to proceed.
While they can clarify crucial points of law, some decisions appear contradictory.
The judicial review procedure in the High Court is based on three tests: illegality; irrationality; and/or procedural impropriety.
However, in practice these are often blurred and cases can be brought on a mixture of grounds.
Recent decisions as to whether to grant leave to go to judicial review, and High Court determinations, suggest that much hinges on the court's interpretation of statutory duties and points of law.
Irrationality and impropriety appear somewhat secondary, though so far there is no authoritative study to confirm this.
For example, in the past two years many applications have been made against local authorities' handling of assessment and service delivery for children with special educational needs.
The rights and expectations raised in the Education Act 1981 have led many parents to press hard for both assessments and services and some authorities are having problems with implementation.
In one case, the High Court turned down a complaint that an authority failed to provide unstressful transport for a child because regulations governing ‘statementing’ do not require an authority to specify that there should be non-stressful transport.
Observers of the case pointed out that the court apparently ignored ‘irrationality’ even though the child's education was affected by the lengthy and difficult journeys.
There is also confusion over applications about residential care.
In one case, the Appeal Court found a local authority had acted unlawfully by failing to consult residents properly before closing a home.
But in another case, Mr Justice Popplewell held that residents of a local authority home have no right of consultation if the authority decides to close it down.
he observed: ‘It would cause administrative chaos if, before any decision, those adversely affected were required to be consulted.’
It is difficult to reconcile these two interpretations.
Though there seems to be no public law right of consultation, the issue may or may not be regarded as germane, depending on other points of law in the case.
Different areas of legislation and regulation affect the likelihood of success for complainants in judicial review.
For instance, Stephen Knafler, a solicitor involved in judicial review, points out that in homelessness cases ‘parliament intended local authorities to be the judge  of facts without appeal to a court.
‘This means few complainants can use judicial review to ‘appeal’ against a local authority decision.
Exceptions might be SSD abuse of powers, or perverse decisions.
It is difficult to predict whether or not judicial review will be useful in clarifying the law over unmet need in the NHS and Community Care Act.
The same applies to local authorities' responsibilities under the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act.
Judicial review may also come into play in the potentially fraught area of contracted-out services.
For instance, home owners are challenging local authorities' proposed new contracts on the grounds that their terms are unfair.
Robert Campbell, solicitor or the National Care Homes Association, says 25 specimen contracts from local authorities may be challenged in this way.
And what is the final legal remedy for someone whose contracted-out domiciliary services are grossly inadequate or whose independent residential home will no longer accept them because they have run out of savings for fees?
Is the local authority purchaser responsible, or the agency?
Richard Poynter, another leading solicitor in this field, argues complainants should be made more aware of the procedure as much recent primary law depends on far-reaching delegated powers through informal tribunals and administrative officials.
However the High Court can no longer keep up with the increase in applications for judicial reviews — there is an average delay of 18 months in getting a case heard.
The Law Commission is reviewing the system, and aims to reduce applications, mainly by moving complainants into another legal forum.
A source close to the Law Commission suggests that, in the case of contracted-out services, one legal remedy might be to sue the relevant agency for breach of contract.
But Lee Bridges of the Public Law Project points out that judicial reviews have so far effectively assumed that, even if services are provided by an independent agent, ultimate responsibility lies with the public body holding basis statutory responsibility.
If Bridges is right, this still does not avoid possible legal argument over the ‘reasonableness’ of the contract between purchaser and provider, nor over how well contracts are complied with.
The Law Commission could take a different view by proposing legal redress concerning contracted-out services should no longer be a public law matter relating to a public body.
If so, the judicial review system will be under less pressure, but complainants and local authorities could face new legal problems.
COMMUNITY CARE: ELDERLY PEOPLE
A MODEL VILLAGE
Devon SSD is investing in four Community Care Support Centres to replace residential care for elderly people.
Gerry Tissier looks at how the project is shaping up
Come retirement age, an old person's fancy often seems to turn to Devon.
There, residential and nursing homes are two a penny.
The private sector alone runs more than a thousand, dwarfing the local authority's supply of a few dozen.
Given this, how should Devon SSD best respond to the post-modern world of community care in providing services to elderly people?
This was the poser set for the department two years ago.
It came up with a risky and controversial course of action: close the county's ‘surplus’ long-stay residential homes and reinvest in specialist community-based services for elderly people.
October In 1991, the council gave the scheme the go-ahead, and earmarked nine homes for closure.
Eighteen months and a judicial review later (‘Consultation in Practice’Community Care , 11 February) the closure programme is well under way.
As beds are given up, part of the money saved is being reinvested in four Community Care Support Centres for elderly people.
Policy development officer Sue Younger-Ross says: ‘At the time, we were looking at what to offer under the new community care arrangements.
Devon was already oversupplied with homes; we didn't need more.
We looked at the pressure points — many elderly people were drifting into homes after discharge from hospital due to poor aftercare.
Yet we had skills in assessment and rehabilitation and links with the health service which the independent sector lacked.’
The department was guided by good practice already developed in one of its home during the 1980s.
A joint health and social services team had provided assessment, rehabilitation, advice, and community-based services to elderly people with complex problems like dementia.
The team offered information, day care, short-term accommodation, and carer support.
Ian Jane, the home manager, says: ‘We found a flexible support package enormously extended what carers were willing to provide.
We could respond to their needs at any time of the day or night, whether for psychiatric help or respite care.
Because of this, people weren't going into nursing homes.’
The team also supported clients in small private homes.
In the process, it discovered such homes often provided better care for seriously mentally frail elderly people than local authority accommodation.
Jane says: ‘By helping homeowners give dignified care we prevented people ending up in large psychiatric hospitals and residential homes.’
Moving with the times: Outlands, a former residential home, is now Devon's model support centre
This philosophy of helping elderly people return to or stay in their own or small-scale homes will be picked up by the new centres.
They will take confused or physically frail elderly people for assessment and rehabilitation when they are at their most vulnerable, maybe after a stroke or bereavement.
Each centre will be designed to help even the most physically disabled or confused people move around and orient themselves easily.
To enable them to take all client groups, accommodation standards will be higher than those set down in the registration criteria.
But the co-ordinator of the elderly peoples' service development programme Paul Cousins says he is not looking for uniformity.
‘The idea is that people come in for different services according to local need.
They might plug into respite beds, day care or meals-on-wheels services.’
Such thinking is in evidence at the department's six-month pilot project at Outlands, a former 64-bed residential home.
Now, one floor of the building has been converted into a 40-place day centre and another into a ten-bed assessment and rehabilitation unit.
Manger Barry Luckham says both are full and have waiting lists.
The day centre, whose facilities will be available to elderly people in danger of physical or emotional harm, boasts a kitchen, library, shop, laundry, bathrooms, dining rooms, hairdressers, lounge, quiet room, smokers' room, and orangery.
Each room is specially designed and the centre is liberally scattered with toilets.
It is also developing ann information service, meals-on-wheels, and support groups.
The rehabilitation unit provides accommodation for up to six weeks for elderly people discharged from hospital.
Clients are assessed and prepared for independent living, with recommendations made for aftercare.
A physiotherapist and occupational therapist are attached.
Similar services will appear in the new support centres.
But Cousins stresses they are only a part of community care.
He says most elderly people will be assessed in their own homes with further support and facilities provided to carers and private homeowners.
Cousins believes the SSD must form good relationships with carers and the private sector in its approach to community care.
It also has a common interest with the health authority in seeing people are placed appropriately and beds are not clogged up.
Younger-Ross says: ‘You need a constructive dialogue with everyone if this concept is to work.’
She believes success also depends on staff.
‘It is easier and quicker to do a task for someone than promote independence.
But with improved staffing levels and training at the centres, workers will have the skills and time to teach the techniques of independence.
They will find it enormously rewarding.’
She says a new management structure will ensure care staff work closely with the assessment and rehabilitation teams.
Such improvements are expensive but Cousins believes they are a long-term investment.
‘You won't be paying for inappropriate placements and you won't be picking up the bill for carers later.
These centres are flagships and I hope more will follow.’
POLICY: MANAGEMENT AND TRAINING
HIT AND MISS
What excuse have SSDs for having achieved so little, despite the vast amount of cash hurled at them by successive governments since the early 1970s?
Bob Bessell argues a controversial case
Why have SSDs achieved so little despite the massive increase in resources allocated to them since they were first established in 1971?
There are various possible answers: The world of 1993 is different from that of 1971; the numbers of disabled elderly people have soared; the divorce rate has rocketed; or, more conveniently, we could expect nothing else given the governments we have had.
These statements are all true and there have been astonishing changes of government policy in a remarkably short period.
Nevertheless, SSDs have somehow managed to obtain resources at a rate which is the envy of other local authority departments.
They have convinced themselves and the public that each year they have suffered draconian cuts.
In truth, the only major cutbacks lie in the disparity between resources and SSDs' generally unrealistic aspirations.
One hopes they will escape the fate of the farmers who cried ‘wolf’ while eating the fatted  calves of subsidy or it will be hard to gain credibility during real hardship.
Indisputably, social problems now seem worse than in 1971.
But if throwing resources at them is not the solution, what is?
Social workers must ask this question.
The first problem is whether there is still a consensus about the nature of social work.
Twenty years ago people argued about definitions but they did not really disagree about a system of values which centred the individual's worth in a family context and saw counselling as the social worker's core skill.
This role would not find much acceptance these days, which perhaps explains why antiracism and equal opportunities receive so much emphasis.
Because the humanistic justification of social work is now outmoded, its value is expressed in harsh political terms which increase confrontation.
As well as losing sight of its basic principles, social work has lost its major influence on senior managers who are now at political centre stage.
Unfortunately, many directors do not have even a basic social work qualification but are more influenced by business management.
This indicates little more than the lack of influence exerted by BASW and the SCA, but the real indictment of the profession is that the principles of social work and management have not been integrated.
The work of thousands of social workers has been frustrated because SSDs have not developed as agencies based on social work values.
The superficiality of many community care plans indicates a near-bankruptcy of thinking.
The response to mounting criticism is to reorganise or complain of lack of resources.
Some SSDs have reorganised radically five or six times in ten years.
Small wonder so little value has been obtained, despite the substantial increase in resources.
The problem is not confined to SSDs.
If anything, social work teaching is in even greater disarray.
Teachers do not need a specialist social work teaching qualification.
They do not even need a basic social work qualification.
Apparently, the explanation is that the institutions where social workers are taught will not tolerate interference in staff appointments.
But would anyone unqualified be allowed to teach doctors or lawyers?
This criticism is not mainly directed at universities and colleges, which would surely wish to appoint experience professionals who met their academic and teaching standards.
But where could social workers obtain skills which would qualify them to teach social work?
The wonder is not that social work and social work education are in such a mess, but that so much is being achieved, despite the difficulties.
This says much about the worthwhile underlying values of social work and provides grounds for hope.
We must either have such confidence in social work's professional values that we wait for everything to sort itself out, or social workers must grasp their own destiny.
For instance, we could press for an integration of social work values in senior management and social work teaching.
People in a position of influence could accept responsibility for implementing the results.
CCETSW has outdone SSDs in attracting more resources and has printed more forgettable publications than even the VAT office.
It is questionable whether it can become an agent to promote social work but is position is so central than an attempt must be made.
If that fails it will have to be replaced.
LEARNING DIFFICULTIES: PARENTS
LOSING OUT ON PARENTHOOD
Despite the Children Act, there is often no partnership with parents with learning difficulties so they remain disadvantaged and may even risk losing their children.
Linda Ward explains
Mrs Peters' (not her real name) first baby was born in 1988; it was taken into care.
A while later she married and had a second baby; it was made a ward of court.
Mrs Peters has a learning difficulty.
‘All I really want is to have a home of my own and for my children to be happy.’
Her parents complained about social services' behaviour during her pregnancy and the birth of her second child.
The local ombudsman found Lancashire SSD had not given her the support and counselling she needed.
It had fallen ‘a considerable way short of discharging its responsibility’.
Its failure to provide the counselling and support needed was unfair to her and her parents.
Mrs Peters is no isolated case.
People with learning difficulties who become parents are regularly at great risk of losing their children.
Despite the Children's Act's emphasis on partnership with parents, it seems this group of parents is likely to lose out in this most personal and painful arena.
Over the past 15 years there have been great advances towards an ordinary life in the community for people with learning difficulties: the growth of ordinary housing; the development of employment and education opportunities; steps towards integration in the community and more flexible support services; and the mushrooming of self-advocacy.
But progress in marriage and parenting for people with learning difficulties is much less clear-cut and visible.
Many professionals find it difficult to accede, in practice, to the values and philosophy of normalisation — that people with learning difficulties should be treated as equal citizens, with the same rights and access to valued social roles as everyone else.
One of the most socially valued roles in contemporary society — being a parent — is regularly denied to people with learning difficulties.
But why should this be?
This is the point where a number of difficult areas converge: society's ambivalence about sexuality and people with learning difficulties; a tradition of segregation; a lingering concern about eugenics; a shameful history of (enforced) sterilisation; a proper concern about vulnerable children; and their right to due protection from neglect and abuse — set against an increasing recognition that people with learning difficulties should enjoy the same rights to an ordinary life in our society as anyone else, including the rights to be parents.
There are no simple answers.
But for people with learning difficulties — and those involved with them — this is a pressing concern.
For many mothers with learning difficulties, the experience of being a parent in our society is difficult, as the new publication Parents with Learning Disabilities shows.
Any problems with parenting are routinely exacerbated by poverty, inadequate housing, harassment, and constant anxiety about losing the child.
Professional interventions, far from being a source of help and support, are often another cause of upset and trouble.
Professionals are right to be concerned that all children are protected from abuse and neglect.
But we know children can be at risk from even well-qualified professionals appointed to care for them (not least in children's homes to which they have been sent for their own welfare and safety), or from parents not burdened by a ‘learning difficulty’ label (witness the recent ‘home alone’cases here and in the United States).
Many of us who are parents — especially those of us who are single parents or working mothers — worry we are not perfect.
Most of the time we console ourselves with the knowledge that we are ‘good enough’, loving parents.
But not having a learning difficulty is no guarantee of competent parenthood, any more than a learning difficulty label automatically means the reverse.
All parents need support at different points in their parenting careers, but parents with learning difficulties are frequently beset by additional problems.
They have often received inadequate parenting themselves, had negative experiences of the legal process and have been judged by standards which would not be applied to most ordinary people (and which many ‘ordinary parents’ would fail to meet).
The research which has been conducted on their parenting and its outcomes for their children has often been flawed and equivocal.
The problems which they confront in bringing up their children have too often been exacerbated by the interventions of those in the helping professions.
Partnership with parents with learning difficulties must been openmindedness and innovation from professionals, backed up by flexible, sensitive, and changing support for parents and children so both can flourish.
Is this too much to ask in the current economic climate when priorities may all to easily lie elsewhere?
Services can at least do better by parents with learning difficulties in the future than they have in the past.
TRAINING RESOURCES
WHAT'S NEW
Home Visiting — The Starter Pack
A basic pack with video which covers skills and attitudes required for effective work with families in their homes.
Surviving Divorce
A manual, based on a well-tested approach, for offering information and crucial support for people who are divorcing or separating from partners.
‘Frozen Peas’— Handling the Memories of Childhood Sexual Abuse
A video in which a woman recounts how, in her late 30s, she realised how she had blocked out her experience of sexual abuse from her memory.
Improving Practice with Children and Families
Second training manual in a series produced by CCETSW's Northern Curriculum Development project on anti-racist social work; uses case studies, exercises and readings to foster good practice.
Investigative Interviewing with Children
The much-tested, long awaited OU pack which helps social workers, police and others to interview effectively children who may have been abused.
Making the right choice
MY CHOICE, MY OWN CHOICE
This is a video resource pack on safer sex aimed particularly at adolescents and adults with moderate learning difficulties.
It was developed following work carried out by Empower, a Lambeth working group on relationships and sexual health for people with learning difficulties.
The group's approach was guided by two principles.
First, that wise choices about health are most easily made by people who feel good about themselves and are able to talk to their partners.
Second, that access to sources of personal support is helpful.
The video medium was chosen because a story told in dramatic form can engage the audience emotionally and convey knowledge, ideas, and strategies.
The main characters (played by actors with learning difficulties) are four people with learning difficulties who live in a group home.
They run their own lives with the assistance of a support worker.
The two men are in an established gay relationship and one of the women has a non-resident boyfriend.
The story's action centres around the fourth person, Eileen, who is concerned about her relationship with her new boyfriend, John.
Themes of decision-making, personal choice, respect, importance of support, knowledge about sexual intercourse and safer sex practices, parental anxiety, and independence run through the story in ways which are sensitive to the experiences and needs of its intended audience.
The story is told in seven episodes, each covering a day.
An accompanying facilitators' pack contains nine training sessions of roughly 90-minutes.
The first session is used for introductions and for setting up a framework for the course.
It also gives participants an opportunity to see the complete video and express their first impressions.
Remaining sessions each focus on a single episode in the story (with the important theme of sexual choice being allocated two sessions).
The introduction to the pack gives useful guidance about the setting for running such a group and on establishing a contract for the way the participants will work together.
The recommended group size is between eight and ten people, with two facilitators (a woman and a man if the group is mixed).
The plans for each session are clearly laid out and various learning strategies are suggested: discussion; brainstorming; role play (with additional situation cards); exercises; reflection.
Four full-page line drawings illustrate mutual stimulation, oral sex and penetration with the man wearing a condom.
One concern is that the package, while adequately covering its target themes, does not give sufficient recognition to the context in which it will be used.
It is suggested that the pack is likely to work best with established groups, where these groups have not previously addressed  sensitive personal areas.
But work on sexual expression can at first be confronting and anxiety-provoking.
More than one group-building session may be needed for the facilitators as well as the participants to feel comfortable with the subject.
That said, the package is a useful resource for the growing number of people working with adolescents and adults who have learning difficulties on adulthood, choice, personal relationships, and sexuality.
Benefits explained
DEMYSTIFYING THE BENEFITS SYSTEM: A TRAINING MANUAL FOR PEOPLE DEALING WITH BENEFITS ENQUIRIES
This is a training manual for a two-day course on means-tested benefits including the Social Fund.
The manual is attractively presented and good typography makes it readable.
It is presented in an A4 ring binder and each section is well indexed.
But it is bulky as it is printed on one side of the page only.
The presentation makes the pack feel like a self-instructor though it is clearly not.
My copy included ‘tutor's notes’ which provide a timetable, session plan and write-ups for flip charts.
The session plan, like so much welfare rights training, lacked interactive opportunities.
The introduction suggests the manual will enable a trainer with little knowledge of the subject to teach means-tested benefits effectively.
I doubt this, because many questions are left unanswered.
But it might be useful for an expert trainer who lacks time and opportunities to produce his or her own materials.
The amount of detail is uneven.
For example, there is nothing about people in residential accommodation but several pages on the benefit position of 16- and 17-year-olds.
Generally, the advice on difficult areas of adjudication was unchallenging and this again suggests the need for an experienced tutor.
The most glaring omission was the lack of reference to take-up problems.
Without this, students might ask: ‘Why learn about benefits?
It all looks straightforward.’
In the first worked example I thought the female carer had an underlying entitlement to invalid care allowance and the carer's premium.
This was not mentioned and highlights the intricacies of benefit take-up.
Good things come in small packages
GOOD THINGS CAN STILL HAPPEN
There are plenty of glossy, expensive training packs going the rounds at the moment.
They arrive in large packages with up-market ring folders, with the text and video presented to give the impression of a plethora of special information and guidance.
‘Good Things Can Still Happen’ swims against the tide.
You get one video and what at first glance looks like a child's painting book.
But once you open the book and view the video you realise that for £62 you have the best buy in town.
This training pack aims to help professionals work face-to-face with the primary school-aged, sexually abused child.
It aims to help the child survive and work through his or her feelings.
The video is refreshingly direct and will appeal to children, as this is their usual means of communication.
There are six sections.
The first looks at the mixed feelings children have after they have disclosed.
Several clips look at the fears sexually abused children have.
Anger, depression and guilt are then talked about and there is an opportunity to start discussing and resolve destructive feelings.
Two animated child characters with Canadian accents are wittily drawn.
This helps adults use the video to understand the long-term effects of sexual abuse.
The booklet not only gives good information about the subject but suggests open-ended questions to prompt children to talk.
One the principle that ‘children themselves often know what they need in order to heal but can't say it in words’, there are some lively activities to pursue.
Perhaps the ending of the video is too rosy, but then sexually abused children may need considerable reassurance that ‘good things can still happen’.
Primary task: The video's direct approach will appeal to children
Stress in the workplace
STRESS IN THE GROUP CARE SETTING
This is a video about staff stress in homes for children and elderly people from a management viewpoint.
It is full of Scottish commonsense and relevant to those of us living south of the border, though one or two of the participants are less easy to comprehend that others.
The video identifies four types of stress: stress through clients; stress through organisations; personal stress; and stress brought about by fellow staff.
I would say from personal experience that the most debilitating stress is the stress brought about by fellow staff, particularly if a person is living in the residential situation.
The video does not have a lot to say about stress brought about by sexual harassment but it does rightly emphasise the importance of professional workers leaving their personal problems at home.
But for colleagues who have illness in the family or marital troubles, this is easier said than done.
The video emphasises the need all staff, but particularly young staff at the sharp end, have for positive feedback.
They need to know that the onerous  tasks they are performing are done correctly and are appreciated by line managers.
Otherwise, negative views and bad practice can be reinforced — with tragic results.
Formal staff appraisal systems are essential.
Caring for elderly people and children in the residential setting can be one of the most rewarding as well as the most stressful of all jobs in our society.
It is sad that, as far as disturbed children are concerned, it is also becoming one of the most dangerous.
A head of home can also be a lonely job.
This video does not really address these problems at a deep level.
This training video would be useful not only to show to new staff, but it must be admitted, to a lot of heads of homes as well.
The notes accompanying the video are particularly helpful.
RECRUITMENT: CARE MANAGEMENT
THE FINAL FRONTIER
Will the new post of care manager point boldly to more senior positions or is it a career cul-de-sac.
David Mitchell investigates opportunities nationally
Is there life after care management?
Yes, but not as we know it.
In fact, no one seems to know exactly where future career opportunities lie for this new breed.
Some see care manager posts as a move into management while others view them as a progression of practice.
Most agree, though, that care management does not preclude social workers from going back to direct work with clients, nor from switching to other areas like child care.
Some of the more advanced authorities have already developed a career structure for care managers — a model which could prove a pointer for the rest of the country.
In Kent, the natural progression for a care manager would be to group leader, supervising five to ten care managers, then to locality manager, and finally to one of five area commissioners.
Kent has had a care management model in adult services for three or four years and is aware there could be a potential imbalance between itself and other authorities.
‘There could be recruitment problems, but our care managers are in a reasonably strong position because Kent is acknowledged to be further advanced,’ says Oliver Mills, assistant director responsible for inspection and quality assurance.
Though Kent has established a career path, it does not exclude a move back to service provision.
A few care managers have already gained posts in the SSD's linked resource centres or moved to children's services.
‘Social workers have always had a management role in what they do.
What we are doing in care management is not greatly different from what we do in children's services — working with limited resources and with other agencies,’ says Mills.
There is a danger of an even greater divide than already exists until we get care management in child care
Nevertheless, he feels career paths for care managers should be explored in future: ‘Career opportunities flow from training and qualifications.
They are not well developed in terms of a national framework, compared with social workers and occupational therapists.’
Elsewhere, opinions differ greatly as to whether a move into care management is a move towards management or a further development of practice.
Alan Pretty, a team leader in personnel services at Lincolnshire SSD, believes it is very much a management move and is not for social workers who want to continue in the caring role.
‘Social workers are not really managers.
They get close to clients and do their best for them.
That can often mean standing up for the client and criticising the system,’ he says.
‘Care managers are stepping into a different world, managing budgets and telling clients when they can't do something because there is no more money.
They have to strike a balance and be more prepared to manage.’
A widespread view in London is that care management skills are no different from the basic skills required of any social worker.
‘There may be aspects of care management which require to be developed in a different way, but they are as interchangeable as any social work skill,’ says Brent director Peter Raine, secretary of London ADSS.
Raine admits the knowledge base is likely to be different in London where social services and housing are coterminous or even joint services.
‘There will have to be reorientation courses as people change jobs, but we should be doing that now anyway.
As time passes, it becomes harder for workers to shift, but it is just a matter of absorption and keeping up to date,’ he says.
‘Given longer, care managers may need to develop skills which are not social work skills.
We may ultimately have people pulling together plans where they assessment is done by a range of people outside social services.’
In East Sussex, which has yet to appoint care managers, assistant director Jim Graham reckons there will be some concerns about the types of job descriptions put together for the job.
‘Initially, there will be the same sort of debate as when departments moved from a generalist to a specialist base.
Then the differences proved to be less than the similarities, and the same is likely to emerge with care management,’ he says.
Graham believes care managers will have the option of pursuing careers in management or specialist practice roles: ‘I don't see a problem with returning to direct client work.
At the end of the day, care management is a process and a system, not a career.’
Wakefield director David Lane believes care management is likely to go through a fairly turbulent period initially.
‘People who have skills in one authority are likely to be accepted in another unless they have higher standards of training and qualifications, but it is too early to see any pattern,’ he says.
The main difficulty Lane foresees is that care managers will have to adapt to new systems which will vary between individual authorities rather than types of authority.
‘It would be helpful to have more steering on inter-authority models and useful to have career structures.
A lot of career structures are fairly stunting at the moment,’ he says.
The Isle of Wight takes the line that care management is a parallel profession to social work and pays care managers on equivalent scales according to experience, skills, and qualifications.
Neighbourhood manager Sue Bennett feels this has yet to be recognised nationally, but is certain to become a major issue in future.
‘It has become quite clear that every authority is pursuing a different model and taking a different approach.
But there is no recognition in national training policy nor in the approach local authorities are taking’ she says.
‘Authorities like ourselves take the training and development of care managers seriously.
But unless authorities have accredited training, how recognisable is their training going to be when staff move to other authorities?’ she asks.
The Isle of Wight SSD sees care management as a progression of practice rather than management, with care managers able to transfer back into social work posts.
‘Sometimes it is necessary to tell people they haven't burned their boats.
We also hope that if people want to work across client groups there will be some transfer of skills,’ says Bennett.
The argument for care management as a parallel profession is backed by Ian Winter, assistant director responsible for purchasing and policy development at Northamptonshire SSD.
‘The basic level of social work and social care training pays no more than a passing eye to the kind of skills we need to develop in care management.
It should be a thread that runs right through courses,’ he says.
It's a care manager, but not as we know it
Whatever model is adopted, the fundamental skills needed for the job will remain unaltered, according to Winter.
It will also be a positive career move — care managers will be mobile, with all the advantages of having developed key skills in purchasing and providing.
‘The important thing is the skills are transferable to general management or maybe back into practice, because we still need good managers to manage provision.’
If any divide is to emerge, it is more likely to be between adult care and child care services.
Winter maintains, ‘People find it much harder to move back into child care after a period in adult care because they tend to be consumed with either the Children Act or community care legislation.
£There is a danger of an even greater divide than already exists between the two until we get care managements in child care,’ he says.
According to Lesley Bell, director of the Joint Initiative for Community Care, funded by the ADSS and the Local Government Management Board, departments should encourage service managers to see a spell in care management as part of their career development, possibly towards a more senior post in service management.
‘Rather than creating a chasm between purchasers and providers, we need to build bridges across the gap and enable people to move backwards and forwards from care management to service management,’ she says.
Bell believes the best care packages will be put together by care managers who have an appreciation of the service issues involved in delivering that package.
‘Care management could be quite a restrictive task to do over any length of time.
It makes more sense to see it as a career development move, providing an understanding and appreciation of both sides of the divide,’ she says.
‘The way that organisations are structured at the moment, I don't see any real advantages in people pursuing their career entirely through the care management structure.’
OFFLOAD
THERE'LL BE BLUEBIRDS OVER…
Is community care bringing out the Dunkirk spirit in all of us?
First we had the ACC's Stephen Campbell, in our 1 April issue, announce in his best Churchillian tones that is was: ‘The end of the beginning, but not yet the beginning of the end.’
Then our 15 April cover — apparently featuring a map borrowed from ‘Dad's Army’— spoke of ‘So much owed by so many to so few’.
Next we'll have Virginia Bottomley telling us ‘I have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears and sweat’, or Terry Butler from the Support Force saying ‘Give us the tools and we will finish the job.’
For my part, I would humbly suggest: ‘We shall assess them on the beaches, we shall assess them on the landing grounds, in the fields and in the streets…’ and so on.
WHO AM I?
When the Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley, well-known ally of single parents everywhere, gave evidence to the social security select committee recently, the nation's media were assembled to hear his pearls of wisdom.
And they weren't disappointed.
He introduced himself to the committee as Secretary of State for Trade and Industry.
Obviously that gleam in his eye, which I have always interpreted as something completely different (and probably libellous), is in fact a passionate yearning after his old job.
Or maybe he's just tired.
Too many late nights listening to Gilbert and Sullivan, I shouldn't wonder.
LITERARY HYPE
Mad Carew is a diligent reader of The Times Literary Supplement and was pleased to note a review by social work professor Bob Pinker of the London School of Economics.
Reviewing a biography by Phyllis Willmott of social work administrator Geraldine Aves, he threw out an impressively succinct characterisation of the Seebohm Report, which, as one might say at a BASW workshop, I want to share with you.
‘A marshmallow of expansionist generalities which has encouraged social workers to think and act beyond their capabilities and material resources’.
Well, I suppose that's one way of putting it.
SEQUEIRA'S SUCCESSES
That stalwart of style and impeccable manners, Robin SeQueira, director of Dorset SSD, has sent his workers into an indeterminable tizzy over his self-penned article on community care which appeared in the department's in-house publication,Interview .
A concerned and confused practitioner sent in a cutting of the cataclysmic article and highlighted a paragraph which reads as follows:
‘There are great expectations, pious hopes and myriad uncertainties which have coalesced to cause a frisson of excitement at the prospect of success, for success alone can be the only option that should be countenanced.’
Surprisingly, after all that, the only bone of contention is the supposed ‘frisson of excitement’ which the anonymous mole declares is impossible to find and seeks help, as certain members of the department ‘don't know where to look, or even what we are looking for’.
If somebody is feeling decidedly brave, and can decode the rest of SeQueira's ode to community care, they will get an ‘Antiques Roadshow’ approved Community Care mug.
NOBODY'S FOOL
More frolics from the ADSW conference in Inverness.
It being 1 April, Grampian's director Mary Hartnoll and  deputy Alex Hamilton decided to test the mettle of Archie Robb, who was minding the fort.
A press release on Scottish Office notepaper was dispatched to the Woodhill House HQ saying the conference had heard community care was to be postponed due to a miscalculation of infrastructure costs, which authorities were required to pay back by 31 April.
They received the following reply: ‘Emergency social work committee this morning agreed to sell Woodhill House to repay infrastructure cost while acknowledging pressure this would put on accommodation budgets.’
YOU GETS WHAT YOU PAY FOR
The director of applied social studies at the Royal Holloway College, Brian Sheldon, provides a definition of a ‘seamless service’,(Offload, 1 April).
‘I was once on the receiving end of one I think when I bought a suit in Hong Kong.
The advert for the community tailoring unit looked good; the sartorial needs assessment took five minutes; the product was delivered in 48 hours, it looked slick and it was very cheap.
‘Unfortunately, it fell to pieces the third time I accessed it as a user (no seams you see).
I was told this happens because suit managers insist providers use the cheapest materials.
So ‘seamless’ means stitched together quickly and cheaply, not recommended for long-term use.’
THE WAY WE WERE
Community Care 3 May, 1978
Caning should be regarded as a form of baby battering and the non-accidental injury procedures should be followed.
So says the Nottinghamshire branch of the British Association of Social Workers in the latest move against last year's reintroduction of the cane in Nottinghamshire's community homes with education.