

Chapter One
1950
You took your bloody time!’
Dr Martin O'Reilly stared down into the child's face and sighed.
‘I had to see another patient.
Now where's your ma?’
‘In bed, of course.’
The little boy went back to sit on the stairs with his seven brothers.
They ranged in age from three to fourteen.
The doctor lit a cigar.
He stood in the hallway puffing on it for a few seconds to make sure it was fully alight.
The smell of the Ryans en masse was enough to turn the strongest of stomachs, though the slum stench was in his blood now, he reckoned.
It permeated his clothes and skin.
He started to pick his way up the stairs, careful not to tread on any little fingers.
The children shuffled left and right on their bottoms to let him pass.
He was also careful not to touch the wall.
The smell he could combat with his cigar, but the roaches — he would never get used to them.
How the buggers ran up the walls he would never know.
They defied gravity.
On the landing he pushed open the first bedroom door, and there in front of him was Sarah Ryan.
She was lying on a large double bed, her belly huge and swollen.
He smiled at her, his heart breaking.
Sarah Ryan was thirty-four years old.
Her faded blonde hair was scraped back from her face into a bun, her skin was pale and dry.
If her eyes had not been so bright and alert, she could have been mistaken for a corpse.
He could remember coming to this house fifteen years earlier to deliver her first child.
A fine-looking woman she had been then.
Now her body was fat and  scarred from constant childbearing, and her face wrinkled prematurely from habitual frowning.
‘It's well on then?’
His voice was gentle.
Sarah tried to hitch herself up in the bed.
The old newspapers that had been placed underneath her crackled at the movement.
‘Yeah.
It's good of you to come, Martin.
I told the little sods to get their dad, but as usual he ain't nowhere to be seen.’
She gripped her belly as another pain shot through her.
‘Oh, it's dying to be born this one.’
She smiled faintly.
Then her eyes stretched wide as she saw the doctor take a syringe out of his bag.
‘You ain't sticking that thing in me!
We had all this out the last time.
I ain't having any bloody injections.
This is me thirteenth child and I never had one with any of them.
Not even the stillborns.
I ain't starting now.’
‘Come on, Sarah.
This will ease you.’
She put up her hand to stem his protests.
‘I'm sorry but them things hurt like hell, whereas giving birth…it's nothing.
Nothing…’
Martin put the needle on the small bedside table and, sighing heavily, pulled back the blankets covering her legs.
His expert hands felt around her sides and then he slipped two fingers inside her vagina.
When he had finished he pulled the blankets back over her.
‘I think this one's breech.’
Sarah shrugged.
‘First one if it is.
I ain't done so bad.
Ben was saying the other day that soon they would drop out as I walked down to the shops!’
She laughed and the doctor laughed with her.
‘That would do me out of a job.
Now you relax for a minute, I won't be long.
I want one of the boys to run an errand for me.
’ He left the room, shutting the door quietly behind him.
‘She had it then?’
This from eight-year-old Leslie who had let him in earlier.
‘No, she hasn't had it yet.
Be patient, you young bugger.’
The doctor turned to the eldest boy, Michael.
At nearly  fifteen he was already over six feet tall and towered over the little Irish doctor in front of him.
‘Michael, go and get old Mother Jenkins.
I'm going to need help with this one.’
The boy stared down at the doctor for a few seconds.
‘Me muvver's gonna be all right, ain't she?’
His voice was deep and concerned.
The doctor nodded.
‘Of course.’
The boy still did not move.
‘She's never had old Mother Jenkins before.’
The doctor stared up at the boy impatiently.
‘Look, Michael, I can't stand around here all day talking to you.
Your ma's bad, but if we can get this baby born she'll be all right.
The sooner you get Mrs Jenkins the better.
Time's short.’
Michael turned slowly away from the doctor and placing one hand on the banister and the other on the wall he slid down, jumping over the younger boys' heads.
As he landed heavily on the linoleum, the doctor called to him: ‘Tell her I'll be paying the ten shillings or she won't come.’
Michael waved to let the doctor know he had heard, then, opening the front door, he rushed out.
The doctor looked down on to the younger children's heads and his teeth clamped down even harder on his cigar.
Michael's foray down the stairs had caused the cockroaches to fall from the walls.
The youngest child, Benny, not only had them crawling in his clothes, but one adventurous roach was slowly making its way across his face.
Martin watched the child flick it gently away and made a mental note to see the landlord about getting the house stoved.
It would never get rid of the damned things permanently but at least it would give the Ryans a breathing space.
‘Now then, I want a couple of you to go and find your father.’
Geoffrey, Anthony and Leslie all stood up.
The doctor pointed at them in turn.
‘You, Geoffrey, try the Latimer Arms.
You, Anthony, go up the Roundhouse.
And you…’
Leslie nodded, his eyes fixed on the floor.
‘…go to the Kensington Park Hotel.
If you can't find  him in any of those places then try the Bramley Arms.
If by any chance you do find your da, tell him that he is needed at home.
Can you all remember that?’
The three heads nodded and they went on their way.
Martin went back into the bedroom with Sarah.
‘Sure they're good boys you've got there.’
Her voice sounded sceptical.
‘I don't know about that, Doctor.
They're a bit wild at times.
It's the old man.
He takes the belt to them for nicking one minute, and then the next he's sending them out to do it.
The poor little sods can't win.’
She doubled up as another pain hit her.
‘Relax now, Sarah.’
He pushed a few stray hairs from her face.
It was getting dark so he pulled the curtains and put on the overhead light.
He lit himself another cigar from the butt of the previous one.
Then, with it firmly clamped between his teeth, he examined her again.
When he had finished he had a worried look on his face.
He visibly relaxed as he heard a voice in the hallway.
A few seconds later Matilda Jenkins had pushed open the bedroom door.
She stood at the end of Sarah's bed, all eighteen stone of her.
‘All right, Doctor?’
This was a form of address, not a question.
‘All right, Sarah?
The bloody stairs knacker me these days.
But them boys!’
She flapped her hand at Sarah.
‘Talk about scatter them.
One look at me coming up 'em and they run like mad!’
Her deep booming laugh reverberated around the bedroom.
The doctor was paying her the ten shillings, she could afford to be friendly.
‘It's a big woman you are, Matilda, to be sure.
Now get yourself back down the stairs and heat me up lots of water.
I want to sterilise me things.
This little fellow's breech.’
Matilda nodded her head vigorously.
‘Righto, Doc.
I'll send around the neighbours, get them to put their kettles on.
We might even get a cuppa out of them!’
As she stamped from the room, Sarah glared at the doctor.
‘What's she doing here?
I ain't got ten shillings, and if I did have I'd give it to the kids.
They ain't eaten since yesterday, and until that man of mine comes home, they won't eat at all!
Knowing him, he's shacked up with some old sort somewhere and won't be home till the morning!’
She was near to tears.
‘Calm down now, Sarah.
I'm paging her.
’ He grasped one of her hands.
‘Now be quiet, woman.
I can't cope with this on me own.
So you whisht now, and save your strength.’
Sarah lay back against the pillows, her face drenched with sweat.
Her lips were cracked and dry.
Turning awkwardly towards the bedside table, she picked up a glass of water and sipped the warm liquid gratefully.
A little while later Matilda bought up a bucket of steaming water.
The doctor set about sterilising his things, including a large pair of scissors.
By nine in the evening Sarah was in great distress, as was the child within her.
Twice the doctor had tried to push his arm inside her to turn the child and each time he had failed.
He wiped his hands on a towel he had brought with him.
This child had to be born, and soon, or he would lose the pair of them.
Blast Benjamin Ryan!
It was always the same.
He gave her a child every year, but was never there when it came into the world.
The little boys kept their vigil on the stairs.
All were tired and hungry.
Michael, waiting at the top, was silently cursing his father as he looked at his younger brothers' little faces.
Benny was sucking the arm of his jumper.
Suddenly there was a loud banging on the front door.
Six-year-old Garry answered it, only to be knocked flying as two policemen came crashing in.
Michael took one look at them and, swearing under his breath, ran into his mother's bedroom.
Cries could be heard from the stairs as the policemen tried to make their way up to the landing, the remaining boys making it as difficult as possible for them in the hope that their brother would get away.
Michael had opened the bedroom window and was half in and half out as the policemen burst into the room.
Then the lights went out.
‘Who turned off the lights, you little bastards?’
‘No one turned off the bleeding lights.
The electric's gone.’
Sarah's voice was faint.
The policemen turned on their torches.
‘Bring those over here.
This woman is in danger of her life.’
The urgency in the doctor's voice brought both men to the bed.
The boy was long gone, they both knew that.
Sarah was writhing in agony, tears on her cheeks.
‘You lot want slaughtering.
My boy ain't done nothing.’
Matilda Jenkins broke in, ‘Look, has anyone got a shilling for the meter?’
‘I have.’
The smaller of the two policemen fished some change out of his pocket.
Leaving his colleague to help the doctor, he walked from the room and carefully made his way down the stairs.
Stepping through the children as gently as he could, he went to the cupboard under the stairs and, locating the meter, put a shilling in.
He put in another, and turned off his torch as he stepped out of the cupboard.
Seven pairs of eyes were looking at him with open hostility, even the youngest's who was not yet four.
The man looked at the boys as if seeing them for the first time.
At the heads close-cropped to combat the lice and the holey jumpers with elbows poking through.
He stood for a while staring at them.
He felt for the first time in his life what it must be like to be one of them and was overwhelmed with a feeling of sadness and futility.
Taking out his wallet, he pulled out a ten shilling note and offered it to Geoffrey, the second eldest.
‘Get yourself over to Messer's and get some fish and chips.’
‘We don't want old Bill's money!’
‘Hark at the hard man!
Well, clever clogs, your little brothers are starving, so go and do what I tell you.’
He pushed the money into Geoffrey's hands.
All the boy's instincts told him to throw the money back at the policeman, their natural enemy, but his little brothers' faces changed his mind.
They had not eaten for nearly two days.
Sullenly, he pushed past the man, who held on to his arm.
‘Tell that brother of yours that we'll catch him in the end so he might as well give himself up.’
Geoffrey pulled his arm roughly away.
Then, looking at the man as if he was so much dirt, he let himself out of the front door.
The constable walked back up the stairs, shaking his head.
In the bedroom, Sarah was fighting to get the child born.
The other policeman was holding her down, while the doctor was cutting her down below.
As he cut she gave an almighty push and ripped open to her behind.
The child slipped into the world, still in its birth sac.
The doctor punched this open and looked at the little blue face inside.
He cleaned its nose and gently blow into its mouth while he pressed tenderly on its tiny ribcage.
The baby coughed and gave a little cry.
Then, taking a deep breath, began to bawl its head off.
Quick as a flash the doctor had cut the cord, passed the child to Matilda Jenkins, and was stitching away at Sarah as if his own life depended on it.
She lay against the pillows, her whole body numb.
She swore to herself that this was going to be the last child.
‘Your first girl, Sarah.’
Matilda's voice was kind.
She sat up in the bed, dumbstruck, her face aglow as if lit from the inside.
She grinned, showing all her large yellowing teeth.
‘You're joking!
I thought it was another boy!
A girl !
Is it really a girl?’
Even the policemen smiled at her.
She was genuinely amazed.
‘Oh, let me have her.
Let me hold her!
A daughter at last, thank Gawd!’
Matilda placed the child in her arms.
The baby was now cleaned up and Sarah looked down into the bluest eyes she had ever seen.
‘She's a beauty, Sarah.’
She stared down at her daughter in wonderment.
This was her thirteenth child, but her first girl.
All tiredness was forgotten as she gazed at her daughter.
Then she looked around her at the other smiling faces, and remembered why the policemen were there.
The elder of the two had been  coming to the house for nigh on fifteen years.
Ben had even been at it all through the war.
‘What's my Mickey supposed to have done now?’
Her voice was flat.
‘He's been running for a bookie again, Sarah.
I've warned him twice now.
This time I'm going to nick him.
So you tell him to come and see me.’
She looked back at her daughter.
The doctor had finished, and, after removing the old newspapers from under Sarah, covered her up.
She looked back at the policeman.
‘I'll tell him, Frank, but he's like the old man.
He goes his own way.’
Her voice was low.
Matilda Jenkins opened the bedroom door and called the rest of the boys in.
They all trooped in, eating their fish and chips, and clustered around the bed.
Benny could not see anything so pulled on the doctor's coat.
‘What do you want, child?’
Benny looked up with his little monkey face.
His mouth was full of food.
‘Is it Hovis, then?’
‘Hovis?’
The doctor's voice was puzzled.
‘What are you on about, boy?’
‘Hovis…you know, brown bread.
Well, is it?’
The doctor looked around him for enlightenment.
‘Brown bread?
Are you delirious, child?’
‘He means is it dead?
Brown bread…dead.
Get it?’
This was spoken by Anthony, and his tone indicated that if anyone was stupid it was not his little brother.
‘Brown bread, bejasus!
No, it's not.
It's very much alive.
Now eat your chips, you little heathen.
Brown bread indeed!’
The policemen laughed.
‘How long you been in London, Doc?’ the elder asked.
‘Twenty years?
And you still don't know the lingo.’
They thought this highly amusing.
‘We'd better be off, Sar.
Don't forget to tell Michael when he gets in.’
‘I won't forget, Frank.
I'll tell him, but he won't come.
You know that.’
‘Well, try and persuade him.
Good luck with the new arrival.
See you all.’
The two men left.
Sarah looked at her sons' faces and smiled.
‘It's a girl!’
All the boys grinned at her.
‘A daughter for me old age.’
She hugged the child to her.
‘I'm going to call her Maura.
Maura Ryan.
I like that.’
‘Shall I go and get Mickey, Mum?
I saved him some chips.’
‘Yeah, Geoff.
Tell him the coast is clear.’
The doctor stopped packing away his instruments and looked at Sarah sternly.
‘You knew where he was all along?’
She grinned at him.
‘Course I did.
He's in the Anderson shelter at number 119.
He always hides there.’
Seeing the funny side of what Sarah said, Marion O'Reilly threw back his head and laughed out loud.
Seven mouths stopped chewing as the boys stared at him.
‘What a night!
Your little girl certainly picked her time to arrive.
She saved young Michael's bacon tonight, that's a fact.’
Sarah chuckled with him.
‘She did that all right!’
Pat Johnstone, Sarah's best friend and next-door neighbour, came into the bedroom with a tray of tea.
She ushered all the boys out and poured Sarah a strong cup.
‘Here you are, girl.
Get your laughing gear around that.
What about you, Doc?
Fancy a cuppa?’
‘That would be grand.
I'm parched.’
Pat poured the doctor out a cup of tea and placed it on the bedside table.
Then she sat on the bed next to Sarah.
She looked at the baby and gasped with surprise.
‘Oh, my Gawd!
She's a cracker, ain't she?’
Her naturally loud voice seemed to bounce off the walls.
‘Gis’ a little hold, Sar.’
Sarah passed the child to her and took a deep drink of her tea.
‘This is just what I needed, Pat.’
‘Is that right the filth came in looking for your Mickey and the electric went?
I nearly wet meself laughing when Mrs Jenkins told me, I thought it was so funny.’
Sarah rolled her eyes to the ceiling.
‘Oh, please, Pat.
Don't remind me!’
The doctor finished putting his things away and drank his tea.
‘That was lovely.
It just hit the right spot.
Now I'll be off, Sarah.
Don't get out of bed until I tell you that it's safe.
I've had to put in a lot of stitches.
If you start to bleed, send one of the lads around for me, OK?’
‘I will, Martin.
And thanks for everything.’
‘That's all right.
I'll see you in the morning.
‘Bye now.’
He went out of the bedroom and down the stairs to the hallway where Matilda Jenkins was waiting for him with her hand out.
He slipped a ten shilling note into her palm.
‘Thanks, Matilda.
‘Bye.’
‘'Bye, Doctor O'Reilly.’
She closed the front door behind him.
He walked down the flight of stairs that led to the road and looked at his car, a Rover 90.
It was his pride and joy.
There was not a windscreen wiper to be seen.
He should have known this would happen in Lancaster Road.
‘Little buggers!’
He got into his car and drove off.
On 2 May 1950 he had brought Maura Ryan into the world.
Chapter Two
1953
Sarah Ryan glanced around her kitchen.
A feeling of satisfaction swept over her.
It looked beautiful.
Taking a deep breath she sighed with contentment.
She had not felt this happy for years.
The table was laden with food.
Turkey, ham, a large joint of beef, all carefully prepared and waiting to go into the oven.
The kitchen was filled with the aroma of mince pies and sausage rolls cooking to a golden crispness in the oven.
She was startled out of her reverie by a loud crash from above.
Her mouth set in a grim line, she went to the kitchen door.
Opening it wide, she shouted as loud as she could: ‘I'm warning you lot, one more noise and I'll come up there and scalp the arses off yer!’
She stood listening for a few minutes, trying not to smile.
Then, assured that the children were all in their beds, she went back to her preparations, humming 8 little tune.
Her last task was to lay thick strips of bacon across the turkey.
Finally she stepped back from the table to admire her handiwork.
Then, picking up the poker from the hearth, she banged it three times against the back of the fireplace.
A few seconds later the banging was answered by two sharp thuds.
Going to the sink she filled the kettle with water and placed it on the gas.
As the kettle came to the boil she heard the back door open and popped her head into the scullery to see her friend Pat Johnstone kicking snow off her shoes.
‘Get yourself in, Pat, I've got the kettle on.’
‘Oh, Sar, it's brass monkey weather out there tonight!’
Coming into the kitchen, Pat dropped into an easy chair by the fire.
She looked around the kitchen, impressed.
‘By Christ, you're well set up this year.’
Her voice held a hint of jealousy.
Sarah poured the steaming water into the tea pot and smiled at her friend.
‘Michael brought the lot in this morning.
I couldn't believe it meself when I saw it!
There's sweets and biscuits as well as nuts and fruit.
He's a good boy.’
Pat nodded her head, reckoning up the cost of everything in her mind.
She realised that what was being said about Michael must be true.
You couldn't buy all this working at Lyons bakery or the Black Cat factory.
Crime certainly did pay by the looks of it.
‘And there's presents for all the kids,’ Sarah chatted on happily, unaware of the animosity she was creating.
Pouring the tea into two thick white mugs, she gave one to her friend.
With a tea cloth around her hand she opened up the oven and took out the mince pies and sausage rolls, placing them on the top of the stove to cool as she put the turkey in to cook.
Her movements were quick and confident.
She straightened up, wiping her forehead with the bottom of her apron, and then went to the dresser to open the drawer.
Taking out a package, she passed it to Pat.
‘I nearly forgot!
Happy Christmas.’
Pat Johnstone took the package and placed it on her lap.
She looked at Sarah's face with troubled eyes.
‘I didn't get you nothing, Sar…
I ain't got the money.’
Sarah dismissed this.
‘Oh, shut your face and open it.’
Slowly Pat tore the brown paper apart.
Then her hand went to her mouth.
Her voice shook as she tried to speak.
‘Oh, Sar!
Oh, it's lovely…’
Sarah patted her friend's shoulder gently.
‘I knew you'd like it!’
Pat pulled the white blouse out of the wrapper and held it to her cheek, rubbing the soft material against her skin.
‘It feels like silk!’
‘It is silk.
As soon as I saw it, I knew it was for you.’
All the terrible things she had thought earlier rose up in Pat's mind.
Jealousy of her friend had been steadily mounting in the last few months.
It had started the day three months previously when Michael paid to have the house  stoved.
Sulphur candles had been burning for days, leaving the house free of vermin, then the whole place had been painted from top to bottom.
Like most of the women in the street, Pat Johnstone had been angered by it all.
By Lancaster Road standards, the Ryans had gone too far up in the world, making them aliens.
If it wasn't for the fact that Michael Ryan was now a force to be reckoned with, the other families would have tried to force them out.
All this flickered through her mind in a split second and she felt ashamed.
She had gone to school with Sarah, and they had helped one another over the years.
Now Sarah was remembering her friend and Pat felt she didn't deserve it.
‘It's absolutely gorgeous, Sar.’
Satisfied that her friend was happy, Sarah sat opposite her and took a quarter bottle of Black and White whisky from the mantelpiece.
She poured two generous measures into their cups of tea.
‘This'll keep the cold out, Pat.
God himself knows we need it in this weather.’
Picking up her mug, Pat toasted her friend.
‘Merry Christmas to you, Sarah…and many more.’
Settling themselves into their chairs, warmed by the whisky, the two women began the serious business of the day: gossiping.
Michael Ryan walked down the Bayswater Road.
He walked, as always, as if he owned it — head held high, even in the driving snow.
At eighteen, Michael was magnificent.
Over six foot two, he was built like an athlete, his dark brown overcoat emphasising the spread of his shoulders.
He still had thick black unruly hair, which he now wore cut in a DA.
His eyes, deep-set and a striking blue, seemed to drink in everything around him.
The only softness about his rugged face was in his lips.
They were full and sensuous like a woman's, though at times they gave him a hint of cruelty.
Women and men were drawn to Michael Ryan, and he knew it.
He used it to his advantage as he used everything.
Now he watched the women lounging against the railings  of Hyde Park.
Even in the snow on Christmas Eve the streetwalkers were out.
A few of the younger girls, new to their beat, looked at him with interest.
One opened her coat to reveal a scantily clad body.
Michael looked her up and down, his lips curling with contempt.
He wouldn't touch a tom with a barge pole.
An older woman, seeing the exchange, laughed out loud.
‘Cover yourself up, girl.
Before you get frostbite of the fanny!’
The other women laughed, glad of some light relief.
Michael carried on walking.
He didn't really mind the prostitutes.
In fact, he admired them.
To his mind theirs was a business, like any other.
Supply and demand.
What he didn't like was the way some of them looked at him as a potential John.
He liked to think that people put him above that kind of thing.
He crossed the road, dodging the traffic skilfully.
The snow was easing up and last-minute shoppers were everywhere.
The Portobello Road had been packed.
He walked into the warmth of the Bramley Arms.
Pushing his way among the men he went to the bar, nodding a greeting here and there.
Over the last year he had worked hard to create an image for himself and it was paying off.
People were deferential towards him.
He snapped his fingers at the barmaid and ordered a brandy.
He didn't particularly like brandy, but it was a put of his image.
It set him above other people.
The men at the bar moved to give him room.
He sipped his drink.
Ranging around the crowded bar, his eyes settled on a group by the window.
He picked up his drink and made his way over to them.
One of the men glanced at him, giving a double take as he realised who it was.
Tommy Blue felt a knot of fear somewhere in his bowels.
The four other men at the table with him sensed his panic and stopped talking to look at the newcomer.
Seeing Michael Ryan smiling at them, they seemed to crowd together, hunching in their seats.
Enjoying the terror he was creating, Michael drank his brandy in one gulp.
Then, wiping his hand across his mouth, he placed his glass gently on the table.
‘I've been looking for you, Tommy.’
His voice was quiet.
Tommy Blue felt his heart sinking.
He tried to smile, his lips trembling.
‘I think me and you had better have a little walk.’
Looking around the table at the other men, Michael pointed at Tommy.
‘I'll be waiting outside for you.’
Turning, he pushed his way to the door.
Outside he leant against the wall of the pub.
He bit on his lip, the feeling of excitement in his breast causing his heart beat to pound in his ears.
A group of Salvation Army singers were making their way along the road.
Pulling a pack of Strands from his pocket, Michael lit one.
The strains of ‘Onward Christian Soldiers’ gradually grew closer.
He pulled hard on the cigarette.
He would give Tommy Blue five minutes before going in after him.
Inside the Bramley Arms, Tommy was rooted to his seat.
‘How much do you owe, Tom?’
This from Dustbin Daley, a totter from Shepherd's Bush.
‘Forty-five quid.’
Tommy's voice was low.
One of his companions whistled.
‘I'd better get out there…otherwise he'll come in after me.’
Getting up unsteadily, Tommy made his way to the door.
Dustbin Daley shook his head.
‘He must be bloody mad.‘
The others agreed with him.
Their earlier high spirits were gone now, out of the door with Tommy Blue.
Tommy shivered as the cold hit him.
He was wearing a thin jacket, tom in places, and a thick multi-coloured scarf.
Michael threw his cigarette on the slush-filled pavement and ground it out with his boot.
Pushing himself from the wall he grabbed Tommy's jacket and pulled him along the road.
The Salvationists were alongside them.
A young girl pushed a tin in their direction.
She smiled at Michael as she rattled it.
‘Merry Christmas, sir.’
Her eyes held open admiration.
Pulling his coat open, he pushed his hand into his trouser pocket, and taking out two half crowns dropped them into the tin.
The girl flushed with pleasure.
‘Thank you, sir.
Merry Christmas.’
Nodding at her, Michael resumed piloting Tommy Blue along the pavement.
The tambourines and the singing faded into the distance.
The two men walked in silence for five minutes.
Tommy Blue could not feel the cold now.
He couldn't feel anything.
Fear had completely taken over.
Tommy Blue was on automatic pilot.
All he could do was wait.
The beer he had been drinking steadily all day was now weighing heavily on his stomach.
Michael slowed down in Treadgold Street.
The laundry here was known affectionately as the bagwash.
Michael himself had brought his mother's laundry here on many occasions.
Now it was deserted, shut up for the Christmas holidays.
Taking a key from inside his coat Michael opened the double doors of the building and pushed Tommy inside.
Pulling the doors shut behind him, he turned on the lights.
Tommy stood immobile.
Taking out his pack of Strands, Michael lit one slowly.
He pulled deeply on the cigarette and blew the smoke into Tommy's face.
‘You've made me very cross.’
As usual Michael's voice was quiet.
Tommy's face seemed to come to life.
He blinked his eyes rapidly.
‘Look, Mickey, I…
I tried to get the money.
I swear it!’
‘Shut up, Tommy.
You're beginning to annoy me.’
Dropping the cigarette he grabbed Tommy's scarf, forcing him backwards until he was against one of the huge machines.
Bringing his right fist back over his shoulder he punched Tommy in the face with considerable force.
Tommy's nose seemed to collapse underneath the blow.
Michael let him drop on to the filthy floor.
Groaning, Tommy curled himself up into a ball, his hands covering his head.
Michael kicked him in the back, the force of the blow sending Tommy across the dirt-strewn floor.
Picking up one  of the large wooden podgers the women used to push down the bagwashes, Michael prodded Tommy on the shoulder.
‘Hold out your arm.’
Michael's voice held no emotion whatsoever.
Tommy was blubbering.
‘Please…please, Mickey, I'm begging you.’
He looked up at Michael, his face bloody and awash with tears.
‘Don't do this…
I swear I'll ge-get the money somehow.’
Kicking him in the legs, Michael brought the podger down on Tommy's shoulders.
‘If you don't put your arm out, I'll break your bastard back for you.
Now put your arm out!’
Michael's voice echoed around the laundry.
Slowly Tommy placed his arm on the floor, his whole body jerking with fear.
Twice the ‘podger’ smashed down on his elbow, shattering the bone.
Tommy screamed with pain.
He was struggling to keep conscious as red-hot waves of nausea washed over him.
He threw up on the floor, beer mixed with bile steaming in the cold.
‘Get up, Tommy.’
Michael's voice was quiet again.
Slowly he dragged himself to his feet, his arm hanging awkwardly against his side, the sleeve of his jacket gradually staining crimson.
Droplets of blood ran over his fingers and dripped on to the floor.
He leant against the machine, crying quietly.
‘You've got seven days, Tommy, that's all, to find the money.
Now piss off.’
Michael watched Tommy stagger from the laundry.
He checked himself over to make sure there was no blood on his clothes.
Then, whistling to himself, he washed the podger clean and put it back where he'd found it, against the far wall.
Then, still whistling, he turned off the lights and locked up.
Joe the Fish listened avidly to everything Michael said to him, nodding his head now and again and every so often muttering, ‘Good…good.’
When Michael had finished, Joe smiled at him.
‘The arm was good and broken?’
‘Yeah.
Smashed to smithereens!’
Joe the Fish sighed.
He had a distaste for violence, but in  his business it was a necessity.
He looked at Michael Ryan sitting opposite him.
He liked the boy, could see himself in Michael.
The boy had the same urge to better himself.
That had been Joe's ambition as a young man.
Like Michael he had started out as a ‘breaker’— a heavy — until he had built up his own business.
Now he was a respected member of the community.
He owned shops, clubs and market stalls, from Petticoat Lane to the Portobello Road.
His most lucrative business, though, was the bets.
Joe had been a bookie for over twenty years, gradually moving into loan sharking.
He had realised as soon as he had employed Michael that he had found himself a kindred spirit.
Michael was innately honest.
If he said the punter had paid him fifty quid, Joe knew that was what had been paid.
Most of the breakers kept a portion for themselves, knowing that the unlucky punter would eventually pay that portion once again.
Michael Ryan, though, had his own set of principles.
He might beat a man up so badly he needed hospital treatment, yet Joe knew that in Michael's mind, keeping any money back would be tantamount to stealing.
Joe liked him.
He liked the way Michael looked at his home.
He liked the respect that Michael afforded him.
He coughed and spat some phlegm into the fire, hearing it sizzle as it hit the coals.
‘From January I want you to take over the ‘breaking’ side of the business.
I'll inform all the men that they're to take their orders from you.’
Michael stared at Joe.
Then a wide grin broke out across his face and he shook his head in amazement.
‘Thanks, Joe!
Bloody hell!’
Joe, like most people, felt happy to see Michael grin.
It was as if a blinding sun had emerged from behind a black cloud.
Michael had the gift of making people want to please him, as if by giving him pleasure they were somehow indebted to him.
Joe felt a rush of warmth go through him.
He would enjoy working with this boy, teaching him the ropes.
He let his eyes travel over Michael's body.
He certainly was a fine-looking boy.
Michael watched Joe's eyes and a thrill of anticipation  went through him.
Joe the Fish was fifty years old.
He had never married or had an association with any woman as far as Michael knew.
What he did know was that Joe liked to be surrounded by young men.
In the last few months he had consciously ingratiated himself with Joe, flattered him, let Joe think that he was grateful to him for giving him the breaker's job.
He stared into Joe's face and smiled at him, his deep blue eyes seemingly full of gratitude and admiration.
He watched Joe heave his bulk out of the chair.
A flicker of repugnance crossed Michael's features, to be quickly replaced by the dazzling smile he knew caused Joe so much happiness.
Opening one of the drawers in his desk, Joe took out a small box.
He walked around the desk and gave it to Michael.
‘Just a little token of my appreciation.’
Joe's voice was low and husky.
Leaning against the desk he watched Michael's face as he opened the box.
When he heard the deep intake of breath, Joe related.
He would not rush the boy, he had to let him come to him.
Michael stared at the tie pin glinting up from the red velvet lining.
It was gold, in the shape of a large M, encrusted with diamonds.
Looking up into Joe's face, Michael felt a moment of terror at what he had to do.
Then, seeing the softness in Joe's eyes, he swallowed heavily.
It was now or never.
Placing his hand on the top of Joe's thigh, he gently brushed his knuckles against the man's groin.
Joe stared down at the large, rough hand gently rubbing against him.
Closing his eyes momentarily, he felt a rush of ecstasy pulsing through his body.
He opened his eyes and stared down into Michael's face.
In the firelight, he looked like a dark angel.
His blue eyes held an amber glow that caused Joe's heart to somersault inside his breast.
Dropping heavily on to his knees, he placed his hands on Michael's thighs, rubbing and kneading them, his breath coming heavily.
Watching him, Michael smiled to himself.
He thought Joe looked ridiculous, and noticed that he had a film of sweat above his lips which he licked at nervously.
As he felt Joe begin fumbling with his trousers Michael stifled an urge to slam his fist into Joe's head.
He couldn't go back now, not after all the planning and scheming of the last few months.
Joe was his ticket out of Notting Hill, his passport into the world of real villainy.
Gritting his teeth he lay back in the chair and forced himself to relax.
Outside, in the muffled stillness of the snow, Michael heard a lone voice singing ‘Silent Night’.
Looking down at the top of Joe's balding pate, Michael listened to the haunting childish voice and could have cried.
Sarah was basting the turkey when she heard Benjamin come in.
The front door was slammed as loudly as possible, causing Sarah to wince.
Putting the turkey back into the oven, she sat back in her chair.
Benjamin stumbled into the kitchen, his hair and clothes still laden with snow.
He grinned his wide toothless grin at her and made his way unsteadily across the room to her side.
‘Hello, Sarah, my darling!’
As usual when drunk, he spoke to her as if she was at the other end of the street.
‘Will you keep your voice down!
You'll have all the bloody kids up!’
Benjamin stared down at his wife, blinking his eyes as he swayed unsteadily before her.
The more he tried to concentrate, the more blurred she seemed to become.
Finally seeing two Sarahs, he staggered into the seat vacated by Pat Johnstone not an hour ago.
Lifting up one of his legs he broke wind loudly, causing Sarah to purse her lips.
He sat in the chair smiling amiably at her, his clothes beginning to steam with the heat of the fire.
Wordlessly she pulled herself from her chair and swiftly began making him some ham sandwiches.
She looked at the clock and noticed it was twenty-past one — everyone was in now except Michael.
Placing the sandwiches on a plate, she gave them to her husband.
She was bone tired.
She had been working since seven in the morning.
Going through the scullery she pulled on an old coat and went out into the tiny back garden.
Squatting down, she  took a plate from the top of a large glass bowl.
The snow had drifted up the sides and on to the plate.
Carefully she wiped it clean.
Then, touching the green mass inside the bowl softly, she smiled.
The younger children loved jelly.
That was one good thing about the snow, it kept everything nice and fresh.
Replacing the plate, she stood up and went back inside the house, banging her slippers on the step to get rid of the snow.
Back inside the kitchen she heard her husband snoring loudly.
He was sprawled in his chair, his long legs outstretched, his hand holding the plate of sandwiches away from his body.
Taking the plate gently from him she placed it in the sink, then checked the turkey one last time, turned the gas down as low as it would go and made her way up to bed.
As she undressed in the bedroom she saw her daughter had climbed into their big double bed.
This was Maura's first real Christmas.
Slipping into the bed Sarah looked down on the white-blonde head and felt the familiar tightening in her guts.
The child stirred and burrowed deeper into the bed.
Placing her thumb in her mouth, she sucked on it furiously for a few seconds before settling down once more into a deep sleep.
If Benjamin had given her nothing else in their life together he had given her this child, and for that Sarah would forgive him anything.
Michael woke up and glanced at his watch.
It was three-fifteen.
Shaking his head to clear the fustiness he noticed a fat arm around his waist.
In the dying firelight he looked down on the sleeping face of Joe the Fish.
Somewhere inside himself he felt disgust at the events of the previous few hours.
He was acutely aware of everything that had gone on in front of the then roaring fire.
Mixed with his revulsion was also a tiny feeling of excitement.
He now had Joe the Fish in his grasp, as he had sworn to himself that he would.
A cruel smile played at the corners of his mouth.
He would play Joe like a musical instrument.
He would slowly become the focal point of his life.
Then, when Joe had served his purpose, he would dispose of him.
Michael  knew what he had to do.
He had been planning it long enough.
Gently, he brought his face down on to Joe's and kissed him on his lips.
Joe's watery eyes opened and he smiled, displaying discoloured teeth.
‘I've got to get going, Joe.’
Yawning lazily, the older man stretched his plump arms above his head.
‘All right, Michael love.
Try and get around tomorrow.
I'm always alone on Christmas Day.’
His voice sounded sad.
‘I will.
Don't worry.’
Joe watched Michael dressing in the firelight, his heart bursting in his breast.
In his mind's eye he relived their love-making of a few hours before and the picture of Michael lying underneath him as he penetrated him rose in his mind.
He couldn't quite believe he had found himself such a beautiful animal.
As Michael slipped on his overcoat Joe felt a wave of loneliness wash over him.
‘See you tomorrow then.’
Michael's voice was gentle and caressing.
He favoured Joe with one of his blinding grins.
Pulling himself up from the floor he stood before the dying fire, his short fat legs and large stomach making Michael feel sick inside.
‘Haven't you forgotten something?’
Joe's voice sounded like a young girl's — high and breathless with anticipation.
Michael frowned at him, bewildered.
Then seeing Joe's lips pucker, he walked over to the fireplace and embraced him.
Joe pushed his tongue into Michael's mouth, kissing him with an energy that startled him.
Breaking away gently, Michael smiled at him and quietly left the room.
The picture of Joe's doughy white body seemed to be imprinted on his mind.
As he walked out into the silent white world Michael was glad of the freezing cold that seemed to cut down into his lungs.
A light snow was falling and he raised his face to allow the soft flakes to fall on his skin, willing it to wash away the disgust he felt inside.
The street lights gave the pavements a glittering glow as if thousands of diamonds were lining his path.
Picking up  speed, Michael began to smile.
He shook his head and shrugged in the stillness of the night.
The worst was over now.
He knew what he had let himself in for and he was glad.
Let the fat old queen use his body.
It had put food on his mother's table.
It had bought the kids clothes.
It would eventually bring him untold riches.
Never would he allow himself to feel bad about it again.
He looked up into the black sky and waved his fist at the stars.
This was a new beginning for the Ryans.
He was going to pick them up out of the gutter and establish them in the monied world where he knew they belonged.
Shoving his hands into the pockets of his overcoat he felt the little box that contained the tie pin.
He grinned.
As soon as the shops opened after the holidays he was going to go out and buy himself a tie!
When Michael saw the happy faces on Christmas Day, the food that seemed inexhaustible and the merriment his gifts had brought, he finally came to terms with himself.
Anything, however bad, was worth all this.
After a large, noisy Christmas dinner, Michael sat with his sister Maura asleep on his lap.
As he looked down at her sleeping face, sucking contentedly on her thumb, he swore that he would commit murder if it kept his family as happy as they were now.
It was a promise he was to keep many times.
Chapter Three
1955
Garry and Benny Ryan were playing on the bombsite that was once Testerton Street.
The day before they had noticed while coming home from school that an enormous mound of sand had been left there.
That meant one of two things — the remaining houses were either being patched up or demolished to make way for pre-fabs.
Either way they knew that their playground was going to disappear.
Both boys had been up and out by six-thirty.
If they timed it just right they could scavenge for a few hours before going to the Royalty in Ladbroke Grove for the Saturday morning minors.
They had played in the mound of and for over an hour.
Benny, at nine, was already a true Ryan.
Big for his age, he towered over Garry who was eleven.
Garry had a long thin body, giving him a waif-like appearance.
He was the only Ryan to wear glasses, which he was forever pushing higher on his nose, the thick lenses giving him an owlish appearance.
Where Benny was dark-haired with the characteristic Ryan dark blue eyes and full-lipped mouth, Garry was the opposite.
He had light brown hair and a feral quality about him that made people do what he wanted.
Garry was the acknowledged genius of the family, forever reading.
His room was strewn with books and papers.
He also fancied himself as an inventor — a pastime that had his mother caught between maternal pride and an almost uncontrollable urge to murder him.
The June sunshine gave their play an added vigour.
All around them the world had come to life.
The hum of the traffic was getting louder and every so often the rattling of a  train set the dirt trembling.
To the right of the mound of sand stood what remained of the houses in Testerton Street.
The bomb had been a direct hit and only the last few dwellings had still been standing afterwards.
These had no fronts left.
Their rooms were great gaping caverns that miraculously still had wallpaper and broken furniture inside.
The two boys knew every inch of these houses.
From the roof rafter of the most stable hung their ‘bundle’ swing.
Now summer was here the swing would become a focal point for the children around and about.
Boys would come from as far away as Shepherd's Bush and Bayswater to play on it between fighting rival gangs.
Providing the work didn't start too soon, it would be a good summer.
Scrambling down from the mound of sand, Garry began walking towards the houses, his hands and knees stained orange.
Seeing his brother walking away Benny followed hastily, rubbing off the damp sand from his hands on his shorts.
He caught up with Garry, puffing for breath.
‘What we gonna do then?’
As always he waited for Garry to decide what games were to be played.
Garry looked up at his brother, his thin face already grimy.
‘We's gonna look for bombs and things.
Lee's hid some gunpowder he swiped from under the Arches and I'm gonna pinch it off him.’
Benny looked worried for a second.
Lee at thirteen was already as big as Roy, who was seventeen, nearly six feet tall, and was also bad-tempered.
‘Lee'll smash us up!’
Garry smiled and pushed his glasses higher up his nose.
‘He's got to catch us first!’
Benny laughed nervously.
Lee would catch them, he always did, but he kept his own counsel because when Garry got mad he sent him home.
Then he'd have to play with his sister!
He followed Garry into the end house.
The stairs were still sound and both boys made their way up to the top floor.
Standing dangerously close to the crumbling edge, the two looked out across London.
Over the last few years the landscape had changed.
From their vantage point  they could see the whole of their world.
In the distance Garry saw that the fairground had arrived at Wormwood Scrubs Park.
He poked Benny in the ribs and pointed to it, a thrill of expectation going through them both.
‘I'm gonna get Mickey to give us some money!
We'll go there later and see what rides they've got!’
In his excitement Benny jumped backwards and tripped over a lump of wood.
As he landed on the floor boards he gasped, ‘Here, Gal, look at this lot!’
Garry was already staring at what lay beneath his brother's large feet.
‘Where'd you reckon they come from?’
Garry shook his head.
Kneeling down on the floor, he picked up an empty cartridge case.
There were over a dozen in all.
‘I reckon someone nicked them and then left them here!’
Pushing his glasses up on to the bridge of his nose, Garry snapped: ‘Trust you to state the bloody obvious.
These have been hidden here by a little firm, and I think I know whose it was!’
Benny pulled himself up from the floor with difficulty.
Both his hands were stinging where he'd skinned them.
‘Who d'you reckon hid them then?’
‘I bet it was that gang from Elgin Avenue.’
Garry's voice was triumphant.
‘Come on, let's nick them quick.
Before anyone comes.’
Both boys began stuffing the empty cases down their shirts.
Then they ran down the stairs as fast as they could.
As they ran out of the house into the sunshine they both skidded to a halt.
Lee, Leslie and Roy were walking towards them.
Garry looked at Benny, his face troubled.
‘Whatever you do, don't tell them about this lot.’
He patted his shirt.
Benny's hands were smarting and he rubbed them gently on his shirt.
Tears were already forming in his eyes.
Roy noticed the two boys and called to them.
‘What you two standing there for?
What you done?’
Garry as usual did the talking.
‘We ain't done nothing.
We thought you was looking for us, that's all.’
‘What would we want with you two?’
Roy's voice sounded incredulous.
‘We get enough of you at home.
Now sod off, the pair of you.’
Neither boy needed to be told twice.
They ran off as fast as their legs would carry them.
When they reached the safety of the pile of sand they sat on top of it and watched their brothers.
The three older boys stood by the opening of the houses.
They were all smoking.
‘Did you smell them?
I reckons they've been to the baths in Silchester Road.
They've all got that smelly stuff on their hair.’
Benny's voice was disgusted.
In his mind anyone who could have a bath without being told to needed treatment.
He himself had a bath every fortnight, a sixpenny one with soap and towels supplied.
He hated it.
If his mother didn't stand outside waiting for him he'd spend the money on something important, like caps for his gun and comics.
A little while later three girls arrived on the scene, two blondes and a redhead.
Garry laughed.
‘Dirty bleeders!
That's why they've been to the baths.
They're going snogging!’
They watched the three girls pair off with their brothers and go off in different directions.
Even more disgusted, Benny stood up.
‘Come on, let's go home.
I'm hungry.’
Silently the two boys made their way home.
It was three in the afternoon when Roy brought Janine into his house.
It was the first time he had brought a girl home and both he and Janine were nervous.
Grasping her hand in the hallway, he smiled at her.
‘Everything's gonna be all right.’
He looked down into her green eyes and as always had the urge to kiss her.
She had milk-white skin and long thick red hair.
To Roy's mind Janine was class.
She was also very tall — five foot eight inches.
In a way he was glad that she was ‘in trouble’.
It would give them the push they needed to come out into the open.
He led her by the hand into his mother's kitchen.
As usual Sarah was cooking.
Even on days like this with the  sun cracking the pavements Sarah still cooked.
With nine children to feed, preparing a meal was a major event.
She looked at Roy and Janine, her surprise showing on her face.
Roy stood awkwardly in the kitchen and, still grasping Janine's hand, smiled at his mother.
‘Mum, I'd like you to meet Janine…
Janine Grierson.’
The girl stretched out her free hand and nodded her head.
‘Pleased to meet you, I'm sure.’
Her voice was very low and refined.
Wiping her hand on her apron, Sarah took the girl's hand and shook it gently.
‘And you, love.
Well, sit yourselves down.
I've made some ginger beer.
Would you like a glass?’
Without waiting for an answer, she went to the scullery and took the large jug from the table out there.
She needed time to think.
Grierson?
Grierson?
Where did she know that name from?
She carried the jug back into the kitchen.
Roy had sat Janine at the kitchen table and was standing beside her.
Then, like a bolt out of the blue, it came to Sarah.
This was Janine Grierson.
Her heart sank in her chest.
Her father owned the butcher's in the Portobello Road.
He had also owned the house next door to Christie's round in Rillington Place.
What on earth was Janine doing with her Roy?
Not that she didn't think her son was good enough for her, oh no!
But Eliza Grierson had great plans for her only daughter, Sarah knew that much.
Forcing a smile on to her face she poured out two glasses of ginger beer.
As she placed them on the table, Roy spoke up.
‘Janine's pregnant, Mum.
And I'm the father.’
Outside in the garden, Maura was watching Garry and Benny working.
Benny was holding the cartridges steady while Garry filled them with the gunpowder.
After watching a particularly thrilling Lone Ranger at the Saturday morning minors, Garry had experienced a renewed interest in the making of bombs.
He pushed the wadding carefully into the cartridge before taking it from Benny and placing it on the garden wall.
He stepped back to admire his handiwork.
That was the last one.
Maura sat on the wooden crate.
Her long blonde hair  seemed to come alive in the sunlight which gave it golden highlights.
Her aquamarine eyes carefully watched every movement her brothers made.
At five, Maura knew that if she wanted to be a part of their games she had to sit and watch quietly, otherwise they would sneak out of the garden leaving her alone.
She saw Garry give Benny a large hammer.
Then Garry carefully took one of the filled cartridges and placed it on the grass.
He had to press it down a couple of times to stop it falling over.
Then he nodded at Benny who took the hammer and brought it back over his head, ready to smash it down on to the cartridge at a sign from his brother.
Garry pushed his glasses higher on his nose and raising his hand as if he was starting a race, brought it down heavily to his side…
Inside the house Janine was crying quietly as Sarah spoke.
‘It's nothing against you, lass, but think of your father.
He'll go stark staring mad when he hears.
Baby or no baby, there's no way he'll allow you to marry Roy.
I know it.’
Her voice had a finality about it that made Roy's blood run cold in his veins.
He opened his mouth to answer.
Both women were looking at him expectantly.
They saw his eyes open wide until they seemed about to start from his head.
‘Benny!
Benny…don't you bloody dare!’
His voice was so loud both women jumped in their seats.
A split second later an almighty bang erupted from the garden, followed by Maura's frenzied screaming.
The three adults seemed to be catapulted from their seats as they ran out into the back yard.
Maura had seen the hammer descend on to the cartridge just as she heard Roy's voice come from the house.
The impact of the hammer hitting the brass casing of the cartridge had caused a flash of blue light followed by an enormous bang.
as if in slow motion she had seen Benny travel backwards through the air, landing heavily on his back among the rubbish that littered the end of the garden.
That's when she started to scream.
Through her tears she saw Garry scaling the wall as he made a run for it.
Roy ran to where Benny was lying, his heart pounding in his ears.
This time Garry had really done it.
He had finally killed somebody.
Picking Benny up gently he cradled his head in his lap, conscious of his-mother standing in the garden, her hand over her mouth as if terrified of what she might find.
Benny was soot-blackened all over.
The smell of burnt powder seemed to hang around him in a cloud.
Looking down into his brother's face, Roy felt the tears come into his eyes.
‘Benny…
Benny!’
Roy's anguished voice carried up into the pale blue sky.
Janine, stunned, had gone to the little girl sitting on the crate.
Instinctively she pulled the child to her breast, stroking the long blonde hair.
Roy clutched Benny to him, cuddling the dirty head to his breast.
Opening his eyes Benny looked up into his brother's tearstained face.
‘What happened?’
His childish voice broke into everyone's shocked thoughts.
‘One minute I was hammerin'.
The next I was blown up!’
Benny looked around him, a bewildered expression on his face.
‘Where's Garry gone?’
Picking him up, Roy felt the terror slowly leave his own body.
‘When that little bastard gets home, I'm gonna murder him.
If it's the last thing I do in this life…’
Maura dung to Janine, enjoying the flowery smell of her.
Her cries had subsided to little hiccups.
Sarah let Roy carry Benny into the house, and as she looked at Janine comforting her only daughter, the ice in her heart melted.
Going to the girl, she put her arm around her shoulders.
‘That Garry will be the death of me.
Well, if you think you could stand the strain of being part of this family, you're welcome.
Janine's white face made Sarah's natural good nature come to the fore.
Pushing the girl's heavy red hair back from her face, she said, ‘I'm warning you, though…excitement like this is an everyday occurrence!’
‘Oh, Mrs Ryan, my father is going to go mad.’
Sarah waved her hand at the girl, her voice sounding more confident than she actually felt.
‘He'll get over it, love.
He'll get over it.’
James Grierson was stalking around his house in a fit of temper so acute he could almost taste it.
Unlike his wife, who had taken herself off to bed like one of the heroines in the penny dramas, he, James Grierson, was going to do something.
What exactly he wasn't sure, but he would think of something.
Stamping up the stairs he went into the bedroom he shared with Eliza.
‘How could a daughter of mine take up with that bloody scum?
A filthy, stinking Ryan!’
He clenched his fists and raised them to the ceiling.
‘I could throttle the bitch.
My God, my mother used to say: ‘Show me the company you keep and I'll tell you what you are.’
Never was a truer word said!’
Eliza closed her eyes and groaned.
Since Janine had told them that morning that she was pregnant, her whole world had fallen apart.
Only a week ago, she had stood in their butcher's shop and-completely demolished the reputation of young Carrie Davidson for the same thing: having to get married.
She could hear herself talking to anyone who would listen about the shameless hussy.
Now it had happened to her daughter and she didn't like it, she didn't like it one bit.
Eliza Grierson was known as a gossip of Olympian standards.
She prided herself on her ability to sift through the most innocent conversations and turn them into major scandals.
She knew that this trouble with her daughter would be all the more enjoyed because it was a reflection on herself.
She groaned again and pushed a pillow over her head.
If it had been anyone but a Ryan…
She felt tears of frustration stinging her eyes.
She could cheerfully throttle Janine herself!
A loud banging at the front door stopped both of them in their tracks.
Pulling back the curtain, James Grierson looked down into his garden and groaned.
It was not a very good day today, and he had a terrible feeling that it was going to get worse.
Michael and Geoffrey stood in the Griersons' front garden.
Like everything of Eliza Grierson's, the garden was what she described as ‘classy’.
It was also immaculate, as were the curtains at the windows and the shiny brass knocker on the door.
This was opened by a rather subdued James who said gruffly: ‘You'd better come in.’
Michael and Geoffrey walked into the spacious hallway as if they owned the house.
Opening the parlour door, James ushered them inside.
‘What do you want?’
His voice was clipped.
Michael sat himself down in an armchair and looked around the room slowly.
Geoffrey sat on the rather hard horsehair settee.
Taking a packet of Strands from his pocket Michael gave one to Geoffrey and after offering the pack to James, who refused, laboriously set about lighting the cigarettes.
He knew that his slowness was annoying James Grierson.
It was a calculated move.
Drawing the smoke into his lungs he put his head back against the chair and blew two large smoke rings.
Then, looking at James, he smiled.
‘I understand, Mr Grierson, that my brother Roy has been shunting your daughter.’
Geoffrey watched the red flush creep up James Grierson's neck and continue until it reached his receding hairline.
Stamping across the room, the man made as if to grab Michael's shirt.
Grabbing Grierson's hand in a vice-like grip, Michael laughed.
‘Naughty, naughty.’
Then pushing the older man from him, he sat forward in the chair.
James was sent sprawling across his own parlour carpet, a blinding anger building inside him.
Michael pointed at him, the cigarette smoke curling around his finger.
‘In three weeks’ time, Mr Grierson, my brother is gonna marry your daughter, with or without your permission.
Personally I would advise you to give them your blessing, what with the baby and all.
A new little Ryan…a Ryan that your daughter is carrying inside her.’
Slowly James Grierson pulled himself up from the floor.
Geoffrey put out his hand to help but was ignored.
Waving his hand away, the older man slumped down on the chair opposite Michael.
Staring at him, Michael underwent one of his lightning changes of mood.
From anger and animosity he turned in a split second to a benevolent caring brother only here to see justice done.
His rugged face softened.
All irritation seemingly forgotten, he leant forward in his chair and smiled at James Grierson — one of his most stunning smiles that seemed to wipe the cruelly from his face at a stroke.
He began to speak in a man to man voice.
‘Listen, James…may I call you James?’
The man nodded, not at all happy with this bewildering change in his antagonist.
‘The way I see it is this.
Your daughter has been made pregnant by my brother.’
He opened his arms out wide in a gesture of helplessness.
‘They love one another, they want to marry.
It's not as if Roy's had it on his toes, is it?
He's quite willing to do the right thing by the girl.
I know you've had a shock.
No man likes to think of his daughter…well, you know what I mean.
But, the only thing left to do is to get them married.
I hope you will change your attitude, soften towards them?’
His voice was now redolent with an underlying threat that was not wasted on James Grierson.
Michael Ryan was offering him a face saver and he knew it.
He was being told in no uncertain terms that he could come out of all this as the loving, caring father who would do anything to keep his daughter's reputation; who welcomed her choice of husband with open arms; who would not bow down in the face of adversity, but would rise up and conquer it.
For the first time in his life James Grierson felt a grudging respect for a Ryan.
He knew he was being manipulated but, he asked himself, what was the alternative?
He had heard stories about Michael Ryan.
That he was as queer as a nine bob note.
That he had taken over Joe the Fish's businesses and made a name for himself among the villains.
At nineteen Michael Ryan was already becoming a neighbourhood legend.
‘Cruel but fair’ was the local opinion.
Could he  really let his only child become a part of this family?
Even as the question formed in his mind he knew it was useless.
If he went against this young man sitting opposite him, he would in effect dig his own grave.
The course was already set.
Janine was marrying Roy Ryan whether he liked it or not.
What he had to do now was stretch out and take the hand of friendship being offered to him.
He sighed heavily and his voice came out in a nervous croak.
‘You're right, of course.
If they really care for one another…’
He swallowed deeply as Michael Ryan took his hand and shook it, the animal strength of the handshake reminding him acutely of exactly what he had done.
His lovely Janine had brought him this low, had brought Michael Ryan into his home.
He could have wept.
Three weeks later, on the first Saturday of July, James Grierson gave away his only daughter to Roy Ryan.
It wasn't until after the reception, once home in his bed.
that he finally gave way to the tears that had been building up inside him since Michael's visit.
He felt he had taken his only child like a lamb to the slaughter.
It would be twenty years before he discovered how right he had been.
Chapter Four
1957
Michael was fuming, his blue eyes dark with anger.
He rubbed one hand across his face and stared stonily at Joe.
‘Look, Michael, you had no right to borrow any money behind my back.
This is my business.’
Joe the Fish pushed a pudgy finger into his chest.
Making a fist Michael smashed it down on the desk in front of him, causing their empty coffee cups to rattle in their saucers.
‘So it's your business now, is it?’
Michael's voice was bitter.
‘I suppose this is your office as well?
Don't let's worry about the money I've brought in…
Joe sighed loudly.
He interrupted Michael as if he was talking to a little child.
‘Oh, for Christ's sake, Michael.
No one 's disputing that you've done well.
What's annoyed me is the fact that you borrowed out five grand without even bothering to mention it to me.’
Joe's voice was cajoling.
In his heart he was frightened of Michael, frightened of his phenomenal temper.
‘Come on, son…try and see it from my point of view.’
Michael picked up his pack of Strands from the desk and lit one.
He sat at the desk, his head hanging forward on his chest, taking quick drags on his cigarette.
Joe was conscious that Michael's hands were shaking.
He knew he was trying to calm himself down.
Joe sat in the chair opposite and placed his elbows on the desk.
Michael was such a difficult boy.
He gravitated from extreme happiness to a difficult and dangerous depression in the space of seconds.
Normally Joe would have let Michael have his head, he was a good businessman, but this latest flouting of the rules had angered him.
He had loaned five thousand pounds to Phillip Wreck, one of the most notorious villains in Paddington, and in Joe's mind Michael had more chance of getting the Pope's inside leg measurement than he had of getting that money back.
Michael stubbed out his cigarette, grinding it into the ashtray with such force Joe thought it would surely break.
Snapping his head up he looked at Joe, his mouth damped closed.
In the quiet room Joe could hear his laboured breathing.
‘I'm warning you, Joe…
I'm warning you now…don't fight me on this.
I know exactly what I'm doing.
I'll get that money back.
I'll get it and the interest on it, you just wait and see.’
There were tears in Michael's eyes.
He's just like a child, Joe thought, it's as if I've taken his toys away from him.
The difference being that when Michael was like this he was liable to explode into a raging temper at any moment.
Joe felt the familiar fingers of fear touching him.
It was Michael's very unpredictability that drew Joe to him.
Twice Michael had lashed out at him and hurt him, only to be contrite and loving in the next breath.
Although Joe had never tried to analyse their relationship, inside himself he knew that it was the boy's vicious streak that attracted him.
‘All right, Michael, I'll let it go this time.
But in future, you come to me.’
Michael's face broke into one of his winning smiles and Joe felt himself relax.
As Michael looked at the man sitting opposite, his fat ugly face grinning like a Cheshire cat's, he felt an impulse to smash his fist into his teeth.
Instead he carried on smiling.
Joe didn't know it but his days were numbered.
Soon he would be out of the way and he, Michael, could get on with his life.
Joe got out of his chair and walked around the desk.
Standing behind Michael he began rubbing his taut muscular shoulders.
Feeling the solid flesh beneath his fingers he  felt himself harden, completely unaware that Michael was planning his demise.
Roy was in the butcher's shop in the Portobello Road.
His father-in-law had given up trying to explain to him the different cuts of meat.
Roy had been working for him since three weeks after his wedding, and he hated it.
He felt like a kept man.
He couldn't do the job, he knew it and his father-in-law knew it, but it was all part of the grand master plan: How To Keep Your Daughter At Home.
They lived with Mr and Mrs Grierson.
They ate with Mr and Mrs Grierson.
And they watched from the sidelines as Mr and Mrs Grierson between them brought up the baby, Carla.
It had been a few months before Roy realised he had married what his mother would have called ‘a lazy bitch’.
Janine was quite content to let her mother take over the baby, the cooking, everything.
That left her free to play at being married which consisted of getting herself done up to the nines and visiting her friends all day, now and again taking the baby, all nice and clean, out in her pram.
Playing at being mother of the year.
Roy winced as he thought of her.
What had happened to the girl he had fallen in love with?
The spirited young woman who had been as eager for life as he was?
Admittedly they were only nineteen, but surely, he reasoned, there must be more to married life than this?
If he mentioned moving out of her parents' house, she dissolved into tears.
Last night had been the last straw.
He had told her there was a flat going in Westbourne Park and she had had hysterics.
‘How am I gonna cope with a baby on me own?’
That's when he had lost his temper.
‘Well, we won't find that out until you try, will we?
God Almighty, Janine, you've never once looked after the bloody kid for a whole day since it was born!’
After that her mother, Eliza, had come into the bedroom and led Janine out, taking her into her own bedroom.
Then this morning she had told him that Janine was ‘delicate’ and needed her mother to look after her.
He was frankly  bewildered by it all.
He wanted them to have their own little place, where Janine looked after the baby all day and cooked his meal in the evening.
What he had was a pampered, spoilt brat whose only interest in life was lipstick and what was on at the pictures.
She never looked at the child unless she had to.
Even his mother had noticed it.
She had asked him a few Saturdays ago if everything was all right between them.
He had felt like telling her everything but just couldn't.
He wouldn't even know where to begin.
‘Hello, Bruv.’
Roy was brought out of his reverie by Michael's voice.
‘Hello, Mickey!’
He hadn't been so pleased to see someone in all his life.
‘Fancy skiving off for a few hours?
I've got a bit of business I want to talk to you about.’
Roy wiped his bloody hands on his apron.
‘I'll be with you in a tick.’
He walked through to the back of the shop and called out to his father-in-law.
James Grierson came down the stairs that led to the flat above the shop.
‘What's all this row about?’
His voice was loud and agitated.
‘Can't you even look after the bloody shop?
Want me to hold your hand now, I suppose.’
Roy was conscious that Michael could hear every word and groaned inside.
‘I've got to shoot offer a couple of hours.’
‘You what!’
Grierson's voice was incredulous.
‘This is a bloody business here, not a bloody knocking shop where you pick your own hours…’
His voice faltered as he saw Michael slip through the doorway.
Grierson paled.
‘Who do you think you're talking to?’
Michael's voice was icy.
He pointed at Grierson.
‘I'm talking to you.
You had enough bunny just now…so answer me.
Who d'you think you're talking to?’
As Michael stepped towards him, Grierson stepped backwards, his hands coming up to defend himself if the visitor lashed out.
Michael snapped at Roy: ‘Get your coat.’
Then walking to where Grierson was cowering against the wall, he  grabbed him around the throat.
‘Now, I don't know what's going down here, but I know this much — if you ever talk to my brother like that again, I'll rip your nuts off and ram them down your throat.
Do you understand what I'm saying?’
Grierson was nodding his head furiously when Roy came back with his coat.
Pulling Mickey away gently, he led him through the front of the shop and out into the street.
He was ashamed that Michael had heard his father-in-law speak to him like that.
He was ashamed that he himself let him.
‘Come on, Roy, we're going to the KPH.
I think we'd better have a talk.’
They walked in silence.
The bright October day belied the cold wind.
Roy noticed that everywhere they walked people acknowledged Michael.
It was as if he was their sovereign and they his subjects.
Depending on how influential people were, Mickey either nodded at them or gave them a hearty greeting.
Roy was impressed.
Michael's name was becoming synonymous with those of the Krays and the Richardsons, two of the most influential young gangs of that time.
Roy knew that Michael kept up a friendship with them.
An uneasy alliance.
It seemed that once people met him they decided they were better off having him as a friend than an enemy.
They walked into the red warmth of the Kensington Park Hotel.
Michael ordered them both hot whiskies and they settled down in the lounge bar.
Michael took his cigarettes from his overcoat pocket, and then slipped the coat from his shoulders.
Folding it up carefully, he laid it across a chair.
All his movements were performed with a natural grace.
Roy shrugged off his own coat while still sitting, letting it fall over the back of his chair.
Adjusting his trouser crew fastidiously Michael sat down again, settling himself into the over-upholstered chair.
Then, pulling a large white ashtray towards him so it would be within easy reach, he lit a cigarette.
Throwing the packet across the table at Roy, he finally spoke.
‘How long has he been talking to you like that?’
His voice was quiet.
Roy hung his head.
‘I know it sounds bad, Mickey, but he is my father-in-law…’
‘I couldn't give a fuck if he was the Immaculate Conception!
There's something wrong, ain't there?
The Roy I knew would never take that from anyone, not in a million years.’
He lowered his voice.
‘Come on, Bruv.
What's the SP?’
The barman brought over their hot toddies and Roy was glad of the few seconds' reprieve.
He could feel Michael's eyes boring into him.
When they were settled again, Roy spoke.
‘I don't know, Mickey.
Since Carla was born it's as if I don't exist any more.
Janine and her mum and dad act like she never got married.
I feel like a lodger in the house.
I eat their food, I sleep in their bed, I shag their daughter now and again.’
All the bitterness of the last two years seemed to boil over and come tumbling out.
‘And I mean, now and again.
Every three weeks when they go and visit her bloody granny in Bethnal Green.
She says she can't do it while Mummy's in the house.
Then old man Grierson treats me like the village idiot.
I'm not a butcher, Mickey.
I hate looking at the meat, I hate touching it…’
His voice trailed off.
‘So what are you gonna do?’
Roy shrugged and took a gulp of his drink.
‘I dunno.’
‘You don't know?
So that's it then, is it?’
Michael was getting annoyed.
‘Why don't you give her a right-hander?
Show her who's boss.
Tell her old man to go and stuff his bloody butcher's shop up his Jacksey.
I knew she spelt trouble…
I bloody knew it!’
‘All right…
All right, Mickey.
Keep your hair on.’
‘Why don't you come and work for me?
That's what I wanted to talk to you about.’
He saw a gleam of hope appear in Roy's eyes.
‘I'd jump at the chance, you know that.’
Michael laughed.
Roy was like a bloody kid at times.
He looked at his brother's open face, and made a mental note  to tell his mother what was going down with him.
He knew that she was worried.
‘That's settled then.’
He looked at his watch.
‘From two-twenty-five today you are a working member of the Ryan dynasty.’
They both laughed.
Anthony and Geoffrey worked for Michael already.
Now he had Roy.
‘What's the pay, Mickey?’
Roy sounded uncertain.
‘Bloody good, that's what.’
‘I wouldn't ask, but what with the baby and everything…’
‘No worries, I'll start you on thirty quid a week.
That's a bit more than the others, so keep stumm about it.’
Michael tapped his nose with his forefinger.
Roy was amazed.
He was going to go and get Janine and the baby and if necessary drag her to the flat in Westbourne Park.
This was gonna be a new start.
Mickey was right.
Maybe she needed a right-hander.
And if his father-in-law stuck his oar in, he would get one and all!
He drank his whisky.
down and felt the warm glow through his body.
It was partly the alcohol and partly the knowledge that he was finally going to do something about his life.
The worry he had been feeling about Janine was replaced by elation.
He would take a leaf out of Mickey's book.
Hit first, ask questions later.
Michael watched his brother's face and guessed immediately what was going through his mind.
He motioned to the barman to refill their glasses, a feeling of satisfaction running through him.
He had a soft spot for Roy, the same as he did for Benny.
They were both too nice for their own good.
He was going to toughen Roy up.
Make him into someone.
Then, when Joe the Fish was out of the way, the businesses would be run exclusively by Ryans.
He raised up his steaming glass to his brother.
‘To the Ryans!’
‘The Ryans!’
Geoffrey and Anthony were sitting at the end of Penzance Gardens, where it met Princedale Road.
It was nearly two-fifteen in the morning.
They ut in a black Humber Snipe.
Both were freezing and both were nervous, especially Geoffrey.
At twenty-one he was two years older than Anthony.
They were identical to look at.
Both had the Ryan dark hair and firm chin.
Anthony had more of Michael's ruggedness whereas Geoffrey had softer features, almost effeminate.
Anthony spoke.
His voice in the darkness caused Geoffrey to jump.
‘How much longer have we got to wait?’
‘How the hell do I know?
What do you think I am?
The Oracle or something?’
‘Very funny.
You get on my wick, do you know that?’
Anthony's usual animosity was coming to the fore.
Anthony Ryan was known in his family as able to pick a fight with his own fingernails.
The only person he was even remotely respectful to was Mickey.
‘You think because you've read a few crappy books you know it all.’
Geoffrey rolled his eyes up towards the roof of the car.
‘Do me a favour, Ant…
Save all your hag for what we've got to do tonight.
I ain't in the mood.’
They were silent again.
Anthony was frustrated because he wasn't as quick-brained as Geoffrey so always came off worse in an argument.
It didn't deter him though.
He tried a different tack.
‘I saw that sort you've been knocking about with last night.
I'd give her one meself.’
Knowing that it would annoy Geoffrey, Anthony braced himself for the ensuing argument.
Instead, Geoffrey put his hand over his brother's mouth.
They listened.
Footsteps were approaching the car.
They sat tense and nervous.
Anthony's hard features looked as if they had been carved from stone.
His fists were clenched tight on the steering wheel.
The man who was walking towards them stepped into the light of a streetlamp.
It was Joe the Fish.
He was walking unsteadily along the road, obviously the worse for drink.
Geoffrey nodded and Anthony started the car.
He did not put on the headlights.
Reversing back a little, they waited until Joe began crossing the intersection between Penzance Gardens and Princedale Road.
Pushing his foot down on the accelerator, Anthony thrust the car forward.
Hearing a loud noise through his drunken haze, Joe turned in time to see the car coming at him.
He raised his arm as if to protect himself as the car hit him full on.
His body flew into the air and landed on the bonnet.
-His head crashed against the windscreen.
Anthony slammed his foot on the brake.
As the car screeched to a halt, Joe's body slid from the bonnet on to the road.
Anthony ran the car over him one more time before speeding off.
The whole operation had taken less than three minutes.
A woman who had been up getting herself a glass of water heard the commotion and ran out into the street.
She took one look at Joe's face and began to scream.
Lights began to go on all over Princedale Road.
Anthony and Geoffrey drove the car from Holland Park to Moscow Road in Bayswater.
The streets were deserted.
Parking the car they left it there and walked around to Porchester Terrace, throwing the keys to the Humber Snipe down a-drainhole.
In Porchester Terrace they picked up a blue Mark 1 Zephyr and drove sedately home to Lancaster Road.
It was just three o'clock.
Inside a private house in Beauchamp Place, Knightsbridge, Michael picked up his cards and studied them carefully.
He was on a winning streak tonight.
He had three aces and two kings.
Joe had left an hour earlier.
He had been given a lift to the Bayswater Road by a mutual friend, Derek O'Connor.
If everything had gone according to plan then Joe was well and truly out of the picture, and he, Michael, had the perfect alibi.
He smiled smugly to himself as he raised the bet by fifty pounds.
If Geoffrey and Anthony had bungled the job tonight, he would personally batter their brains out.
Sarah heard a loud banging on her front door.
She glanced at the clock on the bedside table.
It was five o'clock in the morning.
Sleepily she dragged herself out of bed.
Benjamin was snoring his head off as usual, so it wasn't the police after him — that would make a change.
She yawned, went down the stairs and opened the front door.
Two men stood there and she recognised at once that they were CID.
‘Is Michael at home, love?’
Blinking her eyes rapidly to try and clear her head, Sarah said, ‘Come inside and I'll go and look.’
The two men walked into the hallway.
She went upstairs and looked into Michael's room.
The bed hadn't been slept in.
As she walked back on to the landing, Geoffrey came out of his room.
‘Who's that downstairs, Mum?’
‘The old Bill.
They're looking for Michael.
What's going on?’
She knew her sons and would bet her last pound that Geoffrey had been awake waiting for something like this.
‘You go back to bed, Mum.
I'll sort out the filth.’
Both turned as they heard a door opening.
Maura Ryan came out of her room, clutching a raggy doll.
Sarah went to her, picking her up in her arms.
Geoffrey went down the stairs.
‘Mickey ain't in.’
‘Well, where is he then?’
This from the older of the policemen.
‘He's up West.
At a house in Knightsbridge.
What do you want him for?’
Geoffrey yawned in their faces, stretching his arms over his head and finishing by scratching his belly lazily.
The younger policeman noticed that his pyjamas were hardly creased.
Geoffrey Ryan hadn't been in bed.
The trouble would be proving it.
‘Somebody tried to murder Joe the Fish earlier.’
Geoffrey felt as if someone had thrown a bucket of cold water over him.
‘What do you mean, tried to murder him?’
‘Exactly what I say.
And knowing how close Mickey is to him, I thought we had better let him know.’
The older officer was trying to goad him.
Unlike Anthony, Geoffrey could keep a lid on his temper.
Deliberately misconstruing the policeman's words, he shook his head sadly and said, ‘Mickey's like a son to that man.
This will come as a great shock to him.
What exactly happened?’
He had to know what was going on.
Half of his mind was saying silent prayers.
He'd been sure Joe was dead when they left him.
‘Someone tried to run him over a few hours ago.
He's fighting for his life in St Charles's Hospital.
The hospital said to try and get his next-of-kin.
We assumed that was Michael Ryan.
Two men couldn't get any closer than those two have been over the last couple of years, could they?’
The policeman raised his eyebrows and his colleague laughed.
Geoffrey was saved from answering by his mother's voice.
She had been carrying Maura down the stairs and had heard the policeman's remark.
‘What are you trying to say?
I know you lot with your dirty  insinuendos .’
She hitched her daughter up on to her shoulder, holding her steady with her free hand.
The other was gripping the banister rail, her knuckles white and bony.
‘My Michael is a decent clean-living individual.
Now I'll thank you two to get out of my house.’
Hiding a grin, Geoffrey took the heavy child from her as she came to the bottom of the stairs.
Maura sat in his arms, an alert expression on her face.
At seven she was already wise to the likes of the police.
Sarah pushed angrily at the two policemen.
She looked so tiny beside the two men, yet so ferocious, that Geoffrey laughed out loud.
‘That's it, Muvver.
Tell the bastards to sling their hooks.’
Opening the front door, Sarah let the men out.
She was fuming.
How dare they say that of her Michael!
Her temper was caused by the fact that she had a terrible suspicion that what they said was true.
Slamming the door on them, she turned her anger on her son.
‘Well, don't stand there like a gormless eejit!
Go and get dressed and find Mickey!’
Placing Maura carefully on the floor, Geoffrey ran up the stairs.
Maura followed her mother into the kitchen, curling up on one of the easy chairs by the fire.
‘Can I have a standing up egg, Mum?’
Sarah nodded.
‘Of course you can have a boiled egg if that's what you want.’
She filled the kettle, her mind racing.
If Joe the Fish died  then it would be a murder charge for somebody.
But who?
Michael?
She pushed the thought from her head.
Whatever she thought about her boys, there was one thing she knew: they were not murderers.
They were just tearaways.
High-spirited tearaways.
Or, at least, she hoped that's all they were.
Putting the kettle on the gas, she went to her daughter and hugged her tightly.
Joe was lying in the hospital bed.
Nurse Walton looked down at his battered face.
She shook her head and turned to see the policeman by the bed grimacing at her.
She blinked and sighed.
‘Who would do such a thing?’
Her voice sounded very young.
PC Blenkinsop pushed out his narrow chest and tried to look like an all-knowing, sophisticated officer.
‘You'd be surprised.
It's a wicked life out on the street these days.
He might look like an old man who's been run over a few times to you, but to me…’ he puffed his chest out even further ‘…he's a vicious criminal.’
Nurse Walton looked suitably impressed.
‘Just wait until I tell my mum!’
PC Blenkinsop looked as if he was readjusting his shoulders inside his tunic top.
He thrust out his chin and smiled.
Joe groaned and immediately had the attention of both of them.
‘Mickey…
Mickey.’
PC Blenkinsop was writing down Joe's words with a flourish of his pencil.
Licking it, he waited expectantly.
Michael stood in the entrance to the ward.
He had known that a policeman would be in attendance.
Squaring his shoulders, he walked down the ward towards Joe's bed.
He could see the young PC and the nurse through the inadequate screens.
Putting a sober expression on his face, he went to the bed.
PC Blenkinsop noted Nurse Walton's reaction to Michael Ryan and it annoyed him.
He thrust out his lip like a petulant schoolboy.
‘And who might you be?’
He stood up and seemed to roll on the balls of his feet.
Michael gave him a scathing glance.
He picked up Joe's hand which was heavily bandaged.
He turned to the nurse and smiled sadly at her.
‘How bad is he?’
His voice sounded wretched.
Nurse Walton stared into his dark blue eyes and was immediately filled with pity for him.
‘He's very bad.
The doctor says he'll be surprised if he lasts out the day.’
If she had known Michael, she would have noticed the glimmer of relief that came into his eyes.
‘Has he said anything at all?’
The PC interrupted.
‘He has been calling for a…’ he glanced importantly at his notebook ‘…
Mickey.’
Michael nodded.
‘That's me.’
The young nurse brought Michael a chair and he sat beside Joe, holding the old man's hand and stroking it every now and again.
The PC watched him.
So this was Michael Ryan.
He couldn't wait to get back to the station and brag about how he'd seen him.
The nurse brought Michael a cup of tea and he thanked her, giving her one of his radiant smiles.
PC Blenkinsop could have cried.
She didn't even know he was there now.
Shortly before seven in the evening Joe opened his eyes and immediately recognised Michael.
He passed his tongue over his cracked lips and tried to speak.
Michael could see by the look in his eyes that he knew who had ordered his accident.
Agitated, Joe tried to lift his head off the pillow.
‘Mickey…
Mickey…you…’
Then his head fell back and he died.
Michael closed his eyes, a feeling of euphoria surging through him.
He had got away with it!
Then, as could happen with him, he felt a deep despondency replace his feeling of elation.
Tears welled up in his eyes, spilling over on to his cheeks.
In his own funny way he would miss Joe who had been his passport into the real world.
For that he would always be grateful to him.
He would give Joe the Fish the best send-off anyone had ever seen.
PC Blenkinsop looked embarrassed.
Later on in the station canteen he had everyone hanging on his words.
‘Yeah, I'm telling you.
It was quite touching.
Michael  Ryan cried like a baby.
Well, it was to be expected really.
After all, the old boy died calling out his name.’
At Joe's funeral a week later, the police noted that all the gang bosses stopped to pay their respects to Michael Ryan.
He was well and truly established now.
That, together with the fact that Joe had willed him everything he possessed, made Michael Ryan a very happy man.
Chapter Five
1960
Sister Rosario looked at the pinched face of Maura Ryan and her heart went out to the child.
She had noticed her being teased mercilessly all through the dinner hour, no doubt due to the fact that her brother Benjamin had been expelled the day before.
The nun realised that now the child had no one to protect her, some of the other children were making up for lost time.
She watched Margaret Lacey lean forward across her desk and pull hard on one of Maura Ryan's long blonde plaits.
Sister Rosario didn't like Margaret Lacey.
She didn't like any of the Laceys, with their carroty red hair and green malicious eyes.
And this Margaret Lacey was the most brazen strap of a child she had ever come across.
The nun leapt from her seat, causing her chair to fly backwards.
The noise brought thirty pairs of eyes to rest on her.
‘Margaret Lacey, come out here at once!’
Her voice reverberated around the classroom.
Margaret, her face pale with fright, slowly edged her way from behind her desk and began to walk to the front of the class.
Sister Rosario was without doubt the hardest nun in the school.
No amount of tears could shake her.
Margaret stood before her, trembling.
Tapping a ruler across the palm of her hand, Sister Rosario stared at the child for a few seconds.
She knew from thirty years' experience that bullies were a breed apart.
Most were inherent cowards who picked only on people whom they knew were frightened of them.
The nun's countenance and dark brown close-set eyes challenged the child before her.
‘Did I see you pull Maura Ryan's plait?’
Margaret's big green eyes seemed to have taken possession of the whole of her face.
Her tiny pink mouth was trembling.
Already, tears were beginning to glisten in her eyes.
‘N…
N…
No, Miss…
I mean, Sister.’
In her fright she had begun to stutter.
This caused some of the other children to titter, quickly putting their hands over their mouths to stifle the sound.
Margaret Lacey was the class bully and the children enjoyed seeing her get, for once, what she doled out so often.
‘Are you calling me a liar?’
The nun's eyes had narrowed.
‘No, Sister!’
Margaret's voice was stronger now.
Whoever heard of calling a nun a liar?
It was unthinkable.
Her own mother would kill her if she knew.
Her eyes were now riveted on the ruler in the nun's hand.
She knew that it was liable to come swishing down on her hands and legs at any moment.
Sister Rosario was enjoying Margaret's discomfiture.
Running her tongue across her teeth she glared down at the object of her annoyance.
Her white wimple covered nearly all her head, revealing only wrinkled yellowing skin that, combined with her dark eyes, had earned her the epithet ‘Lizard Features’.
‘So…you admit to pulling Maura Ryan's plait then?’
Maura watched Sister Rosario completely demoralise Margaret Lacey.
She sat in her chair, her face scarlet.
She did not thank this nun for making her the centre of attention.
She knew that whatever Margaret got she would make sure Maura got it back one hundredfold.
‘Yes, Sister…
I pulled Maura's plait.’
This was said so low as to be virtually inaudible.
‘Speak up, child.’
‘Yes, Sister.
I pulled Maura Ryan's plait.’
The high piping little voice was trembling with fear.
Smiling smugly at the class, Sister Rosario lifted the ruler.
‘Hold out your hand then.’
The thin little hand  came out.
Margaret closed her eyes tightly as the ruler came down hard six times across her  palm.
Against her will, hot scalding tears burst from her eyes and down her cheeks.
She held her injured hand to her breast as if frightened it might drop off, and at a nod from
Sister Rosario made her way back to her desk, rubbing at her injured palm with the thumb of her good hand.
Sister Rosario's beady eyes scanned the classroom for about twenty seconds before she said, ‘Let that be a warning to any would-be bullies in this class.
Next time it will be twelve strokes of the ruler and your name read out at mass.’
Thirty faces looked scandalised at the thought of having their name read out by Father McCormack.
Picking up her chair, the nun turned to her blackboard and began writing on it.
Seizing her opportunity, Margaret leant forward across her desk and whispered to Maura.
‘You're dead, Ryan.
Come home time I'm gonna kill you.’
Maura closed her eyes, a knot of fear already forming in her stomach.
Everyone was frightened of Margaret Lacey, even some of the boys.
Which was surprising really because she was so small.
But small or not, she could fight and that was all that counted.
Maura sat back in her chair and looked out of the window to the side of her.
A group of younger children were playing rounders.
The voice of Miss Norman, the games teacher, drifted in at the window now and again.
Always encouraging, never reprimanding.
As Maura watched the dust motes flying through the air in the rays of the June sun she wished that she was outside with the younger children.
That she was anywhere away from Margaret Lacey and her cronies who would without doubt be waiting for her as she left the school.
Why was it that time always flew when you didn't want it to?
The minutes sped by until the bell that heralded home time.
Slowly Maura went to get her coat, hoping against hope that if she took long enough Margaret would get fed up and go home.
She walked slowly from the school, across the playground and out of the gates into Latimer Road.
Sure enough, Margaret was waiting for her, about twenty yards  past the school gates.
She had three of her cronies with her: Jennifer Howard, Betty Leeds and Vanessa Rouse.
Maura began walking towards them like a condemned man on his way to the gallows.
Prickles of sweat had broken out along her backbone.
She bit down hard on her lip as she watched the four girls.
She saw that Jennifer and Vanessa were laughing at her and something inside her stirred.
In all her ten years she had always had one or other of her brothers watching out for her.
Now here for the first time she was fighting her own battle.
And fight it she would!
She swallowed deeply.
She could hear her heart crashing in her ears.
She decided then and there that she was not going to stand for it.
She had eight brothers and had had to fight or argue with every one of them at some time or another.
Holding her head high, she walked faster, swinging her schoolbag menacingly.
The four girls looked at each other, puzzled.
This wasn't supposed to happen!
First they were going to make her squirm, then Margaret was going to hit her…
Betty Leeds began to hop from one foot to another, a sure sign of-agitation.
Vanessa and Jennifer stepped back behind Margaret.
Maura stopped in front of them, still swinging her school bag.
She gave a loud sniff.
‘Well?’
The insolent way she said it made the other girls gasp with astonishment.
Margaret Lacey soon found her tongue.
‘I'll ‘well’ you, you ugly bitch you!
I'm gonna smash your face in!’
The other girls smiled.
This was more like it.
‘Well then, don't just stand there talking about it…do it!’
All eyes were glued to the swinging schoolbag.
Margaret was silent for a few seconds.
She could feel the others losing their nerve.
If she didn't do something, and soon, they would desert her.
She spat on to the pavement casually.
‘I will when I'm good and ready!’
Margaret Lacey was getting more worried by the second.
She had thought she'd give Maura's long blonde hair a few good tugs, a scratch or two on her face, and then home to  tea, basking in the other girls' admiration.
Now she wasn't sure what to do.
She might even get hit herself!
She decided on a delaying tactic.
Kneeling down on the dusty pavement, she made as if to tie her shoelaces.
The next thing she knew, she was lying sprawled across the pavement.
Maura's schoolbag had hit her straight in the side of the head.
Next, her long red hair was pulled so hard she felt as if it was going to come out by the roots.
Finally, she felt a kick on the knee that brought a shocked cry to her throat.
She lay on the pavement staring up at Maura Ryan, amazed.
Her three friends had already run off.
As soon as Maura's schoolbag had hit Margaret in the head, they had made their escape, frightened in case Maura decided on a repeat performance on one of them!
Maura just stood there stunned, staring at Margaret lying at her feet.
She had done that!
She had knocked Margaret Lacey down!
She could feel her chest swelling with the joy of it.
She had actually defended herself against Margaret Lacey, the school bully, and she had won.
She had done it alone without one of her brothers to defend her!
Seeing Margaret begin to pull herself up, Maura's natural kindness came to the fore.
This would be all over the school tomorrow.
She tentatively held out her hand to help Margaret up.
The smaller girl looked at her long and hard before accepting it.
Maura pulled her to her feet and began to brush down Margaret's uniform, which was covered in grey dust.
This was all done in silence, except for the occasional sniff.
Maura saw the small swelling on Margaret's grubby knee and felt ashamed of herself.
She had kicked her very hard and Margaret was smaller than her.
In silent agreement they walked together down Latimer Road, into Bramley Road and then through to Lancaster Road where both girls lived.
They stopped outside Margaret's house first and stood looking at one another.
Margaret sniffed loudly and said, ‘Come in if you want.
Me mum's at work.’
It was the hand of friendship.
Maura shrugged nonchalantly.
‘All right then.’
They walked up the steps that led to the front door.
Margaret's house was the same as Maura's except it had been made into flats.
Margaret's family lived on the top floor.
Being large town houses they were three storeys high with large basements.
As many as five families lived in them.
As they made their way up the stairs the smell of cooking and urine seemed to overpower them.
Margaret's flat had no lock on the door.
There was no need for one, there was nothing to steal.
‘You take off your things and I'll make us some bread and marmite.’
‘Ooh, lovely.
I love marmite.’
As Margaret made the sandwiches and a pot of weak tea, Maura glanced around her.
The room was filthy, clothes and newspapers strewn everywhere.
Unlike her own home that was stoved regularly, cockroaches were on everything.
A particularly adventurous one with large quivering antennae was being slowly buried in the rancid margarine.
Maura shuddered inwardly.
The last few years her mother had been waging a war on all vermin, including bed bugs.
Money was now plentiful in her home, thanks to Michael's employing her brothers in his business, while the majority of the people in Lancaster Road wore still no better off than they had been before the war.
Margaret's mother worked at the new Black Cat cigarette factory out in Harlow and her father still worked in Lyons bakery.
Maura watched with distaste as Margaret flicked the cockroach out of the margarine with the breadknife.
It landed on the floor where it lay on its back, its numerous legs doing cycling motions as it tried to right itself.
Wrinkling her nose Margaret stepped on it, the crunching noise sounding like a gunshot in the hot evening air.
‘I hate them bloody things.’
‘So do I.’ Maura's voice sounded small.
Soon the girls were eating their sandwiches and drinking weak tea.
Neither of them mentioned what had taken place outside the school and neither of them would.
From outside, the sounds of a game of cricket floated into the hot airless room.
Finishing her tea, Maura got up to go.
Margaret offered Maura her little finger with a shy smile.
Maura linked it with her own, vowing that the two girls would be best friends for always — through thick and thin.
This was the female way of becoming blood brothers-unlike the boys they did not cut each other 's thumbs.
Margaret walked Maura down the stairs to the street.
‘I'll be here in the morning to walk to school.
OK?’
Margaret nodded her head vigorously.
‘See you then, Maura.’
‘'Bye.’
Maura walked towards her own house.
She felt lighthearted and gay.
What had started out as a bad day had suddenly become brighter.
In the road a gang of boys with a makeshift ticket bat stopped their game to look at her.
Already the news was travelling fast.
Dinny O'Brien, one of Garry's friends, smiled at her.
‘That right you podgered Margaret Lacey, Maws?’
She nodded, feeling herself blush.
‘We're friends now, Dinny.’
He looked away, disgusted.
Trust girls!
In Dinny's code, if you beat someone in a fight you made their life misery for as long as possible.
You did not become friends with them.
Maura hurried home.
As she let herself in at the front door her mother's voice came booming out of the kitchen.
‘Is that you, Maura!’
‘Yes, Mum.’
She went into the kitchen where Sarah was standing, hands on hips, her face like thunder.
‘Where have you been, you bloody little sod?
I've been out of my mind with worry about you.’
Maura chewed on her lip, staring at her mother.
She very rarely got told off and when she did it upset her.
‘Well?
Answer me, you little cow.’
Sarah's face was haggard.
‘I went to me friend's house and had a bit of tea.’
Her enormous blue eyes had tears glistening on their lashes.
Sarah saw her daughter's face crumple and her heart melted.
Pulling the child into her arms, she hugged her close.
‘I'm sorry, love, but you gave me such a fright.
It's not like you to stay out like that.
You're normally the first one home.
I was worried.’
‘I'm sorry, Mum, I won't do it again, I promise.’
She tried to smile at her mother,— genuinely sorry to have vexed her.
‘I sent Benny, Garry and Lee out looking for you.’
as if her words had conjured them up, all three burst into the kitchen.
‘Mum…
Mum!’
They were all talking at once.
‘Have a guess what!’
‘One at a time…
One at a time.’
She held up her hands for silence then pointed at Garry, the most honest of the three.
‘Right then, Garry, you tell me what happened.’
He pointed at Maura who was beginning to panic.
‘It's her.’
‘What about her?’
Sarah looked at Maura, a frown on her face.
‘She's been and gone and smashed Margaret Lacey's face in!’
Sarah's eyes widened.
‘She's what!’
The tone of her voice frightened Maura.
She pulled on her mother's flowery apron.
‘I had to, Mum.
She was gonna kill me 'cos Sister Rosario gave her the ruler for pulling me plaits.
’ She looked into her mother's face, pleading for understanding.
‘Am I hearing right?
You…’ she pointed at Maura ‘…had a fight with Margaret Lacey.’
She screwed up her eyes as if she was having difficulty seeing her child.
Maura was gabbling with fright.
‘I hit her with me bag but we're friends now, Mum.
That's where I was earlier when you were looking for me.’
Sarah shook her head slowly as if to clear it.
So this one had gone too, another fighter in the family.
‘Go on, all of you…out in the street to play.
Your dad will be in soon and I haven't got a bit of food on.’
She pushed the children towards the kitchen door.
She wanted them all away from her.
The three boys ran out.
Maura stood for a second looking at her mother.
‘I'm sorry, Mum…honestly.’
Sarah's voice was tired.
‘Get yourself outside, Maws.
Go on now.’
When she had gone, Sarah poured herself out a large mug of thick black tea.
She spooned four heaped  spoonfuls of sugar into it and some condensed milk and sat at the kitchen table.
She sipped her tea and her body seemed to sag in the chair.
Her mind was racing, though.
Leslie, aged twenty, was doing three years for robbery.
Anthony, aged twenty-two, was with him, doing five years for robbery and malicious wounding.
Michael was like the local Mafia, everyone was frightened of him.
He now had all the older boys working for him.
Over the years she had forced these thoughts from her mind, telling herself that her sons were the product of their father.
And now this!
Her only daughter, the apple of her eye, had been brawling in the street.
It just wasn't fair.
Her mother used to say that what was bred in the bone came out in the blood, and she had been right.
Oh, Sarah had plenty of money these days and the house was lovely.
After the ban years, she had been only too happy to take the money her sons thrust on her.
She had never questioned where it came from, though she knew deep inside.
But if their lifestyles affected her daughter, she would murder the lot of them.
Maura was going to have the chances that she he self had never had.
One of her children would achieve something in this world.
She was determined on that.
Outside in the summer evening; Maura was the centre of attention.
‘Well done, Maws.’
This from Garry, who was very fond of his sister.
‘I hit her with me bag, that's what done it.’
They all looked across the road as they heard their father call.
Maura's eyes lit up and she skipped across the road to meet him.
Benjamin Ryan had had a skinful, that much was evident.
He was flushed around his ample face and neck.
Under one arm he had a large box of crisps and a bottle of  Tizer.
He passed the box to Lee who had followed Maura over the street and picked his daughter up in his arms.
The old man, as they called him, worshipped his daughter and they all knew this and accepted it.
In their own way they all felt the same.
Maura rubbed her face against his cheek and felt his stubble scratching against her smooth skin.
She breathed in his familiar odour of best bitter and Woodbines and snuggled against him, safe and secure.
‘How's me best girl then?’
‘All right, Dad.
Had a win?’
He laughed at her cheek.
‘How do you know I've had a win?’
He asked the question in a mock stern voice.
‘The box of crisps and Tizer for a start, and your beery breath.’
Benjamin looked at his sons, a theatrical scowl on his face.
‘Hear that, boys?
Typical woman!
She'll drink the Tizer and eat the crisps, and still complain where they come from!’
Benny laughed with Maura, but Garry and Lee just smiled wanly.
The memory of empty bellies because their father had gambled away all the National Assistance was still fresh in their minds.
They all walked up the steps and into the house.
Sarah had started the evening meal.
She completely ignored her husband until he fell asleep in his chair, whereupon she woke him up and berated him all the way up the stairs, their shouting and swearing affecting the children not one iota.
Half an hour later they sat down to their tea.
Maura was once more in high spirits.
As they sat chaffing around the table there was a loud knock on the front door.
Garry answered it and came back into the kitchen with two policemen.
‘Go and wake your dad up.’
Sarah's voice was heavy.
The elder of the two policemen smiled at Sarah but she dropped her eyes and tried to busy herself at the sink.
Every nerve in her body was jangling.
Every time the police visited her house she felt a heavy sickness inside her.
Maura and Benny carried on eating.
Benjamin Ryan shuffled into the kitchen in his trousers and string vest, his braces hanging down the sides of his legs.
‘What the fuck do you want?’
His voice was menacing.
The older policeman looked at the children, a question in his eyes.
‘Never you mind them, they'll hear what you got to say sooner or later.
Now spit it out, man.
I ain't got all day.’
‘Very well.
We've got some bad news for you, concerning your son Anthony.’
‘What about my Antney?
Escaped, has he?’
Benjamin's voice sounded hopeful.
‘No, not exactly.
I'm sorry to tell you, Mr Ryan, that your son is dead.’
‘He's what !’
Sarah's hand went to her chest and she struggled to find breath.
Lee went to her and folded her in his arms.
The younger children were-pale and silent.
‘He was stabbed to death this morning in Pentonville prison.
In the showers.
We're doing everything possible to find the people responsible.‘
Sarah's sobbing was building to a crescendo.
The younger policeman was watching her, fascinated.
‘Jesus H. Christ!’
Benjamin was trying to dear his drink-fuddled brain.
‘Who would want to kill my Antney?
Everyone liked him…’
The younger policeman dragged his eyes from Sarah and looked at Benjamin.
‘Well, someone didn't.
You don't stab your mates.’
Benjamin went for him.
‘Why, you dirty little bastard!’
The other officer intervened, all formality forgotten now.
‘Calm down, Benny.
And you, Brown, shut your bloody big gob!’
He pushed Benjamin back against the kitchen wall.
‘Look, Ben, we've been questioning Leslie all morning and he won't say a dicky bird, but we think he knows who done it.’
Benjamin pushed the man away.
‘Of course he won't tell you.
He ain't a grass.’
‘Grass or no, Ben, this person has killed his brother.’
‘And that person will pay.
Thanks for coming, Bill, but you can go now.
I need to speak to me wife.’
His tone held dismissal and the two officers left the house.
Benjamin pointed at Lee.
‘Go up West to Mickey's and tell him what's.happened.
Tell him, Geoffrey and Roy to get their arses home-now.’
Lee nodded.
Still holding his mother, he walked her to his father.
As Benjamin tried to comfort her, Sarah pushed him violently away.
‘Don't you dare touch me!
You've brought us to this, you conniving old bastard.’
Getting up from her seat, Maura ran to her mother.
The two held on to each other tightly.
Benjamin looked frightened by his wife's attitude.
The hatred in her voice had shocked him.
‘Garry, nip round and get the quick for your mother.’
The boy ran from the room, frightened.
His mother's wailing, following him down the front steps, seemed to spur him on.
Maura, tears running down her face, was frightened out of her wits.
Anthony was dead…her brother Anthony who had alternately teased and comforted her was lying somewhere dead, never to come home again.
Fighting Margaret Lacey seemed so futile now.
Why was it that bad things always happened when you were feeling happy?
The voices had been going on all evening.
Maura could not sleep.
She slipped out of bed, where her mother was snoring softly.
The doctor had been in and given her some sleeping pills.
He had tried to give her an injection but it had only made her more hysterical.
Pulling the cover up over her mother's shoulders, Maura crept from the room and down the stain.
The front room door slightly open and she pressed her face to the crack.
Her eldest brother Mickey was walking up and down the room talking, his face set in a dark scowl.
Maura loved Mickey.
He was her favourite brother.
She thought he was the handsomest of them all.
All the boys were dark, with deep-set blue eyes, but Mickey was  magnificent.
He had something that attracted people to him — men as well as women.
Maura adored him.
He was like a god to her.
Now, though, she was seeing a Mickey that she didn't know.
His teeth were gritted together and he had dark circles under his eyes.
He looked ferocious.
‘I swear I'll kill the bastards!
So help me God, I'll kill them.’
‘Calm down, Mickey.
Calm down.’
This from Geoffrey.
‘Calm down, you say?
When them bastards have stabbed our brother to death?’
Geoffrey took a long drink of his whisky.
‘Calm down and think clearly, that's what I'm saying.
Think with your head and not your heart.’
Michael stopped abruptly in his pacing and punched the wall.
‘I'd rather have given the bastards the cab ranks than see Antney dead.’
Geoffrey sighed.
‘Well, it's done now, Bruv.
What we've got to decide is how we retaliate.’
‘We'll blow the fuckers off the face of the earth, that's what we'll do!’
‘I was thinking along those lines.’
Everyone in the room stared at Gerry Jackson, one of Mickey's closest friends, and he coloured slightly.
‘What I thought was, right, they've got a rank in Ilford, ain't they?
In the High Street.’
All heads nodded in agreement.
‘Well, on Saturday night, Lee here and a few of his mates can go up the Ilford Palais, right?
Later on in the evening they go into the Greek bastard's cab rank, ask for a cab to say…
Wanstead.
Anywhere, just so they can get a good look in.
If he's there, one of them can trot off and let us know, then we can poodle round and petrol bomb the place.
We can sit round Green Lanes waiting for word.
It must be someone they won't recognise.
That would teach the saucy gits a lesson.’
Mickey nodded his head.
‘Yeah, that sounds dawdy, Gerry, I'll have some of that.
Meantime, me and Geoff and Roy, who'll be the main suspects, can be causing a disturbance somewhere else.’
‘Brilliant!
That's it then.’
Maura, listening to all this, was frightened.
Her brothers were planning to blow someone up!
She had heard people talk about her brothers.
Tearaways and out of control, had become the prevalent opinion in Lancaster Road.
Yet she realised that people were always nice to their faces, especially Mickey's.
A couple of Saturdays previously, she had walked with him along the Portobello Road.
They had stopped to get some fruit for her, and the stall-holder had insisted that it was a gift, refusing Michael's money as if it was the norm to give his produce away for free.
Now she knew why people acted like they did.
It was because her brothers blew people up.
She started to hop from one foot to the other.
She was scared.
Anthony was dead and her brothers were going to blow someone up.
Suddenly, the door opened and Roy was standing in front of her.
She saw his face go pale.
‘What's this then?
Can't you deep, Princess?’
His voice was very loud.
He picked her up and carried her into the front room.
It was heavy with cigarette smoke and she coughed.
Michael held out his arms to her and she shrank away from him, clinging to Roy.
This Mickey frightened her.
This was not her brother who cuddled her and bought her things…this was a man who blew people up.
She looked fearfully into his face.
He was so hurt by her attitude he was nearly in tears.
With all that had happened with Anthony, he was near the end of his tether.
Suddenly sensing this, Maura slipped out of Roy's arms and ran to him, big dry sobs bursting from her throat add bouncing off the walls.
He scooped her up into his arms and holding her tightly, rubbed his face into her soft, sweet-smelling hair.
She cried hard, wracking sobs distorting her voice.
‘I want Antney to come home…
I want Antney to come home!
Blow the bad man up, Mickey.
Blow the bad man up!’
He looked at the other men in the room, his eyes resting on his father.
Through her tears Maura heard someone mutter, ‘Jesus Christ!’
Michael held her until her sobs subsided.
Holding her away from him so he could look into her face, he spoke to her.
His voice sounded worried.
‘Listen, Princess.
You must never…ever…tell anyone what you heard here tonight.
Do you understand what I'm saying?
If you tell anyone, even a friend, then the police will come and take us all away.
Even Dad.
Do you understand me?’
She nodded at him solemnly.
‘I won't tell anyone, Mickey…not even Mum.’
Instinctively she knew that this was what he wanted to hear.
He blinked and the relief in his eyes was evident.
‘Good girl.
You're a good girl.
Now, let Dad put you back to bed.’
He kissed her on the forehead and lips tenderly, then placed her on the floor.
‘Good night, Princess.’
She took her father's outstretched hand and began to walk from the room.
At the door she looked back over her shoulder at Mickey, her face serene.
In her white nightdress she looked like a golden angel.
She opened her mouth and spoke.
‘I meant what I said, Mickey…get them that done in Antney.’
With that she carried on walking with her father.
Benjamin looked at her sadly.
His little girl was learning the realities of life.
He just wished she could have been spared them a little longer.
On 20 July 1960 they buried Anthony Ryan.
The funeral cortege went slowly past Wormwood Scrubs prison, up past the wagon works and on to Saint Mary's Roman Catholic Cemetery at the top of Scrubs Lane.
There were five cars from the funeral parlour following the coffin.
Behind these were two dozen other cars containing friends and relatives.
A police car containing Leslie, handcuffed but in his best suit, was last in the line.
In the first car Sarah sat dry-eyed, staring out at the passing roads.
As they had passed by Du Cane Road, where the entrance to Wormwood Scrubs prison was, she had been reminded of how many times she had been there, visiting either her husband or one of the older boys.
Her husband had been proud of how he had lived his life.
‘I'm a ducker and diver.’
How many times had she heard him tell someone that?
Well, the result of his way of living was upon them today.
Her lovely boy dead.
She felt the hot tears bunch in her throat.
Looking into her troubled face, Benjamin placed his hand gently on her arm.
She smacked it away.
She blamed him for all this.
He had encouraged the boys to be villains.
Even when they had been little more than babies he had started to corrupt them.
If they had been beaten in a fight, he would give them a good hiding and send them back out to do the job properly.
‘None of my boys are Nancys,’ had been one of his favourite expressions, coupled with, ‘All my boys are hard.’
He had dragged them to dog tracks, pubs, bare knuckle fights.
He had taught them how to pick a lock, steal a car, to shoplift…
The list was endless.
What had he done? she asked herself.
She felt an urge to fell him to the floor of the car, strike his face and hurt him as she was hurting inside.
Her big manly husband — at this moment she hated him.
She crossed her arms across her breasts and hugged herself.
Her gaze lighted on her only daughter and her face softened.
This one he could not touch.
A beauty was her Maura.
Sarah's pride in her daughter knew no bounds.
With her white-blond hair and dark blue eyes, she was exquisite.
Now Maura's hair was hanging in long waves, unaccustomed to being out of plaits, her eyes sad and shining with unshed tears.
Sarah knew that the child was bewildered by all that had happened.
She leant across the car and grasped Maura's hand, forcing herself to give her daughter a little wink.
The cars stopped and everyone got out, standing around in little groups, talking in hushed voices.
Sarah's seven remaining sons carried Anthony's coffin to the graveside.
The main mass and requiem mass had already been said in the RC Church in Notting Hill.
Now all  that was left was to bury her boy.
The youngest, Benny, although only thirteen, walked with his brothers, carrying the coffin.
Michael had placed Maura, dressed in white, at the front of the coffin.
She led them slowly through the graveyard to the burial site.
Father McCormack was standing silently by the yawning hole.
The sun was high in the sky and beating down on the mourners' heads.
In the yew trees nearby, birds sang and the hum of traffic and smell of exhaust fumes carried on the air.
Outside the cemetery walls were carts carrying totters from Shepherd's Bush.
The rag and bone men were grim-faced and silent.
Benjamin Ryan's eldest brother was leading them.
Their horses had the old fashioned black plumes rising up from their harnesses.
The carts had been washed down and polished for the day's event.
Paddy Ryan wiped a tear from his eye as he watched his brother's son being lowered into the ground.
Bees were quietly going about their business, bumbling from flower to flower, the hot summer day bringing them out in force.
The priest's voice droned on.
The police had once again handcuffed Leslie.
Funeral or no funeral they were not taking any chances.
Maura was holding Michael's hand tightly, her face pale and troubled.
The policeman to whom Leslie was handcuffed was impressed by the turn-out.
The Krays, Richardsons, and many more villains had come to pay their last respects.
It showed the respect accorded to Michael Ryan.
Mickey stared stonily into the grave.
Anthony's oak coffin had a large brass crucifix on the lid.
The INRI above Jesus's head was glinting in the sunlight.
In his mind's eye Michael could see Anthony's face inside ie, staring upwards at darkness for the rest of eternity.
He clenched his teeth together before he lost control and cried out.
He prayed for the first time in years to the Holy Spirit to come and take his brother's soul.
To care for him and protect him.
He prayed to the Immaculate Conception and Holy Saint Anthony, the patron saint of miracles.
He prayed to every saint and martyr he could remember from his years of Catholic schooling.
Somehow, today, there being a God was important.
Out of the corner of his eye, he saw a movement.
He turned his head.
Being so tall he was head and shoulders above most of the mourners.
To the left of him, standing about ten yards from the small crowd around the graveside, was a man.
Michael stiffened.
Feeling the change in him, Maura looked up into his face.
She noticed that he was staring across the graveyard.
She followed his gaze, through a small gap in the mourners opposite her, and saw the object of Michael's scrutiny.
The man was dark — not dark like her brothers but swarthy.
His thick black curly hair seemed to grow around his head like a crown, leaving his forehead exposed where it had receded.
He reminded her of the mad professor in her comics.
The sun was behind him and she could see the glare that shone on his bald pate.
Instinctively she knew that this was Stavros, the Greek man that her brothers had been constantly talking about since Anthony's death.
The man was smiling slightly.
She looked from him to Michael and realised that her brother was going to go over to the man.
He was pulling back his shoulders in his arrogant way.
Holding Michael's hand tightly, she pulled on it.
He looked down at her.
When they both looked back a split second later the man was gone, but his face was stamped on Maura's memory.
Then she felt the hot, scalding tears come into her eyes, spilling down her face and entering her mouth, their saltiness exploding on her tongue.
From far off she heard shrieking.
It was a few seconds before she realised that it was coming from her.
Michael picked her up in his arms and held her tightly to him, murmuring endearments into her hair and stroking her back until she was spent.
After what seemed an age all that could be heard were little hiccups.
Even the hardest of the men there was sobered by her outburst.
Reggie Kray, always a lover of children, had tears in his eyes as he watched Michael comfort the girl.
Like most Londoners from working-class backgrounds, family was important to them all.
You looked after your own, no matter what.
A little while later, still holding Maura in his arms, Michael threw his handful of dirt on to the coffin.
When the service was finished, he put her down gently by their mother and, picking up a shovel, filled in Anthony's grave, helped by Geoffrey and Roy.
One of the rag and bone men's wives, Lilly McNamara, had been asked to sing while this was being done.
She was noted throughout Kensington and the surrounding areas as a fine singer.
In the hush, broken only by the scraping of the shovels in the dirt and the soft thuds as it landed on the coffin, she sang ‘Amazing Grace’.
To outsiders it would have looked incongruous: men in black zoot suits, all with fashionable elephant's trunk hair styles, filling in a grave, surrounded by more men and women dressed in black.
The women's hats and bright make-up made them look like exotic birds.
To the Ryans and their like, Anthony had been given a magnificent send-off.
Sarah stood dignified and erect as her sons buried their brother.
She would not cry here; she would wait until after the wake, when she was alone.
In the scorching heat she had felt as if she would pass out; now she wished she had.
It would have saved her having to watch this grisly ritual, the burying of her son's remains.
She closed her eyes, her hand on her daughter's soft and springy hair.
When the singing was over and Anthony buried, the mourners went to the family and paid their respects.
Diana Dors, the secret object of the young policeman's desire, hugged Michael long and hard.
She was a firm favourite of everybody there, a kind, loving, generous woman who never in all her life judged anyone.
Freddie Mills and his boyfriend Michael Holiday each clasped Michael to them.
Freddie Mills had been Michael's boyhood hero.
It had been worship of him that had aroused Michael's interest in boxing.
Nowadays he met him socially, as an equal.
A few days before Anthony's death they had been together at the Lancaster Road Baths watching local semi-professional boxers.
It did not escape Sarah's notice that Michael was treated as the head of the family and her husband relegated to second position.
That was how it should be.
After all, Michael was the main provider.
He made sure that she had ample money.
More than enough in fact.
She did not feel overawed by the company at her son's funeral.
She had known Violet Kray for many years.
The Richardson boys had been visitors to her house for a long time.
Many of the mourners were young men who had grown up with her sons.
Petty criminals most of them, but good boys all the same.
Roy's wife looked depressed as usual.
Sarah knew that it was not the funeral that had put the sad look on her daughter-in-law's face, but something quite different.
Janine and Roy had problems, she was sure of that.
Neither of them looked happy these days.
Their daughter, Carla, nearly five now, looked as if she hadn't been washed for days.
Sarah made a mental note to go and see Janine.
Even in her grief she could still look out for her remaining children.
Finally, they began to make their war back to the cars.
Sarah noticed Roy trying to take Janine's hand and being shrugged off.
She frowned.
as if there wasn't enough unhappiness in the family, they had to bring their petty squabbles into the cemetery with them.
Benny was staring at the mound of dirt that covered his brother.
Benjamin walked back to get him, his old face looking more haggard and careworn than usual.
He had been drinking steadily since the early morning.
‘Come on, son.’
His voice was slurred but gentle.
Benny was staring intently at a large worm wriggling on the pile of damp earth.
In his mind's eye he saw it boring its way into the earth, down, down, until it reached his brother's face.
Covering his own face with his hands, he was overtaken by silent sobs that made his shoulders shake.
He was as tall as his father, and as Benjamin took his namesake into his arms, he felt the strength of him.
Sarah was watching them.
She realised for the first time how Benjamin must be feeling.
After all, Anthony had been his son too.
A feeling she had not known in over a decade slipped through her body.
All animosity towards her husband dissolved and a spark of affection for him seemed to light up inside her, as it had in the old days.
She couldn't blame him entirely for what had happened.
Children would go their own way in the end.
In the environment they lived in it was inevitable that kids would turn to crime.
All she could really blame him for was not working hard enough to get them out of it.
She sighed heavily.
How could he?
He had never had the chance.
All this flashed through her head in an instant.
She looked around the cemetery.
The brilliant sunshine seemed to be mocking her.
It was too nice a day to be burying a young life.
It should have been cold and raining as befitted a funeral.
She saw the flowers gently swaying in the light breeze, the lichen-covered gravestones that hid their contents from the world, and was overcome with sadness.
The birds were still singing as she made her way slowly to the cars.
Her body seemed to have shrunk since Anthony's death, giving her the appearance of an old woman.
She was only forty-four.
Back at the house everyone was drinking.
Maura pushed her way through the adults and stationed herself in the front room next to the table piled high with food.
Presently she was joined by Margaret Lacey.
This had been arranged the day before.
That morning Margaret had complained of a bad bout of sickness.
Her mother, anxious to get to work, had given her the day off school.
Now she was up and dressed and holding her new best friend's hand.
She could not even imagine what it must be like to have a brother who had been murdered.
Her mum and dad had talked of nothing else for days.
According to them it was a wonder something like this had not happened before.
Margaret, though, wisely kept this bit of information to herself.
Mickey came up, and, taking the two girls by the hand, led them out of the house and into the back garden.
He could not bear to be away from Maura today.
She was so innocent and trusting.
With his guilt over Anthony, he felt that at least she loved him and didn't blame him for the death.
No one would dare say that it was his fault outright, but he knew what was going on in everyone else's mind.
He sat in an old deck chair and the two girls sat on the  ground, each leaning against one of his legs.
He was already half drunk.
The sun was so hot it was impossible to open his eyes without being blinded.
Eventually he dozed.
Maura and Margaret sat by him for hours.
The friendship of a lifetime was bonded that day.
Maura and Margaret became a pair, the friendship only to end with the death of one of them.
That night in bed Maura had her first nightmare.
It was of the man in the cemetery coming after her with her mother's bread knife.
She was to have the same dream intermittently for the rest of her life.
Chapter Six
Carla Ryan opened her eyes.
The sun was streaming in at the windows of her room.
She lay for a few moments watching the patterns it made on the ceiling.
A cool breeze drifted over her thin little body.
She rubbed her arm, where she had a large bruise above the elbow.
Her mother had picked her up bodily the night before and dragged her into her room where she had then thrown her on to her bed.
She had bumped her arm on the little bedside cabinet.
The pain had made her lose her breath for a few seconds.
Lifting up her pink nightdress her mother had then smacked her behind as hard as she could, afterwards putting her face next to Carla's and telling her that she had had enough.
Her mother's breath had been sour as it always was when she had been drinking.
What exactly her mother had had enough of Carla was not sure.
All she had done the night before was make herself a sugar sandwich.
She had asked her mother for something to eat over and over again, until finally she had decided to get it herself.
She supposed it was the sugar all over the table and floor that had made her mother cross.
She sat herself up in bed and swung her little legs over the side.
She yawned and her long brown hair fell over her face as she stretched her arms out.
She winced as her bad arm was stretched.
This was going to be a sore one, she reflected.
Like the one she'd had on her leg a few weeks previously.
Slipping off the bed she crept across her room, opening the door as silently as possible.
She looked through the crack into the hallway.
Opposite her bedroom was the kitchen.
She waited a few seconds for any sounds that might tell her that her mother was in there  but out of her range of sight.
Nothing.
She walked across the hall and into the kitchen.
The sugar she had spilt everywhere the night before was sticking to her bare feet.
She was hungry again.
She was always hungry.
Sneaking across the kitchen she made herself some bread and margarine.
She was kneeling on a kitchen chair, her long hair trailing in the margarine, when she heard the steps.
The heavy thudding steps that meant her mother was getting up.
She froze.
Her heart was fluttering in her chest.
Her breathing came rapidly.
Remembering the night before she threw her knife from her hand as if it was red hot, then tried to push the sticky mass of bread and margarine underneath the bread wrapper.
In her haste she was clumsy and only succeeded in pushing the loaf of Dinkum bread and the sandwich off the table and on to the floor, already sticky from the sugar.
Tears of frustration stung her eyes.
She felt her mother's presence before she turned and faced her, her little grubby hands clenching and unclenching with nerves.
Janine looked at her coldly.
Her daughter's face was exquisite even when she was terrified.
Her eyes were a startling violet colour that made her look incredibly strong-minded.
Coupled with her dark brown hair and high cheekbones, she looked like a miniature woman.
Janine watched her daughter sweep her hair away from her face with a gesture that was more fitting to a sexy movie star than a four-year-old girl.
Her long neck and strong pointed chin were shown to advantage by the gesture.
Janine chewed her lip, staring spitefully at her child.
She knew that if she didn't speak Carla would get more and more nervous, eventually breaking the heavy silence herself.
She noticed the black bruise on her arm and a wicked light glowed in the back of her eyes.
She would have to keep the child's arms covered, because Roy would go crazy if he thought his little angel had been whipped.
She gritted her teeth and, aping the child's earlier movement, theatrically swept her own thick red hair off her face.
She looked like a sleek, tawny cat about to pounce on its prey.
Carla  stared back at her, every nerve in her body tensed and waiting.
As her mother swept back her hair in a parody of her own action she dropped her eyes.
Everything she did annoyed her mother.
How she sat, how she stood, how she ate, how she spoke.
Every movement was ridiculed and parodied.
She wished her father was home but he was very rarely around much these days, and when he was her mother fought with him.
Carla would curl up on his lap and hold her hands over her ears desperately trying to block out their arguing.
She loved her father and missed him when he was away.
She thought of him as a big tree, with strong branches that enabled her to climb him, which she did when he was home.
With Roy holding her by the arms she walked up his body until, reaching his shoulders, she flipped over and landed on her feet, screeching with laughter.
She wished he was here now.
Her mother daren't touch her when her father was at home.
The tension in the kitchen had reached its peak and, stuttering in fright, the child spoke.
‘Where's me dad?’
As soon as she spoke the words she flinched inside.
Why had she mentioned him?
She closed her eyes tightly.
Somewhere inside her was a weak hope that she had not spoken.
She heard her mother's slippers crunching across the sugar-strewn floor.
She squeezed her eyes shut as tightly as possible.
As she felt her hair being yanked, she screamed.
The pain was searing through her scalp.
Shaking her like a rag doll, Janine began to shout.
‘You want your dad, do you?
You little slut!
He's out whoring as usual.
Shacked up with some woman somewhere.
He don't care about you.’
Carla was trying to drag her mother's fingers from her hair.
Crying now, and frightened, she screamed back at her mother, ‘Please, Mum…
Please…
Let go of me hair…
You're hurting me!’
Sarah heard the screams from the entrance hall of the flats.
Grabbing Maura's hand she ran up the stairs and banged on the front door with her fists, demanding to be let in.
Janine heard the banging and shouting and went cold  with fright.
She threw Carla from her and looked around her wild-eyed, like an animal seeking an escape route.
The state of the kitchen registered inside her mind somewhere.
Carla lay sobbing where she had landed, holding her poor injured head in both hands.
Her granny's banging on the door was like music to her ears.
She watched her mother walk out of the kitchen as if in a trance and a few seconds later Carla was nestled in her granny's arms.
Little kisses were planted on her wet face, and murmured endearments and gentle strokes ad-ministered.
Gradually the child calmed down.
A handful of her hair was lying on the floor.
Maura watched the whole thing wide-eyed.
Janine was now sitting at the kitchen table smoking a cigarette.
Maura took in the dirty sugary floor and the loaf of bread now scattered everywhere, the filthy table and the stacks of dirty dishes.
She dragged her eyes from it all, disgusted.
She didn't like Janine.
Taking the weeping Carla out of the kitchen Sarah motioned with her head for Maura to follow her, which she did gratefully.
Going into Carla's room, Sarah laid the child on the bed.
Maura watched as her mother checked the little girl from head to toe, shaking her head and tutting as she did it.
Finally, Sarah turned to her own daughter.
‘You stay here with Carla.
Find some half-decent clothes and get her dressed.
I'll call you if I need you…all right?’
Her voice was thick with emotion.
Maura nodded wordlessly.
In the kitchen Janine sat at the table smoking yet another cigarette.
Pulling herself up to her full height, Sarah glared at her.
‘Now then, Janine.
I think you'd better tell me exactly what's been going on here.’
Her voice was determined.
Janine glanced at her and, all the hatred and animosity falling from her, began to cry.
Groaning as if in physical pain, she rocked herself back and forth in her chair — her teeth bared as if she was grimacing at some diabolical joke.
Sarah stared at her.
Where on earth was the beautiful, vital girl her son had married?
How did this scruffy, dirty-looking individual come into being?
The girl was only  twenty-two years old.
She looked at the filthy kitchen.
The windows were so grimy it was difficult for the sun to penetrate them.
The whole place stank.
She had always understood that Janine's mother was never off the doorstep, that's why she never came herself.
Say what you like about Eliza Grierson, she was a very particular housewife, so how come the flat was in this state?
She shook her head in puzzlement.
And just how long had Janine been beating the child?
By the looks of Carla she had not had a decent meal for weeks.
Sarah blamed herself.
She should have come over sooner, she should have spoken to Roy, but how did you ask a grown man about his home life?
Once they left home it was up to them surely?
That had been her own mother's philosophy.
She was distressed, unsure how to go about sorting this situation out.
Suddenly Janine spoke.
‘No one ever said it would be like this!’
Her voice was high.
‘I hate it all…
I hate the cooking and the cleaning and the dirt and the washing and the mending.
I hate this flat — it's like a prison to me.
Sometimes I don't see anyone for weeks on end.
I'm so lonely.’
Sarah was nonplussed.
Janine took a deep breath and all the fears and worries inside her came tumbling out like a great canker that had finally burst.
‘Roy's never here.
He leaves me for days on end.
And Carla…that bloody Carla is like a permanent reminder of my bloody mistake!
If it  hadn't been for her I wouldn't be here…
I wouldn't be here!’
She began crying again in earnest.
Sarah went to her.
She hesitated a few seconds before putting her arm around the girl's thin shoulders.
‘What about your mother, Janine?
I thought she came to see you.’
She gave a harsh bitter laugh.
‘Well, you thought wrong, Mrs Ryan.
My mother…my darling mother…has nothing to do with me any-more.’
‘But why, Janine?
Why?’
‘Oh, it's a long story.
She told me that if I left Roy and  went home she would forgive me having Carla and everything…forgive me bringing shame on them by marrying a hoodlum.
That's her choice of word not mine.
And as much as I hate Roy at times…’ she began to cry again ‘…
I know that if I left him, I would never be happy again.
I can't live without him, Mrs Ryan!
I love him so desperately yet I can't seem to make him happy.
When he's here I start fights and drive him out of the house.
I want him to want me and he doesn't.
I know he doesn't…’
‘Dear God, Janine.
What on earth's the matter with you, girl?
Look around you, for Christ's sake.
Who'd want to come home to this?
It's like a bloody pig sty.’
Janine's declaration of love for her son had softened Sarah up.
She reasoned that if she could help the girl, she could save their marriage as well as the child.
‘Look at yourself.
You look like the wreck of the Hesperus!
No woman likes housework, but it's got to be done.
At your age I already had five children living and not the hope of a decent wage coming.
You've got it made if only you'd realise it.’
She began rolling up the sleeves of her best dress.
‘I'll tell you what we'll do.
First we'll have a cup of tea.
Get ourselves nice and calm.
Then we'll go through this place like a dose of salts.
Scrub it out from top to bottom.
With the two of us working like blacks we'll have it done in no time.
What do you say?’
Janine nodded but Sarah could see her heart wasn't in it.
She tried a different tack.
‘Then you can go and get your lovely hair done while I get some food cooked.
Can you imagine Roy's face when he comes home to everything nice and clean and homely?
I'll take the little one home with me for a few days to give you a break.
Now what do you say to that?’
Janine brightened up and Sarah smiled but deep inside she was worried.
The only reason Janine had cheered up was because she was taking her child from her.
She sighed.
Even when your children grew up they still made demands.
You were never free of them.
Wearily she put on the kettle for the tea.
Already she was tired, and by the looks of the flat by the time she was finished she would be exhausted.
Well, soonest done soonest mended, as her mother used to say.
She made the tea.
In the bedroom Maura had dressed Carla in a fairly clean pinafore dress.
All the child's socks were dirty so she had turned a pair inside out and put them on her.
They looked pretty clean.
She was sitting on the bed cuddling Carla when her mother came in and told her to go to the shops and get some bits and pieces.
She was instructed to take Carla with her and get her a big ice cream, and one for herself also.
She was amazed at how quickly Carla seemed to get over what had happened to her.
At the mention of ice cream the little girl became excited and animated, bouncing up and down on the bed.
Maura felt so sorry for her.
Her arms were like sticks and the purple-black bruise looked swollen and painful.
Yet jumping on the bed she could almost be a normal, happy little girl.
She had seen the pity in her mother's eyes and a great rage against Janine had rushed through Maura.
If she was older she would go into that kitchen and tear her apart.
Instead she took the money from her mother and walked sedately down to the shops with Carla, playing with her and making her laugh.
She knew that Carla was coming home with her and decided that she would take the little girl into her bed with her.
After all, she was her aunt.
She had a responsibility towards her.
Three hours later the little flat was sparkling clean.
Janine seemed to get up some enthusiasm as her mother-in-law chatted to her, telling her about her own difficult marriage, and how it was hard when one was young and unsure of oneself.
For the first time Janine felt that she had an ally, and it made all the difference to her.
Sarah was consciously getting her confidence, telling her what she knew she wanted to hear.
When Janine finally opened up to her she felt the loneliness and unhappiness emanating from her.
Sarah reproached herself.
She should have visited her more often, should have taken more of an interest in her — and just  wait until she went around to Eliza Grierson's!
She'd floor that bitch with what she had to say to her!
The supercilious old cow!
Sarah was looking forward to it.
She'd ‘hoodlum’ her before she was much older!
Next on her agenda was that galloping big son of hers.
Letting the girl get into this state, and neglect that little child.
She'd annihilate him as well!
When she got her hands on the bugger, that was.
From what she'd gleaned from Janine he came and went like a bloody ghost, flitting in and out as it suited him.
Sarah's mouth set in a grim line.
He wasn't too big for a clout round the ear hole, whatever he thought.
Janine came into the kitchen dressed up for her trip to the hairdresser's.
Sarah smiled at her.
‘You look a picture, love.
Like one of them girls on the adverts!
Now get yourself off and I'll fix you something for your dinner.’
Janine smiled shyly at Sarah.
She felt better than she had for months.
‘Thank you, Mrs Ryan.
You've been so good to me.’
Her voice was trembling with emotion.
Sarah waved her hand impatiently.
‘Don't you think it's about time you called me Sarah?
As for thanking me…for what?
I should have been here for you a long time ago.
I'm ashamed of meself.’
Janine went to her and kissed her on the cheek.
‘Thanks…
Sarah.’
She said her name timidly, as if it felt strange to address her so.
Sarah just grinned at her.
‘Get yourself off and I'll have a lovely meal waiting for you, OK?’
Janine nodded and left the flat, feeling lighter hearted than she had for many days.
Sarah watched her go and wiped her arm across her brow.
She was sweating.
It had been a hot and sultry summer.
In a way she was grateful to Janine.
Today had been the first time since he died she had not been tortured with thoughts of her Anthony.
She looked out of the now sparkling window and heaved a deep sigh.
She began to cook the meal, briefly wondering how her own household was coping without her.
She pictured Benjamin waiting for the food to run out of the cupboard and into the frying pan, and smiled.
It would never occur to  him to cook himself anything.
Well, he would just have to wait.
She had more pressing things on her mind.
As she prepared the vegetables, she heard the front door open.
Thinking it was Maura and Carla she called out: ‘I'm in here, lovelies.’
‘What you doing here, Mum?’
Roy was standing in the doorway, staring at the kitchen as if he was in the wrong house.
Sarah smirked at him nastily.
‘Well, well.
The Wandering Jew's returned to his home at last!’
She looked at his crumpled clothing, and the dark shadow on his jaw.
‘Obviously your new lady love isn't looking after you very well.’
She slammed the saucepan of potatoes on to the draining board.
Roy stared at her warily.
There was something funny going on here.
‘So, now that you're home, are you thinking of staying at all?
Or are you just going to get a change of gear and go off again on your merry way?’
She gripped the handle of the saucepan.
Roy looked at her, bewildered.
‘Are you being funny?
Where's Janine and the kid?’
Too late he realised his mother's intention.
The saucepan and potatoes hit him full in the chest, the water drenching him.
Sarah ran to him, slipping on the wet floor.
Righting herself she slapped him across his face, a white hand print appearing as if by magic.
‘I'll give you where's the kid…she's your daughter, Roy Ryan, and you fought hammer and tongs to marry her mother.
When I think of the trouble you caused because you couldn't keep your private parts to yourself!
You've driven that poor girl to distraction.’
‘I've what!
Now you hold up a minute, Muvver.’
Sarah screamed at him: ‘No, I bloody well won't, you gormless eejit!
Before that girl took up with you the most she ever did in her life was get dressed up for church.
She wasn't brought up to do all this.’
She gestured around the flat.
‘She's been slowly going out of her mind stuck here day in day out, and do you care?
Not on your bloody nellie!
I'm ashamed to admit that you're my son!
That poor innocent  little child has taken the brunt of everything.
She's got a bruise on her arm like she's been ten rounds with Dempsey…and it's all your fault.’
Roy's mouth was hanging open with disbelief.
‘Shut your bloody gob up!
You look like a mental deficient standing there gawking.’
Roy's mouth snapped shut.
‘Janine won't do anything around the place.’
‘Shut your trap, I said, or you'll be getting another smack off me otherwise.
You're not too big for a good hiding, you know.’
Roy wanted to laugh.
He towered over his mother.
He had to admire her though.
She stuck by her guns.
Inside him there was a little nagging doubt.
What his mother had said was true.
He didn't try to understand Janine.
Slowly bending down Sarah picked up the saucepan.
It was dented on one side.
She stifled an urge to brain her son with it, and instead placed it in the sink.
In unspoken agreement mother and son began clearing up the debris.
Potatoes had flown to all four comers of the kitchen.
Water was every where.
When it was all put right, Sarah pushed Roy into a chair.
Outwardly, she looked her old formidable self.
Inside, she was gloating.
She was actually enjoying herself!
She had not had so much fun for a long time, since before she buried Anthony.
She made a pot of tea.
Putting a cup in front of Roy, she said, ‘I came here this morning because I knew that something wasn't right.
I sensed it at the funeral.
The child looked like the orphan of the storm, and Janine looked terrible.
I admit that I'm as much to blame, I should have come to visit her, but I understood her mother was never off the doorstep, so I left her to it.
When I came here this morning she was pulling the child's hair out of her head.’
She watched Roy's mouth harden.
‘And don't you come the old biddy with me!
If you had done your job properly, been a decent husband, then all this could have been avoided.’
She poked him in the chest.
‘You are going to get yourself sorted out, my man, and you're going to start coming home at nights.
I sat in many a night myself when  you were all younger, waiting for that piss artist of a father of yours to come home, knowing in my heart that he was down the Bayswater Road, spending desperately needed money on old brasses.
How I never got a dose of clap I'll never know!
Well, I won't have any of my sons going the same way.’
Roy sat staring at her.
He knew, as all the boys had always known, that she had not had the best of lives with his father, but she had never before spoken to him like this.
He knew that she was trying to help him save his marriage, and in a tiny part of himself he knew that she was right.
He had left Janine to fend for herself.
He had chosen to ignore the fact that she took out her frustrations on Carla.
But he just didn't know what to do.
He was ashamed that his mother had so accurately put her finger on where he spent his nights.
Since Michael had opened a hostess club in the West End, he had literally had his pick of women to spend the night with.
It had been easier than coming home to fighting and arguing.
To a dirty home and an unhappy wife.
But he still loved Janine.
He had thought that taking her away from her mother's influence would have encouraged her to stand on her own two feet.
Instead she had leant even more on him and he just couldn't take it, so had chosen the easy way out.
Now he had to face not only Janine and little Carla, but his mother.
He heard the front door open and braced himself, looking at his mother for support.
As Janine walked into the room, Sarah stood up and smiled at her.
‘You look an absolute angel, doesn't she, Roy?’
She poked him in the shoulder, her bright smile belying the force she had used.
Janine smiled uncertainly at him.
The tension in the kitchen was like an electric current.
Janine did look like an angel.
Her hair was swept up off her finely boned face, emphasising her long neck.
Her deep green eyes were made up expertly and there was a wistfulness in them that pierced Roy's heart.
She was a cracker, he thought.
She really looked the business.
His mum was right, Janine was like a high-spirited thoroughbred.
She  needed gentle guidance.
He got up from his chair and held out his arms to her.
Janine hesitated for a few seconds before she slipped into them.
Sarah watched, a satisfied expression on her face.
Now all she had to do was go and see Father McCormack and get him to sort out her Michael and she would be happy.
Half an hour later she left the two love birds, Maura and Carla in tow.
Her next stop was the Church and Father McCormack.
She looked at her watch.
If she hurried she would catch him as he finished six o'clock mass.
Sitting in the refectory with a glass of wine in front of her, Sarah poured out her heart to the priest.
‘I feel ashamed to tell you this, Father, but Michael has bought himself another club, this time a bordello.’
She sipped her wine to steady her voice.
‘Men go there to…
Well, I don't have to paint a picture, now do I?’
Father McCormack looked at her through shrewd eyes.
He was sixty years old and had been the parish priest for over thirty years.
His hair was grey and cut in an American crew-cut.
He had heavy grey-flecked eyebrows that gave him a wise demeanour and looked on religion the way some men looked on marriage: as a necessary part of life.
You made the best of it.
He put his large, soft hands together.
‘I see, I see.’
His Irish accent was still thick even though he had left Ireland over forty years previously.
‘Sure that Michael was always a difficult one.
I can see why you're worrying.’
‘I think that if you had a word with him, Father…’
Her voice trailed off.
‘Well, Sarah, I'll do my best.
But your Michael was always a strong-minded fellow.
He might not like the interference.’
Sarah was determined that before she left this room she would have an appointment to save her son's eternal soul!
She tried a different approach.
‘Oh, Father, I know what people say about my Mickey, but as you know yourself, stories get stretched in the  telling.
All he needs is a little gentle guidance.
If you were to talk to him, I'm sure he would listen to a fine man like yourself.
Even when he was an altar boy, he always had a high regard for you.’
The priest raised his eyebrows.
When Michael had been an altar boy he had also stolen the lead from the church roof!
But he had the glimmer of a plan forming in his mind, and it would please this poor soul sitting before him.
He decided to do as she asked.
‘Hostess club, you say?
Well, I think that a few words from me are called for, as you say.’
Sarah jumped in before he could change his mind.
‘If you come to my house at eleven o'clock tomorrow morning, I'll make sure that he's there.’
He smiled at her, showing tobacco-stained teeth.
‘Eleven o'clock it is then.
Now tell me, how are the other children?
I hear that all the older boys are driving big expensive cars and living the life of Riley.
They all work for Michael, I take it?’
Sarah dropped her eyes.
‘Yes, Father, that's true.
But if you can help to sort out Mickey, the others will follow suit, I'm sure.’
‘Well, Sarah, we can only put our trust in the Lord.’
He looked up at the ceiling as if expecting to see him floating there.
‘As it says in the Bible, ‘God is no respecter of persons’, Romans 2–11.
Michael Ryan may be a big man on earth but in heaven he's just another of God's children.’
Sarah smiled at him.
There was nothing, she thought, like a chunk of the Bible when spouted by a true believer.
She left a little while later, happier than she had been for a long time.
Over the years her religion had been a great comfort to her.
As she had suffered one setback after another-no money, another still birth, one or other of the boys in trouble with the police — she had turned more and more to the church.
Benjamin was no good at all.
If she relied on him for anything, it never happened.
Whether it was her housekeeping or anything, he always let her down.
Michael, God love him, had been a good son in many ways.
He had looked after his younger brothers and sister, he had made sure that she always had enough money, but she had been hearing things of late that had frightened her.
Anthony's death had been the last straw.
She knew that her eldest son was involved in all manner of criminal activities, that he was thought of as a kind of mobster.
She shuddered.
She was all for a bit of ducking and diving, that's how everyone lived in her estimation, but from what she had gleaned recently about her sons, it was a completely different lifestyle they were after.
She had seen the effect that Michael had on the people around and about.
She herself was now treated like visiting royalty when she went anywhere.
She could, to an extent, understand Michael's craving for recognition.
She was shrewd enough to understand that the way he had been treated as a child would give him the added drive and determination to better himself.
But she herself drew the line at prostitution.
In her mind it was the ultimate degradation, and any man who could live off the proceeds of it was the lowest of the low.
She fervently hoped that Father McCormack would be able to talk some sense into her son.
The robbing was bad enough though the insurance companies could afford the losses and money had no soul.
But the wilful destruction of young lives was a different kettle of fish altogether.
She had been shocked to read in the News of the World about the drugs that were available now to youngsters.
What on earth was the world coming to?
Young girls selling their bodies for drugs.
In the war years and after, women had sold their bodies to feed their children.
That fitted in with Sarah's creed.
You could do anything to feed the children, to keep the family fed or clothed.
Even sell your body.
But that had been for women with no man to protect them, so they had to do whatever they could and were respected for it.
Sarah herself knew many women who had moonlighted down the Bayswater Road to supplement meagre war pensions or National Assistance.
What Michael was doing was disgusting.
He was putting them on the game, women and young  girls who would otherwise never have dreamt of doing it.
He was offering easy money, a far cry from the days when it was a means to an end.
She watched Maura and Carla skipping in front of her.
Maura looked huge beside the tiny Carla.
Dear Maura, she had taken the poor little thing under her wing.
Sarah only hoped now that Janine and Roy sorted themselves out.
That it wasn't too late for her to take to her daughter.
Oh, the worry of having children!
A Jewish woman Sarah had been friends with, before the war, used to say to her, ‘When your children are young they tread on your feet.
When they get older they tread on your heart!’
How right she had been!
The poor woman had died when she had been bombed in the blitz.
A direct hit.
Sarah often thought of her.
Too many good people had died in the war, had suffered in one way or another.
She sighed.
She was dead tired.
Now she had to-go home and start her own cooking and cleaning.
Still, she consoled herself, Father McCormack was coming in the morning and hopefully everything would right itself.
Father McCormack sat opposite Michael and appraised him.
There was no doubt about it, he was a fearsome-looking individual.
From his dark expertly cut hair to his hand-made shoes he was the epitome of the new young man.
His single-breasted suit was made of mohair and he flicked a trace of ash off his trousers with a perfectly manicured hand.
His closely shaven face was tense and his usually sensuous mouth set in a grim line.
The priest had guessed that he was well aware of the object of this visit.
Sarah had made a pot of tea and left them together in the overcrowded room.
It was as if , after years of having no furniture at all , Sarah had gone mad for it.
The room was filled with tables, knick-knacks, chairs, and a large horsehair three-piece suite.
Religious paintings were all over the walls.
The Sacred Heart, the Last Supper and the Crucifixion stared down at them.
Our Lady of Lourdes looked at the doorway opposite her in a gesture of supplication.
On  the large sideboard that covered nearly the whole of one wall statues of the Virgin and Child, as well as the holy family, stood silently.
One particularly macabre statue of Saint Sebastian, arrows poking out of every limb, was given centre stage.
The priest found his eyes drawn towards it and made a conscious effort to stop staring at it.
He picked up his cup of tea and turned his gaze back to Michael.
‘I expect you know why I'm here?’
Michael sniffed and uncrossed his legs.
‘Yeah.’
His voice was wary.
The priest nodded as if in understanding.
‘Well, Michael, if you know then it's pointless me droning on now, isn't it?’
‘Yeah.’
This was said insolently.
Michael's fear of priests and nuns was long gone.
Father McCormack sat forward in his chair and replaced his cup on the table.
His face hardened.
He spoke in a low voice.
‘What I am here for today is something completely different.
When your mother, good woman that she is, came to see me yesterday I was not shocked to hear what she had to say.
I guessed that you were breaking the law in some way.
I'm not a fool, you know.
Anyway, that's all neither here nor there…
I want to speak to you as a man of the world.’
Michael looked at him.
His blue eyes were sceptical.
‘What I'm after is a little donation.’
Michael sat up in the chair, stunned.
‘A what!’
The priest became agitated.
‘Whisht now, whisht.
You'll have your mother galloping in here else.
As you know, I am rather sympathetic to my countrymen.
There poor Paddies in London even now, God love them, who have been driven out of their homes by the Proddies.
It's every Irishman's duty to help these poor unfortunates.’
‘Look, Father, just because my name's Ryan don't mean I'm Irish.’
The priest banged his fist on the little table, causing the cups to jump in their saucers.
‘Listen here, you, since nineteen-twenty the Catholics have been discriminated against in Ulster, Belfast, all the  North.
They can't even get a council house out there!
The bloody Protestants run the whole fecking  shebang !
I collect money for the IRA so we can build up an army and fight the bastards at their own game.
One day, my laddo, we'll be ready for the eejits.
We forced them out of the South and we'll fight the buggers in the North.
We want an Irish Free State that spans the whole of Ireland.’
The priest's eyes were alight.
Michael stared at him as if he was mad.
He had heard stories of Ireland from the cradle, as most Catholic children had.
He could still hear his granny singing ‘Kevin Barry’ on Saint Patrick's Day, still remember the stories of the Easter Uprising and the Famine.
How his ancestors had left the meat that Queen Victoria had sent over to them to fight in the streets rather than accept help from the English.
But this was nineteen-sixty, for Christ's sake.
Who gave a toss what was happening out there?
Father McCormack drank his tea.
Wiping his mouth with the back of his hand he spoke again.
‘I know an awful lot about you, Michael Ryan.
There's nothing I can't find out if I want to.
All I am asking is a little donation now and again.
You'd be surprised at how many people give money to the cause.
The Americans have regular collections in their bars and churches.
Ireland is a poor country and needs all the help it can get.’
Michael laughed.
‘Supposing I give you some money…now and again…what would you do in return?’
The priest took a handkerchief from the pocket of his black cassock and mopped his forehead.
‘I would tell your mother exactly what she wanted to hear.
If it came from me she would believe it.
I can be a very persuasive man.’
Michael ran his tongue over his lips, and shook his head.
‘What about the poor orphans and the starving blacks?’
His voice was sarcastic.
‘Sure, they would get a bit as well, God love them.
Though I think most of the blacks are in Notting Hill.’
Michael burst out laughing.
‘All right then, Father.
You've sold me.
But I'm warning you now, you've got to keep my muvver sweet.’
Father McCormack smiled.
‘I will, Michael son.’
He sighed heavily.
‘Sure, it's a terrible world we're living in today.
Money makes it so much easier.
I remember this room when there was hardly a thing in it…except children, of course.
Your mother always seemed to have plenty of those.
Well, I must be off.
It's been grand chatting to you, Michael.
I'll expect you at the Presbytery in a few days with your donation.’
He held out his hand.
‘I won't give you a blessing…
I don't think you need one!’
Michael shook his hand.
‘I have a feeling I've just been conned, Father.
An Irish Catholic Northern-Ireland?
Donations to the IRA…?’
He smiled.
‘If it was anyone else I'd kick their arse out of the door.’
The priest's face straightened and he looked meaning-fully at Michael.
‘Don't mock what you don't fully understand.
Your religion is the mightiest in the world.
Remember this?
Dominus illuminatio mea, et salus mea, quem timebo ?’
Michael translated it for him, smiling as he did so.
‘The Lord is the source of my light and my safety, so whom shall I fear?’
‘Would you listen to that!
You remembered your Latin.’
‘Yeah, I remember it all right.
And I don't fear anyone, not even God.
You remember that.’
Father McCormack digested the veiled threat gracefully.
‘How could I forget?
But I'll tell you one thing before I go.
One day the troubles in Northern Ireland will be known all over the world, and the British will have to listen to us.
When that day comes you remember my words, Michael, because we won't forget our friends, whoever they are.’
With that the priest picked up his hat and left the room.
Michael watched him leave.
He felt like laughing out loud.
The old boy had lost his marbles somewhere along the line.
Still, if it kept his mother off his back, he didn't  care.
He picked up the tray of tea things and took them to the kitchen where he glanced at the clock.
If he got his head down for a couple of hours he would be nice and fresh for the evening.
His new club was raking the money in.
After the lean war years, people wanted a bit of fun.
And he would make sure that they got it!
Chapter Seven
1966
‘You look nice, Maws.
Where you off to?’
Sarah's voice was tight.
‘I'm going up Tiffany's with me mates.’
‘Tiffany's?
Where's that?’
Sarah's voice had taken on the tone of an interrogation.
Garry answered for Maura.
‘It's in Ilford.
The old Allie Pallie.’
‘What's she going up there for?
What's wrong with the Hammersmith Palais?’
Maura sighed and tossed back her hair.
‘There's nothing wrong with round here, Mum.
I'm just meeting some of the girls from work, that's all.’
Her voice was beginning to rise and she tried in vain to control it.
Sarah wiped her hands on her apron and stared at Maura, her face wrinkled in concern.
‘Well, it's a bloody long way to go if you ask me.’
‘Well, I'm not asking you, Mum.
I'm nearly seventeen and I can do what I like.’
Sarah walked towards her daughter.
Garry tried to pull her back, holding her arm gently.
‘Let me tell you something, Madam.
You can't do what you sodding well like…’
Her diatribe was cut off by Michael who stormed into the kitchen.
The constant bickering between Maura and his mother was beginning to get on everyone's nerves.
‘For Christ's sake, Muvver, give it a rest.
Let the girl go out if she wants to.
Anyway…’ he put his arm around his mother's shoulders ‘…
Garry's going up there tonight.
He can give her a lift on the back of his scooter.’
‘I'm not getting on the back of his scooter with all my new gear on!’
Maura's voice was horrified.
‘Just as well, 'cos I ain't going up the Palais.’
‘Tiffany's.’
‘Tiffany's then.
I'm going to the pictures with me mates.’
Maura smiled triumphantly.
‘Well, that's settled then.’
She picked up her shoulder bag.
‘Gawd Blimey, it's worse than living in Scotland Yard here.
Where you bin?
What you been doing?
What did you talk about?
Did he kiss you?
I wouldn't mind, but I can't get a bloody boyfriend!
As soon as they find out who I am they shy off.
‘You Mickey Ryan's sister?’ they say.
‘Yes,’ says I, and watch them poodle off down the road.
So stop worrying about me getting in the club, Muvver, I don't get the bloody chance!’
She snatched her coat off the kitchen table and stormed out of the kitchen, shouting, ‘And if by any chance I do need an escort, it won't be my bloody brother.
Ta rah!’
She walked out of the front door and gave it a satisfying slam behind her.
In the kitchen Michael and Sarah stared at one another, shocked.
Garry went to the sink and washed his hands.
In the back of his mind he was cheering Maura on.
‘Well, I never, Michael.
Did you hear the way she carried on?’
He sighed heavily.
‘I think the whole of Notting Hill heard it.’
Garry wiped his hands on a tea-towel and faced his brother.
‘She's got a point though, ain't she?’
Michael looked at him.
It was like looking at a miniature version of himself.
‘What do you mean by that?’
His voice was cold.
Garry plucked up every bit of courage he had.
‘Well, the way that everyone's at her.
If I was her, it would drive me up the wall.’
‘If you was her you'd be getting the same treatment.
She's our sister, our responsibility.
If we don't look after her, who will?
You want to put your brain in gear before you open your trap, Garry.
Our Geoff was right about you.
He said an original thought in your head would die of loneliness.
After hearing the crap you just come out with, I'm inclined to agree with him.’
Garry's face was scarlet with embarrassment.
‘Come on, you two, get a move on or you'll be late.’
Sarah was worried.
She knew that Michael was capable of attacking Garry for what he had said.
In Michael's mind it was tantamount to mutiny and he would not stand for anyone disagreeing with him.
He took a comb from the pocket of his suit and stood at the sink.
Looking in the mirror that was perched precariously on the windowsill, he combed back the hair that hung over his eyes.
Then, turning to Garry, he pointed the long steel comb at him.
‘In future, Bruv, keep your nose out of what don't concern you.’
He kissed his mother lightly on the forehead and walked out of the room.
Garry was fuming inside.
Sensing this, Sarah went to him.
‘He don't mean it, Gal.
But he's tight about Maura, you know.
You should all look out for your sister.’
Garry shrugged her arm off and picked up his crash helmet.
‘We're not looking out for her, Mother.
We're trying to own her, and that's a completely different thing.’
When he had gone Sarah carried on with her chores, but Garry's words stayed with her all evening.
Maura breathed a sigh of relief as she slammed the front door.
It was getting more claustrophobic in that house by the day.
If it wasn't for Margaret she would go mad.
They were as close as two friends could be.
They worked in the same office, they ate their lunch together, they went down the Lane on Sundays and the Roman Road on Fridays.
The only cloud on the horizon was a boy called Dennis Dawson.
Margaret had been seeing him for nearly a year and Maura had the feeling that they were going to get married.
Still, she consoled herself, she would always have Margaret as a friend.
Tonight the two girls were meeting Dennis and one of his  mates up Tiffany's.
She had nearly had heart failure at the thought of Garry going up there.
That was all she needed.
The only reason they were going there was because they could be pretty sure that one or other of her brothers would not be up there and Maura would have a bit of privacy.
How she hated the way her brothers protected her, and her mother was all for it.
She was beginning to dislike her mother.
The last few years Sarah had practically suffocated her only daughter.
Maura wished that she could meet a nice bloke and get right out of it.
If she married, at least she would have a life of her own, away from prying eyes.
She daydreamed sometimes about finding a little flat but knew they were just that — daydreams…
There was no way she would ever be allowed to go and live alone.
She saw Margaret waiting for her outside her house and she gave her a little wave.
They made a funny pair.
Maura was tall, nearly five ten, and big-boned.
She was what her father jokingly called ‘a good eyeful’, with her large breasts and wide hips.
Her long blonde hair war.
backcombed up into a beehive, kept firmly in place with sugar and water, making her look even taller-like an amazon.
Her eyes, still a startling blue, were now heavily made up, with black liner and white eye shadow, the false eyelashes giving her a startled doe look.
In her short shirtwaist dress and white winklepicker shoes she was the height of fashion.
Margaret on the other hand was still under five feet tall.
Her orange-red hair was worn bouffant, and her orange lipstick made her look like a small circus clown.
She was very flat-chested but had big legs and a large behind.
When they were younger the boys in the streets whistled the Laurel and Hardy music as they passed.
Nowadays they took no notice if people stared at them, they were used to it.
‘You managed to escape then?’
‘Oh, don't talk to me about it, Marge.’
Margaret laughed her billy goat laugh.
‘You'd better check in your bag.
It might be bugged.’
‘Don't even joke about it, Marge, I wouldn't put it past them.’
They began to walk to the bus stop.
‘What's Dennis's mate like?’
‘Well, he's tall and very good-looking.
He's twenty-four years old.’
‘What job's he got?’
Margaret shook her head.
‘Dunno.
Dennis did tell me but we was too busy…well, you know.’
‘No, I don't know.
And you know that.
Come on, Marge, tell me.
What's it like?’
Margaret pursed her bright orange lips.
‘What?’
Her voice was innocent.
‘You know very well, Marge.
A bit of the other?’
‘Maura Ryan!
I am not discussing my sex life at a bus stop!’
Maura burst out laughing.
‘Why not?
It's never stopped you before!’
Both girls laughed and pushed each other in the chest.
‘Come on, tell me.’
Maura's face straightened and she looked earnestly at her little friend.
‘Well, I've only done it a couple of times as you know.
But…
I like it.
It's nice, but a bit embarrassing.
Dennis said that I'll get over that.
In fact, he says I'm a natural!’
The last piece of information was given with a toss of her head.
‘Oh, hark at the Duchess of Duke Street.’
They both laughed again.
The bus pulled up and they jumped on it, going upstairs so they could smoke.
‘Two to Holborn, please.’
As they lit their cigarettes Maura felt the familiar annoyance wash over her.
This was another bugbear.
Her brothers all smoked yet when Mickey had seen his sister smoking he had snatched the cigarette from her hand, grinding it out with his heel, shouting at her that only dags smoked.
He had done it in the street in front of everyone.
She had thought that she was going to die of shame.
Now she could only smoke when well away from them.
They got off the bus at Holborn and got a train to Mile End, from there taking another train to Ilford.
They were in Tiffany's at nine forty-five.
If they got in before ten it  cost only a pound.
They went straight to the toilets and repaired their makeup and hair.
As they came out of the toilet and into the bar Maura's heart stood still in her chest.
Standing beside Dennis was the best-looking man she had ever seen in her life.
She looked at Margaret with a question in her eyes and when she nodded felt a burst of happiness like she had never felt before.
‘Hello, darlin'.’
Dennis kissed Margaret on her cheek.
‘Maura, this is me mate Terry.
Terry, this is Maura.’
She shook the stranger's hand timidly.
Terry Petherick was well over six foot.
It seemed strange to Maura to look up at someone.
He had dark blond hair yet his eyes were a light brown.
Maura was besotted after one smile.
‘Would you like a drink?’
His voice was deep and it sent her pulses racing.
‘Please.’
Her throat was dry with nerves.
‘I'll have a scotch and dry.’
She was surprised at her answer.
What on earth had made her say that?
She drank half of bitter normally, but somehow she couldn't say that to him.
He would think her terribly unsophisticated.
‘Ice?’
She nodded at him.
As he took Margaret and Dennis's orders she watched him.
When he went to the bar she whispered into Margaret ear, ‘He's gorgeous!’
At the bar Terry Petherick was thinking about Maura.
He had been surprised at how big she was, but she was absolutely fantastic.
She was incredibly sexy and didn't even realise it!
As she had walked towards him he had felt a physical pain in his guts.
She was like one great big present, just waiting to be unwrapped.
He paid for the drinks and took them back to the others.
Maura gulped at her drink.
The music seemed very loud all of a sudden.
They were playing a Beatles number.
‘Love Me Do’ seemed to be reverberating off the walls.
Maura could see Terry's lips moving but could not make out a word.
She smiled and gestured that she couldn't hear him.
He laughed, showing perfect white teeth, and putting his mouth to her ear, he shouted: ‘Another drink?’
She looked at her glass and was amazed to find it was empty!
She smiled and nodded.
When he brought her back another drink he moved close to her trying to have a conversation.
‘Do you come here often?’
‘No.
Only in the mating season.’
The record ended just as she spoke and her voice caused people to stare at them.
Terry's eyebrows went up and she felt herself blushing furiously.
Why had she said that?
It was a silly saying of Margaret's.
Now he would think she was a tart.
She could have kicked herself.
She concentrated on her drink to hide her embarrassment, deciding that whisky was all right.
Just like drinking ginger beer really.
She noticed that it was getting very hot all of a sudden.
Terry grinned at her ruefully.
‘Another?’
She was aware of the disbelief in his voice even above the din.
He bought her another drink and she sipped it.
A slow dance came on.
Putting her glass on the bar, she went on to the dance floor with him.
As it was quieter now, he began to talk to her.
‘I thought I'd better dance with you in case you wanted another drink.’
His voice was jocular.
‘I don't drink shorts very often.’
‘I thought so.
Are you nervous or something?’
‘Yes…
Yes, I am.’
He smiled a funny little lopsided grin and pulled her closer.
She could feel his heartbeat against her breast and it gave her a feeling of longing she had never experienced before.
She closed her eyes.
‘What do you do for a living?’ he asked.
‘I work with Marge.
We're typists for a firm of account-ants in Charing Cross.’
‘That's right.
I remember Dennis telling me now.
I'm a policeman.’
He felt the change in her.
‘You're a what!’
Her voice sounded shocked.
‘I said, I'm a policeman.
What's wrong with that?’
He was puzzled.
Maura could hear it in his tone.
‘Nothing!
It's just that I've never met a policeman before.’
God forgive me for lying, she thought.
He relaxed.
‘Well, don't worry.
I'm not on duty so I won't arrest you.
Not tonight anyway.’
She tried to smile at him.
Bobby Darren was crooning ‘Dream Lover’ and Maura stepped back into Terry's arms.
They finished the dance in silence.
When they went back to Dennis and Margaret, Maura picked up her drink and slugged it straight back.
She signalled to Margaret and both girls went into the toilets.
As soon as they were in there Maura said: ‘He's only an old Bill.’
‘He ain't!’
Margaret was stunned.
‘Oh yes he is, Marge.
What am I gonna do?’
Margaret put her finger to her bottom lip.
Her tiny heart-shaped face was screwed up as she thought the problem over.
She looked up at Maura.
‘Do you like him, Maws?’
‘Oh, yes, Marge.
But a filth…
Jesus!’
Maura was nearly in tears.
‘Then it's simple.
Just don't tell him about your brothers.’
‘Do you honestly think I could get away with it?’
Margaret grinned.
‘It's a doddle!
’ Her green eyes widened as she thought of a plan.
‘Look, Dennis obviously ain't said nothing to him about your family and I'll put him wise.
He don't see that much of Terry anyway.
You just carry on as if nothing's happened.
Let's face it, your brothers are more well known on their own turf-than around this way.
Anyway, you're not responsible for them, are you?’
‘No, Marge…
I know that.
But I would feel a bit snidey pretending that I don't know them.’
Margaret rolled her eyes at the ceiling.
‘Look, pea brain, you're not denying them…you're just not mentioning them.
There's a difference.
Like in confession when I tell Father McCormack that I have sinned in a personal manner — I don't tell him I'm having it off, do I?
It's just a matter of not letting on, that's all.’
Maura still wasn't convinced.
Margaret sighed.
‘Well, it's up to you, Maws.
But I think  he's lovely, and you can tell a mile off that he likes you.
Now let's get back to them before they send a search party out looking for us.’
Later in the evening Maura was sitting in a small Chinese restaurant with Terry.
What Margaret had said earlier had been going through her mind over and over again.
She tried to reason with herself.
Just because he was a policeman didn't mean she couldn't go out with him, surely?
She shook her head to clear it.
It was all the whisky she'd had.
She was drunk.
‘Do you come from a large family, Maura?’
‘Oh, the usual, Terry.
A few brothers, that's all.
How about you?’
‘There's only me now.
I had a brother but he died.’
Maura's heart went out to him.
‘Oh…
I'm sorry.
One of my brothers died.
I know how you must feel.’
‘We lost Joey to cancer when he was twelve.
I was sixteen at the time.
Funny, though, I still miss him.
How did you…?’
Maura looked at the tablecloth.
‘He got run over.
I was only a kid.
I don't really remember it.’
Another lie, she thought.
Not a day went by but she saw Anthony's face, and superimposed on it the face of Stavros, smirking slightly as he had been in the cemetery.
No one in her family had been the same since Anthony's funeral.
Her mother and father had aged dramatically overnight.
Michael and the boys had become harder, more violent somehow.
As for herself, she just missed him.
Sometimes in the middle of a celebration, Christmas or Easter, she would think of him and the knowledge of how he had been murdered would cast a shadow over everything.
The food arrived.
As they served themselves from the many little dishes, Maura surveyed her companion.
She could really get to like Terry and the thought frightened her.
She was going to murder Margaret tomorrow, going off with Dennis and leaving them like that.
Now he had to take her home whether he wanted to or not.
‘Eat up, Maura.’
She smiled at him and brightened up.
He wouldn't have asked her out for a meal if he didn't like her, she reasoned.
‘Sorry.
I was miles away.’
‘Maura?’
‘Yes.’
‘Can I see you again?
I don't think I've enjoyed myself so much with a girl for ages.’
He smiled at her with that lopsided grin and she was undone.
Her whole body seemed to tingle with expectation.
He liked her!
‘Of course you can.
Whenever you want!’
She popped a prawn ball into her mouth and bit on it, showering him with sweet and sour sauce.
‘Oh, I'm sorry!’
She leant across the table to wipe his face with her napkin and knocked his glass of wine into his lap.
Mortified at what she had done she leapt out of her seat and collided with a waiter, sending the plate of egg fried rice he was carrying flying through the air.
She stood in the restaurant with her hand over her mouth and tears in her eyes.
Terry burst out laughing, causing all the people in the restaurant to take their eyes off Maura and begin staring at him.
He laughed so hard that he had a fit of coughing which, in turn, caused big tears to roll down his face.
He stood up and, throwing a handful of money on the table for the bill, led a scarlet-faced and humiliated Maura out of the restaurant and into the night air.
‘Now can I trust you with my car?
You won't knock my wheels off or pull my radio to pieces?’
Although it was said in a jocular fashion it was too much for Maura.
The whisky, the heat, the Chinese food, the humiliation, and finally the cold night air all took their toll.
She threw up in the gutter.
Terry rubbed her back as she heaved.
When she had finished she leant against his car, gulping in the cold air.
Her forehead had small beads of sweat on it that glistened in the lamp light.
Her mascara was smudged under her eyes.
One of her eyelashes had come unstuck.
Gently he pulled it from her eyelid.
Giving her his hanky, he went  back to the restaurant and came back with a glass of iced water.
She stood there dejectedly looking at him, convinced that he would never want to lay eyes on her again.
She looked at the red wine stain on his trousers and felt tears pricking her eyes.
She frantically blinked them away.
‘Feeling better now?’
His voice was gentle.
He handed her the glass of water.
‘Drink this down and you'll feel much better, I promise you.’
She shook her head.
‘Come on, drink it.’
The authority in his voice surprised her and she took the glass and drank the water.
The coolness eased her throat which was burning.
She handed the glass back to him and he returned it to the restaurant.
She breathed deeply, trying to settle her nerves.
He came back and unlocked the car, helping her into the passenger seat.
As he pulled away from the kerb, he said, ‘I think you drank too much.’
‘It was the whisky.
I've never drunk it before.
Normally I drink a half of bitter.’
She looked at his profile.
He looked solid, not just physically but mentally, with an air about him that denoted an inner strength.
He smiled.
‘Well, if it's any consolation, it happens to us all!
I can remember the first time I got drunk on Scotch.
I threw up all over my mum's slippers!
Never touched the bloody stuff since, so you're in good company.’
He poked himself in the chest.
‘I can't take my drink either.’
He felt in his jacket pocket and brought out a pack of Juicy Fruits.
‘Have one of these.
It will freshen your mouth up.’
She took one gratefully.
‘Where do you want dropping off?
I know you live in Notting Hill.’
‘Do you know the Bramley Arms?’
He nodded.
‘Well, there will do.
I live nearby.’
‘I'll take you right to your door.’
‘No…
That's all right.
It's my dad.
You know.’
He glanced at her and grinned.
‘I get it.
You're supposed to be coming home with Margaret.’
‘That's it.
He's a bit old-fashioned.’
They chatted on until they came to the Bramley Arms.
The water and the Juicy Fruit seemed to have done the trick because she felt great.
And better still, the big hunk of man beside her made her feel terrific.
He stopped the car and turned to face her.
‘When will I see you then?’
‘Whenever you like.’
He smiled at her eagerness.
‘Let's see.
’ He put his head to one side as if he was thinking, closing one eye and giving his little grin.
‘Tomorrow's Sunday.
How about Monday night?
I'll pick you up here at about seven-thirty.
Is that all right?’
She nodded and he pulled her into his arms and kissed her, then waved his finger in her face and said: ‘And no drinking whisky!’
She grinned and got out of the car.
‘See you, Maura.’
‘'Bye.’
She watched the car pull away.
He wanted to see her again!
She felt as if she could float up into the starry night.
It was two in the morning and she walked the short distance to her home as if on a cushion of air.
He wanted to see her again!
She couldn't believe her luck!
She had a little nagging worry in the back of her mind about Mickey, but pushed it impatiently away.
As Margaret had said, what people didn't know couldn't hurt them; Anyway, Mickey and the boys weren't really bad.
They were just tearaways.
As she pushed the key into the lock of the front door she heard a row going on.
She walked into the kitchen just in time to see Benny punch Garry in the face.
She ran and stood between them.
‘What on earth's going on?’
‘Get out me way, Maws.
I'm gonna kill that little runt.’
‘Calm down, Benny.
What's he done?’
‘CaIm down?
You dozy cow!
He's poached my fucking bird, that's what he's done.
The no good dirty ponce!’
Garry pushed Maura out of the way and faced his brother.
‘She ain't your bird.
She can't stand you, she told me that herself.’
With that Benny launched himself at Garry.
As they fought, their mother and father came into the room, followed by Leslie and Lee who separated their brothers.
‘What the hell's all this row abaht?’
Benjamin's voice was slurred as usual.
He was still half drunk.
‘That wanker's poached me bird, that's what.’
‘For the last time, Benny, she ain't your bird.’
Leslie threw Garry across the kitchen where he fell against the fireplace.
He pulled himself up slowly.
Leslie pointed at him.
‘What's her name?’
‘Mandy Watkins.’
Leslie and Lee looked at one another and burst out laughing.
‘Not Mandy Watkins from Bletchedon Street?’
Benny and Garry nodded warily.
There was something going on here.
‘What's she doing, Les, making a career out of the Ryans?’
Lee and Leslie began hooting with glee.
‘What do you mean?’
This from a sullen Benny.
‘Me and Lee's had her, and Geoffrey.
Me and Lee had her at the same time.
She's a dog.’
‘You're lying, you…’
Garry went for Leslie who grabbed his arms and held him tightly, pushing his arms up behind his back expertly.
‘Ain't we had her, Lee?’
He nodded, still smiling, then picked up a pack of cigarettes from the table and lit one.
‘I take oath that we've all had her.
Christ almighty, she's had more pricks than a second-hand dart board!’
‘That's enough!’
Sarah's voice echoed off the kitchen walls.
‘I won't have this kind of talk.
If you have no respect for me, your mother, at least have some for your sister.’
All the boys looked shamefaced.
Leslie spoke.
‘Sorry, Mum.
We're out of order.’
‘Who wants a cuppa?’
Maura tried to defuse the situation.
The boys all nodded but Benjamin and Sarah went back to bed.
Maura put the kettle on.
‘Have a good time, Sis?’
‘All right, Garry, I suppose.’
As she made the tea she thought about the way her brothers had talked about Mandy Watkins.
She had known Mandy all her life.
The papers might talk about the swinging sixties but the nearest most girls of Maura's age got to it was in the clothes they wore.
If her brothers even suspected that she had been with a boy, all hell would break loose.
She put their tea on the table.
Benny and Garry were bosom pals once again.
Kissing all the boys, she made her way up to bed, taking her tea with her.
Her last thought before she fell asleep was the reaction she would get if they knew that she had been out with a policeman.
She didn't care, though.
She couldn't wait until Monday!
Chapter Eight
Margaret and Maura were in Maura's bedroom, painting their nails.
They had worked out a system.
On the nights that Maura saw Terry, Margaret would come to the house and they would get ready there as if they were going out together.
In reality, Maura was meeting Terry and Margaret, Dennis.
Maura had been seeing Terry for nearly five months, and miraculously had managed to keep him a secret.
Sometimes though a terrible feeling of dread came over her.
She knew that she was playing with fire but couldn't help herself.
She was absolutely besotted with him.
‘How's you and Den these days, Marge?’
‘Great!
We're getting engaged.’
Maura's eyes rounded.
‘You're joking?’
‘Oh no I ain't!
We get on so well.
He's got a good job and mine ain't that bad.
We're thinking of saving up a deposit for a little house.’
Maura was impressed.
‘Good luck to you, Marge.
Dennis is lovely, and you can see how much he thinks of you.’
‘He's all right, I suppose.’
Margaret was embarrassed.
‘How about you and Terry?
You doo-dahed yet?’
‘No, we most certainly have not!’
Maura's voice sounded shocked even to her own ears.
‘No disrespect to you, Marge, but I want to save myself for when I get married.’
Even as she spoke she knew she was being a hypocrite.
She wanted to do it more than anything in life.
Margaret laughed.
‘You can't fool me, Maws.
You're more worried about your brothers.
It's 1966, for Christ's sake.
Saving yourself for marriage, my Aunt Nellie!’
Maura ignored the jibe and started to apply mascara.
‘I have all me life to do that.’
‘That's just it though, ain't it?
You don't!
Imagine still doing it at forty!’
Both girls laughed.
To them forty seemed positively ancient.
‘I'll think about what you said, Marge.
Now can we drop the subject?’
‘Be a damn sight better if you dropped your drawers and got it over with!’
‘Marge!’
Maura's voice had lost its joviality now and she sounded annoyed.
‘All right, all right , keep your hair on!
I'm sorry!’
‘I should bloody well think so and all!
You're obsessed with it.’
Margaret glanced at her watch and jumped off the bed.
‘Come on, Maws.
Get a move on.
It's nearly a quarter past seven.’
Both girls scrambled into their coats.
It was October and the nights had turned very cold.
They hurried down the stairs.
Michael and Geoffrey were in the hallway.
Geoffrey whistled at them.
‘You two look nice.
Who's the lucky lads then?’
Maura thought she was going to faint with fright.
Mickey glanced at Margaret and chucked her under the chin.
‘You might be little, Margie, but you poke out in all the right places.’
Sarah's voice stopped Margaret from having to answer.
‘Will you leave the poor girl alone!
I don't know what comes over you sometimes, Michael.
You can see she's embarrassed.’
He picked Margaret up and hugged her.
‘She knows I'm only joking, don't you, Margie?’
Margaret smiled shyly and nodded her head.
He placed her gently on the floor and turned to Maura.
‘Now you, Princess, you look absolutely gorgeous!’
He frowned.
‘I wish you'd lay off the make-up, though.’
Maura rolled her eyes up to the ceiling.
‘Everyone wears their make-up like this, Mickey.
It's the fashion.’
Her voice, as usual when talking to Michael, was strained.
‘Well, I think it suits her.’
This from Garry who had just come in the front door.
‘You look a cracker, girl.’
‘Thanks, Gal.’
Maura smiled gratefully at him.
He was the only brother who allowed her to live her own life.
He worked for Michael but wasn't as subservient towards him as the other boys.
And though Michael acted as if he was annoyed with Garry when he spoke out of turn, Maura also got the impression that he admired Garry for it.
Geoffrey snatched the books Garry was carrying from under his arm.
Garry and Geoffrey were the only readers in the family.
They shared a common bond, a love of literature.
The other boys revelled in baiting them about it, but in a good-natured way.
Michael put on his best voice and said, ‘And what is one reading this week?’
Garry grimaced at him.
‘I've read this, Gal.
It's quite good.
Heavy going at first, but then you can get into it.’
‘I've read it before, Geoff.
I like Voltaire.’
‘I like revoltaire.’
Michael parodied Garry's voice.
Everyone laughed.
Geoffrey looked at Michael.
‘In Candide it says, ‘If we do not find anything pleasant, at least we shall find something new.’
A very astute man.
It's for that reason people like us read, ain't it, Gal?’
‘Oh, for Gawd's sake, don't start on all that crap!’
Mickey's voice was full of fun.
‘I've read a few books in my time, and there's one thing I've learned…there's a difference between education and being well read.’
‘Come on, Marge, before Robin Day turns up to join in the debate!’
‘You saucy cow!
Where you off to and we'll give you a lift?’
‘Oh…we're just off to get the train to Holborn.’
‘We'll drop you off.
Come on then, Geoff, let's make tracks.’
Maura and Margaret exchanged dismayed looks.
‘That's all right, Mickey.
We don't want to put you out.’
‘You're not.
See you all.’
He kissed his mother on the  cheek.
As he passed Garry he pretended to punch him in the arm.
‘See you later, book features.’
‘Tah rah, Mickey.’
Garry took his books back from Geoffrey.
Inside the Mercedes, Margaret and Maura sat quietly in the back.
Maura felt panic building inside her.
She was meeting Terry at Holborn, and prayed her brothers would not see him there.
If he came over to them she would have to introduce him, and that thought was enough to bring on near hysteria.
Michael's 280 sports car pulled out of Lancaster Road and into Bramley Street.
It was already dark.
As he turned the corner a police car pulled out in front of them.
Slamming on the brakes, the car skidded to a halt.
It was obvious to Michael and Geoffrey that the car had been waiting for them.
A policeman walked Michael over to the side of the road.
His face dark with temper, he parked the car.
A plainclothes policeman got leisurely out of the panda car and walked across the road to them.
He looked at the tax disc on the windscreen and motioned Michael to wind down his window.
‘Insurance certificate, please.’
Michael already had it in his hand.
The policeman took it and studied it.
‘Well, well, well.
I never thought I would see a Ryan driving a new Merc with all the rent paid.’
‘Well, officer, we live and learn, don't we.
Now fuck off!’
‘That's not very nice, Mickey.
You should have a bit more respect for the boys in blue.’
The voice dripped sarcasm.
‘It looks like pimping in the West End is a lucrative business.
Who's that in the back?
A couple of new girls?’
The policeman was knocked off his feet as Michael jumped from the car.
Geoffrey was trying to drag him back by holding on to his overcoat.
He could see what the police were trying to do.
They wanted Mickey to lose that famous temper of his so they could legitimately nick him.
‘That's my sister you're talking about, you ponce!’
Two uniformed policemen got out of the Panda car and joined their boss.
Geoffrey got out of the car and stood in front of Michael, willing him to calm down.
If Mickey went berserk here there were too many witnesses.
Michael pushed him out of the way.
‘No one talks about my family like that and gets away with it.
Do you hear me?’
The two uniforms stood in front of their boss to protect him.
They were both terrified.
It was true what they had heard: he was crazy all right.
‘Mad Mickey’ they called him.
Since the Krays had been sent down, Mickey Ryan was the Number One.
The only one left of all the big-time crooks.
And unlike the Krays and the Richardsons, Michael Ryan was as cunning as a fox.
‘So that's your sister in there, is it?
I'm sorry, Michael.
It was an easy mistake to make.
I should have guessed because you don't have a lot of time for girls, do you?’
He was goading again.
He noticed that the veins were standing out on Michael's forehead and against his will felt a surge of apprehension.
Geoffrey tried to save the situation.
He grabbed Mickey's arm.
‘They're trying to wind you up.
Ignore them.
If you blow your top, they'll nick you double quick.’
Michael's breathing was returning to normal.
Geoffrey faced the plainclothes officer.
‘Look, what do you want?’
The man ignored him and carried on talking to Michael.
‘Can't your club run without you?
I heard you had a very good doorman.
Gerry Jackson, ain't it?
Another brainless Mick…’
Michael shook his head in disbelief.
‘If I'm not mistaken, you're Detective Inspector Murphy, ain't you?
So you would know all about brainless Micks, wouldn't you?’
The two uniforms laughed and the Inspector was annoyed.
‘I wasn't born in Ireland, Ryan.’
‘Neither was I, nor any of my brothers.
Neither was Gerry Jackson, by the way.
Now why don't you take these two little boys home?
It's way past their bedtime.’
The two uniforms sobered up instantly.
Michael was calm now.
Maura got out of the car and went to him.
‘Can my brothers and I go now, please?’
The uniforms were giving her the once-over.
One of them smiled at her.
‘Who are you smiling at?’
Michael's voice was loud.
The young uniform was in a quandary.
He didn't want to answer Michael, but at the same time didn't want to look like a coward.
He was saved from answering by the DI.
‘Very attractive girl, Michael.’
He smiled at Maura, feeling a little bit sorry for her.
He looked at her feet.
In her winkle picker shoes they looked enormous.
‘Do your feet go right to the end of those?’
He tried to sound jocular.
She was only a kid.
He had a daughter about that age himself.
Maura looked at him with the arrogance of youth.
‘Do their heads go right to the top of their helmets?’
She jerked her head in the uniforms' direction.
Everyone looked at her in amazement.
Michael and Geoffrey burst out laughing, surprised at Maura's front, but proud of her all the same.
‘Now, Mr Murphy, can we go?
Or would you like to ask us some more questions?
Only I don't know about you, but we're very busy people.’
She was as surprised as everyone else at her outburst.
But she was annoyed.
What gave this man the right to speak to people like he did!
She would bet her last pound that her Terry didn't carry on like that.
She got back into the car with Margaret.
Now the excitement had worn off she was shaking.
She heard the DI saying, ‘I'm gonna have you, Ryan.’
Michael laughed softly.
‘Yeah, Murphy.
Of course you are.’
Without bothering to speak again Michael and Geoffrey got back in the Mercedes.
The three police stood watching them.
Murphy knew when he was beaten and decided to retreat on this occasion.
He made a mental note to have Maura Ryan checked out.
Young girl she might be, but she was as streetwise as her brothers.
She had made a fool of him and he wouldn't let that go.
Once the uniforms had told their version in the canteen, he would be a laughing stock.
In the car everyone was congratulating her.
‘Oh, Maura, how could you?’
Margaret's voice was filled with awe.
‘She's a Ryan, Margie.
And she showed that tonight!
I thought I was going to piss myself.
Murphy's face!’
Michael was roaring with laughter.
‘I'll tell you something though, Geoff.
I'll do for that bastard one day.
I take oath on that.
He winds me up!’
‘You get wound up too easily.
They can't touch us, Bruv.
They can't prove nothing!’
Geoffrey stressed the last two words.
‘I thought we was all gonna get nicked!’
Margaret's voice was still quavery.
Michael looked in the mirror and caught her eye.
‘I can just see you in Holloway, Marge.
Them big butch warders would all be after a little thing like you!’
‘Aaow, don't !’
She put her hand over her mouth.
‘Don't be rotten, Mickey.
Marge, he's winding you up.
What on earth would they nick us for?’
‘That Murphy's all talk.
He couldn't nick himself shaving.’
They all laughed and joked until they got to Holborn.
Maura was praying that Terry was not about.
Her prayers were answered.
When she and Margaret got out of the car, Michael and Geoff drove off immediately.
‘Sod that, Maura, I thought we was  goners there!’
‘I know Mickey's my brother, but he scares even me when he gets annoyed.’
‘Don't you think he's a bit weird, Maws?
I mean, one minute he's foaming at the mouth and the next…laughing and joking.’
Michael's quicksilver temperament made Margaret nervous.
Maura was annoyed.
‘No, Marge, I don't actually!’
‘I wasn't criticising him, Maws…’
‘He likes you, Marge.
He always makes you feel welcome when you're round our house.
There's nothing wrong with Mickey.
He's just…highly strung.’
In her heart Maura agreed with Margaret's opinion of Michael, but she would never admit it openly.
Maura was more like her brothers than she cared to think about.
There  was a loyalty in her family that would not, and could not, be understood by outsiders.
Margaret was contrite.
‘I'm sorry, Maws.
Here, imagine the old Bill thinking we was old brasses!’
She tried to lighten the atmosphere between them.
Maura giggled.
‘Bloody cheek!’
They stood outside the station until Dennis came up.
When Margaret and he had gone, Maura thought about what had happened.
Tonight she had discovered a new side to herself.
She had not intended to say what she had.
It just came out.
She shrugged and pulled her coat tighter around her.
It was getting cold.
She saw Terry walking towards her and smiled at him.
The familiar lurch in her breast that always heralded his approach left her breathless.
She ran into his arms for a kiss.
‘Hello, Princess!’
Maura froze in his arms then pulled away from him.
‘Do me a favour, Terry.
Don't ever call me that again.’
Her voice was frosty.
Terry couldn't believe her attitude.
‘I'm sorry, Maura.
I…’
He held out his arms in supplication.
Maura could see that he was bewildered.
‘Look, it's no big deal.
It's just that I hate that expression, that's all.’
Her voice was rising.
‘All right.
Keep your hair on!’
He was annoyed and she knew it.
‘Terry.’
She drew his name out softly and slipped her arm through his.
‘What?’
His voice was flat and expressionless.
He had really been looking forward to seeing her tonight.
Then, within two minutes, she had started an argument with him.
He couldn't believe it.
‘I'm sorry, Terry.’
Her voice was small.
He relaxed.
‘Let's forget it.
I've booked a table for us up West in a snazzy restaurant.’
He saw her face fall again.
Now what was the matter with her?
Maura was in a state of acute agitation.
She couldn't go up West with him!
Supposing Mickey saw her?
Or one of her other brothers?
Not to mention all the people who worked for them.
They all knew her.
Michael might come  into the restaurant to say hello!
She felt faint just thinking about it.
‘Are you all right?
You've gone very white.’
His voice was all concern.
Maura's mind was reeling.
‘I feel a bit under the weather.
I haven't eaten all day.
Can't we eat around here?’
She knew she was clutching at straws but nothing would get her up the West End.
‘But I booked the table especially.
We're celebrating.’
‘Celebrating what?’
‘Never you mind.
I'll tell you when we get to the restaurant.’
Oh, God, please help her.
‘Oh, let's stay around here…please.
I don't fancy travelling back up West.’
Her voice was wheedling.
He couldn't help smiling.
She was some girl!
Not two minutes in his company and she was biting his head off.
Now she didn't want to go to an expensive restaurant in the West End.
He shook his head at her.
‘All right.
You win as usual.
What's it to be?
Indian?
Greek?
What?’
Maura felt the tension drain out of her.
She kissed him hard on the mouth.
‘Greek, please.
I just love taramasalata!’
She tucked her arm into his.
Twenty minutes later they were sitting in a little restaurant drinking retsina.
‘So what are we celebrating then?’
‘I've been given a transfer.
I applied for it about six months ago.
Anyway, today I was told that it had been passed.
From next month I will be at Vine Street!
That's why I wanted to go up West tonight.
Get the feel of the place.’
He grinned at her.
Maura felt herself smile in response.
She felt the muscles in her face moving.
‘What exactly will you be doing up there?’
‘It's hard to explain really.
There's a lot of illegal gambling up there, always has been, as well as prostitution and drugs.’
The waiter placed two moussakas in front of them.
‘Anyway, some firms — that's gangs to you — are using the  hostess clubs as a front for many other things.
Guns, blackmail…the list is endless.
Well, I'll be a very small cog in the wheel that's trying to stamp it all out.’
‘I see.’
Maura was finding it increasingly difficult to swallow.
‘You don't see, but never mind, love.
You'll never have to worry about it.
Or are you a closet villain?’
She laughed with him, amazed that she was still able to function normally while her insides were doing the Twist!
‘How about a toast to your new job?’
‘I'll drink to that, Maura.’
They clinked glasses and Terry chattered on.
‘It's so exciting.
Do you know that there's men running clubs up there who would murder somebody like you or me would have a cup of tea?
It's unbelievable, I tell you.’
She stared into her glass of wine.
What was she worried about anyway?
Michael wasn't involved with anything like that.
And drugs?
Never!
But a little nagging voice at the back of her mind kept reminding her of the way he had blown up the taxi rank after Anthony died.
A little voice was whispering: ‘They all work for Michael now.’
She pushed the thoughts firmly from her mind, forcing herself to concentrate on what Terry was saying.
All the while icy fingers were touching the back of her neck-ghostly reminders of the past.
Later on, when they left the restaurant arm in arm, she shivered.
Terry pulled her closer to him.
‘I want you, Maura.’
‘I want you too, Terry.’
And she was surprised because she meant it.
At this moment she wanted him more than she had ever wanted anything in her life.
‘Really?’
His voice was husky with longing.
‘Yes…really.’
‘, Oh, Maura, you don't know how much I wanted to hear you say that.
’ He clasped her hand and pulled her to his car.
‘Come on, before you change your mind.’
‘Where are we going?’
‘You'll find out.’
She felt the thrill of sexual anticipation sweep over her body, wiping everything from her mind except Terry, herself, and their need.
Inside the car he kissed her, long and hard.
He fumbled in his pocket and took out a key.
‘Do you see this?’
Maura nodded.
‘Well, it's a key to a flat in Islington.
I rented it today.
Not for this, Maura, I swear.
But to be nearer my job.
All that's in it is a bed and a camping stove, but it's home for us…if that's what you really want.’
Maura loved him just for those words.
He wasn't trying to force her into anything.
‘I want to go to your flat in Islington, Terry.’
He kissed her again and then started up the car.
Tonight was his lucky night.
On the way to the flat, Terry had stopped and bought a bottle of wine.
Maura sat nervously on the edge of the big double bed while he opened the bottle and brought her a glass.
She took it from him.
The bedroom had large bay windows covered with grubby nets.
Grantbridge Street was the centre of bedsitterland.
Even now, record players and radios could be heard.
Occasionally a shout or a loud laugh broke the gloom.
There was no light in the bedroom, only the moonlight and the subdued glare of the streetlights outside the window.
Maura was glad.
She drank the wine and placed the empty glass on the floor by the bed.
Terry walked out to the kitchen, talking as he moved.
‘It doesn't look much now, I know, but you wait until I've finished it — decorated it, I mean.
Hey, why don't you help me?
We could go to Camden Market together and pick out some furniture.’
He walked back into the bedroom with the bottle of wine.
‘What do you say?’
His voice was eager.
Maura caught some of his enthusiasm.
‘I'd love it.’
He refilled her glass and gave it to her.
‘Look, Maura, you don't have to sleep with me, you know.’
His voice was caressing.
‘I'll understand if you're not ready.’
She looked up.
In the half-light he looked boyish.
She traced the contours of his face with her finger.
‘I am sure, Terry.
In fact, I'm positive!’
He sat on the bed beside her and kissed her gently.
‘Well, as long as you're sure.’
He stood up and removed his shirt.
Maura watched him, fascinated.
The muscles of his arms and chest were rippling as he moved and she felt a hot flush creeping over her body.
She took a deep breath and slipped off her coat.
The room was not very warm and she felt goosebumps on her arms.
Her dress fastened up the front and she began to undo the buttons.
She could sense his eyes on her and felt a sudden bashfulness.
She had never in her life undressed in front of a man — not even a doctor.
She came to the last button and, plucking up all her courage, slipped the dress off her shoulders and let it drop to the floor.
Terry watched her.
His throat was dry and his breathing heavy.
Standing there in the moonlight in her underwear she looked magnificent.
Her breasts were huge — like giant orbs in the confines of her bra, spilling over the top like overripe melons.
He couldn't believe his luck.
She was like a larger than life fantasy that had just come true.
He dragged his eyes from her breasts to her long legs.
He was surprised at how small her waist was.
She was like some voluptuous painting by Titian.
He could feel himself hardening.
He slipped off his trousers and went to her.
Puffing his arms around her back he unhooked her bra, letting her opulent breasts free.
He pulled the brassiere from her body and dropped it on to the floor.
Instinctively her arms crossed over her chest.
He gently pulled them away, staring down at her body.
He groaned.
‘Oh, Maura.
You're beautiful…
You're so beautiful!’
He pressed his lips against her nipples and she jumped.
She could feel them hardening under his tongue and was caught between pure ecstasy and an urge to run from the room.
Her heart was hammering in her breast and her breathing was irregular.
She could feel herself panting.
He squeezed both her breasts together and licked and  chewed on her nipples, sending delicious waves of euphoria through her.
He pulled her gently on to the bed.
They fell together, their arms and legs entwined.
He loomed over her.
‘I love you, Maura.
God, I love you.’
If he never said it again, the way he had just expressed himself to her would last for the rest of her life.
She felt his fingers hook into either side of her panties, and as she felt him pull them down her body she closed her eyes.
It was finally happening.
The mystery of man and woman was about to be unfurled before her.
She bit on her lip, an exquisite agony tearing her apart.
Her natural shyness was trying to overcome a new, bigger, and more intense feeling.
Unaware that she had even done it, Maura opened her legs wide.
As his tongue flicked over her thighs she groaned out loud.
Slowly, he pushed his forefinger inside her.
She was like a juicy peach.
Terry was in a fever of excitement.
Who would have dreamed she would be so fiery the first time?
She was like an experienced woman, the way she moved her body and opened herself up to him.
He loved everything about her-the way she looked, the way she acted — everything.
He especially loved the smell of her.
Maura felt him push himself up on his arms.
She opened her eyes, and as he straddled her watched his swollen member trying to push into her.
Her eyes opened wide.
It was too big, surely?
She pushed her elbows into the bed to pull herself up, but she was too late.
She felt a tearing pain as if Terry pushed against some kind of obstacle.
Then she felt a wave of dizziness as he slipped right up inside her.
As he moved backwards and forwards she thrust her hips up to meet him at every stroke, a jumble of feelings and emotions raging through them both.
Suddenly, she felt a shuddering somewhere in her bowels.
It seemed to be slowly creeping into her groin and up…up into her stomach.
She arched her back, and as she lost control in the final throes of orgasm felt Terry biting on her breasts.
She called out…
All self-consciousness seemed to dissolve in this all-encompassing feeling.
She was aware that she was  wailing and moaning, but she didn't care.
This feeling was too good, too exciting to let go of.
She felt her legs grab Terry's thighs and was trying desperately to push him further inside her.
Above her Terry was watching her, fascinated.
As he felt his own orgasm beginning to pulsate be felt her legs gripping him and drove his penis into her as hard as he could, bursting inside her like a dam.
They lay together, their bodies bathed in sweat, their hearts beating a tattoo on each other 's chests.
Terry kissed her gently, little tiny kisses, all over her face and neck.
He licked her throat and tasted the saltiness of her.
‘That was fantastic, Maura.’
She lay beneath him, shy again, amazed at her own feelings.
‘Thank you, Maura.
For letting me be the first.
And if it lies with me, I will be your last.
You're my girl now.
You'll always be my girl.’
He kissed her again and was surprised to find that she was crying gently.
He was immediately concerned.
‘I didn't hurt you too much, did I?’
‘No, you didn't hurt me.
I'm crying because I'm happy.
That's all.’
He gathered her into his arms and held her tightly.
He had promised himself that he would not get too involved with her, but at this moment he could no more have parted from her than he could have cut his own throat.
Maura felt the heightened awareness that comes with lovemaking.
That feeling of infinite perception that envelops lovers in its embrace.
She was acutely aware that she had burnt her boats.
That she now belonged to the man lying with her.
That her family had taken a back seat in her life.
But she was also aware that no matter how she felt, her family would never allow her to relegate them to second place.
The fact that Terry was a policeman would be enough for Michael.
He would never countenance her having an association with one.
He would take it as a personal affront.
She felt Terry's hand running over her body, kneading  her breasts and shoulders, and was caught up in a feeling of presentiment.
They were doomed and she knew it.
She closed her eyes tightly, praying to her God to take pity on them.
To help them find a way out of the morass they had jumped into.
She wished fervently that they might be allowed to be together, that nothing would happen to make them part.
And even as she prayed and wished, she knew, deep inside, that it was all useless.
But with the foolishness of youth, she convinced herself that somehow, somewhere, there was an answer to their problem.
Finally, she abandoned herself to him once again, the moonlight playing on their bodies as they loved each other with a strength that surprised them both.
Their whispering and low moans echoed around the empty flat, like ghosts that danced on the ceiling with their shadows.
Maura had never dreamt that she could feel like she felt at this moment.
She had indeed burnt her boats.
But she smiled while she did it.