

LEADERS
Grand unified experiments
Though competition can be helpful for big publicly financed science projects, co-operation would bring even bigger benefits
PRIDE is the besetting sin of science — the particular pride that the Greeks called hubris.
What else could lead researchers to test the ultimate laws of nature with machines bigger than the ancient state of Athens, or to seek to live in space, cast adrift from the world that gave them birth?
For all its risks, however, this pride is productive.
That is not so of a different kind of pride, which is currently thwarting the pursuit of those very goals.
In big science, the national pride that sets country against country and scientist against scientist, can be even more costly than the other sort.
The great projects of understanding have now reached such a scale that, in many cases, they are best served by the united efforts of all the world — or at least, of all those who are interested in pursuing them.
In many cases, such co-operation is a matter of swapping data arrived at by various different means — pooling knowledge of genes or weather systems, for example.
By and large, scientists are pretty good at this.
In some cases, though, the co-operation has to be institutional — the instruments of understanding, as well as their products, have to be held in common.
Here the challenge is being ducked.
A prime example is the field of particle physics.
America has embarked on a project for a vast Superconducting Super Collider, under construction south of Dallas (see page 112).
The Europeans plan a similar, more modest but possibly more versatile machine at their joint laboratory, CERN, outside Geneva.
At this scale, the costs of duplication far outweigh the benefits of competition — especially as each machine would be host to more than one experiment, allowing internal competition free rein.
But the world may end up with both projects, a waste of resources that will stunt other science — and might well hold back particle physics, as generations of physicists find themselves growing up in thrall to the vast machines, with no alternative experiments to pursue.
It is particularly sad that CERN should find itself in this strange confrontation; the laboratory offers the best model for centralised multinational science there is.
It came into being to respond to two needs, a scientific need for machines more powerful than could be afforded by any single nation in a Europe devastated by the second world war, and the political need for institutions to unite that fragmented continent.
After a long childhood it has become the most successful laboratory of its sort in the world.
Half the world's particle physicists are involved in its work; there are more Americans working there than there are physicists from any other country.
If the world is to have a laboratory, this looks like it.
If the SSC were to be cancelled, American particle physics would go through a crisis — but CERN would help it pull through.
America could be welcomed into CERN as a full partner, and experiments planned for Texan caverns might end up beneath French hills.
American companies would compete for CERN contracts.
A new international laboratory might be set up elsewhere to pursue related physics with different machines.
The unifying aim with which CERN was born in post-war Europe could be rekindled, larger and brighter in a post-cold-war world.
Isidor Rabi — the great American physicist who, even more because of his belief in the unifying power of scholarship than his belief in physics, did as much as anyone to encourage CERN's birth — would have approved.
As on earth, so in the sky
The case for co-operation in space is, if anything, even stronger (see page 111).
Russia has a space station; America wants to build one, the Europeans and Japanese will help.
Everyone is short of cash, and nobody set on the goal of having a station could argue with the idea of combining the efforts.
Unfortunately, many powerful people are more interested in the means (large contracts to local industries) than the ends.
There is nothing wrong in wanting space to make a profit, but trying to make the profit from the pork-barrel is a foolish waste.
Finding out about the worthwhile things men in space can do is best done with a unified, if multi-faceted, programme.
The same applies to fulfilling the goal, worthwhile in itself to many, of merely having men in space.
Competition drove men into space, but only co-operation will keep them there — an irony the Greeks might have appreciated.
Re-regulating Japan
Strangling the financial markets is no way to revive the economy
JAPAN'S finance-ministry mandarins are gloating.
After presiding over a string of humiliating scandals and embarrassing policy failures, they feel on top once again.
They are lauded for stimulating the Japanese economy through a recent ¥13 trillion ($116 billion) supplementary budget and for ‘rescuing’ the stockmarket.
It is all grist to the mill of those who like to argue that Japan has succeeded because it works by different rules from those in the West.
Administrative guidance is back with a vengeance, they assert approvingly.
And officialdom shows disturbing signs of believing the flattery.
The celebrations are premature.
The latest leap in the yen only adds to the deflationary pressures already burdening Japan's economy.
Bill Clinton's ominous rhetoric in Washington threatens the very source of its prosperity: exports.
Not least, Tokyo share prices will fall if Japanese companies, lulled into complacency, appear to be delaying overdue cost-cutting.
Yet even if there were short-term cause to rejoice, the mandarins would be wrong to assume that the most effective way out of Japan's current problems — slow growth, asset-price deflation and a troubled financial sector — is to indulge their strongest instinct: to re-regulate everything.
That seems precisely where they are heading.
Their most outrageous step toward re-regulation is rigging the stockmarket, which officials once disdained as a mucky casino.
They have ordered public-sector agencies to buy Japanese shares.
The past six months have also seen a flurry of administrative guidance, including arbitrary changes in accounting rules designed to prevent institutions from selling shares at a loss or even recognising their diminished value in their books.
And the futures market is being manipulated to protect share prices: the Tokyo Stock Exchange, a mouthpiece of the finance ministry, wants the right to prevent securities firms from trading stock-index futures on their own account any time it thinks the stockmarket is ‘overheated’.
The long slow process of deregulating the financial sector in fundamental ways is also coming unstuck.
After years of tortuous study, absurdly limited measures to break down the barriers between banks and brokers have been proposed.
Stockbroking commissions remain fixed.
Liberalisation of insurance is glacial.
And then there are the banks.
The way in which the finance ministry is handling the banks' bad-debt problems shows clearly how low a priority it attaches to fostering a competitive banking industry.
It has done nothing to encourage banks to reserve against dodgy loans or write them off, for some banks risk insolvency if they do so.
Rather than reveal qualitative differences among the banks and draw the public's attention to the bad-debt mess (not to mention the responsibility for it of the finance ministry, which regulates banks), officials are doing everything they can to help banks sweep their problems under the carpet.
Japan risks remaining saddled for years to come with the primitive financial sector that created the domestic boom and bust of the late-1980s.
Its firms depend on bureaucratic guidance; clear winners and losers are not allowed to emerge as they have done in, say, Japan's car and electronics industries.
Banks and securities firms lag behind their rivals elsewhere in innovation, and have lost what competitive edge Japan's relatively low interest rates and strong currency gave them abroad a few years ago.
They allocate capital inefficiently; they measure risk badly, if at all.
The stockmarket has in effect been closed to new equity issues for three years, and banks will lend only to the safest borrowers.
Meanwhile regulatory overkill has prevented a desperately-needed corporate-bond market from emerging, and has barred Japan from joining the international trend toward securitisation of assets — which could, for instance, alleviate some of the distress in Japan's property market.
Caught between yesterday and tomorrow
As they seek to reassert control, however, finance officials face a problem.
One big piece of deregulation over the past ten years will be hard to reverse: the freeing of interest rates.
Since market forces now set the price of money, what counts increasingly is who can raise capital most cheaply, not who has the best access to bureaucrats.
Japan may thus end up with a financial system that is caught halfway between freedom and regulation, and more dangerous than either.
A job for China
Helping Asia's awkward squad to help themselves
THESE are testing times for China.
It has long wanted recognition as a great power, especially among its Asian neighbours.
Now the end of cold war, the collapse of the old Soviet Union and the readjustment of America's role in the region are thrusting great-powerdom upon it.
Yet, to China's discomfort, great power brings with it big responsibilities — and irksome public scrutiny.
In the past China could earn itself plaudits simply by standing aside and not mucking up America's efforts to sort out Asia's trouble spots.
No longer.
Whether the issue is North Korea's nuclear defiance, tensions between India and Pakistan, or the wrangle over Cambodia, China's new-found influence obliges it to choose: it can join in and help with the sorting out, or confirm the suspicion that China may become, instead, Asia's most troublesome power.
North Korea presents the stiffest test of China's good intentions.
It has refused to allow inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency of two suspected nuclear sites, and has announced that it will pull out of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in June.
North Korea has secretly produced more plutonium (from which nuclear weapons can be made) than it has owned up to; it is suspected of building a bomb, despite its NPT promise not to do so.
China has regretted North Korea's defiance and called for a nuclear-free Korean peninsula.
But China is also protecting North Korea from the wrath of the United Nations Security Council.
North Korea is an old friend, albeit an increasingly crabby and ungrateful one.
As an unreconstructed communist regime, it also has a certain rarity value to China's own communist old-timers.
China is thus reluctant to see it put in the dock.
Even so, China has no interest in seeing North Korea get the bomb.
An unpredictable, nuclear-armed North Korea would be a threat to the whole region, including China, since it could provoke South Korea, Japan and Taiwan to go nuclear — and prod India and Pakistan to step publicly across the nuclear threshold.
As the country with most influence over North Korea, China is already talking more toughly in private than in public.
But it may have to do a lot more than talk.
If North Korea is looking for a way out of its nuclear predicament, and a way back into the NPT, China could offer to do what America once did for Taiwan: persuade it to give up its nuclear moonlighting, and take charge of any offending materials and bomb bits.
North Korea would probably still have to admit, as Iraq has done under UN sanctions and as South Africa did voluntarily, that it had been up to no good.
But by coming clean and staying clean, North Korea could look forward to much in return: the right to poke about military installations in South Korea, a better relationship with America, more outside help and investment for its decrepit economy.
And there would be a lot in it for China too: if it could help to pull all this off, it would establish itself firmly alongside America as the other power to be reckoned with in Asia.
However, the real test comes if North Korea refuses to be helped.
It has spent scarce resources on its nuclear programme.
It values its self-sufficiency to a fault.
And its leaders, with precious little to show for 40 years of economic folly, may see the nuclear crisis they have provoked as a way of taking minds off empty stomachs.
A China ready to stand on principle would then have to tell North Korea to accept the help on offer or else — the or-else being China's acquiescence in, and compliance with, UN sanctions against the North.
Put that the other way round: a China that flunked this test would not only be seen to be throwing in its lot with Asia's rogue regimes.
It would also put in jeopardy the global effort to halt the spread of nuclear weapons.
And it would bring to an end a promising era of Security Council co-operation.
When the ducking has to stop
China hates being forced to choose.
It has still not made up its mind what its role should be in the world.
Old reflexes and outsider instincts, along with its army's need for cash (see page 76), make it want to duck great-power responsibilities and go on quietly selling dangerous nuclear technologies to the Irans of the world, and missiles and other advanced equipment to rogue regimes anywhere.
Yet its more forward-thinking apparatchiks and diplomats know that, to be a truly great power, China will have to come out of its cocoon.
These more co-operative instincts have led China in recent years to end military support for the Khmers Rouges in Cambodia, to patch up relations with India and extend a firmer hand of reconciliation to Taiwan (see page 75).
China has recently joined the NPT and agreed in principle to observe some limits on its missile sales.
China has increasing weight to throw about.
But its neighbours still question whether this weight will be thrown behind efforts to build a more secure and more stable Asia.
If that is to be China's choice, then North Korea is where it should start.
Clinton's next 1,361 days
Some suggestions for improvement
BILL CLINTON himself tells the story.
He was in the Oval Office, on the second day of trying to sell his economic plan.
Al Gore, the vice-president, was fussing over him; aides were rushing in and out, adding thoughts to his speech.
Suddenly, Mr Clinton was reminded of that quip of Bismarck's, that making laws is a lot like making sausages.
But the difference between the Iron Chancellor and the Huggable President is this: Mr Clinton thinks his horizontal management style is modern, exciting, even clever.
To others, it looks like chaos.
Hubbub, shoving and ten good ideas before breakfast — the character, in short, of the 100 days that have just passed — need to give way to something different in the 1,361 that are left.
Mr Clinton began his presidency wanting to do it all.
He still does.
This omnivorous man has been kept from sampling every policy dish on the table only because he has chosen two, deficit-reduction and health-care reform, whose size has slowed him down.
As priorities go, these two could hardly be bettered.
But Mr Clinton has many more (see page 53).
Last week he put forward a (disappointing) programme to overhaul the schools; next week he homes in on campaign finance and national service; some day soon, welfare reform.
So little time, so many ideas, so much government to get to grips with.
This Gargantua quality is a constant.
In the months to come, Mr Clinton will undoubtedly go on gorging.
He loves it, and it would be a hard critic who suggested that he should deprive himself of, to him, the most enjoyable bit of his job.
But, that said, America needs to find some theme in his gorgings, and some sense of priorities between the goats'-cheese salad with balsamic vinegar and the stack of blueberry pancakes with syrup and melted butter, before dyspepsia sets in.
A few good themes
On Mr Clinton's menu, deficit-reduction must stay at the top.
This theme has been clouded by different and even contradictory ideas, such as a stimulus package and an investment tax-credit to pep up an economy that will probably grow by 3% this year.
Both the budget package, as voted, and any new tax proposals — on energy, on sins, or in the form of a value-added tax — should be linked clearly to cutting the deficit.
So too, at least in part, should health-care reform.
This makes one coherent line of argument, where at present there are half a dozen.
It should not need the Senate Republicans to remind Mr Clinton of the wisdom of fiscal consistency.
Trade policy is another case.
In the campaign, when grand themes seemed so much easier, Good New Democrat Mr Clinton linked free trade to economic growth and, from that, to national security.
In office, doffing his hat to ‘fairness’, he has presided over a wild game of insults and shadow-boxing between Americans, Europeans and Japanese.
At the Vancouver summit in April Mr Clinton found his old line again, to good effect: aid to Russia, he said, was not charity, because ‘it helps us’.
A whole set of disagreements on trade, notably over North American free trade and the GATT, could be smoothed over under that rubric: to be open and unbelligerent on trade is not weak-minded, but is in America's interests.
Mr Clinton has failed to draw clear lines not just because the world, seen from the Oval Office, is complicated, nor because he is congenitally easy-going; it is also because the structure for effective leadership is not yet in place.
Cabinet officers, dogged by side-issues of ‘diversity’ and ‘balance’, are still struggling to fill the lower-level posts in their departments.
Power cannot flow to empty desks; which is why, in part, it has been so hard to devise a policy on Bosnia.
As the weeks pass, and the posts are filled, horizontal freelancing should give way to proper vertical management: advice up, orders down.
At that point, the Clinton the world pines to see — leader, rather than scrambler — should, with luck, appear.
The long view
It will be none too soon.
By that stage, the two giant budget and health bills, probably joined by Russian aid and the North American free trade deal, will be moving through Congress.
All Mr Clinton's talents will be required not merely to stroke his allies in the Capitol's anterooms, but to keep the country focused on what he is aiming at.
After the bruisings of the first 100 days, the president should have a shrewd idea which issues he should fight for, and which he should cheerfully surrender as lost.
And he should husband his capital accordingly.
The passage of time will help.
Not only Mr Clinton, but most of his advisers came to power on a crest of frustration and almost revolutionary fervour.
Once they become bogged down in pushing bills through Congress, that excitement will fade.
They will realise they cannot change everything; the hours spent re-inventing government or shifting paradigms will be put down to youthful inexperience.
And with that, too, may come a lesson in humility.
The Clinton administration, more than any other in memory, sees itself as a ménage of bright young minds out to shake up America.
In some ways, they may manage it.
But America, however sleek the surface, is a massively antiquated contraption in which the wheels grind slowly, and in which it is old pols, not callow meritocrats, who understand the working of the gears.
Alone among his White House colleagues, Mr Clinton knows that.
He knows, too, how to bridge the gap between these two sorts of Democrat, old and new.
But he can bridge it only if he has broad lines of policy clear in his head; if, knowing his own mind, he drives his authority down through the departments; and if he is prepared to understand that the fruits of his efforts may appear long after the presidency of William Jefferson Clinton, gourmand and ground-breaker.
Putting the City together again
Restoring confidence in London's financial centre will be harder than fixing its bomb-damaged buildings
‘BUSINESS as usual’ was the upbeat message emanating from the City of London after the IRA exploded a huge bomb in the heart of Britain's financial capital on April 24th.
It was the second big explosion there in a year.
The bomb, claimed big-wigs from the prime minister to the bosses of City firms, would not stop London's financial markets from trading normally.
Nor did it threaten London's long-term position among the world's main financial centres.
Such talk in the face of disaster is necessary and admirable — but not terribly convincing.
True, on the first working day after the bomb, business did go on much as usual.
Many firms had arranged back-up facilities that came smoothly into operation.
Other firms were less well-prepared, but the depression in London's commercial-property market enabled them to put thousands of workers in unlet offices quickly.
However, the City must expect further attacks.
In recent months, thanks to several timely discoveries of bombs and equipment by the police, many hoped that tighter security could make last year's bomb a one-off.
Such hopes are now as battered as Bishopsgate.
Banks' and brokers' investment in London makes any rapid exodus unlikely, but some in the City are asking what ‘business as usual’ will be like within a prime terrorist target — and whether the benefits of doing it there, rather than somewhere else, outweigh the costs.
One such cost is higher property-insurance premiums.
The withdrawal of terrorist-cover by insurers after last year's bomb may have left many buildings uninsured.
A scheme to share the costs between insurers and taxpayers has been agreed to, but Parliament has yet to approve it.
This time, the government has promised to pay, but rumours persist that it will try in future to leave more of the cost in private hands.
That would be foolish; to soothe City nerves, the scheme should be introduced, as agreed, and fast.
Tighter security, which will follow, also comes dear.
The government's response to last year's bomb — more policemen on the beat, more security cameras, occasional armed road-blocks — was inadequate.
People feared that turning the City into Fort Knox would damage its attraction as a financial centre.
Now, plainly, tighter controls on vehicles entering the City are essential.
Firms may decide that it is necessary to spend more of their own money on security — or be asked to contribute more to the cost of police protection.
The centre cannot hold
The City will never be made completely safe from terrorists.
The best the authorities may be able to do is persuade firms, by tightening security, that the chances of another blast as big as this latest one will be much reduced.
That, you might argue, would still leave the City, which retains so many other advantages as a place for financiers to work, as one of the world's main financial centres.
It would be unwise to bet on it.
London's traditional advantages — light but effective regulation, lots of established firms, liquidity — are in any event being eroded as other centres catch up.
More important, the very idea that financial markets need a geographic centre is being gradually refuted by electronics.
In future, the main reason for financial firms to band together may be that lunching brings them vital extra insights.
But if the conviviality of eateries will loom larger in deciding where to locate, the admittedly tiny risk of being blown up will count for something, too.
Vulnerability to terrorist attack will work against not just London but other concentrated centres of business, as well.
Terrorists bombed the City — and, in February, New York's World Trade Centre — because dense clusters of valuable buildings, empty at nights and weekends, are cost-effective targets.
In the end the main beneficiary of London's troubles may be neither Frankfurt nor Amsterdam, nor any other competing centre, but lots of quieter places that are not central at all.
See you for lunch in Bath.
I am Boris Yeltsin…
IN COMING months and years Russia will falter again.
Painful reform will look as if it has been wasted, firms will go bust, unemployment will rise, people will demand populist cure-alls.
When this happens, look back to the referendum of April 25th and remember its foremost message: that Russians nowadays can rise to the occasion.
When they are given a chance to take a big decision about reform they tend to make the right — meaning the most reformist — decision.
In June 1991 they voted for the most democratic free-marketeer on offer in a presidential election.
In August 1991 Muscovites chose to defy the tanks of the old regime.
In January 1992 the government chose radical reform over gradualism.
And now voters have chosen reform by unexpectedly large majorities.
On the most important of four questions —‘Do you trust the president?’— Mr Yeltsin won as much support as he did in the presidential election of 1991 (see page 41).
This was an impressive personal vote of confidence.
On the question his opponents had included to embarrass him —‘Do you approve of his policies?’— a majority said Yes.
Given the halving of living standards over the past year, this was an even more remarkable result.
If reforming Russia is now the world's biggest challenge, then comfort can be taken in this new Russian knack of taking the right road when choices have to be made.
The next fork in the road
But in Russia reform is not only a question of getting the principles right.
Having reaffirmed their belief in the big ideas of political and economic freedom, Russians still need a way to transfer those ideas into workable policies.
Here, too, the news is good.
The referendum shows that, for a while at least, many Russians are willing to bear the pain of transition.
Only last month many outsiders had written Mr Yeltsin off.
Exhausted by infighting, humiliated by his foes, he seemed on the verge of losing his struggle with parliament.
His rivals — Ruslan Khasbulatov, parliament's leader, and Alexander Rutskoi, the rebellious vice-president — were poised to take his place.
Quite suddenly, the voters have put the initiative back in his hands.
Now he must decide how to use it.
Mr Yeltsin has two chief aims: to push ahead with economic reform, and to establish a new form of government for Russia.
He also faces a choice of methods.
One is to continue his war of attrition against parliament, albeit from a position of greater strength since the referendum.
The other, much more risky, is to abolish this anti-reform parliament altogether, and call for new elections.
The first course has powerful attractions.
For one thing, it is legal.
Mr Yeltsin did not win enough votes to enable him to call a new parliamentary election constitutionally.
As Russia's only properly elected leader ever, he should hesitate before putting himself outside the law.
He might also calculate that he can continue economic reform without a terminal confrontation with parliament.
Its main power over the economy lies in its control of the central bank, but Mr Yeltsin has made the bank promise that it will issue only a quarter as much credit in the second three months of the year as it did in the first.
This should stop it from debauching the currency.
Lastly, trench warfare is a policy Mr Yeltsin has pursued with some success for much of the past 12 months.
He has several times got himself into a position of strength in his battle with parliament, and bartered it away for short-term gains.
He swapped the threat of suspending parliament for the referendum, and sacrificed Yegor Gaidar to protect other reformers.
In a new democracy, it is no bad thing to master the art of compromise.
Yet to continue trench warfare as before would be a mistake.
Russia's most wretched political problem over the past two years has been a failure to separate the powers of president and parliament.
The referendum was supposed to resolve this fight by consulting the people.
They have spoken.
If the referendum does not result in a reform of the constitution, a rare opportunity for decision will have been wasted.
Parliament is already arguing that the referendum was no more than a glorified opinion poll.
Mr Yeltsin can break the deadlock only by choosing the second, riskier, course of action.
He should abolish parliament, introduce a new constitution, and call elections.
Get a new constitution by tearing up the old one unlawfully?
It is not as undemocratic as it sounds.
Though short of the needed 50% of all voters, a big majority of those who voted favoured new parliamentary elections soon.
More important, the constitution in Russia is not, as it is in other countries, a fixed and historically proven set of rules.
It lacks popular legitimacy.
And, because parliament alone can change the constitution, it has become a weapon that parliament exploits cynically to block reform.
If Mr Yeltsin tries to play by the rules as he moves towards a new constitutional order, he will fail, because parliament can make up the rules as it goes along.
But if he can get a new constitution accepted by regional leaders and, still better, by an elected assembly, he could establish a constitutional order with real legitimacy whatever parliament decides.
The time for compromise on the economy is also over.
Parliament represents the interests of the old, pre-reform Russia.
A fifth of its members are directors of state enterprises, with a vested interest in blocking change.
The governor of the central bank, a friend of parliament, says brazenly that his all-important promise to rein in credit was a trick to show that Mr Yeltsin's austerity measures were impossible.
Parliament, in short, cannot be trusted; and the referendum showed that by and large the people do not trust it.
In these circumstances, early elections are essential.
Still more important is the implementation of the draft constitution which was published on the eve of the referendum.
This would create a system of government rather like America's, though with a somewhat stronger presidency.
Neither economic stabilisation, nor political calm, can realistically be achieved before the elections happen.
But with both in place, Russia will at last be able to make full use of the $13 billion in foreign help that has been promised.
…and I claim my $13 billion
Western help for Russia is a confusing mess.
Aid policy badly needs a rethink
THE case for generous aid to Russia was strong, and has been argued in this newspaper many times.
It was not that Russia is poor — many countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America are poorer.
Nor was it that reforms already undertaken by Russia's post-communist government, if only supported with a pile of hard currency, will deliver a lasting rise in living standards — because Russia has not yet done anything like enough.
Indeed, unless much more is quickly done, the West's $13 billion will go directly down the drain.
Since neither of the standard rationales for rich-country aid to the third world applied, the case rested on three essentially political arguments.
One was that Mr Yeltsin was Russia's best hope — no plausible alternative leader has argued so unequivocally for a market economy, or seemed willing to trust the young reformers who will be needed to create it.
Another was that generous outside help would strengthen, not weaken, Mr Yeltsin's position at home.
The third was that the costs of failure in Russia — from civil strife within its borders, up to and including a new international arms race — would be far greater to the rest of the world than the costs of economic failure in, say, Zaire.
Therefore, if the first two arguments were correct, it would be better to err on the side of generosity.
All that was, and is, right.
But it is important that these arguments do not lead the world to forget what it learned about aid during the past 30 years.
Paying attention to those lessons would make disappointment in Russia and Eastern Europe a little less likely, and it would remind governments that, nearly always, there are more useful ways of bestowing generosity than the questionable methods adopted in Russia's case.
Where good intentions lead
Mr Yeltsin and the West have a shared interest in claiming the biggest figure for the aid package, so there has been little dissent over the headline-seizing ‘$13 billion’.
The package is so complicated that it could, in fact, be described as being worth almost anything between zero and $13 billion, depending on definitions.
It includes aid already promised; debt relief that will deliver no new cash; bilaterally-negotiated grants and credits, many of them tied to trade with particular ‘donors’(one man's export subsidy is another's development assistance); and a variety of loan facilities that may not be drawn and which are, in fact, conditional on further reform.
In all the discussion over the package, however, one principle went unchallenged: the more, the better.
As a test for Russia's package, a special case, such a view is perhaps understandable.
As a guiding principle for aid in general, it is hopelessly wrong.
A sensible aid policy — not just for Russia and Eastern Europe, but for the third world in general— calls for careful priorities, realistic goals and, above all, an understanding that the quality of aid matters much more than the quantity.
These points are being forgotten at the very time that they have become most pressing — for the transition from communism in Russia and Eastern Europe has added greatly to the demands that are being placed on western aid budgets.
The most crucial lesson of experience is that aid, by itself, achieves nothing.
It has often achieved less than that — by keeping corrupt governments and their economy-wrecking policies in place.
Meanwhile developing countries that are managing to trade, accumulate physical capital and grow year by year, are increasingly able to find the finance they need from private suppliers.
Much of Eastern Europe is already in this category; with the will to change, Russia soon could be.
In the past these so-called middle-income countries (many of them in Latin America) relied too heavily on banks; the result was the debt crisis of the 1980s.
For the past few years, however, much more non-bank capital (in the form of portfolio and direct investment) has flowed in their direction.
It seems that, once a certain level of competitiveness has been achieved, private capital markets can supply the resources that are needed for further growth.
In doing so, they provide continuing discipline over domestic policy: this sort of dependence on external resources, unlike dependence on aid, is welcome.
In future, aid budgets therefore need to be concentrated on the boldest triers among the poorest countries — countries (as in Africa and south Asia) that lack basic infrastructure and where poverty is most acute.
Many such countries are so far behind that even if their governments get their policies right — and, however much the recipients protest, aid donors must insist on that — their access to private capital will be limited.
Often their most urgent needs, in any case, are for public investments (in education, sanitation, health-care and so on) that are unlikely to appeal to private investors — or for technical help, which can be far more productive than mere money.
The crowning absurdity of the rich countries' current thinking on aid is not, however, their preference for lots of tied aid to not-terribly-poor countries, but their fondness for combining big cheques with barriers to trade.
Both preferences reflect the power of domestic producer interests, whose aim is not to spur development abroad but to sell exports and block imports.
In the long run the West could help Russia and Eastern Europe more by opening its markets to their produce than by handing over cash — and would immediately make itself a lot better off in the process (see page 50).
But governments would rather plunder their taxpayers — then, turning to the cameras, acknowledge the applause for their vision and self-sacrifice.
LETTERS
America's health
You suggest in ‘The price of health’(March 20th) that the solution to America's rising health-care costs is government intervention.
Unfortunately, Hillary Clinton's health-care ‘task force’ conspicuously lacks health-care professionals.
So the government has no idea why there are cost problems in the first place.
Any doctor or insurer will tell you that the cause of America's medical woes is government procedures and regulations.
Further regulation is not likely to improve things.
Medicare and Medicaid have a plethora of policies that escalate their own costs.
For instance, Medicare often requires a primary-care physician to refer patients to more expensive specialists.
Frequently, the government repays doctors for their services (and pharmaceutical companies for their drugs) far below cost, forcing up the prices for those who can pay.
Government repayment schedules encourage specialisation, driving costs up still more.
Instead of considering more legislation, Bill Clinton should think about deregulating medicine.
If the government would stop pulling its medical strings and ration Medicare and Medicaid, costs would go down and more Americans could afford insurance.
The baroque complexity of the health-care debate, aptly summarised by you, contrasts with the simplicity of the issue.
American health spending is exploding primarily because the government subsidises it.
Employers buy health insurance with pre-tax dollars.
This tax deduction not only subsidises health spending directly, but forces people into third-party-payer systems where they are insensitive to cost and incur administrative expenses.
If you go to the doctor with a hangnail, either an insurer must be involved, by law, or else you pay with after-tax dollars.
This ties health insurance to employment, which impedes labour mobility and is unfair to the self-employed and unemployed.
The solution is as simple as the problem.
End tax-deductibility of employer health insurance.
End Medicare.
Pay for all medical care with after-tax dollars.
Remove restrictions on insurers and let people buy for themselves inexpensive insurance.
When this is done, people will be sensitive to costs, much less will be spent on health care overall, and by the law of supply and demand, the cost of medical care will plummet.
Accordingly, all will be able to afford care.
The biggest villain in the escalation of health-care costs is the ordinary American citizen, who demands maximum coverage for everything but wants to pay for nothing.
My solution is to place the control of health-care costs squarely where it belongs: in the hands of patients, their families and treating physicians.
The way to do this is to see that patients bear some responsibility for the cost of services.
This can be done through asymptotic deductibles.
These are variable payments based on the cost of each office visit and each stay in hospital.
At one end they would be high, say 90%, to discourage trivial visits.
For a $10,000 hospital stay, though, a patient would pay only 5% of the cost.
Such deductibles would create a self-regulating system that brings free-market forces into play, while preserving patients' freedom of choice of physicians and hospitals.
Your otherwise useful report perpetuates some of the myths of the Clinton ideologues, notably the claim that ‘the system leaves 35m Americans with no insurance at all.’
Independent studies suggest that half these 35m are uninsured for less than three months, and 85% for less than two years.
Probably 10% are students, and 25% have incomes greater than $10,000.
Something in reserve
A sample of the world's biodiversity (‘Noah's fridge’, April 10th) has already been assembled; not in a freezer, but in the collections of millions of biological reference specimens held in natural-history museums, herbaria and similar institutions around the world.
Such specimens represent the diversity that exists both between and within species from all regions of the earth, from the deep sea to the tropical rain forest; and, by virtue of having been collected over hundreds of years, they provide a record of past patterns of biodiversity that can be used to interpret environmental change.
These collections indeed serve as ‘a storehouse of knowledge’, providing the basic data for many biological studies, including the most fundamental of all — the description and classification of species.
Allocating to biodiversity studies the same amount of money that big science projects already attract would allow these institutions to convert centuries of knowledge to a readily available form through the application of information technology.
It's as simple as that.
Union power
In your article on Britain's unions (April 3rd) you seem to be using the number and size of strikes as a measure of union strength, as if the reason for the unions' existence was to organise strikes.
Surely, in a modern industrial society, the calling of a strike is evidence that the negotiating position of the union was too weak.
Strong unions do not need to call strikes.
They can concentrate their efforts on working with others in the labour market to achieve common goals — profitable and humane working conditions.
Splitting hares
Although Koor's policy of siphoning money from its successful subsidiaries to loss-makers is certainly generous, I cannot agree that it is ‘hairbrained’.
Had its policy been described as pea-, bird- or harebrained, I would take no exception, but I do have difficulty envisioning the hirsute minds you describe.
BOOKS AND ARTS
Homeless masterpieces
MADRID
THERE can be only one Prado…
On second thoughts, make that three.
The magnificent collection, which includes Goya's ‘Maja Desnuda’ and Velazquez's ‘Las Meninas’, and is seen by more than 2m visitors a year, is just part of the picture.
There is also the Prado oculto, a term coined to describe the paintings, sculptures and drawings that line the store-rooms beneath the gallery.
This unseen collection includes works by El Greco, Velazquez and Murillo, and is particularly rich in non-Spanish masterpieces.
Then there is a Prado disperso, made up of works which not even the store-rooms have space for, and which are on loan to embassies, universities, provincial town halls and the like.
The Prado's problem is an embarrassment of riches, with nowhere to put most of them.
By the summer of 1992, when the last count was made, it owned 19,056 works.
Only 1,781 were permanently on view.
Nonetheless, a plan to enlarge the main Prado building has unleashed a passionate controversy — not least because the suggested extension would not even be used for the permanent display of works of art.
Its cost is put at Ptas2.4 billion ($10.6m).
Controversy was brewing even before last November when Francisco Rodriguez Partearroyo, the architect who designed the proposed extension, unveiled his plans.
Critics complained that instead of just handing him the challenge, Spain's arts ministry ought to have held an international competition for the best scheme.
The Prado's director, Felipe Vicente Garin, retorted: ‘Why should I call for new ideas when I've already got my own?’
Mr Partearroyo has impressive qualifications for the task, having worked with the Prado for many years and remodelled several of its rooms.
His plan is for an extension offering 10,500 square metres (12,560 square yards) of extra floor space on three levels in line with the slope of the street which runs along the northern side of the gallery.
A new entrance to it would be created by way of a trench passageway.
Supporters insist nothing would be lost other than a small car park and the steps leading up to the Prado's ‘Goya’ entrance.
Critics retort that not much would be gained either.
The extension would provide space for offices, cloakrooms, a souvenir shop and bookshop, the library and temporary exhibitions.
It does not deal directly with the main problem of providing more room for permanent display.
The Prado administrators have asked for opinions from two influential organisations: the San Fernando Royal Academy of Fine Arts, of which Goya was a director, and the professional body that represents Madrid's architects.
So far, only the academy has delivered its verdict, which was one of vehement disapproval.
Among numerous objections, the strongest was to the rearrangement of the northern façade of the structure, generally considered the Spanish capital's finest neo-classical building.
How else could the unhung paintings be catered for?
For years, the gallery was promised the Villahermosa Palace.
But that stylish building went instead to Baron Thyssen's collection.
The Villahermosa Palace has not been the Prado's only recent loss.
Last July, after months of furious debate over whether the artist's wishes were being respected, Picasso's ‘Guernica’ was removed at dawn from the Prado's annexe, El Cason del Buen Retiro.
Its new home, at the other end of what El Pais called the ‘the most controversial kilometre in the history of contemporary art’, was Spain's new Reina Sofia modern art centre.
There is a feeling, especially among parliamentary critics of the Socialist government, that the Prado is being neglected, and is overdue a favour.
The arts minister, Jordi Sole Tura, wants to give it the ornate edifice that currently houses the ministry of agriculture.
In the long term, the Prado has also been promised the building now occupied by the Army Museum — one of the last remnants of the 17th-century Palace of El Buen Retiro, whose artist in residence, fittingly enough, was Velazquez.
But some are convinced that nothing short of rehousing the entire collection in a new, perhaps purpose-built, structure will solve its problems.
‘A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush’, counters Mr Partearroyo.
He stresses his scheme would free 1,884 square metres in the main building currently being used for administrative or commercial purposes.
‘That means there would be almost 15% extra for permanent exhibition.’
His proposed extension would also include an area set aside for temporary exhibitions covering some 1,600 square metres, compared with less than half that at present— a further net increase of 850 square metres.
‘This,’ he says, ‘would allow the display in rotation of a lot more of the paintings that cannot be found a permanent hanging space.’
His plans have recently gone on display to the public.
Madrilenos have passionate opinions about changes to their city.
Protest itself has become an art form since the end of General Franco's dictatorship.
So, when the subject under debate is the country's richest cultural jewel, feelings are likely to run at least as high as they did in Paris over the pyramid at the Louvre or in London over the National Gallery extension.
The public has a month more in which to make its feelings known.
Ultimately, the decision will rest with the Prado's trustees.
In the meantime, visitors may detect a slightly smug expression on the face of Goya's ‘Maja Desnuda’.
For the moment, she forms part of a privileged minority who have a home in the real Prado.
Holocaust museum
Never again
WASHINGTON, DC
‘HOLOCAUST,’ says a bright American voice over the telephone, ‘may I help you?’
The greeting is not the only clue to the cultural provenance of the US Holocaust Memorial Museum, which has opened in Washington.
Engraved in the wall near the entrance is America's ‘Declaration of Independence’ and at the opening events the United States Army band kept striking up ‘God Bless America’.
Then there was the usual diplomatic muddle.
The museum, it turned out, had invited to the opening ceremonies the Croatian president, Franjo Tudjman, who has been accused of being anti-Semitic (he denies it) and has talked about ‘Judeo-Nazis’ in criticising Israelis' treatment of the Palestinians.
The museum invited him, said one of its officials, at the suggestion of ‘the State Department, which advised us that Tudjman was democratically elected.’
The State Department demurred: it had only offered information, not advice.
Yet all these irritations fade away once the museum lays claim to the minds and emotions of its visitors.
The very architecture of the building rebuffs any attempt at hoopla.
Conceived by James Freed, a Jew born in Germany who escaped with his parents to the United States in 1939, it is an eerie, grim and splendidly daunting structure.
Its sentry-box rooflines are designed to suggest the horrors of Auschwitz.
The windows, covered with stone grids, conjure up the bars on prison windows.
The inside walls are rigged with brackets of steel, like the brackets around the crematoria.
The purpose of the museum, says its director, Jeshajahu Weinberg, is not merely to document.
It means to make a visitor understand how the attempt to annihilate an entire people came to be, and how it was executed.
The idea, Mr Weinberg added, was to organise the exhibits in narrative sequence.
And to do so by all possible means, including photographs, videos, audio tapes and, above all, artefacts — not copies but objects collected from extermination camps, ghettos, Slovak villages, Danish ports.
Mr Weinberg's concept has been uncannily realised.
On the fourth floor the visitor follows the Nazi rise to power all the way to the first intimations of total death.
The third floor, called ‘The Final Solution’, brings the visitor face-to-face with photographs of ghettos, videos of residents of Lvov chasing and stripping women on the streets and then carrying them, naked, to lorries surrounded by smiling Nazis, evidence of hideous ‘medical experiments’, and the like.
Among the objects is one of the actual railway trucks used to transport Jews to Treblinka.
The second floor deals with liberation.
as if to challenge the opening ceremonies, there are damning reports on Washington's reticence to save Jews, and the military's refusal to bomb Auschwitz because of the bombing's ‘doubtful efficacy’.
Each visitor will be moved by something different in a museum that is dedicated mainly to the Jewish victims but also commemorates others, notably Jehovah's Witnesses, gypsies, homosexuals and communists.
For your correspondent, nothing is more haunting than the photographs of Jewish life in the town of Eisziszki, near Vilna (in Russia, then Poland, now Lithuania) between 1890 and 1941.
No atrocities here.
Quite the opposite — happy faces, children cavorting in the snow, local beauties posing with shy smiles on their faces, outings by Zionist and socialist youth groups, schools, Yiddish and Hebrew placards, a family around a holiday table, a newly wedded couple.
The photographs are arranged on the walls of a tower spanning two floors and narrowing at the top, suggesting a chimney — fittingly, since all 4,000 Jews of Eisziszki were shot by Lithuanian guards in September 1941, under the watchful eyes of the SS.
It is an excruciating sight, yet hard to tear oneself away from.
And it provides no answer to the question that tears at one's heart: why, why on earth — why?
Hard of hearing
ALTHOUGH it was described in the 19th century as ‘a land without music’, Britain has latterly become a musical powerhouse, particularly rich in its orchestras.
In a new survey on ‘National Orchestra Provision’, due to be published in July, the BBC and the Arts Council have set out to assess how well this musical plenty reaches audiences and how the number of concert-goers can be increased.
The results so far make somewhat bemusing reading.
Interviews with people who profess to enjoy classical music turn up all sorts and conditions of appreciation.
Some people, described by the survey as ‘flirtatious’, are happy to flip across the radio dial, alternating between pop music and the appealing snippets played by Classic FM.
Others match music to moods and tasks, like the listener who does her ironing to ‘loud and rocky’ pop, but likes classical music on her headphones when she reads.
Only the most committed devotees insist that ‘classical music demands your attention…
You've got to have time to sit and listen to it.’
The more casual types are less inclined to go into a concert hall.
As one complained: ‘It's an awfully long time to sit there.
You see something advertised like ‘The Four Seasons’: well, everyone knows the famous bit, but that's only a quarter of it.
There's three-quarters of the stuff you've never heard before.’
On the other hand, some ask, if a piece is familiar why go at all?
For others the trouble is simply that a concert ‘lacks visuals.
With an orchestra you've just got one sense; you're just listening.’
A special event can add excitement, like the jolly festivity of the Last Night of the Proms, or a concert with a world-class soloist, like Placido Domingo, which an attender praises as ‘much more a social occasion and not a purely listening one’.
Indeed, many people seem to feel uncomfortable at a concert precisely because the occasion demands concentrated listening.
Lacking experience of that kind, casual listeners may have difficulty in responding to the finer musical distinctions that make an individual performance unique.
Only a minority of real aficionados, identified by the survey as ‘interpretive listeners’, can say that ‘when you go to a concert it's totally different every time.’
Middle Eastern tyrants
American fall guy
TWIN PILLARS TO DESERT STORM.
By Howard Teicher and Gayle Radley Teicher.
Morrow; 418 pages; $13.
HOLLOW VICTORY.
By Jeffrey Record.
Brassey's; 186 pages; $12.
Distributed by Maxwell Macmillan; £15.95
IF YOU want a friend you can count on in Washington, said Harry Truman, you had better get a dog.
Howard Teicher, bitter at his own treatment in government service, cites this remark with relish towards the end of his rambling account of life as a Middle East specialist under Presidents Carter and Reagan.
Yet the most unnerving revelation of this book is less the bit that shocked Mr Teicher — his colleagues' attempts to make him a scapegoat in the Irangate arms-for-hostages scandal — and more his portrayal of the muddle that characterises America's dealings with this explosive region.
The ‘twin pillars’ of Mr Teicher's title are Saudi Arabia and the shah's Iran, the two countries America once thought to turn into the pro-western policemen of the Gulf.
Mr Teicher claims to have argued well before Iran's Islamic revolution that it was folly to rely on the shah when his regime was collapsing from within.
But inconvenient prescience was unwelcome.
One of Mr Teicher's first tasks was to write a report in support of an American arms sale to Iran.
When he gave warning that internal rebellion might be possible there, the passage was deleted.
Wedded to their twin pillars, his superiors in Washington could not allow this heretical thought to be popped into the head of the secretary of state.
Well, the shah did fall, and the bureaucrats started casting around for a replacement.
They alighted on Saddam Hussein of Iraq, who in the late 1970s was beginning to portray himself as a man of moderation who might be able to make himself useful to the West, not least by acting as a counter to now-revolutionary Iran.
Once again, says Mr Teicher, he at least was not fooled: in 1979 he wrote a report describing the horribleness of the Iraqi dictator and explaining the threat he posed to American interests.
This time his paper went all the way to the defence secretary, Harold Brown, who noted in the margin: ‘I disagree.
Iraq has changed.
It has moderated its behaviour.’
The memoirs of government officials seldom reflect badly on their authors.
It is only human of Mr Teicher to make himself into the hero-victim of his own narrative.
But the picture he paints of general foreign policy-making under the Reagan presidency is disquieting.
The State Department appears to have been riven between ‘Arabists’ and the few analysts who, like Mr Teicher, considered that Israel might prove at least as valuable a strategic ally as Iran, Iraq or Saudi Arabia.
When the advocates of a pro-Israeli policy happened to be Jewish, says the Jewish Mr Teicher, the Arabists did not hesitate to whisper ‘dual loyalty’.
‘Twin Pillars’ is a readable account of this skulduggery, but oddly bad at discussing America's real dilemmas in a region where it has to weigh its friendship with Israel against its strategic interests in the Gulf.
Compared with Mr Teicher's disorderly reminiscences, Jeffrey Record's evaluation of the American-led war to rescue Kuwait is a model of cool analysis.
But his decision to label his arguments ‘contrarian’ is mystifying.
He offers a view of the Gulf war that has become increasingly fashionable even though it is probably wrong.
This holds that although Desert Storm passed one narrow test of political success (the eviction of Iraq from Kuwait) it failed in almost every other way.
It failed, above all, to topple Saddam Hussein, whose removal, Mr Record says, was always one of America's chief war aims, albeit one that was not blessed by the United Nations.
Because of this failure, the war left the Middle East in no better shape than before: Mr Hussein stays in power, butchering his own citizens, continuing to seek nuclear weapons and plotting terrible revenge against his neighbours and their defenders in the West.
All this, says Mr Record, ‘must be counted as a major American political defeat.’
Really?
Even if you put aside America's military performance, which even Mr Record considers flawless, the political outcome is not that bleak.
It is true, as Mr Record complains, that Iraq managed to salvage much military material and has managed to evade some of the sanctions imposed on it.
True, too, that Iraq's possession of a cadre of highly trained scientists and engineers poses a continuing threat of nuclear proliferation.
But the point is that Iraq's demoralised army — driving obsolescent tanks, short of spare parts and stripped of effective air cover — no longer poses an immediate military threat to its neighbours.
That is a war gain.
As for Iraq's engineers, Mr Hussein's demise would make no difference to their ability to build a bomb.
At present, Iraqi laboratories are at least subject to constant, intrusive scrutiny by the UN.
That is a gain as well.
Just as Mr Record understates American gains, so he exaggerates Iraqi consolations.
To say that Saddam Hussein has managed to convert his military disaster into ‘something of a political victory’ is outlandish.
Before the war Mr Hussein, although not loved, was tacitly accepted as a necessary evil by Iraq's Shia majority and Kurdish minority.
Since the war both groups have come to see him as an unnecessary evil.
He clings to power largely because his Sunni-dominated army is afraid of the revenge that would befall it if he fell.
And he may still fall.
Japan
The way things are
CAUGHT IN A MIRROR.
By Lisa Martineau.
Macmillan; 305 pages; £16.99
MOST modern books on Japan say little about the Japanese.
They analyse trade flows, preach against protectionism and predict either doom or continued glory for the world's most impressive industrial economy.
No wonder so many bore as they inform.
Happily, Lisa Martineau takes an opposite approach.
She barely mentions the economic miracle.
Instead, she writes of those ordinary people who make the miracle, and often suffer in the process: the sarariman painfully climbing the corporate ladder; the schoolchildren taught to prefer homework to sleep; the housewives left alone with their drudgery.
She is the perceptive observer — be it of the radiation victims in Nagasaki or the aged geisha dancing exquisitely well for her venerable patron.
One vignette follows another, taking the reader from disappointing Mount Fuji to the old (and now gone) Asahi Beer Hall in a Tokyo slum.
It is a good technique.
For one thing Miss Martineau writes well (although her editor might have dampened an American passion for ‘inside of’ and ‘outside of’, and corrected her mistaken belief that Boeing made McDonnell Douglas's DC-10 airliner).
She also writes with purpose.
When a car drives slowly into her taxi, stationary at a traffic-clogged crossroads, it is more than the stupid accident it would be in London, New York or Sydney.
Because the taxi should not have been there, the car-driver expected it to move — even though it plainly could not.
As Miss Martineau points out, ‘expecting something to happen because it should’ is very Japanese, an automatic consequence of Japanese society's rigid order.
Best of all Miss Martineau writes with a wry humour — of the karaoke bar that bans her as a foreigner and then welcomes her lest her Japanese host lose face; of the popularity of sado-masochistic pornography, but without pubic hair; of the burglar who first took his shoes off.
She is always a gaijin (a foreigner) in a world that jealously protects its insular identity, but she is a gaijin who has penetrated Japan more deeply than most.
Other books talk of Japan's ability to hide behind its face, of the gap between tatemae, the way things are said to be, and honne, the way they really are.
Few, however, do as well as Miss Martineau's in revealing the honne.
Into the woods
THE unpublished works of great men are sometimes better left that way, but not in this case.
Henry David Thoreau's ‘The Dispersion of Seeds’, now published as ‘Faith in a Seed’(Island Press, 284 pages, $19.95), was written in 1860 after many tramps through the Concord woods, where Thoreau caught the cold that eventually killed him.
He went to the woods in Massachusetts as a naturalist, rather than a writer or thinker; his purpose was to disprove the theory, popular at the time, that plants and trees sprang spontaneously from the ground.
Yet even as an ardent Darwinian, keen to prove by minute observation how seeds were adapted to travel on wind, water or in the maws of animals, he continues to write like an angel and to soar like a philosopher.
Thoreau becomes a boy again in woods; they are his natural element.
In his 40s, he squats in blueberry bushes to strip off handfuls of berries, scrabbles in the snow to uncover the nut-hoards hidden by squirrels, and carries home touch-me-not seeds that explode ‘like a pistol’ in his hat.
He enjoys creeping past the back gardens of his neighbours, spotting the gleaming milk pails in one and listening to the notes of a bass viol coming from another.
Fascinated by the white pines that grow like weeds round Concord, on one memorable occasion he goes after their cones, which grow on their topmost branches:
but I am in a pickle when I get one.
The cones are now all flowing with pitch, and my hands are soon so covered with it that I cannot easily cast down my booty when I would, it sticks to my fingers so; and when I get down at last and have picked them up, I cannot touch my basket with such hands but carry it on my arm, nor can I pick up my coat which I have taken off unless with my teeth — or else I kick it up and catch it on my arm.
The political anger of ‘On Civil Disobedience’ and ‘Walden’has burned itself out; only one remark still rings with it, when Thoreau considers how the cherry disperses itself by having its stones swallowed: ‘It is only princes who can afford to have their cherry puddings stoned, and so make their lives more completely luxurious and useless.’
Flawed diamonds
With their players' salaries soaring, baseball clubs are pleading poverty
AS A character says in ‘Bull Durham’, a film about the game, ‘Baseball may be a religion full of magic, cosmic truth and the fundamental ontological riddles of our time, but it is also a job.’
In Major League Baseball it is one that comes with Hollywood-sized pay.
Players will earn an average of $1m this season.
Not bad for hitting, throwing and catching a ball — but also unaffordable.
The $100m that clubs are paying in players' wages this year is more than half as much again as they paid in 1990.
And fat wages like these are putting a financial squeeze on America's national pastime.
According to a study commissioned by the owners, the profits of major-league clubs have fallen by 54% since 1989.
In 1991 they made an operating profit of $17m on revenues of $1.54 billion.
Last year they collectively broke even but 18 out of the then 26 teams in the major leagues reported losses.
For this year, the owners are projecting a collective loss.
Next year, they say, the loss could be anywhere between horrible and horrendous, depending on the outcome of negotiations for a new national television contract to replace the one that expires after the end of this season.
The owners of the major-league clubs (they have increased in number from 26 to 28 with the creation of the Florida Marlins and the Colorado Rockies) will also have to conclude a new contract with the players' union.
The talks are customarily turbulent.
Seven of the previous eight labour-contract renegotiations have involved either a players' strike or a lockout.
Television dollars have in the past paid for the rising salaries but today's bidders seem determined to pay less than the $1.45 billion CBS and ESPN bid in winning the current four-year deal for network and cable rights.
Both television companies are said to be losing a lot of money on baseball.
Big audiences are still attracted for the games of the league championships and the World Series that conclude the season, and for the All-Star contest in its middle.
But otherwise the audience for televised baseball is dwindling.
Even Anheuser-Busch, the brewer of Budweiser, is reconsidering the game's value as an advertising vehicle.
The clubs are right to worry.
The current television contracts are their largest single source of revenue, guaranteeing each of them, big or small, $14.4m a year.
That is supplemented by local cable-TV contracts, which bring in anything between $1.5m a year (for the Mariners) to $12m a year (for the Yankees).
Yet prodigal habits die hard.
Over the past two decades the owners have been generous on pay because their revenues have increased by an average of 12% a year.
But a rocky economy and the resistance of fans to ticket prices, which have risen by 10% a season in recent years, have slowed revenue growth at a time when expenses continue to soar.
The owners signalled how serious they were about halting the pay spiral last year when they first detached labour negotiations from the baseball commissioner, Fay Vincent, and then detached Mr Vincent from his job.
He had played a conciliatory role in ending the players' strike during the last labour-contract negotiations in 1990 and some owners felt they could not fully trust him to be their man this time round.
The owners want a pay structure for baseball similar to the one introduced into professional basketball when it was losing money in the early 1980s, and which professional football is copying.
The National Basketball Association currently caps salaries for a team at 53% of admission and broadcasting revenues.
Imposing such a structure in baseball will take tough bargaining and unaccustomed discipline on the part of the owners.
It would also require them to agree to revenue-sharing arrangements, since clubs from large cities otherwise would gain a big advantage over those from smaller ones, which would veto the deal.
Although capping salaries is part of what they all want, many owners are convinced that only television can provide a long-term solution to the game's financial problems.
Some believe that this means turning baseball into a pay-per-view sport, even though the increasing hold of cable television is causing Congress to think again about baseball's 70-year exemption from America's antitrust laws.
Among the ideas being floated by those owners who see television as their saviour are an expansion of the National and American leagues from two divisions each to three divisions each; the introduction of regular season games between clubs in the two leagues; and the involvement of eight clubs, rather than the present four, in play-off games at the end of the season.
The last idea especially pleases television executives.
They reckon that 90% of their advertising revenue from baseball each season is generated during post-season play.
Such marketing tricks may make the game more attractive to the younger fans the television advertisers covet.
They do not, however, deal with a phenomenon that is doing as much as anything to undermine the profitability of televised baseball: the rise of two cable superstations, Ted Turner's WTBS and the Tribune Group's WGN.
Both WTBS and WGN are parts of entertainment conglomerates which also own baseball teams whose games they pipe into their subscribers' homes (the Atlanta Braves and the Chicago Cubs respectively).
But baseball is sure eventually to find a way to put its financial house in order.
Those who doubt it should consider these words of a club owner: ‘Professional baseball is on the wane.
Salaries must come down or the interest of the public must be increased in some way.
If one or the other does not happen, bankruptcy stares every team in the face.’
They were written in 1881.
British cinema
Goody-goody
J. ARTHUR RANK AND THE BRITISH FILM INDUSTRY.
By Geoffrey Macnab.
Routledge; 262 pages; £30 and $19.95
A TEETOTAL Sunday school teacher from Reigate was nobody's idea of a movie mogul.
Yet between 1933 and 1942 J. Arthur Rank put together a vertically-integrated film empire that was the nearest Britain ever came to emulating the great Hollywood studios.
That he could not, in the end, quite rise to the challenge Geoffrey Macnab ascribes to inherent contradictions in Rank's own personality.
A staunch Methodist with an evangelical conviction that film exists to serve the Lord, he was at the same time the head of the family flour-milling business and imbued with a Yorkshire respect for ‘brass’ and profitability.
As a businessman, Rank knew a good deal when he saw one and struck many, but he often dissipated the rewards in sentimental sidetracks.
Audiences groaned as ‘This Modern Age’, a soppy documentary series, made its monthly appearance with patronising assurances that, for instance, ‘many Africans have risen to distinction and today occupy important posts.’
Rank hankered after prestige and was a soft touch for producers like Filippo Del Giudice, who encouraged him to ‘think big’.
Del Giudice's biggest enemy within the Rank Organisation was John Davis, a brilliant, if ruthless, accountant whose only concern was ‘the bottom line’.
Mr Macnab rightly sees the Davis/Del Giudice conflict as a battle for the soul of Rank himself, with the two reflecting different sides of their ultimate boss.
Rank's attempt to carve out a niche in the American market failed because his films were too slow and talkative for transatlantic tastes.
The plummy Home Counties accents were also said to be difficult for Americans to understand (though this problem never seemed to arise when the same actors — James Mason, Stewart Granger and Jean Simmons — became Hollywood stars).
Rank's assault on the American market culminated in 1949 in losses of £750,000 ($1.1m) and a then enormous overdraft of £16.25m.
It forced a change of direction in the 1950s and the adoption, under Davis, of good housekeeping policies.
Thanks to his inspired decision to link Rank's future with that of the Xerox copiers, by the end of the 1960s the group had profits of more than £52m, 90% due to Xerox.
So Davis (later Sir John Davis) was vindicated.
But the British film industry, chastened and curbed, has lurched from crisis to crisis ever since.
ASIA
Mongolia
Dig for survival
‘IT NEVER rains but it snows’ might be Mongolia's national motto.
This land of little more than 2m people and 24m sheep, enclosed between China and Russia in an area three times the size of France, had already appealed for emergency food aid to get it through the winter when the worst snows for 50 years hit three provinces in the south-west.
Earlier this month up to five feet of snow in semi-desert areas and seven feet in the mountains trapped thousands of families and killed at least 500,000 farm animals in the south-west.
In the north-east, winds are spreading huge grass and forest fires from Russia.
To most of Mongolia's population, close to two-thirds of whom are under 24, their economic plight, like the weather, has never been worse.
Like the countries of Eastern Europe and more recently Russia, Mongolia has since 1990 been dismantling central planning and reversing its virtual integration in the former Soviet Union as the 16th republic.
Most shops and herds have been taken over by families or collectives.
It has a stock exchange.
Foreign investors, from Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, among others, have started to take an interest in its industries, such as textiles and carpet-making.
Mongolia has plans to extend and modernise its airport and its road and rail links with China and Russia.
Plans, but no cash.
Mongolia has been desperately looking for some.
A year ago Japan held an international meeting on aid for Mongolia, which produced pledges amounting to some $120m in credits and aid, some of it emergency assistance to keep Mongolia's lights on (literally).
However, the IMF suspended its stand-by agreement with Mongolia last autumn because of the government's failure to meet its conditions.
IMF officials now seem ready to resume lending, thereby also unblocking further loans from the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.
Over the winter, breakdowns in Ulan Bator's decrepit power supply came close to evacuating the capital and forcing people to abandon frozen buildings for traditional yurts.
The Erdenet copper mine, which produces about half of Mongolia's exports, shuts down for hours each day.
Despite rich coal deposits, Mongolia lacks the spares and the skills to keep the mines running.
The years of central planning had already produced food shortages in a country where livestock outnumber people by about 12 to one.
Now the government has declared this to be the Year of Food.
The aim is to encourage town-dwellers to grow vegetables on small plots of land — an idea reportedly inspired by the success of the vegetable patch in the British Embassy compound.
The economic disaster that has befallen Mongolia over the past two years (see chart) has emboldened diehards in the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (the old communist party), which holds 70 of the 76 seats in parliament, to try rolling back reform.
This month the party refused to renominate the country's president, Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat, as its candidate in the presidential election in June.
Instead it chose Lodongiyn Tudev, hardline editor of the party newspaper.
Mr Ochirbat was immediately snapped up by the main opposition parties as their joint candidate.
Sri Lanka
Who killed Lalith?
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN COLOMBO
THE police said they had no doubt who shot dead Lalith Athulathmudali, a Sri Lankan opposition  politician , on April 23rd.
Near to the spot where the shooting took place the police found the body of a young man.
He had bullet wounds said to have been inflicted by Mr Athulathmudali's bodyguard, and had apparently finished himself off by taking cyanide, a method of suicide used by Tamil Tiger guerrillas.
The government said that it was clear that Mr Athulathmudali was yet another victim of the Tigers, who for more than a decade have been fighting for a separate Tamil state on the island.
It was soon apparent that there were holes in this theory.
Mr Athulathmudali's bodyguard said he had shot at the assassin, but believed he had missed.
The assassin, he said, wore a black shirt.
The man found by the police wore a white shirt.
Many Sri Lankans are sceptical of the government's instant solution to the murder.
The Tigers were said by the government to have blown up the defence minister, Ranjan Wijeratne, in March 1991, and a general, Denzil Kobbekaduwa, in August 1992.
Because no indisputable evidence has been offered that the Tigers were to blame, conspiracy-minded Sri Lankans suspect other villains, perhaps close to the government itself.
Similar suspicions are now circulating about this latest murder.
Indeed, the government of President Ranasinghe Premadasa had plenty of reasons to dislike Mr Athulathmudali, a lawyer educated at Oxford University, and former president of the Oxford Union, who was regarded as one of Sri Lanka's best brains.
Mr Athulathmudali had defected from the ruling United National Party in 1991 and led a powerful opposition group, the Democratic United National Front.
He tried to impeach Mr Premadasa, accusing the president of corruption.
Under Mr Athulathmudali's leadership, the Front was expected to do well in elections for provincial councils on May 17th.
The government is hoping for a vote of confidence in the elections, and has been dismayed by the support the Front appears to be getting.
Mr Athulathmudali was shot while speaking at an election meeting.
If a government supporter killed him, it was a politically stupid thing to do.
The Front has since received many messages of support from both Tamils and Sinhalese.
Even though thousands of people die violently each year in Sri Lanka, the death of an important figure causes national anguish.
So did the the Tigers do the deed?
As a former security minister, Mr Athulathmudali was a scourge of the Tigers.
But the Tigers, although not usually reluctant to claim revenge, deny killing him.
The government says that to settle the matter it is calling in Britain's Scotland Yard.
It may regret the decision.
When the Kenyan government called in a former Scotland Yard detective to clear up the murder of the foreign minister in 1990, he fingered the former energy minister and confidant of the president.
Pakistan
Broken promises,
broken chairs
FROM OUR PAKISTAN CORRESPONDENT
LAHORE
AS PAKISTAN plays out its political crisis, the plot has taken another twist.
The wily old president, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, who temporarily joined up with the opposition leader, Benazir Bhutto, in order to get rid of the prime minister, is now scheming against her, too.
She is furious at the betrayal; and supporters of the sacked prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, have resorted to fisticuffs.
Pakistanis are used to politicians behaving badly; but even they are shocked at this week's outbreak of trickery and thuggery.
President Ishaq and Miss Bhutto were enemies until they discovered a mutual interest in getting rid of Mr Sharif.
Miss Bhutto gave Mr Ishaq an excuse to dissolve parliament by offering the resignation of her party's members of parliament.
But having used her, the president has now turned against her.
He wants to ensure that, after a general election is held on July 14th, neither she nor Mr Sharif emerges as a strong prime minister.
The three are fighting over control of the provincial assemblies, which will be important in the run-up to the election.
Mr Ishaq wants to mould their membership into a support base for himself.
Miss Bhutto wants new elections to the assemblies.
She maintains that, when the president recruited her to support him against Mr Sharif, he promised to dissolve the assemblies.
But instead of announcing free and fair elections to these powerful bodies, Mr Ishaq has occupied himself manipulating the most important of them, that in Punjab.
No sooner had Mr Sharif fallen from grace than Manzoor Watoo, speaker of the assembly and an ally of the president's, set about getting himself installed as chief minister.
He told the assembly's members that if they did not vote down the existing chief minister, a supporter of Mr Sharif's, and put him in the post instead, the president would dissolve the assembly and they would all lose their jobs.
Then he packed them off on a plane to Islamabad to meet the president.
They were shipped back to Lahore from Islamabad on April 25th, the day of the no-confidence vote against the chief minister.
Hundreds of police surrounded the assembly to protect them.
Small groups of Mr Sharif's supporters stoned the building, dodging clouds of tear-gas.
Inside the house, the rump of Sharif loyalists abused and fought with the turncoats, uprooted microphones and hurled chairs at the deputy speaker.
Amazed viewers watched the entire episode live on television.
And after all that, Mr Watoo still got the job.
Mr Ishaq has also been at work on the Sindh assembly, in which Miss Bhutto's supporters make up the biggest group.
He flew down to Karachi on April 27th and told them not to back Miss Bhutto's call for fresh provincial elections.
The same message has been drummed into the province of Baluchistan and the North-West Frontier Province, where neither Miss Bhutto nor Mr Sharif has much support.
Miss Bhutto is spitting fury, not just over the matter of the provincial assemblies, but also because she says that she was given fewer ministries in the caretaker government (just under a quarter) than she deserves.
She is threatening to pull out of the government and join Mr Sharif's agitation if Mr Ishaq does not fulfil her demands.
Mr Sharif, meanwhile, is stomping around the country, vowing to get rid of the president when he gets back into power.
He has also challenged the dissolution of parliament in the Supreme Court.
A verdict is due next month.
If it upholds the president's decision, elections will go ahead on July 14th.
If it does not, anything might happen.
Pakistanis know that the army is watching the chaos with disgust.
Japan
Osaka's bid for freedom
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
OSAKA
IN THE mid-1980s Tokyo's dominance of government, business and academia was deemed to ease efficient contact-making.
Its strength in finance, flowering at the time, was deliberately promoted by the country's bureaucrats.
But these days, Tokyo's overcrowding and long commuting times loom large in people's minds.
Some argue that centralisation and national uniformity were fine for the era of mass production, but that the service-based economy of the future demands diversity.
Networking, too, has got a bad name these days, as the scandalous links between Tokyo's politicians, bureaucrats and businessmen are exposed.
The scandals have brought out a rash of new political movements, all of which want Tokyo's dominance curbed.
Centralisation is out, decentralisation all the rage.
One of these movements is led by Kenichi Ohmae, a management consultant who argues that Japan should be sliced up into 11 semi-autonomous statelets.
Not to be outdone, the ruling Liberal Democrats have various commissions mulling over decentralisation.
In December they set up a new one to consider moving the capital.
Its president is Osamu Uno, a businessman from the Osaka region.
After Tokyo and the neighbouring port of Yokohama, Osaka is Japan's largest city.
It has good grounds for resenting Tokyo's power.
Some 300 companies have moved their headquarters from Osaka to Tokyo each year because they want to plug into the capital's networks.
In all, about a third of the companies listed on Osaka's stockmarket have shifted.
Of the tax paid by Osaka's residents and businesses, 84% goes to central government; they do not see much of it again.
In the year to March 1991, Osaka accounted for 8.3% of Japan's GDP, down from 8.8% a decade earlier; Tokyo's share rose from 16.6% to 18.5% during that period.
Osaka has fought back with a splurge of infrastructure projects, most notably a new international airport perched upon a man-made island.
The airport's opening has been delayed because the island is subsiding.
Its critics say that even if the waves do not lap over the runway, exorbitant landing fees will frustrate Osaka's ambitions to displace Seoul as an airline hub for East Asia.
Osaka's decline is evident in the local prefectural office, a grand stone building with grimy linoleum floor coverings.
The managers of the planning section talk loudly, because someone next door is playing the piano.
They complain that Tokyo is quick to take control of local projects but slow to provide money for them.
High schools are paid for by the prefecture, but their curriculum is vetted by the capital.
It has taken three years to get Tokyo's approval for new lessons on Japan's traditional arts.
In arguing for autonomy, Osaka's leaders stress cultural differences with Tokyo.
The city sees itself as Japan's natural centre of commerce.
There is brash capitalism on show, which is unusual in such a restrained, discreet society.
By day, a long street in the Nipponbashi area is lined with cut-price electronics stores.
By night it is lined with ragged figures, sleeping on cardboard or scraps of bubble-wrap.
Along a side street there prowled, one recent morning, a spanking white Rolls-Royce.
The gangsters are big in Osaka.
Osaka has a distinct dialect.
Its people talk straight and dislike snobs.
They support their local baseball team, the Hanshin Tigers.
They are even more passionate about comics than other Japanese.
They are not ashamed of bargain-hunting: amorous couples go to love-hotels that charge by the hour, not the posh pay-per-stay sort that Tokyo's residents patronise.
They are said to dislike Tokyo's salty cooking.
Yet the distinctions, emphasised by regionalists searching for cultural backing, are not all that great.
According to a chef in Osaka, the younger generation is deserting both regional cuisines in favour of the hamburger.
National television may be eroding differences in dialect.
Youngsters struggle to get jobs in Tokyo.
If change comes (and if it does, it will be mild) it will be driven more by the problems with Tokyo than by the aspirations of Osaka.
Caveat vendor
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
BANGKOK
AT A crowded night market in Bangkok a stallholder and a tourist are haggling over the price of a polo shirt.
Sticking vehemently to her price of 100 baht ($1), the stallholder insists, ‘Ralph Lauren he make nine quality.
This his number-one quality.’
At the next stall backpackers browse through piles of fake Rolex watches — $1 each for an average wrist-life of six months.
Further on there are piles of pirated videos and audio tapes to be had.
The titles are sometimes mis-spelt, but the low prices still pull in crowds of eager buyers.
The International Intellectual Property Alliance, a pressure group based in America, reckons that in 1992 American businesses lost around $1 billion in potential trade in the ten worst-offending Asian countries.
Thailand accounted for $123m of estimated losses; Taiwan cost American businesses $169m.
These figures may underestimate the problem.
Alix Parlour, chief lawyer in Asia for Microsoft, a computer software company, thinks her company may be losing $150m a year in potential sales in Asia.
Even Microsoft's own managers could not identify pirated copies of the company's prized Windows and MS-DOS programmes that appeared in Taiwan last year.
Holograms are placed on real Microsoft products to distinguish them from fakes; but they, too, were being mass-produced for counterfeiters by a university in China.
That ring was broken, but others have since appeared.
Software manufacturers fear that squeaky-clean Singapore may now emerge as a new centre for the pirates.
Earlier this month Microsoft discovered pirated versions of MS-DOS 6 on sale in Singapore before the product's official launch.
Walt Disney released a film of Aladdin in America in November 1992.
Within two weeks, pirated videos were on sale in Bangkok.
Walt Disney organises two to three raids a month on Thai pirates; but according to Brandt Handley, head of Walt Disney's consumer products division in South-East Asia, in most cases ‘within a few weeks they are back at it again under another name and location.’
The new American  administration seems to be taking a stiff line on counterfeiting, and the guiltiest countries were therefore worried by the approach of April 30th, the annual deadline for putting countries on America's blacklists.
Within the past month both Taiwan and the Philippines have passed beefed-up intellectual-property laws.
Thailand, the only country in Asia now on the blackest of the Americans' three blacklists, and therefore in greatest danger of sanctions, fired the official in charge of the enforcement of intellectual property rights on April 20th and launched a series of high-profile raids on counterfeiters.
In recent weeks the Bangkok papers have been full of photos of bonfires of pirated audio tapes.
None of this seems to have deterred the stallholders of central Bangkok.
India
Cop out
FROM OUR DELHI CORRESPONDENT
EVEN the police in Jammu & Kashmir have turned against the Indian government.
They went on strike after a constable was killed by security forces.
The security men say he died in the crossfire of an encounter with militants who want Kashmir to be independent of India.
The constable was on leave and wearing civilian clothes.
The Kashmiri police say he was taken into custody as a suspect, tortured and shot in cold blood.
The strikers, led by the Jammu & Kashmir Armed Police (JKAP), an elite section of the force, marched to the office of United Nations observers in Srinagar, the state capital, and submitted a memorandum calling for the arrest of the police chief supposed to have ordered the killing, and condemning state terrorism.
They also demanded the right to form a union and insisted on the reinstatement of policemen sacked earlier for indiscipline.
Most of the strikers gave up on April 27th.
But more than 100 holed up in the police headquarters in Srinagar.
On April 28th security forces successfully stormed the headquarters.
The government in Delhi now has the task of regaining police support.
One factor in its favour is that almost 40% of the JKAP consists of Hindus from the Hindu-majority region of Jammu.
But the state as a whole has a Muslim majority.
In the valley of Kashmir the police are almost entirely Muslim.
They will be less inclined to be loyal to Delhi.
Without their help, the security forces will have little hope of tracking down militants in the valley.
In neighbouring Punjab the Sikh militants who have been fighting for independence are a spent force, partly because, after a decade of violence, Punjabis want peace.
But in Kashmir the insurgency is only three years old, and while there are cases of extortion and rape by the militants, it will be years before they are rejected as were their counterparts in Punjab.
The central government in Delhi gets some comfort from reports that there is disagreement among the militants.
The Jammu & Kashmir Liberation Front seeks independence for the state, but the Hizbul Mujahideen and other small outfits want union with Pakistan.
The two groups have been kidnapping and killing each other 's followers.
The government hopes that at some point the Liberation Front can be persuaded to accept some form of autonomy short of independence, but that seems unlikely in the foreseeable future.
Getting the police back on its side is a more immediate concern.
A dangerous warmth
THE relationship between China and Taiwan is one of the world's oddest unfinished stories.
Both governments claim sovereignty over a fifth of the world's population, yet have survived as neighbours for 44 years without annihilating each other.
Hostility between the two necessarily frightens tiny Taiwan, with a population one-fiftieth the size of China's.
Yet, as many Taiwanese realise, the growing closeness between the two countries may be even more dangerous than distance.
On April 27th-29th, the two countries held their first almost-official talks, in Singapore.
They had different reasons for talking.
Money matters motivated Taiwan.
Last year bilateral trade topped $1 billion.
An estimated 12,000 Taiwanese enterprises have committed to invest nearly $1 billion in the mainland.
All sorts of issues — about lost mail, official seals, investment law, for instance— arise as a result of these links.
China, on the other hand, had reunification at the back of its mind.
The two governments refuse to talk directly, so the Taiwanese team at the talks represented the supposedly ‘non-governmental’ Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF).
Across the table sat the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits (ARATS), a Beijing front organisation set up to give the SEF a liaison partner.
But it was a summit by proxy.
The Taiwanese team was headed by Koo Chen-Foo, a multi-millionaire businessman who is a personal friend of the president, Lee Teng-Hui, and a member of the central committee of the ruling Kuomintang (KMT).
His Chinese counterpart was Wang Daohan, a close associate of the Chinese president and party leader, Jiang Zemin.
Mr Koo claimed that the people of China and Taiwan have a ‘blood-is-thicker-than-water kind of sentiment’.
But even as he stepped off the plane from Taipei, a slip of the tongue showed how far the two sides have drifted apart, and how unreal to Taiwanese is the official vision of reunification.
He referred to Taiwan and China as ‘two countries’, before quickly reverting to the politically correct phrase ‘both sides of the Taiwan Strait’.
There is after all, as they say in both Beijing and the KMT, ‘only one China’, and Taiwan is part of it.
Mr Koo is in good company.
The Chinese prime minister, Li Peng, made a similar slip a couple of years back.
But despite Mr Koo's slip, the Taiwanese side was at pains to stress that the big issues of its international status and political relationship with the mainland were not on the agenda.
A delegation from the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), was in Singapore to try to make sure it stuck to that pledge.
The DPP, which wants an independent Taiwan and unlike the KMT harbours no dreams about the mainland, sees itself as representing the majority of the Taiwanese, who were on the island long before the mainland influx of the late 1940s.
They feared that the KMT was going to sell out Taiwan in secret talks with its old mainland compatriots.
The DPP's worries are premature: the KMT's aim in the talks is merely to establish a framework for dealing with the problems that crop up between two commercial partners whose business is booming, but whose governments have no relations.
So the two sides talked about smuggling, piracy and other sorts of crime.
Taiwan signed three documents and issued a joint statement with the Chinese.
The documents were not of earth-shattering significance in themselves, but would help business.
One covered the verification of official documents, one dealt with compensation for lost mail and one established mechanisms for future contacts.
But even these small matters proved difficult.
Disagreement over the wording of the joint statement led the talks to be extended for a third day.
Taiwan wanted China to agree to guarantee better protection for Taiwan's investments in the mainland.
Because there are no relations between the governments, there is no investment-protection treaty.
China refused to sign an ‘unofficial’ treaty, or to change its guidelines on the treatment Taiwanese investors should receive — which is more favourable than that offered many foreign investors.
China wanted to see some reference to the possibility of direct trade — currently banned by Taiwanese law.
An ARATS member, Tang Shubei, obliquely warned Taiwanese businessmen that if their government did not co-operate, they would lose out to Americans, Europeans and other Asians.
Because this would involve changing policy and laws, the Taiwanese side regarded this as ‘political’, and resisted.
China sees the talks as all about politics, a way to further its long-term ambition to recover Taiwan.
But for the sake of opening a dialogue, China has played along with keeping reunification off the agenda.
The Taiwanese side quoted Wang Daohan as uttering just one ‘political’ statement.
‘Politics’, he said, ‘is a technique for resolving contradictions and confrontations.’
That in itself hints that China has a longer-term agenda.
Taiwan sees these talks as establishing a means of smoothing out practical problems with China in a difficult political environment.
China wants a channel through which that environment can itself be changed.
In a Chinese phrase, they are in one bed, but they are having different dreams.
China
PLA plc
OVER the past six months, the world's largest army has undergone its biggest shake-up in more than 20 years.
The upheaval in China's 3m-strong People's Liberation Army (the PLA confusingly includes China's air force and navy, too) started in October, at the Communist Party's 14th congress, and amounted to a political purge of the senior ranks.
Its aftershocks rumble on.
A second shake-up, an unusually extensive rotation of regional commanders and troops from all seven of China's military regions, was due to be completed by the end of April.
And all this at a time when China's leaders are asking the PLA to do a bigger job than ever before.
The firings and hirings started with the elbowing aside of China's chief political commissar and general secretary of the Central Military Commission, Yang Baibing.
The over-ambitious General Yang and his cronies were accused of packing the PLA's higher ranks with their placemen, and of committing that most unoriginal of political sins — plotting about life after Deng Xiaoping, China's frail paramount leader.
General Yang's fall goes unlamented among professional PLA men who considered him more a politician than a soldier.
The scale of the troop rotation now being completed probably also stems in part from worry that some regional commanders were getting too well dug in.
But there is more to it than that.
The PLA is having to strain to keep step with dizzying changes.
Already trimmed by about 1m from its bloated strength in the mid-1980s, it may soon be reduced by a further 500,000 or so.
Formerly organised and billeted to defend China against a massive Soviet attack from the north, parts of the army are now being reorganised to form rapid-deployment forces.
After the end of the cold war, and with the lessons of America's crushing defeat of Iraq still ringing in their ears, China's military leaders are having to rethink the PLA's organisation, doctrine and weapons needs.
Years of operating on a shoestring, as the fourth of Deng's ‘four modernisations’ after agriculture, industry and science, have left the PLA ill-equipped for modern warfare.
Many of its main weapons, from tanks and aircraft to submarines, were bootlegged and upgraded from Soviet designs that are now up to 40 years old.
Since 1989 defence has taken a growing share of state spending; the official defence budget has doubled, keeping well ahead of inflation.
Real defence spending, including costs tucked away elsewhere in the budget, is estimated to be two or three times higher.
But even that cannot properly equip the PLA for its modern role.
As well as defending China's borders, its missions now include defending China's territorial claims to the islands (all of them) in the South China Sea.
To project itself over such distances China needs a blue-water navy, long-range fighter aircraft and in-flight refuelling technology.
China has taken delivery of 26 SU-27 fighter aircraft from Russia, and is expected to buy 26 more.
It is interested in MIG-31 high-altitude interceptors, more modern submarines and help in building aircraft carriers.
According to Russia's president, Boris Yeltsin, Russia sold China $1.8 billion-worth of weapons last year.
China does not have the cash to import the weapons it needs.
It would prefer to import technologies, enabling it to copy or co-produce.
But even that strains its resources.
The PLA is used to doing it itself.
Nobody knows how much the PLA earns from its business activities inside China.
Two-thirds of the output from its factories is for civilian use — washing machines, prams and hunting rifles, for instance.
Its interests run to hotels, construction companies and dabbling in currency futures.
The big money, however, comes from China's own weapons sales.
According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, between 1982 and 1991 China earned in excess of $15 billion from exports of big weapons abroad.
That does not include heaps of smaller arms and ammunition.
The trouble with pushing the PLA into the arms business to makes ends meet is that other ministries, to their occasional embarrassment, have little control over which weapons are sold where.
Recent customers have included Syria and Iran (for weapons and nuclear technology), North Korea, Myanmar and Thailand.
Also worried are Taiwan and other neighbouring countries, which wonder what China will do when it has more of its own expensive new toys.
AMERICAN SURVEY
Did you inhale?
WASHINGTON, DC
THE Oval Office may be occupied by a self-confessed non-inhaler; half the members of the cabinet may have marched against the Vietnam war; and the first and second ladies may spend their spare time grooving to the Grateful Dead.
But as far as the security services are concerned, the Kremlin is still plotting to undermine world capitalism and J. Edgar Hoover is still holed up in the FBI powder room.
Hundreds of aspiring office-holders in the Clinton administration are currently being vetted for security clearance, a process as time-consuming as it is nerve-wracking.
Appointees have to fill in monstrous forms providing full details of their financial affairs, listing all their jobs, addresses and trips abroad in the past 15 years, and supplying the names of at least one person who knew them in their various abodes.
Even experienced form-fillers say that the paperwork takes about a week.
All appointees have to provide a urine sample — even Pamela Harriman, the new ambassador to Paris, had to stand in line, clutching her paper cup — and turn up for a face-to-face interview, which usually lasts between one-and-a-half and two hours.
The interviewers, who are normally retired FBI men, are pretty tolerant of homosexuals (as long as they are out of the closet, making ‘outing’ an official policy) and marijuana-smoking (as long as it was part of student experimenting).
But they get hot under the collar about trips behind the old Iron Curtain.
Candidates are still asked that venerable chestnut: whether they are, or have have ever been, members of the Communist Party, ‘or any other organisation whose purpose is to subvert the government of the United States.’
Those answering in the affirmative are presumably blacklisted.
Gun ownership
In Waco's wake
NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE
WHATEVER breast-beating occurred elsewhere over the outcome of the Waco siege, it was not to be found in Nashville, where the National Rifle Association (NRA) has just held its annual meeting.
In America, after all, there are more than 200m privately owned guns and 20,000 fatal shootings a year.
Waco, though the timing was unfortunate, was just a blip on the dial.
Wayne LaPierre, the NRA's executive vice-president, gave a stirring speech, pointing out that the organisation's membership has grown by 600,000 in the past 18 months, to more than 3m.
At the banquet, Rush Limbaugh, favourite TV chatterer of the rednecks, won wild applause for his denunciations of big government and the baby-boom generation (‘an endless parade of human debris’).
Several delegates turned up to the banquet wearing dinner jackets with camouflage bow ties and cummerbunds.
In the cavernous exhibition hall, more than 300 salesmen offered everything from reproduction Gatling guns to a Barrett 82A, a semi-automatic rifle with a range of almost a mile —‘as used by three countries in Operation Desert Storm.’
The NRA displays such a terrifying range of weapons because it thinks it necessary.
Drive-by killers on the rampage?
Arm decent citizens so that they can shoot the killers before the killers shoot them.
Riots in Los Angeles?
Make sure the shopkeepers and housewives have the firepower they need to outgun the marauders.
Although the NRA has no formal position on Waco, many members argue, at least in private, that David Koresh had every right to defend his compound from outside interference.
Over three days, speakers repeatedly conjured up images of incompetent social engineers, bent on disarming honest citizens and leaving them helpless in the face of criminals; ‘anti-gun fetishists’ in the media, with their expense-account life-styles and homes far from the front line; lawyers who turn criminals out on to the streets to kill and rape again; and, above all, the federal government, which is determined to subvert the constitution by establishing a monopoly of arms.
A ubiquitous lapel sticker, ‘It's the criminal, stupid’, summed up the other half of the NRA's philosophy.
Criminals (who, it seems, are biologically pre-programmed to kill and rape) will always have guns; if ordinary people can buy guns too, the struggle is even.
The government should devote its energies to making sure that criminals are caught and imprisoned, rather than undermining the civil rights of citizens.
For all its single-mindedness, the NRA is remarkably adaptable.
This bastion of AWMs (armed white males) is even beginning to use the language of political correctness.
A video, intended to teach children about the dangers of guns, features a black woman who, by some freak of nature, has acquired grandchildren of three different races.
NRA activists boast about providing shooting lessons for the handicapped.
The most widely publicised conference session dealt with women and firearms.
The NRA argues that women are the first victims of the collapse of the criminal-justice system, and the message seems to be getting through: gun-dealers say that their fastest-growing market is among women.
This shotgun marriage between the NRA and political correctness suggests that some of its more far-sighted members are getting a little nervous.
Supporters of gun control are in a stronger position now than they have been at any time since 1968, after the shootings of Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy.
Whereas George Bush was a long-time NRA member, Bill Clinton is a close friend of Sarah Brady (wife of James Brady, the former White House press spokesman who was shot in the head during the assassination attempt on Ronald Reagan in 1981).
Mrs Brady is the head of an organisation called Handgun Control, which has a bill on the subject going through Congress.
The NRA suffered two defeats earlier this year: in Virginia, which restricted handgun purchases to one a month, and in New Jersey, where gun-rights advocates lost a three-year campaign to repeal the state's restrictions on selling assault rifles.
The Brady bill, too, is likely to pass this year.
Yet gun-control supporters should resist an early celebration.
The Brady bill requires only a seven-day wait to purchase handguns, so that the authorities can run a background check on would-be buyers; and the bill was first introduced six years ago.
The Texas Senate race
A contact sport
DALLAS
UNTIL the last minute, the election on May 1st to fill the Senate seat vacated by Lloyd Bentsen when he went to the Treasury had generated almost no interest in Texas.
Then the Houston Post reported that Kay Bailey Hutchison, the favoured Republican candidate, had occasionally slapped and pinched her employees at the state treasurer's office.
The chief victim, as it happened, was the daughter of John Connally, a former governor of Texas, who has endorsed one of Ms Hutchison's Republican opponents.
Both the accuser and the accused have taken, and passed, a lie-detector test.
Ms Hutchison did not boost her case, however, by asserting in a recent televised debate that she is ‘a fighter’ who will stand up for Texas in the Senate.
Her best defence may be her demure appearance.
Once a cheerleader at the University of Texas, she looks like an innocent suburban housewife unknowingly mixed up in the rough-and-tumble world of Texas politics.
Ideologically she belongs to the centre-right of her party, anti-tax and pro-choice on abortion.
Some compare her favourably to Nancy Kassebaum, a respected moderate Republican senator from Kansas.
Others say she is ‘George Bush without the charisma.’
If Ms Hutchison survives the allegations against her, she will almost certainly face Bob Krueger in the run-off.
A self-styled ‘independent Democrat’ who was appointed in December to fill the empty Senate seat, Mr Krueger is no stereotypical Texan; he is a reserved, scholarly type who earned his doctorate at Oxford (Merton College), taught Shakespeare at Duke University for 12 years, and was ambassador to Mexico under Jimmy Carter.
But Mr Krueger's unorthodox manner (by Texas standards) does not bode well: he has been defeated in two previous races for the Senate, and was rumoured to have been chosen to fill the empty seat only after three previous choices had been rejected by special interests.
Since assuming the duties of senator a few months ago, Mr Krueger has drawn attention to himself by campaigning with Larry Hagman, who played J.R.
in the soap opera ‘Dallas’(a popular move), and by composing an impassioned letter in favour of lifting the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces (unpopular, and later withdrawn).
He has also distinguished himself by twice voting against Bill Clinton's economic package.
Not supporting Mr Clinton is no liability in Texas: the president received just 37% of the state's votes in 1992, and in February he recorded the lowest-ever approval-rating among Texans for an incumbent president.
Texas does not need the economic stimulus offered by Mr Clinton: the state has a muscular economy with an employment-growth rate that has exceeded the national average for the past three years (see chart on next page).
In 1992 Texas produced 91,000 net new jobs, more than twice as many as any other state.
The strength of the economy has blunted the one issue that usually pushes voters to go to the polls.
Hence the challenge facing Mr Krueger.
In order to succeed, he must rally traditional Democratic supporters such as blacks, Hispanics and union members; and he must do something to attract votes from populist east Texas, which tends to be more sympathetic to a local boy, Ross Perot, who grew up in Texarkana.
These voters often determine the outcome of statewide elections, and Texas politicos predict that they will do the same this time; if not in the primary (where the winner must get more than 50% of the vote, which is unlikely), then in the run-off in June.
A Perot clone is in the race already: among the 24 registered candidates, one man has pumped nearly $1m of his own money into the campaign.
He is not, however, expected to make the run-off.
Nor is an anti-abortion candidate who aired graphic television commercials with footage of dismembered fetuses.
But winning the prize for Texas-style candour has been Billy Brown, who, when asked about allowing homosexuals into the armed forces, says ‘Hell no!
I never met a queer yet who couldn't be fixed by a sock in the jaw.’
Texas politics, as they say, is a contact sport.
Alabama
The accidental governor
MONTGOMERY AND WASHINGTON, DC
POLITICIANS in Alabama, it is said, will always accept a free ride.
Alas, those days are past for Governor — now ex-Governor — Guy Hunt.
His ride-on lawnmower was among several personal items found to have been purchased illegally with tax-free political funds.
After a protracted investigation — ranging from Mr Hunt's improper use of state aircraft for preaching tours, to his handling of political finances — a jury last week found him guilty of siphoning $100,000 from an inaugural fund into his own account.
The money was spent, in addition to the lawnmower, on a marble bathroom for his house and a cow or two for his farm.
Exit the state's first Republican governor since 1874.
His conviction, if upheld (using excess campaign money for private indulgences is fairly common in the state), will mark the end of a small but remarkable hiccough in Alabama politics.
As a Republican, a Primitive Baptist preacher and a self-described ‘dumb farm boy’, Mr Hunt should never have become governor.
He won the election in 1986 (and, with it, the title of ‘the accidental governor’) because the Democrats self-destructed in their primary.
Yet he started with few political debts, and seemed to offer Alabamians a chance to become part of that shining land, the New South.
It did not happen.
Mr Hunt made a good effort to attract business to the state, but his political reforms floundered.
A new education bill remained unfunded, and reform of a famously regressive tax system made no progress.
Mr Hunt's last campaign was to oppose, vigorously, a court decision that declared it illegal to fly the Confederate battle flag from the state capitol.
This seemed to give a sense of his priorities.
It was George Wallace, Mr Hunt's predecessor, who put the Confederate flag on the capitol in 1963 to show his contempt for federal plans to desegregate the University of Alabama.
Mr Wallace's shadow lies heavily across the state where he was governor for four terms and where his wife Lurleen (who has a museum to herself, complete with wax mannequins wearing her clothes) was governor for one.
He is said to have kept Alabama in the backwoods, culturally and economically, for a quarter of a century.
When people talk of Mr Hunt's misuse of political funds, they remember Mr Wallace's brazen comments about awarding state contracts to his friends.
And the flag saga reminds Alabamians of a governor who, having lost once for being too moderate on the race issue, allegedly promised ‘never to be out-niggered again’.
In the post-Hunt world, the conservative Democrats have returned to power to find little touched or disturbed.
Mr Hunt has been replaced by his lieutenant-governor, Jim Folsom Jnr, the son of a former Democratic governor.
Other top officials remain in place because they are elected in their own right, leaving as attorney-general Jim Evans, the Democrat who brought the case against Mr Hunt, and as state treasurer George Wallace Jnr, scion of his house.
But if Alabama's leaders have scarcely evolved, its problems are increasingly urgent.
Like other states in the south, notably Texas, Alabama is bound by a recent court order to equalise school financing among local districts.
This, in turn, means tax reform.
Any serious overhaul of Alabama tax codes, however, will require a look at the state's constitution.
It is there, in a bizarre document with over 500 amendments, that the state's low pro-business property taxes have been enshrined since the turn of the century, guarded by crowds of lobbyists.
Mr Folsom appears unlikely to trouble them.
Already hampered by the inglorious nature of his ascent, he also has a reputation for wimpishness.
As lieutenant-governor, he is remembered for fleeing down the statehouse fire escape to avoid senators' anger over his choice of committee assignments.
Alabama must hope that somehow, some day, fate will throw up a candidate like Georgia's Zell Miller or Arkansas's Bill Clinton.
Until then, the state will continue to trail its southern neighbours, and the rest of the country, in its rankings for income per head, productivity and pollution: keeping Alabama, as one resident put it, ‘suckin' on the hind teat of poverty’.
Defence spending
The possible cuts
WASHINGTON, DC
THE Clinton team had no real defence plans when it took office, beyond a vague determination to cut spending.
Now the Pentagon has begun a serious attempt to find out what the future shape of American defence should be, and whether the new shape will in fact save money.
The 1994 budget, submitted in March by the defence secretary, Les Aspin, was merely a holding exercise, designed to keep the system ticking over until the new plan emerges.
Budget outlays are set at $174.4 billion, a 5% cut in real terms from 1993 — the seventh consecutive real reduction.
Manpower will be cut faster than the Bush administration intended; the total number of people in uniform will be reduced by 108,000 instead of 83,000, and the number in Europe will be cut to 133,700 instead of 150,000.
The Strategic Defence Initiative is rejigged for action against short-range rather than long-range missiles, at a saving of some $1.5 billion compared with the Bush plan.
Apart from this, the 1994 budget's main feature is to put off some hard decisions on weapons-procurement.
Between 1994 and 1997, Mr Aspin proposes to cut $18 billion from the Bush plan.
But that plan, it turns out, may have a hole in it.
In 1989 the Bush administration foresaw a saving of $10 billion in 1993-97 through various administrative reforms.
This saving was built into its plans.
The Clinton team fears the actual saving may be much smaller.
And environmental tidiness may cost the Pentagon more than had been planned.
When it drew up its ideas for 1994-97, the Clinton administration assumed the Bush programme was underfunded by $10 billion.
If this figure proves wildly optimistic, Bill Clinton will either have to propose more cuts or spend more money.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact, the Bush people did some thinking of their own.
They came up with the ‘base force’— a ready-for-action assembly of 1.6m men, 12 army divisions, three marine divisions, 12 aircraft carriers and 15 wings (groups of squadrons) of tactical aircraft — as the minimum needed to meet the challenges of the post-cold-war world.
Mr Clinton is apparently thinking of a smaller force, with total manpower cut to 1.4m and troops in Europe to around 100,000; but little more is known of his intentions.
What should be the aim of the Clinton review?
During the cold war, the size of America's armed forces was set by the threat from the Warsaw Pact.
Such forces could obviously deal with any lesser adversary.
Now the dangers are smaller, but could come from almost anywhere.
This demands a high degree of mobility (sealift, airlift, deployed amphibious forces, pre-positioned ships) plus well-trained reserves who can get into action with as little delay as possible.
This sort of thing costs plenty of money.
The need for flexibility also implies equipping the men with the best weapons, so R&D must be continued at a high level.
The technology that won the Gulf war was developed to defeat the Warsaw Pact.
It would be folly to shrink R&D spending in proportion to overall budget cuts.
The biggest savings, therefore, will come from asking which existing weapons are still needed, at least in their present numbers.
For instance:
Does the United States need 18 Trident submarines carrying long-range nuclear missiles?
Nine should be enough.
Does America need a huge fleet of manned bombers?
Something like the planned fleet of 20 B-2 Stealth machines may be enough, particularly if they are equipped with accurate conventional weapons.
More of these remarkable aircraft, and many new weapons, could be built with just part of the money that could be saved by scrapping the enormously expensive B-1s and B-52s.
Why does the navy need 80 nuclear attack submarines?
Thirty should be enough now, particularly if the navy can bring itself to build some comparatively cheap diesel submarines as well.
Does the air force really need the 15 tactical aircraft wings in Mr Bush's base force?
The air force's reserves seem much more efficient than the army's or the navy's.
A lot more of the air job could be shifted to them; about ten active wings should be plenty.
Does the navy really need 12 giant aircraft carriers, with the escorts and support ships that must accompany them?
These are immensely useful for some operations, and a number must be retained at high readiness.
But would not nine do?
The answers to these questions ought to supply a fair chunk of the money Mr Clinton hopes to save.
But he and his team should resist the old bureaucratic urge to spread the misery among the services more or less equally.
The collapse of the Warsaw Pact has produced a new challenge which could be less costly to meet than the old one, but only if the right choices are made now.
The fading court
THE last Supreme Court case in which Justice Byron White heard oral argument was an appeal by Dorsey Lee Johnson, a young Texan sentenced to death for a brutal murder.
For most of the hour of argument, Justice White was quiet, occasionally whispering in the ear of Chief Justice William Rehnquist.
But as the arguments drew to a close, you could see Justice White — who at 75 is a stern rock of a man, with a detailed knowledge of cases that has terrorised hundreds of lawyers — start to relax.
He joked with the petitioner's lawyer about growing old: and then he was gone, slipping through the curtains behind the bench.
Appointed by John Kennedy, he had spent 31 years on the court; only three men this century have served longer.
Few would argue that his departure from the court will leave as big a gap as did those of the last two justices to retire: Thurgood Marshall, the first black on the court, and William Brennan, its liberal conscience through four decades and one of its finest minds in two centuries.
But since gaps on the bench happen rarely, and since this will be the first chance a Democratic president has had to choose a justice since Lyndon Johnson was in the White House, the usual debate about likely replacements is under way.
Should Mr Clinton appoint a ‘liberal’?
If so, what kind?
In a sense, this is natural.
The Supreme Court was the one genuinely original element in the founding fathers' scheme for the governance of the new nation.
Ever since John Marshall, its first chief justice, discovered that the court had the ability to overturn legislation that did not accord with the constitution, it has been indispensable in bolstering the central tenet of American democracy: that no grant of governmental power to those who exercise it for the time being is limitless.
That much is a given.
But the court has not always been held in breathless reverence.
At the turn of the century Mr Dooley, that sage of the Irish-American sensibility, said that ‘th' coort follows th' iliction returns.’
And the court's position in the constitutional structure does not mean that it has always been deeply engaged in the pressing national questions of the day.
In a sustained way (meaning in more than sporadic decisions), it can be argued that the court has been critical to national questions only twice.
The first time was during the 1930s, when the court first read the commerce clause of the constitution so narrowly that it gutted much New Deal legislation, and then suddenly reversed itself.
The second was the period of civil-rights and civil-liberties cases that started with Brown v Board of Education in 1954 and which was brought to an end — according to the conventional wisdom — by the appointment of a block of five ‘conservative’ judges by Ronald Reagan and George Bush.
The quotation marks in the last sentence are there to make a point.
Two points, actually.
The first is that all judges are ‘conservative’ to one degree or another; they have to be.
A man who cannot base his decisions on precedent and logic has no business being on the bench (a premise that Justice Brennan never forgot).
The second point is that precisely because legal conservatism values precedent, and will overturn prior cases only rarely, those who hope for great sea-changes in the law with the appointment of politically friendly judges are often disappointed.
Three of the Reagan-Bush appointees — Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony Kennedy and David Souter — have worked within the confines of precedent like good ‘legal’(if not ‘political’) conservatives.
All three voted last year to uphold Roe v Wade, the 1973 case that established a constitutional right to an abortion.
With this in mind, it is quite easy to argue that the selection of Justice White's replacement is far less significant than many suppose.
In fact, other reasons bolster that view.
The Supreme Court was vital in the 1950s and 1960s because the other branches of government were supine, at best, in the face of great injustice to black Americans.
The southern states were dominated by racist politicians; Congress was run by their southern conservative allies.
The court stepped into a yawning breach.
But the great legal matters of that historic injustice have been settled.
Legal racial segregation has been outlawed; blacks have the vote; votes are pretty much equal in value.
There may be (in fact, there are) many areas of life in which the position of black Americans and other minorities needs to be improved.
But insofar as legislation is the way to improve them, which is an open question, the conditions are quite different from those that obtained in 1954.
State legislatures and Congress are no longer gripped as they once were by the dead hand of privilege.
Partly because there is less for the court to do, and partly because the court is stricter in deciding whether or not to hear cases, its case-load has declined.
The court heard only 72 cases in the term that has just ended, compared with twice that number a decade ago.
And of those cases, the majority involved matters of statutory interpretation with little or no political impact.
That is one reason why Justice Souter, the quintessential apolitical ‘black-letter’ lawyer, is becoming the court's intellectual motor.
George Bush appointed Justice Souter, to political conservatives' dismay, in the summer of 1990, in that short period when it looked as if he might be a great president.
The appointment was Mr Bush's finest domestic achievement: listening to Justice Souter grill a lawyer before the court is now one of the great treats of Washington.
But in David Souter's court — and by no stretch of the imagination is this William Rehnquist's court — whoever replaces Byron White will have little choice but to be a judge first, and a politician a very distant second.
The man who wanted to fly
WASHINGTON, DC
‘THIS is an ideas battle…not every one of these things can be distilled into politics — you know, who's for this and who's for that, and if this person is for this, somebody else has to be for that.
A lot of these things honestly involve real debates over ideas…and the answers are not self-evident.
And one of the reasons I wanted to run for president is to open the floodgates for debating ideas so that we could try to change in the appropriate way.’
Thus Bill Clinton, at a press conference on April 23rd, shortly before the 100th day of his presidency.
Ask the thousands of FOBs — friends of Bill — why they have long thought that he would one day be a great president and their replies will sooner or later share the same point.
The man likes ideas.
He genuinely does.
At any gathering of the faithful, he will stay up until the small hours debating ideas with all and sundry, pulling people with different backgrounds into the same conversation.
He is that rare bird, the night-owl who likes talking without the prop of a strong drink in his hands.
Ideas, intelligence, he and his administration have aplenty.
But the FOBs have, in the past, liked their man not just because he was interested in ideas for their own sake, but because he wanted to apply them to government.
And if there is a question about the Clinton administration three months into its term it is not about whether he is an ‘old’ or a ‘new’Democrat; as one of his advisers says, fairly, that will be clear one day.
The problem is that the president does not know how to implement ‘change in the appropriate way’.
Part of this is of his own making.
The famous EGG formula —‘ethnicity, gender and geography’— has slowed the process of appointments in a way that has hurt the administration.
It is no doubt laudable to try to craft an executive branch that ‘looks like America’.
But America does not look like a disorganised company most of whose workers do not have a boss; or at least it did not the last time it deserved worldwide respect.
Part of the problem is that some of the younger Clintonians have got their priorities wrong.
The White House may have all the computer wizardry in the world, but it lacked the old-fashioned political skills required to get a $16 billion ‘stimulus’ package through the Senate.
It was that failure of implementation that seems to have prompted Leon Panetta, Mr Clinton's budget chief, to unburden himself of melancholy thoughts on April 26th.
Mr Panetta thought not only that, at present, the mood in Congress is running against ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement, but that the administration would have difficulty when it sends its health-care proposals to Capitol Hill this month.
This will be the real test of whether ideas can be matched to implementation.
That the health-care taskforce is engaged in thorough and original work on reform is not in doubt.
But if Mr Clinton allows Congress, the doctors and the drug industry to pick apart his proposals, his public standing will suffer.
There is one other reason why Mr Clinton's implementation has lagged behind his ideas.
For a man who studied and coveted the presidency for years, he seems to have been taken aback by the discovery that his time is not his own.
An American president can decide to focus on domestic policy only up to a point; events in the wider world, leaders of other countries, have a habit of eating into time that the president thought he would spend on other things.
Mr Clinton has spent far more time on foreign policy than he or most of his staff anticipated.
Before the Vancouver summit with Boris Yeltsin, the Russian leader, he was devoting a third of his time to the summit agenda.
In the second two weeks of April, he was locked in meeting after endless meeting on Bosnia.
One consequence of time spent on foreign policy is that there are still subjects on which the president himself has not laid down detailed marching orders to his staff.
Trade policy is one of these issues.
With the exception of preparation for his meeting with Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime minister of Japan, he has still not had a full-blown meeting on trade with his economic team.
That has left the impression that trade policy is at the mercy of ad hoc decision-making by a variety of officials.
Education is another area that seems, so far, to have been Clintonless (surprisingly, given his experience in the subject as a governor).
The package of education reforms unveiled by Richard Riley, the education secretary, on April 21st was frankly disappointing; more of the old policy of exhortation, together with voluntary codes of curriculum content and methods of assessment.
Even given the limits that federalism imposes on any education plan (the federal government spends only 6% of the cash devoted to education) this was a damp squib.
How could such a disappointment have been avoided?
For one answer, think back to the triumphant first term of Ronald Reagan.
Crucial to Mr Reagan's success was the role in the White House of Jim Baker, his chief of staff; not only to get good things done, but to make sure that bad things were left undone.
A Baker in Mr Clinton's White House would never have let the education package out.
A Baker would have imposed order on the question of whether or not the administration is flirting with a value-added tax.
A Baker might even have smelt that the FBI's plan for Waco was madcap.
Mr Clinton has no such man.
Mack McLarty, his chief of staff, seems to have imposed his will neither on the business of generating ideas nor on working out how to implement them.
Warren Christopher, the secretary of state, will stick to his last.
Al Gore, the vice-president, seems to have a good working relationship with the president.
But he cannot be a chief of staff; no president can run the risk of seeming to hand the reins of government over to his Number Two.
By a similar token, the president cannot possibly grant more responsibility to his wife.
This is not because she is unpopular.
But there have been enough jokes about the Clintons for the president to avoid any suggestion that he cannot manage without her.
Without a real, head-knocking manager of his programme, the administration continues to live in something of a fool's paradise.
The success that Mr Clinton made of his economic package — the speed with which Congress passed his deficit-reduction measures, the positive reaction in the markets — convinced too many that he would turn all he touched to gold.
Yet this is, in many ways, a weak administration: supported by a minority vote last November, bereft of men and women as big as the president himself can be.
This would matter less if the rest of the year looked easy.
It looks anything but.
There is the snakepit of Bosnia; there is health care; there is an economy whose recovery suddenly looks fragile again.
Mere ideas, however good, will not get Mr Clinton through that lot.
In his second hundred days, he will have to discover how to turn his ideas into lasting achievements.
Leaving the field
LOS ANGELES
FEW American labour leaders ever achieved the prominence of Cesar Chavez; fewer still deserved it.
On April 29th Chavez was buried in Delano, a small town in California's Central Valley, where he founded the United Farm Workers (UFW) in 1962.
Chavez spent his life fighting for the migrant Latino labourers who toil in California's dusty vineyards and lettuce fields.
His greatest victory came in 1975 when his friend Jerry Brown, then governor, forced through an agricultural labour law.
With his fasting and commitment to non-violence, the diminutive Chavez often seemed like a Spanish-speaking Gandhi.
At his death (during yet another fast), his annual salary was only $1,708 plus room and board.
Visitors to the UFW in the 1970s often found nuns typing away in the outer office.
He inspired millions of consumers to join in boycotting Californian grapes.
His enthusiasm for ‘La Causa’, as he called it, spread to thousands of liberals who joined him on boycotts and on several dramatic marches to Sacramento.
Organisation was never his strength.
The UFW's current membership of 15,000 is only a sixth of its total in the 1970s.
Only one in 100 workers in California's fields is a union member, although many farm employers now provide the health benefits which Chavez fought for.
Some have criticised him for not doing more to help urban California, where 80% of Latinos live.
They miss the point.
Chavez's struggle was about dignity.
He grew up in a San Jose barrio called Sal si Puedes (get out if you can); Mexican-Americans were treated as faceless serfs.
Thanks to Chavez, farm-owners now provide outside lavatories for workers; he also prompted legislation to outlaw the hated short hoe.
Latinos have walked taller ever since.
INTERNATIONAL
Aid for Africa
Nothing to lose but your chains
AFRICA is the only continent in the poor world where people ended the 1980s worse off than they were at the start.
Towards the end of the decade even reluctant converts, like socialist Zimbabwe, swallowed their pride and adopted the pro-market policies devised by the World Bank and the IMF.
Three years into the 1990s, signs of life getting better are scarce.
Africa's disenchantment with the two Washington institutions is fast turning to outright hostility.
The rudest snub this year has come from Kenya's president, Daniel arap Moi.
Last month he reversed the economic reforms he had just introduced and condemned the IMF as ‘dictatorial’, its policies ‘suicidal’.
But the hostility is more widely felt.
Angry Zambians protest about the soaring price of maize, their staple food.
In Zimbabwe parents complain that they cannot afford the new school fees.
Ethiopia's civil servants fume about losing their jobs.
IMF and World Bank men are often booed when they talk to African audiences.
The IMF and World Bank are convenient targets.
The typical African grumble against them runs thus: from their plush offices in Washington, these institutions make life miserable for Africans, so that African governments can take out loans which they are then unable to repay.
A growing band of countries finds it impossible to borrow a penny from anyone without having received the IMF's seal of good housekeeping.
To get that they have to adopt tough economic reforms devised by the Terrible Two.
The miscellany of different loans make up an alphabet soup of SALs, SECALs and ESAFs.
But the basic thrust of the ‘structural adjustment’ seldom changes: shrink the budget deficit, devalue the currency, remove subsidies, free prices, liberalise trade and sell off state-owned enterprises.
If Africans had plenty of examples of countries that had gone through painful structural adjustments and emerged transformed, it might be easier for governments to persuade citizens that the pain was worthwhile.
Some Africans have now been ‘adjusting’ for a decade and the evidence of it going right is, at best, patchy.
The model most often cited by development economists is Ghana, which adopted IMF-backed reform in 1983 after its old protectionist ways stifled initiative and brought the economy to its knees.
Ten years on, the economy has finally begun to grow faster than the population.
Yet private investment, a critical test of success, is only trickling in.
After Ghana, the list of successes dries to a handful of minnows, like Burundi, and island economies, like Mauritius.
Most of Africa's giants have disappointed.
Kenya, once a prosperous pocket on the continent, is now swamped by triple-digit inflation and mounting debt arrears.
A damning report published this week by Oxfam, a British charity that has worked in Africa for 40 years, concludes that structural adjustment has neither restored growth nor eased poverty in Africa.
Keeping the faith
The gloom is shared by some of the World Bank's own high priests (see page 109).
Great hopes had been pinned to their reforms halting Africa's downward path.
Billions of dollars have been pumped into the continent.
But the Bank recently published a paper called: ‘Why structural adjustment has not succeeded in Sub-Saharan Africa’.
It argued that Africa had hardly benefited from Bank programmes: though exports had improved, there had been no perceptible impact on growth or inflation, and investment had suffered.
The Bank has a tradition of self-criticism.
But this report was withdrawn, and reissued under a blander title.
Most of the Bank's economists say that Africa's performance has been disappointing not because the gospel is wrong, but because it has not been properly implemented (Marxists, mind you, say the same thing about communism).
Between 1980 and 1990 Kenya sold only one state enterprise, despite endless promises to sell more.
Zimbabwe has not even begun its promised privatisation programme, nor relaxed tight exchange controls.
Wrenching reforms can be politically awkward.
Nigeria has just announced that it will not lift its generous petrol subsidy in June, as it had promised the IMF, out of fear that petrol riots would disrupt the presidential elections due to be held that month.
The Bank's other defence is that some of its recent studies on Africa — of which there are horribly many — suggest that the closing years of the 1980s did indeed see stronger growth and lower inflation in the countries it lent to.
But, after 1990, two shocks threw the progress off track: post-cold-war pressures for democracy made governments more cautious about economic reform; and growth was weakened by recession in the rich world.
In any case, argues Ishrat Husain, chief economist for Africa at the World Bank, a lot of Africans welcome reform.
Farmers now get a decent price for their crop.
Ghana cocoa farmers used to get just 7% of the price of their crop: the rest went to the cocoa marketing board or in taxes.
Now that the board's monopoly has been withdrawn, they keep 60%.
Yet farmers' voices tend to be drowned out by articulate city-dwellers deprived of subsidies and no longer able to afford imported goods.
Still, says Mr Husain, ‘We are learning too.’
One lesson is that the Bank must modify its expectations in Africa, and stop promising instant results.
A second lesson is that a greater effort should be made to cushion the poor (who are often women) from the hardships that go with adjustment.
Too often, governments find it easier to trim their budgets by charging fees at rural clinics and schools than by firing soldiers or well-connected cronies.
Most of all, governments must not feel that the Fund and Bank have trampled on their sovereignty.
Mozambique's new IMF programme is almost entirely the work of Washington draughtsmen.
If a government does not feel the reforms are its own, it will have little commitment to carrying them out.
A more diplomatic approach can pay off.
Last year, before signing up to an IMF deal, Ethiopia's government sent a team to visit eight African countries and decide for themselves what works.
What they drew up looks remarkably like any other adjustment programme.
But sensitive treatment by the Fund and the Bank has persuaded Ethiopia's government to believe, triumphantly, that it is all its own idea.
Polishing blue helmets
As major-league players join the peacekeeping effort, the United Nations is under pressure to make itself appear more professional.
Is this what is needed?
A report from Somalia suggests that something different is required.
First, a report from our special correspondent at the UN
IF THEY find themselves in a tangle at an anti-social hour, the United Nations men now taking over in Somalia will at least have the chance of talking it over with their masters in New York — as well as with their unofficial masters in Washington.
The canard that the UN's peacekeeping department keep nine-to-five hours was a frustrated Canadian blast from General Lewis MacKenzie, an ex-commander of UN forces in ex-Yugoslavia.
Officers in the field did on occasion have to struggle to get through to an official's home number.
But no longer.
The peacekeepers in New York pride themselves on a brand-new 24-hour operations room.
Boy-scout amateurishness, they claim, is on the way out; a professional command-and-control centre on the way in.
These changes, radical in the UN context, have been brought about by the changes in the nature of the UN's missions, and in the soldiers who carry them out.
In the cold-war days, most of its operations were pretty straightforward and problems could be sorted out by officers on the ground.
Now they are composite, multi-faceted and potentially more dangerous — and the governments contributing troops tend to be much more demanding.
With the soaring call for its services — when the UN takes over the Somali operation on May 4th the number of peacekeepers in the field will increase from around 60,000 to nearly 90,000 — the organisation can no longer rely on the old faithfuls: countries that, either from idealism (Canada and Scandinavia, for instance) or from poverty (Fiji, Nepal and many others), were glad to provide troops.
Canada, which dug the knife particularly deep into its defence budget, has had to withdraw from Somalia, and from Cyprus too.
Some of the smaller, poorer countries may not have the right equipment or training for the new types of job.
The UN, trawling the net wide, has not yet found the troops it wants for Mozambique, which in contrast to Angola is supposed to be a model operation, or the mechanised battalion it has been told to send to the Kuwait-Iraq border.
The permanent members of the Security Council, who during the cold war were excluded from some operations, are being looked to more and more.
France still takes the lead.
Russia may offer men or equipment in part-payment for its growing debt to the UN.
But it is the United States, as a potential source of peacekeepers, that is the most interesting.
An important aspect of the new Somali operation is that for the first time American soldiers have been prepared to serve under a non-American chief.
The circumstances were seductive: having helped to save Somalia from itself, the Americans were persuaded to finish the job by providing a strong logistical backbone — headquarters staff, engineers, supply and maintenance and so on— to the UN force under its Turkish commander, General Cevik Bir.
In addition, an American combat unit of 2,200 marines will remain on an assault ship off the coast, ready to come in quickly.
This rapid-deployment force is not officially assigned to the UN but is under the command of General Bir's deputy, General Thomas Montgomery, who happens, by no coincidence at all, to be an American.
Bringing the big boys in under a UN flag is exposing a clash of styles; they tend to have their own way of doing things and there is pressure on the organisation to conform.
The UN felt swamped by the quality and quantity of NATO staff work — NATO planners turned up with no fewer than five bound volumes — in the initial stages of the joint operation that was set up to keep the peace in Bosnia should the Bosnian Serbs join the Croats and Muslims in accepting the Vance-Owen peace plan.
A more telling example is that there is no UN chain of command to carry the news of a casualty in the field speedily to his or her family at home.
Military bureaucracy is something new for an organisation that can beat all-comers at the civilian variety.
Under pressure from influential member states, the UN is trying to make itself into more of a military animal.
The secretary-general, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has made recommendations and his new peacekeeping chief, Kofi Annan, is beginning to get things done, fast.
The war-room is one example.
For the present it deals only with with the two expeditions that attract most excitement: Bosnia and Somalia.
It is staffed by a dozen officers working in shifts but supposed eventually to have three times as many.
The good sense in having communications that work is likely to lead to its services being gradually extended to all peacekeeping operations.
Marrack Goulding, Mr Annan's predecessor, had the vision of a large permanent staff manned by officers on long-term contracts.
That, for the time being, is likely to remain a vision.
But Mr Annan is putting together a planning cell staffed by people who are a mix of officials on short-term contracts and officers on loan from richer governments which continue to pay their salaries and expenses.
Mr Annan's idea is that these planners — civilians as well as military men — should not remain on their bottoms in New York but should be sent off to the field to implement the operations they planned.
The next place, very much on his mind, could be Rwanda.
Mr Boutros-Ghali called on governments to keep specially trained units on stand-by, available to him in an emergency.
The next best thing is to find out what governments have and what they might, perhaps, be prepared to supply.
Extraordinarily, this has not, until now, been known.
So seven officers are now spending a year travelling round the world to set up a data base of what is where: a field hospital there, an infantry battalion here.
This, at least, will provide a menu of the choices.
Another change for the better is that the secretary-general is now equipped with a bunch of good military advisers.
So, breaking with tradition, are several of the national missions.
There is not a great deal of training of potential peacekeepers going on, though facilities exist and manuals and videos are available.
The Canadians, more experienced than most in these matters, say that only a modest amount of special training is needed to turn a good soldier into a good peacekeeper.
The operations room, the data base and the planning cell are all sensible moves as the UN plunges into the unchartered territory of peace enforcement.
Yet too much concentration on the military angle could, in the end, lead the UN astray, causing it to lose sight of what it is trying to do.
In Somalia, for example, the UN's task is humanitarian, the reconstruction of a shattered country.
Yet the current proportion of civilians to soldiers in the UN-led force is one to a hundred.
Protection is vital: but as a means to an end, not as an end in itself.
Tree mischief
FROM OUR SEATTLE CORRESPONDENT
CLAYOQUOT SOUND encompasses a broad emerald sweep of fir, cedar and spruce trees on the western coast of Vancouver Island.
It is one of the last large untouched forests in British Columbia.
A tremendous fuss has exploded over a plan to open most of its 260,000 hectares (642,500 acres) to logging.
The dispute, which has been simmering for years, came to the boil in April when Michael Harcourt, the province's premier, revealed a scheme that would protect 33% of the region, permit limited logging in 17%, and open the rest to extensive (although, at least in theory, well-managed) timber harvesting.
This, said Mr Harcourt, would cause Clayoquot Sound to be viewed as a paragon of balance between the interests of industry and those of the environment.
British Columbia's powerful timber industry — led by MacMillan Bloedel, the company that will be doing much of the cutting in Clayoquot — feigned relief at being given anything at all while bemoaning the loss of jobs that the mild restrictions would cause.
Greens were furious.
They dismissed most of the government's ‘preserved’ land as bogs and scrubland.
Loggers, they said, were getting a crack at 74% of the forests — with only 14% of the region receiving new protection.
Protests throughout the spring and summer are promised.
Greens hope to rally crowds to block the road-building crews as they hack their way into the thick forest.
Rumour suggests that the more radical greens have driven, or are planning to drive, as many as 20,000 big metal spikes into Clayoquot trees.
The spikes can destroy a chainsaw or circular saw.
Forestry workers say that they fear injury, or even death, from metal splinters.
Eyebrows are being raised at the fact that the provincial government bought a number of MacMillan Bloedel shares weeks before the announcement of the plan.
The shares have risen, partly in reaction to the Clayoquot decision.
Although the government denies any conflict of interest, the appearance of something shady may have damaged Mr Harcourt's New Democratic Party.
In any event, the dispute has fuelled a growing distaste for logging in British Columbia.
The province's Forest Service has claimed that logging in Clayoquot Sound will be ‘world class’ and closely watched, but has yet to specify how that will take place.
And British Columbia's record on managing logging is not exemplary.
By some estimates, more than 75% of the temperate rain forests on Vancouver Island have been cut, often with disastrous results as roads on steep hillsides cause landslides, and rain sweeps mud from treeless hills into salmon-spawning streams.
A 1991 report by the province's auditor-general lambasted government foresters for doing little to ensure that logging companies met British Columbia's standards — which are far more lax than those employed by the United States Forest Service just south of the border.
Environmentalists concede that it will be difficult to stop logging in Clayoquot Sound without outside pressure.
MacMillan Bloedel is expected soon to submit applications for cutting permits.
What then follows may be a race between efforts to rally world opinion and efforts to make the tree-cutting a fait accompli.
Iran
One too many
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN TEHRAN
A YEAR ago, when most of Iran voted for President Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, there was talk of a ‘Tehran spring’.
Now, in hyper-inflationary times, the country's brief love affair with its president has turned sour.
The revolution promised paradise for the poor.
The Rafsanjani era was to have satisfied the middle classes, bringing prosperity, freedom and an end to enmity.
Today the country totters on the edge of economic disaster.
Serious political opposition is beyond reach.
And Iran is as unpopular in the West as it has ever been.
Mr Rafsanjani was said to be supported by the so-called moderate right.
But this support evaporated once deputies had won their seats in the Majlis (parliament) on a pro-Rafsanjani platform.
Most of them then switched their loyalty to the country's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who was determined not to allow the Islamic revolution to fall into the hands of a man he saw as an opportunist reformer.
Today, Mr Rafsanjani can count on only a handful of technocrats in the Majlis; even his own ministers sometimes desert him.
Few things are black or white in Iranian politics.
The same people who backed Mr Rafsanjani's economic reforms were soon complaining when a strand of hair appeared under a woman's scarf.
By the summer of 1992 the dress patrols were back in business.
Nor did the ‘moderates’ see much gain from Iranian films winning at international festivals.
People, they said, would do better to stay at home and contemplate the teachings of the Koran.
This meant goodbye to the subsidies for the arts and to the traces of freedom for the press.
Political parties have long been banned.
But, in an attempt to make it look as if democracy were alive, Iran's clergy were urged to form political parties.
They came up with the Militant Clergy Association, which is understood to be moderate, and the Militant Clerics Society, which is described as left-wing fundamentalist.
The two rapidly became deadly enemies.
Mr Rafsanjani weaves uncomfortably in between.
The late Imam Khomeini protected and promoted the fundamentalists and their semi-socialist approach to government.
During the war with Iraq they held the three pillars of power: the Majlis (with Mr Rafsanjani, as Speaker, firmly within their ranks), the government and the judiciary.
Then three things changed.
The war ended.
Khomeini died.
And the economy, ravaged by revolution and war, collapsed.
About four years ago, Mr Rafsanjani shifted to the right, voicing the reformist policies that the post-war era craved.
He realised that without western investment there was little chance of turning the economy around.
He thus emerged as champion of the free market, appointing western-educated technocrats as ministers.
He is not trusted.
His rival, Ayatollah Khamenei, also has less than solid support.
Many clerics have not accepted his overnight promotion to the rank of ayatollah.
Even among left-wing clergy the idea of endowing one man with absolute power is abhorrent.
But Mr Khamenei's active involvement in government means that power is in the hands of two men, and the one is constantly undermined by the other.
Neither takes responsibility for what happens, and each blames the other for failure.
In June Mr Rafsanjani will be re-elected.
He will not need to rig the election, or buy voters, let alone do anything worthy.
The situation is so bad that nobody would seriously want to be Iran's president.
The bandits on their donkeys
FROM OUR EAST AFRICA CORRESPONDENT
KISMAYU
WITH a fine disregard for the dozen Belgian paracommandos stationed on the roof of the United Nations headquarters in Kismayu, a team of Somalis last week chipped a hole in the compound wall and pinched a generator.
The theft was not discovered until the following morning when the red faces of Belgium's finest fighting men matched their burgundy berets.
The incident would be funny were it not that a similar stunt had been pulled in Kismayu, southern Somalia's largest port, at the end of March.
Some 100 armed teenagers, loyal to Muhammad Said Hersi Morgan, sneaked into town mounted on donkeys and drove out their rivals, men loyal to Colonel Omar Jess.
It took the Belgians six hours to rush to the defence of the Red Cross compound and by that time the fighting was over.
It took a further five days for America's ‘quick-reaction force’ of marines and helicopters to turn up.
By then Kismayu was established as a tinderbox that could again plunge Somalia into civil war.
Colonel Jess, who is allied to Somalia's most powerful warlord, General Muhammad Farrah Aideed, has vowed to re-take the city; his men have probably begun to infiltrate its dusty streets.
If the Belgians fight them off they will be accused of favouring General Morgan, ex-President Siad Barre's son-in-law.
If they do not, they will have failed once again in their peacemaking role.
But what is the role of the international forces in Somalia?
The UN mandate that authorised the American-led ‘Operation Restore Hope’ talks of providing a secure environment for relief operations.
That has happened, more or less.
Baidoa, where in the middle of last year 500 people were dying each day, is no longer a charnel-house; nor are Merca, Bardera or Kismayu.
Death rates plummeted as food flooded in.
Yet disease remains a big killer and the deluge of wheat and maize has depressed prices for farmers struggling back to their fields.
The second, implicit, part of the mandate — to disarm the country — has not been addressed.
Somalia is still not ‘secure’.
The warlords, who agreed in March to form a transitional administration, are still the main players.
Peace-loving Somalis, anxious to start rebuilding their shattered country, are still hiding in the shadows.
Much of the blame for this lies with the Americans who shied away from disarming Somalia's bandits and instead took guns from soft targets: small businessmen and relief-agency bodyguards.
Occasionally the marines swooped on armouries.
But their ‘disarmament policy’ mainly amounted to asking the warlords to hide their battlewagons and anti-aircraft guns in the bush.
Dr Kevin O'Kane worked in Baidoa for the Irish agency, Goal; his wife, a doctor with Médecins sans Frontières, was evacuated last week because of death threats that shut down the MSF programme.
He spoke for most aid workers when he said that when the UN takes over control on May 4th its work will be only just beginning.
‘This country’, he said, ‘has absolutely no hope without a massive, global, tough, shoot-the-bad-guys policy of disarmament.
The Americans’ main preoccupation was with their own security.
You have to stick your neck out if you want to do any good here.’
Dr O'Kane's views are shared by Somalis.
In Kismayu's teashops the talk is almost free.
At first people will endorse General Morgan as ‘king of Somalia’ but, a few minutes into discussion, the truth is out.
Last week a group of ten avowed Morganites agreed that all the warlords should be either locked up or shot, including General Morgan and his henchmen.
More subtle Somali thinkers argue that the longer the foreign presence remains, the less power the men of arms will have.
The May handover of international responsibility is supposed to be ‘seamless’.
It should be.
Admiral Jonathan Howe, the American who is the UN secretary-general's representative in Somalia, and thus the UN's top man, has surrounded himself with advisers from the State Department, ‘psy-ops’ from the CIA, retired colonels from the special forces and military academics from everywhere.
He has bold plans for the way things will be run when he takes charge.
UN bureaucrats from the World Food Programme, UNICEF and other agencies will, if Admiral Howe has his way, lose control of their operations and answer directly to him.
His legal advisers are anxious to establish a functioning police and judiciary system so that Somalis can begin to administer themselves — and thus bring to an end the violent anarchy that has caused the death from famine of up to 400,000 people.
But they are aware that the overwhelming suspicion that exists between rival clans, plus the continuing conflict, may mean that even the most honest Somali judge will be unable to work.
If this is so, Admiral Howe's advisers say, foreign judges will be brought in.
Observers all agree that if such radical measures are to be possible, the UN must take a tougher line than America has dared to follow.
It must disarm the country, arrest the warlords and put them on trial.
The question, as one senior American diplomat says, is whether the Somalis are prepared for a UN trusteeship in all but name that may drag on towards the end of this century.
And is the rest of the world prepared for this?
Already Somalia has exhausted its media shelf-life.
Brazil
Minus the goat
FROM OUR BRAZIL CORRESPONDENT
PEOPLE in Brazil tell the story of the  beleaguered tenant who complains eternally about leaky rafters, broken plumbing, short circuits, and the like.
as if all that were not trouble enough, the landlord lets a goat loose in the flat.
The goat, being a goat, wreaks havoc, and the tenant grows desperate.
The landlord removes the goat.
The flat reverts to its former state of disrepair.
But everyone is happy.
On April 24th President Itamar Franco got rid of the goat by showing that he could, after all, take action.
After seven idle months in office, with the roof collapsing over Brazil, he announced an ambitious economic-recovery plan.
His programme — a heady mix of big spending and big cutting — may not cure Brazil's inflation-fevered economy, slay the recession or win back the faith of foreign creditors.
But the country's 150m neglected tenants heaved a sigh of relief.
Mr Franco had been branded as a distracted caretaker, doing little more than warming the presidential chair he inherited last October, when Fernando Collor was ousted in disgrace.
Now, it seems, his government has begun.
People in industry, banking, and the bourse applauded.
The black-market dollar, Brazil's most nervous index, did not go through the roof.
Implementing the plan will be less gratifying.
The promise is to achieve economic growth of over 3% this year while fighting everything from hunger and homelessness to tax dodgers and financial speculators.
Cobbled together from 26 provisional decrees and executive orders, the economic-recovery programme is an ambitious inventory of investment and austerity.
This ‘list of good intentions’, as Delfim Netto, an economist, has called it, will cost $13.2 billion for agricultural credits and subsidies and $1.6 billion for nutrition and health care.
Treasury officials in Brasilia are still crunching numbers.
Eliseu Resende, the finance minister, has said that the money will come from increased taxation, a more aggressive privatisation plan, and a crackdown on tax evaders.
The government will also slash the budgets of state enterprises by a tenth.
The bottom line, Mr Resende says, will be a one-third cut in the $10 billion public debt, and no operating deficit for this year.
Inflation is supposed to tumble to 17% a month.
That would be a scandal anywhere else on the planet, but it will be a blessing for Brazil, where the price rise in May is expected to be more than 30%.
Congress may balk at the spending list.
Legislators have only just passed the 1993 budget, and they will not appreciate having to rearrange the billions in pork they packed into it.
The greater problem is that while Mr Franco's plan is mathematically precise on spending, it is poetically vague on thrift.
Much of the expected boost in revenue is tied to a financial-transactions tax, which has yet to win final approval from Congress, and to fiscal reform, which is unlikely to be taken up until the constitutional revision due later this year.
State companies, accustomed to cosy relations with government, will be loth to offer up their own 10% of flesh.
The government, it seems, is counting heavily on getting money from tax dodgers.
But an effective dragnet takes time — and in Brazil's case even longer since the tax-collecting department has been in shambles since Mr Collor's days.
There are other doubts about the plan.
Mr Franco has often complained about the short-term speculation attracted by Brazil's high interest rates.
He says he will cut interest rates on short-term investments to below inflation, thereby discouraging speculation.
Exactly how he intends to do this, and how such an attempt will fit into his strategy to bring inflation under control, remain a mystery.
Yet the plan represents an important break with the past.
After spending 17 years in Congress hurling broadsides at foreign creditors and defending state enterprises, Mr Franco has changed course.
He intends not only to accelerate privatisation but also to reduce state control of ‘strategic’ sectors, such as mining and telecommunications.
Also encouraging has been his promise, albeit vague, to set up an independent central bank.
Two days after the plan was announced, Mr Resende took the newly minted package to creditors in Washington.
Brazil's talks with the International Monetary Fund and a $1.1 billion standby loan were suspended last July when Mr Collor's government was self-destructing.
The Fund may have difficulty swallowing the numbers in the new plan.
But without the IMF's imprimatur, the rescheduling of Brazil's $14 billion debt to private banks is in jeopardy.
It is a sign of the times that Mr Franco's plan is being praised more for what it did not do than what it did.
Brazilians have become only too accustomed to economic pyrotechnics and were fearful of more.
In the past decade they have suffered through five price and wage freezes, 11 stabilisation plans, three debt moratoriums and seven letters of intent with the IMF.
‘The Brazilian economy is an economy of frights, and mercifully this plan brought no new frights,’ said Roberto Campos, a former finance minister who has seen it all.
BRITAIN
British rail goes private
Euro-buffers
S THE government's bill to privatise British Rail (BR) sways down the track, the passengers feel ever queasier.
Most of the MPs on the Select Committee on Transport are Tories who voted for the bill, now nearly through the House of Commons.
But their report, published on April 28th, gives many reasons why the bill's ‘novel and untested’ route back to private railways may end in derailment.
Most of the reasons are wrong; the right one is not mentioned.
Without more investment in railways, privatisation will not work, the MPs say.
True; but they forget that privatisation will loosen the tight corset that the Treasury now puts on investment.
Passengers will not stomach higher fares, they insist.
True; but the government has already decided that the fares charged wherever private railways have a near-monopoly (for example, commuter lines into London) will be regulated.
Competition between different providers of trains on the same route will not work, they say.
Probably; so John MacGregor, the transport secretary, abandoned the idea last year.
Most routes will now be franchised to a single operator, which will bid for a monopoly on each one.
Mr MacGregor's plans are less novel than the MPs seem to think.
They have not properly read appendix A in their own report.
It tells how in America, Boston and Los Angeles have both handed commuter services to private operators.
In Argentina, a near-moribund system is being revived by franchising to the private sector.
In Sweden, a similar scheme has cut costs by 25-30%.
Why then the nerves?
Tory MPs dread the thought of teething troubles.
If rail travel gets worse before it gets better, voters may dump them at the next general election.
Yet in bravely opting for the high-risk, high-competition approach, the government has left itself an out.
Franchising is supposed to happen one route at a time, over as many as 12 years.
That gives the government much time to reconsider.
Meanwhile, jumpy MPs have failed to notice the real threat to the return of private railways.
A series of one-day strikes by the rail unions has rattled BR.
It now says that it does not envisage compulsory staff redundancies over the next couple of years; and that it has no plans greatly to expand the use of contractors in place of its own staff.
This is good news for BR workers, but bad news for privatisation.
For after privatisation, under European Community law, any company winning a railway franchise will be bound by a long-standing job-protection agreement with the unions.
Under the deal, called PRT (Promotion, Transfer and Redundancy), nobody can be sacked without being offered another job somewhere in the system.
This poses no problem for BR's manpower cuts: BR merely offers someone made redundant in London a job in Glasgow, and waits for him to say ‘no’.
But private franchisees will not have the same range of unwanted posts to offer to their unwanted workers.
They will be hobbled with deterrent-sized costs.
One thing is clear: rail privatisation and the European Community do not mix.
Grrrrowth in store
‘THE recession is over,’ trumpeted newspaper headlines this week.
They were prompted by new figures showing that in the first quarter of 1993 Britain's GDP, excluding its output of crude oil, grew by 0.6% and its total GDP by 0.2%.
Better still, there is mounting evidence that growth over the rest of the year could be stronger than expected.
It now seems that Britain's upturn started as long as a year ago.
GDP actually reached its trough in the second quarter of 1992, since when it has grown by 0.2% each quarter.
Not much, but one should bear in mind the experience of the early 1980s: in the first 12 months of that recovery, the initial statistics showed that GDP had risen by only 0.6%; the number-crunchers later revised that rise to 1.8%.
It would not be surprising if today's figures were underestimates, too.
Other indicators confirm that the economy is stirring.
Retail sales rose by 0.5% in March, to 4.1% above their level a year ago.
The latest survey of manufacturers by the Confederation of British Industry shows the biggest increase in optimism for ten years.
It is particularly bullish about exports, thanks to the pound's depreciation last year.
Even the housing market is perking up.
Perhaps most striking of all was the fall in unemployment in February and March, by a total of 51,000, after 33 consecutive months of increase.
This took everybody by surprise.
In the early 1980s unemployment kept climbing until 1986, even though output had started to grow in the second quarter of 1981.
This time, most economists had expected the number of jobless to continue rising into next year at least.
There are three possible explanations for the early fall in unemployment.
First, whereas the population of working age increased by 1m between 1981 and 1986, today it is barely growing.
Second, the fall in unemployment adds something to the theory that the economy has in fact been recovering for a good deal longer than generally realised.
Third, trade-union reforms have made it easier for firms to fire people.
During this recession, companies have shed workers sooner than in previous ones.
Some 2m jobs have been lost since 1990, almost twice as many as during the 1979-81 recession.
The other side of the coin is that firms may now be hiring workers more quickly as demand picks up.
The recent flood of cheery indicators is so good that it almost certainly condemns the beaming government to setbacks over the coming months, and to talk of a double-dip recession.
Nevertheless, the fall in unemployment will improve consumer confidence and so underpin spending.
Many independent forecasters have recently raised their guesses on growth in 1993 to around 1.5%.
Even this may be too timid.
Commentators have been quick to link the recent spurt in output to sterling's departure from Europe's exchange-rate mechanism.
Yet most of the growth seen so far this year was probably already in the pipeline before that dramatic Wednesday last September.
On past experience, interest-rate cuts take at least 6-12 months to affect demand.
If so, the impact on the economy of the massive easing of policy since September (slashing interest rates from 10% to 6%), has yet to show up in the figures.
Growth in 1993 could therefore be a heady surprise.
If so, what of inflation?
Optimists say there is no need to worry about it because there is so much slack in the economy.
Wages, for example, are rising at their slowest rate for 25 years.
April's inflation figures are likely to show a further fall, mainly because average household bills for local tax have been cut with the shift from a poll tax to a property tax.
Thereafter, expect inflation to creep up as stronger demand makes it easier for firms to charge customers for cost increases caused by devaluation.
The deciding factor will be wages.
Gavyn Davies, head of investment research at Goldman Sachs in London, finds that despite all the labour-market reforms, and given the recent level of unemployment, there is no evidence that wage growth is intrinsically more moderate than in the past.
And although unemployment is likely to remain high for some time, many economists believe that pay settlements are influenced less by the absolute level of unemployment than by its rate of change: as unemployment starts to fall, the perceived threat to job-holders dwindles, so they push harder for pay rises.
If so, and if unemployment does fall earlier in this recovery than in past ones, then pay claims will pick up sooner.
Either way, inflation (excluding mortgage interest payments) looks sure to breach the government's target of 1-4% by the end of 1993.
By British standards, inflation of 4-5% may seem modest, but it is not good enough by international ones.
This year, Britain's main trading partners are likely to have an average rate of less than 3%.
Britons who think inflation has been exorcised are living in a dream.
So long as the government runs a huge budget deficit, approaching 9% of GDP this year, inflation threatens to return.
The glee with which an upward blip in house prices has been greeted hardly suggests that Britons have weaned themselves from the inflation habit.
That is why economists who advise the government to cut interest rates again, to prevent the pound rising and ‘keep industry competitive’, are stroking a tiger.
The pound has risen by 7% against the D-mark in the past two months, to DM2.50, reflecting the diverging fortunes of the German and British economies.
Yet on most measures the pound remains slightly undervalued against the D-mark.
Businessmen meeting at the Institute of Directors' annual convention this week said they wanted a sustained, long-lasting recovery, rather than a repeat of boom-bust.
The best way for the government to achieve this is to keep a tight grip on the tigerish tendencies of the economy.
Justice
More of it
AS ONE might expect from a professional prosecutor, Barbara Mills, the Director of Public Prosecutions, last week called for defendants to lose the right to choose trial by jury.
She was echoing a suggestion made by her department to a royal commission set up in 1991 to review the criminal-justice system in England and Wales.
The commission, due to report in June, was prompted by a rash of miscarriages of justice against supposed IRA terrorists.
Mrs Mills said that the prosecution or magistrates should decide in certain cases whether an accused person ought to have a jury trial.
She also questioned the defendant's right to silence: Mrs Mills wants the defence to disclose its case before trial.
Liberty (formerly the National Council for Civil Liberties) does not much like Mrs Mills's ideas.
It suspects her and others of trying to prod the commission to do more for efficiency than for justice.
The signs, so far, are that Liberty can feel reassured.
The commission is studying the results of its own research into the jury system.
Michael Zander, professor of law at the London School of Economics and one of the members of the commission, has carried out a survey of courts.
He sent questionnaires to the main participants in every case in every crown court in England and Wales during two weeks last year.
Even jurists were quizzed.
The survey will be published in June.
It should make juries look good.
When asked what they thought of the jury system in terms of generally getting the ‘right’ result, 79% of the judges said ‘good’or ‘very good’.
The juries themselves were confident they had understood the evidence.
Lawyers tended to agree: around 90% thought that in most cases the jury had grasped the evidence.
And jurors were very positive about the performance of both barristers and judges.
Because of this mutual enthusiasm, observers of English law think it unlikely that the commission will want to change the jury system much.
Moreover they expect the commission to push for a more careful approach in other areas, in particular:
Forensic evidence.
The commission will want tougher safeguards on laboratory work.
Seven members of the Maguire family were sentenced to prison in 1976 on terrorism charges because a forensic scientist said his tests had shown traces of nitroglycerine on their hands.
His tests were faulty; yet the Maguires served their full prison terms.
The commission will probably also recommend that the defence be given improved access to forensic facilities.
The investigative process.
The commission may decide that the Crown Prosecution Service should exercise more oversight and control of criminal investigation.
At the moment, a suspect is arrested by police, questioned by police and charged by police.
Only then does the judicial system step in.
And a research study for the commission, published on April 25th, said that police needed better training in interrogation techniques, placing less emphasis on the quest for confessions.
Remedies after convictions.
At the moment, Department C3 of the Home Office looks into allegations of miscarriage of justice.
But the department has lost the public's confidence because of recent verdict-reversals.
Worse, C3 tends to start from the premise that original convictions were correct.
The commission is likely to suggest that a new, independent tribunal be set up to review such allegations.
Packaging
Take it back
THE British government tends to see itself as a bastion of common sense where European environmental policy is concerned, weighing benefits against costs which more dogmatic governments ignore.
Now, foreign dogmatism threatens to drive the government down a road it abhors — forcing it to oblige industry to take back and recycle the packaging it ships its product in.
The threat comes from Germany, whose deeply green environment ministry has imposed just such an obligation.
Since the beginning of this year, all kinds of packaging used in Germany, from industrial crates to yoghurt cartons, must be retrieved and recycled.
A levy on each package in German shops helps to pay for a waste-collection system, which picks up potentially recyclable household rubbish and hands it back to producer organisations.
They, in theory, turn old glass into new bottles, old paper into new pulp and so on.
The government has set stringent targets; incineration, even to produce electricity, does not count towards them.
In practice, lots of ‘recyclables’ slip out of Germany, looking for buyers abroad.
In Britain, the government has been trying to encourage commercial recyclers such as waste-paper merchants to join forces with the packaging industry to give more packaging a second life.
Suddenly, these would-be commercial recyclers find themselves swamped with offers of free material from Germany.
Britain is not the only country in the EC whose recyclers are hit by this rubbish-dumping from Germany.
French waste-paper merchants recently drove their lorries through the streets of Paris to demonstrate against the collapse in the price of their product.
One answer might be for the EC to agree rules for the recycling of packaging that would reduce such disruption.
The commission has, with great difficulty, drawn up a draft directive on waste packaging which has been languishing, unadopted, for several months.
Some of the poorer EC countries still see discarded packaging as evidence of progress; many, including the French, Italians and British, think that incineration where the heat is used should count as a form of recycling.
Earlier this month, Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry minister, wrote to the EC commission to ask it to speed up its examination of Germany's packaging law.
The commission is now going to set up a special working group to look at the problem.
Mr Heseltine and Michael Howard, the environment secretary, have both written to their German opposite numbers, and are waiting for the Germans to react.
Faced with a rising tide of imports of old paper, bottles and plastic, the British government has wondered whether to ban the stuff.
But the users of such materials dislike that idea, arguing that they would then be undercut in third markets by rivals using free German rubbish.
So British ministers are now trying to decide whether also to force British industry to recycle its waste packaging (and perhaps other used products, too: Germany is proposing to make its car and electronics industries responsible for their worn-out goods).
Such legislation might keep Britain's beleaguered commercial recyclers in business.
But it would not guarantee markets for products made out of old paper or plastic.
Britain's unrecycled recyclables might then join Germany's on a world tour in search of ever-scarcer buyers.
Young man no more
THE British admire those who speak their mind cleverly and damn the consequences.
In politics, that means they adore Dennis Healey, once chancellor of the exchequer, and Norman Tebbit, once industry secretary.
In sport, on April 27th, Brian Clough showed his membership of the pantheon of verbal Rottweilers when his retirement as manager of Nottingham Forest football club made the front page of every British daily paper, including the Financial Times.
‘Cloughie’ will be missed by many people who don't give a fig for the great soccer his teams have played.
Yes, he is arrogant, addressing players, directors and interviewers alike as ‘young man’, whatever their age.
Authoritarian, too: he was sacked as manager of Leeds United, then Britain's best team, after just 44 days because the players could not bear his unorthodox methods.
What the hell: he was his own man.
Not for him the inane bromides of lesser managers; outspoken wit and intelligence were the hallmark of his post-match reflections.
A Labour supporter, though hardly politically correct, he often thought of going into politics.
If he had, he would have been a disaster in the smoke-filled rooms but a darling with the tabloids and the public.
Mr Clough's teams won two league championships and four league cups, and, most impressive of all, they twice won the European Cup, a knockout competition between the top teams in Europe.
Yet he never got to manage England's national team.
Soccer officialdom, as Mr Clough observed ‘thought I would take over and run the show.
They were dead right.’
The British establishment wanted conformity.
The people like Cloughie the toughie for his utter lack of it.
Local government
More blessed, less bashed
ALTHOUGH 25m electors in England and Wales are due to vote on May 6th in the county council elections, few will bother.
Last time, in 1989, the turnout was below 10m.
Nobody expects much better this time.
Apathy is the long-standing curse of British local democracy.
Under Mrs Thatcher, the curse all but killed it.
Glorying in her national mandate, she despised local councillors as loonie lefties or loopy liberals.
They were carefully stripped of powers (for example, over housing and education) and cash.
This year, that phase officially ended.
John Redwood, a former head of Mrs Thatcher's policy unit, saw no mileage in his current job as local-government minister if it meant non-stop council-bashing.
John Major agreed: after all, the prime minister started in politics as a local councillor.
On February 27th he told Conservative councillors that he wanted a ‘renaissance of local government’.
‘Let's stop batting one another around the head and get on with good government,’ he said.
Recently, local-government chiefs were invited to Downing Street for an amiable if unfocused chat.
More concretely, Mr Redwood blocked attempts by Kenneth Clarke, the home secretary, to strip police authorities of their local-government representatives.
Local councillors will retain a casting vote on police budgets, and London is, for the first time, to get a police authority, half of whose members are elected councillors.
In April local councils acquired an important new power.
They will run community care, a programme which gives co-ordinated help to the old and feeble.
They also got a new source of money, the council tax, to replace Mrs Thatcher's hated poll tax.
The council tax is proving less unpopular: appeals against the valuations of property for the new tax, the best measure of opposition, will fall well short of the 950,000 for which the government had allowed.
Local politicians and officials are pleased, but sceptical.
Council tax or no, their main grouse is still lack of spending power: 85% of local-council revenues are determined by central government, which also limits spending directly.
Hence self-reinforcing apathy: if local government has little real power, voters are not interested in it; and if voters are uninterested, central government has no incentive to part with power.
According to MORI, a pollster, voters agree by a three-to-one majority that government in Britain is too centralised.
John Major seems to sympathise, but the voters can be excused for not yet noticing.
Britain's car makers
The beach-head
WITH Britain's economy just coming back to life, its car production rose by 7.7% last month to the highest March level for 19 years.
European car makers such as Volkswagen and Fiat, meanwhile, are groaning, facing a fall of some 10% in EC sales this year.
The gap in fortunes is not just a result of out-of-sync economic cycles.
Britain's car-making revival has been powered by the Japanese.
On April 27th Michael Heseltine, the industry minister, formally opened another state-of-the-art car factory — built this time by Honda in Swindon.
Britain has attracted over 40% of Japanese direct investment in the EC, and the bulk of Japanese car plants.
According to Garel Rhys of the Cardiff Business School, Japanese car makers have sunk £2.4 billion ($1.8 billion) of investment in Britain.
The plants bring employment, money for equipment and research, and lessons in the art of manufacturing.
The Japanese came to Britain partly for low wage-costs and a welcoming government, but mostly because it is in Europe.
Japanese car makers are laying ever more stress on European sales.
Their traditional markets are taking a knock — home demand is faltering, American competitors are learning the tricks of lean manufacture (the Honda Accord has been knocked from the top spot in America), and Asian competitors grow stronger.
That leaves Europe.
Until 2000, when the EC promises an open market, Japanese imports are restricted by quota.
Britain is a hole in Europe's defensive wall.
Provided the content of cars built in Japanese factories in Britain is about 80% local, the continental Europeans cannot keep them out.
Though EC demand is expected to fall, output from all Japan's EC factories should rise by over 50% this year, reckons Mr Rhys.
The Europeans are trying to dam the tide.
Japan's ‘voluntary’ import quotas have been tightened to offset the growth of the transplants.
Early in April, the European Commission persuaded the Japanese government to cut 1993 car imports by 9.4% from last year, even though it thinks EC demand will fall by only 6.5%.
Europe's car bosses, nevertheless, are bristling.
Jac Nasser, Ford's European chief, claims that his firm has ‘ten times the level of commitment that the Japanese transplants have.’
Jacques Calvet, chairman of Peugeot, a French giant, has called Britain a ‘Japanese aircraft carrier’ poised to attack the Continent, even though there are also Peugeot plants on board.
When the EC negotiated car imports with Japan, it asked Britain to take a 20% rise — the largest among European countries that enforce individual quotas.
Some see that as Britain's punishment for being too Japan-friendly.
The motor industry, says Mr Rhys, is playing out the wider battle between the dirigistes of continental Europe, and Britain's free-marketeers.
European producers incline towards protection of ‘core industries’.
The irony: it is because of that protection that Honda came to Swindon.
Big bang
A bomb made from fertiliser exploded in the City of London, killing a photographer, injuring 50 people, and blowing out thousands of windows.
Politicians and newspapers complained about the impotence of the police and worried about the city's reputation as a financial centre.
In Northern Ireland, another IRA bomb killed a former soldier, but received little coverage.
Secure Ministers spent a weekend at Chevening in Kent pondering the future of social security.
They debated more precise targeting of benefits, and persuading high earners to opt out of the state pension.
Their conclusions were kept under wraps.
Recorded crime rose by 6% last year (compared with 16% in 1991).
Rural areas suffered the biggest increases.
Disruptive
The appeal court dealt a blow to the government's education reforms by backing the right of teachers to boycott the national curriculum tests.
John Patten, the education secretary, is left with two ways of avoiding disruption — diluting his tests, or changing the law.
Holed
The ozone layer over Britain has suffered record damage so far this year, ministers revealed.
Opposition parties called for stricter curbs on pollution.
Old news
The loss-making Observer, the world's oldest Sunday newspaper, was put up for sale by Lonrho, its owners.
On April 29th, Lonhro accepted a bid from the Guardian.
House proud
Up to one in seven people complaining about the valuation of their home for the council tax think their property is undervalued, early evidence shows.
They want their tax bills raised!
Bouncing back
Britain's oldest bungee jumper, 70-year-old great-grandmother Betty Wilson, leapt from a 165ft crane.
Mrs Wilson is blind.
This helps, she says —‘you can't see how far you might fall.’
British broadcasting
Metamorphosis
‘GREGOR SAMSA awoke one morning from uneasy dreams to find himself transformed into a gigantic insect.’
As radical mutations go, the state of British broadcasting has got nothing on Kafka.
But for a business used to being dominated by a single entity — the BBC — the past few years have been unsettling.
First there was the auction of the ITV (Channel 3) franchises in 1991; then the launch of Classic FM, the first national commercial radio station, in 1992; the growth of satellite and cable-TV; and the review of the BBC's charter.
Now two firms promise further changes to an industry already worried about the sort of creature it is turning into.
On April 23rd Pearson, a publishing-to-tableware conglomerate that controls the Financial Times, Penguin Books and 50% of The Economist, bid for Thames Television, Britain's biggest independent TV producer.
Thorn EMI, a music-to-lighting group, accepted, agreeing to sell Pearson its 59% stake in Thames for £99m ($154m).
Meanwhile, on April 30th Richard Branson's latest project, Virgin 1215, took to the air as Britain's second national commercial radio channel.
Neither gambit will be noticed immediately.
For viewers, such popular Thames programmes as ‘The Bill’ will go on being broadcast on Channel 3 — for now.
And although a certain number of eager thirty-something listeners will scan the radio dial in search of Mr Branson's yuppie rock, more will discover the channel gradually, perhaps by accident.
Not so Pearson and Virgin's entrenched rivals.
They are keenly aware that these forays are the latest signs that British broadcasting is becoming increasingly commercial — and competitive.
The change is most splashy in radio.
Mr Branson won the eight-year franchise last April with a bid of £1.9m.
The commercial-radio sector prays that he will be its saviour.
Despite having grown from 33 local stations in 1980 to more than 100 now, commercial radio's share of advertising spending has stayed stuck at 2%.
Local operators hope that, if national commercial radio takes off, some cash will trickle down to them.
For that to happen Virgin 1215 will need to be a hit.
Mr Branson has no intention of being a Classic FM, which as a classical-music channel has limited appeal.
He aims to grab 8% of the audience by offering more music and less talk, thereby attacking the BBC's Radio One, which has recently offered more talk and less music.
The main reason for that is John Birt, the BBC's boss, and his belief that Radios One and Two must be different to justify their bit of the licence fee.
Such constraints mean that Virgin 1215 can succeed, cutting into Radio One's audience — and, ironically, making it harder to use its popularity to justify its subsidy.
It is the ITV network that is most obviously threatened by Pearson.
By taking over Thames, the firm has taken a big step towards becoming a powerhouse in British television.
Thames produces nearly a quarter of commercial television's prime-time programming, and is a partner (with the BBC) in UK Gold, a satellite channel featuring many re-runs from Thames's rich library of shows.
Pearson also holds a 14% stake in Yorkshire/Tyne Tees, another ITV franchise and big programme-maker.
And it is a partner in Rupert Murdoch's fast-growing satellite-TV service, BSkyB.
This makes the other ITV companies, especially Michael Green's Carlton Communications, extremely nervous.
They worry that Thames's programmes will go to BSkyB; or that they will have to pay extortionate prices to stop that happening; or that Pearson will launch other satellite channels.
All are reasonable fears — and ones that should be shared by the BBC, whose audience was bound to be eroded by cable and satellite in any case.
The entry of Pearson and other big firms into British TV will only speed things along.
Broadcasters had best admit that change is no longer creeping, or repressible.
Major's green shoots
THE mood of relief is tangible.
John Major and his friends think they have weathered the storm of their lives.
They have just about sailed between the twin jagged rocks of Maastricht and recession.
Squalls will buffet it, but the ship of government may no longer be destined to lurch permanently from crisis to crisis.
Downing Street no longer feels like a morgue.
The atmosphere in cabinet, they say, is ‘palpably better’.
Ditto on the backbenches.
The prime minister, says one MP, is ‘jaunty, relaxed, determined — in cracking good form’.
In those ritualistic twice-a-week parliamentary knockabouts with the Labour leader, John Smith, he has been performing perkily.
The opposition remains unfocused.
Economic recovery is plainly in the air.
But will it necessarily bring political salvation?
Of course, say the Majorites.
In their heart of hearts, they are less sure.
A deeper confidence has yet to return.
It has, after all, been the worst first year of any parliament in living memory.
The exchange-rate mechanism fiasco made a laughing stock of economic policy.
The Maastricht issue ravaged the party, and sapped the energy and authority of government and prime minister.
Mr Major and his chancellor, Norman Lamont, still have the lowest poll ratings since the second world war.
The majority of only 20 still gives every Tory backbench maverick the power to terrify government.
‘Let's face it,’ the chief whip, Richard Ryder, told the cabinet a month ago, referring ruefully to the assorted rebels, ‘We are now at the mercy of 11 madmen.’
But the Tory loons may now give Mr Major a breathing space.
Murmurs of a ‘stalking-horse’ challenge to his leadership before the October party conference have subsided.
Only a month ago, Mr Major gave the impression of clinging to power.
Now it seems more or less acknowledged, as Rab Butler once said of a beleaguered Harold Macmillan, that ‘he's the best leader we've got.’
No real alternative exists.
Michael Heseltine, fighting back at the Department of Trade and Industry, is still wounded, maybe forever.
Able Kenneth Clarke is still too Euro, too liberal.
Savvy, safe Douglas Hurd may — despite denials — want to retire.
Michael Portillo, with plaudits from the City for his panache as chief secretary to the Treasury, is too young and raw and Thatcherite.
‘If we're going to be ruthless, it would probably be at the end of next summer [1994],’ says one minister, mulling over the possibility that Mr Major's taint of failure proves harder to expunge and that, in best Tory blood-sport tradition, he may have to be cleanly knifed.
So the bet is that the prime minister now has two years — with luck, much calmer than the past one — to start putting a programme into law, followed by another year to sell it to the people in the run-up to re-election.
The latest hope among Majorites, who were preparing for by-election embarrassment a month ago, is that the Tories hold the Newbury seat comfortably on May 6th.
Expect whoops of absurd self-congratulation if they do.
But people are still wary about saying ‘all is forgiven.’
So far, the good economic figures have been met with ‘no thanks to you, John or Norman’, even from many Tory columnists and businessmen.
Central Office complains that the government is blamed for recession but gets no credit for recovery.
That is partly because Mr Major still needs a theme.
He has a meaty agenda, but it is also messy, bitty, hard to legislate and harder to encapsulate with a flourish.
Ask him his priorities, and he puts education and deregulation firmly at the top.
John Patten, scourge of the teachers, has a plan but so far lacks the populism to enforce and sell it.
Deregulation — cutting red tape, in Mr Major's preferred phrase — is easier said than done and far from politically sexy: much has been cut already and Brussels weaves new rules by the week.
Privatisation continues, but Mr Major is left with the least tasty parts of the Thatcher menu: rail, coal, the post office, road-building.
Lots of scope for chaos and more unpopularity.
Law and order has shot up the list.
Mr Clarke may invigorate the police, but nobody thinks you can beat crime just by legislation.
The Citizen's Charter, a Major obsession, lacks a tub-thumper.
These days, Mr Major is rather piano on health reform.
Above all, he offers no panacea for the unemployed.
Even optimists doubt the figures will go on falling.
As for Maastricht, Mr Major and Douglas Hurd, buoyed by their sense that the rebels are on the run, have begun to sound more punchily European.
But Mr Major's argument is still terribly prosaic.
‘Modest good may be done by signing on; much damage would be done if we do not,’ he argues.
Right or wrong, it is not exactly Churchillian.
‘If you're looking for a Messiah or a missionary, you're looking at the wrong man,’ says one of John Major's close friends, irked by the relentless calls for leadership and vision.
His strength, he argues, is management and negotiation and consensus-building, not inspiring the people with rousing speeches and grand schemes, or battering enemies into intellectual submission.
‘These days the chief executive is often more important than the chairman.’
So expect two years of dull, decent, gritty competence, explain the Major-domos — and steady, unspectacular results.
‘He's thoughtful, considerate, ordinary,’ says another minister.
Ordinary?
‘Yes, people can identify with him as an ordinary, decent bloke.’
Yet when was ‘ordinary’ last used as a term of praise for a prime minister?
Greyness and decency are fine if accompanied by guts.
Mr Major still has time to prove he has them.
Ahead lies a test of courage and radicalism: can he cut the public-sector borrowing requirement, while assailing the middle class by introducing means-testing of pensions and social services, raising women's pension age and pioneering workfare for the unemployed?
Choosing between low inflation and lower interest rates will go on being tough.
Now that the worst of Maastricht and the recession is over, Downing Street is awash with papers from ministers and advisers trying, area by area, to plot the next two years.
Mr Major ought to pull the strands together and strike out rhetorically.
His media masseurs promise a new package and a new man, not just a ‘good chief whip’, as critics within the party like to say.
The summer may be warmer for him.
But he is still a leader on trial.
EUROPE
The economic battle
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
ONE reason Boris Yeltsin did so well in the referendum on April 25th is that the Russian economy is looking better than at any time since reform began.
The fall in industrial output bottomed out in August 1992, when production hit 72% of its December 1991 level, the month before economic liberalisation.
By March this year output had risen to 82% of this level.
Inflation has also slowed, from 27% a month in January and February, to 21% in March.
Prices are reckoned to have risen by less than 20% during April.
While these figures are still terrible, they are at least heading in the right direction.
The bad news is that this direction could easily be reversed.
Spring is the time when the government primes the pump to help farmers prepare their fields and the far north to recover from winter.
The flood of credit will be increased this year by all the promissory notes Mr Yeltsin dished out on the campaign trail.
A deal struck between the government and the central bank at the beginning of April increases the former's control over subsidised credits.
Viktor Gerashchenko, the bank's chairman, has described this deal as a trap for the government to show it will not be able to live with constraints on the money supply.
He may be right.
The Russian government's overall budget deficit last year was 642 billion roubles ($1.2 billion), or a respectable 4% of GDP.
The problem with this figure is what it leaves out.
Foreign-debt servicing is not included in spending, though foreign loans received are included in revenue.
In reality the government's budget deficit was probably equal to just under a quarter of GDP in 1992 and the budget passed in March could push it up further.
On top of that come huge sums of cheap credit to enterprises which must be reduced if inflation is to be controlled.
Before the referendum, the chances of the government doing anything decisive to reduce the deficit were shrinking fast.
The appointment of Oleg Lobov, a former construction engineer and close friend of Mr Yeltsin, as a deputy prime minister responsible for the economy had shifted the balance of power within the government towards the Gosplan-types, who favour a return to central planning and tend to dismiss budget deficits as no more than an accountant's fancy.
Viktor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister and leading Gosplanner, said before the referendum that he did not expect a majority to support Mr Yeltsin's economic policies.
The fact that a majority did vote for them has shifted the balance of power back towards the reformers.
Without full control of the central bank, however, any attempt to control subsidised credits to industry, and hence inflation, will remain haphazard at best.
Moscow's foreign-exchange market has taken a dim view of the liberals' chances of winning a decisive battle in the war for control of Russia's economic policy.
After the referendum results were announced, the rouble fell to 812 to the dollar, down from 415 at the beginning of the year.
One wall replaces another
FROM OUR BUDAPEST CORRESPONDENT
ALTHOUGH membership of the European Community remains the top foreign-policy goal of much of Eastern Europe, disenchantment with the EC is growing.
Easterners are especially dissatisfied with the EC's claim that it is doing the best it can for them.
The EC's explanation that its recent ban on imports of meat from the east was ordered for ‘animal-health reasons’ is contemptuously dismissed.
This, say the easterners, was outright protectionism.
The Czech farm minister said the ban ‘restored the iron curtain’.
By now, the Community's talk of free trade sounds sadly worn.
The association agreements the EC signed with Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia have turned out to be disappointingly limited.
The trade clauses exclude ‘import-sensitive’ items such as steel, chemicals and textiles.
More than half of Hungary's exports, proving ‘sensitive’, were liable to limitations, though only some attracted penalties.
All the agreements contain plenty of get-out clauses for the Community.
Animal disease, state subsidies and dumping can all be used to justify barriers.
Austria — which, though not yet an EC member, has applied ‘emergency brakes’ on imports of eastern cement, fertilisers and tractors — has said it would be wrong for Austrian firms, having invested in environmental safeguards, to go bust because of competition from East European rivals who have not.
After environmental dumping, can ‘social dumping’ be far behind?
East Europeans — eager for work, malleable and uninterested in trade unions — are in the judgment of some multinational companies more productive than their western counterparts.
This will produce more pressure in the west for import restrictions.
The easterners could not complain too bitterly while their exports to Western Europe were growing by double-digit amounts.
But now Germany and Austria, Eastern Europe's largest trading partners, are moving into recession.
Hungary's exports plunged in the first quarter of 1993.
There are gloomy signs elsewhere.
The balance of trade is moving in Western Europe's favour.
The EC runs a trade surplus with Eastern Europe and its exports to the region rose faster in 1992 than its imports from it.
There is pressure for counter-protectionism in Warsaw, Budapest and other capitals.
Poland has introduced an import surcharge, and is due to announce a new set of customs duties.
It is considering introducing some non-tariff barriers, too.
Hungary proposed 18 tariff increases after the government ‘heroically resisted’ calls for protection of 1,000 items.
These countries' agreements with the EC permit the protection of infant industries and those being ‘restructured’— which covers most businesses in Eastern Europe.
But the easterners know that such measures, legal though they may be, could lead to a bruising (for them) battle with the EC.
Sir Leon Brittan, the EC's trade commissioner, has warned Poland and Hungary not to retaliate against western protectionism, even if they are entitled to do so.
‘It will make it much more difficult for me to convince member states to accelerate the removal of barriers,’ he says.
Mere soothing words, however, may not be enough to prevent the building of new walls across the middle of Europe.
A battle, not the war
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
THE question facing Russia is stark.
Who will decide the country's future: the majority of the 1,033-member Congress of People's Deputies or the majority of 69m Russians who voted on April 25th to support Boris Yeltsin and his reforms?
Despite the president's victory, the answer to this question is not yet a foregone conclusion.
Mr Yeltsin had been expected to win the referendum, but not resoundingly.
His opponents, and even his own prime minister, had thought the majority of voters would support the president but vote against his economic policies.
The voters turned out to be more sophisticated than that, realising that the man is inseparable from his policies.
Of those who voted, 57.4% said they supported the president and 53.7% his economic policies.
In Moscow, Mr Yeltsin won a higher percentage of the votes cast than he did in the 1991 presidential election.
Most significantly, over two-thirds of those who turned out voted for the early election of a new parliament (not now due until 1995).
Mr Yeltsin's opponents have responded to this defeat by pretending it didn't happen.
Alexander Rutskoi, the vice-president who has become an ineffectual standard-bearer for the opposition, claimed that there ‘can be no talk of overall popular support for Mr Yeltsin’, because a majority of all voters either voted against the president or did not vote.
Ruslan Khasbulatov, the speaker of parliament, declared that ‘the referendum decides absolutely nothing.’
He could be right.
Mr Yeltsin's dilemma is that, to continue with economic reform, he has to get rid of the present parliament, which is blocking him at every turn.
Under the rules set by the Constitutional Court (whose members are chosen by parliament), the president had to get half the electorate (53.5m people) to approve an early parliamentary election.
On April 25th only 44.3m so voted.
Instead of proclaiming victory, Mr Yeltsin kept quiet after the referendum and called an expanded meeting of his cabinet for April 29th.
At this meeting he presented the draft of a new constitution, which he wants to be adopted by a constituent assembly in June.
This draft, which has 130 articles, would abolish the present parliament and the post of vice-president.
It would give the president the power to nominate the prime minister, the chairman of the central bank and the three most senior judges.
A two-chamber federal parliament would confirm these appointments.
The president could dissolve the parliament and call a new election if it refused to confirm his nominee for prime minister, or if there were a ‘crisis of state’.
Only the three senior judges could initiate impeachment proceedings against the president.
Whatever one thinks about this draft — and most lawyers who have studied it reckon it to be reasonably good, though it grants the president extensive powers that could be abused — the real issue has been how to get it adopted as Russia's new constitution.
As usual, Mr Yeltsin's advisers have been split.
Those in the Kremlin (which houses the presidential administration) are pushing for one last attempt at compromise with parliament.
They argue that, after the referendum, the president is in a position of strength, while his opponents are even weaker than they look.
The unpredictable centre of the Congress — known locally as ‘the swamp’— is likely to support Mr Yeltsin again.
Mr Khasbulatov, who had to face a vote of no confidence at the previous meeting of Congress, is therefore likely to seek a compromise with the president.
‘If there is a one-in-a-thousand chance that the present deputies will accept the referendum results and take this path of constitutional reform, then the president and government are obliged to give them it,’ says Sergei Shakhrai, a deputy prime minister who is one of Mr Yeltsin's most influential advisers.
If they reject it, though, another referendum will have to be held on the draft constitution — and only then can elections, based on the new constitution, be held.
But another set of presidential advisers, based not in the Kremlin but in offices of the Russian government, are engaged in daily trench warfare with the conservative apparatchiks who still run the bureaucracy.
They favour a tougher approach.
They argue that unseemly haggling with Congress will allow the momentum of the referendum victory to seep away.
Worse, so long as the president tries to reform through entirely constitutional means, he is bound to fail.
This is because his opponents in Congress set the rules and can change them whenever they want; Congress amended the constitution more than 300 times during 1992.
They have been pressing the president to appeal to regional leaders for support, offering them more local powers under the new constitution.
With their support, he would simply sign a new electoral law and the articles of the draft constitution governing the federal parliament.
Elections would then be held under the new law; the new parliament would gather to adopt the rest of the constitution.
There are dangers in any tough solution, the greatest of which is the price Russia's regional barons might extract for their support.
However, Mr Yeltsin, rejuvenated by victory, is in no mood for compromise.
On April 27th he signed a decree giving the president responsibility for foreign affairs and the same day warned the Serbs not to count on Russian help — a calculated snub to Serbophiles in parliament.
The next day Mr Yeltsin stripped Mr Rutskoi of his responsibilities for fighting corruption.
Mr Rutskoi has already had responsibility for agriculture taken away, along with his official Mercedes and doctor.
This week Mr Yeltsin put forward his own tough option.
This will precipitate a battle with opponents who, knowing how unpopular they are, will fight the harder to keep their privileges.
Win or lose, the referendum shows that a majority of Russians want reform to continue, even without him.
The two Europes
Poor relations
FROM OUR BRUSSELS CORRESPONDENT
Eastern Europe is knocking at the European Community's door.
Three articles examine EC trade barriers to the east, easterners' frustration and evidence that both sides would benefit from free trade
THE European Community knows it has to support the liberal and democratic reforms of its eastern neighbours.
Yet many easterners complain that, since their revolutions began in 1989, the Community has been too wrapped up in its own affairs to give them the attention they deserve.
In December, the EC ‘welcomed’ a report from the European Commission calling for an acceleration of the easterners' integration.
The heads of governments asked the commission to come back with precise proposals for how this should be done, so that they could act on them at June's summit in Copenhagen.
Yet the governments have spent the past three months warning the commission not to propose any serious liberalisation of trade or strengthening of political ties.
Treaties known as Europe Agreements offer ‘associate membership’ to the Community's eastern neighbours.
Poland, Hungary and the former Czechoslovakia signed such agreements in December 1991; Romania and Bulgaria did so this year.
Both sides commit themselves to free trade in industrial goods, but the easterners may keep tariffs for ten years and the Community may keep those on ‘sensitive’ items for five.
EC steel tariffs are to drop from 5% in 1992 to zero in 1997.
Textile tariffs take a year longer to reach zero.
The agreements also allow the EC to impose ‘safeguard measures’— restrictions — on surges of imports it thinks could damage local producers.
The Europe Agreements, however, say nothing about free trade in agriculture.
Special arrangements allow the easterners' exports of meat, fruit, dairy goods and vegetables to rise by 10% a year for five years.
The East Europeans complain that these accords penalise them just where they have a competitive advantage — in textile, steel and meat exports.
Jacques Attali, the president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, has called for the agreements to be scrapped.
A senior American diplomat agrees: ‘If the United States can give Mexico access for agriculture, textiles and steel, why can't the EC do that for its neighbours?’
The Poles would like to send more farm products to the Community, and complain about restrictions on ‘sensitive’ industrial items.
France's Thomson invested in a factory making cathode-ray tubes but found that if Poland sent the EC more than 2.5m ecus-worth ($1.1m) of tubes it got hit by tariffs.
After a long haggle the EC agreed to 9m ecus-worth for 1993, but the Poles want more.
The biggest battles are on steel.
The Community's scrapping of all steel quotas in March 1992 set off a surge of eastern exports.
Czechoslovakia increased steel exports to the Community by 56% in 1992, Hungary by 31%, and so on.
In August 1992 the Community restricted exports of three types of Czechoslovak steel into four EC countries.
Then the commission slapped provisional anti-dumping duties on Polish, Czech and Croatian steel tubes.
Even so, the value of the EC's imports from Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Romania and Bulgaria grew by 27% in 1990, 18% in 1991 and 20% in 1992.
The EC's share of their exports has risen from about a quarter in 1989 to about half.
Czechoslovakia performed best, its exports to the Community — mainly of steel, cars, raw materials and farm produce — rising from $1.8 billion in 1989 to $1.3 billion in 1992.
But the easterners worry that the Community's recession could push it towards greater protectionism.
Farm lobbies have already ensured that the treaties recently negotiated with Bulgaria and Romania are less generous on agriculture than the earlier batch.
On April 6th the EC's governments banned imports of livestock and dairy goods from Eastern Europe for a month.
The reason: an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in ex-Yugoslavia, plus the lack of any veterinary controls between Yugoslavia and the rest of Eastern Europe.
On April 28th the Community agreed to lift the ban on most of the East European countries which were prepared to give 48 hours' warning before exporting animals and to accept quarantine periods of 14 days.
Western Europe's steel lobbies have also won the ear of the EC's industry ministers, who decided on February 25th that, where damage was proved, the commission should negotiate three-year quotas.
On April 21st the commission agreed on a proposal that would limit imports of six types of Czech and Slovak steel to the 1991 level plus 35% in 1993, to plus 45% in 1994 and plus 60% in 1995.
This may not be tough enough for the ministers, even though it would leave Czech and Slovak steel imports in 1995 at about their 1992 level.
The Europe Agreements cover talk as well as trade.
Twice a year the associate members' foreign ministers meet those of the Community, and senior officials see each other more often.
But little preparation goes into these meetings.
‘They don't consult us on the agenda of the foreign ministers' meeting and they don't treat us as equal partners,’ says a Czech diplomat.
Hans van den Broek, the EC's foreign-affairs commissioner, would like to bring the easterners closer to the Community without offering them full membership.
He will suggest a ‘European Political Area’, in which the easterners would take part in ‘European political co-operation’— discussions on foreign policy — when topics of common interest such as Yugoslavia came up.
He will also suggest that the easterners meet the EC as a group, not individually.
Many easterners see these ideas as a poor substitute for concessions on trade, but welcome them as a step towards membership.
The Poles, Hungarians and Czechs want the EC to set a target date for their entry.
The commission has suggested that the Community should clearly accept the principle of the East Europeans' future membership.
Mr Van den Broek said in March that the Community ‘should fix a date midway through this decade when together we can review progress…towards satisfying the conditions for eventual membership.’
That is about as much as the East Europeans are likely to get at the moment.
Bosnia and Serbia
The Inats have it
FROM OUR BELGRADE CORRESPONDENT
ONE of Lord Owen's diplomatic team was so tired he could barely remember what city he was in, let alone which day it was.
It was Belgrade, on April 25th.
The United Nations had ordered new sanctions on Serbia and its little ally Montenegro to be applied if the Bosnian Serbs refused to give their final assent to the Vance-Owen peace plan.
Talks had gone on all day.
The Bosnian Serbs' leader, Radovan Karadzic, had left to consult his parliament.
As the night wore on, Lord Owen's team made their plans.
If the Bosnian Serbs decided to sign, Lord Owen would jump in a car, meet Mr Karadzic on the motorway, and get him to put his signature on the document, possibly in a toll booth.
It was not to be.
Inat won the day.
That almost untranslatable word means bloodymindedness, defiance and spite.
Lord Owen reminded Serbia's President Slobodan Milosevic that, as Iraq has discovered, sanctions, once imposed, tend to stick.
Perhaps it was this that prompted Mr Milosevic to dispatch an emissary to the Bosnian Serbs, asking them to sign the plan.
Too late.
Among the speakers who had convinced the Bosnian Serbs that they must hold out against the world was a guest of honour, a painter called Milic Od Macve.
‘Serbian is the only language with which one can communicate with intelligent beings on other planets,’ he assured parliament.
Professor Jovan Miric, a psychiatrist, says that ‘such people…like the idea that everything important in the world [and out of it]revolves around the Serbs.’
So, as the deadline set by the United Nations Security Council passed, new sanctions came into effect.
They are meant to plug the gaps in the trade embargo that has been in force for almost a year.
This has had a devastating economic effect — but has failed to change most Serbs' minds.
The new sanctions seek to prevent Serbs buying goods abroad using money laundered in, for example, Cyprus.
The new measures will have no immediate effect, save to accelerate rump-Yugoslavia's descent from a relatively modern economy to an agrarian barter state.
This remnant of a country may be slipping towards a ‘future’ rather like Albania's in its Stalinist days, or present-day Cuba's.
Was it consciousness of this that got Mr Milosevic belatedly to urge the Bosnian Serbs to sign the Vance-Owen plan?
Or was he merely seeking to confuse people in the West who have been calling for military intervention?
No one knows: Mr Milosevic never talks to the nation in times of crisis.
The gap seems to be widening between Serbs who want to fight on for Greater Serbia, now, and those who think that goal must be postponed.
The Bosnian Serbs refused to sign the Vance-Owen plan because, if it were ever implemented, it would make it impossible for this generation of Serbs to link Serbia proper with the Serb-held parts of Bosnia and Croatia to make them a single state.
They refused to sign, indeed, even though the negotiators had offered a ten-kilometre-wide, UN-controlled corridor linking Serbia to the Serb-held parts of northern Bosnia.
They say this would leave them vulnerable to attack, because the UN would not let them receive arms and ammunition through the corridor.
Although they have said No, the leaders of the Bosnian Serbs have left themselves with a way out.
They say the question will be put to a referendum on May 15th and 16th.
Most Bosnian Serbs are against the peace plan, but perhaps they will vote otherwise if their leaders powerfully tell them to.
On the battlefield, Serbs operating out of a ‘UN-protected’ zone in one of the Serb-held parts of Croatia this week opened a new front by attacking the solidly Muslim area around Bihac, in Bosnia.
The UN's commander, General Lars-Eric Wahlgren, ordered French troops in the zone to protect civilians.
He said this was not a change in policy, because peacekeepers had a duty to see that no harm came to civilians.
But his deputies said the UN's men did not have a peacekeeping mandate; they were in Bosnia only to protect aid convoys.
Twisting the confused UN's tail, Mr Karadzic claimed the Serbs advancing into Bihac — apparently with tanks and artillery — were simple villagers, outside his control.
The confusion is not confined to the UN.
Television viewers have been revolted by evidence that the Croats, too, have been doing some ‘cleansing’ in Bosnia.
Some European governments have begun to mutter that it is time the Croats had a taste of sanctions.
It has also been inconveniently revealed that some Muslim fighters have being doing to Croats what the Croats stand accused of doing to Muslims.
All of which confuses those who say that Europe's prime responsibility is stop Serbian expansion.
A Belgrade mystic claims that Bosnia is a black hole, and that Europe is about to disappear into it.
The first part of that proposition, at any rate, is plainly true.
Italy
All aboard
FROM OUR ROME CORRESPONDENT
WITH the appointment of Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, the governor of the Bank of Italy, to form a new government on April 26th, Italy broke new ground.
Mr Ciampi, who is 72, is the first non-parliamentarian to be asked to form a government.
He announced that he would pick his ministers himself, rather than submit to the dictate of party leaders used to bartering cabinet posts for parliamentary support.
It worked.
Mr Ciampi announced his team only two days after his appointment — a record in Italy.
A government of national salvation by another name, it includes several non-party technocrats, the leader of the Greens and, most important, three members of the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS), bringing to an end the former Communists' 45 years of political ostracism.
Almost all politicians thought Giuliano Amato's scandal-battered four-party coalition had to be replaced by a broader-based one.
But no one agreed on who should lead the next government, nor on how long it should last.
President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro chose Mr Ciampi largely because his personal prestige is unrivalled.
The Bank of Italy is one of the few public bodies that commands respect.
The market response was enthusiastic.
After months in the doldrums, the lira strengthened.
The political reaction was cooler.
Leaders of the Christian Democrats and of Mr Amato's own Socialist Party gave grudging approval.
Mr Ciampi can count on the support of the other members of Mr Amato's coalition and the Republicans, Greens, and, presumably, the PDS (though there were rumblings of revolt from the left of the party when its leader, Achille Occhetto, gave his support).
Other parties opted to wait and see.
Mr Ciampi's first priority will be to carry out the electoral reforms overwhelmingly endorsed by Italian voters by referendum in mid April.
This is not as easy as it sounds, because the Christian Democrats and PDS differ about which electoral system should be introduced.
The referendum replaced Italy's pure form of proportional representation with a first-past-the-post system for Italy's upper house.
The doubt is whether to extend this to the lower house, or introduce a French-style ballot for both houses.
Mr Ciampi will be on more familiar ground in his economic policies.
A persistent critic of profligate government, he now has his chance to trim the deficit.
He has pledged spending cuts and a crackdown on tax evasion: a tall order for Italy's parliament, many of whose members fear austerity could further damage their popularity, with elections looming this year.
Mr Ciampi's move, after 13 years, from governor's office to government will cause upheaval at the Bank of Italy.
A staunch champion of the independence of the bank, Mr Ciampi will not want to hold both offices for long.
Mr Lanfranco Dini, his second-in-command, is the most likely successor, although he has a challenger in Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, one of the bank's deputy directors-general.
It is a battle which Mr Ciampi might be tempted to influence from his new position of command.
The Maastricht treaty
Where's the beef?
WHEN, last June 2nd, Denmark said No in a referendum to the Maastricht Treaty on European Union, popular discussion of the treaty took off.
So when the Danes reconsider it in another referendum on May 18th, will most Europeans know what is at stake?
No.
A year of argument has left them as befogged as before.
Each government parades its favourite clauses.
Some claim Maastricht blocks European federalism; others that it promotes it.
And most things that make people dislike Maastricht are aspects of the Community that predated it.
So when the Danes scupper or salvage the treaty, few will have a clear idea of what, concretely, has been lost or won.
Here, therefore, is a short guide to where Maastricht will tangibly change the Community — in what The Economist sees as good or bad ways — and where the treaty sounds grandiose but will deliver little.
Start with the mood music, where Maastricht sets a tone but not much more.
European citizenship is mainly symbolic.
The Committee of the Regions may make regional governments feel better but will probably be as ineffective as the existing Economic and Social Committee.
The subsidiarity principle (taking decisions at the lowest practicable level of government), which the British government makes much of, is drafted in a form so soft that it will cut both ways if it cuts at all.
The three-pillared architecture of the new union — by which foreign affairs and home affairs (policing, immigration) will form two pillars distinct from the pre-Maastricht Community — does little to change, or to preserve, the status quo.
The new pillars do not embody novelties that amount to much.
There are no significant new constraints on governments to make joint foreign, defence, immigration or policing policies.
Threats, not pillars, will decide whether the members devise joint foreign or defence policies.
Needs, not pillars, will push them towards more co-ordinated policies on immigration and terrorism.
The changes that count are the ones to EC institutions and the ground rules that they play by.
First, two changes that The Economist is keen on.
The backbone of the treaty is the route to, and design of, monetary union between two or more members.
With sterling out of Europe's exchange-rate mechanism, Britons tend to write this off as a pipe-dream.
Yet as long as France and Germany remain committed to it, the programme to give the whole European market a non-inflationary money still has bite.
The other effective change is that the Council of Ministers will use qualified majority voting (thus removing the national veto) in five areas of policy relevant to the free flow of goods, services, people and money.
These are rules on capital flows, transport and environment, together with some useful measures on education and the granting of European regional aid, known as cohesion funds.
The last help poorer members adjust to a single open market.
Then there are three significant changes that look worrying.
The most important is the social protocol in which 11 of the 12 members (Britain opted out) agreed to use majority voting to harmonise working conditions and employees' rights in the Community.
The worry here is that the protocol will reduce the ability of the EC's poorer members — including eventual newcomers from Eastern Europe — to compete in the great market.
The second is the virtual veto power the treaty will give to the European parliament on new European law in many areas.
This is a promotion of parliament at the expense of the council of member-governments.
It will probably lead to more unrealistic and costly rule-making on, say, the environment or labour rights.
The third is the new power the European Commission and the council will get to demand changes in the fiscal policies of members.
Partly this is the E of EMU (economic and monetary union)— the fiscal discipline thought necessary to make monetary union work.
Partly it is designed to help the EC pursue a ‘high degree of convergence of economic performance.’
The Economist disputes the case for either, preferring to combine one European money with maximum national fiscal independence.
In sum, the tangible effects of Maastricht will be a programme for a European money and the certainty of broader, stronger powers of European government — with good and ill effects, in our view, finely balanced.
The main intangible is the immense effort that the Community's governments have invested in the exercise, and the effect of failure or success on their collective will to govern Europe co-operatively.
Better than aid
WHY is the EC so reluctant to open its markets to imports, especially of farm goods, from Eastern Europe?
Nobody doubts that trade is the best way to help Poland, Hungary, the former Czechoslovakia and the others to overcome their economic difficulties.
Growing exports would give them foreign currency — the means to raise living standards and modernise their factories.
More important, trade would tie their economies into the global market, allowing them to specialise in the things they do best, and helping governments to consolidate their economic reforms.
In all these ways, trade is quantitatively and qualitatively better than aid.
The only reason to prefer aid, as the EC appears to, is that freer trade could harm its own economies.
A new study by two British economists shows that it would do just the opposite*.
In principle, freer trade ought to benefit EC consumers (because of cheaper food) and taxpayers (because of lower subsidies) as well as help Eastern Europe's exporters.
The EC's farmers, however, would lose.
Economic theory would lead you to expect a net gain even in the EC — making it possible to compensate Western Europe's producers for their losses and still show a gain for consumers and taxpayers.
To test this, the study uses a detailed economic model of Europe's farm trade.
For a variety of farm goods, the model takes account of changes in trade on prices, and vice versa, and makes it possible to calculate the gains and losses.
The table shows the results of a doubling of Eastern Europe's farm exports (from their pre-reform levels in 1989), assuming that all the increase would be bought by the EC, and that the increase in EC imports would be allowed to depress farm prices — the worst case, as EC farmers would see it.
Altogether, EC farmers would lose nearly £3 billion ($1.7 billion) a year; taxpayers and consumers would gain, between them, about £4.5 billion; and Eastern Europe's exporters would gain about £1.5 billion.
If these figures turned out to be right, it would be possible to compensate western farmers for their losses in full, greatly improve Eastern Europe's hard-currency earnings, and still leave EC taxpayers and consumers £1.5 billion a year better off.
The study also examines the effects country by country.
Unless compensated, Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain would suffer mostly small net losses; gains elsewhere would be correspondingly greater.
As imports increased, the implied cuts in prices would lie between 1% and 8% (depending on the product).
These numbers are hardly outlandish.
They compare with a cut of 14% in the EC's average farm-gate prices between 1985 and 1991.
Better access for Eastern Europe's farm exports therefore ought to be manageable, even if losers went uncompensated.
Since compensation would be easily affordable, there is no reason for further delay.
* ‘The Political Economy of Eastern Europe's Trade with the European Comunity: Why So Sensitive?’
By Jim Rollo and Alasdair Smith.
Economic Policy 16, April 1993.
BUSINESS
El conquistador
SPAIN'S loss-making but pushy state-owned airline, Iberia, is expanding again.
The carrier, whose losses cost Spanish taxpayers about Ptas33 billion ($122m) in 1992, has already taken over three privatised South American airlines and bought a large stake in a fourth.
Now it is hoping to take shares in another quartet of carriers and to spread its wings into the world's biggest single airline market, the United States.
Iberia's forays into Latin America have not been entirely happy.
The airline's purchase of a 30% stake and management control of Aerolineas Argentinas and its domestic-airline subsidiary, Austral, was plagued by disagreements with local investors and by strikes when Iberia tried to trim the group's bloated labour force.
Those troubles now appear to be over, but Aerolineas Argentinas is still losing money.
So is Viasa, a Venezuelan airline in which Iberia has both a 45% stake and management control.
By contrast, Chile's Ladeco, in which Iberia has a 35% stake but which it does not manage, is in the black.
Iberia is also keen to buy a stake in Pluna, Uruguay's state airline, and has made three unsuccessful bids for a slice of Bolivia's flag carrier, Lloyd Aereo Boliviano.
The ambitious Spanish carrier is almost certain to make an offer for Peru's state AeroPeru when it is (eventually) privatised, and is also eyeing the Dominican Republic's airline, Dominicana.
While it attempts to mop up most of South America's carriers, Iberia is also expanding north of the border.
As well as flying from Madrid to Miami, Iberia can now pick up extra passengers in Miami, ferrying them on in smaller aircraft to six Central American cities and the Mexican resort of Cancun.
Iberia reckons it is the first European carrier to offer flights from America to third countries.
Next stop is to fly across America.
Iberia hopes to do that through a marketing agreement with Carnival Airlines, a 14-aircraft carrier based in Fort Lauderdale.
At present the airline operates mainly between Florida and Puerto Rico but, if America's Department of Transport agrees, it hopes to be able to fly from Miami to New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Houston and New Orleans.
Carnival would mostly use leased airliners and would share flight codes with Iberia.
This would allow the Spanish airline to market the American services as if they were its own.
Earlier this year America's loss-making airlines tried in vain to block a similar arrangement between British Airways and USAir, after the British airline took a 24.6% stake in the American carrier.
America's airlines will not welcome another foreign rival trying to do the same — especially a state-owned carrier.
The Clinton administration, which is looking at ways to help America's struggling airlines, may not be keen either.
Re-engineered Valley
BATTERED by low prices for oil and gas, Bow Valley Industries, an energy company based in Calgary, Alberta, with sales of C$142m ($100m) in 1992, decided two years ago to rethink the way it did business.
Three layers of management were stripped out.
The firm's corporate structure was flattened, just as business-school gurus recommend.
Previously organised along functional lines, Bow Valley (in which British Gas has a 54% stake) restructured into separate business units, each an autonomous profit centre.
The theory: a flatter, less-hierarchical organisation would enable the information that managers need to take decisions to flow more freely.
This would help the firm to respond swiftly to the vagaries of the energy business.
The reality?
‘We were drowning in data but starved of information,’ says Gary Moore, now Bow Valley's information-systems manager.
To discover what had gone wrong, a management team re-examined the processes by which decisions were made, and the way in which information flowed between the firm's 300 employees.
Michael O'Neil, the project's manager, concluded that Bow Valley's information systems, based on ageing mainframe computers, prevented data from crossing functional and divisional boundaries.
The company had become flatter, but its information systems remained stubbornly hierarchical.
This engendered an ‘us-and-them’ attitude: information was seen as a divisional resource, only rarely to be shared with other operating units.
To break down such barriers, Bow Valley last year decided to re-engineer the way in which it processed and distributed information.
At the heart of that strategy was the replacement of the company's mainframe computers with networks of high-powered desktop workstations.
Rather than do this piecemeal over several years, Mr Moore chose to complete the process in five months flat.
The new system went live earlier this year.
Mr Moore reckons the benefits of swift ‘cutting and reseeding’ are legion.
By forcing employees to think in new ways, and to co-operate with other business units, divisional barriers are being blurred and breached.
New cross-divisional groups have been formed to take advantage of the freshly freed-up data.
As a result, information is being analysed more efficiently, allowing decisions to be taken more swiftly.
Best of all, thinks Mr Moore, ‘it has drawn the culture of the company together.
Everyone is now on the same side.’
As a bonus, IT operating costs have been cut by 40%.
The biggest snag, says Mr Moore, is that some of the company's employees expect too much of the new system, and are disappointed when it fails to deliver miracles.
And other employees — mostly those who feel threatened by the new processes — remain convinced that the rapidly installed new order will collapse into chaos.
Bow Valley's management is equally certain that a gradual transition, rather than the wholesale re-engineering for which it opted, would not have transformed the firm's information systems so effectively.
Television in Mexico
Changing channels
MEXICO CITY
Televisa, Mexico's TV giant, is building a Spanish-language media empire across the Americas.
But at home privatisation — and gringo competition — loom
MONOPOLIES are as Mexican as mescal — and just as intoxicating.
For years one of the most egregious has been in broadcasting, where a succession of governments allowed Televisa, with four TV channels, to swallow 95% of the viewing audience and 80% of television ad-spending, which totalled $1 billion last year.
In return Televisa provided slanted news coverage that helped keep the Institutional Revolutionary Party eternally in power.
But under President Carlos Salinas the Mexican media are changing.
On April 1st four groups signed up to bid for two state television stations, a film studio, a chain of cinemas and a newspaper.
These are being privatised as a package, worth up to $100m.
The gems are the TV channels.
In state hands they were moribund.
In June, when they are set to be sold, they are likely to become fiercely competitive.
For Televisa that could mean the end of a luxurious fiesta.
Since 1990 the company's sales have soared by more than 50%, to $1.3 billion last year, with net profits of $102m.
In 1991 Televisa's owner, Emilio Azcárraga, bought out some minority shareholders and took the company public, floating 20% of the equity for $145m.
(His family now owns 64%.)
This cash financed a buying spree that has turned Televisa into the world's biggest Spanish-language media group: its reach extends from Connecticut to Chile.
But with a global audience of 340m Spanish speakers — who are getting richer by the day — there are plenty of rivals raring to take on Televisa in Mexico and elsewhere.
Many of them are powerful gringo media barons.
Mr Azcárraga, said to be Mexico's richest man, is no mean magnate himself.
Over the past few years the pace of his acquisitions would make Rupert Murdoch blush.
They include a big investment in Univision, America's top Hispanic television station, and controlling stakes in TV networks in Chile and Peru.
Last July Televisa bought American Publishing Group, a Miami-based Spanish-language publisher, the world's largest such outfit, for $130m.
Televisa's biggest deal, however, came in December.
It paid $100m for 50% of Panamsat, a company which operates the main satellite used to beam programmes into Latin America.
Soon the firm's managers plan to make it more than that, by launching three new satellites which will give it worldwide coverage.
Pablo Riveroll of Baring Securities in Mexico City says the investment could be hugely profitable for Televisa in the long term, but notes that it will bring the firm no net profit until 1996.
By going shopping Mr Azcárraga has followed fashion.
Like the bosses in the once merger-mad entertainment industry to the north, Televisa's managers tout the company as an integrated media conglomerate, offering advertisers and performers exposure through a range of outlets around the Spanish-speaking world.
The formula has worked wonders in Mexico.
There Televisa owns its four TV networks (three of them nationwide), a cable-TV outfit and a sports newspaper in Mexico City, ten radio stations, three record labels, two soccer teams, a billboard company and Aztec Stadium.
Backing all this up is a studio system that churns out ‘stars’ for Televisa's bland pop-music programmes and melodramatic but successful soap operas (which are watched as far away as China and Russia).
Fernando Diez Barroso, the group's vice chairman, argues that despite its holdings in broadcasting, Televisa's core business is media ‘software’(ie, talent and programmes).
Critics say that Televisa's near-monopoly of television has enabled it to blacklist artists who deal with its rivals.
Few do.
Televisa therefore looks strong — but is it?
The real problem is that Televisa's experience in Mexico may have convinced it that a strategy which worked well in a market where the company was protected by the government is one that will succeed in the face of intense competition.
And that is what lies ahead in Latin American media — especially in television, and especially from big rivals to the north.
Cable and satellite TV are taking hold in Latin America.
Mary Ann Pasante of Spelling Satellite Network estimates that 2.5m homes are connected to cable, another 500,000 to satellite, and that these figures will double in five years.
American media firms, from Mr Murdoch's Fox to Turner Broadcast System, are eyeing the region hungrily.
They are behind the majority of the dozen new channels that will soon start broadcasting in Latin America.
One of the big three networks, NBC, launched a Spanish-language all-news channel in March.
Nowhere is the gringo threat more apparent than in Televisa's home market.
Of the four bidders for the two TV channels to be privatised, the two leading ones have close ties with American media groups.
One is led by Raymundo Gomez Flores, a businessman from Guadalajara who is rumoured to have the backing of Capital Cities/ABC, which owns another of America's networks, and of Paramount, a Hollywood studio.
The other is a consortium which includes Multivision, an upstart pay-TV company in Mexico City which claims more subscribers than Televisa.
It also has links to Turner and Fox.
As such it may emerge as Televisa's main local rival.
Televisa believes that Mexicans will not be as keen on American television as other foreigners are.
If it is proved wrong, though, more than its pride will be dented.
Domestic network television now accounts for just half of Televisa's sales, compared with more than 70% in 1990.
But it remains essential to a stable cash flow.
Since 1990 Televisa has pushed up its ad prices at a rate five times that of consumer-price inflation.
Because of its dominance of the market, the firm compels advertisers to deposit a year's payment for ads in advance.
Televisa gets free use of the money; advertisers allegedly get discounts (they are not so sure).
Televisa's Mr Diez Barroso says rates are cheap — around a fifth of those in America — and that the market would accept them at twice the price.
Maybe.
But that is because they, like the budding Mexican TV stars, have no other choice.
Once both do, neither may be so willing to be bullied.
The future ain't what it used to be
THE secret of successful economic forecasting is to give a number or a date, but never both.
The economic seers who regularly provide The Economist with forecasts for the 13 big industrial economies (published once a month on our economic and financial indicator pages) are not allowed that luxury.
The actual figures for GDP growth in 1992 have now been published in all the big economies.
How did our seers fare?
The table shows the average of the 1992 growth forecasts made by our panel in December 1991, alongside the outturn.
For instance, in December 1991 the seers made an average forecast for America's GDP growth in 1992 of 2%; this was almost spot on the actual growth of 2.1%.
As a group, they also came close for France.
But elsewhere their predictions were far too rosy.
The forecasters' biggest blunder was in Britain: their average forecast for growth in 1992 was 2.1%.
We now know that recorded GDP slumped by 0.5% during the year.
Unlike other surveys of economic forecasts, which usually poll local forecasters in each country, The Economist polls mainly large international banks which make forecasts on a consistent basis for all the big economies.
This allows us to do more than simply check back on the forecasters' performance on individual countries; it enables us to assess which forecaster has the best record across all the big economies.
Twelve of our panel (see footnote to table) provide forecasts for all the G7 economies.
Taking these 12 pollsters' December 1991 GDP forecasts, we have added up their absolute forecasting errors (ie, ignoring whether it is plus or minus) for each of the seven economies.
All the forecasters had embarrassingly large errors, but the winner, with the smallest total error, was Morgan Stanley, an American investment bank.
Repeating this exercise for inflation forecasts, Morgan Stanley again tops the league.
We will spare the blushes of those forecasters' who notched up the biggest errors.
The Economist's consensus forecast for growth beat all but three (Morgan Stanley, J.P.
Morgan and BZW) of the 12 seers.
Indeed, studies in America suggest that individual economists rarely beat consensus forecasts consistently over time: this year's forecasting star tends to be next year's duffer.
We challenge this year's winners.
High-technology trade
School's out
TOKYO
LURKING in Japan's ¥13.2 trillion ($116 billion) supplementary budget, unveiled in April, was an intriguing proposal.
As part of a plan to create a ‘new social infrastructure’, the government said it would buy 330,000 personal computers between now and 1996 for use in state schools.
The new infrastructure is supposed to create a computerised Japan packed with fibre-optic information ‘highways’.
Leading the effort has been Tadahiro Sekimoto, chairman of NEC, Japan's fourth biggest computer company.
America's government, however, is troubled.
It fears that the ¥200 billion school project will amount to little more than a bail-out of struggling Japanese computer makers — such as NEC, which made its first ever consolidated loss, of ¥44 billion, in the year to March.
Personal computers are NEC's most profitable product.
With a 52% share of the market, the company dominates Japan's PC industry.
This may not last.
Thanks to recession, total domestic sales of personal computers fell by 8% in the year to March.
Worse, Japanese PC makers now face foreign competition in their home market, as American importers sell machines fitted with software able to display Japanese characters.
Battered by Apple, Compaq and Dell, NEC belatedly announced big price cuts in February, but its computers still sell for about ¥150,000 more than those of its foreign competitors.
Japanese consumers have noticed.
Houston-based Compaq says its sales rose by 10% during the first three months of this year.
Hence the need for government help in clearing warehouses.
The average Japanese secondary school has 13 computers; the average elementary school just four.
NEC has a tight grip on the school market, though there is no universal standard.
Fujitsu has been trying to expand its share by offering massive discounts.
In some cases, this amounts to giving away PCs.
Apple has been successful selling to schools in other countries, but has so far failed to make an impact in Japan (apart from selling to private schools).
This is partly because it began trying to sell to government schools only a year ago, and partly because it would prefer not to give its machines away.
American officials generously agree that there is nothing wrong with government schemes to spend money on PCs, so long as foreign firms have a fair chance to bid for orders.
In view of the official line that April's supplementary budget was designed to boost only domestic firms, this may be naive.
Nonetheless, the first sign that the Japanese government is buying exclusively from domestic PC makers will be seen as confirming its intention to bail out NEC and others with disguised subsidies.
In an industry where the Americans argue (correctly) that they are more competitive on both product and price, that would be provocative.
Mickey Kantor, America's trade representative, has already raised the issue with Japan's trade minister, Yoshiro Mori.
President Clinton is friendly with Silicon Valley and with Apple's chairman, John Sculley.
Computers and computer parts are America's second-biggest manufactured export to Japan, after aircraft.
Moreover, America's computer industry is just the sort of high-skill, high-wage industry Mr Clinton says he wants to promote.
Lobbying to sell products for which Japanese consumers are voting with their wallets will make a change from lobbying for lemons from Detroit.
Euro Disney
Waiting for Dumbo
OF ALL the fads spurred by the onset of the single European market, none has proved as damning as the one that might be called ‘Euronomia’: an uncontrollable compulsion to include ‘Euro’ in company names.
Not only is this irritating to consumers; it also seems to rebound on some of the firms themselves — think of Eurotunnel, or of Euro RSCG, a troubled French ad agency.
And then there is Euro Disney, which is fast becoming a synonym for Eurodisaster.
On April 27th Euro Disney, which runs a big amusement park outside Paris modeled on American ones owned by its parent firm, Walt Disney, announced its results for the six months to the end of March 1993.
They are ugly.
On sales of FFr1.8 billion ($133m), the company suffered a net loss of FFr1.1 billion.
These figures were for the cold season; the second half will be much better.
But some analysts expect Euro Disney to make losses until 1996.
And it is becoming clear that the company will need to raise new capital if the second phase of its development, a theme park called Disney MGM Studios-Europe, is to go ahead on schedule.
Since opening the gates to the Magic Kingdom a little more than a year ago, Euro Disney has been beset by a series of much-publicised problems: poor attendance, labour disputes, French snobbery and pan-European discontent over high prices and long queues.
In the year to last September Euro Disney lost FFr188m.
That was less than many analysts had expected, partly because the parent company had decided to defer its ‘management fee’(3% of gross revenues until 1997, when it rises to 6%) until Euro Disney becomes profitable.
In January the firm said that, to lure visitors during winter, it would cut its admission prices for locals.
The French, who had been staying away in droves, would also be targeted with a splashy new advertising campaign.
The proportion of French visitors did indeed rise.
And although attendance during the rainy season was poor, the company's projection of 11m visitors for the first year has not proved far from the mark.
To no avail.
Euro Disney says it will make a ‘substantial’ loss for the year to September.
Rebecca Winnington-Ingram, European media analyst at Morgan Stanley in London, reckons that ‘substantial’ means FFr887m.
Cutting ticket prices for the French may have helped the park nearly to hit its attendance targets, but it has also eaten into revenues.
As many as 70% of winter visitors may have taken the discount.
Nor do the French stay overnight much; hence a hotel-occupancy rate of just 37% for the first half.
Euro Disney's costs have been exorbitant, and a slumping French property market has deprived the firm of hoped-for profits from property development.
If the short-term picture looks grim, the longer-term one looks positively bleak.
The second phase of development is supposed to start this autumn, but it is unclear how Euro Disney plans to finance its FFr8 billion-10 billion cost.
The company has steadily drained its cash reserves (now FFr1.9 billion) while piling up debt (FFr21 billion).
Euro Disney has now admitted that it and Walt Disney are ‘exploring potential sources of financing for Euro Disney’.
Given the gusher of cash flowing out of the company, that is unsurprising; it is also talking to banks about restructuring its debt.
Euro Disney stresses that the idea of raising new money is not related specifically to phase two.
This is hard to believe.
Many analysts think the project will never make much money without its second phase; which is why nobody at Euro Disney is keen to delay starting it.
But with banks and investors wary, the company may have little choice — unless, of course, Walt Disney once again comes to the rescue, as it did by deferring its management fee.
But that was easy: to defer is not to forgo.
This time the cost, and the risk, may be far higher.
A profitable theme
PARIS
IT MAY be of little comfort to Euro Disney's shareholders, but all France's leisure parks are struggling to make ends meet.
All, that is, except Futuroscope, a small but successful park near Poitiers, 330 kilometres (205 miles) south-west of Paris.
Last year it made a FFr10m ($1.9m) net profit on sales of FFr175m, and the number of visitors rose by almost a third, to 1.3m.
The park's managers are hoping to double profits this year.
Set up in 1987, Futuroscope calls itself an image park.
Fifteen gigantic screens housed in three futuristic buildings allow the parks' customers to take part in, among other things, a 3-D safari.
After escaping from the lions' den, kids and their parents can try water rides and giant toboggans.
Why has Futuroscope been such a success?
Its high technology appeals to parents as well as children, and it was relatively cheap to build.
An adult pays FFr120 a day (Euro Disney costs FFr225).
Also, the park's hotel accommodation is cheap, costing as little as FFr60 a night.
Futuroscope's marketing strategy is clever, too.
Instead of spending money on a media blitz, it sends carefully targeted mailings to social-events committees and retirement clubs, and to schools and colleges.
Given Futuroscope's success, it is hardly surprising that the park has attracted the curiosity of its competitors.
At Easter, visitors even included a senior executive of Euro Disney with his wife and kids in tow.
He must have found it an educational experience.
Take a clean sheet of paper
Behind the hype surrounding ‘business process re-engineering’ lurks an important message to companies
IT SOUNDS like a parody of a management fad — no mean feat considering that many people view management fads themselves as parodies of rational thought.
Instead of learning from past mistakes and triumphs, say the proponents of ‘business process re-engineering’, managers should forget everything they know about how their companies operate, and reinvent their businesses from scratch.
The reward?
Leaps in productivity and competitiveness.
Despite its ugly terminology and grandiose claims, re-engineering has been embraced publicly by scores of companies, including AT&T, Texas Instruments, Ford, Citicorp, Aetna Life and IBM.
Many firms began ‘re-engineering’ parts of their business before the term was first popularised by Michael Hammer, an American management consultant, in 1990.
Hundreds more are now planning to do the same.
To anyone not running a company, the fuss among businessmen about re-engineering — or ‘process redesign’ as it is also called — seems puzzling.
Its two basic ideas sound obvious, and neither is new.
The first is to start with a clean sheet of paper and design all or parts of the operations of a company in the best way possible.
The second is to look on companies as performing a small number of continuing processes, rather than as collections of people performing hundreds of distinct, though related, functions.
Are not managers constantly exhorted to adopt a fresh approach to their jobs and to ‘streamline’ their businesses?
And is the difference between a ‘process’ and a ‘function’anything more than a semantic quibble?
The answer to both questions is yes, says Mr Hammer.
He cheerfully admits that there is nothing new about re-engineering.
‘These ideas are obvious.
No one disputes them.
The trouble is, until recently no one followed them either.’
Managers often talk about fundamental re-examinations of their business, but most of the improvements they attempt are incremental.
Questioning everything a company does is usually too risky and confronts too many entrenched interests among managers and employees to be worth doing unless a firm is in dire trouble.
By then a complete overhaul is often too late to be of much use.
Similarly, managers in nearly every industry have learned from Japanese firms to look at quality control and inventory management as continuous processes, rather than discrete tasks.
But aside from these two areas, most companies still operate with thousands of specialists who are judged and rewarded by how well they perform their separate functions — with little knowledge, or concern, about how these fit into the complex process of turning raw materials, capital and labour into a product or service.
The reason firms should now re-engineer their businesses, argues Mr Hammer, is that rapid advances in computers, and their plummeting price, have made such a back-to-basics attitude possible.
Most firms are still organised to exploit the efficiencies to be gained from breaking down work into a sequence of specialised tasks, an approach first described by Adam Smith in his famous account of production in a pin factory.
But in just a few years computers have made many specialised tasks obsolete, enabling one person not only to do the work of many, but to do many different jobs at once.
Too many companies, says Mr Hammer, have used computers to automate existing tasks and procedures, when what firms should have done is to obliterate them.
One of Mr Hammer's favourite examples is Ford's redesign of the procedures it uses to pay its thousands of suppliers.
This operation once employed 500 people shuffling purchase orders and invoices among themselves.
Ford managers asked whether any of these bits of paper were necessary.
Now 125 people do the same job faster.
The clerk at the receiving dock, using a computer to reconcile deliveries with orders instantly, accepts goods on his own authority and issues payment.
There are no bits of paper to shuffle.
Most of the successful efforts cited by reengineering advocates are such nuts-and-bolts examples.
But Mr Hammer claims that the opportunities created by computers represent such a dramatic break with the past that they justify managers rethinking their entire business.
Few companies have yet gone this far.
Nevertheless, one reason why Mr Hammer's message has been received so eagerly is that, to a large extent, he is preaching to the converted.
Some of the changes which he is describing are visible to everyone.
When computers first appeared in offices in the late 1970s, they were used as glorified typewriters by secretaries.
Now millions of managers and other professionals, especially in America, use computers, voice-mail and faxes themselves, wiping out the need for typing pools, secretaries and telephone operators.
On the other hand, there is a widespread frustration among companies that the billions invested in computers during the past decade have failed to produce bigger productivity gains.
Some of the most startlingly successful companies of the past decade, such as Wal-Mart and Dell Computer, are those which examined the operations of their industry's leading firms, and decided to do things completely differently with the help of computers.
Wal-Mart dethroned Sears as America's largest retailer by using computerised stock-control systems to offer shoppers greater variety at lower cost.
Dell became one of the world's largest PC companies by using computers to avoid an expensive dealer network or salesforce and sell directly to consumers.
Nuke it
Of course it is easier to design a new business, as Michael Dell did, than redesign an existing one.
This is one reason why firms are often most willing to start with a clean sheet of paper when setting up a new subsidiary, as Britain's Midland Bank did when it established First Direct, its successful telephone-banking business.
A number of large firms, however, have become enthusiastic about re-engineering after trying, and failing, to automate small parts of their existing business.
In the early 1980s Texas Instruments (TI), prodded by an ambitious procurement chief, invested heavily in automating his department.
Armed with computers, the procurement department did its job much faster, reports Larry Skinner, the company's chief of re-engineering, but it actually took longer for anyone in TI to purchase supplies because filling out all the forms demanded by the procurement department had become so complicated.
‘We pretty well nuked the existing process,’ says Mr Skinner.
Today ‘caseworkers’ using computers see every purchase order through to completion.
Orders are processed much faster and the firm has cut procurement costs by $10m a year.
Mr Skinner is now directing similar efforts to re-engineer other parts of TI's business.
AT&T has had a similar experience with its Global Business Communications Systems subsidiary, which sells $1 billion of telecommunications gear annually to corporate customers.
After redesigning from scratch the way it processed orders from customers, it has cut delivery times from 8-12 weeks to ‘days’ even while using 35% fewer people to do the job.
There may be big rewards in ‘nuking’ a company's existing methods, but there are also big obstacles.
Paradoxically, one of the biggest, says Thomas Davenport, a management consultant with Ernst & Young and one of the earliest advocates of re-engineering, is a company's existing computer system, which can be so complex and yet so central to the firm's business that it is too expensive and too risky to scrap entirely (though not always — see box).
One American telephone company, he says, admits that its computerised billing system is a disaster, producing errors on 70% of orders for new telephones.
But the firm's managers cannot face the ‘nightmare’ of replacing its vast computer system and related software with something new and untested.
Mr Davenport now worries that re-engineering is passing from a fad to a cliché.
The term is being applied by some zealots to any change.
America's Chrysler, he points out, claims to have an incredible 150 re-engineering efforts going on at once.
One of his clients boasted of a decision to provide employees with milk instead of cream for their coffee as ‘re-engineering’.
‘At this level, the term loses all meaning,’ complains Mr Davenport.
The backlash begins.
America's energy industry
Welling up
AMERICA'S oil patch has seen more whingeing than wildcatting in recent years.
The oil and gas industry has lost more jobs since 1982 than the country's car, steel and textile industries combined.
Not so rugged as they once were, America's oilmen spend more of their time moaning to politicians and colleagues at seminars about imports, environmentalists and taxes, and less drilling for oil and gas.
But the tide of special pleading may be turning.
Beneath the hubbub there is the distant roar of oil and gas gushing to the surface.
Over the past few weeks a clutch of American oil companies has reported markedly better results.
Chevron's net profits for the first quarter of this year (adjusted for changes in accounting) were $101m, 47% higher than for the same period a year earlier.
Amoco's net profits in the first quarter increased to $129m.
When last year's one-off charges are taken into account, the change is even more dramatic.
Mobil reported a net profit of $190m, after a loss of $119m during the first quarter of 1992.
Even firms such as Texaco, which have been struggling to overhaul their businesses over the past few years, have transformed losses into profits.
This reversal of fortunes has not been lost on Wall Street.
While shares in foreign oil firms and in American refiners and marketers have been falling, shares in American oil and gas production companies have surged ahead.
John S. Herold, a consultancy based in Connecticut, says its index of share prices of large companies producing oil and gas in America rose by 12% during the first quarter.
Smaller energy firms did better still, climbing by almost 20%.
The improvement is partly the fruit of years of cutting costs.
Drilling activity has fallen almost four-fold from its peak in 1981.
Head offices have shrunk.
Larger firms have pared back their rambling portfolios of oil and gas properties.
But there is also a change in sentiment.
Even though crude-oil imports continue to grow relentlessly, many in the industry feel that the decline in American oil and gas production will not be as precipitous as they once feared.
Atlantic Richfield, the largest operator in Alaska, has recently announced large new discoveries in Cook Inlet in the south of the state and Kuvlum in the north.
Although, in terms of volume or profitability, such discoveries cannot hope to make up for the fading glory of the state's North Slope field, daily Alaskan production might fall by only a few hundred thousand barrels over the next decade, rather than dwindling away, as some had suggested.
Alaska apart, much of America's energy business concentrates on producing gas — and ‘the real boom’ is there, according to Dillard Spriggs of Petroleum Analysis, an energy consultancy based in New York.
After years of declining prices (see chart), there are at last signs that the American gas market has begun to rebound.
Throughout most of the 1980s there was a ‘bubble’ of spare capacity, equal to about a quarter of total capacity at its peak.
But now, according to Kenneth Lay, boss of Enron, a Texan gas producer and pipeline firm whose share price has increased by 22% since the start of the year, supply and demand of gas have moved roughly into balance.
as if to reinforce the industry's optimism, several recent reports have endorsed gas's future.
Demand looks set to increase steadily at about 1.4% a year, as clean-burning gas replaces oil and coal.
Much of the new demand will come from a doubling in the amount of gas consumed by electricity generators.
Gas could also benefit from emissions controls on vehicles.
The fleet of gas-fuelled vehicles could grow, according to one estimate, from 30,000 in 1992 to more than 9m by 2010.
As a result, the Gas Research Institute, an industry think tank, predicts that gas prices will rise by 4.2% a year in real terms during the 1990s.
Better technology should help both to recover more gas from existing reserves and also to make new areas accessible.
As a result, about two-thirds of the new demand could be supplied by American wells.
It may be time for oilmen to cheer up.
Rewriting the future
The IMF bravely forecasts that all the big industrial economies will recover by the end of 1993.
If so, when should governments touch the brakes?
ALL economists are blushing about their recent forecasting failures (see page 91), and the International Monetary Fund is no exception.
In late 1991 the IMF forecast that the industrial world would grow by a robust 2.8% in 1992.
It actually grew by 1.5%.
America's economy picked up, as expected, but Japan and continental Europe sank into recession.
What about 1993?
In its latest World Economic Outlook, the IMF's economists have trimmed their forecasts for growth in industrial economies to 1.7%, down from 2.9% last October.
The most dramatic revision has been in western Germany.
Last October the IMF pencilled in growth of 2% for 1993; now it reckons that output will contract by 2%.
The rest of continental Europe is not expected to see any significant growth during the year.
Japan also looks sickly.
The Fund now expects it to grow by only 1.3% this year, down from an ambitious 3.8% last year.
Even this may be too optimistic.
The panel of forecasters polled by The Economist each month currently has an average forecast of only 0.8% growth in Japan.
Only robust expansion in America can prevent a further slowdown in the industrial world as a whole.
The IMF reckons that America's GDP will expand by 3.2% this year and next, and argues that a short-term fiscal stimulus is unnecessary.
Three days after the Outlook was published, however, new figures showed that America's GDP growth slowed to an annual rate of only 1.8% in the first quarter of 1993, down from 4.7% in the fourth quarter.
This immediately triggered talk about a triple (or is it a quadruple?) dip, but many economists believe it will prove to be no more than a stutter.
The IMF expects to see all the big economies recovering in 1994, with growth of 2.9%.
It admits, however, that the big risk is of a lower figure — especially if asset-price deflation and financial fragility continue to restrain demand, and if the Uruguay round of trade talks collapses.
To prevent such calamities the IMF wants governments to adopt ‘co-operative’ economic policies.
First, it says, America should forgo its short-term fiscal stimulus (Congress seems happy to oblige on this) and then implement medium-term budget cuts twice as big as those set out in Bill Clinton's February plan (don't hold your breath).
That would allow long-term bond yields to fall.
Second, Japan must implement its recently announced fiscal boost.
And third, Germany must cut its budget deficit to make room for lower interest rates.
None of this advice is new, but that makes it no less worthy.
The good news is that inflation in many industrial economies is close to its lowest for 30 years.
Price stability, says the IMF, is now within reach.
Alan Greenspan, chairman of America's Federal Reserve, has defined price stability as changes in the average price level which are too small to have a material effect on the decisions of businesses and households.
In other words, not quite zero inflation.
Official figures tend to overstate consumer-price inflation.
A study by Robert Gordon, at Northwestern University, estimated that America's inflation rate was overstated by 1.5-2% a year between 1947 and 1983 because of the failure to adjust for the improving quality of consumer durables.
This is another rationale for defining price stability as an annual inflation rate of 1-2%.
If the IMF's forecasts for 1994 prove correct, then 14 of the 21 industrial economies it monitors will have inflation rates of around 3% or less.
But can governments lock in these low rates?
Lifting economies out of recession is easy compared with deciding when to re-apply the brakes so the economy does not overheat later.
It may seem odd to fret about this while economies are still sluggish, but in past recoveries governments have often kept their foot on the accelerator too long.
Calls in America and Britain for further cuts in interest rates underline how easy it would be to repeat the mistake.
Inflation is not yet rising in either economy, but the trick is to tighten policy before inflation becomes a problem, by watching leading indicators.
The snag is that monetary aggregates have become unreliable, while other compasses, such as commodity and gold prices, asset prices and the shape of the yield curve, are giving conflicting signals.
There is no doubting the determination of Alan Greenspan to hold down inflation, but he does not enjoy the same political independence as Germany's Bundesbank.
The Fed is still sore from the criticism thrown at it for pushing America into recession; if it tightens policy before official figures show inflation to be rising, it will come under fierce political attack.
This makes it awkward for the Fed to act early.
The job of central bankers would be easier if governments trimmed their budget deficits as soon as recovery was under way.
The average budget deficit of the big seven economies has swollen from 1.3% of GDP in 1989 to an estimated 4.4% in 1993 (see chart).
Around half of this increase was due not to the automatic impact of recession on spending and taxes, but to an increase in structural deficits.
Governments' failure to trim deficits by more in the boom years of the 1980s is one reason why they are in their current mess.
FINANCE
Coaxing its capital home
MOSCOW
‘AN ALL-OUT robbery of Russia is going on,’ claims Alexander Rutskoi, its vice-president.
About $17 billion was siphoned out of the country into foreign bank accounts in 1992, he estimates.
Alexander Gurov, a senior official at the security ministry (a successor to the KGB, which knew a thing or two about smuggling money out of Russia) thinks that the figure is probably much nearer $16 billion.
For political reasons, these estimates are on the high side.
Mr Rutskoi has emerged as a leading opponent of the economic reforms introduced by his boss, Boris Yeltsin.
The starting point for more realistic guesses is Russia's balance of payments for 1992.
The officially recorded capital outflow, which does not include debt servicing, was a modest $1.4 billion.
However, lower down the balance lurks a black hole: ‘errors and omissions’ reflect an unrecorded capital outflow of $1.7 billion.
Thus $1.1 billion is the lowest estimate of how much money left Russia last year.
An official at Vnesheconombank, the state-owned bank for foreign trade, suggests that the most accurate figure is $12 billion-13 billion, just slightly less than the $14 billion Russia received in aid last year.
Capital flees Russia in two main ways.
A growing proportion of its commodity exports, especially oil, is stolen by consortia of local officials and mafia groups, and sold abroad.
More commonly, companies send their foreign customers two invoices; payment for the formal invoice is brought back to Russia, while cash for the informal one is kept in an illegal foreign bank account.
The surprising thing is that Russian companies choose to repatriate anything at all, officially.
Under Russian law, they are obliged to convert half their declared foreign-currency earnings into roubles.
Rouble interest rates are sharply negative, and the currency has fallen from 144 to the dollar 12 months ago to 812 now.
What happens to the other half, which can be kept in hard currency, is just as bad.
Each quarter, exporters are obliged to revalue their foreign-exchange accounts against the rouble and pay a 32% tax on the notional gains.
To make matters worse, there are always rumours that the government is about to return to confiscating export earnings, by reintroducing a fixed exchange rate and requiring exporters to convert all their profits.
The only way to coax capital back to Russia is to stabilise the economy.
Here the news is better than expected.
Inflation during March was 21%, down from over 25% in both January and February.
It is forecast to fall to 15% in April.
If Boris Fedorov, the finance minister, can force the central bank to stick to the credit limits agreed on April 9th, then Russia should comfortably meet the targets attached to the aid package offered in Tokyo.
This, in turn, should mean that Russia will receive foreign assistance equal to one-fifth of its national income in each of the third and fourth quarters.
As the government sells aid dollars to buy roubles to finance its programmes, the rouble should strengthen against the dollar.
Yet Russians with bank accounts abroad will probably be among the most reluctant to believe that theory can be turned into practice.
Until they are convinced, the outflow of capital from Russia is likely to remain uncomfortably close to the level of what comes in.
Japanese stockmarket
Any which way but down
TOKYO
WELL and truly ramped, the Tokyo stockmarket is about to shut down for Japan's annual Golden Week holiday.
Investors of public-sector funds, mainly trust banks, have taken exhaustive measures to prevent share prices from sliding during the extended vacation.
The Nikkei closed at 20,454 on April 28th — helped, to the market's surprise, by intervention against the yen on the previous day by America's Federal Reserve.
Ever since the finance minister directed late last year that a big chunk of public-sector investment money be deployed in the Japanese stockmarket, the tactics of those managing these funds have grown increasingly heavy-handed.
They are believed to have put ¥50 billion ($150m) into the equity market on April 27th, for example— far more than the ¥20 billion which is now considered their daily average.
And some are using special tactics to boost share prices, people in the market say — by, for example, deliberately pitching their buy orders above the last dealt price.
This could be considered market manipulation.
Yet nobody, save for a few free-market purists, seems to be worrying — least of all the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission, whose office is located next to the finance ministry.
Brokers and investors cite three other devices that some of those investing public-sector funds are using to give share prices a big boost:
PLOs, short for price-lifting operations, are one.
Managers buy stock-index futures at the beginning of a day's trading, which tends to raise the price of the underlying shares.
On April 22nd, for instance, one trust bank is said to have bought 1,000 Nikkei futures contracts, representing some ¥20 billion-worth of shares.
PLOs are a variation of PKOs (price-keeping operations), the term first coined by brokers to describe the government's stockmarket-support exercise late last year.
In ‘package transactions’, trust banks each buy, say, 100,000 shares of the same 20 stocks — all of them key components of the Nikkei share average.
The wildest approach is the ‘free hand’; a fund manager agrees to spend a certain amount and buys anything and everything up to that limit.
The details of public-sector funds' investment in the stockmarket are kept murky, the better to make folk think the market is on the mend.
But the strategy has its drawbacks.
Those with inside information (such as the securities houses, which execute orders from those managing the public-sector funds) have an obvious advantage.
This would seem a clear inducement to revive the share-rigging practices that so embarrassed the finance ministry when a host of securities scandals broke in 1991.
Few in the finance ministry will fret about this.
Current government policy is simply to get the stockmarket up.
Officials hope that this will help the economy to recover.
And there is another motive.
As recently announced, the government plans to sell shares in the East Japan Railway (JR East) later this year and in Japan Tobacco early in 1994.
Privatisation of JR East was shelved in 1991 and 1992 because the stockmarket was so weak; this time, the government seems committed to a sale.
The word is that officials plan to avoid the disaster (for investors) of NTT, the telecommunications firm that was Japan's first brush with privatisation, and lure retail investors with a dividend yield of 2%.
That is less bad than it looks; in Tokyo, the stockmarket yields only 0.8% these days.
A glut of central bankers?
CENTRAL bankers are riding high.
After years spent under the thumb of finance ministries, an increasing number have been given independence from politicians.
Carlo Ciampi, governor of the Bank of Italy, has just become his country's prime minister.
Yet, with all due respect, are there not too many central bankers stalking the globe?
There has certainly been a severe bout of inflation among central banks in the past two years — because countries have been splitting up.
According to the ‘Central Banking Directory’, which is published annually by Central Banking, a journal based in London, the number of central banks has jumped from 151 in 1990 to 166 in late 1992 — a larger increase than in the whole of the 1980s.
Adding up all their staff, the world has roughly 250,000 central bankers.
The Reserve Bank of India is by far the biggest, with 33,460 employees, followed by America's Federal Reserve (23,088) and the German Bundesbank (18,237).
Tonga's central bank employs just 14.
What about central bankers per head of population — supposing, which is not obvious, that bigger countries need bigger banks?
Even among the industrial economies there are vast differences which cannot easily be explained.
For every 100,000 inhabitants, Belgium boasts 32 central bankers, France 31, Germany 23, America and Britain both 9, while Japan gets by on a paltry 5.
What is the correlation, you ask, between economic performance and the number of central bankers?
Good question.
Our chart more or less confirms that the more central bankers a country has, the slower is its growth rate.
Clearly the key to economic success is to control not the supply of money, but the supply of central bankers.
European insurance
Brand new UNI
THE messy battle for UNI Storebrand, Norway's biggest insurer, has taken a pan-European twist.
This week administrators of the company, which collapsed in August 1992 after a failed bid for Skandia, a Swedish insurer, were weighing two rescue plans.
One comes from a group of domestic investors who want to keep UNI in Norwegian hands.
Another has been put forward behind closed doors by AXA, France's second-biggest insurance company.
A decision by Norway's finance minister, Sigbjorn Johnsen, is expected soon.
UNI ran into trouble after borrowing much of the NKr4.7 billion ($125m) it paid in 1991 for a 28% stake in Skandia.
Together with Hafnia, a Danish ally, the Norwegian insurer had hoped to persuade Skandia to form a pan-Nordic insurance group.
Skandia refused to co-operate, and waited instead until UNI collapsed under the weight of its debt.
Though UNI owes creditors some NKr3.6 billion and made a net loss of NKr3.4 billion last year, its 40% share of the Norwegian insurance market still makes it a tempting target.
Norway's economy is slowly recovering.
And the firm's dominant share of the country's group-life insurance and pensions market means that it is well placed to make money as private pension plans expand to supplement over-stretched state retirement schemes.
No wonder, then, that UNI has no shortage of suitors.
Two Oslo brokers, Sundal Collier and Fondsfinans, have put together a group of 30-odd Norwegian investors, including several industrial companies.
It proposes to recapitalise the insurer by raising NKr2.8 billion through a rights issue and another NKr1.5 billion or so from the bond market.
Erik Keiserud, the head of UNI's board of administrators, says a foreign investor, which insists on being nameless, has also proposed a solution.
An AXA executive confirms that the French insurer wants to invest in UNI, pointing out that gaining a foothold in Scandinavia would be in line with AXA's strategic aim of becoming a global insurer.
When he unveiled AXA's 1992 results on April 23rd, Claude Bébéar, its chief executive, stressed that the firm had some FFr16 billion ($1 billion) in cash that could be used to buy stakes in other companies.
There is, however, a snag.
Norwegian rules generally forbid foreign investors to own more than a third of an insurer.
That may not bother AXA, providing it is the dominant shareholder.
Last year it bought a minority stake (49%) in Equitable Life, America's fourth-largest life insurer, for $1 billion.
AXA has since ploughed almost $100m more into Equitable Life, which is recovering from heavy losses on its property portfolio, and reckons it will soon see a good return on its investment.
Mr Bébéar would like the chance to engineer a similar turnaround at UNI.
UNI's administrators face a difficult choice.
Though a home-grown solution would please Norwegian nationalists, it is not clear whether the domestic bidders would have enough money left after repaying UNI's creditors to develop its business.
AXA, on the other hand, could finance new investment out of its petty cash.
If the French are rebuffed, UNI may soon find itself back in trouble again.
Where regulators rule
BILL CLINTON has been painfully slow with most appointments, but he has moved faster than George Bush did in 1989 to find a chairman for the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Arthur Levitt's nomination is expected to go to the Senate shortly.
Mr Levitt is the majority owner of Roll Call, a congressional newspaper in which The Economist has a minority stake.
A stronger qualification for the new SEC chairman may be his leadership from 1978 to 1989 of the American Stock Exchange, the New York stockmarket on which mostly smaller American companies are listed.
He also established the American Business Conference, a trade group that caters mainly for smaller firms.
As SEC chairman, he may well prove to be a champion not just of small companies but also of order-driven auction markets like his former employer and the New York Stock Exchange.
That would not be welcomed by NASDAQ, the quote-driven over-the-counter market that has usurped much of the two older exchanges' business.
Mr Levitt may be more inclined than his predecessor, Richard Breeden, to prod the conclusions of Market 2000 (an SEC study of American equity markets, now nearing completion) towards keeping regulations that protect auction markets.
At 62, Mr Levitt is both older than Mr Breeden and considered less abrasive.
Impressions change fast in Washington.
Terrorist insurance
The importance of being safe
ONE bomb in the City of London may be regarded as a misfortune, as Lady Bracknell might have put it; two looks like carelessness.
A bomb blew up the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank building and the nearby NatWest tower on April 24th, just as life in London's financial centre was getting back to normal after a similar episode in April 1992.
The Baltic Exchange, wrecked in that explosion, had reopened in March.
Tighter security and several breakthroughs by the police, including the interception of a bomb intended for Britain's biggest office building, at Canary Wharf, seemed to have forced the IRA away from London towards provincial shopping centres and industrial sites.
Now the City's confidence is in tatters.
On April 29th a security alert shut down the London Stock Exchange.
Though the latest attack hit a smaller area than last year's, its impact was bigger.
An ancient church was demolished and 25 buildings were badly damaged.
Insurers reckon the cost of repairs will be at least £300m ($172m), though at this stage nobody is really sure.
Early estimates of the cost of last year's bomb were around £1 billion.
Actual claims were a little over £300m because claims for loss of business were smaller than expected; firms were better prepared for disaster than insurers had thought.
This time, too, the City has reacted quickly.
Most of the firms affected were open for business on Monday morning; all had moved into temporary accommodation by mid-week.
Although around 300,000-400,000 square feet of office space (some 1% of the City's total supply) will be needed by firms hit by the bomb, this is unlikely to have much effect on London's troubled commercial-property market.
According to Barber White, a firm of property researchers, there are about 11m square feet of vacant property in the City.
Unlike last year, most insurers have got off lightly.
Commercial Union is an exception, with probable losses of more than £15m.
Because the likelihood of future bombs was impossible to judge, most insurers simply refused to provide terrorist cover this year.
Instead, the government and insurers agreed to set up a special fund.
If firms require terrorist cover, they pay a premium into this fund, called Pool Re; claims are paid initially out of it, and the government pays any excess after the fund is exhausted.
Though the scheme has not yet been approved by Parliament, it has been in business, in effect, since the start of the year.
So far, though, Pool Re has raised far less cash than was expected, according to AIRMIC, an association that represents corporate buyers of insurance.
Lots of firms simply hoped that there would be no more bombs.
AIRMIC reckons the government will have to introduce a compulsory levy on companies to pay for terrorist cover.
A bigger priority, however, is to beef up security.
After last year's bomb the City's police installed surveillance equipment, hired around 40 extra officers, and set up occasional road blocks.
The police want to make far more checks on vehicles going into the City, but the government seems unwilling to change current laws that impede this.
Individual firms have taken on more security staff, but as yet there is little co-operation among companies on improving security outside their buildings, which is where bombs are most likely to be.
Some talk of controlling which vehicles can enter the City at particular times, and even of identity cards for people working there.
This may help people feel safer, but whether it will stop the bombers is anyone's guess.
No sex please, we're pensioners
EVER since May 17th 1990, when the European Court of Justice handed down its famous ‘Barber judgment’, providers of Europe's pensions in the public and private sectors have been seriously worried.
The judgment held that men and women were entitled to the same pension from the same age.
Applied retrospectively, some reckoned, it could increase pension-fund liabilities by up to £50 billion ($15 billion) in Britain, and nearly as much in the rest of Europe.
An appendix to the Maastricht treaty, signed in December 1991, seemed to have solved the problem.
It said that equal treatment applied only from the date when the European Court made its ruling.
But Maastricht's hesitant progress has made firms (and, indeed, governments) jumpy again.
At last they can start to relax.
A case involving a company called Coloroll has been waiting for resolution by the European Court.
On April 28th the court published an opinion by its Advocate General; this suggested that the court would decide against retrospective equality.
The opinion has a sting in its tail, however.
The Barber judgment was believed to apply mainly to ‘defined-benefit’ schemes, in which the pension is an agreed amount tied to an employee's final salary and length of service.
The opinion makes clear that it also applies to ‘defined-contribution’ schemes, in which an employee makes payments into the scheme and gets a pension reflecting the returns on his or her cash.
Not only must male and female employees make identical contributions, they must also get identical annual pensions.
But most women live longer than most men.
So, to generate the same annual pension, they should in theory pay more.
Instead, if the Advocate General prevails, men may find themselves getting less so that women can get more.
Intriguingly, these rules do not seem to apply to defined-contribution pensions bought by individuals directly from insurance companies.
If that is so, the easiest way out of this battle of the sexes will be for firms to let employees opt out of the company scheme and use their money to buy a private pension.
Sweeping up Lloyd's messes
Lloyd's business plan should improve its future structure.
But it has not solved the huge problems inherited from the past
‘SHOULD membership and market not unite behind this plan then Lloyd's may have no future.’
The warning came from David Rowland, chairman of Lloyd's, in the business plan published on April 29th.
It should concentrate minds.
It may even win Mr Rowland backing within the market and among outside names (the individuals who provide Lloyd's capital), though they will be dismayed by his forecasts of losses of up to £2.8 billion ($1.4 billion) for 1990 and over £1 billion for 1991.
He certainly needs support.
For the nightmare of the past will continue to deter new capital — and without new capital, whether corporate or individual, Lloyd's will die.
True, the plan has good ideas.
Mr Rowland and his chief executive, Peter Middleton, want to run Lloyd's as a business, for the first time in its 300-year history.
They propose an ambitious profit target: 10% of members' underwriting limits.
To achieve that will require more ‘directive’ central management, instead of the free-wheeling tradition in Lloyd's of independent underwriters and managers.
It would embrace such novel reforms (for Lloyd's) as professional training, peer review, tight cost controls, tougher regulation, fuller disclosure of information from a better database, and centralisation of back-office functions.
Messrs Rowland and Middleton also wish to manage Lloyd's capital base.
They want capacity to grow in order to benefit from today's rising insurance rates, but not too fast; the 1980s showed how easily growth can lead to losses.
Corporate members, which they want to admit next year alongside names trading with unlimited liability, will have to bid for a place — the price being a levy to Lloyd's central fund.
The plan's backers are confident that there is substantial corporate demand to join Lloyd's.
Neil Shaw, chairman of the Association of Lloyd's Members, says he will probably switch to corporate membership.
The plan's changes should go a long way to drag Lloyd's up to the standards of other financial markets.
Mr Rowland says most can be introduced immediately, without either membership approval or a new Lloyd's Act.
Aggrieved names landed with huge losses could be forgiven for asking why, in that case, they were not brought in earlier.
A bigger worry is that the plan may not have done enough in three areas: open years, paying for the latest losses and litigation.
Open years are syndicate years of account for which liabilities are too huge or unpredictable to be reinsured into a successor account.
Many go back more than a decade — to about the time when massive asbestosis judgments first started to trigger claims against insurance policies written in the 1950s.
When the 1990 results are published in June, almost all of the 20,000 active names will have at least one open year.
That means they cannot leave Lloyd's.
The open-year problem also deters new capital, for it threatens to saddle newcomers too with unquantifiable losses from the past.
The business plan's solution is to transfer existing reserves set against pre-1986 liabilities into a central pot.
After 1986 the wording of most policies was changed to shorten the period during which claims may be made.
In 1995 the pot would turn into a new company (‘NewCo’), bolstered by extra reserves paid by names.
Mr Rowland reckons existing reserves for pre-1986 liabilities may total £4 billion-5 billion.
So NewCo should be able to cope with back-year claims as they arise.
As an incorporated vehicle, it would ring-fence past claims from new capital-providers.
Yet NewCo is a big gamble, notably on the American courts.
It is precisely because there is uncertainty about how far judges will continue to load costs for asbestosis and pollution on to insurers that so many Lloyd's years have been left open.
Mr Rowland may be right to think that the worst is over; it is increasingly recognised that to expect the insurance industry to foot the entire bill for pollution would bankrupt it.
But if he is wrong, NewCo could go bust, taking the ring-fence with it.
New investors, at least, will not suffer from the huge losses run up in 1990 and 1991.
But existing names are finding them ever harder to finance.
Losses of £500m for 1988 and over £2 billion for 1989 have already depleted free assets, especially for the 5,000-odd names on excess-of-loss syndicates.
The 1990 and 1991 losses will be more evenly spread, partly because a big chunk (perhaps £800m for 1990) represents reserving against stop-loss claims or errors-and-omissions lawsuits, in which one lot of names would pay another.
Names had hoped that Lloyd's might help by raising money through a bond issue.
Messrs Rowland and Middleton say they are advised that Lloyd's has too few tangible assets; and anyway they think it wrong to burden future Lloyd's members with the repayments.
Instead, they are looking at ways of minimising syndicates' cash calls on members — by waiting until claims are actually paid, for instance.
They are also exploring with solvency regulators the possibility of advancing current-year profits, which would not normally be paid out until 1996 — perhaps up to 5% of names' underwriting limits.
Even if they are allowed, such measures may not be enough.
About £350m of Lloyd's £1.1 billion central fund is already earmarked to meet unpaid losses from 1989 and earlier years, in some cases after ‘hardship’ settlements between Lloyd's and insolvent names.
If names cannot or will not pay up for 1990 and 1991, the central fund could quickly be exhausted.
Yet an extra levy on names to replenish it would be highly unpopular.
It might even be voted down.
The business plan's third big hole is its failure to deal with the lawsuits that names are bringing for alleged negligence by agents.
Again, some had hoped that Lloyd's would forestall these by a big loan that could be used to buy off prospective litigants.
Again, Messrs Middleton and Rowland have found this impossible.
They have gone no further than to promise a ‘modest’ central contribution if it would help to settle all disputes.
But unhappy names are not ready to give up enough to produce a settlement.
And defendant errors-and-omissions insurers would have to satisfy both their own names and their reinsurers that any payments were justified.
Yet by accepting that so many changes to past practice are needed, the business plan lends credence to the view that negligence claims will succeed.
If the litigation were spread over two or three years, the publicity — and the lawyers' bills — for Lloyd's would be horrendous.
And if prosecutors conclude that there has been fraud — as is alleged in the case of the Gooda Walker syndicates — the pressure for Lloyd's to foot the bill centrally will intensify.
The common solution to all three unsolved problems — open years, the cash crunch and litigation — might be found in a single word: mutualisation.
The pressure of events is pushing Lloyd's in this direction.
NewCo will be mutually owned, like the central fund.
If either ran out of cash, the burden would fall on all Lloyd's members.
The lawsuits might be settled if more past losses were mutualised.
Many names denounce the concept (as they denounce corporate capital) as foreign to Lloyd's sole-trading tradition.
But traditions are made to be broken; if this one is not, Lloyd's may find itself in pieces instead.
Spanish peseta
Adios
PITY the Spanish peseta.
On April 27th it closed at 73.68 to the D-mark, its lowest level since joining Europe's exchange-rate mechanism (ERM) in 1989.
Investors have been expecting whatever government that emerges from the general elections on June 6th to lower interest rates and devalue the peseta, in order to revive Spain's flagging economy.
Now the currency seems unlikely to last that long.
Boosted by the Bundesbank's cut in repo rates on April 28th, the peseta is still well above its ERM floor of 77.28.
But its ferocious defender, the Bank of Spain, is running out of money.
At the end of 1992, it had foreign-exchange reserves of more than $10 billion.
Today it is reckoned to have only $15 billion-20 billion.
The reason the peseta has not blown before now may be because the Bank of Spain has been looking after its currency in a novel way.
Like other central banks, it has hiked interest rates and sold foreign exchange for immediate or future delivery.
In recent months, however, it has pioneered a third strategy.
Paradoxically, it involves supporting the peseta by granting the right to sell it.
Bankers say the central bank has been selling vast amounts of put options — often up to DM1 billion ($135m) a day — that grant the right to sell pesetas for a fixed amount of D-marks by an agreed future date.
The tactic is to draw speculators' fangs by making them commit capital to buying put options.
If banks hold peseta puts, they are less likely to dedicate more speculative capital to selling in the spot market, the reasoning goes.
They are more likely, in fact, to buy cash pesetas, in order to hedge their put options.
And the central bank collects a premium for selling the option, which helps to offset the costs of intervention.
The Bank of Spain denies selling options; dealers say its footprints are everywhere.
The central bank conducts much of its ordinary currency intervention through the Spanish Association of Savings Banks (CECA).
CECA started selling lots of options, although it is not normally active in that market.
When market-makers began to suspect that the sales were on behalf of the Bank of Spain, the central bank apparently started to use other Spanish banks, which are believed to include Central Hispano, Bilbao Vizcaya (BBV) and Banesto.
Their options business, normally for underlying amounts of DM10m-20m a day, are said by others to have jumped to ten times that amount.
The Bank of Spain has been selling options that grant the right to sell the peseta at exchange rates as low as 80 to the D-mark, well below the currency's ERM floor.
And the Bank is pushing the options in such quantities that it is keeping their price lower than it should be.
That is most evident with out-of-the-money puts, exercisable only when the peseta touches an exchange rate lower than current forward rates.
Currency-option dealers quote not price but implied volatility — the market's guess at how much the underlying asset will move over the life of the option.
On out-of-the-money puts, the implied volatility is usually higher than on options that are struck at the money (ie, at current forward exchange rates), especially when a currency is under pressure.
Yet the implied volatility of such peseta puts is only two percentage points greater than that of at-the-money puts.
Compare this with recent ERM experience.
Last summer, before the lira was devalued, traders were buying lira puts at prices well below the currency's floor against the D-mark.
The gap in implied volatility between out-of-the-money and at-the-money puts rose well over six percentage points before sellers simply vanished.
The French franc offers another example.
When it was in trouble early this year, the gap between at- and out-of-the-money put options was two or three percentage points; most dealers assumed, correctly, that France's central bank would hold the line.
Despite the Bank of Spain's best efforts to assure the market that it will prove no less doughty, dealers are not convinced.
Some were alleging this week that the ubiquitous George Soros is a seller of pesetas.
By using options to support its currency, Spain's central bank has blazed a new trail.
At the price, however, of supplying speculators with cheap options.
A golden lever
When George Soros put his money into gold shares last month, the gold market went wild.
His eye might have been on an altogether different target
AFTER so much disappointment, it is not surprising that a crumb of comfort has driven gold bugs half-crazy with glee.
Years of unfavourable comment, of poor gold prices and worse fundamentals are being explained away.
The reason is that George Soros has come out in support of the metal.
His $100m purchase of shares in Newmont Mining, an American producer, from Sir James Goldsmith was worth far more to the gold market in terms of morale than a straightforward injection of fresh money.
Mr Soros made $1 billion betting against sterling and the lira last autumn.
With funds to invest worth $1 billion and a reputation for picking winners, he can move markets: the gold price has since climbed rapidly by almost $15, passing $150 an ounce for the first time since October.
Are investors betting on Mr Soros, or on gold?
Nothing in the metal's fundamentals has changed since a month ago, when the price languished at a seven-year low of $126 an ounce.
True, supplies could be disrupted if the Russian economy collapses.
The price could rocket if South Africa descends into anarchy.
There has been healthy demand recently in newly-rich China, which has a tradition of buying gold and of susceptibility to inflation.
Against these possibilities (none of them new), are two facts about gold which make soaring prices unlikely.
The first is the flourishing long-run outlook for mined gold.
The volume produced has grown by 60% over the past decade, to 2,157 tonnes in 1991, according to Gold Fields Mineral Services, a consultancy based in London.
Miners are now artful traders in the gold markets.
They take advantage of a rising market to sell their output forward, thereby stalling price rallies.
The second is that a massive supply of gold glimmers unseen in central-bank vaults.
Frequent sales from central banks over the past few years have barely eaten into stocks.
If the price of gold continues to rise over the coming months, bankers will have even more reason to sell than they did in the past.
After selling part of his holding in Newmont, Sir James immediately re-invested most of the money in gold, in the form of call options.
These give him the right to buy the metal at a fixed — and, as it happens, attractively low — price.
Perhaps Sir James and Mr Soros, an expert on Eastern Europe, have taken a strong view on Russia's difficulties.
Perhaps they believe that a change in sentiment is temporarily transforming the gold market, despite its poor fundamentals.
It is even possible that Mr Soros is as wrong about gold as he was about the 1987 stockmarket crash, when he lost something like $100m.
There is, however, one rather more intriguing explanation.
Somewhere to stand
For all its prominence, the price of gold is vulnerable to manipulation.
Not only is the gold market uniquely emotional, full of devotees and crackpot theorists, but its derivative markets are surprisingly thin.
James Grant, the editor of a New York newsletter, has pointed out that the value of outstanding contracts in the gold-futures market is a little over $1 billion.
The market capitalisation of the world's major gold shares is only about $10 billion — compared with Exxon's market value of $11 billion.
Such small markets are well within the sights of big investors, who are used to putting vast amounts into the currency and bond markets.
Moreover, the gold market's lengthy depression has made it particularly susceptible to a bull raid.
As the price of gold unexpectedly rises, some option-writers must find supplies of the metal, for the chances have increased that they will be required to deliver some.
To cover themselves, they, in turn, buy more options.
Futures prices rise too, pulling the spot market behind them.
If the kerfuffle is well publicised (which this one was), its effect is much stronger — especially as the onlooking equity markets are now in just the mood to go for gold.
American bond yields have been at 20-year lows, and shares are expensive.
There is enough footloose money on Wall Street for gold prices to take off, for a while at least.
But why should Mr Soros want to raise gold prices?
It would be hard for him to sell Newmont shares quickly.
Anyway, a few tens of millions of dollars of profits in gold is small change for Mr Soros's Quantum fund.
One answer, suggested by Andy Smith, the gold analyst at Union Bank of Switzerland, could lie in the bond market.
Gold prices are often seen as an indicator of inflation, a view reinforced by the high gold price during the inflationary years of the 1970s and 1980s.
The gold price therefore tends to move in parallel with bond yields, which also reflect expectations of inflation.
So it is that recent Soros-inspired gold-price rises have been matched in the past few days by increases in bond yields (ie, falls in bond prices).
Investors have been unsettled by a filibuster in Congress, which cast doubts on the president's ability to push through as big a deficit-reduction as they were expecting.
There is a persistent rumour that Mr Soros's real interest in all this is not gold at all, but the bond markets.
Suppose that he recently sold bonds short (ie, promised to deliver in future bonds which he did not then own) when prices were at their peak.
Now that prices have fallen, as gold prices rose, he stands to make a pretty profit.
The trillions of dollars in the bond markets have been jostled by a few judiciously placed millions in gold.
As Archimedes said, ‘Give me a place to stand and I will move the earth.’
World Bank/IMF
H-Street Blues
WASHINGTON, DC
IT IS again the week when the world's finance ministers and central bankers flock to Washington for the spring meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
There will be much backslapping.
The governments of the biggest economies are taking actions — lower interest rates in Germany, fiscal expansion in Japan, fiscal contraction in America — which are clearly in their own self-interest.
Yet they can be dressed up to look like the international ‘co-ordination’ that the IMF, for one, has long advocated.
Further, rich countries will be able to congratulate themselves on their common cause of helping Russia — of which the $18 billion package recently announced by the G7 is evidence.
The Bank and the Fund, in theory, have much to feel good about too.
In size, their new challenge — nothing less than rebuilding the once centrally-planned economies — rivals their role in the post-war rebuilding of Western Europe.
The sums that will pass through them ought surely to enhance their prestige, and at a symbolic time.
The Bretton Woods institutions are preparing for their fiftieth anniversary next year.
Despite all this, a pervasive lack of confidence has settled over the two institutions.
The unease has many sources.
For the Bank, probably the biggest is the growing dissatisfaction of its rich-country shareholders over the way it is run.
Too often, project loans are approved only to fail, or fail to be followed through.
Billions of dollars in World Bank loans have been committed but not yet paid out.
(This is not always bad, since, as other critics point out, the Bank has a record of supporting projects that lead to environmental harm or human dislocation.)
Not that the World Bank disagrees with its critics.
Its president, Lewis Preston, has tried to sharpen lending and budgetary procedures.
And his renewed emphasis on the need to help reduce poverty in the third world, rather than fund high-profile projects, is seeping through the organisation.
But Mr Preston appears to have lost interest in managing the Bank.
In his absence, senior bosses resent outside scrutiny almost as much as the rich-country shareholders resent the autonomy of the management, led by the Bank's de facto head, Ernie Stern.
In an attempt to instil accountability, the Bank's board commissioned an internal study to make crisp proposals on improving the way the Bank is run.
The paper was to be voted upon by the board on May 4th.
Yet the opacity and lack of conviction of this paper has so disappointed directors that no vote will now take place.
The document, said one director, had ‘Ernie's fingerprints all over it’.
This was one more example of ‘the undeclared war that exists between the shareholders and the institution’.
That war now threatens to break out into the open.
On Capitol Hill, hearings begin next week on the administration's request for America's $1.25 billion share this year of new money for the International Development Association (IDA, the Bank affiliate that makes soft loans to poor countries).
Barney Frank, the congressman who runs the relevant subcommittee in the House, says that the bill ‘won't pass as it stands’, so strong is domestic opposition from an unlikely coalition of environmentalists and nativist Republicans.
A staffer to Patrick Leahy, who chairs the Senate's foreign-operations subcommittee and generally supports foreign aid, says the IDA bill is in ‘serious jeopardy’ because the Bank is ‘impervious to attempts to get focused on family planning, the environment and poverty alleviation.’
Congress could impose humiliating conditions upon the Bank.
The loudest criticism of the IMF is similar.
It is that the Fund, through lack of accountability, has failed over the past year to fulfil its function as the main conduit for aid to Russia.
This view is held by Mr Leahy; it is expressed most forcibly by Jeffrey Sachs, a Harvard economist who has advised the Russians and long argued for more aid.
The IMF's attempts to help Russia, says Mr Sachs, have been ‘a disappointing performance of a task that it should not have been given.’
The Fund is ‘perhaps the most secretive major institution in the world’.
Is this criticism fair?
Last year the Fund paid out only $1 billion of the $14 billion package to Russia that it was supposed to spearhead.
It did no more, said the Fund, because Russia did not rein back mounting inflation — and Western money might have piled up in bank balances abroad.
These risks may well be outweighed by the risks of doing nothing for Russia, which is why the G7 has pushed the Fund to do more.
On April 20th the IMF announced a new, soft-money source of funds for once-communist countries, called a Systemic Transformation Facility.
Russia could get the first half of its share (half, in turn, of the total of up to $1 billion) as early as May.
The second half would follow a few months later, paving the way for a full IMF standby programme.
But there is an obvious question.
If this kind of aid is justifiable now, why was it not last year?
All this suggests that, one way or another, both institutions will be brought more closely to heel by their big shareholders.
The impression is reinforced by political outrage at the high pay and perks of the international aid agencies (Senator Leahy swears that the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, one of the most lavish, will not get a penny as long as Jacques Attali remains its head).
But this could have consequences.
The first is growing discontent among many of the countries that borrow from the Bank and the IMF (see page 70).
The G7 may well press the Fund to concentrate too much on Russia, to the detriment of other centrally planned economies (notably Ukraine and Belorussia), which will suffer if Russia does sensible things like selling oil at world prices.
Already, third-world countries such as India are complaining that they face tougher loan conditions than Russia.
The second is that the institutions' loan portfolios are likely to grow riskier, should political imperatives substantially increase their exposure to former Soviet republics.
Nobody, not even the credit markets that lend the Bank billions, appears to be worried about that now.
But then the Bank's lending to Russia is still only a trickle.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Circles of the mind
WASHINGTON, DC
IF THE space station dies, or is substantially slimmed down, the Superconducting Super Collider (SSC), under construction in Ellis County, Texas, will claim its title as the biggest science project.
Its proponents would say that it already deserves it, on the basis that the space station, though big, is not really science.
They object to the two giants being lumped together simply because they are hugely ambitious, colossally expensive and largely Texan.
The distinction is, they say, that the space station has no coherent scientific rationale, while the SSC has a clear and compelling goal — a comprehensive theory of the nature of the physical universe.
Since the 1970s physicists have had a ‘standard model’ of the fundamental particles of matter and the forces that govern their behaviour.
This standard model, a close-knit set of theories similar in form, is in excellent agreement with all the measurements that have been made in all the world's particle accelerators.
Yet it is limited; if applied to particles with very high energies it fails to provide meaningful answers.
The SSC is designed to probe those high energies, and thus to make possible the creation of a grander theory, one that would contain the standard model but also surpass it.
The Clinton administration seems supportive — but not very.
The president has kept the SSC in the budget, but is not providing the amount of money required to allow the programme to follow its original schedule.
The programme is being stretched out — it will no longer be finished in 1999 for $8.2 billion, as planned, but perhaps in 2003, at a cost of $10 billion or so.
And despite the reduction in the annual budget which comes from this stretching out, the programme is still a target for budget-cutters.
Last year, surfing on a wave of resentment against Texas, they managed to cancel the SSC in the House of Representatives, though it was saved in the Senate.
This year they will doubtless try again.
And many would not be too surprised if, after the Texas Senate election on May 1st, the administration's support for the programme became less visible.
Although the SSC, like most things, could probably have been designed a bit better and made to cost a bit less, physics dictates its overall scale.
To be sure of providing physicists with details of the world beyond the standard model, the SSC's designers decided it had to be able to make particles with masses of one trillion electron volts (1TeV).
It is to make them by accelerating two beams of protons up to energies of 20TeV and then colliding them head on.
(The collisions are messy, so only a fraction of their energy goes into producing massive new particles.)
Even with powerful magnets, it is hard to bend beams of such immense energy into a circle unless the circle curves round very gently indeed.
That is why the race-track-shaped SSC has an 86-kilometre (54-mile) circumference.
Even such gentle curves require impressive magnets.
The first S in SSC comes from the fact that its magnets rely on coils of superconducting wire, which work only when chilled to about -269C, 4C above absolute zero.
These magnets are the largest part of the project's cost.
Admiral James Watkins, formerly head of the Department of Energy, the SSC's sponsor, saw this expense as a badge of valour.
He enthused about the possibilities of using the technology for all sorts of other things.
In the Republican 1980s, when the spending of government money on industrial research and development was not in favour, such appeals to crypto-industrial policy went down well in some quarters.
Now, though, there is an administration in Washington which believes in helping technologies directly, rather than through spin-off.
On that view the SSC's share in the overall superconductivity budget could be seen as anomalous, even malign.
The project provides only a few specialised types of mass-produced magnets, using the already-established technology of low-temperature superconductivity.
Yet in 1992 the SSC's magnet bill was as large as the total government research and development budget for the newer technology of high-temperature superconductors.
Enthusiasts, such as the Nobel prizewinners who vouched for the SSC's promise in Washington on April 13th, would point out that the SSC is not meant to boost the superconductor industry — it is meant to find new physics.
The question is, will Congress pay that much for pure science, with no clear technological benefit attached?
Republicans who used to back it because the president liked it will no longer feel constrained to do so.
And though every state but Wyoming has contracts for SSC work, the jobs involved are thinly spread.
An additional complication comes from the fact that Congress has never committed itself to paying for the entire SSC.
The state of Texas is making a substantial contribution, and about $1.7 billion is expected from foreign partners.
Unfortunately, this expectation has been arrived at without the agreement of the partners involved — which is to say, for the most part, Japan.
The Americans are hoping for $1.3 billion from the Japanese, but there is no assurance that this will ever appear.
The Japanese are reluctant, partly because they were asked to be contributors after the machine had been designed, rather than to be partners for the whole project.
An unsatisfactory outcome over the space station might make the money even less likely to materialise.
Europe is offering no money, either; it is offering competition.
At CERN, the joint European particle physics laboratory outside Geneva, there is an accelerator called LEP.
It accelerates electrons, rather than protons, and sits in a tunnel 27km long.
Because electrons are hard to accelerate, LEP will never produce beams of more than 100 billion electron-volts (100GeV, or 0.1TeV).
But a proton machine in the same tunnel, with magnets a bit more powerful than the SSC's, could produce 8TeV beams.
CERN is planning just such a machine, the Large Hadron Collider, or LHC.
It might steal a fair bit of the SSC's glory.
In most minds that entertain thoughts on either subject, the SSC is mixed up with the idea of the Higgs particle.
The Higgs particle is the manifestation of a field (the Higgs field, unsurprisingly) which gives the particles in the standard model their masses.
Proof of the Higgs's existence — or the existence of some thing or set of things which can fulfill the same role — would complete the standard model and open the door to the new physics beyond.
That is why it has been hyped as one of the countless holy grails of science.
Leon Lederman, one of the Nobel laureates in Washington and one of the instigators of the SSC programme, has gone beyond grail imagery; in his recent book about the field the Higgs takes centre stage as the ‘God Particle’, no less.
It is quite possible that the Higgs quest will end in Geneva, not Texas.
Estimates of the Higgs's mass can be made from the standard model, and the huge amount of data produced at LEP in the past few years has sharpened such estimates up.
On the basis of such calculations John Ellis, head of theory at CERN, offers two-to-one odds that the Higgs has a mass of less than 200 billion electron volts (200GeV, 0.2TeV)— or, if there is no simple Higgs, that some other mechanism that performs its function can be found at around that energy.
That would make it easily accessible to the LHC.
That is not to say the LHC is an ideal machine.
If the Higgs is more massive the advantages of the SSC's size will begin to show.
But since the LEP tunnel exists, it is tempting to use it — all the more so because CERN's member states would never allow a bigger one to be built.
The LHC's beams will contain more protons than the SSC's, which might offset some of the SSC's advantage in energy.
To minimise that advantage CERN is also concentrating on building magnets more complex and more powerful than the SSC's.
This is causing some difficulties.
CERN's technical record is such that few expect them to be insurmountable, though the original specifications for the magnets — two-thirds as powerful again as the SSC's — may not be met.
The member states are not deluging CERN with money for the LHC — in fact, its budget will drop slightly next year.
But it is quite possible that the programme could go ahead at some point, and it would be comparatively cheap.
As Chris Llewellyn Smith, who takes over as director at CERN next year, points out, the unstarted LHC is less than $3 billion from completion all told, while the SSC, despite being $2 billion in the hole, still has $8 billion to go.
Big decisions
WASHINGTON, DC
Before the Clinton administration can pursue its own ideas on research and development, it must deal with the ‘big science’ bequeathed to it.
We look at the political troubles facing the space station and, on the next page, the Superconducting Super Collider
A GLANCE at the provision for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in the president's budget for 1994 reveals nothing unusual.
As custom requires, it is bigger than last year's — to the tune of $1 billion.
And a handy $2.3 billion has been allowed for the space station.
Look at the fine print, though, and you will see that it is all change at NASA.
The Clinton administration has faced up to the fact that NASA's plans for the space station threatened to swallow the agency whole.
More than $8 billion has been spent on the programme so far, to little visible effect.
In the next five years NASA was expecting to spend a further $15 billion on its plans for space station Freedom.
The White House would not countenance that.
But rather than cancel the station, it sent NASA off to redesign it.
The station has been redesigned before — repeatedly.
That is one of the reasons why the money spent so far has achieved so little.
This redesign, however, is to be different.
Dan Goldin, the self-professed ‘agent of change’ who has been NASA's administrator for a year, is using it as an opportunity to demonstrate what NASA could be capable of.
Mr Goldin's enthusiasm for a smaller, cheaper station may have saved the project from outright cancellation; if that is the case, he has staked his reputation (as well as a lot of public money) on the outcome.
A co-operative inclination
The aims of the redesign are wide-ranging but simple: to find ways of retaining the station's capabilities while slashing its cost.
The amount of slashing is optional for the time being.
The White House wants to see stations that could come in at either $5 billion, $7 billion or $9 billion over the next five years.
Any plan at the $9 billion level, though, must include details of cuts to be made elsewhere at NASA that will free up $2 billion.
Mr Goldin has assembled a small redesign team in NASA.
A review panel of outside advisers is evaluating its work.
The options and evaluations will go before the president in June.
Mr Goldin's team started with a clean slate — but then Congress took it away and gave them one with lots already on it.
Congressman George Brown, chairman of the house committee on space, science and technology, insisted that the team look at ways to build the original space station more cheaply, using components already designed.
So when the team presented three options to the review panel on April 22nd, it was no surprise that one of them looked like a truncated version of a familiar space station, Freedom — with laboratory modules attached to a girdered ‘truss’ that carries solar panels for generating power.
The other two options are more novel.
One is a bare-bones system that would start with just solar panels and could be developed bit by bit into a laboratory for space-shuttle crews to visit.
It would have no permanent crew.
Both this option and the one derived from the existing design could come in three different sizes to fit the three different pockets envisaged.
The third idea is simpler: a tin-can 28 metres long and 7 metres across (92 feet by 23 feet), to be launched in one shot with all its cargo on board.
It looks like a souped-up version of Skylab, the orbiting laboratory that NASA launched with a Saturn V moon-rocket after the Apollo programme had been curtailed.
Since operational Saturn Vs no longer exist, this laboratory might be launched using a modified version of the space shuttle.
The can, with engines fixed to its rear-end, would be attached to the shuttle's big external fuel tank at the point where the winged orbiter normally sits.
Another system, however, could launch such an object — Energia, a vast Russian booster.
For this reason, and others, Mr Goldin has been keen to talk to the Russians about co-operation.
The Russians seem equally keen — unsurprisingly, since they have plenty of expertise (including experience in operating space stations), lots of proven launchers and other hardware, and not much money.
With both sides eager to do business, speculation has mounted that a joint space station might be possible in the late 1990s.
Bearing this in mind, together with the further possibility of reprovisioning the redesigned space station using Russian rockets, NASA's review team is considering an orbit for its station that would be inclined at 51.6 to the equator — the sort of orbit that can be reached from the launch sites the Russians use.
Getting a space shuttle into this high-inclination orbit takes a lot of energy, which means smaller payloads.
But if the station were hoisted aloft on Energia, the shuttles would be needed only as taxis for the crew, not heavy trucks for plant and equipment.
The problem with such friendly schemes is that America already has international partners — irritated ones.
Space station Freedom includes modules made by the European Space Agency and by Japan to carry experiments, and a robotic arm developed by Canada.
The modules could form part of the bare-bones station or the truncated Freedom (though they might not get up there early on); they could also be mated to the single-launch skylab.
However, the big tin-can already has three times more room for experiments than the present space station, which could render the modules redundant.
It also has a limited power supply, and no obvious shoulder to which a robotic arm might be attached.
America's partners have representatives on both the redesign team and the review panel, but they are unhappy about having to endure yet another change of plan.
If America were to break its commitments to them and head into orbit with the Russians, there would be a fair-sized row.
And although Europe might like to work with Russia (the two are already co-operating on other space projects), Japan would probably not.
This could be why Jack Gibbons, the president's science adviser, recently sent a letter to Mr Goldin insisting that the Russians should not be the focus of the redesign effort.
Ashes without phoenix
Whatever the president decides in June, the biggest threat to a slimmer space station will be Congress.
Freedom represented many jobs, especially in southern California and Texas.
Aerospace companies reckon the number directly employed by the project is around 20,000 — one job for every $100,000 spent each year.
If that rough measure holds, and if the redesign does manage to save $8 billion over five years, 10,000 or more jobs could be at risk.
The aerospace companies, and the elected representatives of their employees, are keen to salvage what jobs they may.
That is why they will be supporting the idea of a space station as similar to the present one as possible — that way, the coalition of regions and companies that has backed the station in the past can hang together.
The programme will continue, and might be expanded at some later, less fraught juncture.
Whether it would actually work, though, is questionable.
Last year Freedom was expected to cost $15 billion over the next five years; when it comes back, moderately foreshortened, at $7 billion, why should anyone believe the new price?
There is much talk of cutting back management costs; the redesign team hopes to simplify the station's ghastly management structure, which has different contractors working with different NASA centres all over the place.
But would such cuts stay cut?
The risk is that such a redesigned station, while it may prove palatable to Congress, would not actually succeed in its role as a space station.
Its schedule would stretch out (again), its management would tie itself in knots (again) and its payroll would begin to rise (again).
As one aerospace industry executive puts it, ‘I can imagine us in 2000 with no space station, but still with a space-station programme’.
That is less likely, perhaps, with a more radical redesign.
However, radicalism makes outright cancellation a possibility — for if the station stops providing jobs (or, rather, provides jobs in places that have not yet welded themselves into a firm lobbying coalition) what is it good for?
The administration has yet to answer that rather fundamental question.
Under George Bush, NASA was committed to go back to the moon and on to Mars, and the space station was arguably a step on that road.
Now there is no such commitment.
The arguments that a new industrial revolution is waiting to happen in space are, for now, unconvincing.
The useful research that can be done requires neither a large station nor a permanent manned presence.
In short, the administration does not actually know why it wants a space station.
Co-operation with the Russians may provide not merely the means, but also the rationale.
In the 1970s America spent two years and $500m so that two crews could shake hands in orbit — the mission in which the last Apollo capsule docked with a Soviet Soyuz.
But if no convincing reason for the station can be found, and if the project will no longer create so many jobs, then all the effort will have been for naught.
SPECIAL
Good government?
Fairness?
Or vice versa.
Or both
Italians want to junk proportional representation.
Others could usefully adopt it.
Which electoral system is best?
The arguments are many.
So are the answers
BRITAIN elects its House of Commons by the simplest possible system: single-member constituencies in which the front-runner wins, even if he has under 50% of the votes.
In 1983, 7.8m votes, a quarter of the total, went to the ‘third party’, the Alliance.
It got 23 seats.
The Labour Party got 8.5m votes — and 209 seats.
No wonder half of all Britons say they would like a fairer system.
Italy uses systems of proportional representation (PR) that are elaborately fair.
It has also had 52 governments, mostly coalitions, since 1945, all dominated by the Christian Democrats.
Italian government is famously inept, its parties — not only the Christian Democrats — infamously corrupt.
No wonder Italians have just voted massively to adopt the British system for three-quarters of their Senate seats; the Chamber of Deputies will probably go much the same way.
These two countries exemplify — in parody — the arguments about electoral reform.
Britain's ‘first past the post’ system (FPTP) nearly always produces a single-party government with an overall, and solid, Commons majority.
Unless that party itself is split — as now, over the Maastricht treaty — the government can override all opposition.
The result, given a decisive prime minister, should always be decisive government.
In contrast, look at Italy, Israel or Poland.
Their PR is as fair as it comes.
Umpteen parties, even tiny ones with 1-2% of the national vote, can win seats.
With 3% or 4%, they can make or break policies and governments, as Israel's religious parties notoriously have done.
It sounds like a recipe for feeble government, with the tail — as the enemies of PR put it — wagging the dog.
The choice looks clear: good government or fair representation?
In fact, not so.
British governments have often been feeble; Israel's often decisive, even fierce.
Italy's governments are unstable and inept; not so Germany's, although the Bundestag they rest on is shaped by PR.
True, it keeps out small parties.
Yet most post-1949 German governments have had a ‘tail’, the Free Democrats (FDP).
As for the corruption now disgusting Italy's voters, its cause, arguably, is too long tenure of office, not the electoral system.
Japan has no formal PR, but its ever-ruling Liberal Democrats are hardly clean.
True, PR at times prevents complete clear-outs of government; but the parties that stay in office, despite swings among voters, are usually small, as in Germany (Italy is a special case; its large Communist party was not acceptable as an alternative in government to the Christian Democrats).
Corruption anyway springs more from the climate of society — and state control of the economy — than from any parliamentary arrangements.
Most government in India (an FPTP country) is corrupt within weeks of taking office.
The African minister who is not, by British standards, corrupt, is acting very oddly indeed by African ones (or indeed by British ones of the 18th century: not to help one's friends — and oneself — is, like elective democracy, a recent, North European curiosity of human behaviour).
So FPTP offers no monopoly, or even guarantee, of good government.
But neither does PR of fairness.
Americans fret about many aspects of their political system, but not its fairness between parties; and — given that no third party exists — its results are decently proportional.
Still not fair, maybe.
All Americans have one vote, but of wildly different values: Alaska's 400,000 voters elect two senators, as do California's 23m.
Yet why is that so?
Because the founding fathers chose so.
And few Americans are bothered by this either.
That is a reminder that fairness has many faces.
As much as a party, the voter may want a given person to speak for him.
FPTP allows for this.
He may want one kind of person.
Women hold few seats: in the late 1980s, about 30% in the Nordic PR countries, 5-20% in many others whose parties, in filling the party lists used in PR, take little, if any, note of this; and 5-15% in FPTP countries.
Even fewer members come from poor, ethnic minorities.
A few constitutions (India's, eg) reserve seats for them.
Some American electoral boundaries are drawn to help them.
Mostly, they must rely on accidents of geography, notably inner-city concentration.
Nor is the voter picking only his representative.
He votes for certain policies, and — save in presidential systems — for a government; a serious one, not a bunch of clowns.
A PR system could be as fair as Snow White in reflecting party support, and yet, at times, frustrate all these hopes.
Would the result fairly represent the electorate?
It depends who, where and for what
America offers another reminder: that neither fairness nor effectiveness exists in vacuo.
They depend on their context.
An elected body may spring from long democratic tradition or little, from a multicultural society or a homogeneous one.
It may be national or local.
It may be part of a two-house set-up (America gets territorial fairness in its Senate, demographic from the House).
It may provide a government, as do European parliaments, or just legislate and oversee one, as in America.
It may be mainly a sounding-board, like the 12-nation parliament of the European Community.
And what is ‘right’ here, or for one function, may be wrong there, or for another.
Britain offers an example.
Its local government cries out for PR, since the national demography to which parties adapt is not reproduced locally.
Voting in 1991 left 15 of 36 English ‘metropolitan’ districts with councils that were 80%-plus Labour (nine of them 90%-plus).
Of 296 ‘non-met’— less urban — councils, 31 had no Labour members, 35 no Liberal Democrats.
Point made?
Yet it proves nothing about the Commons.
With so many ifs and buts, it is easy to say if it ain't broke don't even think of fixing it.
Who would today invent Britain's House of Lords, a jumble of hereditary peers, bishops and judges, plus assorted notables (or party hacks) picked by successive prime ministers?
Yet, in its way, it works.
If it can survive — and reforming it is a barely an issue in Britain — maybe anything can, even should.
Should?
A wise country leaves well, or even only moderately well, alone.
After Holland's PR elections, it can take months even to form a government.
Yet few Dutchmen worry, any more than Americans do about Alaska.
But when a majority (Italy) or a large minority (Britain) feels grossly ill-served or ill-treated, it is time to think again.
Beside Italy, Poland has recently opted for change.
Its infant post-Communist democracy chose extreme PR, and in its late-1991 elections paid the price.
In all, 67 ‘parties’ fought; the best-placed won only 13% of the vote, and the legislature now includes 29 — often shifting — groups.
A new electoral law, though it too is PR-based, will limit such follies.
New Zealand, now using FPTP, may go the other way.
A referendum last September backed a switch to PR (mainly, as in Italy, to punish politicians).
Even Britain's Labour Party is looking at PR, if less because of Liberal complaints than of its own fears that FPTP — which in the past served it well — may leave its Tory rivals for ever running solid one-party governments on 40% of the vote.
Britain's love of FPTP is criticised beyond its borders, because, except in Northern Ireland, it elects members to the European Parliament by this system.
So the Tory-Labour balance swings wildly, while large Euro-constituencies crush other national parties.
In 1984, the Alliance won 18.5% of the Euro-vote, but no seats; ditto the Greens in 1989, with 14.5%.
The result distorts not just British representation but the make-up of the whole parliament.
France's recent elections aroused worries about its two-round voting (see box).
This was de Gaulle's substitute for the instabilities of PR, only briefly replaced by PR again in the mid-1980s.
Its results can be fair enough.
Not this year.
Right-wing parties, with 39% of the vote, took 80% of the seats.
The National Front, with 12.5%, got none.
Nasty as the Front is, many Frenchmen doubt that democracy should leave so many voters voiceless.
Pros and cons
Italians' dislike of PR far outruns French or British anxieties the other way.
That is natural: they identify it with lousy government.
And bad government both hits the whole nation and impinges visibly and constantly on daily life; the disfranchisement felt by third-party voters does neither.
Yet worries about FPTP and related systems go deeper.
It is representative democracy, not good government, that is the essence of ‘western’ politics.
The Economist, discussing these issues two years ago, wrote flatly that
And since the perception of fairness is the acid test for democracy — the very basis of its legitimacy — the unfairness argument overrules all others.
There is a more pragmatic reason.
Politicians can, and in Europe mostly do, provide decent government with PR.
Unless, as in America, history has dumped third parties, FPTP cannot, except by chance, and normally does not provide fair representation.
Human wit can get round the faults of PR; it cannot — except in drawing electoral boundaries — act on the crude mechanics of FPTP.
Yet any shift toward PR must, if possible, avoid its faults in advance.
Its critics list many, not all as solid as they sound:
Too complicated.
Nonsense.
What some think the best system, the single transferable vote (STV — see box), is indeed complex.
But the Irish can work it, so why not others?
Too many small parties.
That depends how far fairness is pushed.
A threshold can hold numbers down: Germany's fierce 5% one has usually kept the Bundestag to just four parties, rarely five.
Is it acceptable to exclude 4.9% of opinion — or, as recently in Eastern Europe, several times 4.9%?
FPTP too can let in many small parties, if (but only if) each has a regional base.
Too many weak coalitions.
Coalitions, yes.
Weak, maybe.
PR produces both.
Too much power for small ‘pivotal’ parties.
Germany's FDP is often cited.
In 1982 it quit a coalition with the SDP and joined the CDU.
Undemocratic?
Six months later the policy shift that the FDP had sought was endorsed by the voters.
The ‘tail-and-dog’ case too is weak.
On minor issues dear to them, small parties may get their way (as in Israel).
On big issues, in politics as in physics, small bodies can only influence large ones, not rule them.
West German unification-seeking softness toward Russia in 1989 is cited.
That began with the FDP foreign minister; but it was backed by Chancellor Kohl.
Policy decided in inter-party haggling after an election, not by voters during it.
Often true, shamefully so in Italy, though its smoke-shrouded deals were more about posts than policy.
But the idea that it is ‘unfair’ for those who backed the biggest party in a coalition to see its policy then diluted is bogus: in politics as in marriage, if you cannot win outright, you must compromise.
Too much power for party bosses.
In party-list systems, that is nearly always true.
But STV lets voters choose among a party's candidates; so does Japan's simple system (see box).
Any coalition adds to the power of party machines in government — and (notoriously in Italy, notedly in Germany) in patronage and appointment to public bodies, not least state television.
One can argue whether or not one-party patronage, as in Britain, is even worse.
A better answer is open under any system: less patronage.
Weak links between a member and his constituents.
This is true of PR using large electoral districts, not in the ones of 3-5 members used in Ireland (and Japan).
Members of the Irish Dail feel pressure, they say, to look after constituents, because their support may slip away not only to rival parties but to other members of their own.
British critics fear such a member may care only for a section of his constituents.
That may happen; PR supporters, in reply, praise the voter's freedom to choose which member he turns to.
Districts of 5-7 members, as in most of Belgium, Spain or France in its PR days, allow both PR and acceptable member/voter links.
Many answers
For countries seeking less PR, the considerations, curiously, are much the same, since not even the angry Italians want the pure milk of FPTP.
For them too the trick is to find a balance between proportionality and the faults voters feel in their form of PR.
They too must remember the many faces of fairness, and ask, in each case, what function the elected body serves, what they want to achieve (punishing politicians, however deservedly, is an inappropriate answer) and is it worth the upheaval?
Only zealots think one solution fits every case.
A wide choice of ways to choose
PROPORTIONAL representation is typical of mainland Europe and Latin America.
A country is split into multi-member electoral districts, often large ones (in Israel and Holland, the whole country).
The voter picks one party list; in some places — Belgium, eg — he can vary the order of candidates on it (and the Swiss voter, with as many votes as his canton has seats, can split them among lists or even candidates).
The district seats are then shared out according to each party's vote, to the top names on its list.
How?
One formula, common in Latin America, is largest remainder.
Say in a five-seat district 100 votes are cast: Blue 38, Red 32, White 17, Green 13.
Each 20 votes (100 divided by 5) get one seat.
Any seats left go to whoever has the most votes remaining.
Result: Blue (20 plus 18) gets two; Red (20 plus 12) one; White (0 plus 17) one; Green (0 plus 13) one.
Hardly proportional.
And see how small parties are favoured.
Had White and Green merged, the joint ‘Lime’ party's 30 votes would have earned only one seat.
Bigger districts are fairer.
Say there are ten seats.
Blue gets four; Red three; White two; Green one.
And if White and Green had merged, ‘Lime’ would still get three.
Fair enough?
In either case, ‘swings and roundabouts’ even out the national result — but still with a bias to small parties.
The highest-average formula widely used in Europe allocates seats, one by one, to whichever party thereby shows the highest votes-per-seat.
To do this, divide the party votes by 1, 2, 3 and so on, then pick out the highest five (or ten or whatever) figures from the resultant matrix, below.
The winning figures are shown in bold for a five-seat district (the seat-number is indicated by a superscript figure), plus five more in italics for a ten-seat one:
Small parties suffer: were there only three seats, Blue would get two, Red one, White and Green none (where ‘Lime’ would have got one).
With eleven, even Red would get a fourth seat (figure 8 on the bottom line) Green still only one.
But larger districts are usually fairer than small.
The divisors can be varied: Scandinavian countries divide by 1.4, 3, 5 and 7, which aids medium-sized parties.
Some countries use different systems for the two houses of parliament: Spain's senate is elected by FPTP, its lower house by highest-average PR.
Some countries (Italy, eg) aid small parties by shifting ‘wasted’ votes to an extra regional or national pool of seats.
But many apply a 5% threshold (Poland has just adopted 7%) before a party benefits from such a pool.
Germany's additional member system corrects FPTP with PR.
Half the Bundestag is elected in single-member districts; half via a national pool (voters cast a separate vote for it) which — subject to a 5% threshold — determines the overall make-up.
Say a party is entitled to 200 seats in all.
If it secures 110 district members, the top not-so-elected 90 names on its list also get in.
New Zealanders backed this system in a referendum last year.
In semi-proportion
A few countries (notably Ireland and Australia for its senate) use the single transferable vote, in multi-member districts.
Say there are five seats.
The ‘quota’ for election is then one-sixth (sic) of the total votes cast, plus 1.
Voters number candidates in order of preference from 1 to 5.
First preferences are counted.
Only Fergus O'Fail gets a quota.
He is elected, and his ‘surplus’ votes are shared out, in due proportion, among those candidates who were his backers' second choice.
That brings Nuala O'Fail up to a quota.
She is in, so share out her surplus votes.
No one gets a quota?
Out goes the bottom name, Sean Gael, and all his votes are shared among those voters' second choices.
Still no quota?
Out too goes now-bottom Patrick Gael, and all his votes are shared.
Now Liam Gael is over the top.
Share out his surplus votes.
And so on.
Result, say: two Fianna Fail, two Fine Gael and one Labour.
But note: these are individuals — party people, but maybe not the ones the bosses most fancied.
Even with its districts of only 3-5 members, Ireland's STV produces quite proportional results nationally.
Japan does that with a far simpler system, oddly called the single non-transferable vote.
Districts have 3-5 members, but voters pick only one.
This habitually hurts the Communists (8-10% of the vote), is curiously fair to the same-sized Clean Government vote, and fair enough as between the Liberal Democrats and the main Socialist parties.
Fair by accident
Two large countries use cousins of FPTP.
Australia elects its lower house by alternative vote.
A district has only one member.
The voter marks the candidates 1, 2, 3, etc, in order of preference.
If none wins outright on first preferences, the bottom name drops out, and his backers' second preferences go to their recipients; then, if need be, the next-bottom drops out; and so on, till somebody gets over 50%.
Similar in effect is France's two-round voting.
Districts have one member.
The voter marks one choice.
If any candidate gets over 50%, he wins.
If not, any who got under 12.5% are eliminated.
All the rest can stand — though some may drop out, to help a better-placed ally — in a second vote a week later.
In it, FPTP rules.
Both systems may bring fairly proportional results — by chance.
Australia's National Party, with only 10-15% of first preferences, normally gets a larger share of seats.
In 1975, the Liberal/National alliance, just 0.4% ahead of Labor in the vote, won 2.5 times as many seats.
The French system hurts the extremes — Communists in the past, the National Front in 1993.
So to pure FPTP: one-member constituencies, one vote, cast once, no calculation, no correctives.
Easy to understand and to run.
Unfair maybe, but this legacy of the British empire is not about to die.
Britain, America, Canada, India, Pakistan, and many other ex-colonies use it; no small slice of the world's voters.
BUSINESS THIS WEEK
Low points
America's GDP growth slowed to an annual rate of only 1.8% in the first quarter of 1993, from 4.7% in the previous quarter.
Some economists are fretting again about a triple dip.
After the dollar fell to another post-war low of ¥109.2 in New York, the Federal Reserve intervened several times to prop it up.
That surprised everybody, since the administration has lately tried to talk the dollar down.
The prospects for growth in the world economy have in fact deteriorated, said the International Monetary Fund.
Output will grow by only 2.2% this year, well down on last October's prediction of 3.6%.
At the G7 meetings in Washington, America observed the ritual of urging Japan to stimulate its economy.
Germany's Bundesbank cut interest rates again.
Its benchmark repo rate fell from 8.09% to 7.75%.
Helmut Schlesinger, the bank's president, said his policies were bearing fruit.
The central banks of several European countries cut their rates in response.
Shareholders at the annual meeting of the EBRD censured the bank for spending heavily on itself.
They did not suggest replacing Jacques Attali, the bank's president, but they did tell him to hurry up and find a strong budget director soon.
The EC commission approved a package for deregulation of the EC's telephone service by 1998.
But one part of the package has been delayed.
It would have introduced a little competition among Europe's monopoly operators next January, by allowing large telephone users to lease circuits from cable-television operators and utilities.
Europe's struggle over state subsidies to steel makers continues.
The EC commission blocked Germany's plan to give $1.25 billion to Eko Stahl, an East German producer.
Insurance claims from the huge IRA bomb blast in the City of London were expected to be around £300m ($172m).
The government said it will help meet some of the cost of the damage.
Banks involved with London's Canary Wharf project agreed in principle to put up another £500m ($186m) to get the project back on the road again — under their ownership.
Confidence returned to the market for gold after it reached a six-month high of $152 in New York.
News that Sir James Goldsmith and George Soros were speculating on the metal's rise sparked the recent rally.
Moody's downgraded $1.5 billion of debt at Sumitomo and Fuji, two of Japan's biggest banks.
City tremors
New York's Commodity Exchange (Comex), which recently lost the Chicago Board of Trade as a prospective partner, received an offer from the New York Mercantile Exchange.
This proposed that Comex become a subsidiary of the Merc in a $10m deal.
The Clinton administration is to nominate Arthur Levitt to succeed Richard Breedon as chairman of the SEC.
Lloyd's, London's sick insurance market, unveiled a business plan that it hopes will attract corporate members despite recent massive losses.
Many names said the plan did too little for them; they will continue to sue.
Hurt by recession, pre-tax profits at Hoechst, Germany's biggest chemicals company, fell by 28% in the first three months of 1993, to DM436m ($167m).
Jürgen Strube, BASF's chairman, said his company's profits would also be lower in 1993.
Euro Disney, whose Euro Disneyland near Paris has now been open a year, said it lost FFr1.1 billion ($100m) in the six months to end-March, and now needs more money to restructure FFr21 billion of debt.
R.J. Reynolds, maker of Winston and Camel, entered America's cigarette price war.
Reynolds, which has 29% of the domestic market, made its decision after Philip Morris recently cut the price of Marlboro, America's best-selling brand.
Louis Gerstner, the new head of IBM, told aggrieved shareholders he would do everything to restore the computer giant to health.
More staff cuts (‘right-sizing’) were needed, he said, strategic priorities must be defined and commitment to customers must be redoubled.
In short, he pleaded for time.
Meanwhile Jack Kuehler, vice-president and technologist-in-chief, said he was retiring.
Russia's space industry has won a contract to launch its first western satellite.
The $16m deal was struck between Salyut and Inmarsat, an international-communications satellite operator.
Inmarsat needs to spend millions to adapt its mainly-American satellite for a Russian launch, but hopes to save $10m on the cost in the West.
Speculation grew that Peter Sutherland, former EC competition commissioner, is being sought by the EC commission to replace Arthur Dunkel as director-general of GATT.
America is thought to support the Irishman's candidacy.
British Airways said it will exercise its option on $16.3m worth of new shares being offered by USAir, to maintain its 24.6% stake in the American airline.
In January BA paid $100m for its stake.
The car division of America's Ford made a $176m net profit in the first quarter of 1993, compared with a $16m loss in the same quarter last year.
Ups and downs
Keeping well in
Serbia pressured
Tough new United Nations sanctions against Serbia went into force after the Bosnian-Serb leadership rejected the Vance-Owen peace plan.
The Bosnian Serbs responded by capturing three Muslim villages near Bihac.
NATO generals voiced reservations about making air strikes.
A Security Council mission proposed creating safe ‘areas’ for Muslims.
President Yeltsin claimed victory in Russia's referendums.
More than 50% of those who voted supported him and his policies.
He also won majority support for early parliamentary elections, but failed to get the necessary absolute majority of all registered voters, so the proposal failed.
Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, governor of the Bank of Italy, formed a new, supposedly scandal-free government — though without the country's leading crusader for reform, Mario Segni, who would not join.
A Senate committee recommended the lifting of parliamentary immunity of Giulio Andreotti, a former prime minister, from prosecution for alleged links to the Mafia.
The price farmers receive for agricultural products in the European Community fell by 11.8% in real terms in the last quarter of 1992 compared with the same period of 1991.
It was the 12th consecutive year-on-year quarterly fall.
The centre of the City of London suffered severe damage after a one-ton bomb left by the IRA in a lorry exploded, killing one man.
It is just over a year since the terrorist group devastated the City with another bomb.
Poland's public prosecutors charged Wojciech Jaruzelski, a former president, with criminal offences.
They relate to a crackdown on a shipyard workers' strike in 1970 in which at least 25 people died.
Free for all
Jubilant Eritreans celebrated after a remarkable, but not entirely unexpected, 99.8% of voters in a referendum said Yes to independence from Ethiopia.
A full 98.2% of the electorate voted.
UN monitors declared the referendum fair.
Days before the resumption of multi-party talks on South Africa's future, two influential veterans of South African politics died: Andries Treurnicht, leader of the right-wing Conservative Party, and Oliver Tambo, national chairman of the ANC.
Israel and the Arabs resumed peace talks in Washington.
Warren Christopher, America's secretary of state, promised that America — now a ‘full partner’ in the negotiations — would be ‘even-handed’.
Palestinians on the West Bank and in Gaza went on strike.
An aeroplane carrying many of Zambia's national soccer team to a World Cup qualifying match in Senegal crashed into the Atlantic soon after take-off from Libreville, in Gabon.
There appeared to be no survivors.
Treading carefully
Bill Clinton lamented that, in his first 100 days, people had expected him to do too much too soon.
Leon Panetta, Mr Clinton's budget director, suggested that the president should delay releasing his health-care reforms because his economic plan was in trouble in Congress.
He also said that NAFTA and Russian aid would not get through unless there was progress on domestic policy.
Investigators at the scene of the Waco siege agreed with the FBI's initial conclusion that cult members had started the fire themselves.
Two members were found to have died from bullet wounds.
The Pentagon announced that women pilots in the navy and air force would be allowed to fly combat aircraft within the next few months.
Armed men calling themselves the Death Commandos took some two dozen Supreme Court judges and others hostage in San Jose, the capital of Costa Rica.
The group demanded a ransom, safe passage to South America and the release of some prisoners.
President Itamar Franco announced a plan to stimulate Brazil's economy.
Those who had feared price and wage freezes were relieved.
An American charity was allowed by the Commerce Department to deliver eight tons of vitamins and medical supplies to Cuba.
Miami's Cuban-Americans were furious.
Power of speech
Talks took place between China and Taiwan for the first time since the Communists took control of China in 1949 and the former Nationalist government fled to Taiwan.
The UN said that a Japanese volunteer in Cambodia was probably killed not by the Khmers Rouges, as had been thought, but by somebody disgruntled at not getting a job.
Since the death of the Japanese on April 8th, 10% of volunteers have resigned.
Violence marked the funeral of Lalith Athulathmudali, a Sri Lankan opposition leader who was shot dead while addressing a rally.
Indian soldiers stormed Kashmir's police headquarters in Srinagar, which had been taken over by striking policemen.
The strikers claimed that a policeman had been murdered by security forces.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
OUTPUT, DEMAND AND JOBS
A year later than Norman Lamont expected, the green shoots of economic growth have at last sprouted in Britain.
Its GDP crept up by 0.2% in the first quarter of 1993, a rise of 0.6% on the first quarter of 1992; and its retail sales quickened to a 12-month increase of 4.1% in March.
Japan's industrial output went up 0.5% in March, a fall of 2.2% over the year.
Sweden's industrial output fell by 3.7% in the year to February, and Switzerland's fell by 3.3% in the year to the fourth quarter of 1992.
PRICES AND WAGES
Western Germany's 12-month rate of consumer-price inflation edged up to 4.3% in April, from a revised 4.2% in March.
Australian consumer prices climbed by 1.2% in the year to the first quarter, up from a rise of just 0.3% in the year to the fourth quarter of 1992.
Swiss producer prices rose by 0.8% in the year to March.
Japanese workers received a pay rise of 1.8% in the year to February, a real rise of 0.4%.
AUSTRIA
Like many European economies, Austria faces a difficult year; its close links with the ailing German economy may give it a worse time than most.
According to forecasts by the Paris-based OECD, the industrial countries' economic think-tank, Austria's GDP will fall by 0.4% in 1993.
The government, committed to tight monetary and fiscal policies, is unlikely to stimulate the economy.
This should be rewarded with lower inflation in 1993, after five years in which it rose continuously, if slowly.
Unemployment is forecast to rise sharply, up from 4% of the workforce in 1992 to nearly 6% in 1994.
Austria's longer-term prospects remain rosy, reckons the OECD, thanks to its growing integration with Western and Eastern Europe.
COMMODITY PRICE INDEX
Tea prices in London have fallen by 30% from a three-year peak in January.
Tea output worldwide was hit by drought in 1992, resulting in a shortfall of 130,000 tonnes.
But rain in Kenya, London's leading supplier, helped produce a record January harvest, and world production in the first quarter of this year was around 20,000 tonnes up on 1992.
Even so, prices may soon recover.
Demand for cheap low-quality tea is still strong, due to renewed Russian interest and low stocks.
The former Soviet Union was the world's biggest tea drinker in 1990, taking over 230,000 tonnes.
Last year, lack of cash meant that Russia could buy only 80,000 tonnes.
FOREIGN RESERVES
Many developing countries have seen big increases in their foreign reserves over the past couple of years.
By definition, this reflects heavier inflows (or smaller outflows) of capital than current-account balances alone would suggest.
Taiwan has seen its reserves (excluding gold) climb from $12 billion at the end of 1990 to $12 billion in December 1992 — the biggest stash of any country in the world.
China has seen an even more spectacular jump, from $10 billion at the end of 1990 to $16 billion last September (the latest figure).
Despite Brazil's disastrous economic policies, its reserves have trebled since 1990, to $13 billion.
Saudi Arabia is the only country in our chart where reserves have fallen, from $12 billion to $1 billion; in 1983 its reserves, at $17 billion, were the second biggest in the world.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES
The removal of customs barriers within the EC at the start of 1993 made measures of intra-EC trade unreliable for a while.
Now Germany and Spain have resumed publishing figures which include all countries.
Germany's visible-trade surplus widened to $12.5 billion in the 12 months to January; its current-account deficit narrowed to $14.2 billion in the same period.
WORLD BOURSES
Milan was this week's star performer: share prices rose 4.7%, as investors cheered the appointment of Carlo Ciampi as prime minister.
Hong Kong remained in buoyant mood, with a 3% gain.
But Wall Street and London both fell 0.8%.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
Growth in Japan's narrow money slowed to 0.6% in the year to March; its broad money contracted by 0.3%.
In the same period Germany's broad-money growth quickened to 7.6%, Italy's accelerated to 7.1%, and Britain's to 3.6%.