

LEADERS
Rotten politicians
The Italians are getting rid of theirs.
The Japanese should take note
LATIN passion seems a world away from Japanese reserve, yet the recent histories of Italy and Japan are curiously similar.
In the late 19th century both were seized by a modernising nationalism, which in time got out of hand, producing belligerent fascism.
Both countries lost the second world war.
Both responded by embracing democratic consensus so wholeheartedly that opposition became synonymous with either irresponsibility or extremism.
The result was a system in which the government never changed hands, but instead was carried out by those who could be trusted to look after the affairs of state.
Now, it turns out, they couldn't be: in both Italy and Japan, the guardians of democracy have been shown to be enmeshed in corruption.
Italy is putting its house in order.
Many hundreds have been arrested on suspicion of corruption; after referendums last month, the voting system is being changed (to reduce the power of the party bosses) and state subsidies for political parties are being abolished.
But in Japan only one senior figure is to stand trial; nobody expects a referendum.
The contrast encourages the common view that Japan never alters.
Not so.
Japan is not going about reform with a rush of Latin drama.
Nonetheless, something is stirring.
One sign of change is that some senior politicians have broken with the establishment by founding a reformist faction within the ruling party.
They have not yet followed the example of Italy's chief reformer, Mario Segni, who has left his party to form a new one, but they have at least threatened to do so.
Japan's ruling and opposition parties have both put forward plans for political reform, which include a shift towards a first-past-the-post electoral system.
On the fringes of power a new idealism has emerged.
In a country often dismissed as incapable of vision, a few younger Japanese talk of root-and-branch change of their society.
The mood of businessmen is also changing.
This may help, since it is they who provide the politicians with the money to run the system.
Japan's managers are beginning to notice that the politicians they have invested in no longer look so good outside their country; on Russian aid and on international trade, they are always a step behind other rich countries.
In short, they provide a poor return to Japan's increasingly international companies.
They are therefore being told that future political donations will be less generous.
A culture of passivity
That does not mean that politics will now be cleaned up.
It is not even certain that the Diet (parliament) will reform the electoral system this summer, or that if it did much would change as a result.
Excessive respect for authority still permeates Japan's institutions.
Journalists too easily accept the official line.
Judges are under the thumb of the bureaucracy.
Opposition politicians kow-tow to those in government.
All this stifles debate and leaves many Japanese feeling unable to bring any influence to bear on their government.
The country's authoritarianism and uniformity owe much to the state's overweening power.
Voters back the ruling party's candidates because that is the way to win government grants; businessmen pay for politicians because they depend upon government licences.
Despite much talk of cutting back the state, the central government's annual output of new rules and changes to the old ones has risen by 8% since 1985.
Harder times have reinforced the interventionism: in their rush to prime the economy and prop up the stockmarket, Japan's politicians have shown no wish to deregulate.
By curbing the central government's powers of patronage, Japan could create a climate in which voters and businessmen felt freer to back opposition parties.
A revived opposition would promote debate on public issues; that, in turn, might spread constructive dissent to the press and other institutions.
Slowly, back-scratching consensus might cede to the checks and balances of pluralism.
There is no better antidote to bribes and gangster links than the knowledge that agencies independent of the executive will expose and punish them.
But why should corrupt politicians voluntarily give up their powers of patronage and intervention?
Only, as Italy shows, if electoral advantage lies in espousing reform.
Magistrates may help — if they are independent — but the real pressure must come from the people.
If the Japanese want a government they can be proud of, they must stop voting for permit-wielding, contract-fixing crooks.
In democracies, voters get the governments they deserve.
Bosnia's victims
The Muslims, and the prospect of a safer world
OF ALL the victims of the war in Bosnia, two above all should exercise outsiders.
One is the Muslims, the group that has suffered more than any other in the fighting.
The second is the principles on which the modern world professes to want to run its affairs.
If Croats and Serbs are allowed to slaughter Muslims and steal their land unchallenged, the injustice will, or at least should, weigh upon the conscience of all who might have stopped them.
If the state of Bosnia & Hercegovina is carved up and redistributed by the victors, territory will have been grabbed by force, frontiers changed by war.
It will inevitably be harder to prevent similar acts of aggression in future.
Though each week that passes makes hope for these two victims look ever more forlorn, outsiders can still take some action — if they have the will to do so.
First, the Muslims.
One of the few creditable responses of the outside world in this dismal war has been the provision of food and medical help.
This has saved thousands of Muslim lives that many predicted would be lost in the long Balkan winter.
Even so, more than 1m Muslims are living under siege in towns and enclaves in central and eastern Bosnia.
United Nations troops have been doing what they can to protect the besieged Muslims, but they need more men.
A memorandum submitted by France to the UN Security Council this week suggests that a brigade of 5,000 men is needed in Sarajevo and four battalions of 900 men apiece for the six other main enclaves.
The UN's members should supply them (and pay for them) as soon as possible.
Like every other option in Bosnia, this would not be free of risk.
The point of strengthening the UN forces would be to make them more likely to frustrate the aims of the besiegers; more likely to frustrate means more likely to be shot at.
It also means calling into further question the neutrality of these UN forces in the eyes of the Serbs and Croats, and thus the neutrality of all the UN's providers of aid in Bosnia.
Still, if the UN forces are strengthened, the chances are that the Serbs will not overrun the enclaves they surround.
Though some among them might like to, their commanders will probably settle for what they have.
After all, they have taken almost all the land they want; their main territorial concern now is to widen the northern corridor linking their western possessions to their eastern ones, and thus to Serbia itself.
The main struggle for territory in Bosnia is now between Muslims and Croats.
This change complicates the outside world's struggle to rescue the war's other victim, the principles of international conduct.
They have been hanging, tenuously, on hopes for the Vance-Owen plan.
The West's manifest unwillingness to use force against the Bosnian Serbs to get them to accept this plan has contributed to the latest rejection that the plan has suffered, the resounding No delivered by more than nine out of ten Bosnian Serb voters in last weekend's referendum.
If the Vance-Owen plan is to survive, its one chance is that sanctions will bring about a change of mind among the Bosnian Serbs.
They are the only group that has refused to approve it.
Even the Serbs of Serbia claim to be behind it and are willing, they say, to see the Bosnian Serbs isolated.
Yet traffic still flows across the Drina river, the frontier between Serbia and Bosnia.
It will not stop unless the border is sealed by troops who mean business.
Help for the havens
Two complications enter here.
First, an effective sealing operation would require UN troops, and a lot of them, maybe a brigade or two.
They, like the enclave-protectors, would run the risk of becoming targets for Serb sanctions-busters, especially if they were allowed to fight in order to do their job properly.
Second, sealing the border with Serbia would be unlikely to work if it were not accompanied by the simultaneous sealing of the border with Croatia: the Bosnian Serbs, already talking to the Croats about a confederal division of the spoils (see page 46), would get their supplies from Croatia, and the Croats — never mind their signatures on the Vance-Owen plan — would anyway continue their military campaign for territory.
So sealing, if it were to be done, would have to be done in strength (by the eager-to-help Russians?), along two borders, in the knowledge that frontier-patrolling might be the start of a bigger involvement.
The Bosnian Serbs are unlikely to be trembling with fear: the signs are that the West, now more divided than ever, will settle for observers, who will merely count the lorries breaking the embargo.
That will do little for the Vance-Owen plan's chances of success and little, therefore, for the vigour of the principles of international conduct.
May the world at least send more troops to help the Muslims in their enclaves.
The warning from the Nile
If the Middle East does not move forward it will collapse
REMEMBER all the bad things that were going to happen, but did not happen, after the Gulf war two years ago?
The Arab masses, indignant at the western humiliation of Saddam Hussein, were expected to rise up against their pro-western leaders.
There would be an Islamic backlash in Saudi Arabia and Egypt.
Iran would benefit from the squashing of Iraq by taking its place as regional superpower and master of the Gulf.
In short, said the doomsayers, the Middle East would be much worse off than it had been before the American-led coalition drove Iraq's army out of Kuwait.
In the event, none of it happened.
No Arab regime was toppled for taking the West's side against Iraq.
Political Islam made its biggest splash not in the Middle East but in distant Algeria, and for reasons wholly unconnected with the Gulf war.
Iran continued to say unpleasant things about America, but complied nonetheless with the American-inspired United Nations sanctions against Iraq.
For the most part, a gentle Pax Americana settled over the region.
By the end of 1991, even the Arabs and Israelis were talking about the possibility of peace.
In short, it was a rout of the doomsayers and a vindication of the architects of Desert Storm.
So matters stood in the immediate aftermath of the war.
The pity is that so little has changed since then.
There has been no change, for example, in the management of Iraq (Mr Hussein hangs infuriatingly on) or in the dogmas of Iran (it still sees confounding the West as its sacred duty).
Too little has changed between Arabs and Israelis (no agreement, despite 1.5 years of talking) or inside Saudi Arabia (no parliament, despite frequent promises of a ‘consultative council’).
Nothing has changed in Egypt (sluggish growth, despite the post-war forgiveness of many debts) or in Syria (an old-fashioned dictatorship, despite its warming relations with America).
What could be more stable than for nothing to change?
A world transfixed by the horror in the Balkans is entitled to feel it has better things to worry about than what is not happening in the Middle East.
Unfortunately, these non-events matter.
Saddam Hussein still in power?
The survival of the Iraqi dictator is not just a blemish on the landscape: it is a long-term danger to all the regimes that dared to oppose him two years ago.
Iran still ranting against the West?
An irritation you can live with, until Iran follows North Korea out of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
No peace yet with Israel?
History argues that when Arabs and Israelis do not make peace they will make war: there have already been five and a half since Israel's founding.
The politics of the Middle East, in other words, is not like the politics of other places.
The region's natural inclination, like that of a bicycle, is to be unstable.
And the only way to prevent it from collapsing is to keep moving forward.
At this point in this kind of argument it is customary to wonder what the West — more precisely, the United States — has done wrong in the Middle East, and how it could bring improvements faster.
Think again: by and large, America has made remarkably few mistakes in the region since the end of the Gulf war.
Although it may have mishandled some details, such as last week's round of Arab-Israeli talks (see page 65), its big decisions — to bring its troops swiftly home, to maintain the siege around Iraq, to establish a haven for Iraqi Kurds and to push Israel and the Arabs into long-overdue negotiation — have mostly been right.
The really depressing thing about the Middle East is not that outsiders have treated it badly, which is the tedious Arab refrain, but that there is so little outsiders can do to save it from its future troubles.
Those troubles come from within, and only insiders can solve them.
To judge from Egypt, the traditional bell-wether of the Arab flock, they are failing to do so.
After 12 years as president, Husni Mubarak is rediscovering an old paradox.
Egyptians are famously docile appreciators of strong leadership, but they can become disenchanted at amazing speed.
Just as Sadat lost his popular touch years before he was assassinated, so President Mubarak is now losing his.
The exact reasons are unfathomable.
It is not that Egyptians have found a sudden enthusiasm for Islamic fundamentalism; a majority probably resents the terrorism that has chopped tourism in half.
It is not because stout Egyptians are being suborned by wicked Iranians and Sudanese, as the regime would have the world believe.
Nor is economic failure an adequate explanation; Mr Mubarak has manoeuvred cannily in between the reforms demanded by foreign donors and Egypt's ability to absorb change.
The cause of the malaise is likelier to be a combination of these things, alongside one fundamental: the failure to establish a form of government in which power changes hands in accordance with the will of the people.
Repression, revolution — or reform
This might strike Mr Mubarak as unfair.
By local standards, his regime is not all that repressive.
He had until recently presided over a cautious freeing of expression and politics.
But, having raised expectations, the regime then stopped moving towards the logical sequel, which would have been to offer the electorate an opportunity to replace its present leadership with a new one.
If it had steeled itself to cross this threshold (as Yemen bravely did a month ago), Egypt might today be afflicted by nothing worse than a bad case of anti-incumbency — hardly surprising after a dozen years with the same tired face at the top.
Since it is a non-democracy, dislike of the incumbent swiftly turns into rejection of the state itself.
So long as the army is loyal, the regime will survive.
But Egypt's lesson is this: the only alternative to repression or revolution is reform: genuine political reform that goes all the way.
One day soon the Middle East will have to choose.
Where are the jobs?
Unemployment is rising.
But technology and global competition will eventually put more people to work than it makes redundant
IF THE 34m unemployed people in rich industrial countries stood in a line, they would stretch all the way from New York to Sydney and back again.
Even more depressing, the OECD dole queue continues to lengthen.
Unemployment always rises in recessions, but this time it is more serious, warn the doomsters: the lost jobs will not return when economies pick up because of changes in the technology and organisation of industry, and stiffer competition from developing countries.
Just look at America's ‘jobless’ recovery, which started two years ago, but has failed to raise employment by much.
Many big American firms continue to slash payrolls.
High unemployment in rich countries seems set to be a permanent blight.
Such fears are understandable, but misplaced.
New technology and more international competition will eventually create more jobs than they destroy, as they have for the past two centuries, if they are only given a chance to work.
One reason why this recession is causing such alarm is that it has touched parts of rich countries' economies that other recessions did not reach.
In previous downturns, blue-collar manufacturing workers bore the brunt of job losses.
This time white-collar jobs in services, from banking to advertising, have also been axed — the very sectors that provided virtually all the new jobs of the past two decades.
Government deregulation has exposed previously protected service industries to competition and forced managers to make the job cuts they should have made years ago.
Computers are belatedly replacing thousands of clerical staff and middle managers.
The good news is that productivity is rising.
The bad news is that a given rise in output therefore generates fewer new jobs.
There are, however, at least three good reasons to believe that the gloom over jobs is overdone.
First, the record number of registered unemployed in industrial economies disguises the more salient fact that the rate of employment has actually risen.
In 1992 66% of the OECD population aged between 16 and 64 had jobs, up from 64% in 1982, which translates into an impressive 40m more people at work.
More favourable demographics provide a second reason for optimism.
In the 1990s the number of people of working age will either fall or grow more slowly than over the past two decades in all the big industrial economies, which should help to reduce dole queues.
Last, but not least, workers have fretted about being displaced by machines ever since the invention of the printing press.
But continuous technological advance has not meant ever-rising unemployment.
On the contrary, the number of those employed has soared.
There is little reason to believe that this will not be the pattern in the future too.
Many of the jobs now being lost are indeed lost forever.
Most blue-collar workers will not regain jobs on the assembly line, and a productivity revolution in services may destroy office jobs in the short term.
But in the long term increased productivity will boost investment and growth — and create new jobs.
The worst thing that governments can do is to retard this admittedly painful process with subsidies to obsolete industries, or protectionist barriers.
When I grow up
It is impossible to predict what new jobs will be created over the next 10–20 years.
How many jobs listed in the vacancy columns of today's newspapers even existed in 1970?
Certainly not software engineers or aerobics instructors.
There are a few clear trends, however.
The expanding business of information means more jobs in such businesses as software, telecoms or public relations.
Tomorrow's grannies will have far more to spend than those in any previous generation, creating new demand for health, home care, financial advice and travel.
Speedier technological change will increase the need for most people to retrain at least once during their working life, which should mean more jobs for teachers of all sorts.
Tomorrow's new jobs are likely to share two important features.
First, many of them will require more education and skills than the jobs they replace.
Tomorrow's workforce will include more professionals and technicians and fewer machine operators or clerks.
Second, fewer workers will have full-time, permanent jobs.
Part-time jobs and contract work are increasing everywhere as firms demand flexibility and seek to dodge hefty non-wage costs and employment protection laws.
In Britain, part-time, temporary, and self-employed workers already account for two out of every five workers (see page 29).
Tomorrow's workers will have to be more adaptable, but their employment prospects should be brighter.
A challenging rather than dispiriting message.
Maastricht sails on
THE Danish people's Yes, on second thoughts, to Europe's Maastricht treaty comes as a qualified relief.
Judged in abstract, this treaty's rushed constitution for European Union ought to have been redrafted or shelved.
Yet 18 months after its signing, and set against the political and economic backdrop of today's Europe, the dangers of persisting with it are smaller than the dangers of scuttling it.
The sight of the European Community's civilised, like-minded nations bickering on about the pros and cons of more joint government, with ethnic war on their doorstep and a great deal to achieve across a newly opened continent, would seem absurd to any visiting Gulliver.
‘Europe Yes, Maastricht No’ was the sincere cry of many Danes.
The difficulty is that Maastricht could not have been rolled away to leave the open-market EC that was being built beforehand.
The two ugly sisters of recession, nationalism and protectionism, are abroad.
Given the confusion and currency-turmoil that would be — still could be — provoked by the crumbling of this treaty, it is hard to know where the unravelling of Western Europe's mutual openness would stop.
France, for example, facing recession and rising unemployment, has seen European neighbours that do a quarter of its trade devalue their currencies by a real 10% since last September.
Devaluation-to-match will tempt France ever more as unemployment mounts.
Yet competitive devaluations cancel each other out; they lead only to inflation.
The alternative is protectionism, particularly against the world beyond Europe.
The French prime minister has just thrown down a gauntlet to America on agricultural trade: he wants to rewrite the deal recently struck by America and the EC on farm exports (see page 92).
It will need every ounce of what remains of Community-mindedness to avert an EC-American showdown and the fresh blow to the sickly GATT that would go with it.
The Europe machine
Denmark, consulting its people in a way that some other European governments shunned, has nevertheless taught Europe's statesmen quite a lesson.
It is already a platitude to say that ‘governments must carry their peoples with them.’
The Danish lesson is tougher than that: Europe's union-building machine has run out of control.
Under the Treaty of Rome, it takes only a majority of EC members to launch a constitutional conference that obliges heads of government to talk about central powers that some would call non-negotiable.
This, the oldest trick in any bazaar, dragged Mrs Thatcher into Maastricht's predecessor, the Single European Act.
It then pushed through Maastricht.
And Maastricht promises to make the Europe-machine turn still faster because it pre-emptively convokes the next set of constitutional talks for 1996.
The machine has no reverse gear.
European union is ‘ever closer’: it says so in the Treaty of Rome.
The ‘acquis communautaire’— the powers that the Community has won — can only get bigger.
European governments trade agreements to hand different powers to Brussels, but never to take powers back.
In the Maastricht negotiations, for example, the German price for agreeing to European monetary union was insistence on political union.
The 1996 conference was written into the Maastricht treaty largely because the treaty promised too little federalism for German taste.
European governments should postpone the next ‘inter-governmental conference’ until beyond 2000.
Otherwise they will have barely tried life under Maastricht before their mandarins must start haggling again.
Similarly they will have only just negotiated the entry of four new members — Austria, Sweden, Finland and Norway.
Forget the old adage about non-stop bicycling; the growing Community badly needs a decade of constitutional calm.
The worst aspect of Maastricht was its rushed attempt to suppress the effects of the end of the cold war, rather than take them on board.
Son-of-Maastricht is programmed for 1996 in the same unwise spirit.
Whether or not this date gets changed, the way to control the Europe-machine is to make sure that national parliaments and peoples thoroughly discuss Europe's next constitution before they send their ministers to negotiate it.
The saga of the Danish No suggests that the EC can no longer evolve by piling amendment after amendment on to the Treaty of Rome — conveniently insidious though this method may be.
The result is becoming too impenetrable to be viewed as anything but a plot against the public.
Now, with all Europe freed to unite (or to fall apart), the time has come to devise a shorter, clearer replacement of all that has gone before — a constitution designed for a larger and more disparate union.
The Denmark saga has shown that this must honour three principles in particular.
The first, inadequately expressed as ‘subsidiarity’ in the Maastricht treaty, is that the Community should expect to exercise power only where flows of things or people across frontiers make such power truly necessary.
This battle is far from won.
The second is explicit acceptance that all members do not need to take part in every area of European joint-government.
The rules of the open European market must remain common to all.
But common monetary, defence, foreign or social policies will be hopelessly ineffective if designed to fit all 20 or so countries that could be members of the EC by the end of the century.
The Danes said Yes to Maastricht only because other governments solemnly reassured them at Edinburgh last December that they need not consider themselves European citizens, or adopt a European money, or join a European army.
Gradually the notion that such flexibility adds strength, not shame, to the EC is gaining acceptance across Europe.
The third principle is one that the Danes have long been sticklers for — the democratic accountability of European government.
The chief law-making forum of the Community is the Council of national ministers.
The Foreign Affairs Committee of Britain's Parliament said recently of this forum: ‘It is accountable to no one.
It is more of a cabal than a cabinet, more of a permanent diplomatic conference than a senate.
And yet it legislates profusely.’
The Economist has argued that the council is indeed a senate and ought to debate and vote as openly as a senate.
This idea, too, is gaining ground across Europe.
It should be made explicit in the next treaty.
Maastricht is not yet berthed.
The treaty still faces court challenges in Germany, Britain and Denmark.
It will be a relief to get the wrangling over with, so that Maastricht's big promises and improbable programme for monetary union can be tried out on an enlarged Community.
Then Europe's voters and parliaments will need to discuss what they want next, well before they send their ministers back into the Europe-machine.
Otherwise it will take another Danish No to wake them up to what they have brought upon themselves.
Too Big Blue
United, IBM will fall.
Divided, more of it might survive
FEW companies have fallen so far and fast as IBM.
Once one of the world's most profitable firms, Big Blue last year tumbled to a record-breaking $1 billion loss as it struggled to keep up with technical change, plummeting prices and a wave of new competition in the computer market.
In just five years, the firm's stockmarket value dropped by three-quarters.
Investors, customers and employees remained unimpressed by the half-hearted strategic rethinks of John Akers, IBM's chairman since 1985.
Even Mr Akers seemed slowly to be coming round to the sensible idea that IBM should be broken up.
Too slowly, alas.
Earlier this year he was replaced by Louis Gerstner, former boss of RJR Nabisco.
Only eight weeks into the job, Mr Gerstner is still concocting a rescue plan.
But he has already said to employees and investors that the option he finds most attractive is keeping IBM intact as the biggest, and hopefully mightiest, firm in its industry.
He should think again.
Like others before him, Mr Gerstner is in danger of being bewitched by IBM's glorious past.
Big Blue grew into the world's biggest computer company by dominating the market for big mainframe computers in the 1960s and 1970s.
Fiendishly complex and built to proprietary standards — which meant they would not work with rival machines — those mainframes locked corporate customers into a lifetime of IBM systems, software and service contracts.
IBM made almost everything itself, from circuitry to software.
From the few to the many
Personal computers have turned that cosy world on its head.
Unlike mainframes, PCs use cheap microprocessors and run standard software.
Linked together, they can crunch numbers as fast as any mainframe, but at a fraction of the cost.
The two firms which control PC technology, Microsoft and Intel, have grown rich by selling this technology to all-comers (in Microsoft's case, fabulously rich, see pages 25–27).
And thousands of start-up firms have poured into the computer market.
All this is what makes the argument for breaking up Big Blue so compelling.
In a fully developed, fragmented and competitive industry no company can hope to succeed at everything, as IBM (and only IBM) is still trying to do.
In an industry where proprietary technical standards are all but history, the cradle-to-grave customer loyalty on which IBM could once depend (and often enforce) is also a thing of the past: today's computer users buy from the best, not the biggest.
Compelling though this line of reasoning may be, it does not yet appear to have won over Mr Gerstner.
He is being wooed by three counter-arguments: first, that when it comes to big, company-wide computer systems, customers still prefer to buy everything from a single, proven supplier; second, that mainframes will remain at the heart of many of tomorrow's systems, in which a network of PCs will be served by a central processor; and third, that IBM is moving away from being hardware-dominated to become, increasingly, a one-stop-shop for computer consultancy and services.
If such arguments sound familiar, it is because they were also voiced by Mr Akers.
They were shaky then; they are shakier now.
True, some buyers may still prefer going to IBM for ‘company-wide’ systems and mainframe-based servers, but their number is dwindling as PC-based systems grow more powerful.
And while IBM is undoubtedly now more of a computer-services company, much of this business is a spin-off from its installed base of mainframes — hardly a growing market.
Moreover, none of the arguments put forward in favour of keeping IBM in one piece actually offers a good reason for doing so.
Set free, IBM's individual businesses could still collaborate, if that was what customers demanded, as all of IBM's many units now do with outside firms.
If customers preferred more choice, as most do today, IBM's existing subsidiaries could compete for their business more fiercely and profitably than they ever can as part of Big Blue.
Which is why Mr Gerstner should make the break.
Tax deficient
California's treatment of multinational firms threatens to provoke a global tax war.
Bill Clinton should stop it
HIGHER taxes on multinational companies is one of the few revenue-raisers an electioneering politician can propose without instantly becoming an also-ran.
Once elected, however, bashing foreign firms is the last thing he should do, especially if he wants to boost jobs.
Tax a multinational more heavily and it may simply shift to a tax-friendlier place.
Bill Clinton has been back-pedalling quietly on his promises to tax the daylights out of foreign companies.
Now the Supreme Court has put him on the spot.
On May 17th it said that it would not decide whether to hear an appeal challenging California's ‘unitary tax’ on multinational companies until the administration had made clear its views on the matter.
At issue in this seemingly-abstruse dispute is a fundamental question: how to tax the growing number of firms which operate around the world in such a way that each dollar of profit is taxed only once, but firms are discouraged from artificially shifting profits to low-tax jurisdictions.
Most governments tax the profits of multinationals where firms report them as earned.
This method assumes that a multinational's subsidiaries, incorporated in different countries, are operating at arm's-length from their parent, paying market prices for the goods and services each imports from elsewhere in the group.
The advantage of this method is that profits are normally taxed only once; the drawback is that firms have some leeway to relocate profits, paying inflated prices for imports from group subsidiaries in low-tax countries.
California, however, takes as its tax base a slice of the multinational's worldwide profits, using the proportion of a firm's global workforce, property and sales within its own borders to determine the size of that slice.
Such an approach, while making the double taxation of profits all too likely, in theory does away with fake transfer pricing within multinational groups and therefore has some merit (see page 83).
In practice, however, it cuts across a web of internationally-agreed tax rules at a time when growing co-operation among tax inspectors around the globe has made them ever more effective.
By keeping double taxation to a minimum and cracking down on phoney transfer pricing, these international arrangements have helped boost the efficient allocation of capital worldwide.
Barclays, a British bank, has fought in the courts for years to overturn California's tax.
It has argued, among other things, that a state's constitutional right to raise taxes must yield to the federal government's constitutional right to regulate international commerce.
Other multinationals, both foreign and American, agree.
So too have three successive American presidents, who argued publicly against unitary tax.
So far, the courts have found for California.
If the Supreme Court reverses these decisions, as it should, the financially-stricken state could lose up to $1 billion in back tax.
Last June vote-hungry Mr Clinton promised to side with California.
Since then, silence.
Time's up
By insisting on knowing his views, the Supreme Court is kicking Mr Clinton off the fence, and none too soon.
Alarmed by the case, foreign governments are talking of retaliation.
Britain said on May 13th that it would penalise multinationals based in California if the unitary tax on worldwide profits were not scrapped by the end of the year.
Other European countries, and Japan, are making similar noises.
Their threats are as misguided as Mr Clinton's own campaign pledge; foreign multinationals will suffer as much as American ones if tax authorities start fighting each other.
But, with the prospect of a GATT trade deal already clouded by Mr Clinton's dithering, the last thing he should do is damage world economic relations further by failing to prevent an international tax war.
He must now break his promise to California.
Doing so will not be easy.
California advances all sorts of reasons why Mr Clinton should not bother.
The state rightly claims that its unitary tax is far less onerous than it was a decade ago, and hints that it may soon limit unitary-tax treatment to a multinational company's American profits.
Worst for Mr Clinton, he might jilt California only to see the Supreme Court decide for state over federal rights, thus losing face for nothing.
Nevertheless, the danger of a tax trade war remains.
The president has made a habit of breaking election promises.
At least this time he could justifiably claim to be doing so in a higher cause than that of his own political survival.
LETTERS
Paying for survival
Your review of Raymond Bonner's ‘At the Hand of Man’(April 24th) is a ray of hope for those of us who live with dangerous wild animals.
His book should prick the conscience of the wildlife conservationists in this part of the world, where the interests of thousands of villagers are subordinate to those of wildlife.
Left on his own, the African is a natural conservationist and, indeed, a protector of his ecosystem.
The large-scale hunting of wildlife and cutting down of trees are alien to the African.
But when villagers' lives (and livelihoods) are threatened, say, by the build-up of the elephant population, many feel insulted to see rangers appear promptly in Landrovers, often with a helicopter above, when a rogue elephant is killed while destroying crops.
Rangers rarely respond to their outcry when a person is trampled to death by the same beasts.
In the long run it is not the game wardens — no matter how well financed by international organisations — who will ensure the success of wildlife conservation, but the people who live side by side with wildlife.
For conservation efforts to succeed, there need to be practical and sustainable programmes that guarantee benefits to the locals.
Wildlife should pay for its survival.
Hunting should be allowed to help cull aged or troublesome game.
A proportion of fees from hunters, tourists and tour vehicles should go into community-based projects, such as provision and maintenance of water supplies and primary health care.
Where appropriate, wildlife-conservation organisations should research and promote licensed breeding of some species of wildlife (such as ostriches) for food, and evaluate the economic benefit to the local people.
A well-run Bank
Your article on the World Bank and the IMF (May 1st) refers to ‘growing dissatisfaction of its rich-country shareholders over the way [the Bank]is run.’
Yet your article appeared during the spring meetings in Washington of the two institutions at which finance minister after finance minister endorsed the policies and operations of the World Bank.
It suits your arguments to assert that: ‘Too often, project loans are approved only to fail, or fail to be followed through.’
In fact, the majority of World Bank loans meet their objectives of improving the lives of the poorest people in the world.
The Bank sets itself exceptionally high standards that, inter alia, call for projects to deliver at least a 10% economic rate of return.
The Bank itself commissioned a study which noted that approximately a third of its projects failed to meet these rigorous criteria.
The report also noted, however, that many of those investments nonetheless delivered considerable development benefits to the borrowing countries, despite the inhospitable international economic climate of the 1980s.
And the average rate of return for this group was still 6%.
The Bank's shareholders have welcomed the institution's own desire to improve the implementation of its projects.
For example, Lloyd Bentsen told his fellow finance ministers that America commended the World Bank for ‘undertaking a frank and critical self-evaluation of its project performance’, adding that ‘we would also urge all multilateral and bilateral donors to undertake similar efforts.’
Yet another tax
Your constant drumbeat for a value-added tax in the United States (April 24th) demonstrates a profound lack of understanding of the nature of America's government.
The essence of your argument is sound enough — taxes on spending make better economic sense than taxes on income and investment.
But the benefit is realised only if a spending tax replaces other existing taxes and the tax burden as a whole is either unchanged or reduced.
President Clinton and Congress, however, have no intention of reducing either income or investment taxes.
In fact, higher income and business-profits taxes are already in store for us.
The effect of a VAT would be simply to weigh down companies with paperwork, take more money from over-taxed Americans, and throw it into that black hole we call the American government.
No dividing line
The dismaying aspect of the Palestine situation was best exemplified in your short article, ‘Separate development’(April 24th).
In it you remark that ‘Mr Rabin has lately begun preaching the classical Zionist themes that a Jewish state should rely on Jewish labour.’
You end your article by stating that ‘Arabs and Jews live better apart.’
Nowhere do you mention the several hundred thousand Arabs (Muslims, Christians) who carry Israeli passports and have been second-class citizens for the past 45 years.
How are they to be kept ‘apart’?
Another round of ‘ethnic cleansing’?
Famous, but not first
I have waited a long time to catch The Economist out on an egregious factual error.
I have now done so.
The first chief justice of the American Supreme Court was not, as Lexington (May 1st) states, John Marshall.
He was merely the first famous one.
The first chief justice was John Jay, who resigned after a short time due to his belief that the job would never amount to anything.
A bit east of Eden
Bagehot is incorrect when he states (May 1st) that Harold Macmillan was the recipient of that most famous ‘Rabbism’: ‘He's the best leader we've got.’
The target of Rab Butler's typically feline indiscretion was Macmillan's predecessor, Anthony Eden.
The occasion was a lobby briefing when Rab quipped: ‘capax imperii nil nisi imperasset,’ which might be roughly translated as: apparently able to govern until called upon to do so.
Hardly a ringing endorsement!
Is this what Bagehot wishes upon John Major?
BOOKS AND ARTS
The war and peace of AIDS
PARIS
BACK in 1987 one of the first tentative recognitions of AIDS in the arts world, a benefit concert called ‘Music for Life’, was held at Carnegie Hall in New York.
It leaned heavily towards tragic self-pity.
Leontyne Price sang ‘Visse d'Arte,’ from ‘Tosca’: ‘I lived for art and love…
Why am I being paid back in this way?’
Six years on the tune has changed.
There is a new pugnacity in the battered world of the arts.
It is not just that AIDS has removed famous names — the rock star Freddy Mercury, the jazzman Miles Davis, the pianist Yuri Egorov, dancers like Rudolf Nureyev and Jorge Donn.
It has also cut a swathe through the battalions of ordinary people who do the non-famous jobs, the ones who keep things going in publishing houses, museums and symphony halls.
An American poet, Carolyn Kizer, says that in the arts ‘it is not enough to have just great personalities.
There also must be people backing them up, and AIDS has wiped out a vast number of support staff’.
On stage and screen the attempt goes on to understand this end-of-the-century plague.
A French film maker, François Margolin, has produced a new film, ‘Mensonges’(‘Lies’), in which Nathalie Baye plays a woman who finds herself pregnant and also seropositive for AIDS — because her lover, played by Didier Sandre, had concealed a homosexual affair.
The wife berates the bisexual lover as a murderous villain.
Unlike most earlier films on the subject, such as the American ‘Longtime Companions’, which were primarily pleas for compassion, a film can now show an AIDS victim who is denounced for his duplicity.
This year's Pulitzer prizewinner play, ‘Angels in America’, does the same thing on stage.
It points its finger at the odious hypocrisies of AIDS-sufferer Roy Cohn, one of Senator McCarthy's henchmen.
Not everybody, however, is happy with the use of AIDS as the shaper of a plot, or the vehicle for a political message.
Miss Baye somewhat defensively said of ‘Lies’ that ‘AIDS is a subject like any other.’
Other film makers disagree.
Cyril Collard died last month of AIDS, at the age of 35, after directing ‘Les Nuits Fauves’(‘Savage Nights’).
He himself played the chief role in the film, that of a bisexual young man whose girlfriend decides they will not use condoms although she knows he is seropositive, because she believes that ‘love will protect her.’
The film's claim that love is stronger than death is delivered among some violent scenes of variant eroticism.
Collard compared his characters' decisions about condom-use to ‘the mad passion of Chopin and George Sand’.
Pace Miss Baye, ‘Savage Nights’ declares that AIDS is not a subject like any other.
At least in Europe and America, it mostly strikes homosexual and bisexual men, and drug-users.
French critics seem to have taken Collard's film to their hearts, perhaps because of Gallic admiration for the sheer dash of its heroes, whatever their private tastes.
‘A generation plunged into the torment of AIDS loses its last romantic,’ said Paris-Match after Collard's death.
The Journal du Dimanche called him ‘the Dorian Gray of the AIDS years’.
If film and theatre have found new things to say on the subject, literature is still relatively dumbstruck.
A Cuban writer, the late Reinaldo Arenas, wrote a memoir, ‘Avant la nuit’(Julliard Publishers; FFr150), in which he mixed an account of his gallant resistance to Fidel Castro's regime with details, some of them unsavoury, about his homosexual life in Cuba.
Arenas explained that, although he was suffering from AIDS when he wrote the book, he hardly mentioned the illness ‘because I don't know what it is.
Nobody really knows.
I've seen dozens of doctors and for all of them it is an enigma…
Really, we have never known such an unassailable calamity.
Such a diabolic perfection suggests the possibility of a human hand in its invention.’
This Cuban decided that his ‘only health remains in writing’.
The same spirit produced the recent publication of a posthumous work by a 35-year-old French writer, Gilles Barbedette, who died a year ago in Paris before he could correct the proofs.
In his ‘Mémoires d'un jeune homme devenu vieux’(‘Memoirs of a Young Man Grown Old’, Gallimard Publishers; FFr80), Barbedette argued that AIDS-sufferers ‘have a new ‘Magic Mountain’ to write’.
Yet the only writer who knew himself to be mortally ill and yet managed to achieve great things was Franz Kafka: ‘It is not easy to build an oeuvre knowing that one has a revolver pointed at one's neck.’
Barbedette concluded that the only thing to do is to ‘maintain an intrepid virtue.’
He quoted Cardinal Rancé, whose last words on his deathbed were: ‘I am not leaving you, I am only preceding you.’
If artists have to address the fact that AIDS-sufferers shuffle off this mortal coil faster than most of the rest of humanity, perhaps the arts most closely linked to the body can express the idea best.
Literature is made up of words.
Not so dance.
The world of dance has lost to AIDS not only its two biggest stars of the modern era, Rudolf Nureyev and Jorge Donn, but also many less well-known talents; they include a French choreographer, Dominique Bagouet, who died a few months ago in his early 30s.
Yet dancers seem to be able to keep things going, often in unlikely ways.
A director of a modern dance company, Bill T. Jones, a black American, is continuing the dance company he founded 20 years ago with his companion Arnie Zane, who died of AIDS in 1988.
They used to bill themselves as ‘the famed inter-racial homosexual couple’.
Far from giving up the ghost, Mr Jones now tours the world with his ‘Absolut Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Company’, staging his late companion's choreographies, dancing, even getting into debates with local Roman Catholic clergymen about the use of condoms.
He deals with subjects like safe sex, and some of his decors are by Keith Haring, who also died of AIDS.
If indeed, as Le Figaro magazine has said, AIDS is a ‘world war’, the definitive account of the war will have to wait a while.
Tolstoy wrote ‘War and Peace’ several decades after the Napoleonic battles he described.
It can be argued that no truly great novel has yet been written about the second world war.
In terms of war, AIDS looks more like one of those medieval struggles that dragged on for decades than a relatively swift modern conflict.
Alas, there will be a continuing and increasing need to express through the arts what is unsayable elsewhere about this modern plague.
Joan Miro
The quiet one
BARCELONA
IF THERE is such a thing as a born artist, Joan Miro was one.
Almost as soon as he learnt to write, he handed his parents a note which read: ‘I wish to become a painter.’
They enlisted the young Joan at art school, but he did not do well there, and in 1910 he was enrolled as a trainee at a Barcelona haberdashers.
His career as a clerk was short.
Miro took to sketching in the ledgers.
He also fell so ill that he was sent to the family's country house to convalesce.
The influence of the landscape around Mont-Roig, in southern Catalonia, can be seen in many of the 180 paintings now assembled in Barcelona to mark the centenary of Miro's birth.
The exhibition, which runs until the end of August, charts the development of one of the greatest Spanish artists of this century.
It moves from sketches he made as an eight-year-old, via his figurative and later surrealist paintings, to the simple forms and primary colours of his later work.
That Miro is not as well known as his contemporaries Picasso and Dali has as much to do with personality as with art.
Picasso aimed his passion at the outside world.
Dali's public life was an eccentric extension of his surrealist vision.
Miro was different.
Timid, fastidious and conservative in his dress, he was given to silences of legendary proportions and to a strict working routine more befitting the clerk he never became than the artist he was.
All of his energy was directed inward, into his art.
But, like so many young artists in the early decades of the century, Miro could not keep away from Paris.
He moved there in 1920 and his first years were marked by extreme poverty.
Hunger made him hallucinate, and at times frustration made him bang his head against the wall.
His output of that time reflects the surrealist company he kept.
He knew André Masson, André Breton, René Magritte, Jean Arp and Max Ernst.
Breton later said: ‘Of all of us, Miro was the most surrealistic.’
His best-known friendship of that period, however, was with Ernest Hemingway.
They took boxing lessons together.
It was Hemingway who bought —‘for a few centimes’— Miro's first great work, ‘La Masia’(‘The Farm’).
It had taken Miro nine months of eight-hour working days.
Only half-heeding Picasso's advice —‘Don't leave Paris if you want to be an artist’— Miro chose to spend his winters there and his summers in Mont-Roig.
He did this until 1936, when the Spanish civil war made him stay in France.
Then the invading German army drove him, his wife and child back to Spain in 1940.
Miro called the work of this time ‘my savage paintings…full of oppositions, conflicts and contrasts’.
A self-portrait from the period has the same decided, serene expression as one he had painted 18 years earlier, but his eyes and hair are engulfed in flames, his face is distorted.
As he worked on it, Miro wrote to his friend Pierre Matisse that the painting ‘will sum up my whole life’.
In 1960, though, he felt compelled to return to the painting.
Then living in isolation in Majorca, an ‘internal exile’ from the Franco regime, he got a friend to print a full-size copy of the original, which he worked over in his new style.
The simplicity of his later work — he died on Christmas Day in 1983 — has given him the reputation of being a spontaneous artist.
But the preparatory sketches he made throughout his life, 300 of which are on display at this exhibition, show that a careful process of synthesis lay behind each work.
Miro once said that everything in his paintings and sculptures was derived from something he saw.
‘For me, conquering freedom means conquering simplicity’.
Gilbert and Offenbach
FOR good or ill, D'Oyly Carte has meant Gilbert and Sullivan for well over a century.
In 1875 Richard D'Oyly Carte, an impresario, brought the immortal pair together and established an opera company to present the authorised versions of their works.
In the end, that historic connection almost killed the company off.
Certain that it was the only true begetter of G&S, indifferent to new theatrical styles, D'Oyly Carte presented the same productions year after year, turning them into a rather dreary ritual.
Young people in particular, unimpressed by the company's reputation as a great British institution, saw tatty sets and tired performances.
In 1982 it was disbanded, a victim not so much of changing tastes as of its own inertia.
In the past couple of years, however, it has come bouncing back.
Dashing new treatments of the Savoy operas have been cheered all over Britain, and the company's current tour has seen an even greater departure from tradition.
For the first time in 90 years, D'Oyly Carte has moved outside the G&S canon, presenting an uninhibited version of Offenbach's Gallic masterpiece, ‘Orpheus in the Underworld’.
Not only has ‘Orpheus’ proved the hit of the season; it is also attracting a younger audience.
The company plans to go on pairing a G&S opera with an outsider: next season, for instance, may see Strauss's ‘Die Fledermaus’ on the bill.
It has also been asking the public what other composers' works it might like to see, from Franz Lehar to Ivor Novello and Noel Coward.
Ray Brown, D'Oyly Carte's energetic general manager, believes that ‘continuing to do G&S exclusively would mean closure.
There's no reason why we can't perform anything.’
An expanded repertoire has meant new sources of money.
For the first time in its history D'Oyly Carte is receiving an Arts Council grant, support denied to the old company because of both its sliding standards of production and its refusal to widen its brief beyond Gilbert and Sullivan.
D'Oyly Carte is no longer an institution immemorially bound to Gilbert and Sullivan.
It is a national light-opera company with a future.
There will be traditionalists who lament the change, but the company's founder was no traditionalist.
In his time Richard D'Oyly Carte was known for opulent and daring productions of all kinds.
He was also once described as ‘a man with an instinct for success’.
The death of Yugoslavia
The case for saying it was murder
THE DESTRUCTION OF YUGOSLAVIA.
By Branka Magas.
Verso; 366 pages; £39.95 and £12.95 (paper); $19.95 (paper)
BALKAN GHOSTS.
By Robert D. Kaplan.
St Martin's Press; 307 pages; $12.95
THANKS to the efforts of thousands of persistent and courageous newsmen from all over the world, the war in ex-Yugoslavia that started in June 1991 may already be the most closely reported and copiously documented conflict in history.
But the myriad electronic images and printed words that pour in daily from the Balkan war zone cannot convey the whole truth about what is going on there.
They may even get in the way of understanding it.
They need to be decoded.
The decoding requires a grasp of the political and territorial aims that shape the seemingly spontaneous acts of age-old ethnic hate committed by drunken fanatics and terrified boys.
It takes intelligent illumination to peer through the fog generated by so much detail.
‘The Destruction of Yugoslavia’ provides just such illumination.
Its author, a historian who comes from former Yugoslavia but now lives in Britain, has gathered in one volume her writings published between 1981 and the end of 1991.
She prefaces her book with an attempt to sum up the whole hideous story.
The reader thus gets both the historian's-eye view and a stage-by-stage account of the death of the multinational federation that Tito set up in 1945 and ruled until his death in 1980.
Ms Magas, who is a Croat, argues that ‘Yugoslavia did not die a natural death’; it was ‘destroyed for the cause of Greater Serbia’.
Its destroyer, she says, was an unholy alliance of nationalists bent on creating a racially homogeneous Serbian state and ex-communists longing to stay in power.
The leadership was provided by Slobodan Milosevic, a previously little-known party apparatchik anxious to broaden his power-base by co-opting Serbian nationalism into it.
The military muscle came from the large and predominantly Serb-officered Yugoslav National Army, which wanted to keep as many of its privileges as possible.
The time — after Tito's death, but while the cold war still kept the superpowers nervous — seemed propitious.
What Serbia had failed to achieve earlier in the 20th century suddenly looked within reach.
Leaders of the ‘armed counter-revolution’, as Ms Magas calls it, rejected all compromises that might have preserved the outlines of Yugoslavia while giving something to the non-Serbs.
These included a Croat-Slovene proposal (backed by Bosnia and Macedonia) for Yugoslavia's transformation into an association of sovereign states.
The seemingly boundless confidence of Mr Milosevic and his allies was not unconnected with the fact that until 1991 most of the rest of the world still seemed to reject any loosening of the bonds — controlled by the Serbs — that kept the existing Yugoslavia together.
The third Balkan war of the century happened, as wars usually do, because of miscalculation — in this case by the Greater Serbia people, who had underestimated the readiness of non-Serbs to defend themselves.
But the cost of resistance has been high in blood, in material destruction, in local misery and humiliating international paralysis.
Bosnia still burns, and the world still dithers.
Ms Magas had predicted it all.
It is a notable achievement, especially for a left-wing ‘class-firster’; but Ms Magas understands that in places like ex-Yugoslavia — and perhaps not only there — nation still matters more than class.
Little illumination is provided by ‘Balkan Ghosts’, a travelogue rather self-consciously modelled on Rebecca West's classic about her trip to Yugoslavia in 1937, ‘Black Lamb and Grey Falcon’.
The author, an American journalist, has travelled widely in the Balkans, and has lived in Greece.
He sees the region as ‘the original third world, long before the western media coined the term’.
Here, according to Mr Kaplan, ‘men have been isolated by poverty and ethnic rivalry, dooming them to hate’, and ‘politics has been reduced to a level of near-anarchy.’
He paints an undifferentiated picture of doom and gloom, of villainy, treachery and intolerance.
He has no heroes, except perhaps Kemal Ataturk, the stern maker of modern, secular Turkey, whose discoloured photograph he saw at a Turkish border post.
But even Ataturk is described as resembling ‘an Aryan Dracula…in a black dinner-jacket, peering down on me with heavy eyebrows, a widow's peak of blond hair indicating a mixed Macedonian birth’.
Some of Mr Kaplan's strictures are bizarre, for example when he echoes Rebecca West's hostility to the Austro-Hungarian empire.
He writes that, having ‘grabbed’ Bosnia at the Congress of Berlin in 1878, the Habsburgs ‘soon demonstrated that they could rule just as viciously as the Turks.’
The Turks were not quite as bad as many hostile western historians have painted them.
As for the mild, ramshackle Austro-Hungarian empire, it gave Bosnia peace and reasonably humane government for a few decades, until Austria-Hungary itself was broken up in 1918 — to the regret, quite soon, of many of its erstwhile subjects.
Mr Kaplan's best chapters are those on Romania and Greece, which he knows well.
But read his encounter, at the Serbian Orthodox monastery of Grachanitsa, with Mother Tatiana, a tough Serbian nun.
Having slugged back a glass of plum brandy, she says: ‘I'm a good Christian, but I'll not turn the other cheek if some Albanian plucks out the eyes of a fellow Serb, or rapes a little girl, or castrates a 12-year-old Serbian boy…
’ After this horrifying war, which the Serbs started and in which they committed most of the horrors, people will want to ponder how such things came to be said.
Newspaper publishing
The Indifferent
PAPER DREAMS: THE STORY OF THE INDEPENDENT AND THE INDEPENDENT ON SUNDAY.
By Stephen Glover.
Jonathan Cape; 328 pages; £17.99
FOR many of their peers, it proved what a noble calling all journalists pursued.
In October 1986 three journalists launched a daily newspaper in Britain, the Independent, whose very title was meant to signal scorn for allegiance to any political party and freedom from the machinations of a meddling proprietor.
High-minded, worthy and earnest, the Independent thrived at first, an impressive achievement in Britain's crowded newspaper market.
But it is now in financial trouble.
And this month it looked like losing any semblance of true commercial independence when its two biggest shareholders, Spain's El Pais and Italy's La Repubblica newspaper groups, said they may be forced to increase their joint stake to 50% by investing more money in it.
To judge from this book, the most surprising thing about the paper is that it did not collapse long ago.
Stephen Glover could have taken either of two ‘angles’: a bitchy, scandal-strewn insider's account, which might have appealed to a small audience of fellow scribblers and media junkies; or a description of what it takes to launch a high-profile business in the teeth of fierce competition, which might have interested those thousands of readers who do not drink at London's Groucho Club.
By feebly pursuing both at once, he has produced a peculiar hotch-potch.
Mr Glover bears a grudge.
He left the Independent in a huff in 1991 when the staff of its Sunday edition, of which he was the editor, was merged with the staff of the daily.
This alone would make his book suspect.
What makes it unbelievable is the stilted, mannered tone of his writing and his wholly implausible description of how the Independent was launched and managed.
Mr Glover portrays the paper's three founders — Andreas Whittam Smith, its editor, Matthew Symonds, his deputy, and Mr Glover himself — as sleepwalking their way to entrepreneurial success, forever bewildered by the quaint lingo of fast-talking advertising executives and investment bankers.
At one point he describes his two colleagues as cheerfully admitting that they could not write very well.
At another he speculates that none of them knew much about news or editing.
Most meetings are punctuated with champagne toasts, many are held in expensive restaurants.
During one meandering discussion Mr Glover wonders aloud why the trio are huddled in a fancy hotel, instead of talking to each other back at the office, like less exalted folk.
Mr Whittam Smith, the newspaper's chief executive as well as its editor, may not be the world's cleverest businessman.
After all, he spoiled the Independent's early success by foolishly launching a Sunday edition just as recession hit Britain.
But it is hard to believe that three such bumblers could ever have got the paper off the ground.
The book ends with a flurry of ‘I really never expected to be treated in this way by you’ accusations and counter-accusations.
Aw, c'mon.
This is implausibly pompous, and not how business is conducted even in Britain, where civility too often excuses a multitude of sins.
There is nothing to learn from reading this book except, perhaps, how vain and self-regarding some journalists are.
And who needs a book to tell him that?
A British object
SOME of the world's most enduring stories are about the disturbingly sudden appearance of a Savage Outsider in a community that regards itself as settled and, by its own lights, civilised.
The 19th-century legend of Kaspar Hauser, that strange boy with no origins and no language, who appeared as if from nowhere, has in recent years reappeared in a film by Werner Herzog and in the poetry of Georg Trakl.
Who was he, and where had he come from?
Was he a visionary?
A wolf boy?
A child of God?
An Australian novelist, David Malouf, has tapped the same source of fathomless fear in ‘Remembering Babylon’ *.
A creature, filthy and in rags, appears in a freshly settled rural community in 19th-century Queensland.
No one knows whether he is black, white or in-between.
‘Do not shoot!’ says the creature.
‘I am a British object.’
The words spring unbidden to his mind; the language he once knew has slipped from his grasp.
But they contain more plain truth than he is able to recognise.
He is indeed more object than subject, both to himself and to those among whom he has arrived.
Little by little, the story pieces together the trials of this greedy and repulsive rag of a man, who assumes the name of Gemmy Fairley: his terrible early life as a rat-catcher's assistant in England, where he had been treated as little better than a beast of burden by his loathed master, Willett; how he managed to survive as a stowaway on board ship in order to escape the consequences of the revenge that he wreaked upon his master; his arrival in Australia and his early life there, lived among the aborigines.
He is part-aboriginal by nurture and white by nature; and the mixture shakes the white settlers to their roots.
They become a prey to nameless and often unspoken fears.
Is he in league with the aborigines?
Is he an infiltrator — or even a spy?
It is what he represents, not what he is, that matters: the Bogeyman; the Coal Man; Absolute Night…
And the settlers, precariously rooted in this new and strange land, must come to terms with whatever his presence among them represents.
‘Remembering Babylon’, plainly told, is a novel about the colonial heritage; about human endurance and human brutality; about loneliness, neighbourliness, the anguish of childhood; but above all about the definition of humanness.
David Malouf is a poet as well as a novelist, but the best of his poetry is in the prose of a novel like this.
Maestri Milanesi
How do you build the best soccer team in the world?
ITALY has many problems.
Football is not one of them.
On May 12th, at Wembley, Parma took the Cup-Winners' Cup, one of Europe's three main international tournaments.
Turin's Juventus marched right up to a triumph in this week's UEFA Cup.
And AC Milan is expected to beat Marseilles on May 26th in the final of the European Cup, having won all the qualifying matches and having already been European champion twice in the past four years (see table for its total performance over recent years).
AC Milan is the star of stars.
In the Italian league, full of good teams, it has lately notched up an all-time record — no defeats in 58 successive games — and is close to winning its 13th title.
Is it the world's best?
Most football fans, from China to Argentina, have no doubt: it is.
How has Milan done it?
Easy: by a combination of big money and sound management.
And, of course, having been around a long time.
Founded in 1899 by a Briton living in Milan, Alfred Edwards (who with due respect for the game's summer rival called his creation the Milan Cricket and Football Club), the rossoneri —‘red-and-blacks’, their shirt colours — won the Italian league championship in 1901, and again in 1906 and 1907.
In the 1950s three Swedish players — Gunnar Gren, Gunnar Nordhal and Niels Liedholm, the ‘Gre-No-Li’ trio — helped to bring more triumphs.
In the 1960s came a frail-looking but gifted midfielder, Gianni Rivera, and a stocky manager, Nereo Rocco, inventor of il catenaccio (‘the bolt’, an ultra-defensive game).
The 1970s and early 1980s were less brilliant, in several ways.
Milan got relegated, twice: once by not winning enough games, once after being caught out in buying one.
And three consecutive chairmen had trouble with the law.
One retired to Beirut after going bankrupt, one got mixed up in a betting scandal, and the third was convicted of tax-dodging.
The team's fortunes turned up again in 1986.
That was when Silvio Berlusconi, the chairman of Fininvest (which owns a chunk of the Italian economy), one of the wealthiest men in the country and a true Milanese, took over the team in order to challenge Gianni Agnelli's Juventus, of Turin.
It was a clash of cultures: Lombardy versus Piedmont, Fininvest versus Fiat, new money versus old.
Il dottore, as Berlusconi's people call him, put his billions and his business instinct into reorganising Milan.
He bought three talented Dutchmen — a forward, Marco van Basten, and two midfielders, Ruud Gullit and Frank Rijkaard — who settled down well in hard-working, hard-winter Milan.
At 1.75 billion lire ($1.2m), Mr van Basten was one of the best bargains in football history.
A less obvious but equally successful choice was Arrigo Sacchi, an unknown second-division manager from Parma who brought to Milan an attractive, attacking (and so rather un-Italian) type of football.
But good managers and talented players had been around before, and they can get quickly burnt out; the Italian football landscape is littered with expensive relics.
What is unique about Milan is its style of management.
Mr Berlusconi made it clear from the start that his new purchase was going to be run like any other company.
‘I remember when in 1987 he took us all to a castle near Como,’ says Adriano Galliani, Milan's managing director.
‘He told us we had a mission: to become the best football club in the world.’
The changes began.
The old San Siro stadium, now formally called Giuseppe Meazza, became an all-seater arena holding 85,000 people.
Tickets could be bought in banks and shops, and booked long in advance on a computer, just like aircraft tickets.
‘Sponsor’ contracts were signed with companies providing the team with clothing, shoes, drinks, watches, shampoos.
Other companies were licensed to put Milan's logo on their products, and in return paid the team a royalty on their sales.
The team's organisation has acquired an almost military precision.
A ‘team manager’(they use the English words) is for the Milan machine a sort of liaison officer between the players and the board.
A medical task force consists of two doctors, a traumatologist, a dietologist and a psychologist.
(Another Italian first-division side, Pescara, not to be outdone, employs a clairvoyant.)
The team's trips are organised long in advance, in minute detail.
The players are mollycoddled: the club is prepared to rent a player's house for him, do his bill-paying, get his telephone connected, find a school for his children.
‘If somebody's mother-in-law fell sick, we would take care of her too,’ says Mr Galliani.
‘We tell the players they have to put their minds on one thing alone: winning.’
The relationship between the team and Fininvest's three television channels (Rete 4, Canale 5, Italia 1) works to both sides' advantage.
This season four cup ties (against Roma and PSV Eindhoven, and two against Portugal's Porto) have each been watched by more than 10m viewers.
These numbers sell high-price advertising space for the television people.
They also help Milan to sell tickets.
This season the club has had 73,500 season-ticket holders, which means that San Siro is packed even for dull matches.
The most adventurous mixture of football and business came last year.
To maximise Milan's chances of doing well in the Italian league, the national cup and the European Cup at the same time, Mr Berlusconi has built up a squad of players that can field two top-rate sides.
From France has come a striker, Jean-Pierre Papin, a former ‘best European player’.
From ex-Yugoslavia there are two midfielders, Zvonimir Boban and Dejan Savicevic.
Turin has provided a winger, Gianluigi Lentini, at a rumoured cost of 65 billion lire, though Mr Galliani told The Economist that it was really only 18.5 billion lire ‘plus his salary, the amount of which we prefer not to reveal’.
The players' total salary bill is 54 billion lire a year.
Mr Berlusconi is proud of all this, and relishes the club more than any other part of his empire.
He once said he loves the team come una bella donna, like a beautiful lady.
Of course, his passion has its drawbacks.
At the start of almost every Fininvest boardroom meeting in the soccer season il dottore waxes lyrical on this great shot by Papin, that winning header by Van Basten.
The other directors can only fret quietly in their seats.
They know their television stations, their publishing houses and their department stores have no chance against the heroes of Milan.
ASIA
India
Peace at last in Punjab
FROM OUR DELHI CORRESPONDENT
After more than a decade of Sikh terrorism in which 25,000 people have died, Punjab is peaceful again.
This is how it was done
A YEAR ago, the streets of every Punjabi town were deserted after dusk.
The nights belonged to the several extremist groups demanding an independent Sikh state.
In the countryside, the government had no control even in daylight.
Every month, on average, 200 people were killed.
Most of them were civilians.
Punjabis could expect no protection from the ineffective, demoralised police.
The militants ruled the towns by decrees announced on wall-posters.
They were instantly obeyed.
They banned meat, eggs and alcohol in the name of religion.
They forbade lavish wedding ceremonies, bringing to an end the glitzy Punjabi wedding.
A community famed for exuberant high living suddenly decided that austerity was the better part of valour.
Newspapers were told what to publish, and did as they were told.
The militants enforced the ban on cheating in school exams, and even that old tradition disappeared.
Land prices plummeted as Hindus as well as Sikhs left the state to escape violence.
All that has changed in the past year.
Gaiety and laughter can be heard in the towns late into the night, and shopkeepers are beaming.
High living has returned with a vengeance.
As one Sikh merrymaker puts it, ‘Egg, leg and peg are back.’
Land prices in some areas have trebled in a year.
And, alas, children have started cheating again.
Politics has come back to life as well.
When an election for the state assembly was set a year ago, after five years of direct rule from New Delhi, the militants threatened to kill voters as well as candidates.
The election was a farce, as only 22% of voters cast their ballots.
But in the municipal elections held last September, the turnout was 70%, and in village council elections in January this year, the turnout was 82%.
The militants did not even try to influence the voters.
How is it that the demand for an independent Sikh state, once seen as the beginning of a threat to the unity of India, suddenly looks like an idea whose time has gone?
Part of the reason is the government's effort to strengthen the security forces.
The police force was increased from 35,000 to 60,000 over five years.
Policemen were equipped with self-loading rifles, jeeps and even armoured tractors to chase militants into the fields.
The army sealed the border with Pakistan, making it harder for terrorists to buy weapons and seek sanctuary.
Much credit must also go to the new Congress chief minister, Beant Singh, and his police chief, K.P.S. Gill.
Mr Singh came to power in last year's farcical assembly election by getting the support of no more than 9% of registered voters.
He saw that he had no chance of winning over the militants, and so abandoned the conventional view that a political settlement was essential.
This helped the police, who had been demoralised in the past when, time and again, they would arrest terrorists only to find that they were released in government amnesties aimed, in vain , at regaining the trust of alienated Sikhs.
Mr Singh gave the police carte blanche.
He told them to sort out the terrorists by whatever means they chose.
They took this to mean a licence to torture and shoot.
At the same time, the attitude of the police was changing.
In the past some policemen had sympathised with the separatist movement, but when terrorists began killing relations of the police, the force united behind the government.
Civil-rights activists were appalled by the new brutality of the police, but it gave courage to ordinary people to become informers.
Within months, terrorism was met with police counter-terror.
Many of the most-feared militants were shot, and more than 700 of them surrendered.
None of this could have happened, however, had the attitude of Punjabis not changed.
As Mr Gill points out, in the mid-1980s police crackdowns had no effect because every time a terrorist was killed, his friends turned into terrorists to avenge him.
Somehow this stopped.
Sikhs decided they had had enough.
No doubt this was partly because many terrorists had taken to extortion and rape, ruining their once-glamorous image as freedom-fighters.
The state government took advantage of this new attitude by giving village vigilantes guns and cash to kill militants.
Punjabis are now with the police, and Mr Gill is a national hero.
But popular feeling is a delicate flower.
The government will have to cultivate it carefully.
State terror cannot be a lasting solution.
Unless police excesses stop soon, the gains of the past year may prove short-lived.
Taiwan
Twixt handshake and armlock
FROM OUR TAIWAN CORRESPONDENT
FRIGHTENED of China's growing power, Taiwan's government is looking further afield for support.
Last month President Lee Teng-hui announced that Taiwan would seek to rejoin the United Nations, as well as pushing for membership of the GATT.
Taiwanese are sceptical, but the president is determined.
Challenged on the question on May 20th, he said: ‘Hope is more important than reality.
Without hope, how can one change reality?’
The main fear concerns money.
Taiwanese investment has been flowing into the mainland since the early 1980s, but in the past year the flow has become a flood.
Up to now, it has gone mostly into moving sweatshop industries, driven out of Taiwan by rising wages and land prices.
Recently, however, investors have been shifting into high-tech industry and property development, which demand more capital.
According to official Chinese estimates, the stock of Taiwanese investment in the mainland jumped from $1.4 billion at the end of 1991 to $1 billion at the end of 1992.
The Chinese government says that the number of Taiwan-financed projects approved last year was greater than the 3,815 approved during 1983–91.
Unofficial guesses in Taiwan put the amount of cash rather higher, at $15 billion-25 billion.
The flood of money disappearing into China is causing problems for the Taiwanese economy.
The local financial system has been drained of liquidity, interest rates have gone up and the stockmarket has been falling.
Because of the cash shortage, the government is having difficulty selling bonds to finance its huge six-year national infrastructure programme, which is likely to cost over $100 billion.
On the political side, Taiwanese worry that the more money they invest in China, the more vulnerable they will be to manipulation by the Chinese government.
They fear Taiwan will become like Hong Kong, whose stock exchange oscillates every time Beijing clears its throat.
Accordingly, they were happy to hold semi-official talks with China last month, aimed at resolving some of the practical problems that arise through their growing business relations.
In retrospect, most Taiwanese seem to feel that the talks won them little, and allowed China to come too close.
The government is trying to curb investments by listed companies into the mainland, but has no means of accurately monitoring — let alone controlling — how much local companies have put into China.
In an attempt to divert money from China, the Taiwanese government is getting involved in developing an export-processing zone in Subic Bay, the former American base in the Philippines.
But that is not likely to do much to stem the flow.
To strengthen its position, Taiwan is looking for support abroad.
The government's efforts to join GATT could just pay off, but the bid to rejoin the United Nations (in which communist China replaced Taiwan in 1971) is another matter.
Since both Koreas joined the UN in September 1991, it looks slightly more possible that the two Chinas could be members as well; but it still seems unlikely that China, committed to opposing formal Taiwanese independence by force, would allow it.
The UN bid may anyway be aimed partly at Mr Lee's domestic troubles.
He faces, as well as an increasingly bad-tempered party, a pesky opposition noisily pressing him to push for Taiwanese independence.
He may well reckon that his bid to win UN membership for Taiwan is doomed from the outset, but he can at least claim to have tried.
Cambodia
It may fail to explode
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
PHNOM PENH
AS PEP-TALKS go, it was hardly encouraging.
In a speech to United Nations workers in Cambodia on May 19th, the final day of the election campaign, their chief, Yasushi Akashi, said the Khmers Rouges had increased their military strength in the country by 50% in the run-up to polling.
It was ‘more than likely’ that the Khmers Rouges would try to disrupt the voting that begins on May 23rd, perhaps by mining the approaches to polling stations, or even by shelling the stations.
The UN people reckon that about 80% of polling stations are within range of Khmer Rouge artillery.
In Kandal province, which surrounds the capital Phnom Penh, every polling station could be hit.
Mr Akashi insists on looking on the bright side: Khmer Rouge artillery was known to be inaccurate and their shells often failed to explode, he said.
Despite the reports of political violence and killing, there has been plenty of genuine electioneering.
And the general uncertainty about the outcome suggests that there is real democracy at work.
Hun Sen, the current prime minister and leader of the Cambodian People's Party, wound up his campaign in Phnom Penh this week by urging his rain-soaked audience of around 10,000 not to be inhibited about shouting their approval of his speech.
His message is simple.
The Phnom Penh government and its army are the only reliable safeguards against a return to power by the Khmers Rouges.
Government employees were given the day off to swell the crowd, and Mr Hun Sen emphasised that only his party could guarantee that they would keep their jobs.
The chief opposition to the Hun Sen government comes from the royalist party, Funcinpec.
Its rally in Phnom Penh was graced by dancing girls and a large group of white-robed nuns.
The nuns were rewarded with alms and T-shirts, and broke into an appreciative chant as the cash was handed out.
The party leader, Prince Ranariddh, has proved an adept campaigner.
His physical appearance and his rapport with the crowds remind people of his father, Prince Sihanouk, whose reign they may associate with the happier days before the Vietnam war and the Khmers Rouges.
Twenty parties are registered to fight the election and some of the smaller ones are making a respectable showing.
At a rally in Kompong Thom, one of Cambodia's most troubled areas, the Liberal Democrats drew a crowd of 7,000.
The Republican Democracy Khmer Party is one of six fringe parties preaching the virtues of American democracy — a reflection of the large number of Cambodians living in America.
Kim Kethavy, the party's leader, made his fortune from petrol stations in California and has put up a large slogan outside his office in Phnom Penh's Market Square proclaiming ‘Communism is evil’.
One message the UN has driven home is that the ballot will be secret.
There will be about 1,500 polling stations, though 1,800 were planned.
The fewer the stations, the harder it will be to vote.
Some voters will have to walk 20 kilometres (12 miles) to vote, although the average hike will be less than half that.
Democracy is less demanding in the rich world.
Afghanistan
The battle for
Kabul
IT FEELS lonely these days, being an Afghan.
Not long ago Afghanistan was a focus of world attention.
But the Soviet invaders went home in 1989, and the communist government they left behind fell in 1992.
The world has turned to places it regards as more important, and Afghanistan has been left to its civil war.
In the latest outbreak of fighting in the capital, Kabul, which began on May 12th and was continuing this week, at least 600 people have died and more than 3,000 have been injured.
This number of casualties over a period of a few days would have been exceptional even when the mujahideen guerrillas were fighting the communists.
Much of Kabul, which was almost unscathed when it was the seat of the communist government, is in ruins.
This once pleasant city of 1.5m people is now divided into a patchwork of small fiefs controlled by rival guerrilla groups.
Families pulling handcarts loaded with possessions move from area to area seeking refuge from the fighting.
But no area is safe.
The north-western suburbs, which had previously seemed a haven, came under attack in the latest fighting.
Many of the dead had camped there.
The faction which started this latest fighting with a rocket attack is led by Gulbuddin Hikmatyar.
Mr Hikmatyar, whose strength springs largely from the favours shown him by the Americans and Pakistanis in the 1980s, is now ‘prime minister-designate’ of Afghanistan.
He was accorded this title in March at a meeting in Islamabad of nine warring factions called by Pakistan in an attempt to bring peace to the country.
The pact made by the nine is probably already dead.
‘Prime minister’ he may be but Mr Hikmatyar cannot get into Kabul.
The strongest force there is run by Ahmed Shah Masoud, the defence minister.
Mr Masoud was the most successful guerrilla commander against the Soviet army and loathes Mr Hikmatyar, who sat out the war on the other side of the Pakistani border.
Unable to take over Kabul, Mr Hikmatyar has set up his own administration in Jalalabad, once a retreat for Afghanistan's kings, 110 kilometres (68 miles) from Kabul.
Afghanistan now has two governments of a sort, neither of which has much authority.
Like the capital, the country is divided by fief.
The most successful is centred on Mazar-i-Sharif, near Afghanistan's northern border.
Its chieftain is Abdul Rashid Dostam, who ran the army for the former communist president, Muhammad Najibullah.
Mr Dostam supports the idea of an Islamic government for Afghanistan, but gives sanctuary to former communists (although not to Mr Najibullah, who is holed up in the United Nations headquarters in Kabul).
The territory he controls is peaceful and there are foreign missions in Mazar-i-Sharif.
Mr Dostam keeps a token force of fighters in Kabul, sometimes supporting Mr Masoud, sometimes opposing him, depending which way the wind is blowing.
The battle for Kabul, still a symbolic prize despite the destruction there, is likely to continue.
If there is any reason for hope, it lies in the world's lack of interest.
Afghans have always killed each other in a small way, and started to do it in a big way only when foreign armies, money and weapons became involved.
Those have dried up.
Pakistan appears to have lost confidence in Mr Hikmatyar, and is anyway more concerned with its tangled domestic politics.
Being left alone for a while might have a calming effect.
Japan in a bind
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
SOUND everyday management is the Japanese government's strength, but when it comes to bold reform the politicians tend to duck.
So it is that, despite much talk of changing the electoral system and the laws on financing political parties, Japan has so far seen no Italianate reaction to corruption scandals.
Equally serious, recession has not inspired Japan's government to economic reform.
This failure may be gnawing at the roots of Japan's post-war success.
Japan's real GDP shrank 0.1% in the fourth quarter of last year and few expect much of a recovery before the end of this year.
The government's response has been to pump demand into the economy.
Two special spending programmes, worth ¥23.9 trillion ($114 billion), announced in the past year, have helped ward off full-blown recession, and the government has propped up the stockmarket by shovelling post-office savings money into it.
Satisfied with attending to the symptoms of the economy's problems, the government has not applied itself to tackling some of their causes.
Japan protects and regulates parts of the economy where imports and other sorts of competition ought to flourish.
In the food industry, the rice grown by Japan's protected farmers costs several times as much as it does abroad.
In service industries, regulation and protection have allowed Japanese companies to be around half as productive as America's.
In the construction industry, red tape, along with the endemic bribery so sharply illustrated by the recent Sagawa Kyubin scandal, means that foreigners get virtually no contracts: last year Americans got 0.02% of them.
And restrictive regulations, which keep Tokyo buildings low and living spaces small, stifle one of the economy's biggest potential areas for consumption and imports.
Such inefficiencies clash painfully with hyper-efficient manufacturing.
Japan's car makers and machine makers are among the best in the world — hence the country's much resented $10 billion-a-month trade surplus.
This surplus pushes up the yen, which ought to boost imports.
Yet imports stay low, partly because foreign firms do not always try hard enough to crack Japan, but partly because of over-regulation.
Sometimes the impact of regulations on imports is straightforward: foreign rice is all but banned.
Sometimes red tape cuts the advantage that efficient foreigners should have; this is the plight of financial and legal firms.
The effect of building regulation is still more roundabout.
By making it hard to put up the tall blocks of flats of the sort that span the skylines of most capitals, the government condemns Tokyo to low-rise, cramped housing.
That deprives Japanese of the space that, in other rich countries, would be used to  accommodate the domestic fantasies whose purchase occupies the weekends and disposes of the earnings of workers.
With little scope for investing in new kitchens or spending on three-piece suites, the Japanese put their money in the bank.
So savings rates stay high, and consumption, including the consumption of imported goods, stays low.
Such distortions lead to a persistent trade surplus and a persistently rising yen.
This is bad news not merely for Japan's relations with America but also for ordinary Japanese.
The higher the yen rises, the harder the country's exporters must strain to stay competitive.
Japan's big firms are not given to sacking workers publicly.
Beneath the surface, however, restructuring goes on.
The number of jobs in the economy is still rising slightly, but permanent jobs are scarcer: white-collar permanent employment fell by 2.9% in the year to March, blue-collar by 1.8%, according to Jesper Koll, of S.G. Warburg.
Those who keep their jobs are also affected.
Overtime pay is down 15% from its peak two years ago; summer bonuses are expected to fall 1.6% this year, the largest drop on record.
Bankruptcies, especially among the big firms' small suppliers, are at a record.
In the year to March they resulted in job losses of more than 110,000.
Ironically, this burden is falling upon Japan's efficient export industries as much as on inefficient, over-regulated ones.
Worse, the high yen is forcing exporters to move to cheaper sites in Asia.
Japan risks losing the industries it is good at, and being lumbered with the rest.
On top of this pain, some economists see a less direct danger in the rising yen.
The link between effort and reward is weakening.
Japan's exporters have already had to go through a punishing belt-tightening, prompted by the yen's steep rise against the dollar after 1985.
They might reasonably feel they deserve to be rewarded.
But, because regulation depresses imports, the yen has started to go up again, forcing them to tighten belts some more.
Individuals are feeling similarly unrewarded.
On paper, Japanese have the second-highest average incomes in the world.
This puzzles them: they ask why, if they are so rich, life is not easier.
Part of the reason is that their earnings are dissipated by prices kept high by import controls.
Spotted in a Tokyo supermarket: six peaches for ¥4,200 ($18).
Other regulations do their bit; Tokyo residents have to commute huge distances because building restrictions limit the living space available in the capital.
The frustration of unrewarded effort reinforces other creeping changes.
Japan's tradition of lifetime employment is based on the fast growth of the 1960s and 1970s.
In those days Japan's firms borrowed technology from abroad, then trained their workers to apply it.
To make the training pay off, firms did their best to keep employees; at the same time, the prospect of training gave employees an incentive to stay with their firms.
Now that Japan has caught up technologically, growth is inevitably slower.
The reason for companies' single-minded loyalty to their workers is fading, as is the reason for workers' loyalty to their firms.
This adds up to a threat to the source of Japan's post-war strength.
Left-wing and right-wing, labour and management have never wavered from the pursuit of economic growth.
Families have not questioned the breadwinner's devotion to the firm.
Now different priorities are emerging.
The government's current five-year plan declares that Japan must become a ‘life-style superpower’.
Businessmen may hope to ignore such sloganising.
But if Japan's workers lose their devotion to their jobs, the bosses will have to pay attention.
Sri Lanka
The centre holds
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN COLOMBO
THE most significant feature of Sri Lanka's provincial elections, which took place on May 17th, was the calm that surrounded them.
Although they were held in the shadow of the assassinations of President Ranasinghe Premadasa and an opposition leader, Lalith Athulathmudali, and in sharp contrast to the provincial elections held in 1988, not a gun was fired.
The police cells were empty.
In 1988 the turnout was 50%.
This week the figure was close to 75%.
Premadasa's posthumous influence on the election was evident.
Having learnt early in life that power and prosperity resided in the villages, he had concentrated his political efforts there.
Not being a member of the goigama (farmer) caste, he identified easily with the lower orders and poured money into rural welfare schemes.
The ruling United National Party has been repaid handsomely for his attentions.
It won four out of the seven provinces.
The Indian Tamil plantation voters, along with the Tamil Muslim and Christian voters in other parts of this Sinhalese-Buddhist island, helped the party to victory in the poorer areas.
The leftish People's United Front of Sirimavo Bandaranaike won two provinces, including the Western Province.
The capital, Colombo, and much of the island's recent prosperity are in the Western Province.
This victory is a fillip for Mrs Bandaranaike, who became the world's first woman prime minister in 1960, but has been in the political wilderness in recent years.
Her daughter Chandrika, whose politics have not altered much since her Left Bank days as a student at the Sorbonne, will be the province's chief minister.
The business world seems distinctly unalarmed at this prospect; the stock exchange rose five points at the news.
The only person likely to be seriously annoyed by Miss Bandaranaike's rise to local power is her brother, Anura, the party's national organiser.
No elections were held in the predominantly Tamil Northern and Eastern Provinces because it was judged that the Tamil Tiger terrorists would have set about disrupting them.
Yet the point of devolving power to provincial assemblies, central to the debate over the Tamil question, was to give these provinces some control over their own affairs.
The argument over decentralisation will probably dominate political debate in the future, because it lies at the heart of the Tamil issue.
Although measures to devolve power to the provinces were widely advertised, they did not add up to much.
Power has remained centralised under the constitution of 1978, enacted by Junius Jayewardene with Singapore in mind.
He wanted a presidency that could take unpopular measures that might be necessary if Sri Lanka were to match Singapore's success.
For a decade, Sri Lanka has been caught between this ambition and the demand for decentralisation that springs from the country's ethnic troubles.
The opposition now says that it will use the councils it has won to agitate for the dismantling of Mr Jayewardene's centralist vision.
Malaysia
Powerhouse
Penang
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
PENANG is where Malaysia's past meets its future.
Tourists in search of a little colonial nostalgia can still go ballroom dancing in the crumbling grandeur of the Eastern & Oriental Hotel or may chance across an ancient guide book: ‘To Siam and Malaya in the Duke of Sutherland's Yacht’.
But tourists are not the only foreigners flocking to Penang.
Scores of multinational companies have set up in the industrial parks on either side of the giant bridge that links Penang island to the mainland.
Penang has become crucial to Malaysia's move into high-tech manufacturing.
When foreign companies like Intel, a maker of computer chips, arrived in Penang 20 years ago, they concentrated on simple assembly work.
Now the work is a lot more sophisticated.
Last year Intel opened a design centre and started to make a new line of microprocessors in Penang.
Its chief international rival, Advanced Micro Devices, is also in Penang.
The province's industrial parks offer a roll-call of multinational electronics and computer firms: Motorola, Hitachi, Philips, Thomson and Sony.
Such a concentration of growth in a small area means that Penang is no longer the place to go in search of cheap labour.
Skilled labour is what they want.
The local technical university is a useful source; so is the Penang Skills Development Centre, set up and financed by local multinationals.
Andrea Vecchiotti, the managing director of Otis, a maker of lifts and escalators, which is building a $10m plant in Penang, says that direct labour costs will be only 2% of the cost of producing a lift on the island.
Mr Vecchiotti is looking not for masses of assembly-line workers, but for a few skilled and adaptable engineers.
Those companies that do rely on large numbers of assembly-line workers are beginning to have difficulty finding them.
Signs outside Penang factories advertise ‘walk-in interviews’.
The obvious solution — to move into more capital-intensive highly skilled work — is being energetically pursued.
Penang's chief minister, Koh Tsu Koon, is so intent on his high-tech strategy that he says he has been turning away unsuitable investors.
Labour-intensive or dirty work is being politely pushed into other provinces or into Thailand or Indonesia.
In the manner of modern-minded technocrats, Mr Koh thinks in triangles.
He is keen to see a ‘growth triangle’ linking Penang with northern Sumatra in Indonesia and southern Thailand.
The idea is that Penang will provide the skills and its poorer neighbours will provide the labour, although Mr Koh is too polite to put it that bluntly.
In April Thai and Indonesian leaders gave their formal blessing to the idea of the triangle.
Mr Koh is vague about what practical steps will be needed to realise his geometrical scheme.
But if Penang can become a regional centre for services and technology, it will be following the spectacular success of Singapore.
The comparison between the two islands is beguiling.
Both prospered in the colonial period as free ports.
Both have moved into advanced manufacturing and specialise in supplying parts for the computer industry.
Both draw heavily on the skills of an educated Chinese population.
In Penang, alone in Malaysia, the majority of the population is Chinese.
Mr Vecchiotti of Otis says bluntly that the main reason his company chose to move to Penang, not Kuala Lumpur, is that Penang is ‘more Chinese’.
Such sentiments, expressed too loudly, could cause Penang problems in a country where the distribution of wealth between the Malays and the Chinese minority is still a central political issue.
GDP figures suggest that Penang is about 20% richer than Malaysia as a whole and the gap is likely to grow.
Last year the economy in Penang province grew by 11%, compared with 8.5% or so for the country as a whole.
Mr Koh says that Penang's gain is Malaysia's gain.
Fortunately for Penang, Malaysia's prime minister, Dr Mahathir Mohamad, seems to agree.
AMERICAN SURVEY
No socialism here
MIAMI
IF BILL CLINTON were to look to Florida for advice on how to pass a health-care bill, the answer might come back in the words of Lyndon Johnson: better to have your enemies inside your tent pissing out, than outside pissing in.
Florida's health-care plan was recently approved.
Like the emerging national plan, the Florida measure seeks to make health-insurance benefits available to the working poor by giving them the same clout in the marketplace as employees of big companies.
It requires small businesses, many of which do not provide insurance, to join one of 11 huge regional bargaining pools around the state.
State employees and Medicaid recipients are also required to join.
The idea — a version of managed competition — is that each pool, with its thousands of members, will be in a strong position to negotiate for a menu of medical-benefit packages.Health-care providers — physicians, hospitals and pharmaceutical companies — will be compelled to come together to offer these packages or risk losing patients.
When Florida's Governor Lawton Chiles outlined this plan early in the year, he faced formidable opposition from entrenched groups: doctors, hospitals, insurers, businesses (which feared tax increases) and state workers (who thought the new benefits would fall short of what they already have).
But this phalanx of enemies, all with influence in the legislature, did not present an unbroken front.
Doctors, for example, were split on the plan: primary-care doctors were open to reform; their colleagues in esoteric specialities balked.
Insurers, too, were divided.
The largest companies told Mr Chiles they were willing to go along with his programme in the belief that they could compete.
They also sensed that it would help them to make sure that managed competition was made to work; they feared that, if it failed, politicians might opt for a government-run programme that would cut them out entirely.
The key to getting the reform through was held by business, which found itself confused.
On the one hand, business leaders agreed that something had to be done to the health-care system because the cost of covering their workers was eroding their profits.
The concept of managed competition (as opposed to a government-run system) appealed to them.
Yet business lobbyists told Mr Chiles that they distrusted the state's ability to carry out the plan.
The lobbyists argued that if bureaucrats ran the regional pools, they would have neither the incentive nor the ability to negotiate the best possible deal.
The governor responded by crafting a bill that establishes 11 semi-autonomous boards across the state, one in each region, empowered to carry out the negotiations within a set of basic guidelines.
He then handed business a plum: the majority of seats on each board will be held by business representatives.
The governor's strategists say they became confident that the reform would get through when the state's biggest business lobby, Associated Industries of Florida, agreed to support it.
After that many Republican law-makers felt compelled to go along with it — and it became harder for critics to attack the reforms as ‘socialised medicine’.
Afrocentrism
Pharaoh time
WASHINGTON, DC
STUDENTS of the demonic ice people (whites) and the beatific sun people (blacks) have triumphed.
Thanks to a decision by a federal jury on May 11th, Leonard Jeffries, a pioneer of this branch of scholarship, should soon be back in his old job as head of black studies at the City University of New York.
The university had sacked Mr Jeffries for making an anti-Semitic speech; he accused the Jews of masterminding ‘a financial system of destruction of black people’.
The court decided that the university had violated the professor's right to free speech, and awarded him $100,000.
The curious thing is why a university made Mr Jeffries head of an academic department in the first place.
The answer lies in the rise of Afrocentric education, and the educational establishment's confused response to the phenomenon.
Afrocentrism is based on two somewhat controversial propositions.
First, that civilisation was invented by the Egyptians and then plagiarised and corrupted by the Greeks.
Second, that races differ in everything from their moral worth to their mental abilities.
Blacks are presumed to be the superior race, largely thanks to their emotional temperaments and intuitive thinking, and whites to be inferior, because of their repressed feelings and addiction to bloodless rationality.
Afrocentric explanations of these racial differences range from the physiological (blacks have a superabundance of life-enhancing melanin) to the neo-Lamarckian (whites acquired their pallid colour and crabbed ways from living in caves for too long).
The movement found a home in the universities, particularly in their black-studies departments, and enjoyed the enthusiastic patronage of many deans.
Lately, however, academics have taken to exposing the whole business as a farrago of fantasies and errors.
Frustrated in academia, the Afrocentrists are now concentrating their efforts in schools.
Surprisingly, the most extreme curriculum has been adopted not in Chicago or Detroit but in Portland, Oregon's sleepy capital.
Schools in a number of prosperous suburbs are starting to give as much prominence to Egypt as to Greece and Rome in their history courses.
A widely used textbook by Asa Hilliard claims not only that Africa is ‘the mother of western civilisation’ but also that Africans discovered America centuries before Columbus.
That sounds right.
For all its exotic pretensions, Afrocentrism is as American as hamburgers.
Enthusiasts are usually city-bred people who have seldom, if ever, ventured abroad; they are edgy when confronted with flesh-and-blood Egyptians, particularly Egyptians with doctorates.
The movement is quintessentially American in its ‘feel-goodism’.
One of its central tenets is that studying black civilisation will boost the self-esteem of black students, and with it their academic performance.
Afrocentrism is a conservative movement bent on conserving a tradition, albeit one that never really existed.
Devotees don their kinte-cloth caps in much the same spirit as British Thatcherites sport their tweeds and Republicans their blazers.
Fierce in their hostility to drugs and casual sex, Afrocentrists are in the forefront of black self-help movements.
Their enemy is liberal society, with its emphasis on personal choice and instant gratification, and liberal social theory, with its bland notion of the equality of all cultures.
Worse than the disease?
WASHINGTON, DC
THE third week in May was billed as the week in which Bill Clinton would join FDR as one of America's great social reformers.
He was to have unveiled a health-care plan that managed, at a stroke, to introduce universal cover, control prices and, thus, tame the deficit.
Instead, Mr Clinton spent the week drumming up popularity by giving speeches in Los Alamos and playing basketball (badly) in Los Angeles.
He has not given up on health care.
He is being exhaustively briefed on such things as rural medicine and trends in the insurance market.
His task force is set to deliver its report any day now.
The trouble is that the problem is proving to be more intractable than even the most cynical Democrats had feared.
The president still has to make a host of key decisions: how generous to make the benefits; how to pay for the changes; how much freedom to give the states and, above all, how to sell the package.
The administration blames the delay on the fact that Hillary Rodham Clinton, the president's wife and head of the task force, had to take two weeks off to care for her dying father.
There are other reasons.
The task force is still divided between those who believe that price controls are the best way to control costs (Mrs Clinton, supported by Donna Shalala, the secretary of health, and Judith Feder, a senior adviser) and those who put their faith in competition (principally Ira Magaziner).
Several leading Democrats, in the administration and in Congress, have made hostile noises about health-care reform.
Leon Panetta, director of the Office of Management and Budget, warned Mr Clinton about trying to do too much too quickly.
Richard Gephardt, the majority leader in the House of Representatives, warned him that if he introduced health-care reform on the coat-tails of his budget, it would be seen as a tax issue rather than a health issue.
The result is that Mr Clinton is unlikely to unveil his plan until the third week of June, and it could be later if his economic package encounters more problems.
Overhauling an industry that consumes $100 billion a year and accounts for about a seventh of the national economy merits delay.
Not since the days when Gosplan tried to micro-manage the Soviet Union have government employees attempted anything quite so ambitious, not to say foolhardy.
Even members of the Task Force occasionally have their doubts.
Two things, in particular, are making the policy-makers jittery.
The first is that health-care reform is certain to destroy jobs.
The worst affected will be small businesses, the main engine of job-creation in the Reagan-Bush era.
Firms that do not already offer coverage will be obliged to cough up — and some of them will be forced out of business.
This will take a heavy toll in the south in general, and in Arkansas, the president's home state, in particular .
The National Federation of Independent Business, which speaks for small businessmen, puts job losses as high as 1m; some economists say they could be as low as 100,000.
Everybody agrees that jobs will go.
The second big worry is that health reform will confirm Mr Clinton's reputation as a tax-and-spend liberal.
The plan could easily cost $100 billion-150 billion a year, a massive increase in public expenditure.
Mr Clinton will try to fudge the tax issue, arguing that most of the money will come from a wage-based premium, which will go straight to local health alliances rather than to the Treasury, and that much of the rest will come from ‘sin taxes’— on alcohol and tobacco — which appeal to America's Puritan conscience.
He is also likely to phase in the measure over five years or more.
But the potential for a public backlash is there.
Some policy-makers also wonder if they did the right thing in opting for ‘managed competition’.
For a start, there is no clear agreement on what it actually means, with some people putting the emphasis on the first part of the oxymoron, and some on the second.
Indeed, whatever it means, it is bound to be enormously complicated.
Quite a few people argue that managed competition is nothing more than a compromise, cobbled together to make sure that the mighty insurers and high-tech hospitals stay in business.
They say that America would have done better simply to import the Canadian system of national insurance financed by taxes.
The administration has long known that it faces a bloody fight with conservative insurers and physicians and their hangers-on.
But it is also beginning to realise that, unless it is careful, it could also face opposition from more unexpected quarters.
Many left-leaning Democrats are still firmly attached to the Canadian model or some domestic version of it.
The trade unions could also be a problem.
For the past decade they have been more concerned with health-care than with wages and some fear that the benefits their members will get under a national plan could be less than they have managed to negotiate.
And all Mr Clinton's supporters look nervous when reminded that California's Proposition 166, which tried to make firms pay for health-insurance for all their employees, was shot down in flames last November on the grounds that it would destroy jobs.
The White House is preparing for the fight.
The policy will be sold by a team that includes Mrs Clinton, James Carville, the president's campaign manager, and Mandy Grunwald, his media adviser.
They are planning a blitz of television commercials, town-hall meetings and phone-ins.
Meanwhile, their opponents are busy taking out newspaper advertisements, buying air time and working the telephones.
The deficit
A rock too large
WASHINGTON, DC
A BUMPY summer awaits the administration.
Its economic package, designed to cut the budget deficit by $196 billion over five years, is being challenged in Congress.
And, in the country at large, the administration is seen more and more as a high-tax collector.
A piece of good news for Bill Clinton in Congress was followed, in short order, by the opposite.
The good news, on May 13th, was that the Ways and Means Committee of the House of Representatives passed the taxation part of the president's economic proposals.
Although the committee fiddled with details, no Democrats opposed the president's plan, as amended by Dan Rostenkowski, the committee's chairman.
But no sooner was that battle over than a new one began — on two fronts.
The weak point in the Democrats' control of Washington is the Senate.
On the vital Finance Committee, they have only 11 seats out of 20, which gives substantial leverage to dissidents.
Two Democrats on the committee — John Breaux from Louisiana and David Boren from Oklahoma — are from energy-producing states.
Neither likes Mr Clinton's plan for an energy tax, assessed on the thermal content of fuels, which over five years would raise $10 billion.
Neither man, however, is solely motivated by local concerns: both have been hawks on the deficit and would like to see Mr Clinton cut it more.
The two are believed to have been talking to Republicans to see if a different kind of package could be put together.
This will not be easy; there are differences even among the Democrats.
Mr Boren is thought to want to scrap the energy tax completely, and find the $10 billion from new spending cuts.
Mr Breaux would find some spending cuts but partially replace the energy tax by increasing the tax on petrol.
The administration would hate this, largely because the petrol tax is so unpopular in the open spaces of the West.
Time was when the Democrats could ignore western complaints, since everything beyond the Mississippi was a Republican fief.
No more: Mr Clinton won eight western states last November and is acutely sensitive to western politics.
While skirmishing has started in the Senate, which will not consider the economic plan for a few weeks, something like open warfare has broken out in the House.
Democrats are starting to say that the Clinton plan relies too much on new taxes and not enough on spending cuts.
Their leaders — who keep in touch with their friends in the Senate — are Tim Penny, of Minnesota, and Dave McCurdy, of Oklahoma, both members of the centrist Democratic Leadership Council (which is chaired by Mr Breaux) together with Charles Stenholm, who represents a great chunk of west Texas.
Mr Stenholm, not a man to be underestimated, presented his proposals for new cuts on May 18th.
His idea is to cap expenditure on entitlements: the mandatory spending on things like pensions, medical benefits and unemployment compensation.
Higher-than-expected entitlements levels, according to the Congressional Budget Office, is one of the main reasons why the deficit is bigger than it was expected to be in the 1990 budget agreement.
In January 1991 the CBO thought that entitlements would cost $176 billion in fiscal 1994, $124 billion in 1995, and $181 billion in 1996.
In January 1993, the CBO revised these to $116 billion in 1994, $166 billion in 1995, and $113 billion in 1996: a cumulative increase in the deficit of $114 billion.
Little of this projected increase is attributable to economic conditions.
What is killing the budget, as the table shows, are the projected increases in the costs of Medicare (health care for the elderly) and Medicaid (health care for the poor).
Medicaid is a particular headache.
The programme, whose costs are split between state and federal governments, is growing out of control, partly because states keep finding ways of shifting the costs to Washington.
Capping entitlements has never been popular, mainly because it has always been assumed that social-security recipients (old-age pensioners) would be hardest hit.
They need not be.
Social-security is not out of control; the CBO projections for it were almost unrevised, because it is simple to work out who is eligible for pensions.
And although entitlement caps are not easy to implement, there is more interest in them in Congress than there has been for years, and the interest is being communicated to the administration.
On May 18th 60 members had a long session with Howard Pastor, the White House head of congressional liaison, trying to convince him of the need for further cuts.
Their message to Mr Clinton, amply seconded by the people he met in town meetings on a swing through western states, was simple.
He has a credibility problem.
He is thought to be a man who is going to increase taxes, not one who is cutting the deficit.
To overcome that problem, say some congressional Democrats, he is going to have to show more determination to cut the deficit — and not just by raising taxes.
Otherwise, they fear, there will be little public support for the policies on health and welfare, national service and education, which both they and Mr Clinton want to see.
Return of Ears
OUTSIDERS are the taste of the month.
In Jersey City, where non-Hispanic whites account for only 35% of the population, a 34-year-old Wall Street anti-tax whizz-kid runs for mayor against the local machine.
Jesse Jackson and Bill Bradley, New Jersey's influential senator, campaign against him, to zero effect.
He wins 68% of the vote.
In Los Angeles, another place where non-Hispanic whites are a dwindling minority, a 62-year-old white businessman is in a run-off for the mayor's office against the young Asian-American who has for years been thought to be one of California's most personable Democrats.
Seasoned observers of Angeleno politics can only just believe it, but it looks increasingly as if the fat-cat will win.
And then there's this other bloke, computer wizard, Texan, big ears, worth $1 billion plus change.
Says he can run the country.
Want to bet that he won't?
The three businessmen-politicians can be lumped together, but only up to a point.
Bret Schundler, the new mayor of Jersey City, seems to be a quite normal Republican of the Jack Kemp mode, the type whose belief in the ability of economic growth to balance the budget does not commend them to Mr Perot.
Richard Riordan, who is likely to be the next mayor of Los Angeles, is less charismatic than Mr Perot.
Where Mr Perot has built real companies, Mr Riordan's career has mainly been spent as a wheeler-dealer.
But he turns out to be a devastatingly good campaigner.
He is able — as Mr Perot is not — to give straight answers to questions…
What is undeniably true is that Mr Perot's extraordinary performance at last November's election, when he won more of the vote than any third-party candidate since 1912, has exposed a deep distrust in the electorate for the familiar old kind of politician.
There will be more Schundlers and Riordans in the future, and they will all be in Mr Perot's debt.
That is the good side of the Texan, the stuff that would make him an asset in countries, such as Britain or France, where the old political order needs a solid whack.
But as it becomes clearer with each day that Mr Perot still harbours political ambitions for himself, the old doubts about him recur.
There is the rumbling, heard during the election campaign, that his organisation ‘United We Stand America’ is far from being the grass-roots citizens' army that he says it is, more a body tightly controlled by Mr Perot and a handful of lieutenants in Dallas.
There is his dishonesty.
He dislikes Bill Clinton's budget-deficit plan, arguing that it relies too much on new taxes.
But his own plan for cutting the deficit is not only just as tax-heavy, but riddled with vagueness, like a huge $141 billion annual saving through unspecified ‘health-care cost containment’.
And there is his willingness to play fast and loose with the facts.
In this regard, his April 22nd testimony before the Senate Banking Committee on the North American Free-Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which he opposes, set new standards.
He argued, oddly, that only 36 Mexicans (the 36 who, he thinks, control the Mexican economy) would be able to afford to ski in Aspen or shop at Tiffany, and that ‘probably less than a thousand’ Mexicans could afford a trip to Disney World.
His argument against NAFTA is that it will suck American jobs south of the border.
He has been challenged many times on the weak link in his case, which is that since American firms are free to relocate to Mexico, a trade agreement is the best way to make sure that American interests are protected.
Mr Perot has never yet chosen to give a straight reply to that point.
Yet still he remains phenomenally popular.
A recent poll in US News & World Report had him running dead even with Mr Clinton in a poll on presidential preferences.
He has got Washington terrified.
With just a few honourable exceptions, congressmen fawn over him whenever he comes to town.
Bob Dole, the Republican leader in the Senate, has made the courting of Mr Perot and his supporters the central element of his political strategy.
Why is he so popular?
And why is Washington so scared?
One canard, at least, needs to be laid to rest.
There is little evidence that Mr Perot's supporters are deficit hawks who conclude that everyone in Washington is weak-kneed on deficit reduction.
On the contrary, polls seem to show that his supporters intensely dislike the new taxes that are needed to shrink the deficit.
This is one reason, probably, why Mr Perot speaks far less about deficit reduction than he once did, and spends far more time shooting at easy populist targets, such as NAFTA and wicked foreign lobbyists.
His popularity seems to rest on his ability to look back with pride.
No Perot speech is complete without a reference to the 1950s, that golden age when a dollar was worth a dollar (now, on Mr Perot's figures, it is worth 18 cents) and IBM was the best company in the world.
His testimony before the Senate Banking Committee had one priceless moment of nostalgia for simpler times.
‘If you only got an apple for Christmas during the depression’, said Mr Perot, ‘you understood your parents loved you.
But if they gave you a toy made in Japan, you wondered.’
His difficulty is this.
If there are indeed older American values of the Truman and Eisenhower era, the people who hold them are suspicious of posturing blowhards, influencing public policy without being forced to take the hard choices that government requires.
That is what Mr Perot now is.
And this is what makes his fellow-outsider, Mr Riordan, more interesting.
He has a comfortable life in west Los Angeles; he dates a movie mogul's ex-wife; he wants for nothing.
And yet he is prepared to risk all this for the chance to make his city a better place.
Bilingualism
Spanish time
MIAMI
IS IT un-American not to speak English?
The debate flourishes in many parts of the United States, with south Florida out in front.
On May 18th the commissioners of Dade County, the metropolitan district of Miami, unanimously repealed an ordinance that prevented government money from being spent on promoting the use of other languages.
The debate had been passionate, held to a background chorus of Viva la democracia competing with ‘God Bless America’.
Bilingual lobbyists argue that they do not seek to challenge English as the state's official language, merely to help recent immigrants, as well as foreign tourists and businessmen.
Advocates for the other side say that immigrants should learn English and give dire warnings of a ‘white-flight’ from south Florida.
The trend, they say, will not stop in Miami.
Much has changed in Miami since the ‘anti-bilingual law’ was passed by referendum in 1980 amid the tension brought on by tens of thousands of Cubans and Haitians pouring into the city.
Spanish-speakers have grown from a third of Dade County's people to just over a half.
Changes in the electoral system recently brought in a new commission with six Hispanics, four blacks and three whites.
But the fear of racial conflict has not gone away.
This week saw the start of the retrial of William Lozano, a Hispanic policeman who killed two black men in Miami in 1989.
The case has alarming similarities to the Rodney King trial in Los Angeles.
Smuggling Chinese
Heroin substitute
SAN FRANCISCO
THE latest crime wave to hit America's shores is the wholesale smuggling of people from China.
Over the past 18 months they have been arriving, hundreds at a time, crammed into cargo space and sometimes half-starved during a circuitous voyage.
Once ashore they melt into Chinese neighbourhoods in New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco.
But their new life may be worse than their old as they struggle to repay the $15,000 or more they owe the smuggler.
Even when caught by the coastguard or the Immigration and Naturalisation Service they seldom get sent back.
American sympathy with Chinese dissenters, inspired by the Tiananmen Square uprising in 1989, is such that Chinese refugees have no difficulty in proving that they are in danger of persecution at home: of the 3,440 Chinese who sought asylum in 1992, only 89 were rejected.
Many of the refugees say that the restrictions on the number of children a family may have, now being enforced by the Chinese government with particular vigour, is the reason for their flight.
Official leniency is exploited by the smugglers who can virtually guarantee secure entry, whatever happens.
They themselves face no more than a trifling penalty if caught.
The ship's captain and crew may be brought to trial and even sent to prison.
But for no more than half-a-dozen months — and then they are back on the high seas again, pursuing their trade.
Criminal Chinatown gangs, some also involved in the drugs business or in extortion, make sure the smuggled humans pay up.
The new arrivals are steered into jobs, usually pretty menial, and told, under threat, to start repaying the huge debt that they contracted under the misapprehension that instant wealth would be theirs once they arrived.
Pushed into virtual slavery, the dream of wealth becomes inaccessibly distant.
Many of the Chinese come from Fujian province on China's south-east coast.
Their destination tends to be New York, to join an already established colony of Fujianese.
But the numbers arriving on both the west and east coasts are increasing: according to some estimates, as many as 40 ships have delivered people since the first boat was detected in September 1991.
The largest single shipload so far discovered were the 524 Chinese passengers on the East Wood which had to call for help when it broke down near the Marshall Islands earlier this year.
Wayne McNamara, an INS agent with special responsibilities for these boat people, went to Beijing last year but found that the Chinese authorities dismissed the matter as an American problem.
Mr McNamara urges a review of asylum regulations and stiffer penalties for smugglers.
He would, for instance, like the courts to have authority to seize the legitimate businesses of convicted gangsters.
The smuggling of aliens, he says, has become a new source of money for the gangs ‘and they are growing bolder by the month.’
A helping hand?
DETROIT
HE IS not stupid.
When Jack Kevorkian helps people to commit suicide he could be doing grave damage to the Hippocratic oath.
But, so far, nobody has proved the retired pathologist from suburban Detroit to be a criminal.
The state of Michigan may be having another try.
On May 16th Dr Kevorkian was present when Ronald Mansur, who had terminal bone and lung cancer, killed himself by breathing carbon monoxide from a portable tank.
If the doctor helped Mr Mansur, he could be charged under a new Michigan law that makes it a crime to assist a person to commit suicide.
The problem for the police is that they have almost no chance of determining whether Mr Kevorkian assisted or not.
The doctor has taunted officialdom since he began his crusade to help terminally ill people kill themselves almost three years ago.
He has so far helped some 15 people on their way.
In the process he has been much reviled and much praised.
He had been charged twice with crimes, but both times the cases were dismissed because Michigan had no law against assisted suicide.
Last autumn the state decided to put a halt to Dr Kevorkian's activities.
Ignoring polls that show the public to support assisted suicide (though few people seem enamoured of the doctor himself), the legislature passed a law that makes helping somebody to commit suicide a felony, punishable by four years in prison.
The law was not to take effect until the end of March.
This seemed to have prompted a rush of at least six people to seek Dr Kevorkian's assistance in January and February.
So, at the end of February, the lawmakers put the ban into immediate effect.
The American Civil Liberties Union, among others, is challenging the constitutionality of the legislation; a judge's ruling is expected soon.
Dr Kevorkian had said that he would not help anyone else to die until after the judge's ruling — but that if the law were upheld, he would still continue.
If, in fact, he helped Mr Mansur, he has been careful to leave no traces.
In earlier cases, people made videotapes confirming their wish to die; the suicides were attended by relatives or videotaped or both, with careful notes taken by Dr Kevorkian.
Mr Mansur left no suicide message, and there were no relatives, videotapes or notes.
Dr Kevorkian was the only witness.
And he is not talking.
Strategic defence
Second coming
SAME SDI, different day.
On May 13th Les Aspin, the secretary of defence, proclaimed the end of the star wars era.
The Strategic Defence Initative Organisation, which over the past decade has spent some $10 billion in answer to Ronald Reagan's call for a defence that would make nuclear weapons impotent and obsolete, is no more.
In its place there stands a new Ballistic Missile Defence Organisation which employs the same people to do the same things with the same money — $1.8 billion requested for the next year.
The fact that it is the same organisation does not mean it can fulfil Mr Reagan's technically impossible goal.
Nor will it concentrate on the panoply of improbabilities — orbiting battle stations, particle-beam weapons, deadly X-ray beams — beloved of star warriors in days gone by.
In that respect, Mr Aspin's pronouncement of death was accurate, but a little overdue.
The huge space-based extravaganza has been gone for some time.
The SDIO has been concentrating on limited ground-based systems.
The idea is to protect American forces overseas from attack by ballistic missiles as soon as possible, and eventually to provide a defence for the United States.
Not a defence that could stop thousands of missiles, but one that might deal with a few terror weapons lobbed around the planet by third-world undesirables.
The first part of the job requires new missiles that can be easily transported, and radars to guide them.
The second would need squadrons of bigger interceptors at six or seven sites in the United States.
Both systems might be helped by a swarm of new early-warning satellites called ‘brilliant eyes’.
In George Bush's time, there was also a plan for little space-based interceptors, ‘brilliant pebbles’, that would hit missiles early on in their flight.
The system was the last shadow of the original shield in space, pursued partly because it contained exciting high technology, partly because it might possibly offer some worthwhile advantages, and partly because it could be used to show that Mr Bush had not turned his back on Mr Reagan's dream.
There was no need for the pebbles in the overall plan, and there was no likelihood of their imminent deployment.
If there was one bit of star wars that Mr Aspin might have killed, this would have been it.
But instead he is talking about keeping up research and development on space-based systems — which is exactly what was being done before.
The SDIO could have been scrapped.
It could have been cut back hugely, and told to concentrate just on defending troops in the field.
Instead it has been given a new imprimatur and left on the old job.
Some changes may come in the ‘bottom-up’ review now bubbling through the Pentagon; others could be brought in when the organisation gets a new boss.
The new man, unlike his predecessors, will not report to the secretary of defence, but to his under-secretary for acquisition and technology.
A reduction in emphasis, perhaps; but perhaps also another step on the road from research to deployment.
Star wars may be dead; something familiar is slouching toward Bethlehem to be born.
INTERNATIONAL
Venezuela
Perez's slick
MUEZZINS summon the faithful of Caracas to Latin America's most magnificent mosque.
But the shimmering white minaret, and the impressive dome, designed to shelter 3,500 worshippers, are deceptive.
Venezuela's Muslim population is far from the largest in the region.
Venezuela owes its Islamic Centre, completed last month, not to its own oil riches, which are considerable, but to the generosity of Saudi Arabian benefactors.
Oil wealth has long allowed Venezuelans to enjoy such extravagance.
They grew used to the good life during the oil boom in the 1970s, an era they fondly recall as Venezuela Saudita.
When world oil prices plunged in the 1980s, their leaders did little to help them adjust to the inevitable decline in living standards.
Instead, successive presidents continued to promise prosperity and to dole out unsustainable subsidies.
President Carlos Andres Perez was different.
He came into office in 1989 promising a return to the free-spending habits of his previous presidency in the 1970s.
Once elected, he chose instead to set the country's finances in order.
It was not a popular course.
On two occasions in 1992 military men tried to depose him.
And at the end of this week he was braced for another blow: the Supreme Court was set to announce whether he would face impeachment proceedings on embezzlement charges.
Whatever the court's decision, most Venezuelans have already persuaded themselves that their whole government — president and Congress together — is rotten to the core.
This disenchantment reflects an unpalatable truth about their country.
Despite pursuing many of the right policies, many of its people are getting poorer.
Venezuelans have enjoyed democratic government for 34 years.
Their governments have long depended on the fat income their oil reserves reliably gave them.
Wealth, and the stability it brought, also encouraged graft.
The democratic parties that grew up in opposition to the military rule earlier this century kept the tradition of authoritarianism in their internal structure.
The two main parties, the ruling Democratic Action and the Social Christian COPEI, have long used their access to oil money to lubricate an elaborate system of patronage.
Ordinary citizens tolerated corruption when times were good and when the government rewarded them with cheap food, services and petrol.
Then came the oil bust: by 1989 real income per Venezuelan had tumbled to nearly two-thirds of its 1977 level.
The country's leaders went on as before.
President Jaime Lusinchi, afraid that the drop in oil prices in 1986 might hurt his party in elections in 1988, ran down the reserves.
By the end of his term, his government could not service its foreign debt.
To cope with the aftershock, Mr Perez has made himself unpopular by bringing in painful economic reforms.
He has cut tariffs, promoted privatisation, scrapped subsidies and reduced state spending.
Though petroleum still makes up four-fifths of export earnings, he has made the country less dependent on oil.
Non-oil GDP has increased by about 9% in each of the past two years and non-oil exports have gone up 7% so far this year.
The country is beginning to have something to show for all the pain.
Inflation is now around 35% a year, down from over 80% in 1989.
After shrinking during the 1980s, the economy grew by 10% in 1991 and by more than 7% last year.
Unemployment has fallen by a fifth over the past two years to below 8%.
But most ordinary citizens — buffeted by price rises and aware of worsening poverty in the slums — remain unimpressed.
A common grumble is that all the wealth created by the recent growth has found its way into the trousers of the elite.
It would be a grim irony if the charges against Mr Perez stick.
Alongside his economic reforms, he has tried to open up the political system and make it harder for politicians to cheat.
During municipal elections last December he pushed for direct elections, in place of the old system of lists controlled by party bosses.
He also ended a particularly crooked system of multiple exchange rates.
Even Ramon Escovar, the attorney-general who brought his alleged wrongdoing before the Supreme Court, grudgingly acknowledges that Mr Perez has helped to fight corruption by exposing the long-sheltered state sector to more open inspection and greater competition.
The charges against Mr Perez have come at an inconvenient moment, not only for him but also for Venezuela.
A presidential election is due in December.
If he is forced out before then, the country will need an interim ruler.
As disgruntled army officers may have noticed, there is no obvious candidate.
If he is exonerated, some of the dirt may still cling.
The best outcome — a quick and decisive conclusion to the messy affair — also seems the least likely.
Mr Escovar brought corruption charges against ex-President Lusinchi nearly a year ago.
They continue to languish in legal limbo.
Nigeria
Mysterious
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN LAGOS
FOR a country that has been run by soldiers for nearly a decade, Nigeria shows little enthusiasm for the elections due on June 12th.
This is due in part to the fact that President Ibrahim Babangida has already postponed the promised handover to civilian government three times in the past three years.
Many Nigerians still do not quite believe that he will go through with it this time.
But even if he does, there may be little rejoicing.
The country is in such disorder that a successor may be unequal to the task of putting it right.
Rumblings that the election might be postponed once again have grown after a series of ominous events in recent weeks.
The first was a decision by the National Electoral Commission to submit the two presidential candidates, Bashir Tofa and Moshood Abiola, to a second round of ‘screening’.
This was odd, given that they had already been cleared before the presidential primary elections held last March.
The commission, supposedly independent but appointed by the military government, said that it was investigating various claims of irregularities made against the candidates.
On May 19th it decided abruptly that the allegations did not matter.
A second ominous event came last week, when Mr Babangida issued a treason decree, imposing the death sentence for anybody attempting to ‘disrupt the fabric of the nation’.
The decree's ostensible purpose was to suppress the growing dissidence of some of the minority tribes in the oil-producing eastern states, which claim that they have lost land and gained pollution without receiving royalties for the huge quantities of oil pumped out of their territory.
Mr Babangida stressed this week that the handover was ‘irreversible’.
But after a separate decree issued last month, allowing the president to postpone the election in the event of disorder, these measures have added to the doubts of those who say the transition will not happen.
Nigeria's vast size, and its complicated ethnic and religious make-up, do not make the country a comfortable candidate for democracy.
Mr Babangida and his predecessors have tried to meet competing ethnic demands by spreading power around regional governments in a federal system.
But two decades of tinkering with the federal constitution have not so much created regional self-government as extended the practice of divide-and-rule perfected by the British colonists before independence.
Mr Babangida's regime has concentrated power more than ever in a central executive.
By setting up only two political parties for next month's election, Mr Babangida has tried to stop Nigerians voting along ethnic lines.
The two parties are the National Republican Convention (NRC) and the Social Democratic Party (SDP), which come with manifestos, courtesy of the military government, which put the NRC a little to the right and the SDP a little to the left.
But since the two parties are untrammelled by tradition or ideology, Nigerians will probably resort to voting for ethnicity anyway.
What the two presidential candidates lack in experience of government they make up for in wealth and good connections.
Despite the urgent need to halt economic decline, neither has a clearly defined policy.
So the decisive factor in the election will be their promised or implicit allocation of government jobs along regional or ethnic lines, known as ‘zoning’, and the backing of the big power-brokers in Nigerian politics, many of whom have been disqualified from running themselves.
To make zoning work, the choice of presidential running-mates has been critical.
That ethnic allegiance can swing support was illustrated by the defection to the NRC last week of Chukwuemeka Ojukwu, who led the attempt to create an independent Biafra in the 1960s, although he had stood earlier in the year as a candidate for the SDP.
The reason for Mr Ojukwu's new enthusiasm for the right is the choice of a Christian Ibo from the east, Sylvester Ugoh, as running-mate for Mr Tofa, who is himself a Muslim from the Hausa heartland in the north.
This astute choice by Mr Tofa, creating a balanced ticket of Muslim and Christian, has all but secured the NRC's dominance in the east.
Zoning is harder for the SDP because Mr Abiola, a Yoruba from the south-west, is a Muslim.
If he had chosen as his running-mate a northern Christian, he would have risked losing the majority-Muslim vote in the heavily populated north, where he has no power base.
Instead, he opted for a northern Muslim, Baba Gana Kingibe.
The choice was at once criticised by the Christian Association of Nigeria.
Last time Nigeria had civilian rule, the elected regime went on an undisciplined spending spree that was cut short by a military coup.
The current presidential candidates are businessmen with no record of public service.
Many Nigerians already fear that a third republic could be short-lived.
African debt
Borrowed time
LAST month President Bill Clinton announced a package of $13 billion of aid to Russia, including substantial forgiveness of its foreign debt.
Last week his treasury under-secretary, Lawrence Summers, said that America would write off half the debts of 18 of the poorest countries in Africa.
If you assume — as the Treasury does — that little of the original $128m debt owed to America by these countries would have been recovered anyway, this will cost the Treasury, over three years, the princely sum of $11m.
Though the sum is small, it is a significant change of heart.
America and Japan are the only members of the Paris club of rich-country creditors that have not reduced Africa's debts.
The Bush administration was reluctant to forgive Africa's debt, even though it had pushed commercial banks towards solving part of the debt problem in Latin America.
As a means of helping Africa's debt burden, however, it barely scratches the surface of the problem.
The Americans say their proposal will allow them to forgive $128m-worth of African debts owed on non-concessional (ie, market-rate) loans.
Compared with the total debts of the 18 poorest African countries (about $10 billion), the American offering is tiny.
Compared with the total debt of sub-Saharan Africa ($183 billion), it is minuscule.
Africa's debt may appear manageable next to the $147 billion Latin American countries owe.
But relative to Africa's puny economies, it dwarfs the Latin problem (see chart).
And it is growing.
Africa's debt has more than tripled since 1980.
This is partly because Africans are borrowing more, but chiefly a result of the build-up of unpaid interest over the past decade.
Africa as a whole now meets only half its debt-servicing obligations.
Five countries — Nigeria, Côte d'Ivoire, Kenya, Zambia and Zimbabwe — contribute two-thirds of all interest payments by Africans.
Mozambique, emerging shakily from civil war, meets only 12% of its interest payments.
Even this meagre effort is a struggle.
Africa as a whole spends four times more on the interest on its debts than on health.
Burundi, a wretchedly poor country, manages to service almost all its debt, but doing so gobbles up 30% of its budget each year.
Moreover, in order to keep up payments on their debts, governments use up scarce foreign exchange.
Uganda spends two-thirds of all the foreign currency it earns from exports on servicing its debts.
The average share for sub-Saharan Africa is about a fifth.
The price of these outflows of foreign exchange to the West is billions of dollars-worth of unsurfaced roads, unpurified water and untreated illnesses.
Creditors concerned about Africa's debt burden have generally opted for rescheduling rather than outright cancellation.
This simply postpones the pain.
True, the Paris club, a group of rich-country creditors, has cancelled some African debt outright.
Between 1989 and 1991, its chief members wrote off $10 billion of sub-Saharan Africa's concessional (ie, low-interest) debt.
But, according to a recent report by Oxfam, a British charity with much African experience, most of this was on loans that were not being repaid anyway, so barely dented the servicing problem.
To date, creditor governments have cancelled 11% of Africa's concessional bilateral debts.
A succession of rescheduling deals, known by the places — Toronto, Trinidad — in which creditors dreamt them up, have been proposed in recent years.
None has done much to ease Africa's long-term debt burden.
The ‘Trinidad terms’, proposed in 1990 by John Major when he was Britain's chancellor, write off two-thirds of a poor country's debt incurred before a certain date, and reschedule the rest over 25 years.
Britain has offered this deal to 15 of its poor African debtors.
Most Paris-club countries prefer the less generous ‘enhanced Toronto terms’, which cancel only half a poor country's debts contracted before a certain date.
That is what America is now offering 18 African countries — on the condition that they implement IMF-approved reforms.
Yet for a country like Uganda, which was offered an ‘enhanced Toronto’ deal last year, the impact is minimal: only half its $1.8 billion debt is eligible for relief because the rest was incurred after the agreed date.
Even a Trinidad deal does little more than bring the amount of interest that Africans owe closer to what they are managing to pay anyway.
The World Bank reckons that a Trinidad deal would still be unsustainable for weak economies like those of Somalia, Mozambique and Sudan.
This is why organisations like Oxfam argue that virtually all non-concessional debt should be written off by creditors, not just a smaller share of debt taken on before a certain date.
Ishrat Husain, the World Bank's chief economist for Africa, argues that the debt overhang is now a serious turn-off to private investors.
He would prefer to see Africa's debt obligation reduced to no more than the $10 billion it is managing to pay each year.
This would need the co-operation of non-Paris-club creditors, like Russia, to whom large sums are owed by former Soviet protégés, such as Ethiopia and Mozambique.
It would also need to embrace countries like Nigeria, which are still unrealistically classed as middle-income and therefore not eligible for Paris-club relief.
There is a further problem.
A growing share of all Africa's debt is lodged not with governments, which can choose to write off loans if they so wish, but with multilateral institutions like the IMF.
From 1980 to 1992, the multilaterals' share of African debt grew from 19% to 28%.
Loans from these institutions cannot be rescheduled or written off if countries are to go on borrowing.
If the West could be confident that full debt forgiveness would automatically be matched by a growth in spending on things like schools and clinics, then the zeal with which it pursued debt-forgiveness might be greater.
But the conviction too often remains that any extra money in the government pot will somehow find its way into the pockets of the country's leaders.
Arab-Israeli peace talks
They muffed it
THE ninth round of Arab-Israeli peace talks, which started in Washington amid unusually high hopes at the end of April, ended a fortnight later having achieved nothing.
Negotiations between Israel and Syria on ownership of the Golan Heights did not proceed beyond the usual vicious circle: I won't promise peace till you promise to withdraw; I won't withdraw till you promise peace.
A plan for a joint Israeli-Palestinian statement of principles also came to naught.
The one novelty was that, in addition to blaming one another, both sides chose this time to blame America too.
In a way, the Americans asked for it.
Breaking with the habit of the Bush administration, the Clinton-Christopher team has taken to calling itself a ‘full partner’, not merely a bystander, in the interminable peace talks.
Warren Christopher and his officials at the State Department pre-negotiated a sequence of intricate concessions — the return of some deportees, subtle changes in the ground-rules — that let Israel get the Palestinians talking again despite the non-repatriation of the 400 or so alleged militants Israel expelled in December.
But then, it seems, their attention wandered.
The Palestinians were peeved when the Americans, spotting an impasse, tried to bridge it by coming up with a compromise.
But this bridging paper had apparently been shown to, and agreed with, the Israeli negotiators before it was shown to the Palestinians.
This was tactless.
Even Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, is said to have grumbled to his cabinet that Mr Christopher, preoccupied by Bosnia, had not given the talks enough attention.
Some Israeli ministers, worried by the lack of progress, have called on the Americans to appoint a roving mediator so that negotiation can continue between formal rounds.
So far — perhaps because of difficulty in finding a sufficiently masochistic emissary — the Americans have not taken up the suggestion.
After a year and a half of desultory contacts, none of the parties to the conflict has shown itself able to give enough to elicit a useful response from the other side.
In Israel, meanwhile, another coalition row is threatening the future of Mr Rabin's government.
In the Gaza Strip this week, a few more Israelis and Palestinians slaughtered each other.
Syria is hinting that it may refuse to attend further talks unless it is promised the whole of the Golan first.
And Egypt — once considered a potential peacemaker — is becoming increasingly engrossed in its own war against Islamic extremism.
Against this background, and given the other demands on his time, it would not be surprising if Mr Christopher's interest flagged.
But what a tragedy that would be.
When their number came up
FROM OUR BRAZIL CORRESPONDENT
RIO DE JANEIRO
IN A country where government has not always been a friend, it is little wonder that society has sometimes turned to the authorities of the underworld.
Lampiao, Brazil's backlands bandit of the 1920s, is still remembered fondly in some parts as an occasional justice-maker.
The residents of Jacarezinho, a ragged slum in Rio de Janeiro, built a bust to ‘Half-Kilo’, the charismatic local strongman-cum-cocaine-trafficker who died escaping from prison.
As the singer Chico Buarque once put it, in a satirical number about Brazil's bone-deep distrust of the police, ‘Call a thief!
Call a thief!’
Lately, however, Brazil's bandit heroes have lost their charm.
On May 14th a criminal-court justice, Denise Frossard, shocked the country when, with a stroke of the pen, she ordered 14 of Rio's leading outlaws into jail as a threat to public order.
The 14 were the financiers of the wildly popular numbers racket known locally as the animal game, the jogo do bicho.
While their chauffeurs kept the engines running, the stunned bicheiros were handcuffed and paraded away in their silk suits to jail.
The move was as daring as it was unprecedented.
For a century, after all, the bicheiros have been the closest thing in Brazil to a robber aristocracy.
Their fame began innocently enough in 1893 when an enterprising baron founded a lottery to pay for the Rio de Janeiro zoo.
Fittingly, bidders would stake money not on numbers but on a bestiary of images, from the avestruz (ostrich) to the vaca (cow).
People flocked to the zoo less for the fauna than for the door-prize after the daily drawing of a cardboard bicho.
The game's popularity alarmed the authorities, who promptly banned it, thus assuring the total success of the animal game.
Dozens of impresarios got a piece of the now clandestine action, battling, often bloodily, for control over neighbourhoods.
The police tried to repress it, but to no avail.
By early this century, the animal game had spread all over Brazil.
Though never legalised, the bicheiros' sport grew to be Brazil's most lucrative lottery.
Today bicheiros control an empire of 400,000 employees, who handle $1 billion in bets each year.
Not a gentle lot, the bicheiros never hesitated to muscle (or rub) out the competition.
But they sweetened their reign of fear with occasional favours and a glaze of authority that went a long way in communities accustomed to neither.
Their repertoire included financing football clubs and the yearly carnival pageant, the two institutions dearest to the Brazilian heart.
Eventually, the bloody turf wars ceased, and for a long time the authorities either winked at their illegal trade or even helped themselves to the till.
Bicheiros might be wanted criminals for 362 days of the year, only to turn monarchs during the pre-Lenten pageant, samba-dancing arm in arm with governors, mayors and other overworld  glitterati .
But times and habits changed.
The government got wise, started its own lotteries, and the bicheiros were ‘forced to diversify’, says Alba Zaluar, a local sociologist.
Increasingly, they have been linked to more nefarious activities, from cheating on taxes to financing cocaine traffickers.
Blood and Uzis more than samba and sequins are their trademark today.
Rafael Cesario, a state prosecutor who investigated the bicheiros for a decade, linked them to 40 murders.
But those charges would routinely slip through Brazil's diaphanous justice system.
For years, the bicheiros were virtually untouchable.
The present case had been stalled since 1986, when the 14 were indicted on charges ranging from $1.2m in tax debts to conspiring to sell cocaine.
Judge Frossard, it seems, wanted to put an end to the inertia.
Her order of preventive detention caused consternation among lawyers over a possible breach of civil liberties.
Her ostensible motive was that one of the defendants, not content with court security, had arranged for his own — an off-duty policeman, packing two police-issue revolvers and, said the judge, ‘enough ammunition to send to Sarajevo’.
It is too soon to know if the initiative will touch off an Italian-style mop-up of Brazil's mob.
However, Judge Frossard has won the support of fellow justices and applause from a crime-weary public.
She is expected soon to hand down a ruling.
The betting on the outcome is frantic.
If you can't, Yucatan can
Our Mexico correspondent reports from Merida on how one Mexican state plans to prosper from free trade with the United States
MOST Mexicans refer to the Yucatan peninsula as ‘the south-east’, and think of it as a poor relation memorable only for its Mayan ruins and the resort of Cancun.
But look carefully at the map and you see that Merida, the peninsula's largest city and the capital of Yucatan state, lies farther north than Mexico city.
Sticking up into the Gulf of Mexico like a thumb, Yucatan points towards Miami and New Orleans, each only an hour and a half from Merida by air.
This is no more than the flight time to Mexico city, with which Merida lacked road and rail communication until little more than a generation ago.
This is the geography lesson Yucatecos give to visitors in order to explain their state's politics, in which separatist sentiment is never far from the surface.
But it is also a lesson that Yucatan's businessmen and its state government have been trying to impress on investors from the United States — with controversial results.
In February Richard Gephardt, the Democratic leader in America's House of Representatives, accused the Mexican government of ‘stealing American jobs’ because of its shareholding in Amerimex, a $17m investment fund, based in Merida, whose aim is to buy American companies and move part of their production to Yucatan.
The row came just as talks were starting on the environmental and labour safeguards that the Clinton administration wants before asking Congress to ratify the North American Free-Trade Agreement involving the United States, Mexico and Canada.
Unlike Mr Clinton, President Carlos Salinas badly needs NAFTA; his government promptly withdrew its small shareholding in Amerimex.
Last month American opponents of NAFTA seized on Yucatan again.
They objected to an advertisement in which a jaded American factory manager complains that he cannot cut his labour costs.
‘Yes you can — Yucatan’, the advertisement says.
It boasts that Yucatan's labour costs average less than $1 an hour, allowing an annual saving of $15,000 a worker.
In public, Mr Salinas argues that Mexico's future should not be based on cheap labour.
The Yucatan advertisement has been withdrawn.
But in aiming to combine American capital and technology with Mexican labour, Yucatan is following NAFTA's underlying logic.
According to Adolfo Peniche, the Merida businessman who founded Amerimex, his fund will save rather than steal American jobs.
The idea, he says, is to buy American companies that are going bankrupt because their competitors are in Asia.
By moving their labour-intensive operations to Yucatan, such companies will survive, while their new Mexican workers will spend more of their pay packets on American imports than would their counterparts in, say, Thailand.
Even without NAFTA, similar logic has brought 1,700 plants to Mexico's northern border with the United States under the maquiladora programme for duty-free assembly.
By contrast, despite running a professional investment-promotion programme since 1984, Yucatan has attracted only 31 maquiladoras — whose products range from dental braces to fishing rods — to its four purpose-built industrial parks.
State officials hope that when the treaty is at last ratified, NAFTA will start to bring in more, particularly in the clothing industry where Mexico has a comparative advantage and Merida has experience.
Their new advertising campaign will stress Yucatan's obedient workforce and the area's pleasant way of life.
But they also need to improve the state's port and other infrastructure if Yucatan is really to become a low-cost assembly centre for America's east coast.
To locals who criticise this effort to attract low-paid jobs, Dulce Maria Sauri, the state governor, says: ‘I'd like a car plant, that's the dream of every governor, but it takes time.
Our people need work now.’
For although tourism and construction are booming, Yucatan continues to face a shortage of jobs.
It was once Mexico's richest state, thanks to its plantations of henequen — sisal hemp.
At the turn of the century, Yucatan was an informal colony of Chicago's International Harvester, which turned its sisal into bailer twine for mid-western farmers.
The planters built magnificent wedding-cake mansions, which are used nowadays as the offices of banks and insurance companies on Merida's main avenue, and sent their children to school in New Orleans or Havana.
The Mayan peasants worked the plantations as debt slaves, until Mexico's revolution transformed them into collective farmers.
But cheaper substitutes displaced henequen from the world fibre market.
Expensive state subsidies cushioned but could not reverse Yucatan's long decline.
Only under Mr Salinas has the state finally found the courage to withdraw from henequen.
This month Ms Sauri's administration completed the privatisation of the cordage industry.
The government even paid ‘compensation’ to 43,000 collective farmers after it halted the system of annual agrarian bank ‘loans’that were rarely repaid.
These subsidies had helped to maintain the political control of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) in the state.
Without them, the conservative National Action Party, which already governs Merida, appears certain to turn Yucatan into only the third state in Mexico's history to elect an opposition governor.
The state election due in November will be the last such ballot before next year's presidential contest, and the prospect of defeat in Yucatan seems to have rattled Mr Salinas's government.
Last month the local PRI rammed through a law postponing the state election for 18 months, only to back down after a national outcry.
Yucatecos blamed the whole shady episode on meddling from the centre, and took it as confirmation of their opinion that little good ever comes out of Mexico city.
No surprise, then, that they look to the United States with such extravagant hope.
Zimbabwe
Two wrongs
FROM OUR ZIMBABWE CORRESPONDENT
BETWEEN 1910 and 1970, the white rulers of Rhodesia took 15m hectares (38m acres) of land from blacks, nearly half the country's farmland.
The desire to recover it drove many black peasants to support the nationalist guerrillas in the war against white minority rule.
President Robert Mugabe announced on April 30th that the government is to buy 70 big commercial farms, covering 190,000 hectares, as the first step in a plan to redistribute some 5m hectares of white-owned land to blacks.
The necessary legislation — enabling the government to buy compulsorily at a price of its choosing — was pushed through last year.
The government then did nothing.
But by announcing the first tranche of purchases, it has now signalled its intention to press ahead, rekindling the fury of the country's 4,300 mostly white commercial farmers.
They were already under stress, thanks to the aftershock of last year's drought and a drop in the price of tobacco, the country's chief export.
The rains have been good this year, and the crop has been bumper, but tobacco is fetching only 93 American cents a kilo at international auctions — less than half the price expected.
Fifteen tobacco farms are among the 70 farms on the government's shopping-list.
White farmers argue that parcelling out commercial farmland in small plots will reduce productivity and so jeopardise the country's ability both to feed its people and to export valuable crops.
The government's previous attempt at land reform, shortly after independence, was not regarded as a success.
Unless the new land is farmed by well-trained black farmers, and unless they have ownership rights giving them incentives to invest, this may happen again.
The commercial farms, moreover, are the largest single employer in a country with unemployment touching 40%.
The farmers say that fear of being bought out will discourage future investment in their land.
The minister of agriculture and resettlement, Kumbirai Kangai, has been trying to reassure white farmers.
Officials claim that reasonable prices will be paid for the land that is purchased.
Yet the commercial farmers can be forgiven for believing that the decision to buy the white farms has been taken for short-term political reasons rather than longer-term ones of efficiency or fairness.
Mr Mugabe's party is increasingly unpopular among city workers.
With an eye on the election in 1995, this latest action bears all the hallmarks of a bid to shore up his position with support from the land-hungry peasants in the countryside.
BRITAIN
Bye-bye, John Major?
LAST October The Economist published a study of John Major's chances of holding on to his majority for a full five-year parliament.
With the help of a consulting actuary, we predicted the likely deaths among Tory MPs, and their probable impact on the government's majority.
David Wilkie, the actuary, concluded that the loss of the Tory majority, then 21, was ‘not impossible but the odds are rather against it.’
After the Tories' loss of Newbury in the by-election on May 6th, and the death of Robert Adley, the MP for Christchurch, on May 13th, is that still true?
The study ‘predicted’ 1.09 deaths (meaning about one) among Tory MPs in the first year of the parliament, and 1.54 in the second year.
There was indeed one death in year one.
For year two, there has been one death so far.
If there are no more before April, Mr Major is doing better than expected.
Another death and he is doing worse.
No need to revise our predictions yet, on that score.
But something important has changed.
In our original study, we assumed that Mr Major could hope to win roughly one by-election in three in Tory seats.
That now looks optimistic.
The swing to the Liberal Democrats at Newbury was 29%.
Not a single Tory seat in the country would be held at a by-election on such a swing, according to John Curtice, of Strathclyde University; not even Christchurch, which would go Liberal Democrat on a swing of 20%.
If the Tories lose every by-election, the odds change.
The chances of losing their majority before five years are up become around four in ten.
After four years of the parliament (ie, by April 1996) there is a one-in-six chance that their majority will have gone.
More likely, the majority will be down to about six.
Either way the Tories would depend on inveterate Tory rebels (such as Nicholas Winterton) or hardline Ulster unionists (such as Ian Paisley).
The message for Mr Major: unless he wants to be prisoner to such as these, he should plan to go to the polls by April 1996 at the latest.
Schooling
Test drive
WASHINGTON, DC
TEACHERS on both sides of the Atlantic are up in arms about school tests.
In Britain, they have voted overwhelmingly to boycott the new tests introduced by John Patten, the education secretary, largely because they are too hard.
But their American colleagues complain that tests are too easy.
Does this suggest that Mr Patten should stand up to his critics?
Not necessarily.
American circumstances are different.
There, everybody's favourite whipping-boy is the multiple-choice test, 100m a year of them.
Teachers complain that children sail through these tests without being able to write a decent essay, solve a multi-step maths problem or do a précis.
They want to replace multiple-choice tests with ‘portfolio tests’(in which external examiners mark a file of the children's best work) and, horror of horrors, timed essays.
Britain's teachers too would welcome more use of external examiners, to lighten their workload.
America took tests seriously after the publication in 1983 of ‘A Nation at Risk’, a chilling report on the state of education.
The federal government used them to see if America was keeping up with its competitors.
States used them to discover whether schools were giving value for money.
Parents used them to select schools.
Some administrators even used them to award merit pay to teachers.
Mr Patten would like British tests used for similar purposes.
But are tick-the-box tests up to the job?
Businessmen complain that they fail to produce the modern self-reliant worker they need.
Teachers accuse the tests of ‘dumbing down’ learning and producing a generation of intellectually passive box-tickers.
Everybody complains that the tests bear no relation to what children have learnt in class — not a problem in Britain.
Reformers argue that the only way to improve education is to introduce tests that measure children's ability to think analytically.
More than half the schools in the United States are now experimenting with such tests.
None of them has made a hash of things like the British government.
Not yet, anyway.
In the longer run, there could be problems.
The new tests are time-consuming, and require special training for teachers and painstaking marking by examiners.
The far right objects that the tests encourage children to criticise traditional values.
The far left says they penalise children from minority groups.
Marking the tests calls for a dangerous amount of subjective judgment.
How long before American teachers, like their British colleagues, demand dumber tests?
Industrial policy
All talk
BILL CLINTON does it.
So does Jacques Delors.
British ministers used to do it, until Margaret Thatcher disapproved.
Now Michael Heseltine, the industry secretary, is trying it.
He is starting to discuss the nation's problems with top businessmen.
Around 20 industry chiefs, including David Sainsbury, chairman of J Sainsbury, and John Towers, managing director of Rover, have been summoned to attend the first of a series of ‘round table’ meetings on May 25th.
This is part of Mr Heseltine's much-puffed ‘partnership’ with industry.
Top firms have been asked to supply him with sales data to help him understand how the economy is doing.
His Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) has been split into sections, each charged with assisting one area of industry.
Businessmen have been drafted in to advise civil servants.
Civil servants are being sent out to parley with business.
Last month, two of Mr Heseltine's people spent two days on Rover's production line.
Even the prime minister is playing the game: in a speech to the Confederation of British Industry on May 18th, John Major promised stronger ‘partnership’ with industry.
Business and government were last so chummy in the 1960s and 1970s.
The National Economic Development Council, Neddy, brought together ministers, businessmen and unions to ‘plan’ the economy.
Neddy was shut down last year by Norman Lamont, the chancellor.
‘The age of corporatism must be put firmly behind us,’ he proclaimed.
Not for long, it seems.
Walter Eltis, the last head of Neddy, is now Mr Heseltine's economic adviser.
He has told friends that he intends to recreate the best bits of Neddy.
Those ‘best bits’ do not include the unions, excluded this time to their disgust.
Nor do they include old favourites like industrial subsidies and incomes policies.
What do they include?
The industrialists are mystified.
One industry chief invited to the ‘round table’ declares that top businessmen will stop coming unless they see advantage for themselves.
‘Advantage’ might include a mechanism to remind government departments other than Mr Heseltine's of how their policies help or harm industry.
It might also include more state help in opening up foreign markets.
Whatever the new forum does for industry, it certainly does something for Mr Heseltine.
Since he resigned as defence secretary over the Westland helicopter affair in 1986, he has campaigned for an active industrial policy.
In 1987 he argued for a beefed-up Neddy with the council meetings chaired by the industry secretary rather than by the chancellor.
By shutting Neddy down, Mr Lamont put Mr Heseltine in his place.
By launching the new forum Mr Heseltine is getting his own back on the now weakened Mr Lamont.
The DTI still has a long way to go before it can seriously contest the Treasury's hegemony over matters economic.
But, while Mr Heseltine remains its boss, no chancellor will sleep easy in his bed.
Labour pains
A more flexible labour market has not stopped pay going up.
But it may still prove to be the route to more jobs
UNEMPLOYMENT fell for the third consecutive month in April, by 1,400.
At 2.94m, 10.5% of the labour force, it is down from a peak of 2.99m in January.
Such cheery jobless numbers have taken everybody by surprise.
It is, however, the way in which unemployment evolves from now on that will really put Britain's labour-market reforms of the 1980s to the test.
The conventional wisdom of the late 1970s blamed Britain's high unemployment on the trade unions, which priced workers out of jobs.
If so, today's labour market should work more efficiently.
Union membership has fallen from 53% of workers in 1979 to 37% now.
Only one firm in two now bargains with unions, compared with two-thirds then.
Closed shops have been outlawed.
Meanwhile, the government has squeezed unemployment benefits in comparison with wages, and has also made benefits harder to get; so the jobless have to hunt harder for work.
Together, these measures ought to have made wages more flexible — downwards.
Yet so far there is little evidence of this effect.
Average earnings are now rising at their slowest rate since the 1960s.
But the real wage is what matters so far as jobs are concerned.
Earnings — up 4% in the year to March — are still rising faster than underlying inflation.
In the 1980–81 recession real earnings fell briefly.
Worse, average pay settlements, monitored by the Confederation of British Industry, have run only slightly behind prices in the past couple of years.
In 1980–81 they ran 4% behind.
The real test is what happens as output picks up.
In the 1980s recovery too much extra demand spilled over into higher real wages rather than new jobs.
In theory, today's more flexible labour market should allow unemployment to fall more quickly.
Undoubtedly, the labour market is more flexible.
Non-standard types of work such as part-time and contract jobs and self-employment have boomed in the past decade.
One British worker in four is now a part-timer.
Add in temporary staff and the self-employed and two workers in five are outside permanent, full-time employment.
Firms such as Burton Group in tailoring, British Home Stores and British Airways are rushing to convert full-time workers into part-timers.
As many as two-thirds of the staff of Sears, the Saxone-to-Selfridges group, are now part-timers.
These firms say part-time work enables them to boost staff at busy periods, improving customer service.
Most part-timers are women, which explains why women have fared better in this recession than men.
Only 5.6% of women are currently unemployed — a third below the peak in 1986.
At 14.1%, joblessness among men is higher than its previous peak.
Britain is the only EC country where more men than women are unemployed.
In the long run, more flexibility in the labour market should mean more jobs.
But in the short run the part-timers and weaker unions have made it easier for firms to shed labour.
This helps to explain why more jobs have been lost in this recession than in the early 1980s.
And if firms are now hiring two part-timers rather than one full-timer, it may also explain why unemployment has started to fall earlier than expected.
Other implications of the part-time boom are less palatable.
A grim Panorama programme on BBC television on May 17th highlighted the problems of Britain's increasingly insecure workforce: milkmen working longer hours for the same money, CD stackers sacked just before the two years after which their jobs would be legally protected, betting-shop workers thrown out if they refuse to work evenings.
Flexibility for employers means new chances to save money and to fire unwanted workers.
Part-timers may be on lower pay rates than full-time workers.
Most do not qualify for redundancy pay, pensions, sick pay or national-insurance benefits until they have been with a firm for two years.
Employers escape paying national-insurance contributions for workers on less than £56 a week.
An economist would say this is the market working: cheaper labour means more jobs.
Trade unionists cry ‘exploitation’ and want part-timers protected.
More protection would mean fewer jobs.
Many women, especially those with children, like part-time work.
A recent Department of Employment survey found that only 13% of part-timers did such jobs because they could not find full-time work.
Paradoxically, to ‘protect’ them might mean that they ended up with no jobs at all.
British institutions: The Royal & Ancient
Monarch of the greens
A private club in Scotland is the unlikely ruler of a global golfing empire
LESS likely headquarters for world golf is hard to imagine.
Admittedly, St Andrews boasts four 18-hole courses and a 9-hole one (a fifth 18-hole course, the Strathtyrum, is due to open this summer).
From the granite-grey clubhouse of the Royal & Ancient (R&A) its secretary, Michael Bonallack, enjoys a sweeping view down the 18th fairway of the Old Course, with the green of the Road Hole, the scene of so many golfing triumphs and disasters, beyond.
The trappings are certainly adequate.
But St Andrews as a place is nowhere.
On Scotland's east coast, it has no railway station; the nearest, Leuchars, on the Edinburgh to Aberdeen line, is 15 minutes by taxi.
It has no airport.
It has no motorway.
Fax machines now mix with the deep armchairs and ancient oils of the clubhouse, easing communications with the world outside.
But face-to-face meetings require arduous journeying.
From this retreat, the R&A presides over a huge golfing empire.
America has its own golfing authority, the United States Golf Association (USGA).
Canada and Mexico are semi-independent.
But more than 60 countries, and perhaps 15m golfers, bow to the R&A's authority.
The R&A decides what equipment golfers may use, and (with the USGA) what rules they play to.
When disputes arise, it is judge and jury.
It also runs the British Open championship, and invests in developing British golf.
This empire was acquired in a fit of absence of mind.
The first written record of golf at St Andrews dates back to 1552: golfers' rights were protected when the Archbishop of St Andrews was granted rights over the rabbit warren.
The club was formed by 22 noblemen and gentlemen of Fife who started the ‘Society of St Andrews Golfers’ in 1754.
It became ‘Royal and Ancient’ in 1834, when King William IV became its patron.
New clubs sought the R&A's advice.
‘We are all duffers here.
Please send us copies of your rules,’ wrote one.
‘Please send me by return the length of the holes at St Andrews as I intend to lay out a course on the common next weekend,’ wrote another.
In 1897, the R&A's governing role was formalised, as countries abroad recognised Scotland as the home of golf.
Getting the empire was one thing.
Keeping it is another.
The R&A's full-time staff remains minute: eight executives plus a support staff of 16 (the USGA has 200 people).
It relies entirely on the voluntary services of its 1,800 members, of whom 1,050 are British or Irish.
Some are distinguished amateur golfers.
A handful of professionals are admitted as honorary members.
But the R&A is no meritocracy; many members are invited to join because they are ‘clubbable’.
The USGA by contrast is not a club at all, but a representative organisation with 8,000 member clubs.
Strains are evident.
‘In years gone by — as late as the 1950s — a lot of members were wealthy people,’ says George Wilson, the R&A's deputy secretary.
‘In a changing environment, where people have to work for a living, it is not so easy to give all your spare time to running golf.’
Yet the R&A survives.
Golfers are conservative, disciplined people.
Cheating is easy.
Anyone can nudge a ball into a better lie when no one is looking.
Stopping it requires not only rules but a strong moral code.
That comes naturally to the old-fashioned British gentleman — especially the Scottish version.
Golfers accept authority in a way more anarchic sportsmen never would.
Even that would not protect the club if it was incompetent.
It isn't.
The Open championship, first held in 1860, has been transformed first by television and then by the boom in corporate hospitality.
In 1922 the winner, Walter Hagen, won £75 — £2,000 in today's money.
Last year the prizes totalled nearly £1m ($1.5m), and revenue £7m.
Yet the club has avoided the kind of foul-up that ruined this year's Grand National steeplechase because of primitive starting procedures supervised by another archaic British body, the Jockey Club.
The R&A's next challenge is likely to come from the golf-equipment manufacturers.
They persuade golfers to pay out at least $1 billion a year worldwide in their eternal quest to hit the ball farther, straighter, less often.
In their way stand six amateurs, and two consultant scientists who advise them, on the R&A Implements and Ball Committee.
Jointly with its American equivalent — which has half-a-dozen scientific professionals on the job — it decides how far the ball may fly and with what it may be hit.
So far, the system has worked.
The R&A pooh-poohs suggestions that modern equipment transforms golf.
The statistics do not show drives getting much longer, says the club.
Most changes now are cosmetic, such as coloured shafts and big heads for drivers.
Most manufacturers have played the game.
The Japanese are commended for making sure that everything they produce is strictly kosher.
But tensions are not far from the surface.
In August 1989 Mr Bonallack was attending a convivial dinner after the Walker Cup, a transatlantic amateur match, in Atlanta, Georgia.
As he left, lawyers representing the Karsten Manufacturing Corporation served a writ on him, after the R&A's banning of their new Ping Eye2 clubs.
The case has gone against the Pings, but it was a rude shock in a world of gentlemen.
And it could get worse.
Until now, equipment performance has not hit the R&A's limits.
Over the next ten years manufacturers will be able to exceed them, and they will want the rules changed.
The R&A's amateurs will have to cope with a big industry, lobbying for change, and exercising the clout that money brings.
They may then be glad that St Andrews is so geographically remote.
Labour Party
Smith's fudge
‘ONE member, one vote,’ demanded John Smith when he was elected to be Labour's leader, wanting to end trade-union influence over the choice of Labour's parliamentary candidates.
‘Hands off our rights,’ retorted the unions.
The likely result of the clash, after separate meetings on May 19th of the party's national executive committee and of six big unions affiliated to Labour, is a fudge.
Union power will be cut.
Pure democracy in the party is a long way off.
The unions created the Labour Party.
They still have it in their grip.
Of the 29 members of the national executive, 12 come from the unions.
They have a 40% vote in the choice of the Labour leader (with the party's MPs and its rank-and-file sharing the rest); up to 40% in the choice of parliamentary candidates; and hitherto some 90% of the vote at the party's annual conference, though this will come down to 70% this year.
The unions are not prepared to abdicate.
A MORI poll of members of the big six published on May 17th showed that 65% want to keep the union/Labour link.
By law they have to ballot their members in the next couple of years on whether they can keep their political funds, through which they give money to the party.
If members see their power over Labour reduced, they may be less inclined to vote Yes.
Neither can Mr Smith afford to relent.
Trade-unionists make up a decreasing proportion of the electorate.
In 1974, when Labour last won a general election, 29% of electors were trade-unionists.
In 1992, only 19% were, of whom less than half voted Labour.
Labour has to attract middle-class Britain.
Hence Mr Smith's promise on May 19th of a national referendum on Britain's first-past-the-post electoral system.
Reform is popular with middle-class liberals, though Mr Smith personally is not persuaded of the case for it.
But he cannot afford to ditch the unions altogether.
They provide up to two-thirds of the party's money (though Michael Pinto-Duschinsky, of Brunel University, calculates that in 1981 this was 90%).
Anyway, any change depends upon the party conference.
If Mr Smith demands too much, the unions will vote him down.
So a compromise is on the cards.
Trade-unionists will still help to choose candidates.
But they will vote as individuals, becoming special members of the party at a cut-price rate.
This can be said to satisfy Mr Smith's call for ‘one member, one vote’.
The unions' share of the vote at the party conference will again be reduced, and will no longer be cast by union leaders in monolithic blocks.
The unions' say in the choice of leader may also be reduced.
Everyone satisfied?
The voters will decide at the next election.
Roller-coaster
Ministers sighed with relief when the Danes said Yes to Maastricht in their referendum, then pushed on with ratifying the treaty at home.
As the bill faced its third and final reading in the Commons on 20th May, all danger was not passed.
Cliffhangers to come: a bid by rebels in the House of Lords to force a British referendum, a legal challenge over Britain's social chapter opt-out, and a vote in both houses on scrapping the opt-out.
Shuffling Kenneth Clarke, the home secretary, and fancied to replace Norman Lamont as chancellor, soothed Tory Euro-sceptics by saying he would be ‘surprised’ if sterling rejoined the European exchange-rate mechanism during the present Parliament.
Subtext: I will not split the party if I am made chancellor.
His boss, John Major, also ruled out re-entry ‘for some time’.
Learning curve
Record proportions of 16- and 17-year-olds stayed in education in England last year.
The recession explains some of the rise.
But ministers claim credit for boosting further education.
Deep cut
Fears grew that some pensioners and children might lose the right to free prescriptions, after Michael Portillo, chief secretary to the Treasury, warned of huge public spending cuts.
Voters had humiliated the government in the recent county elections, he reasoned, as a protest against high public spending.
Deadly
A nurse was convicted of murdering four children in her care.
She had been diagnosed as dangerous five years before she first struck.
The government refused to set up a public inquiry.
Cheap return
Since the Citizen's Charter was introduced to British Rail, compensation paid for late or cancelled trains has fallen by over 50%.
The charter was meant to help passengers claim refunds.
Slushy novels
From a survey of unusual bookmarks discovered by librarians: a used condom, a kipper, bacon rashers, and an ageing jam sandwich.
Pepys into Number Ten
MAJOR is infinitely preferable to that dreadful charlatan, Heseltine.
But John is vulnerable to the charge of ‘not yet ready for it’.
And he's not classy, which doesn't worry me, but, worse, he doesn't (like Mrs Thatcher) aspire to be classy.
NOTHING really corking there, in a snippet from the forthcoming diaries of Alan Clark, a former minister of state for defence procurement, as he describes the intrigue surrounding the fall of Thatcher.
In fact, John Major promises to emerge mildly well from the schemers' cauldron.
At any rate, the diaries' author guesses, ‘I don't think he'll mind them.
I don't join the club of people saying how dreadful and incompetent he is’.
But these days the Tories are an unusually twitchy lot.
Few ministers are looking forward to ‘dear Alan's amusing ruminations’.
Yet nobody in government is likely to be blown out of business, come their publication on June 1st.
Readers of high moral sensitivity may be shocked — in the words of one reader — by the ‘Machiavellian and devious way decisions were made during the Thatcher era’.
Mr Clark is consistently bloody about his namesake, ‘that pudgy puffball,’ Kenneth C with an ‘e’.
But ministers have been reassured that the diaries stop short of Matrix-Churchill: the investigation by Lord Justice Scott, now under way, fills Tory hearts with gloom.
‘Such a boring subject, hardly worth an entry,’ says Mr Clark.
So why the brouhaha?
Partly because the publishers and the Mail on Sunday have paid £350,000 for his pensées.
There is the special delight Britons have in gossip, especially when it is hinted that politics are spiced with sex.
And the extracts in the Mail so far give a foretaste of that other favourite British hobby, class warfare — hot stuff now because Mr Major and his friends say his detractors are snobs.
The anti-Clark, pro-Major carpers have already pounced on two diary gobbets and misconstrued them.
The reference to ‘classiness’, mentioned above, is not a dig at Mr Major's origins but at his style.
Likewise, Mr Clark has had to explain that his remark to Mr Lamont (‘I can see you weren't at Eton’) is derogatory not of the chancellor but of Mr Clark's alma mater, where ‘you were surrounded by shits and knew what shits were, the sort of people who could vote against Her in the first round.
People [in Britain]are so hysterically, shriekingly sensitive about sex or class.’
Do the diaries suggest that Mr Clark is an appalling cad?
Yes and no.
He is a rum customer who inspires violently different emotions among his colleagues.
Most friends acknowledge two sides to a complex persona: the serious historian, devotee of Mrs Thatcher, bent on reshaping Britain; and the uncontrollable, overgrown schoolboy with a ‘Daddy complex’, endowed — in a friend's phrase — with a ‘maniacal desire for self-publicity’.
‘I can never resist the temptation to épater,’ he confesses.
In politically-correct America, Mr Clark would be almost unelectable.
Slighting references to immigrants and Bongo-Bongoland, a penchant for the cult of leadership, and an interest in what is called ‘Aryanism’ have inevitably raised eyebrows.
To damp Tories like Sir Edward Heath, Mr Clark's populist chauvinism, his protectionist tendencies, his hostility to the European Community and American hegemony alike, are repellent.
Friends, however, admire Mr Clark's historical knowledge and intellectual zest, his honesty and wit.
He has written four tomes of military history, acclaimed by some historians.
Despite his inherited millions, he is in many ways anti-establishment, an anti-toff toff, agin the instinct of the mandarin and the power-broker to close ranks, irritated by Etonian complacency.
He drinks little.
He doesn't even like fox-hunting.
But the diaries raise broader questions too.
Do they serve the cause of history?
Do they damage the business of government by inhibiting confidentiality and honest private discussion?
Or do they do a public service by tilting government towards more openness and accountability?
As a chronicler of the times, Mr Clarke is hard to assess.
‘The diarist has to be a maverick or a cad or an oddball,’ says one of today's more literary ministers.
‘You need anecdotage and colour to bring out some of the great arguments.’
‘It's exactly the sort of stuff I as a historian would love to read about a period,’ Mr Clark says modestly of his own offering.
His admirers are already comparing him with Chips Channon, Harold Nicolson, Richard Crossman, even Samuel Pepys.
‘No one compares with Chips, nasty and shallow as he was,’ says Mr Clark, ‘but that doesn't matter because he was so observant’.
As for Pepys, there are curious parallels: both maverick MPs who did almost the same job trying to reform Britain's armed forces — Pepys more successfully at sea; both irreverent, yet painfully conscious of their need to keep their patrons sweet; both hedonists fascinated by sex, class and gossip.
But times are different.
The Radcliffe rules, invented in 1976 following the row about Richard Crossman's controversial diaries, say ex-ministers should launder names of, and verbatim conversations with, officials.
Clark disregards them.
‘Breaching the rules is a bad thing,’ says a current cabinet minister.
Officials, especially, fear that candour unscreened by confidentiality will open them to the later ridicule of diarists.
‘Everybody begins to talk for effect.
Next thing, ministers will arrive at meetings with their lawyers.
Then we'll have recorders in our pockets and all that.
You simply can't run anything — a business, a newspaper, a government — if the honour and privacy of the personalities involved are completely unguarded.’
Ah yes, say the diarists' lobby.
Remember Tony Benn's words: ‘Secrecy is the enemy of democracy.’
National security, not people's reputations, says Mr Clark, is the only argument against early publication.
‘There's a certain self-perpetuating establishment core of goody-goodies who sit on [the records], even extract and destroy files.
It's got nothing to do with national security; it's that they may embarrass some dear old buffer who did a lot of damage.
A bit of exposure might concentrate minds a bit better.’
Pepys, of course, was just as frank as Mr Clark.
Democratic scrutiny was still a century-and-a-half away.
More to the point, his diaries took a little longer to come out — 122 years after his death.
EUROPE
Spain
Triple whammy
FROM OUR MADRID CORRESPONDENT
THRICE smitten were the rulers.
First, by recession.
The country's GDP shrank 0.2% in the last quarter of 1992; unemployment at the end of March hit 21.7%; inflation rose to 4.6% in the year to April.
Then came corruption.
The decision to call an election was prompted by the prime minister's failure to heal a split among his followers over accusations that state-owned companies had been arm-twisted into making contributions to the party.
Last was devaluation.
On April 13th the government devalued the peseta, by 8%, for the third time in eight months.
In these circumstances, what ruling party would stand a chance?
Answer: Spain's Socialists.
Spaniards remain insouciant about their currency (so often a country's virility symbol) partly because, during Franco's dictatorship, the state-owned press used to spend half its time explaining why the latest devaluation was a good thing.
Parts of the press and television, some still government-controlled, have been energetically making little of the latest setback.
In any event, the prime minister, Felipe Gonzalez, is conducting an impressive campaign.
His most effective action so far has been to deflect the corruption allegations by recruiting Spain's ‘Mr Clean’ to stand alongside him as a Socialist candidate.
A friend of the late Giovanni Falcone, one of Italy's martyrs in its fight against the Mafia, Baltasar ‘Superjudge’ Garzon is the closest Spain has to an anti-Mafia crusader.
Best known as the judge who (unsuccessfully) defied Mr Gonzalez's government five years ago in a case involving the recruitment of mercenaries to assassinate terrorist suspects, his decision to join the politicians he was unable to beat has caused some disillusion but much excitement.
Mr Gonzalez has also been striving to put some shine on his party's tarnished image with a blend of promises and apologies.
On the one hand, the Socialists say they will tackle corruption by introducing a new law on party financing.
On the other, the prime minister offers self-criticism: ‘I would like to apologise for whatever we have done wrong,’ he says.
‘I found out [about the extortion scandal]through the press…
That does not excuse the fact that I ought to have found out otherwise.’
In almost any other country, he would face yet another handicap — defending a left-of-centre programme in a world that dislikes too much socialism.
But on this issue Spain is something of an exception.
After 36 years of right-wing dictatorship, and more recently a decade of Mr Gonzalez's rather unsocialist socialism, most Spaniards seem to want more, not less, left-wing government.
That preference has been strengthened by an alarming rise in unemployment since last autumn.
No wonder the Socialists' manifesto offers measures to reduce unemployment, invest Ptas500 billion ($1 billion) in training over the next four years, and build 500,000 new houses.
The Socialists claim proudly that it is their most left-wing manifesto since since they came to power in 1982 and hint that their liberal finance minister, Carlos Solchaga, is for the chop.
Their programme may, however, may prove more popular with the voters than with the foreign-exchange markets.
Bosnia
It's a madhouse
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT IN BANJA LUKA
IN PARTS of Serb-held Bosnia, the results of the two-day referendum on the Vance-Owen peace plan were like the good old days of Russia or China.
Some municipalities turned in No votes of 99%.
When polls closed on May 16th, the Bosnian Serb leaders cheerfully declared the plan dead, and claimed peace was now nearer than ever.
Lord Owen condemned the voting as chaotic.
Spokesmen of the French government called it null and void.
The voting seems in fact to have been orderly, though claims made about the plan were plainly false.
The head of the voting commission for northern Bosnia, for example, said the Serbs could keep only 20% of Bosnia.
Actually, they hold around 70% and under the plan could keep only 43%.
Not that truth in advertising would have changed much.
Percentages of votes or of Bosnia seem ever more beside the point against the ugly facts of what is happening there.
As people went to the polls in the Serb-held city of Banja Luka in northern Bosnia, bulldozers cleared away the remains of two 16th-century mosques blown up the previous week.
One contained the tomb of one of Bosnia's most famous sons, Serhad Pasha Sokolovic, a Christian convert to Islam who became Suleiman the Magnificent's grand vizier.
In Pale, their political headquarters, Bosnia's Serbs congratulated each other on once again throwing sand in the eyes of the world.
Nikola Koljevic, their deputy leader, says Serbs will go back to their old demand for a Bosnian confederation of independent Serb, Muslim and Croat states.
The point is brazen: the Croat and Serb statelets of Bosnia would then be free to ‘share sovereignty’ with Croatia and Serbia.
The Muslim one would be shrunken and isolated.
Bosnia would survive as a constitutional fiction, allowing the world to save face.
In reality, Croats and Serbs would have succeeded in carving up Bosnia between them.
The Serbs in particular are nice judges of how far the outside world will go to stop them.
Lord Owen and his new UN colleague, Thorvald Stoltenberg, Norway's former foreign minister, have not given up hope for the Vance-Owen peace plan.
The idea seems to be to apply it wherever possible.
An avenue Lord Owen wants to explore is compliance by Croats and Muslims in territory they control.
As they have been fighting each other on much of it, any agreement to stop must represent progress.
On May 18th Lord Owen met the Croat and Muslim leaders in Medjugorje, where the devout used to come to watch appearances of the Virgin Mary.
Lord Owen said the two had agreed to stop or limit the fighting.
Nor was he the only one to see hope amid chaos.
General Philippe Morillon, the commander of the UN's forces in Bosnia, said on the same day that he expected a solution soon to the siege of Sarajevo.
The idea, according to one report, was for the capital's defenders to surrender their arms to the UN, for the Serbs to keep theirs but to pull back from the city, and for the UN to create a ‘security belt’ between.
General Morillon has also been negotiating for the placing of six Muslim towns or enclaves to be put under UN protection.
The general hopes as well to open UN-controlled roads through Bosnia.
The Serbs say they do not object.
Bosnia's president, Ilija Izetbegovic, may.
If the siege of Sarajevo is lifted and the roads out are safe, thousands will bolt, leaving him a president shorn of land and people.
Any attempt to apply the Vance-Owen plan, with or without Serb assent, will take money and troops.
These are scarce.
The secretary-general of the UN, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, announced this week that UN troops might have to be pulled out of Croatia unless relations between Croats and Serbs in UN-patrolled enclaves there improved and the world began to pay its peacekeeping bills.
Cedric Thornberry, his civilian representative in ex-Yugoslavia, had some good news, at least on the first score.
Serbs and Croats in Croatia have held their first face-to-face meeting since January.
Bosnia resembles ever more a madhouse where the patients have guns and there are no tranquillisers.
The doctors, lacking a cure, vent their frustration on each other.
The row across the Atlantic is becoming sharp.
In February the Americans said the prevention of wars like the Yugoslav one in the post-communist world was in America's interest.
Having failed to get the Europeans' agreement on a course of action, Warren Christopher, America's secretary of state, is back to what the Bush administration was saying 18 months ago: Yugoslavia is at heart a European problem.
The Americans are also put out by the efforts of Russia's foreign minister, Andrei Kozyrev, to rescue something from the apparent wreckage of the world's peace efforts.
They snubbed his invitation to a meeting of foreign ministers at the UN in New York on May 21st.
Mr Kozyrev has scrapped that idea.
But he wants to press on with others despite American misgivings: full implementation of UN sanctions, UN policing of the border between Serbia and Bosnia, peacekeepers for havens in Bosnia and the setting up of a war-crimes court.
This is much like what Lord Owen and General Morillon are aiming at.
The victors and villains in this war seem once again to have the outside powers where they most like them: stuck deep and quarrelling among themselves about what to do next.
Maastricht: Europe celebrates
FROM OUR COPENHAGEN AND BRUSSELS CORRESPONDENTS
Denmark's approval has revived the Maastricht treaty.
But problems remain.
We look at the EC's agenda now; at the recession hampering closer union; at the problems faced by one country (Norway) that wants to join the EC and at a challenge to the treaty in Germany's constitutional court
HAVING rejected the Maastricht treaty by 50.3% to 49.7% on June 2nd last year, Denmark's voters approved the same treaty, with added opt-outs, on May 18th, by 56.8% to 43.2%.
Denmark's vote makes it likely that Maastricht will, eventually, be ratified by all 12 members.
But 18 months of argument over the treaty has left Denmark deeply divided.
A riot in Copenhagen on the night of the referendum left 11 protestors wounded by police gunshots and two dozen policemen in hospital.
The opt-outs mean that Denmark will not take part in economic and monetary union, common defence, common citizenship or joint policies on home affairs.
Just as important for the future of Denmark's European policy — and perhaps for the future of European integration — was the size of the No vote.
The country's politicians, believers in consensus, stress that the naysayers must be assured that the European Community is not on the slippery slope to a federal Europe.
They know that it was fear — fear of a loss of prosperity, fear of having to leave the EC — that persuaded Danes to vote Yes rather than enthusiasm for European union.
Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, the prime minister and leader of the Social Democrats, worked hard to drag a Yes out of the Danes.
Last year, when his party was in opposition and locked in a leadership battle, 60% of its supporters voted No.
This time the party campaigned more effectively for the treaty and 60% of its supporters voted Yes.
A majority of women, too, did the same, having voted No last time.
Two other countries have yet to ratify the treaty: Germany (see page 41) and Britain, where John Major's government is likely to extract the treaty from Parliament by July.
It will then have to contend with a challenge in the British courts over the legal status of Britain's opt-out from the social chapter.
It will take more than the ratification of the treaty to restore Britain's European credentials.
During the first two years of his prime ministership, Mr Major rebuilt Britain's standing in the EC.
The past nine months of wobbling over Maastricht have undone that work.
Britain's partners will put strong pressure on Mr Major to promise that the pound will rejoin the exchange-rate mechanism, which, they fear, may be further weakened by Britain's devaluation.
In private, politicians from other countries are becoming increasingly rude about Britain.
A Socialist ex-prime minister of France recently remarked that ‘Europe should advance without the British, who could always rejoin later.’
Now that the politicians and diplomats who run the EC believe that their treaty is safe, they have begun to bicker over what comes next.
The opening of talks about membership with Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden has forced governments to consider the workings of the Community's institutions.
The Maastricht treaty commits them to holding a big treaty-revising conference in 1996.
One reason for having that meeting is to reform the institutions so that they can cope with a second wave of new members, this time from Eastern Europe.
Britain, Denmark and perhaps others will be in a camp calling for minimal changes in 1996.
But despite the scepticism of some Europeans, especially in the north, many governments continue to believe in the bicycle theory: Europe must move forward or crash.
Belgium's finance minister, Philippe Maystadt, has called for the acceleration of the timetable for monetary union and for a relaxation of the Maastricht treaty's economic-convergence criteria.
In Germany, ministers still appear to side with the federalists.
‘Maastricht went too far for public opinion, but not far enough to allow Europe to deal effectively with the problems it faces, such as Yugoslavia,’ says an exasperated German official.
Yet opinion in Germany has shifted over the past year.
Officials complain less about the feebleness of the treaty and talk more of goals such as enlargement and aiding Eastern Europe.
In the end, it may not prove impossible to reconcile Euro-sceptics and Euro-enthusiasts.
‘Variable geometry’(or Europe à la carte) may keep everyone content.
The Maastricht treaty established that principle by giving Britain opt-outs on monetary union and social policy; Denmark's opt-outs have reinforced it.
The ERM's history over the past nine months makes it increasingly likely that monetary union, when it happens, will involve only a small group.
The prospect of an EC including Scandinavia and even Eastern Europe, has persuaded countries like France, which once argued that the Twelve should advance in a straight line, to accept a new geometry.
The French would rather have the neutral Finns opting out of the EC's common foreign policy, for example, than watering it down.
Meanwhile, the mood in the European Commission is sober, despite the Danish Yes.
The commission remains so weak that it will continue to avoid confrontation with governments.
Its legislative programme is modest.
In the first four months of this year it agreed on 18 draft laws; in the same period last year, it produced 37.
Legislation apart, there is plenty to keep Jacques Delors, the commission's president, and his team, busy: the GATT talks, a study of what makes Europe's economy uncompetitive, an attempt to get governments to accept more liberal trade relations with Eastern Europe, and so on.
But Mr Delors, whose use of the word morosité grows ever more frequent, says there is nothing to cheer about while Europe remains impotent in the face of the Yugoslav tragedy.
Norway not hooked
FROM OUR BRUSSELS CORRESPONDENT
BUOYED by Denmark's decisive Yes to Maastricht, three other Nordic governments are knocking all the more vigorously on the door of the European Community.
If all goes according to plan, Finland, Norway and Sweden, as well as Austria, will hold referendums on EC membership some time next year.
Of these, Norway is the most likely to vote No (as it did, by a margin of 3.5%, in 1972).
According to the latest opinion polls, the noes have 50%, the yeses 35% and the rest are undecided.
Many Norwegians see the EC, with its Treaty on European Union, as a threat.
Union means subjugation to most Norwegians, who recall their 400-year union with Denmark and a century-long union with Sweden before independence in 1905.
Norway's north is even farther from Oslo than Oslo is from Brussels; Norwegians fear that the EC would mean rule by distant bureaucrats who know nothing of their country.
Norway's economy is heavily dependent on natural resources.
Manufacturing accounts for only 15% of GDP, compared with 20% in Finland and Sweden.
Most Norwegians do not want to let others get their hands on the goodies — and that is what EC membership would involve.
Oil provides 40% of Norway's export earnings, and the government gives Statoil, the state-owned oil company, half the contracts for exploiting Norwegian oil.
That would have to stop if a draft EC directive ever became law; Norway would not be allowed to keep so much to itself.
The government swears that its rules will not change.
About fish, a matter of great symbolic and economic importance in Norway, the government bluntly says that if the EC asks for more fishing rights in Norwegian waters there will be no question of Norway joining.
‘Fish kept us out in 1972, and may do so again,’ says Gro Harlem Brundtland, the prime minister.
She says it was because the EC drove such a hard bargain on fish in 1972 that public opinion turned against membership.
Norwegians are as emotional about fish as the French are about farming.
Almost every family has connections to a fishing community.
Norwegians are proud of their management of fish stocks: the number of cod and herring in the Barents Sea is rising, whereas the EC's fisheries policy has failed to prevent the depletion of stocks in its waters.
Abroad, however, Norway's 16,000 fishermen have a predatory reputation which will be enhanced by Norway's decision this week to resume commercial whaling in defiance of the international ban on it.
Norway's 95,000 farmers love the EC no better.
They soak up NKr11.5 billion ($1.7 billion) of government aid every year, and reckon that even the EC would not allow such bounty.
Norwegians worry about the difficulty of keeping people on the land of a country that is larger in area than Italy or Britain, but which has only 4.3m citizens.
They believe it essential that farmers should remain in the far north, however uneconomic their agriculture, lest half the country become depopulated.
Similar worries affect Finland, too.
Norway's most eloquent campaigner against the Community is Anne Enger Lahnstein, leader of the Centre Party, which, like the anti-EC Socialist Left Party, is picking up support at the expense of Labour, which forms the minority government.
‘We object to the economic philosophy of the Treaty of Rome,’ says Ms Lahnstein.
‘The EC's ‘four freedoms’ are good for multinationals but bad for our farmers, our small companies, our poor, our environment and the third world.’
The Christian Democrats also oppose membership, as do a majority of trade-unionists and many members of the Labour Party.
The Labour leadership, the Conservative Party, the anti-tax Progress Party and the employers' lobby all argue that the economy would suffer from a No vote.
Investment would shift elsewhere, they believe.
They also argue that much of Norway's sleepy manufacturing industry needs a blast of EC competition policy.
These arguments have yet to sway public opinion.
But Denmark's ratification of the Maastricht treaty, think ministers, may do so.
The government will now do its best to ensure that Norway holds its referendum after those of Sweden and Finland, in the hope that Yes votes in those countries would make Norwegians think twice before joining the Icelanders as the only Nordics to stay out of the EC.
The economics of European disintegration
THIS year, the first of the European Community's vaunted single market, will mark the continent's worst recession for two decades.
The German economy stopped growing last summer and is now in deep recession, with industrial output in the year to March down more than 10%.
For the year as a whole its output is likely to fall by 1.5%.
France, Italy, Holland and Spain are all in recession.
Among big countries, only Britain is growing.
The panel of forecasters who track the largest economies for The Economist says the GDP of nine European countries will contract by 0.4% this year (chart 1).
Recession is hampering European integration and the Maastricht treaty designed to promote it.
The reason is that the treaty sets criteria to measure whether a country is ready for economic and monetary union.
The criteria for budget deficits and public debt require spending cuts.
Yet shrinking economies mean falling tax revenues and so larger budget deficits and more government debt.
Countries with big debts — like Italy and Belgium — will not be able to meet the Maastricht criteria unless their economies start growing like Topsy.
How can they get going?
The answer depends on how much of the slump is attributable to exceptional circumstances whose impact will fade, how much to the business cycle whose fluctuations will bring happier times, and how much to the erosion of Europe's competitiveness, which may take years to overcome.
The last time the Community was in such straits was in 1975, when output fell 1%.
It bounced back quickly, growing by 4.7% in 1976.
A big reason was that much of the slump had been caused by the doubling of oil prices in 1973; as the shock was absorbed, growth picked up.
The shock this time is German unification.
The need to finance the cost of unity and damp down its inflationary effect has pushed up German — and therefore European — interest rates and exacerbated recession.
How long it will take to get over this shock is unclear, but it will be more than a year.
The agreement to increase wages in eastern Germany by 18% (see page 80) seems likely to ensure that the high cost will continue for several years.
German unity also seems to have disrupted the business cycle, and may limit the benefits that Europe can expect to get from recovery elsewhere.
At the end of 1989 German producers benefited from the appearance of 17m eastern Germans with D-mark purchasing power.
With low oil prices, loose fiscal policies and all the optimism generated by the approach of the 1992 single market, the German economy expanded.
While America's growth fell from 2.5% in 1989 to 0.8% in 1990, Germany's rose from 3.3% to 4.8%.
Now the opposite is happening: the American economy is recovering as Europe's goes into recession.
Europe might expect to export more to America as demand picks up there.
In practice, however, export-led growth in Europe is likely to be overwhelmed by problems left over from the late-1980s boom — especially the sharp rise in public-sector deficits between 1989 and 1993 (chart 2).
Loose fiscal policies will have to be tightened, limiting the strength of recovery further.
The biggest worry about Europe's recession, however, is that part of it is the result of an erosion of competitiveness that will burden Europe for years to come.
In a world where capital can move freely, investment and technology will go wherever labour is skilled and cheap.
West German wage rates are the highest in the world, and most other European countries are more expensive than America or Japan (chart 3).
And that is just wage costs.
Non-wage costs such as firms' social-security payments add 20–45%, far more than in America and Japan.
When countries lose their competitive edge, manufacturing is hit hardest because it is the part of the economy most vulnerable to international competition (it is hard to import haircuts or dry-cleaners).
This will be especially damaging to Europe because Germany, its economic powerhouse, has so much of its workforce in manufacturing — more than any other industrialised country (chart 4).
No wonder Europe is losing its competitive edge.
German cars may be wonders of technology, but fewer people can afford to buy them while they are made in Germany.
So both BMW and Mercedes now plan to build new car plants in South Carolina.
At the proposed Mercedes plant, the labour cost per car will be about a third of what it is back home.
Worse still, Europe may be losing out because it has too little high-technology manufacturing.
Investment in research and development is lower in Europe than in Japan or America.
And, since 1987, Europe (chart 5) has run a trade deficit in high-tech goods.
In other words, technology does not make up for Europe's high labour costs.
In the long run, a united Europe will attract support and become irreversible if it seems to make Europe more competitive.
At the moment, Europe is becoming less so.
Awaiting the
German Ja
FROM OUR GERMANY CORRESPONDENT
AFTER Denmark's referendum, Britain is not the sole obstacle to final ratification of the Maastricht treaty.
Nine red-robed German judges also have the power to strike the treaty down.
Both houses of Germany's parliament overwhelmingly approved the treaty last December.
But full German ratification, sealed with the president's signature, awaits the constitutional court at Karlsruhe.
Several anti-Maastricht suits are pending before its second bench.
The judges will hear arguments next month and make their rulings, with luck, before Germany shuts down for August.
Among the suits are some from the Greens and others from far-right Republicans.
But the main challenge comes from a lawyer, Manfred Brunner, who worked for one of Germany's two European commissioners, Martin Bangemann.
Convinced that the treaty would undercut German sovereignty by taking away powers from the German parliament, he left Brussels and filed a sweeping complaint claiming that Maastricht damages constitutional guarantees of individual rights and democratic procedure.
Might the court strike the entire treaty down?
‘Inconceivable,’ says a top German diplomat.
In the foreign ministry, as in Brussels, the line against Mr Brunner's campaign is that it is a slight joke by somebody who, when working in the EC's headquarters, ‘spoke no foreign languages properly and never understood how the Community works’.
The judges are politically sensitive: six of the nine are chosen with a clear party affiliation, the other three being independent.
They will have noted the strong support for Maastricht not only in the Bundestag but also in the Bundesrat, the upper chamber representing Germany's independent-minded Länder (states).
Yet several of the judges are bothered about democratic accountability and may have something to say about the lack of it in the Community.
Although the European Parliament may get more power, its competence is still limited, so the German parliament must help to ensure some accountability over EC matters.
And though the Bundestag now has a European oversight committee, it is weakened by the jealousies of members of existing committees.
The government hopes the judges will not prevent ratification and will not call for any changes in the treaty.
Even small amendments would delay ratification further, and the government is in a hurry.
But the court has other business besides Maastricht to attend to.
One issue is whether East Germany's more liberal rules on abortion are to prevail or West Germany's more restrictive ones.
Another is whether German airmen can stay in NATO's reconnaissance aircraft over Bosnia.
These cases come first on the court's calendar.
The betting at the German foreign ministry and in the federal chancellery is that the judges will approve the treaty as it stands.
But they could also switch on a constitutional warning light about future treaties, as yet unwritten, calling for still closer European integration.
Russia
Into the swamp
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
Can Boris Yeltsin persuade parliament to abolish itself?
ARTICLE 104 of the Russian constitution says unambiguously that the Congress of People's Deputies is ‘the highest agency of state power of the Russian Federation’.
Only it has the power to change the constitution.
Most of its 1,033 members have little sympathy for the democratic, capitalist Russia that Boris Yeltsin is trying to create.
Hence Mr Yeltsin's dilemma: to persuade the deputies to commit political suicide without acting unconstitutionally.
During the eighth and ninth Congresses held in March this year, this task looked all but impossible.
But Mr Yeltsin's victory in the referendum on April 25th has transformed Russia's political landscape.
A rift has opened up within the leadership of the parliament, which could be the beginning of the end for it.
This rift emerged on May 14th when Nikolai Ryabov, a lieutenant of the chairman, Ruslan Khasbulatov, unexpectedly took the floor of the Supreme Soviet, the smaller of the two houses of parliament.
Ignoring repeated interruptions from Mr Khasbulatov, Mr Ryabov explained why he thought parliament was wrong to refuse negotiations with Mr Yeltsin about a new constitution which would lead to new elections and the end of the Congress.
At the last two Congresses, Mr Ryabov was one of the fiercest critics of Mr Yeltsin's reforms.
Thus his breach with Mr Khasbulatov took most reformers by surprise.
His motives, however, are not hard to understand.
The referendum was a humiliating defeat for the unpopular Mr Khasbulatov.
His reaction to this defeat was to tighten his grip on parliament, throwing the remaining democrats off two influential parliamentary committees, one concerned with economic reform, the other with the press and television.
These purges seem consistent with the aim (which his opponents accuse him of) of turning parliament into an updated version of the old central committee of the Communist Party, with himself as general secretary and Congress acting as a rubber stamp.
The referendum suggested that most Russians will not tolerate attempts to recreate the past.
Mr Ryabov understands this.
So do Ramazan Abdulatipov and Venyamin Sokolov, the heads of the two chambers of the Supreme Soviet, who have both supported him.
Mr Yeltsin must now decide how best to exploit this rift in the parliamentary leadership.
At the past two Congresses, the democrats could rely on fewer than 200 votes (see chart).
Mr Ryabov's defection will give them enough votes to block the two-thirds majority that is needed to change the constitution.
This means that conservatives will be unable to reduce the president's power further.
However, Mr Yeltsin is still far from winning the two-thirds majority he needs to get a new constitution adopted.
Russian Unity, the largest block in parliament and an implacable opponent of the president's, has 303 votes, only 42 short of the number needed to veto constitutional changes.
The president's lobbying effort will now switch to the soft middle of parliament, known in Russia as ‘the swamp’.
This is made up of deputies who are either unattached or are only nominally members of two centrist groups, the Democratic Centre and the Block of Creative Forces.
Unencumbered by knowledge or convictions, the swamp is notoriously unpredictable.
Mr Khasbulatov's source of power in the past has been his ability to manipulate it.
But now even members of the swamp can see that following the chairman leads to political oblivion.
It will become clear on June 5th whether the president has been able to exploit this split.
A meeting is due to be held then to discuss Mr Yeltsin's draft of the new constitution.
Originally, two representatives from each of Russia's republics and regions had been invited to this meeting.
But the invitation has now been widened to include 100 or so members of parliament, partly because of their new willingness to negotiate, partly to counter-balance the heads of 11 of Russia's 19 semi-autonomous republics who have already rejected the draft.
The risk for Mr Yeltsin is twofold.
This meeting could be too cumbersome to achieve anything.
And the new line of Mr Ryabov and his allies might be a cleverer tactic than the one used by Mr Khasbulatov: instead of opposing the president, Mr Ryabov might be trying to draw him into protracted haggling in order to dissipate the momentum the president won in the referendum.
With parliament's morale in freefall, however, Mr Yeltsin should be able to make sure that does not happen.
Germany
Bavarian blues
FROM OUR GERMANY CORRESPONDENT
THE pressure on Germany's finance minister, Theo Waigel, to return to Bavaria as state premier is of the cost-push, not the demand-pull variety.
The cost is Germany's ballooning budget deficit.
Even Mr Waigel's friends shake their heads at his ‘double-the-number-you-first-thought-of’ handling of Germany's public finances.
The demand-pull, or so Mr Waigel hoped, was the Christian Social Union, of which he is president.
The CSU is a local Bavarian conservative party allied with the Christian Democrats of Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor, but independent and proud.
It has run Bavaria for 30 years and the state premiership is in its gift.
When Max Streibl, the incumbent, recently ran into trouble over allegations that he took free trips from a defence company, Mr Waigel spied an escape from his travails in Bonn.
Scandal aside, Mr Streibl was losing his grip on a regional party adrift after German unity and unsure of its future.
Mr Waigel hoped to go to Munich; Mr Kohl would move someone better at adding up the costs of German unity to the finance ministry.
The snag was that no one asked the CSU.
Some of the party say they want as premier not the amiable Mr Waigel but Bavaria's interior minister, Edmund Stoiber, a hard-hitting intellectual.
Amid back-biting, CSU deputies prepared to choose their man on May 26th.
Personalities are not the only problem.
In Bavaria's parliament, the CSU has enjoyed that German rarity, a clear majority, since 1966.
It could well lose this at the state election due in the autumn of 1994.
Its vote has dropped from a high of 62% in 1972 to 55% in 1990.
It is becoming the party of old voters.
It has lost its hold on Munich, Bavaria's capital, and faces resistance in the country from conservatives fed up with the party's hold on patronage.
By tradition, the CSU is Catholic, right-wing and folksily Bavarian.
But Bavaria is changing fast and the CSU is struggling to keep pace.
During the 1970s the boom in luxury cars and high-tech engineering transformed the state into one of Europe's most modern economies.
Bavaria remains different.
But less so than before.
The CSU has responded by trying to become a broad church that appeals to devout pensioners, Munich punks and aerospace engineers.
Not all CSU-ers think that can work.
Those who like their conservatism raw and their patriotism loud see a danger of blandness.
Peter Gauweiler, Bavaria's environment minister, thinks his state is still well to the right of the nation.
The extreme-right Republicans, he says, will ‘light a candle every day’, if the CSU adopts a ‘Rita Süssmuth conservatism’, a reference to the brainy CDU president of the Bundestag.
Between 1987 and 1990, the German electorate jumped by almost 15m.
That poses a problem for any regional party.
Parties in Germany need at least 5% of the national vote to win seats in the Bundestag.
In 1990 the threshold was applied separately in eastern and western Germany.
Next year it will be applied nationwide.
In 1987 the CSU won 9.7% of the vote.
In 1990 they won 7%, near enough the threshold to ring alarms.
Some members of the party think their party must go national or die.
They see a market opportunity on the right among disgruntled Christian Democrats who like the Germany-first message of the far right but dislike its extremist image.
This is not new for the CSU.
Its most famous leader, Franz Josef Strauss, used to lean on the Christian Democrats when he wanted something by threatening to go national.
The Christian Democrats did not normally take the threats seriously, though with Strauss they were never sure.
In 1980 they made him their candidate for chancellor.
The CSU's problem now is that Germany's political map has changed utterly and it has no one of Strauss's size.
BUSINESS
Tatra
A Detroit rescue
PRAGUE
EARLIER this month, the Czech minister for industry and trade, Vladimir Dlouhy, called on his countrymen to buy more home-produced goods.
He urged his cabinet colleagues to set an example by swapping their luxury German cars for Tatra limousines.
Unfortunately, even if every minister were to trade in his BMW or Mercedes-Benz, it would do little to save the nearly bankrupt car and truck maker.
A team of top American managers, who have taken over running the 97-year-old firm, are now its only hope.
Car production at Tatra has not been profitable for more than 40 years.
The firm's T613 limousines, much favoured by the old communist politburo members, were subsidised by truck sales.
But when Tatra's once-guaranteed East European markets collapsed along with communism, so did truck sales.
In 1990 Tatra sold 10,000 trucks, but just 80 in the first half of 1992.
Last year, the firm lost 175m koruna ($1.2m) and its debt climbed to an estimated 3.7 billion koruna.
In April a crisis loomed.
Component suppliers decided to stop making deliveries unless they were paid.
Tatra was forced to stop production of its giant T815 trucks, 2,000 of which have been ordered by Russia and China.
The 11,000-strong workforce, slimmed from 16,000 in 1989, was sent home.
Then the men from Detroit arrived in Koprivnice, the company town in north Moravia where Tatra is based.
They were led by Gerald Greenwald, a former Chrysler vice-chairman who quit to take part in an abortive, union-backed buy-out of United Airlines.
With him were David Shelby and Jack Rutherford, former vice-chairman and vice-president respectively of International Harvester.
Mr Greenwald has now been appointed chairman of Tatra and Mr Shelby and Mr Rutherford have joined him on the board.
What on earth enticed such high-profile American industrialists to throw in their lot with a tottering East European vehicle producer?
A fat salary, reputed to be a combined $120,000 a month for all three, might be part of the answer.
They have formed a company, GSR Inc, which will also receive 15% of Tatra's shares.
Their contract runs out in two years.
After that control of the firm will be handed back to Tatra's Czech managers.
But by then the three American managers hope to have turned the company, and their 15% stake, into something worth owning.
Despite the firm's dire financial health, they have a slim chance of pulling this off.
Tatra's trucks have a reputation among lorry drivers for great toughness.
Although they are not competing this year, Tatra trucks are usually among the first home in the gruelling Paris-Dakar rally.
‘We have all dealt with Tatra during our careers,’ says Mr Rutherford.
‘We can sell these rough, tough suckers anywhere in the world.’
Nevertheless, at the moment Tatra's shares are worth zilch.
Under the country's voucher-privatisation system, the majority of the company's shares were acquired by seven big investment funds.
These have given up part of their holdings to provide GSR with its shareholding.
The Czech prime minister, Vaclav Klaus, describes the deal as ‘the first example of an untraditional approach.’
It will not be the last.
The Czech government does not want to see lots of companies go under because of a new bankruptcy law.
It intends to regulate closures among firms whose collapse would cause big social problems, or which — given a rigorous overhaul, like Tatra — might survive.
But can GSR get Tatra back on the road?
The investment funds have placed their bets on Mr Greenwald, who helped Chrysler revive after the firm's narrow escape from bankruptcy in 1979.
But unlike Chrysler, Mr Greenwald does not have a government loan-guarantee to help finance Tatra's regeneration.
So far, bank loans have been rescheduled; suppliers have been reassured of future payments (deliveries have resumed) and the company has promised to cut its workforce by another 20%.
Western experts will be brought in to train staff in quality control, component buying and after-sales service.
Output will be held at 5,300 trucks this year — the factory has the capacity to produce 15,000 a year — and talks have also begun with two German component makers to manufacture parts for them.
Although GSR intends to reduce emission and noise levels to help Tatra drive into western markets, its first aim is to regain sales in traditional eastern markets, especially in the forestry, oil and mining industries where firms might have some cash.
As for Tatra's T613 limousines, the company said on May 18th that it is looking for dealers to help sell them.
But with production set at only 300 vehicles this year, limousines are not a priority.
Mr Greenwald suggests that a foreign partner might be recruited to help Tatra develop that side of its business.
Perhaps Mr Dlouhy should have held on to his official Audi after all.
EC trade policy
Better barter
IF ANYONE deserves the blame for the world's failure to complete the Uruguay round of world trade talks — now more than two and a half mind-numbing years overdue — it is the European Community.
The EC dragged its feet before coming up with a reluctant and minimal proposal to reform farm trade.
Even after the outline of a farm agreement had been sketched in Washington last November, the Community equivocated with the outgoing administration, which was in a mood for compromise.
Now trade officials are talking about yet another deadline in mid-December, it seems as if the EC may at last be ready to play a more active role in liberalising world trade, thanks largely to goading from its energetic new trade commissioner, Sir Leon Brittan.
The signs of progress came in recent bilateral negotiations between America and the EC over tariff barriers — big cuts are crucial in winning industrial backing for a successful round.
Also encouraging has been the fact that a row with America over government procurement, which threatened to spill over into tit-for-tat sanctions, was averted at the last minute.
Though the row might flare up again, American and European trade officials have established some sort of rapport.
Four-way talks in Toronto on May 13th-14th, where America and the EC were joined by Canada and Japan, left the habitually optimistic Sir Leon remarking that ‘we are now in top gear.
There can be no doubt now of the momentum towards a Uruguay round agreement.’
After so much drift, any expression of enthusiasm is welcome.
Perfect timing, then, for the EC's dismal reputation to be cast in a better light by an impartial judge.
A trade review by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), published on May 18th, praises the Community's single-market programme for improving ‘access, transparency and legal security in many sectors.’
Far from building fortress Europe, the report says, Project 1992 has removed ‘long-standing ‘residual’ national trade restrictions.’
True, the report's authors criticise the EC's trigger-happy use of anti-dumping rules and say there remains a risk that the Community will drift into a European trade zone built around special agreements with the EFTA countries and Eastern Europe.
But the tone of the report is quite different from the GATT's previous review, published in 1991, which was harshly critical.
Even France, the EC country that has done most to block progress on the Uruguay round, now at least seems willing to discuss specifics.
It recently released a list of conditions upon which the round's success depends.
True, some of these seem expressly designed to bring the country into confrontation with America.
One is the insistence that America renounce all its bilateral disputes as part of the round.
Another, which will infuriate both Hollywood and Mickey Kantor, America's chief trade negotiator, is the French demand that EC broadcasting rules restricting foreign TV programmes be left unaffected by the round.
A few other French demands are so regressive that it is inconceivable that they will be met.
There are, for example, calls for an increase in farm protection for one crop, and for proposed restrictions on the volumes of subsidised farm exports to be forgotten.
Yet a large part of the French memorandum consists of a third category of conditions — such as a demand for broad and deep increases in the market access of goods and services — that are constructive, even if ambitious.
France does not expect to get its way on every one of these conditions.
For all the problems that it raises, this formidable wish-list is better than a constantly repeated non, which is about all that France contributed in the past.
Eat your heart out
PARIS
START with a salad of lobster and truffles.
Next enjoy foie gras and sweetbreads, followed by a selection of sumptuous cheeses.
Top the whole thing off with a dessert of chocolate mousse in strawberry sauce and wash it down with a Bordeaux red.
A recipe for obesity?
Not at all: this feast is part of a diet.
Michel Montignac preaches that you can eat fabulously well while losing weight.
In the process he is turning his so-called ‘Montignac method’ into a weighty dieting business.
His three books have sold more than 1.5m copies and this month he launched a glossy magazine providing recipes and ratings of restaurants that adhere to his diet.
Mr Montignac is also trying to export his gastronomic ideas to America.
‘Enough of this dieting that makes you feel guilty,’ says Mr Montignac.
‘We know that the French way of eating and drinking wine is the best passport for good health.’
But Mr Montignac is not a doctor or even a trained nutritionist.
Some critics claim that his diets are high in cholesterol and could cause heart attacks.
Others argue he has invented nothing.
‘Reconciling dieting and gastronomy is nothing new,’ argues Christian Millau of the Gault Millau restaurant guide.
Mr Millau points out that famous French chefs, such as Michel Guerard, have long have offered diet haute cuisine.
Mr Montignac says he discovered his ‘method’ while lunching in fancy European restaurants when he worked for a drugs company.
He says conventional low-calorie diets cause only a temporary loss of weight.
He advises lots of olive oil, pasta, rice, duck and fish.
Mr Montignac's theories are not as strange as they sound.
Medical researchers have found a low incidence of coronary heart disease in Toulouse, the capital of foie gras.
Toulousians do not use much butter, but they typically follow a diet that is high in bread, vegetables, fruit, cheese and locally produced fat-laden goose liver; and they drink plenty of red wine.
French health statistics show that deaths from heart disease in French cities are about half of those in some cities in America.
Perhaps lack of guilt, rather than lots of wine and foie gras, accounts for most of the difference.
The movie mogul on the line
NEW YORK
A $1.5 billion deal between Time Warner and US West indicates that many cable-TV and telephone firms prefer to collaborate, rather than compete, in building America's ‘information superhighway’ Will the government let them?
SINCE the presidential campaign, when Al Gore banged on about about a glittering new ‘information superhighway’, few topics have generated as much fevered chatter.
No asphalt and concrete monster this: instead, a national network using digital and fibre-optic technology to turn the humble television into an interactive medium for everything from video conferencing to home-shopping to movies-on-demand, computer games and databases.
A growing number of people believe this may be more than a fantasy.
But even for believers, two questions loom.
Who will build this expensive new superhighway?
And what role will government play?
On May 17th a partial but telling answer to the first of these questions emerged when US West, one of America's huge regional Bell telephone companies, said it would pay $1.5 billion for a 25% stake in Time Warner Entertainment (TWE), the cable-TV and film subsidiary of the world's biggest media conglomerate, whose stars include Mel Gibson (pictured above).
Of the total, $1 billion will be used to upgrade Time Warner's cable-TV systems — with some 7m subscribers, America's second-biggest — so they can carry the full range of whizzy ‘multimedia’ services.
The rest will pay down part of Time Warner's $16 billion mountain of debt.
The deal was no shock.
Time Warner has been looking for a high-technology partner since 1991, when it sold smaller stakes in TWE to two Japanese firms, Toshiba and ITOCHU (then known as C. Itoh).
Last year talks with IBM fell apart as the computer behemoth's own fortunes collapsed.
Time Warner's boss, Gerald Levin, began talking to telecoms firms.
The US West investment was rumoured for months.
Nevertheless, the deal is the most dramatic sign yet that the battle over the data highway that some predicted between cable-TV companies and telephone firms may not materialise.
There is plenty of other evidence to support this view.
Bell Atlantic, another of the Baby Bells, is working with two cable-television companies to send voice and video across its fibre-optic lines in New Jersey; in February Southwestern Bell bought two cable systems in suburban Washington, DC, for $150m.
US West itself is a partner in Britain with Tele-Communications Inc (TCI), America's biggest cable company — and Time Warner's arch-rival.
Until the Time Warner-US West deal, such collaboration has been small scale.
But Fred Vierra, a top manager at TCI, thinks the deal will now ‘create a sense of urgency among the players — a sense that we all need to decide who's going to be on which teams.’
Indeed, the day after it was announced, Mr Vierra, visiting London, says he received a fax from another Baby Bell — Nynex would be a good guess — urgently seeking a meeting to discuss collaboration.
Switching it on
What is the logic behind this cross-industry cosiness?
Start with the cable companies.
When their businesses were booming, they could afford to pose as tough-talking entrepreneurs keen to take on the telephone companies.
But as they began to see the possibilities of the data highway, they also realised that they did not have the technical expertise to build the sorts of switched networks necessary to bring it off.
Nor do they have the money.
Loaded with debt and poor credit ratings, the future of their juicy cash flows is in doubt.
With 63% of American households linked to cable, saturation is near.
Worse, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has served notice that it is going to treat cable firms, under the terms of the 1992 Cable Act, more or less as it treats telephone companies — that is, with vigilance.
Price cuts of 10% on basic cable services are already being imposed.
Cable bosses once sought to keep the Baby Bells out of their industry fearing the telephone firms would use local-exchange profits to cross-subsidise cable subsidiaries unfairly.
Now they are keen to get in on any cross-subsidisation themselves.
Time Warner's needs are as urgent as those of any cable-TV company.
Under Mr Levin its high-tech ambitions are bigger than most, and so are its debts.
The money from US West will help its balance sheet, which Mr Levin has been trying to clean up.
After the death last year of Steve Ross, the controversial mogul who merged Time and Warner in 1989, Mr Levin laboured day and night to seal the deal.
In doing so he may silence those who have suspected that he will never be a dealmaker of Ross's calibre.
More importantly, with the help of the Denver-based US West, Time Warner's cable systems should be upgraded in five years rather than ten, as originally forecast.
That matters to Mr Levin.
His vision for Time Warner is not Ross's; high technology, not synergy or globalisation, is the company's new raison d'etre.
To pursue that vision Mr Levin is giving up a lot: after Toshiba, ITOCHU and US West, Time Warner is left with just 63% of TWE, which produces more than two-thirds of the group's cash flow.
And Mr Levin, who has fashioned a complex web of small joint ventures with companies such as Silicon Graphics, a computer manufacturer, has also been careful not to rule out deals with bigger partners.
Other telecoms firms might well be interested in getting their hands on Time Warner's sackful of valuable entertainment copyrights.
Once scornful of cable companies, telephone firms have learnt that they can be useful.
For one thing, cable companies are ahead on certain technologies, such as digital compression.
For another, telephone firms see a growth opportunity in ‘dial-a-video’ cable services.
The value of linking with the cable companies has other, more traditional, advantages.
Each Baby Bell can see its local-exchange monopoly coming under increasing pressure from cellular companies, private-line operators and nimble intermediaries offering customers alternative ways to reach long-distance operators.
The growth of cable networks is even more of a threat.
The 1982 Cable Act bars the Baby Bells from taking a stake in cable networks in their monopoly areas.
They can, however, invest in others that operate in other Bell franchises.
By developing telephone services via the data highway they might be able to expand into each other 's markets.
Thus US West is set on attacking such firms as BellSouth,(in Florida) and Nynex (in New York) where Time Warner has lots of cable customers.
No wonder that Nynex might be keen to make a deal with TCI, whose headquarters are, like US West's, in Denver.
The prospect of such telecoms competition raises the spectre of intervention by government or the courts.
Mr Levin says that the Time Warner-US West deal needs only to win ‘some fairly minor approvals’ from regulators.
Really?
The nuts and bolts of the deal have been put together cleverly to comply with the 1982 Cable Act and with the specific terms of the 1984 consent decree from Judge Harold Greene that set up the Baby Bells.
But the point of the TWE deal is that US West and its other owners could share stakes in a multimedia venture and build up competitive telephone services across America.
However desirable, that might fly in the face of everything the 1984 decree was about.
Grounds for Judge Greene to intervene are not hard to imagine.
Permission will apparently be sought for TWE to use satellite links, which are closed to Baby Bells by the 1984 decree.
The scope of TWE's business is so wide that US West will probably have to seek the judge's waiver for one interstate operation or another.
And there is the little matter of US West's $1.5 billion investment.
The 1984 decree prohibited the Baby Bells from R&D work, except insofar as it goes into their existing networks.
How might the judge respond?
Another Baby Bell, Pacific Telesis, sought his approval to go ahead with a cable deal in Chicago.
But that was three years ago and the judge is still pondering it (Pacific Telesis has since dropped the idea).
Telecoms lawyers in Washington are sceptical that the judge will take a kinder view of US West's ambitions.
Nor is the regulatory background elsewhere encouraging.
The case for urgent reforms has got nowhere in Congress.
The FCC, still being restaffed with Clinton loyalists, does not appear to have reforming instincts.
Yet the logic of Time Warner's deal with US West remains so compelling that others will want to push hard for similar cross-industry alliances.
For such deals to fall over government obstacles would be a tragedy.
As TCI's Mr Vierra says: ‘We'll build the data highway.
The job of the government is to clear the decks.’
British Airways
Slow descent
IN A YEAR when the world's airlines collectively lost $1.8 billion on their international services alone, British Airways (BA) is still doing rather nicely.
The carrier that likes to call itself ‘the world's favourite airline’ announced on May 18th a 35% fall in pre-tax profits to £185m ($113m) in the year to the end of March.
That was good enough for BA to launch a rights issue to raise £442m to pay for its grand ambition: to become the first and biggest global airline.
Much of its strategy is now coming together with the purchase of stakes in USAir, Australia's Qantas and TAT, a small French airline.
Buying into other airlines has cost BA more than $100m.
Not everything is going according to the flight plan.
Although air travel started to grow again last year, it was mostly among passengers using discounted tickets and sitting in the economy section.
With companies continuing to cut back on corporate travel, the first-class and business-class passengers who have traditionally provided airlines with their profits are not returning in anything like their earlier numbers.
On top of that, BA's attempts to cut costs have hit some turbulence.
The airline is trying to establish a low-cost European operation at London's Gatwick airport, where it bought the remains of bankrupt Dan-Air last year for a nominal £1.
BA wants to put Gatwick-based pilots, cabin crew and ground staff on lower rates of pay than those at the airline's main base at Heathrow.
Suspicious of the ‘two-tier’ contracts used by some American carriers to drive down pay for all, strikes are threatened over the holiday weekend of May 28th.
If the Gatwick dispute is not resolved, it could spread to BA's main Heathrow services with devastating results.
BA's strength has long been its profitable routes across the North Atlantic.
But last year American Airlines and United started nibbling away at this business when they replaced bankrupt Pan Am and TWA on many of the services between America and London.
Together with the decline in business travel, this helped to cut BA's operating profit on North Atlantic services by 26.9% to $17m last year.
Now the Clinton administration is trying to negotiate a more liberal air treaty with Britain.
In return for BA being able to increase its 25% stake in USAir, American carriers are demanding more access to British airports — especially BA's fortress at Heathrow.
And if that were not enough, the Virgin affair still haunts BA.
As part of a libel settlement in January, BA was forced to make a humiliating apology to Richard Branson for waging a ‘dirty-tricks’ campaign against his Virgin Atlantic Airways.
Among other things, BA staff tried to poach passengers from their tiny rival by hacking into Virgin's computer.
After failing to agree damages that BA would pay to Virgin, Mr Branson has launched new legal action.
The dispute has hit morale among BA staff and raised questions about its management.
Despite an internal inquiry finding the affair was ‘confined to a number of unconnected incidents involving a small number of employees’, allegations continue.
When BA's formidable chairman, Lord King, brought forward his retirement earlier this year his place was taken by the chief executive, Sir Colin Marshall.
Sir Colin says BA will rigorously defend itself in court.
Now another internal inquiry has had to be launched, this time to find out how news of BA's rights issue was leaked.
More gaffes like that, and BA's management might not survive intact.
That would be a major blow for the airline.
Sir Colin, especially, was responsible for realising that airlines are a service business in which competitors use similar equipment and fly to and from the same places with costs that can be much the same.
The way to differentiate the product is therefore through the quality of service provided by staff.
Sir Colin managed to transform BA's bolshy workforce, despite the big cutbacks needed to turn what was a lame, state-owned airline into Europe's only fully privatised carrier.
Now Sir Colin has to spread the same degree of charm throughout BA's expanding empire.
So far, BA is leading the handful of so-called ‘megacarriers’ that are expected to dominate air travel in future.
But that could change.
A study by William Hamilton, a graduate at Britain's Kingston Business School, compares BA's global network with those of its nearest rivals (American Airlines, United and Delta).
It shows that if one of the American majors strikes up a big overseas alliance, the tables could quickly be turned.
That might happen soon.
Delta already has links with Singapore Airlines and Swissair, and American Airlines has been quietly talking with Germany's Lufthansa about a possible partnership.
Fools' mercury
MOSCOW
OLEG SALDYKOV claims to have succeeded where generations of alchemists had failed.
He says his company, Promecologia, based in Yekaterinburg, has developed a technique to synthesise 100kg of red mercury a day.
This substance can allegedly be used to make a variety of things: fuses for conventional and nuclear bombs; anti-radar coatings; missile-guidance systems; and bank notes which are impossible to forge.
A kilo of this miraculous stuff costs up to $150,000.
Mr Saldykov insists that he has a contract to sell 84 tonnes of red mercury over the next three years to an American company called API International.
He claims that the deal is worth a cool $14.2 billion.
But two things have gone wrong with the deal.
Alexander Rutskoi, Russia's vice-president, found out about it.
On April 16th, he made a speech in parliament accusing associates of Boris Yeltsin of illicit dealings in this ‘extremely valuable raw material.’
(Yekaterinburg is Mr Yeltsin's home town.)
The second problem is more fundamental.
In January, Evgenny Primakov, Russia's chief spy, denied that red mercury existed and claimed that deals involving it ‘are used by mafia structures as a means of laundering dirty money, including income from the drugs business.’
America's State Department agrees with him.
A cable sent earlier this year to American embassies around the world gave a warning: ‘Since the late 1970s, there have been at least 25 attempts to sell various quantities of an alleged nuclear material described as ‘red mercury’…
After careful consideration of the claimed physical properties of the alleged material, it became apparent that ‘red mercury’(as a nuclear substance) does not exist.’
Those who want to believe in the existence of red mercury are unabashed.
Pravda, the leading anti-Yeltsin newspaper in Moscow, has printed excerpts of what it claims is a memo from Mr Primakov, dated March 21st 1992, in which the spook outlined the properties of red mercury, or mercuric salt of antimonous acid as it is also known, in detail.
The previous month, Mr Yeltsin signed a secret decree giving Promecologia the right to export red mercury, an order which was rescinded on March 20th 1993.
Pravda claims that red mercury was first synthesised in 1968 and has been smuggled out of Russia for many years.
It seems that some unwise governments, desperate to build their own atom bombs, have been willing to trust the dealers.
Inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency have found documents mentioning red mercury during their searches in Baghdad.
That raises the alarming prospect that red mercury may actually be a codename for real substances that are needed to make nuclear bombs.
A more devious theory is that the whole red-mercury affair is simply a fantasy dreamt up to make Mr Rutskoi look foolish.
That would certainly suit Mr Yeltsin, who is anxious to be rid of his vice-president.
Olivetti and bribes
Carlo goes to confession
ROME
ITALY'S continuing corruption probe took a fresh turn with the confession by Carlo De Benedetti, Olivetti's chairman, that he, too, was forced to grease a few palms along the way.
Mr De Benedetti presented himself voluntarily to Milan magistrates on May 16th after rumours began to appear in the Italian press that his company had paid bribes to win contracts, notably with Italy's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications.
But this was more than a confession.
Mr De Benedetti's testimony amounted to a scathing attack on Italy's political establishment and what he describes as the ‘climate of extortion’ imposed by politicians in order to wring bribes out of businesses trying to supply the public sector.
Strong stuff, but for Mr De Benedetti this was a startling change of tack.
Until his confession he had steadfastly denied that any of his companies had paid bribes.
Now his name has been added to the list of more than 700 businessmen and politicians who are under investigation in Milan.
His testimony follows that of Cesare Romiti, managing director of Fiat, who had previously announced that his company will be collaborating with investigators.
Mr De Benedetti's lawyers say that no charges have been brought against him.
Yet on May 18th, two more Olivetti executives were put under investigation and questioned in Milan.
Mr De Benedetti's line in self-defence is also rather familiar.
Like Fiat executives, he argues that Olivetti paid bribes in exchange for contracts only out of dire necessity.
The Ministry of Posts, he says, was a typical case.
Having seen its share of contracts with the ministry dwindle to ‘practically zero’ in 1987, Mr De Benedetti says Olivetti capitulated and paid up in 1988.
The company was rewarded for the payment of 1.2 billion lire ($121,000) in bribes in 1988 with contracts worth 204 billion lire.
Altogether, says Mr De Benedetti, between 1988 and 1991 Olivetti paid just over 10 billion lire to Italy's political parties in exchange for ministry contracts worth about 500 billion lire.
On the whole, adds Mr De Benedetti, Olivetti has suffered rather than benefited from politically institutionalised bribery.
The firm's market share in Italy's public sector has been eroded over the past three years and he says Olivetti, unlike its principal European competitors (Siemens-Nixdorf of Germany and Bull of France), has enjoyed no particular privileges in its home market.
So, why not blow the whistle on a thoroughly corrupt system sooner?
The time, says Mr De Benedetti, was not right.
Public-sector contracts anyway only account for a small proportion of Olivetti's sales, says Mr De Benedetti.
Certainly it is in the private sector, where the only bribe that counts is low prices, where fierce competition and price wars have been wreaking havoc among Europe's surviving computer makers.
This is also where Olivetti's survival really depends — and that of Mr De Benedetti's other businesses.
Last month Olivetti reported a loss of 649.9 billion lire in 1992.
Denied a dividend, shareholders had to cough up to meet a daunting 903 billion lire rights issue.
The only positive news has been that America's Digital Equipment has raised its stake in Olivetti ahead of schedule, taking it to almost 10%.
This makes Digital the largest shareholder after the 38% stake held by Mr De Benedetti's holding company CIR.
Digital's commitment is one of the strongest cards in Mr De Benedetti's hand when he claims that Olivetti will be among the survivors of the current shake-out in the computer industry.
The brunt of the company's restructuring, which has lead to 18,000 layoffs in two years (a cut of close to 30%), says Mr De Benedetti, is now over and he expects Olivetti to return to profit in 1994.
Shareholders may not be too heartened by such promises.
They have heard it all before.
While Olivetti is by far CIR's largest single interest, there is trouble elsewhere in the De Benedetti empire.
CIR posted losses of 540 billion lire last year, against a profit of 49 billion lire in 1991.
This was not all due to difficulties at Olivetti.
Cerus, the French holding company controlled by CIR — and through which Mr De Benedetti has launched his most ambitious international operations — has had to make big one-off provisions to staunch the crippling credit problems faced by the group's French bank, Banque Duménil-Leblé.
Losses at Cerus amounted to FFr1.54 billion ($191m) last year.
The problems at the bank have plagued Cerus for over two years.
The rest of CIR's subsidiaries — a 37% stake in Valeo, a French car-components company; Sasib, an Italian engineering concern, and Espresso/Repubblica, a publishing group — did well last year.
But the high hopes of the 1980s, when Mr De Benedetti's ambitions spanned Europe, are long gone.
His frustrated Spanish partners in Cofir, the Spanish subsidiary of Cerus, complain that Mr De Benedetti has been too distracted by Olivetti's problems to employ his legendary dealmaking skills on their behalf.
Despite holding plenty of cash, Cofir has made no significant acquisitions recently.
Now that Mr De Benedetti has been engulfed by Italy's bribery scandals, things are likely to stay that way.
Taxing questions
What is the best way to tax multinational companies?
THE 100 biggest multinational firms own about 16% of the world's productive assets; the top 300 probably account for 25%.
So how these firms are taxed matters a lot.
The best tax regime is one in which firms behave exactly as they would if there were no tax.
If tax rates are too high, firms' overall activity may fall.
If rates vary between countries, firms may carry out more or less of their business in one particular country than they would if all countries had the same rate.
Tax would then have caused the world's productive assets to be used inefficiently.
Policy-makers are looking closer than ever at how to tax multinationals more consistently.
Last year, a report for the European Commission argued that all EC countries should set corporate taxes within a Community-wide minimum and maximum.
Tax rates currently vary widely from one country to the next (see chart).
In last year's election campaign, Bill Clinton promised to squeeze an extra $10 billion a year from multinational companies with American subsidiaries, which he reckoned were under-taxed.
On May 17th, America's Supreme Court sought Mr Clinton's views on a long-running case challenging California's right to use a completely different method of taxing multinationals to that used by the rest of the developed world.
With luck, the Supreme Court will hear the case, and force California to back down (see page 20).
When different tax authorities use conflicting tax systems, ‘double taxation’— the same profit being taxed twice — is more likely.
Even so, California's method, called ‘unitary taxation’, is not a bad one.
In fact, many tax specialists reckon the rest of the world should adopt the same method.
Unfortunately that is not going to happen any time soon.
Meanwhile, having a consistent worldwide system is more important than having the best possible one in any single state.
Most countries tax multinationals on an ‘arm's length’ basis, calculating the profits that the firm earned within their borders as if it had done so through a stand-alone business, operating at arm's length from the parent firm.
‘as if ’ is the crucial phrase.
A multinational's operations in a country are rarely stand-alone; product parts, management skills, software and research ideas are often imported from the parent.
To calculate its fictional arm's length profits, a firm is supposed to assume it pays the same price (the ‘transfer price’) for those imported bits that it would have done were it buying them from an unrelated company.
In practice, it will probably try to get away with transfer prices that let it shift profits into low-tax countries.
If a subsidiary faces high taxes, for instance, the parent will set transfer prices as high as it can, lowering the subsidiary's taxable profits and boosting its own, which are subject to a lower tax rate.
Tax authorities have to try to stop such fiddling.
That was hard enough when most transfer prices were for tangible goods, points out Gary Hufbauer, of the Institute for International Economics, in a recent book*.
Now, as trade in intangible services becomes more important, monitoring transfer prices within multinationals has become mind-bogglingly complex.
Such services are often available only to businesses within the multinational, making a comparison with outside equivalents fraught.
Payments of royalties and licence fees between related bits of American multinationals amounted to more than $13 billion in 1990; payments to unrelated firms totalled only $1 billion.
The growing co-operation between tax authorities in recent years, made easier by a web of international treaties, hardly suggests the arm's length system is breaking down.
That does not mean it is efficient.
As trade in services soars, taxmen will find it harder to keep up with clever finance directors.
The entire arm's length approach is flawed, reckons Mike Devereux of the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) in Britain.
With multinational firms it is hard to say where profits are actually earned.
If a product is invented in, say, Spain, produced in Taiwan and marketed in America, where do any profits arise?
Worse, a system that forces on multinational firms similar prices to those faced by unrelated firms misses the point of multinationals: to cut costs by locating their activities more efficiently around the world.
A unitary tax, such as California's, suffers from none of these conceptual weaknesses.
The tax base is simply a slice of the worldwide profits of the multinational determined by the proportion of the firm's worldwide workforce, property and sales sited within the taxing country.
The rules for calculating the tax-base are clear, simple and not easily manipulated.
Many American states apply unitary taxes to profits earned by firms inside America — a system known as ‘water's edge unitary tax’.
This seems to work well.
But the similar tax-accounting rules of most American states is what makes this possible; there is no need to argue about how much profit a firm actually earned.
Outside America, tax-accounting standards vary a lot.
So a worldwide unitary tax would be very costly.
Instead of calculating profits in each country according to local accounting rules, as multinationals now do under arm's length taxation, they would have to recalculate their entire worldwide profits according to each set of local rules.
If countries did harmonise their accounting rules, so that tax authorities agreed on how much profit a multinational had earned, switching to worldwide unitary taxation would solve most international tax problems, reckons the IFS's Mr Devereux.
Though some progress has been made towards common accounts, differences are unlikely to be ironed out worldwide for decades.
More likely, definitions will be harmonised, and unitary taxes introduced, within blocks of countries such as the EC or NAFTA, suggests Mr Devereux.
Maybe.
But even that is a long way off.
By then governments may have woken up to a yet more radical option.
All firms are ultimately owned by people.
Those people receive the whole of the firms' profits either through dividends, rising share prices, fatter pensions or better returns from investment funds.
So the simplest, and most efficient, way of taxing company profits may be to get rid of corporate taxes altogether and simply tax the money when it gets to the owners.
Eastern Germany's capitalist wage deal
FRANKFURT
BEFORE Germany's press caught him in a questionable stockmarket deal, Franz Steinkühler looked like a working-class hero.
IG Metall, the union he heads, had staged a two-week strike in eastern Germany to defend pay rises that employers had promised but withdrawn.
The settlement looked like a workers' victory.
Employers — and Germany's economy — looked like losers.
Germans have already changed their minds about Mr Steinkühler.
He is under pressure to quit because of speculating in the shares of a company associated with Daimler-Benz while sitting on its supervisory board.
They may soon reassess the outcome of eastern Germany's strike and decide the damage to business and the economy is less grave.
Employers agreed to pay on December 1st nearly the full wage hike they promised to give on April 1st.
They will lift eastern wages to western levels by mid-1996, two years later than the earlier contract.
Though employers can delay another six months if the economy is sour, they failed to link wage parity to productivity and growth.
Engineering workers in four of five eastern German states have accepted the settlement; those in Berlin-Brandenburg and steel workers throughout eastern Germany are expected to follow shortly.
Were that the end of the story, the eastern wage deal might indeed strangle Germany's economy gradually.
The gap between eastern consumption and output is the biggest contributor to Germany's mounting public-sector deficits.
Unless wages rise more slowly or output picks up faster than seems likely, Germany faces higher inflation and a growing deficit in foreign trade.
By 1998, said Goldman Sachs, an American investment bank, Germany could be a net debtor to the rest of the world.
Yet the eastern wage deal has an escape clause: companies may pay their workers less if they exercise a ‘hardship clause’ and prevail upon IG Metall to co-operate.
The grounds for seeking an exemption are broad: to preserve jobs or help a restructuring.
With luck, that will happen often.
The danger is that few firms will exploit the flexibility.
The metal employers' federation says half its members may resort to the escape clause.
But that hopeful estimate assumes that firms owned by the Treuhandanstalt, the privatisation agency for east German industry, will find the courage to ask for lower pay hikes rather than pass the bills on to German taxpayers.
If firms exploit the escape clause, IG Metall may have little choice but to go along.
Opt-outs are supposed to end in 1996, when eastern Germany joins the western system of labour contracts.
But they may not.
Some west German firms plan to spend the next three years lobbying to incorporate eastern-style flexibility into western wage deals.
If they succeed in that, Germany's economy and its workers will be better off.
If Mr Steinkühler retires early, that prospect should soften the blow.
FINANCE
Japanese corporate governance
Dawning
TOKYO
VICTORIOUS in America, the California Public Employees' Retirement System (Calpers) is taking its campaign for better corporate governance abroad.
Last September Calpers, America's biggest pension fund, chose two foreign targets: Britain and Japan.
These countries have won the biggest overseas slices of Calpers's $14 billion fund.
But there the similarity ends.
Britain has already moved towards putting independent directors on company boards, charging them with appointing auditors and overseeing bosses' pay.
In Japan, talk of corporate governance has been about as common as sararimen in bowler hats.
This is slowly changing.
On May 10th Bill Crist, the president of the Calpers board, was invited to address a Tokyo conference laid on by the Keidanren, a big-business association.
There he shared a platform with distinguished Japanese financiers, who agreed that shareholders ought to have more power over company managers.
Corporate profits have fallen for the past three years.
Suitcases of shareholders' cash have been found in the grip of bribed politicians.
Japan's justice ministry wants to give investors' resentment a readier outlet.
It is ushering a bill through the Diet (parliament) that would give shareholders with 3% or more of a company the right to inspect its management accounts; at the moment they need 10%.
The draft also aims to revive the system of ‘statutory auditors’.
Appointed, in theory, by shareholders, they have a legal duty to report managers' wrongdoings.
In practice, however, shareholders have rubber-stamped the choices of the company's top brass, who usually elevate loyal company bureaucrats who have failed to make it to the managing board.
The bill would require that at least one statutory auditor have no previous links with the company.
Next, the draft would make it cheaper for disgruntled shareholders to sue directors for mismanagement.
At present, the awards in successful cases are paid to the company — which makes, unsurprisingly, for few suits.
The revision would allow successful plaintiffs to keep enough of the award to pay their lawyers.
This may encourage a few feisty individual shareholders to sue.
Even under the existing rules, several cases have been brought against the directors of securities firms caught compensating clients for stockmarket losses.
Some foreign shareholders may come forward too.
Calpers, with more than $1 billion in Japanese equities, has been filing proxy statements in Japan since 1991.
The trouble is that most shares are not owned by investors like Calpers.
Many are held by firms as reserves against liabilities, or to cement business relationships.
These investors cannot be bothered to attend annual general meetings: many companies conclude theirs in well under an hour.
To talk up the prospects of change, some note that Japanese life insurers have been demanding bigger dividends lately.
This would please Calpers, whose proxy voting has been partly aimed at raising Japan's niggardly pay-outs.
The snag is that life insurers, too, are relationship investors.
By holding stock in a company, they expect to win the business of insuring its employees.
They are likely to run from the sort of fight that makes good corporate governance stick.
The rouble
Twilight zone
MOSCOW
ON MAY 14th Boris Yeltsin told the heads of government of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) that Russia was ‘ready to create a currency union as an indivisible part of an economic union’ within the Commonwealth.
On the same day the government of Kirgizstan, a member of the CIS, was polishing plans to replace the rouble with the som, which became the country's official currency on May 17th.
The Kirgiz government has a more realistic vision of the future than the president of Russia.
The rouble zone is in its death throes.
Estonia (not one of the ten members of the CIS) was the first of the former Soviet republics to issue its own currency, in June of last year.
Latvia, Lithuania and now Kirgizstan have done the same.
Ukraine and Belorussia have issued non-convertible, temporary currencies, which are supposed to be replaced soon by permanent ones.
In Georgia, temporary coupons circulate.
Turkmenistan and Azerbaijan have printed new currencies (both called the manat), but are dithering over when to introduce them.
That leaves Kazakhstan as the only large, non-Russian republic still firmly in the rouble zone.
As the manager of any Kazakh company knows, however, the zone exists only in name.
Even if a firm has roubles in a Kazakh bank, it cannot necessarily use them to pay a Russian supplier.
All payments between Kazakhstan and Russia have to pass through the two countries' central banks.
Only Russia's has the power to print roubles.
Until May, however, the other CIS central banks were able to create ‘account’ roubles — ie, to credit roubles to domestic bank accounts.
This power has now been suspended while a new trade-finance system is negotiated in which non-Russian central banks will not be allowed to create liquidity.
Two further developments are likely to put the rouble zone out of its misery before long.
Other republics which, like Kirgizstan, want to push ahead with economic reform, will leave the rouble system to insulate themselves from Russian inflation.
The rouble has collapsed as Russia's prices have soared: it now takes 934 roubles to buy a dollar, up from 128 a year ago.
Contributing to the rouble's decline is the Russian central bank's predilection for printing money, a big pile of which has been used to finance other CIS republics' trade deficits with Russia.
Russia gave away an amount equivalent to about one-tenth of its GNP in this way last year.
These hand-outs are one reason why the sluggish reformers in the CIS have not yet issued their own currencies.
More are likely to do so soon, however, for Russia can no longer afford to subsidise its neighbours.
Its government has imposed a ceiling of 200 billion roubles on central-bank lending to the other republics during the second quarter of this year.
Officials are now negotiating a $1 billion facility with the IMF, which insists on tougher credit overall.
Cutting Russia's remaining lending to CIS republics is politically easier than bankrupting Russian factories.
With the final demise of the rouble zone all but inevitable, the only question now is the manner of its death.
Jeffrey Sachs, a Harvard professor who advises the Russian government, argues that trade within the former Soviet Union would be made easier if each of the 15 republics had its own freely exchangeable currency, which could then be pegged to the rouble if any issuer were mad enough to do this.
Estonia's experience shows that the difficulties of introducing a new currency have been  exaggerated , he says.
Estonia exchanged all the roubles in circulation for its new kroon in three days, at a rate of ten roubles per kroon.
Since then, fully backed by the country's gold reserves, the kroon has held steady against the dollar, and appreciated to 69 Russian roubles.
Mr Yeltsin's statement on May 14th shows that Russia is not yet ready to replace the rouble zone with a more efficient system of individual currencies.
If the zone is to endure a lingering death, the rouble may be succeeded by a mishmash of non-convertible currencies and coupons.
That would make trade among the republics even harder.
There are already worrying signs that this is happening.
On the day that the som was introduced, conservative Uzbekistan closed its land border with Kirgizstan, cut telephone links and and stopped transfers from Uzbek to Kirgiz banks.
British banks
Thick on the ground
Britain's banks are struggling to cut ‘excess’ capacity.
But measuring banking capacity is so difficult that nobody really knows whether an excess exists
A YEAR ago, proselytising on behalf of the most controversial bid of the year, Lloyds Bank argued that its takeover of Midland Bank could only benefit British banking.
The landscape was dotted with unnecessary branches and bank clerks, it argued: the fastest way to reduce excess capacity was to buy out a big chunk of it.
Lloyds lost.
But was it right to argue that British banking suffers from overcapacity?
Other banks seem to think so.
They are voluntarily shrinking themselves, cutting workforces and branch networks.
Yet defining capacity in banking is no simple matter.
Measuring how many widgets a factory can produce is easy.
Finding the maximum number of customers a bank can serve is mind-numbingly complicated.
The clearest indication of the balance between demand and capacity is whether banks are earning an after-tax return on equity capital (ROE) that satisfies shareholders — perhaps 15–20%.
The recent performance of British banks has been lousy.
According to analysts at Lehman Brothers, the nine main clearing banks combined have averaged annual ROEs of less than 7% since 1988.
It may be misleading to judge capacity by how banks perform in a recession.
Britain's had to provide more than £27 billion ($17 billion) against bad loans over that period.
In less demanding times, it is often argued, they should be capable of making healthy returns.
But there is a bigger problem than timing in using aggregate ROE as a guide to capacity.
Banks are several businesses rolled into one.
Some activities are profitable (which suggests a shortage of capacity or competition), others are loss-making.
Few banks can accurately allocate costs and measure the profitability of each line of business.
Broad measures of physical capacity are equally limited.
The table shows that Britain's banking system is not unduly burdened with branches compared with others (though all may be labouring under the legacy of the expansionary 1980s).
But national figures are misleading, bankers say.
Just as America has diverse regional economies, so Britain is best seen as a series of distinct local markets.
Midland Bank divides Britain into five big regions, while Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) slices it into 45 markets.
There seem to be too many outlets in Wales, for example, but too few in the north of England.
This insight tells observers little about macrocapacity but suggests that banks should pursue micro-surgery.
Yet banks are rightly reluctant to cut branches in the areas where they are most densely grouped.
Clustered together, branches of the same bank help each other to generate and retain more business than they would do independently.
RBS has taken a hard look at its branches in England, and decided to shut isolated outposts or develop new outlets to support them.
Partly because of the ‘network effect’, banking seems peculiarly prone to competitive inertia.
Bank customers are notoriously slow to shift their business, even if they are miffed.
Bankers do not make it easier for them to do so by, for example, facilitating the transfer of standing payment orders.
So banks hang on to business that they should by rights lose, but find it hard to win new good-quality business.
In any event, however, the number of branches says less and less about capacity in banking.
Branches are becoming less uniform as banks tailor outlets to meet specific needs.
Then, too, more services are being provided outside branches.
Frank Kirwan, director of strategy at RBS, says that his bank is deliberately locating its automated teller machines (ATMs) away from its branches.
That way, if the bank closes a branch it need not lose its ATM customers.
As banks explore new ways of pleasing customers (eg, by offering telephone-banking services), it becomes ever harder to paint broad-brush pictures of physical capacity.
There is one area, however, where excess capacity looks undeniable: in the technological plant dedicated to processing and clearing payments.
Some banks have begun touting for the business of processing for rivals.
Yorkshire Bank, a regional bank owned by National Australia Bank, put its clearing out to tender and received lots of bids; RBS retained the business.
Other banks report discreet offers to handle their entire processing needs.
If America is any example, such ‘outsourcing’ will take off, as banks admit their own weaknesses and take advantage of rivals' over-investment.
A final favourite measure of capacity in banking — and perhaps the least useful — is the number of players.
The average British town is served by three or four clearing banks, up to a dozen building societies (thrifts) and even the odd foreign bank, all bidding for retail savings.
That is more than one might find in Holland, for example, but is it actually too many?
In theory, if customers are willing to give each bank enough business to survive, supply is balancing demand.
In practice, however, failures are often forestalled by governments that fear systemic contagion from the collapse of credit institutions; and the authorities only allow mergers between big firms where they are convinced that competition will not suffer.
What to bankers looks like overcapacity, consumers may call healthy rivalry.
French banks
Into private hands
PARIS
PIERRE MAUROY, a former Socialist prime minister, used to complain that his government had nationalised France's banks, but not its bankers.
His successors may find the reverse is also true.
The new, centre-right administration led by Edouard Balladur plans a new round of privatisations, perhaps as soon as September; details are expected on May 26th.
Banque Nationale de Paris (BNP), may well be set free before long.
Changing the behaviour of Paris's bankers will take longer.
BNP is the obvious big bank to sell first.
It is in far better shape than its main state-owned rival, Crédit Lyonnais, which has lent recklessly to film moguls and on property.
BNP's net profits fell by 26% to FFr2.2 billion ($116m) last year; Crédit Lyonnais lost FFr1.9 billion.
No wonder, then, that BNP's certificats d'investissement, or non-voting stock, have roared ahead on rumours of privatisation, leaving Crédit Lyonnais's in their dust.
The appointment on May 19th of Michel Pébereau to replace René Thomas as BNP's chief executive seems to confirm suspicions that sale of the bank is imminent.
As head of Crédit Commercial de France (CCF), Mr Pébereau masterminded its privatisation in 1987.
A far-sighted strategist and tough manager who built CCF into a top-notch, medium-sized retail- and merchant-banking outfit, Mr Pébereau doubled its capital and trebled its profits.
He turned down Mr Thomas's job a year or so ago, citing unfinished business at CCF.
Others say that he was unwilling to move while BNP remained in state hands.
Once privatised, BNP is likely to emulate Société Générale, which has shed staff, costs and unprofitable accounts since Mr Balladur, then finance minister, returned it to the private sector in 1987.
BNP's unions have howled at Mr Pébereau's appointment, fearing that he will not hesitate to wield the axe.
Yet that is exactly the treatment most big French banks need.
In 1991 their cost-income ratio was around 72%, compared with 65% in Germany and 62% in Britain.
As well as tightening at home, Mr Pébereau will need to clarify BNP's strategy abroad.
Plans to swap 10% or so of its shares with Germany's Dresdner Bank, touted as the most ambitious cross-border linkage of its kind, have been awaiting approval from the European Community for four years.
The banks have opened joint subsidiaries outside France and Germany, but need the EC's blessing before completing the swap.
Once BNP and Dresdner have tied the knot, they will no doubt reconsider their relationship with Kleinwort Benson, a British merchant bank in which BNP has a 4.5% stake but, apparently, little interest.
Mr Pébereau may want to push harder for some sort of three-way alliance.
He knows the London market well.
In February, while still at CCF, he engineered his bank's acquisition, jointly with Germany's Berliner Handels- und Frankfurter Bank, of Charterhouse, a British merchant bank owned by the Royal Bank of Scotland.
BNP's sell-off will be followed by others, and this should, eventually, produce a sea-change in French finance.
For years bankers in Paris have taken instructions from the government on everything from bailing out troubled companies to keeping base lending rates low.
State-owned banks have kow-towed the most.
In November 1991 BNP bought 8.8% of Air France, the country's ailing national airline, even though the bank's managers were known to oppose the deal.
Banks' base rates are lower now than they were in September 1992, though their cost of funds is unchanged.
Such behaviour will become rarer once private-sector shareholders demand more of their banks.
Attitudes will not change overnight, however, partly because privatisation is likely to be slow.
With the French stockmarket in the doldrums, Edmond Alphandéry, the economy minister, has estimated that sales of state assets could at best raise a total of FFr30 billion this year.
BNP, which is probably worth FFr40 billion-45 billion, is likely to be auctioned off in several tranches.
Mr Pébereau may have moved too soon.
Staring at a bottom
NEW YORK
A BOOMING art market went ignominiously bust two years ago.
Few expected this year's spring sales at Sotheby's and Christie's to do much to revive spirits, or prices.
So they were pleasantly surprised that sales of Impressionist and ‘modern’ art were near the top end of the houses' estimates, even if‘contemporary’art foundered.
But the one market on which the auctioneers had come to depend nearly collapsed: Latin American art bought by rich Latins.
Until 1990 not one such work had sold at auction for more than $1m.
A dozen have since done so.
This mini-boom is already over.
Ill omens were there for the taking.
For its catalogue cover, Christie's chose a painting by a Colombian, Fernando Botero, called ‘The Dancers’, much of which is taken up by a corpulent woman's behind.
But because it (the painting, that is) was too big, the work was judged a fake.
As it is, Mr Botero has been whining that too many of his real works are flooding the market.
He himself played a part by convincing Paris to line the Champs Elysées with his sculptures.
Jealous cultural ministers from other lands wonder what nefarious persuasions he used.
So maybe the lack of interest in Latin American art this week should not have come as a shock.
At Christie's, 122 works out of 317 found no buyers.
Only two went for more than $1m: a giant mural, entitled ‘America’, by the late Oaxacan, Rufino Tamayo, and his painting, ‘Mujer con Mascara Roja’.
Sotheby's fared worse, with 38 out of 78 lots unsold, and none fetching more than $118,000.
Six months ago the auctioneers were showered with bids from rich Mexicans.
Free-spending Mexicans are now rarer than a tamale in Lapland.
It is not just mid-town Manhattan that should take note.
Wall Street is mad for Mexico's booming financial markets.
A warning lurks in this week's art sales.
Insider dealing
Balancing act
IT HAS been called the victimless crime.
Some question whether it is a crime at all(see box on page 102).
Yet most countries now have rules against insider dealing, not least because it can put outside investors off securities markets.
Rules run into two problems, however.
One is how to detect and punish offenders.
The other is how to define their offence without blocking the flow of information from companies to investors.
Britain's experience shows how hard both problems are.
Since 1987 the London Stock Exchange has referred over 100 cases of suspected insider dealing to the Department of Trade and Industry.
Yet these have led to just 30 prosecutions and 13 convictions.
A fund manager recently complained that shares in Tiphook, a transport group, had fallen sharply three days before the company issued a profit warning.
His claim that insider dealing is common, and that too little is done to stamp it out, was echoed by many City investors.
Only days later news of a rights issue by British Airways was leaked to many newspapers.
Yet there has also been dismay that concern over insider dealing may threaten the flow of information.
In March a Scottish investment analyst was convicted of insider dealing for doing what he thought was his job — advising clients to sell after talking to top managers about their company's prospects.
Earlier this month London International Group, a condom and photo-processing company, was censured by the stock exchange for warning selected analysts that its profits would be lower than expected.
And Terry Venables, the chief executive of Tottenham Hotspur, a publicly quoted football club, was criticised for revealing on television that its profits for 1992 would be £5m ($1.8m).
In each case many people queried whether any harm had been done.
Other countries, too, are struggling.
In America insider dealing has been treated as a category of securities fraud since the 1930s; the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) prosecutes 30–40 cases a year.
But there are still grumbles that much insider dealing goes unpunished.
And some say that tight SEC rules on shareholders' freedom to talk to one another, and to their company, hinder good corporate governance.
The SEC has relaxed its rules in response.
In most European countries insider dealing has only just become an offence, thanks to a 1989 European Community directive.
Germany has not yet implemented it.
Pressure to do so has been increased by the recent row over Franz Steinkühler, the leader of Germany's biggest trade union.
Mr Steinkühler, a member of Daimler-Benz's supervisory board, made a killing by buying shares of Mercedes Holding shortly before they were exchanged for shares in Daimler-Benz.
Though he claims to have had no inside knowledge, he may yet be forced out of his job — and the government forced to speed up planned legislation.
Britain, the only other EC country not to have implemented all provisions of the directive, is doing so in the Criminal Justice bill that has just come before the House of Commons.
Rewritten after heavy criticism, the new draft is reckoned by most in the City an improvement on the original.
But there is still concern over the definition of inside information, which the bill requires to be ‘precise and specific’; this could leave out general information that is equally price-sensitive.
The bill also allows the defence that information has already been published, without explaining what that means.
Still more revision of the bill's drafting could ameliorate some of these worries, though a crystal-clear definition of inside information may never be possible.
But the government is doing nothing about enforcement.
It has ignored two suggested reforms to bring Britain into line with America: acting against insider dealers through civil suits that require a lower standard of proof than criminal cases; and centralising investigation and enforcement in a single body, probably the Securities and Investments Board.
A new opportunity for such changes could come in the current review of the board by its chairman, Andrew Large.
As for the release of information, the stock exchange points out that it already requires price-sensitive information to be published through its regulated news service.
It has no desire to stop analysts (or investors) talking to companies; but it wants to stop companies leaking information in order to smooth its impact on share prices.
Analysts' jobs will be harder if firms no longer‘steer’ their profit forecasts.
In all countries, insider dealing will continue as long as profits can be made from it.
So the best cure might lie in shortening the period when that is possible.
Making companies release important information more quickly could do more to curb insider dealing than any laws.
Inside out UNLIKE almost everyone else, many economists reckon insider dealing is rather a good thing.
Allowing insiders — ie, better-informed people — to profit from trading means that share prices reflect information more quickly.
This can make markets more efficient, and lets investors spend less time and money searching for information.
A recent study* of insider-dealing cases in America by Lisa Meulbroek, once at the SEC but now at Harvard University, weighed the pluses and minuses of insider dealing.
Looking at 320 cases prosecuted by the SEC between 1980 and 1989, it found that insider dealing did lead to share prices quickly becoming ‘more accurate’.
On the day the inside information was made public, the price of the share concerned jumped to reflect it.
On the earlier day when the dubious dealing took place, the share price had jumped too, though only half as much relative to the market.
Price rises were similar whether the illegal trade was detected by a stock exchange — which looks out for unusually large price jumps — or by tip-offs from jilted mistresses and the like, who probably do not.
How does the market recognise that someone is trading on inside information?
One clue is high trading volume: around 1% of a firm's equity changed hands on an average inside-dealing day, compared with a more typical 0.2%.
Although the insider dealer himself contributes only around a tenth of that volume, he gives a clear enough signal to arbitrageurs in the market, reckons the study.
But volume alone is not enough.
The market also takes other things into account, such as the size, direction and number of trades.
Despite the sensational headlines about the millions of dollars earned by Ivan Boesky, Dennis Levine et al, these cases were exceptional.
The median insider-dealer made a profit of just $15,000, calculates Miss Meulbroek.
A loser's game
The ‘defensive’ stock-picking strategy that has recently served Wall Street investors well will now fail badly
IT has become clear that the stockmarket rally which has pushed American share prices up by one-half since the autumn of 1990 is over.
The expectation of falling interest rates and bond yields which underpinned it has been rudely removed.
On May 18th the yield on long-dated Treasury bonds rose above 7%.
At the peak of Clinton-inspired euphoria early this spring, yields had dipped to 6.7% and pundits were insisting they would near 6%.
So far, broad stockmarket indices have held steady.
On May 19th the S&P 500 closed at 447.6, just nine points off its record.
Shares are selling at 23 times earnings, their highest since 1926.
Dividend yields are close to a 20-year low.
This is not to say that the stockmarket must crack, even if bond prices go on falling.
Bond-buyers have been spooked by rising inflation, most recently by April's 0.4% rise in core producer prices.
Only a couple of months ago some inside the Federal Reserve thought it might loosen monetary policy this summer one last time.
Now a tightening seems more likely.
Stock investors, on the other hand, take comfort from a sharp fall in the price of raw materials during the second half of April, which should boost manufacturers' profit margins.
They can make a decent case that economic growth will pick up in the second half of the year.
By then, firms' high inventories will have been run down and will need replenishing, the argument goes.
Most comfortable of all is the continuing diversion of retail money from low-yielding bank deposits and money-market funds into the stockmarket.
Suppose that the ‘wall-of-money’ theme plays through December, and that share prices move sideways or fall by no more than, say, 10%.
The volatility of the broad share indices would remain muted.
But that general calm would mask, as it does now, the extraordinary volatility of individual stocks.
Over the past year, many a fund manager has had his confidence shattered as supposedly reliable shares that were the solid core of his portfolio — IBM, Merck, Kellogg, Philip Morris — crashed out of a clear blue sky.
As David Shulman, equity strategist at Salomon Brothers, was the first to point out, the danger for investors these days lies less with the few hot shares whose rise he misses than with the many dubious ones already in his portfolio.
We are in, says Mr Shulman, a ‘loser's game’.
How so?
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, investors thought they could successfully invest in ‘growth’ shares that were at once exciting and defensive — among them, the giant consumer-product and health-care companies whose pricing power was meant to guard their earnings from the cyclical downturns that the stockmarket was bound to suffer.
For several years, the idea paid off handsomely.
No longer.
Many blame the Clinton administration's bent for regulating business: health-care stocks have fallen most brutally.
But it is also becoming apparent that the pricing power of brand-name companies is, in big measure, a myth.
Take Philip Morris, which last year had the biggest capitalisation in the S&P 500.
On April 2nd the company announced it was slashing the price of its Marlboro cigarettes to compete with plain-brand rivals.
That brand names were in trouble was no secret.
Philip Morris itself had been testing the effects of discounting in Oregon.
Yet investors were so shocked that in a day they knocked $13.4 billion off the value of the company.
More surprises will come, because Wall Street has proved slow to pick up on such clues.
Zacks Investment Research in Chicago looked for The Economist at 27 analysts' recommendations on Philip Morris before April 2nd.
It found that 21 were buys and five were holds; just one was a sell.
Brokers' recommendations (and earnings forecasts) are similarly bunched for giants such as Microsoft and Walmart.
A strong consensus among brokers may now signify risk, not safety.
Until last month the horrors of Philip Morris, Merck and others had served other sectors well.
Debacles elsewhere pushed more money into utilities, which are believed to benefit from low interest rates, at least in the short term.
Electricity companies sparkled for the first part of the year.
And money in search of‘safe’ growth stocks flooded into the shares of financial firms in the first quarter, pushing up bank shares by about 15%.
Utilities have now retreated.
And, since mid-April, bank stocks have also given up nearly all their gains amid fears of rising interest rates.
Yet many bank analysts are more bullish than ever.
They argue that banks have put the worst of their bad loans behind them and become more efficient, making record profits.
George Salem of Prudential Securities is one who signals caution, however.
The good news is already reflected in banks' share prices.
The bad news is that banks are continuing to lose business.
Their net new lending is minimal, as companies rush to raise money from bond- and stockmarkets instead, partly to pay off bank loans.
While bank deposits have stagnated over the past three years, mutual funds, which are mostly outside the banks' domain, have grown by two-thirds.
This is a case of Philip Morris-like disenfranchisement.
All this leaves precious few sectors for ‘defensive’ investors.
Gold shares, though far dearer than they recently were, are still attractive to some who reckon on rising prices.
Capital-goods firms and even the big three car makers are a buy for those who believe that more robust economic growth is coming.
Some are betting on companies in sectors such as paper and pulp, which are meant to do well at times when the dollar is weak.
Oversold health-care shares are now rebounding, as Mr Clinton's ability to push through sweeping reform begins to look limited.
For the time being, however, investors might do better to clear out their portfolios than to add to them.
Whose business is it anyway?
NEW YORK
America's infrastructure cries out for refurbishment, yet private-sector projects have yet to take off.
Is Wall Street missing a trick?
A LEADING contender in the mayoral race in Los Angeles wants to beef up the city's police force.
Not surprisingly.
But if elected on June 8th, he plans to pay for it by leasing the city's international airport for 30 years to a private-sector manager.
And that does make people sit up.
Privatisation, broadly defined to cover all sorts of novel roles for the private sector, is now on the political agenda in much of America.
Fifteen states have passed laws enabling private operators to run roads and railways: the state of Washington did so last month.
Roads are congested, bridges creak and sewers seep.
Yet fixing them will cost billions of dollars that local politicians cannot raise from taxes.
Nor are more federal dollars likely.
Roughly half of the $16 billion in fiscal stimulus that Bill Clinton proposed earlier this year was earmarked for infrastructure.
Congress threw out the package.
There is nothing in theory to stop states and cities raising extra money without asking taxpayers for it.
Big projects can be financed by public bonds serviced by future revenues, such as tolls or other user-charges.
Yet not enough projects are being launched to stifle growing frustration.
Why not let the private sector provide what the public sector cannot or will not?
Many large companies are lobbying furiously to be allowed to build and operate bridges, roads and the like for profit under franchise.
Among the firms are big civil-engineering companies like Brown & Root, Bechtel and Peter Kiewit Sons.
They have honed their skills as developers and operators in privatisations elsewhere.
Now they want to use them at home.
The question is how.
Unlike America, much of Europe has already accepted the notion that any facility or service capable of generating cash-flow and profit is capable of being privatised.
America, despite (or perhaps because of) its smaller state sector, has been slow to see the point of it.
One reason is that users have grown used to roads, for example, that are offered either free or at fees that reflect the cost advantages with which governments start out.
Cities and states can issue tax-exempt bonds, for starters.
Yields on 30-year tax-exempt municipal revenue bonds are now under 6%.
Companies raising private finance to build a toll road would probably need to offer at least 9–10%, given that many investors want compensation against the risk that a future government might expropriate the project or regulate it into unprofitability.
In addition, companies pay taxes on any profits they eventually make, as well as dish out dividends to shareholders.
Private firms must be formidably efficient to overcome these handicaps and offer facilities at the same or lower prices.
True, they are supposed to supplement government, not compete with it, building sewage systems and tunnels that would not otherwise get built.
Yet politicians fear a backlash if private sponsors end up charging fees much higher than users are accustomed to for what are often monopoly products.
To help bridge the gap, in February a congressional commission recommended broader access to the tax-exempt market for infrastructure projects involving some private control.
Mr Clinton is unlikely to agree.
Instead, companies are looking to develop partnerships that marry the traditions of municipal and private project finance.
In some circumstances, such partnerships can, in fact, tap the tax-exempt market.
In February First Boston Corporation arranged a $1.1 billion issue of tax-exempt bonds for a Californian toll road in the San Joaquin Hills that was sponsored by private developers and local officialdom.
GE Capital, a subsidiary of General Electric, expects to take an equity stake in a hybrid infrastructure project before the end of the year.
Bob Jenks, one of GE Capital's directors, thinks that the ability to issue tax-exempt bonds is crucial.
Others are bolder.
Barry Gold, project-finance executive at Citicorp, says that commercial banks, insurers and other institutional investors are interested in participating in high-quality project loans syndicated on behalf of private developers and operators.
Citibank is arranging a $125m financing for a toll-road (SR91) in Orange County, California, for Kiewit and COFIROUTE, a French toll-roads operator.
And Bechtel is setting up a joint venture with Kiewit that is looking at projects in 15 states and outlays of up to $1 billion.
Silence on the Street
One of the curiosities of the current debate is Wall Street's reluctance to promote what could prove a multi-billion-dollar market, yielding fees to match.
Last year Goldman Sachs, Smith Barney and Lehman Brothers, among other investment banks, set up teams to explore the opportunities that privatisation might present.
Now most of these teams have been disbanded, and many of those involved sound deeply sceptical.
Tax-exempt partnerships like the San Joaquin toll road are too complex for many municipalities, say some.
Private-sector firms are bound to be too expensive, say others.
And politicians will never yield turf to them.
Conspiracy theorists blame internal rivalries between municipal-bond and corporate-finance folk.
Such uncollegial feeling has been a factor at some investment banks: Smith Barney, for example.
More broadly to blame, however, may be simple lack of co-ordination.
Ralph Stanley, a former head of the Urban Mass Transportation agency in Washington, DC, who now works for Bechtel, says that he approached 44 firms on Wall Street in 1989–90 before finding the right combination of people to put together a private toll-road project.
The corporate-finance bankers lacked political savvy; the municipal-bond men knew nothing of project financing.
Many on Wall Street acknowledge this weakness, but say it is being redressed.
If firms are sceptical about public-private partnerships, says Austin Koenen, managing director of Morgan Stanley's public-finance department, there is a simple explanation: the lack of solid business.
More will come only if city halls scent a crisis.
For that, the election of a few more pro-privatisation politicians would help.
One such, a former Wall Street broker named Bret Schundler, was elected mayor of Jersey City last week, joining the bipartisan likes of William Weld, the governor of Massachusetts, Richard Daley, mayor of Chicago, and Stephen Goldsmith, the mayor of Indianapolis.
Will Los Angeles provide the next?
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Japanese R&D
The bashful giant
THE outdated image of the Japanese as poor innovators lingers on, both outside and inside Japan.
The chilling effect which Japan's rigidly conformist educational system has on creativity is an old chestnut in Tokyo.
Over the past four decades, Japanese managers have often readily admitted that their companies have much to learn from more creative Americans or Europeans.
These admissions are borne out by the way their firms have so avidly bought technology in international marketplaces.
But these days the Japanese appetite for foreign technology is one that supplements a fruitful home-grown crop.
The Japanese innovate at home and actively collaborate in the innovations of others.
That is the message of a recent survey of Japan's technological prowess by David Mowery and David Teece, both at the Haas School of Business on the University of California's Berkeley campus, which appeared in the California Management Review.
The study shows Japanese firms investing more in R&D than their American counterparts, relying less on government funding and exporting as much technology as they import.
There is no single way to measure creativity or industrial innovation; they are complicated things.
One man's breakthrough is often another's trifling adaptation.
Spending is not an infallible guide to results or intentions.
Some investment does not bear fruit.
Other investment — in patents and licences, for example— may be intended to deny ideas to rivals rather than to search for useful products.
Nevertheless, Dr Mowery and Dr Teece have varied sources that make their picture of Japan convincing.
According to Japanese government figures, the ratio of the value of Japan's technology exports to imports (measured as the value of licence fees and royalties) increased from 39.4% in 1975 to 99.8% in 1989.
Thus it looks as though there is an almost exact balance in technology trade, which will be a surprise to some.
Moreover, these figures include continuing payments for many older licences, when Japan imported more technology and exported less.
If these are stripped out and only payments for new licences and contracts are measured, Japan is revealed as a net exporter of technology in all but two of the years examined.
Comparing the absolute number of patents filed between countries is difficult because of different national patent regimes.
But in patenting activity, too, the trend is clear.
Japan was the only industrialised country to register an increase, rather than a decrease, in the number of patents received per scientist and engineer between 1967 and 1984.
It was also the only country to post an increase in the number of patents received in foreign countries.
America's National Science Foundation reported in 1988 that Japanese firms held more American patents than firms from any other country.
The table shows the growth of Japan's patent power through the 1980s.
In 1990 Japanese firms were granted more patents in America than German, French and British firms combined.
And the patents appear to be worthwhile as well as numerous.
In applications for new patents in America, existing patents of Japanese origin are more frequently cited than those from any other country.
Such innovation costs a lot.
As a proportion of GNP, the total spent on R&D by firms and government has been higher in Japan than in America every year since the early 1960s.
Though the government is supportive, companies foot most of the bill.
The share of Japan's R&D spending (including grants to universities) financed by the government was only 20% in 1987, while in America it was 49%.
America's heavy spending on military R&D accounts for much of this difference, but when military spending is removed from the figures for both countries, Dr Mowery and Dr Treece still find that the proportion of R&D financed by companies is higher in Japan.
The researchers also chronicle the growing R&D links between Japan and the rest of the world, which have proliferated despite the Japan-bashing rhetoric among many American and European businessmen.
While Japanese firms have established R&D centres in America and Europe, foreign firms have done the same in Japan.
According to Japanese government figures, by 1990 American and European firms had established 141 laboratories in Japan.
That year they spent ¥206 billion ($1.42 billion) on R&D there.
The number of R&D alliances between Japanese and foreign firms, ranging from full joint ventures to product development or marketing agreements, has soared.
Hundreds of them can be found in most large industries.
Dr Mowery and Dr Teece argue that trying to exclude Japanese firms by forming government-backed R&D consortia such as America's Sematech and Europe's JESSI is wrong-headed.
After all, the usefulness of Japanese technology to firms elsewhere makes retaliation against such tactics quite possible.
Instead, companies should concentrate on tapping the growing flow of new technology coming out of Japan.
This may not always be easy.
In America and Europe much basic research is conducted at universities, offering foreign firms easier access to the best researchers.
Japanese universities are rarely the home of world-class R&D, though this is changing slowly.
Nevertheless, Japanese companies seem as willing to sell technology, or collaborate on its development, as any other firms, when doing so offers them some advantage.
If others can see them as an engine driving innovation around the world, rather than a sump draining it off, they may find there is much to gain.
Unholy dentistry
BETHESDA, MARYLAND
NOW that several of his own teeth have lost their crowns, and the fillings beneath have deteriorated, Kenneth Anusavice wishes his mother had known what today's studies have shown: that not all cavities call for immediate fillings and that it is not always necessary to replace fillings that break down because of wear and tear.
Dr Anusavice, a researcher at the University of Florida, Gainesville, is not about to give up the profession of dentistry.
He still believes that there are lots of ways dentists can make the world a better place.
It is just that he no longer thinks that filling every cavity is one of them.
Dr Anusavice took the opportunity of a recent conference at the National Institute of Dental Research (NIDR) in Bethesda, Maryland, to remind 700 of his colleagues of something all 190,000 American dentists know, or should know.
Every time they intervene in someone's mouth to fill cavities or replace fillings, they do damage as well as good.
The same rule holds true when simple fillings no longer suffice and a tooth has to be crowned or a bridge has to be placed.
This collateral damage to otherwise healthy bits of tooth may in the end have to be dealt with itself.
In other words, if fewer teeth were filled to begin with, and more worn fillings were repaired, rather than replaced, their owners would have less need for crowns, dentures, root-canal therapy and dental implants over the long haul.
The places most at risk for cavities are the biting surfaces of the teeth, especially if they have deep pits and fissures.
Thanks to the addition of fluoride to toothpastes and, in many places, to drinking water, decay on the smooth surfaces of teeth has become relatively rare in America.
But fluoride's toughening is not so much help to the uneven biting surfaces; they are at risk even when people practice good oral hygiene and regularly have their teeth professionally cleaned.
It is primarily the rough chewing teeth at the back of the mouth that are prone to cavities.
They are the teeth that stand to benefit most from the conservative approach advocated by Dr Anusavice and like-minded practitioners.
Just as all teeth are a bit different, so are all cavities.
Some deteriorate quickly, some slowly, some hardly at all.
In a perfect world, a dentist would be able to predict the rate of decay of a tooth.
In the real world, the science is inexact.
The trouble is that there are some things even X-rays, penetrating as they are, cannot reveal.
They do not always accurately portray the degree of damage, nor do they vouchsafe how long the damage has been there.
Thus the dentist cannot see how fast it is spreading, if at all.
To be on the safe side, most dentists fill cavities right away.
But the decay may not be spreading, in which case the damage done by intervention will not be worth it.
No drilling, however, does not mean no dentistry.
For a wait-and-see approach to work, the patient has to come back regularly for decay or lack of it to be assessed.
Regularly does not mean every other week.
Even when the decay is spreading, it typically takes six years to travel through the tooth enamel into the softer dentin, where it becomes a threat to the nerves in the root canal.
There is plenty of time to intervene if need be.
And intervention need not be with the drill.
Treatment of the tooth with fluoride, plastic sealants or both might instead be advisable at some stage to slow or halt any progression that does take place.
These treatments may be useful on a more widespread basis, too; the NIDR advocates that the chewing surfaces of children's permanent teeth be treated with sealants as soon as they surface from the gum, as a precaution.
At the same time, the patient should bear the cavity in mind when eating.
Going easy on sugary snacks and drinks is obviously helpful; so is immediate brushing after any lapses into indulgence.
Chewing sugarless gum stimulates the flow of saliva, which can help neutralise the acid which bacteria make from sugar in the mouth.
People may pay you to be humane
Just as dentists are taught to plug cavities on sight, so they are trained to remove badly worn, leaky or broken fillings.
That way they can deal with decay underneath or around them.
Given the extra work done when fillings are removed, their replacements are larger than originals — and if replacement is not possible, an onlay or a crown involves the destruction of even more tooth.
However, thinking on this score is also becoming less doctrinaire.
Eva Mertz-Fairhurst, a dentist at the Medical College of Georgia, in Augusta, has shown that old fillings can often safely be repaired rather than replaced, providing that the decay is not too extensive.
Her technique is to remove any crumbly enamel on the biting surface of the affected tooth, bevel the remaining enamel for stability and then fill the decayed areas with a plastic resin.
Then she coats both the resin and the rest of the surface with a sealant.
As long as the seal is not broken, the decay does not progress, even when some of it is left behind.
By saving more of the tooth, she leaves it healthier, and buys it time.
That time is valuable for two reasons.
One is that people are living longer than they used to, and it is obviously a help if their teeth last longer too.
The other is rapid technological advance.
Resin-based glass ionomers, which can release fluoride within cavities, are already on the market.
Although the ionomers do not wear well and thus are not very popular, they will probably get better, and new innovations will follow thick and fast.
Since tomorrow's materials will be better than today's, delay is not just pointless procrastination.
The major obstacles to more conservative — Dr Anusavice holds out for ‘ultraconservative’— dentistry are the outmoded attitudes of dentists and their patients.
Dentists have traditionally been paid for filling holes; people are unwilling to pay them for much else.
In America, dental insurance plans are also an impediment.
Although they pay up to $500 toward a crown, they rarely cover less costly services that would obviate the need for one.
Until these attitudes change, a lot of teeth — and their owners — are going to be subjected to grief which many of them could be spared.
Industrial cleaning
Dry-ice rice
HEAT ice; it melts.
Heat water; it boils.
For H2O, moving from solid to liquid to gas is a simple thing.
For carbon dioxide (CO2), though, things can be made more complicated.
Cool pressurised CO2, and it becomes a liquid.
Release the pressure, and it becomes a solid.
Warm the solid and it turns straight back into gas.
Put together, these properties allow a neat approach to industrial cleaning.
Waste Minimization and Containment Services Inc (WMC) of Cleveland, Ohio, has spent a year and a half and $750,000 harnessing the intriguing physics of CO2.
Its investment is beginning to pay off.
America's Department of Energy has awarded WMC and its partner in the bid, Oceaneering Technologies, a two-year, $1.2m contract to develop a remote controlled robot to clean radioactive surfaces.
That is only one of many potential applications.
The robot will roam nuclear-weapons facilities, scouring concrete surfaces with a gadget like a sand blaster which shoots out a pressurised stream of dry-ice pellets.
A high-power vacuum system sucks up the resultant radioactive concrete dust.
If the surfaces were cleaned by sand blasting, that concrete dust would be mixed up with the sand used in the cleaning; but when the surfaces are cleaned with dry ice, the pellets sublime away into easily filtered gas.
Oceaneering estimates that, because their scouring agents vanish so conveniently, their method creates 200 times less secondary waste than conventional sandblasting.
Less ‘hot’ waste to be buried makes environmentalists happier.
The technology has other, less exotic applications which WMC and other companies are exploring.
The dry-ice pellets can vary in size, density, and hardness (for the nuclear waste job, they are the size of rice grains); the spray-gun nozzle can be designed to vary the flow and pressure of the stream.
Thus the cleaning can be tailored to different surfaces.
And as well as producing less secondary waste, the dry-ice system is also gentle enough to be used on things too delicate to withstand sand.
CO2 pellets do not pit or cut the surface they are cleaning.
One car-part manufacturer has already replaced sand-blasting with a CO2 system for cleaning its moulds.
A continuous moulding machine for making wheel hubs will yield a more consistent product with less time spent idle when cleaned with the frozen pellets.
And there is less risk of getting sand into the machinery, or the workers' lungs.
Some power companies are taking advantage of the technique to clean large generators quickly.
Previously they used corn-cob husks and bits of walnut shell to remove the carbon dust and oil that build up in large motors and cause them to short circuit.
Some printers are attracted to dry-ice blasting because the cleaning processes they use at the moment require volatile chlorinated solvents and dangerous methyl ethyl ketones (MEKs)— not very environmentally friendly.
Food processors are using the systems for cleaning stainless steel food preparation stations.
And shipping lines are exploring the technique as a way of stripping paint and barnacles from hulls.
Last month, WMC performed a demonstration at Windsor Castle for the queen's architect, Paul Sherrod, and some of the craftsmen involved in assessing and repairing the damage caused by last year's fire.
The company's system cleaned soot from the blackened limestone and brick without damaging to the venerable surfaces.
It also cleaned fire-charred beams and exposed the structural soundness of the underlying solid wood.
This could speed the checking and preserving of sound timbers that remain.
If all goes well, the company could add ‘by royal appointment’ to its other claims to fame.
Save the sticky stuff
WOBBLY teeth in unsound gums are as much of a problem in adults as tooth decay.
Toxins that attack the connective tissue and bone which support the teeth are to blame.
These toxins are made by bacteria that thrive in the crevices where teeth meet gums; so treatments for gum disease tend to focus on getting rid of the germs.
New research is taking a different tack.
It uses a weapon from the arsenal usually deployed against bacteria — an antibiotic — but it uses it in doses too small to bother the bugs.
The idea is that it will block the action of an enzyme which the toxins force the body to produce, an enzyme responsible for much of the damage.
The enzyme, called collagenase, breaks down collagen, a structural protein which does much to hold teeth in place, and to hold various other parts of the body together.
Lorne Golub at the State University of New York at Stony Brook and his colleagues have found that low doses of doxycycline seem to have a direct effect on collagenase, at least in the laboratory.
Stopping the collagenase from working should save the collagen in the gum from damage.
Trials have not yet shown the clinical efficacy of this approach; they have shown its safety.
Dr Golub's work may have implications well beyond the mouth.
Many cancers rely on collagenase to break down collagen in connective tissues.
This helps the cancers form and maintain the blood vessels that nourish them, and which provide them with the routes through which they spread.
Stop the formation of these blood vessels and you might check the cancer.
A promising start has been made at Johns Hopkins University Hospital in Baltimore.
Henry Brem has halted the growth of blood vessels using a chemically-modified tetracycline that Dr Golub supplied.
Meanwhile, at the North Shore University Hospital on Long Island, Henry Perry has, at Dr Golub's suggestion, used a different tetracycline derivative on another sort of unwanted growth that requires collagenase: germ-free corneal ulcers.
When added to the usual treatments for this condition it cleared up persistent ulcers in 40 out of 60 cases.
Dr Golub and his colleagues are studying ten drugs related to tetracycline to learn which of them best inhibits collagenase.
This could lead to better treatments not only for cancers and corneal ulcers, but for many other things, such as some skin disorders and types of arthritis.
After all, the body contains more collagen than any other protein: it should be no surprise that protecting it could do a lot of good.
SPECIAL
Today Windows, tomorrow the world
What IBM used to be, Microsoft is.
In little more than a decade, its operating systems have won dominance in the personal-computer industry.
It is challenging for the same leadership in applications software.
And its ambitions spread much wider still — into realms where it could come a cropper
IN THE days when IBM was still the unchallenged ruler of the computer universe, Bill Gates, chairman and co-founder of Microsoft, was fond of saying that he wanted his firm to become the Big Blue of software.
It did.
Driven by his ferocious determination to be first, Microsoft, based in Redmond, in Washington state, has become the biggest software company in the world.
With sales only a fraction of theirs, its market value is close to those of IBM or General Motors.
And Mr Gates is America's richest man.
He has made his firm the IBM of the 1990s.
By 2010 or even sooner, will it have fallen as IBM has now?
To avoid that fate, Microsoft will have to do more than keep ahead in the business, and of the rivals, that it has today.
It is not only computer technology that is altering, but the whole nature of the industry.
Microsoft must foresee where the market is going, where and how to direct its effort — and do so better not just than lively young rivals eager to up-end it like IBM, but than powerful companies moving in from outside the industry.
The firm will launch its — and conceivably the whole industry's — key new product next week.
It has already spread out from its core business, and is spreading wider still, from software into the information business itself.
The opportunities are great.
So will the competition be, and the risks — and there will be no more of the fat margins that Microsoft enjoys today.
From DOS to Windows
Oddly, Microsoft's initial success owed much to IBM.
In 1980, the computer giant turned up on Mr Gates's doorstep seeking an operating system (the software that tells a computer's electronic circuits how to work as a computer) for its forthcoming personal computer.
Mr Gates did not have one, but he knew a man who did.
A little firm just down the road had developed QDOS — Quick and Dirty Operating System — which looked just right for IBM's PC. $100,000 later, Microsoft had bought the rights to QDOS, renamed it MS-DOS — Microsoft Disk Operating System, no frivolous acronyms for Big Blue, please — and licensed it to IBM.
Crucially, the deal did not bar Mr Gates from selling to other computer makers.
IBM's PC sold in millions.
Hundreds of clones of its design soon poured on to the market, selling even more millions.
And MS-DOS swiftly became the standard operating system for PCs.
To date, Microsoft has sold over 100m copies of DOS, the best-selling software of all time.
Windows, its Microsoft successor, could be as big a hit.
It is a DOS-based operating system which presents users with a screen of friendly, pictorial instructions, rather than DOS's arcane codes.
Since launching it in the late 1980s, Microsoft has sold over 25m copies.
Together, DOS and Windows now have close to 90% of the world market for PC operating software.
Not for nothing do rivals sourly suggest that MS-DOS stands for Microsoft Seeks Domination Over Society.
Together, we sell
The success of his operating systems took Mr Gates another giant step forwards.
To aid sales of his systems, he encouraged other software companies to develop applications programs (which tell the computer how to work as a word processor, spreadsheet, database manager and the like) for use with them.
Thousands of independent software developers have done so, to their profit and his.
Selling word-processing, spreadsheet and database programs for use on Microsoft's DOS software made the fortune of American firms like WordPerfect, Lotus and Borland in the 1980s.
Their widespread success convinced all but the bravest computer makers (notably Apple, though even it is now seeking to make its machines compatible with Windows) to join the DOS and Windows club.
Two-thirds of all PCs sold today have Windows already on board.
With this came what you could unfairly call the sting.
While applications-software firms that had thrived on DOS struggled to convert their DOS-based software to work with Windows, Microsoft launched Windows-based applications of its own.
Already it has snatched leadership of the word-processing market from WordPerfect.
It is challenging Lotus for pole position in spreadsheets, and, with its new Access software, hopes to do the same to Borland in the database market.
Microsoft is being helped by the conservatism of first-time PC buyers.
Having bought a machine equipped with its operating system, many take the easy route and buy its applications software too.
No one ever got fired for buying Microsoft.
Can Microsoft be stopped?
All this has made Microsoft immensely profitable.
In the nine months to March 31st, it made a net profit of $188m (up 38% on the same period of the previous year) on sales of $1.7 billion (up 40%).
Its 25% net margin is bettered in the computer industry only by Intel, the world's biggest micro-processor maker.
Microsoft's gross margins (total revenues minus production costs) are 83%; software, once designed and written, costs next to nothing to churn out.
Most analysts expect the company to record sales of around $1.8 billion for the year to June 30th — a 19-fold increase in seven years.
It has no debt and $1 billion in the bank.
Investors have profited handsomely.
Those who put up $1,000 when Microsoft made its initial public offering in March 1986 are now sitting on $15,500.
And 37-year-old Mr Gates, who still holds 28% of the company, is worth some $1 billion.
That looks a pretty impregnable base for the next advance.
Unable to compete in the market, some of Microsoft's rivals have already sought refuge in antitrust law.
Since 1990, the firm has had to face an investigation by the Federal Trade Commission.
The main complaint was that Microsoft offered large discounts to PC makers who agreed to pay for a copy of MS-DOS or Windows for every machine they sold, whether or not it was actually loaded with one.
This, said Microsoft's rivals, dissuaded PC makers from considering other operating systems, such as DR-DOS, developed by Novell, a Utah-based software firm.
Why would a maker fit DR-DOS, when it had already paid for a copy of a Microsoft system?
The FTC, perhaps mindful of its fruitless 13-year investigation into IBM, is now believed to have backed away from any significant action against Microsoft.
Fearing that the commission has gone soft, some of Microsoft's competitors are threatening the firm with legal action.
Higher costs, lower margins
They should not bother.
Changes in the computer market, and in Microsoft's own activities, are set to make Mr Gates's firm look a lot less unassailable.
A year ago, applications software made up less than half Microsoft's sales; this year it will account for more than 60%.
As this side of its business grows, the firm's cost structure will change.
Its operating software costs almost nothing to market and sell; computer makers hammer on Microsoft's door to buy the stuff.
Applications software not only brings extra development costs but needs selling, which means hefty marketing and advertising budgets.
Microsoft's selling costs amounted to 33% of sales in the nine months to the end of March, up from 27% three years earlier.
That proportion will go on rising.
Microsoft's margins will face more pressure as a price war in applications software hots up.
Eighteen months ago, most applications software for personal computers cost over $100 a throw.
But that was when a typical PC cost well over $1,000.
These days PCs are to be had for half that price, which has dragged down in turn the prices obtainable for software.
Introductory deals and cut-price offers to lure users into ‘upgrading’ to rival applications have cut the price of some software to as little as $100.
At the same time, the PC-software market is getting saturated.
Most PC users who want a word processor, spreadsheet or database already have one.
And there are no new ‘killer apps’— industry jargon for top-selling programs such as spreadsheets — on the horizon.
All this, says Mr Gates, means that three-quarters of his firm's overall software revenues will eventually be generated by selling upgrades to existing customers, compared with only a quarter at present.
That will mean much slimmer margins.
In the long term, he concedes, Microsoft's net margins will be nearer 15% than 25%.
New products, new responsibilities
The biggest single chunk of the firm's spending over the past four years has been on the development of Windows NT, due to be launched on May 24th and aimed at the large and fast-growing market for the software that can link together sprawling networks of PCs.
This could be a humdinger.
Mr Gates reckons his firm's $100m investment in NT (for new technology) will win it half of a market now dominated by Novell.
To help fend off Microsoft, Novell last year bought Unix System Laboratories from AT&T for $150m.
Unix is a powerful operating system used on many mainframe computers, and is in theory ideal for use on big computer networks.
At present, though, it is used on just 3% of the world's PCs, and is not vastly more user-friendly than Chinese ideograms.
That is one reason why Microsoft reckons Windows NT can clean up: on the screen, despite 4m lines of wholly new computer code, NT will appear just like friendly old pre-NT Windows.
To make its new technology a sure-fire success, however, Microsoft is being forced to move into new territory too.
Most of the software it makes today is sold to individual users in homes or offices.
If the odd buyer hits a software bug, well, bad luck, call us and we'll talk you through it.
That will not do for Windows NT.
Whole companies depend on the computer networks that it is designed to control.
When things go wrong, they will want more to turn to than a toll-free telephone help-line.
To that end, Microsoft has trained 2,000 independent technical-support engineers and software-implementation consultants, and is adding to their number at the rate of 250 a week.
For much the same reason, it is also nurturing partnerships with several big information-technology consultancies.
Not enough, say some large corporate customers, insisting that Microsoft itself carry out the design and implementation of their networks, and back that up with in-house service.
‘We have ‘gone vertical’ with around 30 large customers,’says Mr Gates.
‘Going vertical’ troubles Mr Gates.
He has often argued that one of Microsoft's key competitive advantages is precisely that his firm is not like the old computer giants, offering customers everything from chips and computers to software and service contracts.
For how much longer?
First languages, then operating systems, then applications software, now implementation and service contracts for favoured clients.
And there's more.
Microsoft is now adding an extra, untried ingredient: information.
First the messenger, now the message
In essence, software plays the role of an electronic messenger: it delivers information, manipulating it as desired, to computer users.
The message, the actual information, is put in by the user (words to be processed, for instance, or numbers to be crunched) or by professional suppliers (of training manuals or porn films).
But with the messenger business increasingly beset by price wars, market saturation, soaring development costs and flagging margins, Mr Gates is looking for fresh profit in producing and selling the message itself.
This will be no mere sideline.
He expects Microsoft's consumer division, into which all its information activities are lumped, to be the firm's biggest within five years.
At present, it comprises just 400 staff (including an ‘ethno-musicologist’) out of a total of 14,000.
But its sales per employee are among the firm's highest, and rising fast.
Most of its products blend Microsoft's software skills with text, pictures, music and speech, all colourfully crammed on to a ‘multimedia’ CD-ROM.
Among its titles are a $195 encyclopaedia, an $10 feature-film guide and ‘Dinosaurs’, a multimedia prehistoric tour.
Susan Boeschen, head of the division, reckons all PCs will be fitted with CD-ROM drives within two years.
To extend his multimedia range, Mr Gates is negotiating with everyone from Hollywood producers to sedate British publishers.
Microsoft has already taken licences on cartoon characters' voices and electronic rights to reproduce famous paintings.
It has even bought a 26% equity stake in Dorling Kindersley, a British publisher of lavish tomes (and the source for ‘Dinosaurs’).
The tree of knowledge
The risks here are plain.
Information has been around since the garden of Eden.
It is not a business easy to dominate; nor, even if it were, is Microsoft expert in it.
So Mr Gates is trying to work out how his rising pile of information can best be combined with the expertise he does have, in software.
What the world needs — and is increasingly getting — says Nathan Myhrvold, the company's head of advanced technology, is ‘innovation in the way that we distribute information; we still communicate mainly by smearing ink across dead trees.’
He envisages a none-too-distant future in which information of every kind will be delivered, via fibre-optic cable and wire-less networks, to tiny computers contained in telephones, fax machines, photocopiers, television sets, printers and ‘personal digital assistants’(PDAs — wallet-sized combinations of electronic notebook, fax and cell-phone).
In this multi-channelled world, Mr Myhrvold argues, the challenge will be not just to supply information but to make it easy for the user to pick out the specific bits he wants.
‘You might have the world's biggest electronic haystack, but it will still be difficult to find the needle.’
That is where software skills come in.
More precisely, it is where Microsoft hopes a whole new range of Windows software comes in.
To lessen the risk and cost of developing new versions of Windows for everything from PDAs to combined PC-TVs, Mr Gates is entering into a slew of joint ventures.
In April his firm announced a partnership with Compaq, America's second-biggest PC maker, to design PDAs and related Windows-based software.
Two weeks later it unveiled a deal with Intel and General Instrument, a telecoms-equipment maker, to produce a cable-TV converter that will allow America's 60m cable subscribers access to interactive multimedia services, with software again based on Windows.
With Intel, it has just launched Windows Telephony, which the two firms hope will become the standard software used to integrate telephones with PCs.
More deals lie ahead.
Strong competition, less loyalty
All this is in striking contrast to the complacency and not-invented-here syndrome that has helped to bring many a big firm down (think of the motor industry).
Mr Gates may yet make Microsoft as powerful in communications, multimedia, entertainment and information as it is today in software.
But he faces some powerful competitors.
One is General Magic, an alliance of Apple, AT&T, Matsushita, Motorola, Philips and Sony, which aims to establish its own software standard for PDAs and a family of related devices, ranging from PCs to multimedia machines.
Matsushita, along with Time-Warner and others, also has an alliance with 3DO, a new Californian firm with bold ambitions for its interactive multi-media machines.
Both projects, and more besides, aim to make Microsoft an also-ran in tomorrow's markets.
Those hopes are backed by the view of some Hollywood creative types that Windows is too inflexible and ‘clunky’.
Microsoft replies that the Windows of tomorrow will be smarter and more flexible, with little but its friendly on-screen appearance in common with today's versions.
Other big Japanese consumer-electronics companies, such as Sharp, Casio, Sega and Nintendo, are also showing interest in producing gadgets to profit from the blurring of boundaries between TV, telecoms and computers.
So are several big American companies from those industries, among them US West, Tele-Communications and IBM.
As yet, few have shown much interest in basing their products on Windows.
Microsoft's foray into the message business has risks of another sort.
Its PC-software strategy centres on brand loyalty: lure customers in with operating systems, sell them applications software, keep them sweet — and the cash flowing in — with regular upgrades.
Mr Gates is convinced Microsoft will be able to ‘draw on our incumbency on the desktop’.
But brand loyalty is harder to win in the information and entertainment businesses.
As Mr Myhrvold concedes, ‘Nobody says, gee, let's go see a Paramount movie tonight.’
Moreover, multimedia, PDAs, PC-TVs, PC-telephones and the host of other gadgets that will soon fill shop shelves are all new businesses.
Be sure, young, nimble competitors are even now planning to steal Microsoft's thunder in one or more of them, just as upstart firms with names like Microsoft stole the thunder of the mighty IBM.
BUSINESS THIS WEEK
That's business
Carlo De Benedetti, the chairman of Olivetti, was placed under investigation after he revealed that his electronics and office-equipment firm had bribed politicians in Italy to win public-works contracts.
Around 20 billion lire ($13.5m) was paid over a decade in a corrupt system that was, he said, ‘nothing short of racketeering’.
Britain's biggest clothing retailer, Marks and Spencer, became the country's most profitable retailer once more when it knocked J Sainsbury into second place with pre-tax profits up 25% to a record £736.5m ($1.2 billion) in the year to end-March.
A big Australian brewery, Foster's, announced an initial A$120m ($13m) investment in a joint venture with China's Huaguang Brewery.
Foster's reckons that within five years it will brew as much beer in China as in Australia.
Struggling with $16 billion of debt at Time Warner, Gerald Levin, the new chairman, is selling a 25% stake of its prize cable and entertainment business to US West for $1.5 billion.
Time Warner will also form a strategic alliance with the regional telephone company to build a ‘full-service network’.
The Philippines government criticised a ruling by an American jury that cleared Westinghouse Electric and Burns & Roe, an engineering firm, of charges that they bribed Ferdinand Marcos with $16m to win a contract to build a power plant.
President Ramos said the two firms would yet be made ‘to account for their actions’.
Woolworths, an Australian retailing group and part of debt-ridden Adelaide Steamship, launched an A$1.45 billion ($1.7 billion) share offer, the biggest made in Australia.
The crisis in Germany's steel industry claimed another victim.
Saarstahl, a subsidiary of France's Usinor Sacilor, filed for protection from its creditors.
It blamed its problems on, among other things, cheap imports from Eastern Europe and lack of help from Brussels.
Pessimism
Corporate bankruptcies in Japan fell for the second month, but were still up 7.5% in the first four months of 1993.
Year-on-year, April's figure was up 3.9%.
Depressed consumer spending showed up in a 10.3% drop in Tokyo department-store sales in April, the 14th month of year-on-year decline.
Fear of inflation in America depressed bond markets and drove the price of gold over $175 an ounce in New York, its highest price since the Gulf war.
America's faltering recovery continued with a 6.7% rise in housing starts in April over the previous month, lower than had been expected after a first quarter in which housing starts had been curbed by bad weather.
Optimism
Japan's 20 biggest brokerages reported a combined pre-tax loss for the year to end-March of ¥317 billion ($1.5 billion), an increase on last year's loss of ¥192 billion.
Nomura, the biggest, took a 95% drop but just managed to keep in profit.
Another of the big four, Daiwa, had its first loss since 1964.
But they all declared the worst is over.
Eddie George, soon to be the governor of the Bank of England, has asked to have his salary frozen for his five-year term to demonstrate his determination to fight inflation.
His new salary is thought to be about £220,000 ($137,000) a year.
Some sacrifice, sneered the union representing the bank's 4,500 workers, before calling for wage talks.
Franz Steinkühler, chairman of Germany's giant IG Metall engineering union and a member of the supervisory board of Daimler-Benz, was accused of insider trading.
Mexico's president, Carlos Salinas, announced his support for giving the central bank autonomy over monetary policy.
The congress is likely to approve the necessary legislation and proposed constitutional amendment.
The head of Crédit Commercial de France, Michel Pébereau, was confirmed by the French cabinet as the new chairman of Banque Nationale de Paris in place of René Thomas, who is retiring.
Mr Pébereau led Crédit Commercial through privatisation and is regarded as the man to take BNP through the same process later this year.
Bumpy rides
A big drop in profits coupled with a doubling of its debt to £2.5 billion ($1.8 billion) in the year to end-March led British Airways to launch a £442m rights issue.
Pre-tax profits, excluding an accounting change, fell by 35% to £185m.
This still outclasses the results of most of the world's airlines, which collectively lost billions.
Two of Europe's biggest car makers posted terrible results.
At France's Renault, pre-tax profits dived by 90% from a year earlier to only FFr240m ($13m).
The pre-tax loss of its Swedish partner Volvo grew to SKr331m ($14m) from SKr248m in the first quarter of 1992.
In Japan, things were not much better.
Honda declared pre-tax profits in the year to March of ¥88.6 billion ($110m), a fall of 32% from the previous year's ¥130.8 billion.
The World Bank concluded that Hungary's two largest commercial banks, Magyan Hitel and Kereskedelmi, are technically insolvent.
Back on track
To the relief of their European partners, the Danes decisively backed the Maastricht treaty (with a few escape clauses) in their second referendum on the issue.
Two nights of riots ensued in Copenhagen.
John Major promised that Britain would now speed up ratification of the treaty.
Bosnian Serbs, in a referendum, overwhelmingly rejected the Vance-Owen peace plan.
Their leader, Radovan Karadzic, pronounced the plan dead, though Lord Owen vowed to see it implemented wherever possible.
America and its European and Russian allies, in disarray, were set to agree only on UN monitors for the Bosnian-Serbian border.
Italian police arrested Nitto Santapaola, the most wanted boss of Cosa Nostra, the umbrella organisation of the Sicilian Mafia.
He had been on the run for ten years.
Engineering workers in most east German regions went back to work after being promised pay parity with west German workers by 1996.
There will be zero growth, at best, in the European Community this year, said the EC commission, in its latest gloomy forecast.
Suleyman Demirel, seven times Turkey's prime minister, was elected president to succeed the late Turgut Ozal.
The trial in Moscow of 12 men, charged with leading the attempted coup in Moscow in 1991, disintegrated after the judge dismissed the prosecuting team.
He agreed the team had infringed the defendants' rights when they wrote a book on the case.
Norway announced it would resume commercial whaling regardless of an international ban.
President Mitterrand inaugurated France's high-speed train service between Paris and Lille, soon to be extended to the Channel tunnel.
He mocked Britain's failure to start building a high-speed link from London to its side of the tunnel.
Riot act
In Seoul, riot police battled with 4,000 students who were demanding the arrest of two former South Korean presidents, Chun Doo Hwan and Roh Tae Woo.
The students claimed that the two had ordered the massacre of 200 people in Kwangju in 1980.
UN peacekeepers in Cambodia said they expect Khmer Rouge guerrillas to attack polling stations in the general election starting on May 23rd.
In Kabul, more than 600 people were reported dead as Afghan factions fought for control of the capital.
Into Africa
The United States would, said Bill Clinton, now offer recognition to Eduardo dos Santos's government in Angola.
He called on its rivals in UNITA to work for peace.
Abdoulaye Wade, leader of the opposition party in Senegal, was arrested after the murder of the vice-president of the constitutional council, which oversaw last week's general election.
He was later released.
Mr Wade's party lost the election.
The life president of Malawi, Kamuzu Banda, bowed to opposition pressure and said he would not insist on having two ballot boxes, one for yeses, one for noes, at next month's referendum on whether to move to democracy.
Opposition leaders had said the two-box system would lead to intimidation.
Police in Egypt arrested more than 800 members of a group called Vanguards of the New Holy Struggle.
Their plan, said the police, was to organise attacks on Christians, overthrow the government and establish an Islamic state.
President F.W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela met to discuss the growing disorder in South Africa's schools.
Schoolchildren rioted in protest at examination fees; teachers planned a pay strike; and black activists threatened to occupy white schools.
Meeting Americans
Bill Clinton was meeting the people, this time in the West, trying to dispel the notion that he is a tax-and-spend president.
His own party has its doubts; congressional Democrats may not accept his plans for cutting the deficit.
The Supreme Court has agreed to consider whether potential jurors may be excluded from a case because of their sex.
It has already ruled that race should play no part in jury selection.
Les Aspin, America's defence secretary, said the era of star wars was over.
Maybe.
In any event, America has formally dropped Ronald Reagan's dream of weapons in space.
Eliseu Resende resigned as Brazil's economy minister after only two months in the job.
He was replaced by Fernando Henrique Cardoso, the foreign minister.
Carlos Andres Perez's future as president of Venezuela remains uncertain.
The Supreme Court was due to rule whether he must face impeachment proceedings on corruption charges.
SURVEY
History and geography have conspired to bring Greece to a moment of decision.
The decision it takes will be a rare test of national character.
Brian Beedham explains
A country on the edge
THE Greeks, as they cheerfully explain, are a special people.
They are not quite like anybody else, anywhere, and they are especially different from the Slavs and Turks and Arabs who occupy so much of the neighbouring part of the world.
When the introspective mood is upon them, as it is today, the Greeks will add that being special is not all fun.
When you are a small country as well as a special one, and when you live on the edge of things, it can be dangerous.
These 10m people live at the south-eastern edge of the culture-area called the West.
Their Parthenon-building ancestors began that culture, and their Byzantine ancestors kept it alive when the rest of Europe had fallen into the dark ages.
If the West eventually gave the world the Enlightenment, it was Greeks who had provided much of the light.
The Greeks of 1993 are still recognisably their ancestors' descendants.
The original blood has been blended with the blood of Turks and Slavs and others, but the face in a modern Athens street or a rural corner of the Peloponnese is not a face from Istanbul or Belgrade.
The language has changed hugely since classical times, but the Greeks are the only people in the world, apart from the Chinese, who can look at a 2,500-year-old inscription and recognise in it their own tongue.
To argue with a Greek today is to experience the same mixture of exhilaration (because he is so full of ideas, so quick with logic) and exasperation (when he slides around awkward facts) that many a growlingly impressed Roman experienced two millennia ago.
The trouble is that, since those days, the West has moved steadily westward, and has left Greece isolated at the bottom right-hand corner of Europe.
This does not matter when Greece can present itself as a lonely outpost of western ideas, defying the barbarians; then the West rallies round.
Sometimes Greece's place on the map can even help, in the periods of history when Europe is on easy terms with its neighbours to the east.
Then geography, and the entrepreneurial cleverness that Greeks seem to carry in their bones, make their country a natural trading post between Europe and the countries of south-west Asia and northern Africa.
Unfortunately, such periods are rare.
For much of the time, perched on the end of its European promontory, Greece feels lonely and insecure.
It does not know quite where it belongs, or what it stands for.
It is currently going through a bad patch of such uncertainty.
Since they won their independence from the Ottoman empire 170 years ago, there have been only three times when Greeks could justifiably feel the world was smiling on them.
There was the brief glory of the 1820s, when Greece was the first part of south-eastern Europe to break free from the Turks, and high-minded liberals all over Europe thought they were seeing the rebirth of Periclean Athens.
The illusion soon faded, and an administration of dull Bavarians had to be imported to sort out the Greeks' affairs for them.
In three hopeful decades between 1882 and 1912 the Greeks began to pull their politics together; they also captured a huge new slice of Ottoman-held territory.
Then came another political bust-up and the catastrophe of 1921–22, when a Greek army tried to march on Ankara and was roundly beaten by the new Turkey of Kemal Ataturk.
The longest and best of the times when things went well was the one that started in 1945, when Greece was suddenly the only non-communist country in Europe east of Vienna.
Once again Greece stood for something.
Help poured in from the West.
For much of the 1950s and 1960s the Greeks had the fastest-growing economy and yet one of the lowest inflation rates in Europe.
They chose their governments, except during the seven buffoonish years of the colonels' dictatorship, in a properly democratic way.
They were a useful member of the West's military alliance, and in 1981 they persuaded a hesitant European Community to take them in as full members.
But now this third bright period may also be coming to an end.
The Socialist government of the 1980s spent too much money and collected too little, thereby going spectacularly into the red.
The growth rate fell, inflation soared.
Worse, the end of communism removed Greece's claim to be of special interest to the democracies of the West.
It remains a member of NATO, but it has no longer any obvious function.
It is part of the European Community, but the other Europeans are worried about its economy and deeply irritated by the way it has treated new-born Macedonia next door.
The catastrophe that could be
The Greeks, in short, are back where history has put them before, on the fringe of the western world's concern.
They are also on the edge of something that could be even more immediately dangerous.
Unless they show an unprecedented degree of self-discipline, the economic disappointment of the past dozen years could slide past the point of no return.
For Greece's hopes of joining the modern world, this would be as big a catastrophe as the humiliation the Greek army suffered in Anatolia 70 years ago.
The heart of the economic matter is whether the government will insist on collecting more money than it spends, so that it can reduce the mountain of public debt that has piled up since 1980 (see chart 1).
The conservatives of the New Democracy Party promised to tackle the problem when they came back to office in 1990, but little progress was made until a tough new economics minister, Stephanos Manos, was appointed last year.
The measures Mr Manos introduced have at last started to get the figures moving firmly in the right direction.
But the battle is far from won.
The debt is still rising, though more slowly than before, and it will probably not start to fall until the basic budget — the part that excludes payments on the debt — is running an annual surplus equivalent to 7% of Greece's gross domestic product.
That is a dauntingly large amount.
Even on the government's estimates, which may be too hopeful, it will not be achieved until 1995 — and meantime an election has to be held, by May next year.
Hitherto the universal election-time practice of Greek governments, of left or right, has been to spend more money and go easy on taxes.
This time New Democracy has to resist the temptation.
There can be no major relaxation of its new-found economic rigour.
If the Socialists win the election, they too will have to bite the bullet.
The alternative is to push the task of debt reduction even further into the future.
The risk then is that the government will find itself unable to refinance the short-term part of the debt, and will have to print the money instead — and there comes hyper-inflation.
If Greece is to shape a coherent future for itself, it has to do three hard things.
It faces several more years of economic self-restraint, with no real easing in prospect until the second half of the 1990s.
It needs a shake-out of its two main political parties, because both New Democracy and the Socialists contain people who are not truly interested in the building of a modern society and an efficient economy.
And it has to make up its mind where it stands in the matter of the European Community.
Does it really wish to dissolve itself into a European federation, as many of its intellectuals claim, or does it still have specifically Greek aims to pursue in the Balkans and the Middle East?
Out of the spell?
Impossible, many will say; the Greeks can never bring all that off.
The sceptics have plenty of history on their side.
Greeks have never been good at the plodding job, even in their classical prime; Demosthenes was not the only one to complain of that.
The governments of modern Greece, the country that emerged in the 1820s from nearly four centuries of Ottoman rule, have been notoriously quarrelsome and changeable.
That is why soldiers called Metaxas and Papadopoulos have from time to time felt obliged to step forward and try a spot of military dictatorship.
Greece is not, on the evidence of the past, the sort of place to carry through the democratic reconstruction it now needs.
This time, though, the sceptics may be wrong.
It is at last possible that things are changing.
The prime minister, Constantine Mitsotakis, almost certainly understands what has to be done.
The three chief contenders for the leadership of the Socialist Party, when the ailing Andreas Papandreou hands it over, all tell you sensible things that would have got them drummed out of the party ten years ago.
The opinion polls have begun to suggest that ordinary Greeks are getting tired of the alternation of placeholders that has made up so much of recent Greek politics.
Perhaps the Greeks are emerging from the long, mesmerising spell that history has cast upon them; perhaps they are coming out of their corner.
If they are, the best way they can show it is to do something decisive about their economy.
The undodgeable thing that has to be done with the economy
This time Sisyphus must get there
TO UNDERSTAND the two most important things about the Greek economy, you need to remember that economic performance is just one of the outward manifestations of a people's inner life.
The Greeks of 1993 are trying to get to grips with a pair of huge economic imbalances.
One is to a large extent the consequence of something deep in the Greek character.
The other is at least partly the result of what history did to the Greeks between 1453 and 1821, the centuries of Ottoman rule when ‘government’ meant something alien.
The first imbalance is grave; the second is potentially fatal.
The merely grave one is Greece's imbalance of trade.
In round terms the Greeks buy three times as many goods from the outside world as they manage to sell to it.
Last year their imports cost nearly $10 billion; their exports brought in just over $1 billion.
That leaves a yawning gap — 17% of Greece's GDP — to be filled by other means (see chart 2).
The gap is so big because the Greeks have never managed to build up much of an industry.
Their farms produce some excellent things — first-class olive oil, plenty of good fruit and vegetables, a short but growing list of wines a Frenchman might be persuaded to drink — but Greece has not yet found a way of selling them abroad on a large scale.
Agriculture provides little more than a quarter of total exports; no doubt that figure can be improved, but not enormously.
There is a handful of raw-material exports.
But the Greeks, though they enjoy buying the products of other people's factories, are stubbornly reluctant to go in for factories themselves.
It is not for want of encouragement.
Greek governments have provided the usual tax incentives for the right sort of investment, and the usual cunning export subsidies.
In the blithe mid-century days when five-year plans were supposed to create industrial sectors at the flick of a wand, there were five-year plans galore.
To little avail.
Greeks with money do not want to put it into building factories.
Other Greeks do not want to work in them; they prefer the little shop, the handyman's job, doing something for cousin Yannis.
Nobody who has ever murmured, ‘Ah!
What individualists the Greeks are!’ should be surprised by this.
But the statistics reveal the economic consequence: a manufacturing sector in 1990 with a smaller share of GDP than it had in 1960 (see chart 3 on next page).
It is the service sector, producing little foreign currency, that has swollen.
This is an experience familiar to the old industrial countries.
But it was only in the 1950s that Greece set out to build a serious manufacturing sector — and immediately, unlike the Koreas and Spains of the world, found it was not capable of it.
So how is the trade gap to be filled?
One old stand-by is remittances, the money sent home by Greeks living abroad.
The Greek diaspora is almost as big and lively as the Jewish one.
Something like 4m people who speak Greek, or think of themselves as Greek, are scattered around the world.
They have been loyal with their money, as well as their feelings, to the 10m who still live in Greece; their remittances still cover about a sixth of the trade gap (see table 4 on next page).
But the money will not flow in on this scale for ever.
The great wave of migrants who left Greece in the 1950s and 1960s subsided long ago.
Third-generation and fourth-generation Greeks abroad will not be quite so ready to open their wallets.
Remittances are a fading asset.
The other stand-by has been the money earned by Greece's merchant navy.
Ships flying the Greek flag make up the world's third-biggest merchant fleet, after Liberia's and Panama's (having recently beaten an uppity Japan back into fourth place), and account for 40% of the European Community's total tonnage.
Ships owned by Greeks but flying other countries' flags double the Greek-flag tonnage.
In all, shipping in 1992 made almost as big a contribution as remittances to closing that trade deficit.
But this too has its limits.
The Greek merchant fleet is much smaller than it was a dozen years ago.
Its earnings, as a share of GDP, have halved, and its contribution to the balance of payments has fallen even more sharply.
Moreover, most of the Greek fleet is in the bulk trade, at a time when merchant shipping is becoming increasingly specialised: you now need chemical-carriers, food-carriers, and so on.
Greek shipowners are nimble men, but it will take some brave (and expensive) investment decisions if their fleet is to stay sufficiently up-to-date to maintain even its present share of the Greek economy.
Tourism, then?
This already provides a bigger contribution to the balance of payments than either remittances or shipping, and the Ministry of National Economy bubbles with ideas for making it still larger.
Greece is to become ‘the Florida of Europe’.
There are to be a total of 30 new marinas, eight more casinos, nine new golf courses.
Tourist offices will be open seven days a week; signposting is to be improved for visitors who do not know an alpha from an omega; there will be tougher inspection of hotels and boarding houses.
Fine, but some questions remain to be answered.
What sort of new tourists are the Greeks hoping to attract?
Not the Costa Brava hordes, they reply firmly; we want discerning, money-to-spare, middle-class visitors.
But such people will want a smoother-running, cleaner, tidier Greece than the one tourists find now.
By 1997 or thereabouts Athens will have a new airport, plus the best underground railway in Europe (thanks to European Community money) and a big park-and-culture zone in the heart of the city (ditto).
Soon afterwards Salonika too will have its underground (ditto again).
Roads and railways are to be improved and so, in some of the places tourists flock to, is the sewerage system; see page 20.
All this will help, but it will take time.
And meanwhile Greece has to reckon with the fact that Turkey, on the other side of the Aegean, is planning to lure exactly the same sort of middle-class tourist with exactly the same combination of sunshine, classical ruins and mildly exotic food — and, it must be added, with lower costs and beaches many of which are less in need of de-whiffing.
There remains the other great source of money from abroad — one in return for which, with a single uncomfortable proviso, Greece needs to do nothing.
The European Community gives Greece roughly $1 billion a year, almost 6% of its GDP and as much as net tourism and shipping together bring in.
On top of this, the Second Delors Package (which adds ‘cohesion’ money to ‘structural aid’, farm support and the rest of it) could add up to half as much again.
The first Greek economic miracle, of the 1950s and 1960s, was built on American Marshall aid.
A second one, the Greeks hope, is about to be built on European money.
The only snag is that uncomfortable proviso.
The EC is far from sure that the Greeks can be relied on to get their financial house in order.
If it comes to the conclusion that they cannot, it will stop playing Midas.
Which brings up the second of those two Greek imbalances — the potentially fatal one.
But first balance your budget
This is the Greek government's now almost chronic inability to balance its budget, and so stop itself sliding even more deeply into debt.
Last year the soaring public debt reached almost 120% of GDP, even without counting the money owed for the weapons Greece's soldiers buy from abroad.
Every country has budget problems, of course.
But Greece's have become a lot worse than most other people's because of a couple of things those centuries it spent under Ottoman rule did to it.
One effect of the Ottoman years was to leave Greeks preternaturally suspicious of government, any government.
The contemptuous name for ‘the state’ is still a Turkish word, dovleti.
The unimpressive performance of most post-Ottoman Greek governments — itself partly a result of the general mistrust of the state — has made things no better.
So it is almost a matter of philotimo, honour, that even in the relatively affluent Greece of recent years nobody who can possibly fiddle his taxes has failed to do so.
Last year direct taxes extracted a mere 8% of GDP.
Even the Italians manage nearly twice that.
The other effect of the Ottoman period — the reverse side of the coin — was to prolong the feudal element in the Greek character.
For most Greeks, a political party has long been not so much the voice of an ideology, or even of a class, as a system of social protection.
It answers the question, ‘Who looks after whom?’
When your side wins an election, you expect it to help its followers by giving them plenty of undemanding if not very well-paid jobs (kicking out the other lot's placemen in the process), arranging nice little contracts, inventing new pension wheezes, and so on.
It is the sort of thing feudal lords were once expected to do.
All Greek parties have done it.
But it got out of hand in 1981, when Andreas Papandreou's Socialists came to power.
Their lot, they felt, had not had a proper turn since the defeat of the left in the civil war of the late 1940s.
Now was the time to straighten the accounts.
To the social reforms any left-of-centre government would have wanted to make, the Socialists added a large helping of the special Greek look-after-your-own system.
The budget deficit quadrupled in the 1980s, and the public debt followed it into the stratosphere.
At long last something is being done to stop this.
The conservatives, having regained a parliamentary majority in 1990, dithered until they were half-way through their four-year term of office.
But last summer they took a deep breath, and a brave risk.
A freeze was imposed on wage payments in a large part of the public sector.
Because inflation at the time was about 16%, this inevitably meant a sharp cut in the workforce.
It was also (rather optimistically) decided that in future only one new government employee can be recruited for every three who leave the service.
Pensions were brought under control.
Greece has had one of the most lavish old-age pension schemes in the western world, measured against national income; it spends relatively half as much again on its elderly as the OECD average.
Now Greeks will have to pay more for their pensions, and wait longer for them.
Privatisation has been speeded up.
Of the dozens of ailing firms that the Socialists took under their wing in the 1980s, rather than let them die, almost all have been sold back into private hands or wound up.
So have 30–40 other smallish enterprises.
Now the government wants to sell two big oil refineries, the National Tourist Organisation, and up to 49% of the shares in the vast state telecoms company.
If it all comes off, this will put 550 billion drachmas ($1.6 billion) into the state budget this year and next.
But it is already clear that the programme is running into trouble.
The officials in charge of it still cannot find out exactly how much some of the firms they would like to sell are worth — or indeed, says one, how many firms the state actually owns.
And they are audibly unsure how keen on privatisation the government really is.
The way things look now, Greece's public sector is not going to be cut as much as it ought to be.
Most important, because this is the biggest part of the budget-rescue operation, Greeks are being told they have got to pay more tax.
The government has said to the European Community that, of the 7.7-percentage-points improvement it hopes to make in the total public-sector deficit between 1992 and 1996 — from 9.6% of GDP to 1.9% — more than half, 4.1 percentage points, is to come from extra taxes.
Some of this will be the result of the stiff increase in indirect taxes ordered last summer, notably in the tax on petrol.
But the larger part is supposed to come from direct taxes.
This is not because tax rates are being raised: on the contrary, they are being lowered.
The squeeze comes in another way.
The government's plan is that tax-dodging is suddenly to be made dramatically more difficult, by reorganising the tax-collecting system and making it easier for the taxman to spot the dodgers.
That bottom-of-the-league feeling
Will it work?
The spending-cuts part of the plan should do reasonably well.
The pension reform is skilfully organised, and will save a lot of money (though most of this will help the social-security fund, not the government budget).
The long-overdue squeeze on the public-sector workforce will save some more, though there are reports that unpublicised redundancy payments are eating up much of what is saved in wages.
The privatisations also help, even if they do not go far enough.
The big question-mark hangs over the tax-increase part of the programme.
That question-mark needs the next article all to itself.
If it fails to get its finances in order, Greece has a black future.
This place, which 30 years ago had the fastest-growing economy in democratic Europe, is now an economic failure.
It gets more money from the European Community than anybody else, but despite this its economic performance has deteriorated alarmingly.
It now has, on the published statistics, the lowest income per head in the Community, the lowest productivity, the highest inflation and the biggest external debt.
And the gap between it and its fellow Europeans is widening.
The Greeks claim that their black economy is bigger than any other Community country's, and so in absolute terms they are not quite as badly off as the published statistics make it seem.
But even if this is true (as it may be), it does not alter the fact that relatively speaking Greece is falling behind the rest of the Community; and the process continues.
The downward slide is in danger of becoming a drop over the precipice.
If the Greeks do not get their debt under control — and that, be it repeated, means getting a 7%-of-GDP surplus on the ordinary part of their budget, so as to have enough money left over to pay what is due on the debt — they will one day find they cannot sell the bonds that keep the debt going.
They will then lose control of the money supply, and of inflation.
They may also lose the generous donations from the European Community that enable them to pay what they owe abroad.
They must do what Sisyphus was commanded to do but, unlike Sisyphus, they must succeed.
They have to heave and sweat their great stone to the top of the mountain, and plant it firmly on the summit.
Otherwise it will roll back and crush them.
Or, to recall another grim Greek myth, they must avoid the fate of Tantalus.
The tantalising apple just above their heads is acceptance as a full member of the western world.
The Greeks have kept on reaching up for it, and it has kept on slipping through their fingers.
Let this be the leap that grasps.
All suggestions welcome for how to get them to do it
Pay up like a Eurogentleman
WHETHER today's Greeks do better than poor Sisyphus and Tantalus will be decided chiefly by the success or failure of the attempt to stop them being tax-dodgers.
It is not going to be easy.
The average Greek lawyer, poor chap, earns only half as much per year as the average Greek factory worker — if you believe their tax declarations, which a self-employed professional man can fiddle far more easily than can any mere employee.
No wonder there are 23,000 lawyers in Greece, nearly three times as many proportionately as in Italy or Spain.
Yet the attempt has to be made, because bringing in more tax is the centrepiece of the government's plan for saving the economy.
With value-added tax, and the other charges made when something is bought and sold, things are comparatively easy.
Even in Greece, most transactions of this sort are nowadays recorded on receipts that computers memorise, and the tax inspector can therefore poke his nose into.
The government should be able to get quite a lot of the new indirect tax money it is counting on.
It is on far trickier ground with direct taxes, especially income tax.
Unfortunately, more than half of the total extra money the government hopes to collect between now and 1996 comes from direct taxes.
To extract the blood from the stone, the tax system has been changed in two ways since last summer.
First, the top rate of income tax has been cut sharply.
This sounds counter-productive, but the theory is that all those self-employed lawyers and doctors and dentists will be more truthful about their income if the government is demanding less of it from them.
It will be interesting to see if this is how Greeks in fact react.
Second, the tax-collecting system has been given new teeth.
Local tax offices now have to report to a central-control office.
The regional nomarch, or prefect, tells each local office how much it ought to collect in the year (the national total being what the government reckons the budget needs).
Tax inspectors, who can already ask that bone-poor lawyer how he managed to afford a BMW and a five-bedroom house, may now also check his electricity bills and his credit-card spending; one Santorini tourist shop turned out to have reported only a tenth of its credit-card takings.
Is this going to be enough?
Many people doubt it, both at the European Community's headquarters in Brussels and inside the Greek government.
It is not just that the tax offices are the home of a great deal of corruption, which has survived many previous attempted clean-ups and, so far, even the arrival of computerisation.
Just as depressing is the flaccidity of much of the honest majority of the Greek civil service.
Ministers give orders that do not get carried out.
Explanations, when called for, are embarrassed evasions and sometimes plain lies.
This limpness is far from universal — parts of the system are excellent — but you get an uneasy feeling that the tax inspectorate is not one of the better parts.
No one who has visited a Greek tax office in a provincial town, and seen rows of clerks thumbing and date-stamping their way through piles of dusty paper, can feel confident that a new broom is truly on the way.
The opposition Socialists are now sounding tougher about tax reform than the ruling New Democracy conservatives.
Of course, the Socialists, if they win the coming election, have an interest in catching the tax-evaders.
The more money they can collect in direct taxes, which bite the rich hardest, the less they will have to raise by indirect taxes, which bite everybody equally.
Still, some of the suggestions made by the people who would be running economic policy in a Socialist government are worth the attention of anybody anxious to straighten out the Greek system.
To catch the self-employed tax-dodger, there could be a ‘profession tax’— a flat rate paid by every member of the profession in question, with additions according to which income bracket the ruling body of the profession reckons he belongs to.
Tax inspectors should be empowered to examine a man's bank statement as well as his credit-card dealings.
Farmers, now almost entirely outside the system, must become taxpayers too.
(Since many farmers vote Socialist, this idea is less bland than it sounds.)
There could be a property tax.
The imagination trembles at some of these ideas — will a profession's ruling body really come clean about its members' income?— but no suggestion, on this subject, should be dismissed out of hand.
It ought to be possible to tell within the next few weeks whether the measures the government has introduced over the past year are delivering the hoped-for results.
There is, in theory, no reason why the state should not collect a great deal more tax than it does.
Most estimates reckon that the black economy is roughly 40% the size of the official one.
This means that tax evasion is depriving the state — and the people who benefit from what the state can do for them, whether it is building better roads and hospitals or cleaning the seashore or guarding the frontiers — of a sum amounting to about 10% of the current official national income.
It should be possible to rake in, say, half of that.
The alternative is for Greeks to watch their economic hopes fade, and listen to the world go on chuckling about the story of the Golden Unfleeced.
Unlikely though it sounds, the Greeks need to be politically subtler
What's the Greek for Thatcher and Rocard?
PICTURE a country that has two main political parties, both led by 74-year-olds.
Both parties were created less than 20 years ago, by men still living today; one of these has continued to be the leader of his lot, and the other founding-father is now president of the country.
The right-hand party includes (on a French comparison) everybody from Valéry Giscard d'Estaing to Jean-Marie Le Pen; the left-hand one (in British terms) everybody from Paddy Ashdown to a large chunk of the Militant Tendency.
Both are run from the top: party headquarters pick the candidates at election time, control the patronage, take no nonsense from the constituencies.
In short, both of them combine motley membership with rigid structure — which does not make for relaxed, efficient teamwork.
This is Greece.
If the Greeks do get their economy under control, they still have to do something about their politics.
Greek parties are no longer, as they once were, just vehicles of personal ambition (there really once was a ‘George Papandreou Party’).
Today's big two have kept the same names for 19 years, and the right-of-centre one has unprecedentedly changed leaders without breaking up.
This is no longer the politics of the Levant.
Nevertheless, the Greek system still has some way to travel before it will be the sort of political machine a post-cold-war democracy requires.
What post-communist politics needs
Now that communism has gone, parties do not have to choose between two irreconcilable ideologies, two utterly different ways of running a country.
Nor, as the country grows richer, do they represent hugely different social classes.
They are all democrats now — real democrats, not ‘single-party democrats’— and they all believe in market economics.
Their relatively humdrum job these days is merely to argue about the best mechanism for finding out what the people want, the best way of looking after the country's interests abroad and, in economics, the rival merits of maximising productive efficiency and maximising compassion for the poor devils who get least out of the efficiency.
No country's parties have yet fully adjusted themselves to the new pattern — of the big countries, the United States and Germany are probably closest — but Greece is further away than most of the rest of the western world.
This is because Greek politics is still distorted by two stubbornly persistent hangovers from Greece's past.
The distortion of the Socialists (who got 38.6% of the vote in the 1990 election, and 33.8% in an early-May opinion poll, when 23.8% were ‘undecided’) is the easier one for outsiders to understand.
The Greek civil war of 1946–49 — less than half a century ago in fact, but merely yesterday in the politics of south-east Europe — was the last great European left-versus-right convulsion; by comparison, the Hungarian rebellion of 1956 was no more than a bloody skirmish.
After the Greek civil war, the losers were excluded from public life for more than three decades.
This embittered minority included not only Greeks who chose to vote for the Communists, when these were eventually relegalised, but a large number of those who voted for the Socialist Party that Andreas Papandreou created in 1974.
Hence the slogan — Allaghi, ‘the change’— with which the Socialists came to power in 1981.
Even now, many older Socialists feel abandoned by history: Jacobites, as it were, condemned to live in a country run by triumphant Whigs.
The party needs a shake-out, if it is to be the driving-force on the compassionate side of the new politics.
It is unlikely to get a shake-out while Mr Papandreou is its leader.
But even Mr Papandreou, who in recent years has survived a brutal scandal, major heart surgery and a demanding new marriage, is now looking pretty frail.
Of those who might succeed him as leader, at least two men and one woman — Constantine Simitis, Gerasimos Arsenis and Vasso Papandreou (no relation)— could probably do for Greece's left what Michel Rocard has proposed to do for France's.
The Socialists need to redefine themselves as a definitively ex-Marxist party that is nevertheless keener on social fairness (and better at keeping Greece green and clean) than its conservative rival.
But those conservatives of New Democracy (46.9% of the vote in 1990, but only 24.1% in this month's opinion poll) also need a shake-out.
The New Democrats' distortion is nationalism: not the reasoned nationalism of the anti-federalists in today's European Community, or even the relatively disciplined nationalism of 19th-century Western Europe, but something much more primal.
This has shown itself most vividly in the miserable business of Macedonia.
When the Macedonians broke away from ex-Yugoslavia last year, the man who was then Greece's foreign minister, Antonis Samaras, told his EC colleagues that the new state could not have the word ‘Macedonia’ in its name.
His prime minister, Mr Mitsotakis, did not stop him, either because he did not know what Mr Samaras was about to do or because he thought he could fudge the issue.
He could not.
Nearly a million people (a tenth of Greece's population) demonstrated in Salonika; an opinion poll said that 72% were against any compromise on the name, and 20% were ready to fight about it; and up to a quarter of New Democracy's members of parliament threatened rebellion.
The Macedonia eruption is now technically over.
Greece was obliged this spring to accept the new country's admission to the United Nations with ‘Macedonia’ in its name, and the New Democracy rebels swallowed their fury when they realised that voting against the government would cause an election their party would probably lose.
But the damage is done.
The primitive ferocity of Greek nationalism, which is a sign of Greek insecurity, has bared its teeth again.
A great many Greek politicians and officials who at the time said privately that they thought the thing was a nonsense heard themselves publicly using arguments which did not improve Greece's reputation for honest debate.
The EC was infuriated.
And Mr Mitsotakis may now be tempted to recover votes lost over Macedonia by making a premature relaxation of his correctly rigorous economic policy.
That is a high price.
There is a better pattern
How much better if this shrill hyper-nationalism were sliced away from New Democracy.
Usually, a two-party system is better for a country than a many-party one, because it is less liable to tie itself up in knots.
But the modernisation of Greece will probably come faster in the late 1990s if there is now a period of four- or five-party politics.
On the right would be the hyper-nationalists, with maybe 10% of the vote.
On the left there would be, for a time, the obstinate rump of the orthodox Communists, flat-earthers to a man (say, 3%).
There will also, with luck, be the far more attractive if somewhat dreamy non-Communist radicalism of the Synaspismos movement, led by two of the most appealing politicians in the country, Maria Damanaki and Leonidas Kyrkos (maybe 6–7%).
The other 80% would be the natural battleground of New Democracy, minus its wilder nationalist fringe, and a Socialist Party stripped of its now irrelevant old left.
Here would be two worthy contenders — one Thatcherite, one Rocardian — for the newly defined middle ground.
The result of the next election, due within 12 months, is a toss-up, though it is not conventional wisdom to say so.
The opinion polls show the Socialists well in the lead, and their supporters are apparently twice as determined to turn out and vote on election day as New Democracy's are.
But things may not be as simple as that makes them sound.
Mr Papandreou is visibly flagging, and the mass rallies and repeated television appearances of a Greek election will be a fierce test of his stamina.
Mr Mitsotakis, though half a year older, and no bundle of charisma, is in much better physical shape.
His party, though divided over Macedonia and the economy, is entitled to claim that its record includes nothing as bad as the Socialists' foolish first few years in power in the 1980s.
It is not impossible that by election-day the memory of past Socialist errors (committed by the man still leading the party) will have eaten away Mr Papandreou's present lead, and that Mr Mitsotakis will pull off as big a surprise as the one the equally uncharismatic John Major pulled off in Britain last year.
For the most cheering news out of Greece today is that the country may at last be getting tired of the bumbly, floppy politics of the past.
It shows in the opinion polls' evidence of the Greeks' growing reluctance to commit their votes to any of the present parties.
It also shows in their embarrassed defensiveness when foreigners wonder aloud whether their public life is in need of change.
This is at least partly due to Greece's membership of the European Community.
It is not just money — the EC's one-drachma-out-of-every-17 gift to the Greek economy — that Greece gets from its link to Western Europe.
Along the link there also flows a realisation that there are more efficient ways to run a country.
No European nation is satisfied with its politics at the moment, but Greece is more dissatisfied than most.
Out of that dissatisfaction it may be about to build something better.
But northward, look
A new Great Idea
EVER since Greece won its freedom from the Turks in the 1820s — no, ever since the Turks took Constantinople on that black Tuesday at the end of May in 1453 — the Greeks have had a Megali Idea, a Great Idea.
Until the catastrophe in Anatolia in 1922, the great idea pulled them eastward, in an attempt to recapture the glory, and some of the lands, that had been Byzantium.
In the past dozen years an alternative great idea has pulled them westward, as they have tried to dissolve themselves into the European Community.
Now the end of the cold war, which has changed everybody's map, has changed Greece's more than most.
It has given the Greeks a new foreign-policy possibility, to the north: one in which membership of the Community will be useful, but Greeks can still be Greeks.
For Greece, as for Germany and one other country in the NATO alliance, the cold war had shut a long border on the other side of which lay once-familiar territory.
Now the barrier is down, and the Greeks can resume business in the Balkans.
Like the Swiss, they combine a strong sense of national identity with a cheerful willingness to live and work outside the homeland.
Like the Jews, they are exactly the sort of quick-decision, risk-accepting businessmen who are needed when a region is changing from communism to capitalism.
The Balkans are the Greeks' natural new hinterland: or, rather, their rediscovered hinterland.
What they can do there should not be exaggerated.
Greece does not have the resources to remake the Balkans all by itself; it will not be, as some Greeks excitedly think, ‘like Japan in South-East Asia’.
But history and geography give Greece some handy advantages.
The Greeks used to know this part of the world well, and a scattering of them still live in Romania, Bulgaria and as far east as Ukraine.
They belong to the Orthodox branch of Christianity; so do most of their northern neighbours.
And in picking up these old connections it helps greatly that Greece now belongs to the European Community.
The Salonika area, in the Greek part of Macedonia, is a good place for capitalists from other countries to build the factories that will one day be selling their goods into the revived Balkans.
The Greeks are already the biggest investors in Bulgaria.
They are training some of the region's future central bankers.
The drachma is the unofficial currency of southern Albania; four new 100-drachma coins, pointedly displaying Alexander the Great's head, and worth $1.90, are a day's pay for a labourer there.
The reopening of this northern hinterland, however, could well change the Greeks' view of what it means to be a member of the Community.
Until now, the EC has meant a generous inflow of cash, and a political good example; but it was also something more.
It seemed to be Greece's only chance of breaking out of isolation, its only hope of finding a role for itself in the world.
The rediscovery of their Balkan hinterland gives the Greeks something new to do.
They still need to be part of a wider Europe, but they can now be more relaxed about it.
In particular, the change will probably dilute their definition of the sort of Europe they want to be members of.
Until now, the Greeks have claimed to be among the most radical of Europeans, ready to move swiftly to a federal European union with a single foreign policy and a single army.
Most of them have almost certainly not thought through what this would mean.
It is hard to imagine Greeks letting basic decisions about their future be taken by a European parliament that would be about 97% non-Greek.
It is even harder to picture them leaving the defence of their border with Turkey to decisions taken in a distant European capital, and to a garrison in Thrace consisting mostly of soldiers from Germany, Italy, Spain or wherever.
When the Community seemed to be their only option, the Greeks thought they had better be thoroughly Community-minded.
Now that new possibilities are opening up in the Balkans, they will modify this.
Greece's natural interest in Europe, like Britain's, is to be part of a wealth-creating economic confederation, but not part of a political union in which it could get out-voted on something it considered vital.
New option, less old nationalism
The new prospect to their north may also encourage the Greeks to behave differently in two other matters.
Explosions of nationalism like last year's row over Macedonia, it should now be clear, are the worst way of pursuing their new interests in the Balkans.
It may be also be easier in these new circumstances for Greece and Turkey to wind down their long confrontation with each other.
The emergence of an independent Macedonia on Greece's northern border was indeed an event that justified a Greek response, but the response should not have been to tell the new country it could not use the name ‘Macedonia’(see box).
The important thing was to ensure that nobody tried to change the border between the new place and Greece.
That could have been achieved by an international conference in which both sides (and Bulgaria, which also has an interest) would have been asked to swear their respect for existing frontiers.
This might have involved a change in the preamble to the Macedonian constitution, which refers to something expansionist-sounding that was said in 1944; but that would have been it.
Instead, the Greeks embarked on an argument about the name of the place in the course of which they cosied up to Serbia (which is the chief danger to the peaceful, democratic Balkans they want) and bullied Macedonia (which they need as a buffer between themselves and Serbia).
They angered their EC colleagues, who were first persuaded to back the Greek argument and then had to wriggle out of it, and the United Nations, which got hauled into the dispute.
And in the end the Greeks lost: Macedonia is going to have ‘Macedonia’ in its name after all.
It was all, to put it mildly, counter-productive.
The other benefit of the end of the cold war could show itself in Greece's relations with the Turks.
Turkey is the third of those three NATO countries, along with Greece and Germany, which had been sliced off by the cold war from a familiar next-door world.
For the Turks the rediscovered hinterland is the Muslim ex-Soviet republics of central Asia.
This region will be absorbing much Turkish attention and money in the coming years.
Here is an opportunity.
Now that Turkish eyes have turned eastward, and Greek ones northward, perhaps the two countries can stop glaring at each other.
Poor as it is, Greece still spends 6.2% of its annual income on defence, almost three times as much as the average for the European Community.
The Greeks explain that they cannot spend less, despite the cold war's end, because of the Turks.
The Turkish Fourth Army, facing Greece, remains undiminished; it has a fleet of more than 100 landing-craft; it assiduously practises river crossings.
Should not Greece be fearful?
All of this is broadly true.
But the Turks for their part point out, when you visit them, that something like four-fifths of the undiminished Greek army is concentrated in Thrace, on Turkey's border…
Mesmerised, the two countries stay frozen in their hostility.
An enmity that goes back to the battle of Manzikert in the wilds of Anatolia 922 years ago will not vanish just because something as ephemeral as communism has gone away.
But it can be eased.
This writer, who knows and likes both Greeks and Turks, has a suggestion.
Let the EC and NATO jointly propose a conference at which all their members, including Greece and Turkey, will sit down together.
The aim of the conference will be to do for this junction of Europe and Asia what the Helsinki conference in 1975 did for the rest of Europe.
Greece and Turkey will be asked to accept that the border between them must not be changed by force, and to agree to a set of ‘confidence-building measures’— pull-backs from the border, inspectors on the ground, aerial reconnaissance — to help them trust each other.
It would be nice if the conference were preceded by an agreement on Cyprus — about which the Turks could usefully be more accommodating than they have been so far — but the conference should not depend on that, any more than the Helsinki one needed a prior agreement on the unification of Germany.
If it came off, one of the world's more unnecessary irritations would be eased, the Greeks could halve their defence spending — and a calmer Greece and Turkey could both get on with their more interesting new post-cold-war business.
The bare facts of Macedonia
QUESTION: who owns the name ‘Macedonia’?
Answer: it is a mistake to ask such questions, because they lead you into the murky borderland between history and myth, where the evidence is fragmentary and the fragments point in different directions.
And because those who see the present as a mere extension of the past usually come a cropper.
The first Macedonia most people know about was the Macedon of King Philip, denounced as an alien tyrant by Demosthenes of Athens in some of the greatest speeches ever written, the Philippics.
Philip got his revenge when his army beat an Athenian-led alliance at the battle of Chaironea in 338BC, thereby putting Greece under his control and, a little later, causing Demosthenes to kill himself by poison.
Philip's great-something-grandfather, Alexander I, had been accepted as a Greek by the Greeks (so that he could take part in the Olympics).
Some other early Macedonians, the sort who could afford to be buried in graves with inscriptions, were also plainly Greek.
On the other hand, most Greek historians at the height of the classical era put the bulk of Macedonians out among ‘the barbarians’.
The likeliest explanation is that Greek settlers moving in from the south gradually came to dominate the many hill tribes of the region — much as, a little later, Chinese moving into what is now Vietnam came to dominate the local tribes there.
The Macedonia of Philip and his son Alexander the Great (the one in the picture) included not only the present Greek province of Macedonia but pretty well all of the new, ex-Yugoslav country that wants to share the name.
Of course, the present inhabitants of this new country are Slavs, the result of a great Slav migration from the north 900 years after Philip and Alexander.
But this does not disqualify them from using the word, any more than the English who displaced the ancient Britons are disqualified from continuing to use the name ‘Britain’(no doubt to the irritation of their southern neighbours, the Bretons of Bretagne).
The name of Macedonia then went on a wander.
For a time the Romans applied it to virtually the whole of Greece.
The Byzantines confined it, for a period, to an area of the Black Sea coast in what is now Bulgaria.
It was not until some time around the 18th century that it was firmly back where it is now.
The present border between Greek Macedonia and Slav Macedonia, for those worried about ethnic cleansing, is racially fairly tidy.
There are 40,000 or so more-or-less Slav-speakers on the Greek side — the Greeks will not be specific — out of Greek Macedonia's total population of 2.25m.
The number of Greek-speakers on the Slav side, equally hard to be precise about, is perhaps half that.
Some excitable Slav nationalists still talk of a united Macedonia; but then some excitable Greek nationalists still want to unite themselves with southern Albania (North Epirus to them), a bit farther west.
If the two governments agreed to leave the border where it is, and if Slav Macedonia perhaps changed that vague phrase in the preamble of its constitution, then Britons and Bretons — sorry, Makedones and Makedonci — could probably live side by side with not much more than the usual inter-human friction.
Go and see a place that is Greece in miniature
For those who care about skoupidia
IT WAS once an independent state, all 32 square miles of it; but it got on the wrong side of the local superpower, whereupon angry Athens exiled its inhabitants for daring to ally themselves with Sparta.
That was in 431BC, in the Peloponnesian war.
A couple of millennia or so later it was momentarily the capital of newly freed Greece, when the Greeks broke away from the Turks in the 1820s.
If you want to see a very Greek place that is neither the urban mess of contemporary Athens nor the deracinated tourist prettiness of some of the islands, go to Aegina.
This is a ‘working island’, a place that needs tourists but still has an economic life of its own.
It is a good illustration of how much Greece has changed since 1945, and the sort of changes Greece still has to make.
At the end of the second world war, Aegina, like most of Greece, was on the brink of death.
Its chief exports had been sponges and merchant seamen, and those brought in nothing in wartime.
The island's simple agriculture, after the Germans had taken what they wanted, could hardly feed even its few thousand inhabitants.
The older people still tell stories of starvation, and corpses found in the gutter at dawn.
Even in the early 1960s, though Piraeus is less far away over the water than Dover is from Calais, taking a car to Aegina meant winching it into and out of a caique.
Then came the two saviours of modern Aegina, tourists and that prince of nuts, the phistiki, alias the pistachio.
For the past 30 years Aegina has been producing about the best pistachios in the world.
It now has a permanent, or wintertime, population of 11,000 people and a swollen, or summertime, one three times as big.
Most of the summer's extra 20,000 or so are the families of Athenians who have turned the western side of the island into a hot-weather dormitory suburb.
The Athenians built 2,400 homes there in the 1970s, when faster boats made the trip easier, nearly doubling the previous number of houses on Aegina.
But it is the visitors from abroad who have become the island's chief money-bringer.
Unlike most of the Athenians, they want to eat out in tavernas; they hire mopeds; they buy souvenirs.
Some are pulled in by the package-holiday attractions of Ayia Marina, the island's miniature experiment in Costa Bravado.
A few come for Aphaia, one of the most beautiful of Greece's classical temples.
Most probably just want an inexpensive look at a bit of ‘typical Greece’ not far from Athens: the working waterfront, with fishing boats moored alongside the rich tourists' yachts; some amiable villages up handsome valleys; a quick taste of that Aegean simplicity of water, bare rock and sky.
Aegina has beds for 6,500 tourists, in hotels and private houses.
It filled only 60% of them last year, a good season for Greece as a whole; it is hoping to do better in 1993.
The next best prop for the economy is those pistachios.
Aegina grew 700–800 tonnes of them in 1992, nearly twice as much as in 1982, and in principle looks forward to growing twice as much again by the late 1990s.
But pistachios are no longer the sure-fire success they seemed to be in the 1960s, when Aegina's soil and air produced nuts of a quality nobody appeared to be able to match.
Italy and various parts of the Middle East are producing pretty good pistachios these days.
The profit per tonne in Aegina is falling, because trimming the trees and picking the nuts is a laborious business that modern workers can insist on being paid more for, and much of the water the trees need has to be brought in from the mainland.
For the rest, there is fish; the waters around Aegina yield lots of tasty varieties, which make up income-earner number three.
There are still those seamen (of Aegina's permanent population of 11,000, several hundred work in the merchant navy or are ex-sailors living on the island).
The olive is making a mild come-back, with the help of European Community money.
But the rest of Aegina's agriculture is a fading story.
The abandoned vine-terraces along the inland valleys, dried grey by the sun, look like the side of an amphitheatre; much of the local retsina you think you are drinking in the village tavernas in fact comes from the mainland.
Those simple things
The island's other problems are the result of growth, not decline.
If you go to ask the mayor of Aegina town about them, you see a room in which Capodistrias may have sat, planning post-Ottoman Greece.
You also get a fine demonstration of the Greek political process.
These are people who believe that everybody has something to say, and who find the idea of consensus rather boring.
The mayor, Tryphonas Gotsis, assembles a group of colleagues and friends — the head of the pistachio-growers' association, a man who has a hotel in Ayia Marina, a trio of town notables.
You ask the first question, and within moments six people are disagreeing vehemently with one another in Greek, breaking off to explain courteously in English what each thinks the answer should be, and then disagreeing with equal passion in English.
There is the water problem.
Aegina is not as badly off as, say, Hydra, or as Athens will be until the extra river the Athenians plan to tap comes on stream; but this is a dry island.
Seven-eighths of the water the town of Aegina consumes is shipped in from the mainland.
The small fishing harbour of Perdika, facing the Peloponnese, has no water of its own at all.
In the mayor's office there is eventually resigned agreement.
More storage tanks can be built, more pipes laid; but the water level is still falling.
Aegina — like a tiny Hong Kong — has to go on buying the stuff from the mainland.
At the other end of the digestive process is the sewage question.
Everywhere in Greece the hoped-for growth of income from tourism depends in part on removing the smells that haunt too many beaches and other places where north Europeans twitch noses and raise eyebrows.
(The Greeks prefer fresh air, too.)
Aegina is no exception.
Ayia Marina has already put in a proper sewerage system.
Aegina town — courtesy of the European Community's taxpayers — is in the throes of constructing one, currently a large nuisance to vehicles and pedestrians alike.
The smaller town of Souvala, and poor Perdika, have not yet got that far; but in general Aegina will fairly soon be up to the standards those fussy Germans and English expect.
And then there are ta skoupidia — the piles of rubbish, a subject on which the Aegina decibel level reaches its maximum.
In the towns and big villages, the rubbish-collection system is now fairly efficient.
The trouble is disposal.
This one-time capital of Greece finds it necessary, in 1993, to send the rubbish its people throw away, 10,000 tonnes a year of it, by ship to the mainland, to be disposed of there.
This is ridiculously expensive, and the cause of much political rancour.
It happens because, so far, each successive plan to dump or bury the stuff on the island has been scuppered by the opposition of those who live near the proposed site: opposition that takes, sometimes, splendidly Byzantine forms.
Now, however, the question has been settled.
(‘No, it hasn't.’)
A place has been found in the loneliest part of the island where, it is agreed (‘Not yet, not yet!’), ta skoupidia can be buried for the next 25–30 years, much more cheaply than by shipping it to Attica (‘But the figure is not yet known!’).
This will be ready by the end of 1993 (‘Oho!’).
If, this time, it all works out successfully, Aegina may save itself some money.
It should also diminish the roadside piles of kitchen refuse, plastic bottles and (in mysterious numbers) old mattresses that still litter the places the rubbish trucks have yet to reach.
This excellently Greek island is in many ways a sample of the successes and the continuing tribulations of the country as a whole.
In one way, though, it is unique.
Aegina claims to be, so far, the only place in Greece that has bothered to establish — and can find the money for — a sanctuary for injured birds and animals.
On the northern edge of Aegina town, near the sea, Philip Dragoumis takes in 2,000 damaged creatures a year, mostly birds, half of which have been illegally shot.
Cranes teeter among the ducks and swans; there were eight wolves when your correspondent was there, and a collection of cats that had, as it were, just wandered in.
A network of volunteers collects wounded birds around the country and delivers them to Aegina at the collectors' expense.
A volunteer vet treats them.
Even so, running the place costs nearly £5,000 ($1,850) a month, most of which is covered by donations (The Economist made a modest one).
If you had thought that Greeks never worry about animals, or rubbish, go to Aegina.
Will they make it?
That depends how much of a determinist you are
Atoms and solid matter
THE next few years are going to be a test of the Greek character.
This nation of quicksilver individualists has to be stoically unwavering in the economic self-discipline it has belatedly imposed on itself.
It needs to make up its mind whether Greece has some special purpose in the world, apart from survival, and if so how this purpose fits into the wider patterns of Europe.
And it must find time to sort out its politics.
The Greeks, it is often said, are wonderful patriots but terrible citizens.
They have a highly developed sense of national identity but almost no sense of responsibility towards the state they live in.
Or so runs the common accusation.
They will not pass the coming test unless they disprove the charge.
Whether or not they succeed depends on which theory of the Greek character you chiefly believe.
According to the first theory, which is the one the Greeks themselves prefer, they behave as they do in the public side of life because of what history has done to them.
This is the relatively cheerful theory, because the damage done by unkind history can be made good when history turns kind again.
There is much to be said for this explanation.
The Greeks spent several centuries under the heel of the Ottoman empire, which allowed them no form of self-government except in church matters (about which the Turks were on the whole remarkably liberal).
The Greece that got away from the Turks was a country of peasants, local clan chieftains and Orthodox priests, with only a sliver of a mercantile and professional upper class.
It was also, even in its language, a fragmented country.
The Greek spoken in 1821 varied greatly from place to place; one lot of islanders who proved invaluable in getting rid of the Turks spoke, in fact, Albanian.
Dismayingly, things got little better in the post-Ottoman period.
For very few of these past 170 years have Greeks felt properly in command of their own country.
Their 19th-century kings, with accompanying royal courts, were sent to them from north-west Europe.
They have had two spells of native military dictatorship.
The Germans occupied them in the second world war, the Americans rebuilt them afterwards, and then the north-west Europeans came back in the shape of the European Community and its powerful money.
This has been a dependent country.
It has also remained, in a new way, a fragmented one.
Greece's brand-new, post-1945 middle class is the product of the brutally rapid urbanisation caused by the German occupation, the civil war of 1946–49 and the Marshall-aid boom that followed the civil war.
It takes time for any new middle class to realise that there is more to life than the sudden enjoyment of prosperity.
The plump new Greek bourgeoisie has been, you might say, no exception.
This has not made for a smoothly running society, whose members all feel part of a common enterprise.
History, in short, say the proponents of this first theory, has until now discouraged the Greeks from learning the proper relationship between the citizen and the democratic state.
This is why they do not, if they can possibly avoid it, pay the taxes the state can legitimately call for, obey the signs it reasonably puts up in the streets, and so on.
No matter, say the optimists.
It will all come right, now that a different period of history has begun.
Once the Greeks grow familiar with the alternation of democratically elected governments, and once their economy is giving them something like a proper European standard of life, they will behave like proper Europeans.
Perhaps they will.
But there is another theory about the Greeks.
It says that at least some of the characteristics of this hyper-individualist people cannot be explained by what has happened to them in the Ottoman time and since, because these characteristics predate the Ottomans.
Pericles noticed it too
This second theory remembers that in 431BC — the high point of classical Greece — the great Pericles spoke bitterly of the many Greeks who in his judgment avoided their public responsibilities: a ‘useless’ lot, he called them.
It notes that the Byzantine Greeks were also a brilliant but undisciplined people, held together only by some pretty unscrupulous methods of government.
Indeed, it is hard to explain some of the oddities even of modern Greece by the history of the past 500 years.
There is that persistent reluctance of Greeks to build factories, or to work in them.
Does the Turkish occupation, or anything that has happened since, explain why Greeks so much prefer to earn their living in the little, man-to-man operations of the service sector?
There is also the recent failure of the government to reorganise the export of agricultural produce.
In 1991 it offered handsome tax incentives to encourage the creation of big trading companies that would do the job more efficiently than lots of little sellers.
The attempt failed.
Greeks do not like big organisations; they would rather do the job personally.
At Ierapetra, in Crete, there is a statue of a Dutchman who taught the local farmers how to export cucumbers.
Matters have improved somewhat since then; a number of agricultural co-operatives, including two or three in Crete, are doing good business abroad.
Yet it remains true that, with a few exceptions (which include anything to do with ships), the Greeks are not good at working together in large groups.
It is no accident that the Greek word for ‘person’ is the same as the word for ‘atom’.
‘This lifeboat holds 20 atoma,’ says the sign in the ship you board in Piraeus.
No people ever quite loses the quirks and quiddities that originally got it identified as a recognisable entity — as a people.
The Greeks are not about to become Germans (and the rest of Europe can probably survive the fact).
But it may be that the things they have been through these past few hundred years have exaggerated some of their original characteristics.
The sensible old Athenian scepticism about the power of the state developed into a generalised mistrust of any large organisation.
A healthy individualism became an introverted one.
It is these history-caused distortions that may be changing.
The Socialist Party, which got its economics so disastrously wrong at the start of the 1980s, has now more or less caught the point.
The New Democracy conservatives, though they were alarmingly slow to tackle the budget deficit when they got back to power, did eventually do something stern, and are still resisting the temptation to relax again.
The voters, so far as you can judge from Greek opinion polls, would like to choose an economically responsible government in the coming election, and may even be willing to react responsibly to what it asks of them.
The reopening of borders long sealed by the cold war could be the event that confirms the change.
For too long the Greeks, in trying to decide where they stood in the world, have had only two implausible choices.
They could fix their eye on the old enmity with Turkey; but that was manifestly leading nowhere.
Or they could tell themselves that they belonged to a European Community from which they were in fact, until very recently, separated by a long stretch of communist-occupied territory; and that too was not exactly convincing.
The cold war's end has altered this.
There is now a possibility of a more or less homogeneous Europe, in the south-eastern part of which Greece can find a distinctive role for itself, and can therefore more confidently feel part of the wider Europe.
It will no longer be a country on the edge.
The Greeks, being a thin-skinned lot, dislike criticism.
They have lately had a great deal of it.
It is now in their power, at long last, to show that they are not the people the critics said they were.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
INTERNATIONAL BANKING
According to the Bank of England's latest Quarterly Bulletin, London remains the leading centre for cross-border bank lending, with 17% of the total.
Japan is second with 14%.
In 1984, by contrast, Britain accounted for 24% of external lending and Japan only 9%.
If Japan's lending had continued to expand at the same pace as in recent years it would have overtaken Britain in 1992.
Instead, lending from Japan fell by $19 billion last year, whilst lending from Britain increased by $18 billion.
America's share of external lending has slumped over the past eight years, to 9%, but lending from continental Europe has soared.
In 1984 lending from Britain was more than double that of France, Germany and Switzerland combined.
Last year their 20% of total lending was well ahead of Britain's 17% share.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES
America's visible-trade deficit rose to $10.2 billion in March, lifting its 12-month deficit to $13.8 billion.
Germany's 12-month trade surplus fell to $11.9 billion in February; its current-account deficit narrowed to $17.3 billion in the same period.
Following last week's 8% devaluation of the Spanish peseta within the ERM, it fell 4% in trade-weighted terms.
WORLD BOURSES
Madrid was this week's star performer.
Hopes of lower interest rates after the peseta's devaluation lifted share prices by 6.1% to a 1993 high.
Hong Kong, Singapore and Zurich hit record highs.
But Tokyo dipped 3.4% and the world index finished 1.2% lower.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
America's narrow-money growth quickened to 10.8% in the year to April, but its broad-money supply fell by 1%.
During the same period Spain's broad money increased by 7.2%.
France's broad money grew by 4.8% in the 12 months to March.