

SUPPORT BETWEEN KIN: WHO GIVES WHAT TO WHOM?
Introduction
We all have experience of family life but it is dangerous to generalize on the basis of it, especially since contemporary Britain is an ethnically varied society and one with considerable regional disparities.
The purpose of this chapter is to assess what we know from research evidence about patterns of support between adult relatives in contemporary Britain.
Since this evidence is patchy, the chapter also begins to identify areas in which future research seems important.
The purpose here essentially is to outline what we know as a prelude to tackling the themes and patterns which emerge in a more analytical way in subsequent chapters.
Specialists in the field will be familiar with much of the material reviewed here and may wish to pass over it quickly.
Readers less familiar with these studies may be interested to weigh their own experience against the research evidence.
The discussion in this chapter is organized around the central question ‘Who does what for whom?’.
I have broken this question down into two component parts, and deal first with the issue of what types of support pass between relatives, and second with precisely which relatives offer each other assistance.
These questions form the framework for discussion.
As I was reviewing the material to be used here I had certain issues in my mind which concern the structure and meaning of the support given, based upon the ideas developed by anthropologists and sociologists who have studied kinship in Britain and elsewhere.
As these appear as themes threaded through the discussion it may be useful to identify them here, although I shall return to them at the end of the chapter.
1
It is obvious that we are bound to find considerable variation in people's experience of support between kin.
Are these variations  personal and idiosyncratic, or does people's experience vary more systematically in relation to their position in the social and economic structure?
Do the major social divisions of class, gender and ethnicity really account for the differences?
There are also bound to be variations with age, which in terms of family relationships is reflected in a person's position in the structure of generations (for a discussion of age and generation, see Finch, 1986a).
Another possibility is regional differences in different areas of the United Kingdom, in both beliefs about and the practice of family support.
2
How reliable is support between kin?
There is a sense in which family relationships are regarded as providing structures of support which are uniquely reliable, but at the same time it is obvious that not everyone draws upon such support in practice.
Clearly assistance is not given to all kin invariably and whatever the circumstances, but are there certain relationships where it is given almost automatically?
In what sense is support from kin reliable, and are there some types of support which are more reliable than others?
3
The polar opposite of automatic support is the idea that people act out of self-interest in family relationships, as in other areas of life.
Is there evidence that this happens, and if so when does it happen?
At the level of morality, is it regarded as proper to take self-interest into account when deciding whether to offer support to a relative, or to ask for it?
Or are you always meant to act in a selfless manner towards your relatives, or at least to give the appearance of doing so?
Focusing upon the roll of instrumental considerations in family support thus helps us to uncover elements of the morality of duty in family life.
4
The concept of exchange has often been used to describe support in families, and this can be seen as expression of mutual self-interest.
How important is the exchange element in structuring kin support?
Must there always be a two-way element, or are there circumstances in which a one-way flow of support is regarded as acceptable and even appropriate?
Inevitably the preliminary review presented in this chapter raises more questions than it answers.
This is deliberate, in that it helps to identify key questions about support in families which need to be addressed in later chapters.
What kinds of support do relatives provide for each other?
I shall begin this review by considering the available evidence about different types of support in families, grouping under five main headings: economic support; accommodation; personal care; practical support and child care; emotional and moral support.
How important are kin in providing each type of support?
On what terms is it given and received?
Economic support
The most obvious examples of economic support between kin concerns giving and lending money for specified purposes.
This can be anything from a loan of £10 to tide your sister over to her next pay cheque, to substantial gifts like giving your grandson the money for the deposit on his first house.
Some do not involve the direct exchange of money.
At the outset we need to make a distinction between economic support which passes between one individual and another, and situations where members of a family share resources from a commonly-owned pool, which represents a distinctive type of economic sharing between kin.
For example in the farming industry kin ties still form the basis of many businesses (Marsden, 1984; Hutson, 1987).
More generally, family businesses still are more significant in the British economy than is often supposed (Scott, 1986) although participation in a family firm does not necessarily imply pooling living expenses.
It is also the custom of certain groups who have migrated to Britain to pool resources between kin, either between people living in the same household or sometimes across households (Anwar, 1985, pp. 52–5; Brah, 1986).
Whilst these variations are important I shall focus this discussion mainly upon the more common examples, where support is being given by one person to another.
Money transfers What evidence exists about direct transfers of money between relatives, what kind of sums are involved and between whom?
A good starting point is Bell's (1968) work on middle-class families in South Wales, which highlighted the importance of financial support in middle-class kin groups and which identified the link between father and son (or son-in-law) as the main channel through which it flowed.
Some of this support was on a substantial scale: a large cheque given to enable the parents to ‘buy things for the baby’; a capital sum to enable a young architect to buy into a new firm; paying the wages of a home help to assist a family with several young children (pp. 92–4).
As Bell points out, because of the composition of his sample, these illustrations all concern flows of money from parents to children at a point in the life course when characteristically resources are stretched, namely in the early years of child-rearing.
A much more recent study confirms that similar patterns continue in the 1980s (Wilson, 1987).
This is a useful starting point in that Bell's work highlights two important themes necessary to understand economic support in families: gender and class (in particular, the distribution of income and wealth).
The ability to give or lend money to relatives obviously is related to one's own economic resources in some way — although we are unlikely to find that people who have more straightforwardly give more.
Equally, gender differences are probably not as straightforward as they first appear.
In Bell's work the giving of financial support within middle-class families is ‘men's business’, and in a sense this is inevitable given that men exercise direct control over economic  resources in this setting.
However, women can be important as mediators and negotiators of financial assistance to kin, as Stivens (1978) argues on the basis of Australian data.
Data from more recent studies in Britain bear out the observations.
Qureshi and Simon's (1987) work, on exchanges of assistance between elderly people and their kin, and Wilson's (1987) findings on grandparents' support for their grandchildren, both show that women as well as men give economic support to younger generations, but there are some gender differences in the type of support given.
Usually women give smaller amounts of money than men, or gifts in kind.
Only a minority of women are in a position where they have control over substantial financial resources; however, when they do have such control they give money to their children and grandchildren in the same way that men do.
The observed gender differences are a consequence of the different economic position of women and men in society as a whole.
Both of these more recent studies, like Bell's work, indicate that class is a dimension of exchanges of money between kin, in that the purpose of such exchanges in middle-class families is to enable younger generations to establish or maintain a life-style similar to that of their parents.
In this sense, sharing economic resources in families helps to reproduce the class structure.
On the question of regional differences, these studies of financial exchanges suggest that geographical location is rather unimportant.
Similar patterns of exchange emerge from studies undertaken in different parts of Britain: Sheffield, London, South Wales.
Ethnicity represents another important dimension of money transfers, but this is not visible in most specialist studies of family relationships.
There is substantial evidence that people who have migrated to Britain quite commonly send sums of money on a regular basis to assist relatives still living in their country of origin.
This is reported for people whose origins lie in quite different parts of the world, for example, Poland, Montserrat and Pakistan (Patterson, 1977; Philpott, 1977; Anwar, 1985).
Most of the examples discussed so far imply that transfers of money are gifts rather than loans, although the distinction between these two is not always clear.
Hill's (1970) classic American study of transfers between three generations shows that people do distinguish clearly between gifts and loans in principle, but less clearly in practice.
It seems that a similar ambiguity is common in Britain in relation to money transfers between kin, although we do lack up-to-date evidence on this point.
It is likely that such evidence would show up ethnic and cultural variations; for example, Anwar reports that it is common for migrants from Pakistan to borrow money from kin for major purchases such as a house or a business, but there is a strong obligation to return this loan fully and quickly (Anwar, 1985, p. 72).
Gifts in kind Gifts in kind are no less important than money in family exchanges and there is evidence that these can include both goods and  services, including the basic necessities.
Baldwin's (1985, p. 142) work on bringing up handicapped children indicates that grandparents often buy necessities such as food and clothing, and this can be vital to the finances of a household where having a handicapped child creates additional expense.
Similar findings are reported in McKee's (1987) study of the kin relationships of unemployed people living in Kidderminster.
This work offers a good illustration of the range of economic support which is given between kin, and is also important in that it stresses its two-way nature.
Even in these circumstances, where one might expect unemployed people to be net receivers, McKee shows that they give as well as receive and the list of what they give looks remarkably similar to the list of items which they receive.
The importance of being able to reciprocate gifts in kind is also illustrated by case study data from Pahl's study on household work strategies on the Isle of Sheppey in Kent, in which one man who was long-term unemployed had been helping an uncle to decorate his house, and how the uncle then gave him a large piece of meat.
This apparently is the system which works in the family: ‘He does favours for them and they do favours back’(Pahl R.E., 1984, p. 340).
For families in less straitened circumstances, one gift in kind which could be of increasing importance is the payment of school fees.
In popular discussions of private education, grandparents emerge as people very likely to pay school fees (Guardian 27 May 1986) and it certainly has been the case for some time that it is advantageous in taxation terms for them to do so, since grandparents can take out a deed of covenant to cover this payment whereas parents cannot.
Evidence that payment of school fees is an established — if a minority — pattern among the English middle classes can be found in the study by Firth, Hubert and Forge (1970, pp. 349–50).
Inheritance For those people who have accumulated assets during their lifetime, leaving money, property and land to relatives after death represents another — and very significant — mechanism through which economic support is given in families.
It was the view of Engels (1884) that these inheritance arrangements provided the foundation of the development of capitalism in Britain in the nineteenth century, since they had made it possible to retain property and wealth — and with them all other forms of social privilege and power — within the hands of a small number of families from one generation to the next.
In his study of poverty in the United Kingdom, Townsend (1979) argued that the mechanism of inheritance remains an important vehicle for ensuring that the wealthier groups in society maintain their economic position across generations.
But what of the majority of people who do not have substantial wealth to bequeath?
How significant a part does inheritance play in sustaining or raising standards of living?
The available contemporary evidence suggests that very few people accumulate much in capital assets other than the house in which they live (Allan, 1982).
The number of people who have this asset to bequeath has been rising.
In 1951 about four million people in Britain owned their own homes; by 1985 this figure had risen to 14 million, with 62 per cent of the total housing stock being owner-occupied (Social Trends , 1987, p. 137, table 8.1).
Many more people in the future than in the past will benefit from the kind of economic support which people give to their relatives through post mortem transfers.
Movements in the housing market, especially in the 1980s, have produced wide disparities between the value of property in different parts of Britain.
This is one respect in which we can see regional differences opening up in the kind of support which relatives can give to each other, although we know very little about how these matters are handled in families at the present time.
Some writers have speculated that we could see the development of new patterns of support such as an increase of private loans within families, or substantial bequests to grandchildren rather than children, since the younger generation are the ones who will find the most difficulty in getting onto the first rung of the housing ladder (Murie and Forrest, 1980; Means, 1987).
Clearly these are all matters which would repay up-to-date research, since it seems that we may be witnessing important social changes in patterns of family support at the present time.
I have been making the assumption that people bequeath their assets to their relatives, but is this necessarily so?
Under English law this is not straightforwardly a requirement, since one of the cornerstones of the law relating to inheritance is the principle testamentary freedom — the right of each individual to dispose of their assets as they wish.
However in the twentieth century this principle has been modified somewhat through both statutory and case law, by introducing the principle that a will should make fair provision for people who have had certain types of relationship with the deceased, mostly but not exclusively kin (Cretney, 1984, ch. 23; Green, 1988).
So the law does acknowledge now that people generate obligations to certain relatives during their lifetime, and that these should he honoured after their death.
In addition to spouses the people who make such claims are: former spouses who have not remarried; children; people who were treated as children of the deceased; any other person (relative or not) who was being maintained financially by the deceased at the time of his or her death (Cretney, 1984, pp. 702–7).
Such claims in fact are quite rare, running currently at the rate of about 400 a year (Freedman et al., 1988, p. 53).
The major reason for this is that a rather small proportion of the population makes a will-only about 20 per cent on the most authoritative figures available (Todd and Jones, 1972; Manners and Rauta, 1979).
For the majority who die intestate, separate legal rules apply and these also reflect the idea that certain relatives have the right to claim a share in the resources of the deceased.
These rules are fairly complex and depend on the size of the estate.
But they demonstrate a fairly clear hierarchy of claims to receive financial benefit from a relative which runs: spouse and/or children; parents; brothers and sisters and their children; grandparents; uncles and aunts.
People  lower down the hierarchy can only make claims if the deceased did not have relatives who rank above them; and a distinction is made between full and half-blood relatives, the former having prior claims (Cretney, 1984, pp. 698–700).
So in the case of all who die intestate, and for most of the rather small number who make a will, the outcome of inheritance will be that relatives are beneficiaries, and the legal procedures which ensure this codify a set of obligations to give support which discriminates between close and more distant kin.
In popular imagery, the reading of a will is the occasion for bitter squabbles to break out over the deceased's preferred distribution of assets, but the limited amount of research data which we have on this issue suggests that overt conflicts are not very common.
In the study of middle-class families, Firth, Hubert and Forge were able to find only small numbers of such cases, and then the conflict tended to be expressed as private resentment rather than open hostility (pp. 373–8).
However, in a few cases there were serious disputes in families over questions of inheritance, apparently always followed by very cool relationships between the parties, or ceasing contact altogether.
In one instance, it was believed in the family that one sister had visited their father during his final illness and had persuaded him to make a new will in her favour, directing his hand as he signed it.
Other siblings resented the fact that ‘she got the cash and we got a load of old books’(p. 375).
In another family, where the inheritance from the father was quite substantial, funds for the brothers and sisters were tied up in a trust which was administered by their mother, and this appeared to result in a series of squabbles about whether each of them was getting their fair share in comparison with the others (p. 376).
Thus disputes between brothers and sisters (who in a formal sense are in the same position in respect of their claims to a parent's estate) is one of the situations where serious conflicts do arise.
The other, according to the evidence of Firth and his colleagues, is disputes which involve step-relatives, especially the claims of a second spouse by comparison with the children of a first marriage.
The possibilities for disputes of the latter kind of course have increased since this study was done in the 1960s because of rising rates of divorce and remarriage, and we need up-to-date data on how people handle the range of claims of inheritance in families where there is a complex series of step-relationships.
Looking at the effects of inheritance in a broader perspective, it is apparent that the laws and customs associated with it in any society have the effect of shaping kin relationships in ways other than the transmission of economic resources.
For example anthropologists have argued that in those societies where women are allowed to inherit as well as men this can determine many other aspects of social relations.
Typically it means that steps are taken to ensure that women do not take away a proportion of the kin group's resources when they marry — which can mean variously, that women's sexuality is tightly controlled, that women are given little choice about whom they marry, that there is  a preference for choosing marriage partners from within the kin groups (Tillion, 1983; Goddard, 1987).
England traditionally had inheritance laws based on the principle of primogeniture, that is the property should pass to a single heir, usually the eldest son, rather than being divided between all surviving children.
This arrangement is particularly suited to a society where wealth is concentrated in the ownership of land, because it ensures that an undivided estate can be passed on to succeeding generations in the family.
In their study of the development of the English middle class in the early part of the nineteenth century, based on analysis of wills, Davidoff and Hall have shown that this system did not suit the growing numbers of middle classes who had business or capital to pass on.
Increasingly they used the principle of partible inheritance (which had long been characteristic of some other European societies), where the estate was divided between the surviving spouse and children.
At this time when women could not hold property after they married, typically daughters were left trust funds which would provide them with an income, while sons received land, property and liquid assets (Davidoff and Hall, 1987, pp. 205–7).
These different patterns of inheritance are bound to have an effect upon the relationships between siblings.
Under the system of  primogeniture it will be known from childhood that one sibling will be privileged over all the rest; by contrast partible inheritance requires a much greater degree of co-operation between siblings in adult life, especially if they inherit land or a firm which provides them with a common livelihood.
This is an issue to which I shall return later in this chapter, when I consider relationships between siblings specifically.
Finding work and migration It has become the common wisdom that using relatives to help you find work — associated in the past with the early phase of industrialization and more recently with informal methods of recruiting casual labour — is of little significance in the present.
This view is challenged by Grieco's (1987) work on the use of social networks, especially kin networks, in job-seeking.
Grieco's work is based on a detailed case study in the Northamptonshire steel town of Corby, and smaller studies of women in the fisheries industry in Aberdeen and of people migrating from the East End of London to live and work in the new town of Basildon, on London's outer fringes.
Her work shows the continuing importance of kin networks in seeking and finding jobs, even in situations where employers use more formal recruitment strategies.
She argues that it often is still in the employers' interest to recruit someone on a relative's recommendation, since this gives employers more control over their workforce.
From the point of view of people seeking work, the kin group continues to provide a reliable and up-to-date information network and a means of getting to the head of the queue of potential employees.
An example of this can be seen in a story reported by a worker in Corby,
I'd heard they'd started taking people on.
I went over to personnel and said, ‘What about my son-in-law?
His form's been with you for ages.
And you're taking other people in front of him.
How's that?’
So they looked for the form and they couldn't find it.
Well it wasn't surprising really; I'd never filled one in.
But he got up the front of the line and he got the job.
It's the only way.
You have to push if you want something, don't you?
(Grieco, 1987, p. 86)
Grieco is able to show that in each of the situations she studied in different regions of Britain, proportions of the workforce had kin connections with the firm for which they worked.
Women often are as important as men in making and keeping these links, which is one reason why the importance of the kin network in employment frequently has been missed by other researchers, who have looked for people with the same surname.
In fact in-laws, and indeed kin as distant as cousins, seem commonly to be included in these employment networks.
These conclusions are supported by case study data reported by Wilson and Pahl (1988), based on the detailed study of one kin group on the Isle of Sheppey.
In this family both women and men expected to use kin contacts as a way of finding work.
Grieco's major example is Corby which, as a town based upon the steel industry, had an employment history of deliberate recruitment of workers from Scotland.
In this situation the kin network operates not only as a means of finding work but also for assisting the process of migration.
She argues that if you have been assisted by relatives yourself, this imposes a strong obligation to provide similar support for others, even if that means giving a temporary home to someone whom you do not particularly like (p. 89).
So-called chain migration, where one relative gets established and then acts as a bridge for others, is a common feature of many situations both in the past and the present, where people migrate to find work.
The same pattern certainly is found among people who have migrated to Britain from overseas since the end of the Second World War.
Chain migration on this pattern is reported for a wide variety of people now living in Britain, including those who originated in Italy, Hong Kong, the Punjab and Pakistan (Palmer, 1977; Watson, 1977; Ballard, 1979; Anwar, 1985).
The kind of economic support given from one migrant to the next includes: assistance with the fare; assistance in finding work; a temporary home; personal encouragement and moral support whilst the new migrant is adjusting to Britain.
The significance of economic support Drawing together the different strands of this discussion of economic support, we can ask: Who are the main beneficiaries within a family?
Does economic support flow between the generations in both directions, or is the trade one-way?
These questions have been explored more fully by researchers in North America than they have in Britain (Sussman, 1965; Cheal, 1983) but the findings of recent British studies seem broadly to be in line with this work (Qureshi and Simons, 1987; Wilson, 1987).
The common pattern seems to be that there is an uneven flow of support across the  generations, with a net transfer from older to younger which continues throughout the life cycle, and indeed after death in the form of inheritance.
Of course the value of this varies considerably according to the resources available to the older generation.
Parents give to their children, and continue to give more than their children ever give them in most cases, although one situation in which this flow often is reversed is where children have migrated to a more affluent country, and expect to send money back to their parents (see for example, Thorogood, 1987).
I began this discussion of economic support between relatives by asking how significant it is in contemporary Britain.
The answer is that it is more significant than often it appears, especially if you include examples such as help in finding employment, the importance of which continues to be greater than often is recognized.
Although perhaps rather few people rely on their relatives for regular financial support, many people go through times in their lives when such support is important to their capacity to establish or maintain a particular life style.
It seems that the central significance of economic support in families lies in its reliability: you always know that you can fall back upon the support of relatives if necessary and that this will be regarded as a legitimate request.
In the context of white British culture, all of this applies particularly to middle-class people, who have more substantial resources to share.
By the same token it is usually middle-class men who ultimately are in the position to make substantial gifts, although when women can behave in this way, they do.
Normally this financial support passes from older to younger generations in families in a one-way flow.
Accommodation
Sharing accommodation with relatives on a permanent basis is not regarded as a desirable option in contemporary British culture, where the image of the normal household is based firmly upon the nuclear family: typically a married couple and their immature children, with possibly the addition of an elderly parent.
This contrasts with many other societies in which sharing a home with relatives has been regarded as the normal option and a permanent arrangement.
One example would be traditional arrangements in Turkey, where an adult son would expect to bring his wife into his parents' home to live, and to raise his children there (Stirling, 1965).
Whilst scholars debate how far economic changes have been responsible for breaking up these traditional arrangements, there is evidence that the idea persists that this form of joint household is an ideal which people would put into practice if they could (Benedict, 1976).
Many similar examples can be found around the world, but in Britain there is substantial historical evidence which suggests that sharing with relatives outside the nuclear family in adult life has never been widely regarded as an ideal to be aimed for (see chapter 2).
Nonetheless the composition of households does change over time, perhaps rather more than much recent research has acknowledged.
In reality, the household is a constantly changing social unit as members age and other members come and go (Pahl, J. 1984, p. 201).
We need to distinguish, on the one hand between popular imagery and the public ideology of ‘the family’ and on the other hand what happens in practice, which inevitably is more diverse.
Historical evidence suggests that in the past people did share accommodation with their kin, at least on a temporary basis, and they did so essentially for instrumental reasons resulting from social and economic pressures (Anderson, 1971; 1980; Davidoff, 1979; Roberts, 1984).
Can we discern contemporary patterns of shared accommodation between kin which might also be the result of such pressures?
Are there predictable circumstances in the 1980s where people are likely to live in the home of a relative?
How common are these?
One can begin to answer these questions by looking at the proportion of the population who live in households of different types.
Evidence from official statistics suggests that the number of households containing two or more elementary families has indeed fallen: from 3 per cent of households in 1961 to 1 per cent in 1981 (Social Trends, 1987 , p. 41, table 2.1) Clearly this is, and apparently has been for some time, very much a minority arrangement within the British population as a whole.
However, for certain groups in that population it is much more common.
Small scale studies indicate that households of this type are quite common, for example, for people of Pakistani origin living in Britain (Anwar, 1985) and this is reflected in official statistics by evidence about the overall size of households: in 1985, whilst less than one in ten white households contained more than four people, where people classified themselves as Pakistani, or Bangladeshi, just over 50 per cent of households were of that size (Social Trends 1987 , p. 45, table 2. 9).
The circumstances which have produced such patterns in some ways are similar to those in Britain in the past, namely in the early years after a migration, with the additional dimension that, in the case of migrants say from Pakistan, joint households are a familiar pattern and indeed often are larger than those established in Britain (Saifullah Khan, 1977; Anwar, 1985).
In this instance instrumental considerations are reinforced by long-established cultural patterns.
In the majority white British culture, there are phases in people's lives when shared accommodation does feature, especially in young adult life and in old age.
I shall look at each of these in turn as a way of helping us to understand when and why people offer help to their relatives in the form of shared accommodation.
Young adults living with relatives The early years of marriage traditionally have been a time when people did live with relatives, before establishing their own household, although this is now less common than it once was.
Evidence based upon population censuses and analysed by Holmans (1981) indicates that the number of married  couples in shared accommodation fell from three-quarters of a million in 1951 to slightly under a quarter of a million in 1971.
However in practice the change has been less dramatic than it first appears, for two reasons.
First, the length of time which couples spend in shared accommodation has fallen from an average of almost three years for people who married before 1955, to around one and a half years for people married in the late 1960s (p. 12).
In a study of newly weds' housing, Madge and Brown (1981) calculate that a total of 31 per cent of their sample had shared accommodation at some stage in their early married life, usually with parents.
The average length of time in this accommodation was 10 months.
Second, the age at which people marry is closely related to their ability to set up an independent household, and for women who married under the age of 20 the numbers sharing accommodation with relatives changed little between the 1950s and the 1970s (Holman, 1981).
Thus sharing accommodation with relatives in the early years of marriage still is the experience of a sizeable minority of the population, especially for those who marry young.
Sharing a home with relatives (other than parents) before marriage is another phenomenon which was more common in the past than in the present (Anderson, 1971; 1980) Very little is known about circumstances under which young people now may go to live with a non-parental relative, although Gill Jones (1987) has shown that it still happens for a substantial number, especially those designated as working class on occupational criteria.
Basing her analysis on data from a large-scale, representative sample of women and men at the age of 23, she shows that 16 per cent of single working-class men and 22 per cent of single working-class women were living with kin at the time of the survey.
The proportions for middle-class people were 6 per cent and 9 per cent respectively; among the middle-class respondents it was much more common to share with friends rather than relatives after leaving the parental home.
So for young people from working-class backgrounds in particular, it certainly seems still to be an option to live with kin.
However, we know very little in a systematic way about the circumstances under which this is considered a desirable option, or the terms under which young people live in a relative's household.
Elderly people living with relatives Official statistics indicate that living with a relative (other than spouse), in old age is the experience of a rather small minority.
Evidence for the year 1985 indicates that whilst 52 per cent of people aged over 65 lived with a spouse and 36 per cent lived alone, only 12 per cent lived with relatives (Social Trends 1987 , p. 44, table 2.8).
However, the experience of living with kin seems to be more common for elderly people of minority ethnic origin.
Mays (1983) has calculated that about three times as many elderly people from South Asia live with relatives.
Barker's (1984, p. 22) review of the living arrangements of elderly people of Asian and Afro-Caribbean origin indicates that almost three-quarters of Asian elderly people live in large  households and as few as 5 per cent live alone, whereas the household composition of elderly people of Afro-Caribbean origin is similar to that in the white population.
Thus, with the important exception of certain ethnic minority groups, living with a relative seems to be a rather uncommon experience for older people.
In chapter 2 I shall discuss this in an historical perspective.
To anticipate that discussion, the available evidence suggests that elderly people, just like people in the early years of marriage, have always shared a home with relatives for instrumental reasons of a financial kind rather than by personal preference (Wall, 1984).
In the case of elderly people these economic considerations seem somewhat more important even than the elderly person's need for physical care.
That conclusion is supported by contemporary evidence from Qureshi and Simons's (1987) study in Sheffield, which clearly indicates that it is rare for elderly people to move in with their children in order to be cared for.
Where there were examples of co-residence, the joint household had been established some years before the elderly person needed physical care, and a number of these households had been created by the younger generation(s) moving in with the parent, not the other way round.
Sharing with relatives after divorce So far I have concentrated upon two situations in which people may live with relatives, both of which probably would be regarded as a predictable part of the normal life cycle.
But are there other circumstances, perhaps less predictable, in which an adult might need to have a home with relatives, at least on a temporary basis?
Of particular interest, given that rates of divorce have been rising over the last two decades, is whether relatives commonly provide housing for people who have separated from a married or cohabiting partner.
We know that in general women who have been married (that is, separated divorced or widowed) are more likely to be living with their own parents than those who currently are married (Martin and Roberts, 1984).
This suggests that there is a tendency to return to the parental home when a marriage ends, through whatever means, and this is confirmed in the case of separation and divorce by Sullivan's (1986) analysis of data from the period 1976–81.
She is able to show that both women and men are much more likely to be living with relatives after a marriage has ended than during it.
Data from 1976 for women specifically show that 14 per cent of women whose marriages were intact were living in someone else's household (the most popular choice being the wife's parents), but for divorced and separated women the figure rose to 61 per cent.
Data from the Labour Force Survey in 1981 show that high proportions of both women and men who are divorced or separated live in the home of their own parents, although there are some differences related to both gender and social class (as measured by housing tenure).
The highest concentrations of divorced people living with parents are to be found among men whose parents live in local  authority accommodation.
Making the assumption that such men have working-class occupations, Sullivan argues that the housing options for them are very limited after divorce, more limited than for women who, if they have been left as single parents relying upon state benefits for their income, probably will qualify for local authority housing.
The importance of economic considerations is supported by evidence from Burgoyne and Clark's (1984) small-scale study of couples in second marriages.
They report that 9 out of 31 divorced women and 11 out of 33 divorced men returned to their parents' home when their first marriage ended.
On the whole this was seen as an arrangement that should be temporary if at all possible, even where the relationship with the parents was good and they were supportive of their adult child.
In some cases it was necessary to return to the parental home even when parents were not wholly supportive, for lack of viable alternatives, as in the situation described by this respondent,
I got to the stage where I went back to me mum and dad.
They said I were wrong for leaving him and that I should go back to him = my father didn't agree with it, he's er, very old fashioned, we've never had any divorces or anything in our family…
(But) I went back to them, well I had nowhere to go…my mother and father said I could stay as long as I wanted.
(Burgoyne and Clark, 1984, pp. 80–1)
It seems from this evidence that living with relatives when a marriage ends is considered in a rather similar way to living with relatives in other circumstances.
It is an option to fall back on if you have to; it is certainly appropriate for relatives, especially parents, to assist in this way, but it is not sought as the most desirable arrangement in the circumstances and therefore it should not last for too long.
It also has a strong instrumental element, in the sense that it is most likely to happen when it is economically advantageous.
The theme of instrumentality seems to be as important in understanding support in the form of accommodation, as it is in understanding financial support within families.
Personal care
By ‘personal care’ I mean nursing someone who cannot fully look after themselves and/or performing domestic tasks which they are unable to undertake.
This may or may not entail living in the same house.
Because of the large number of elderly people now in the population it is inevitable that much of the discussion will concern their needs, but they are by no means the only people who need personal care.
There are also younger people who have a long term chronic illness or handicap; people who have been Psychiatrically ill; people who have a mental handicap.
In these cases, some of the ‘care’ required may not be so much nursing care as a constant or regular presence of another person who will ensure their safety.
What part is played by kin in practice in the provision of such care?
Who provides care for whom ?
What kind of personal care is given to relatives on an unpaid basis?
Between which relatives?
Are there boundaries to what is considered reasonable for kin to provide?
Evidence about who actually acts as an unpaid carer has to be pieced together from various statistical sources, but the best informed estimates seem to be that very few people are cared for by non-relatives, and that women provide about 75 to 85 per cent of relative care.
Single, never-married daughters traditionally have been the group who provided care for their parents in old age.
In the present generations of younger women, very few never marry so this particular source of family care has almost dried up, although there is evidence that never-married women still account for a disproportionate number of unpaid carers (Finch and Groves, 1980; Lewis and Meredith, 1988).
The only common circumstances in which men provide substantial care is when they are looking after a disabled wife, whereas women care for husbands, parents, handicapped children and sometimes other relatives too (Charlesworth, Wilkin and Durie, 1984; Parker, 1985; Henwood and Wicks, 1985; Finch 1986b).
A consistent feature of unpaid caring, demonstrated by all the available detailed studies, is that once a particular relative has taken on the responsibility for the care of an elderly or handicapped person they get rather limited support, if any, from other relatives or friends.
So the care of a highly dependent person by ‘the family’ in most cases means care by one relative, usually a female relative (Gilhooly, 1982; Nissel and Bonnerjea, 1982; Parker, 1985).
This can demand a very high level of commitment, in which caring for a relative completely dominates the carer's own life.
In their study of 41 women who had cared for their own mother before she died, Lewis and Meredith comment that to an outside observer ‘the majority of respondents led remarkably restricted lives’(Lewis and Meredith, 1988, p. 87).
Most spend much of their time feeding and bathing their mother, doing laundry and other household work, and sometimes also holding down a paid job, with only very limited opportunities for a break of any kind.
One woman compared it to her experience of being in service in the past: ‘It's like being in service.
I got one evening off…and one afternoon a month’(Lewis and Meredith, 1988, p. 83).
Of course taking some responsibility for providing personal care does not always demand quite this level of commitment, but examples of this kind are valuable in specifying just what responsibility towards one's parents can mean.
Situations such as those described by Lewis and Meredith apparently fall within the range of what is regarded appropriate for a daughter who has a sense of filial duty.
Looking at the evidence available, there seem to be four main principles which determine who offers personal care.
This has been characterized by some writers as a hierarchy of obligations (Qureshi and Simons, 1987; Ungerson, 1987).
1
The marriage relationship takes primacy, so that one's spouse becomes the first source of support for married people.
This is  confirmed by more detailed research evidence, for example Wenger's (1984) study of elderly people living in rural North Wales, where she found that married and infirm people had distinctive patterns of personal support, where the spouse was the main helper for every task mentioned.
2
Second, it appears that the parent-child relationship is the second port of call, with children being a major source of support for elderly parents and (less commonly in numerical terms) parents being the principal supporters of adult handicapped children.
Unlike the personal care between spouses, these patterns of support here are highly gendered, with daughters and mothers being carers much more commonly than sons and fathers (Bayley, 1973; Wilkin, 1979; Glendinning, 1983).
3
People who are members of the same household are also major providers of support.
Of course often they also fall into the first two categories mentioned, but it seems that household membership operates separately in relation to giving assistance, so that a particular child who shares a home with their parent is much more likely to be giving personal care than their siblings.
The same applies to more distant relatives who may sometimes share a household.
Qureshi and Simons (1987) have been able to show this on the basis of data from their Sheffield study of elderly people and their carers.
4
The fourth and very important principle which operates in personal care is gender.
There certainly is plenty of evidence that women are much more likely to provide personal care for relatives than are men.
Even where there is an apparent choice between a male and female relative, women are much more likely to be carers — daughters and even daughters-in-law rather than sons (Henwood and Wicks, 1985; Parker, 1985; Ungerson, 1987).
This is usually taken to reflect a generalized normative expectation that women are the appropriate carers; although empirical evidence about normative expectations is actually fairly sparse (a point which I shall take up in chapter 5).
The operation of these four principles leaves some room for manoeuvre, in the sense that their application may produce more than one possible carer in a given situation.
This leaves Open the possibility of negotiation between the parties to identify the person who eventually becomes the main carer.
The processes by which such negotiations are conducted are considered in some detail in chapter 7.
Gender is an important dimension in personal care.
It affects not only who becomes an unpaid carer but also is relevant to two other dimensions of this issue: who receives care, and what kind of support is given.
Shanas (1979), in her review of American data on family support for the elderly, notes that women are two or three times more likely than men to say that no one helped them during a period of illness.
British evidence demonstrates that women who are ill or handicapped are less likely than men to receive support from formal services or informal sources (Charlesworth, Wilkin and Durie, 1984; Bebbington and  Davies, 1983).
Women are presumed to be able to cope domestically in circumstances where men are presumed to be unable to manage: they can cook, clean and care for themselves even if they are physically impaired (Wenger, 1984).
The foundations of personal care in families The picture which emerges from evidence about personal care given to relatives is one of very extensive amounts of support, especially at particular points in the life course.
It is possible to do a financial calculation which puts a price on this, by working out the number of hours ‘caring’ labour contributed by relatives, and the total amount is equivalent to the whole statutory input of health and social services for the equivalent age groups (Family Policy Studies, Centre, 1984; Finch, 1986b).
At the same time, research evidence about how people view this in practice conveys a sense of boundaries: that there are limits to what one can reasonably expect relatives to do, and to what a person would want to rely on relatives for.
This is graphically expressed by the phrase ‘intimacy at a distance’ which was first used by Rosenmayr and Kockeis (1963) and applied to the British context by Townsend (1957), in his study of the family life of old people.
The phrase conveys a sense of the desired relationship between elderly people and their relatives, especially their children: they want to be on good terms with them, and to have regular contact with them, but they do not want to rely on them too directly.
More recent evidence, whilst not addressing this issue directly, tends to suggest that this desired relationship is still important.
Wenger (1984), in discussing her North Wales data, argues that elderly people do turn to their children for support, but they do so reluctantly.
Thompson and West in a study of preferences for sheltered housing which included a sample of people of all ages who suffered from rheumatism and arthritis, found among these respondents ‘a strong feeling of not wanting to impose on relatives’(Thompson and West, 1984, p. 318), and the older respondents were even less willing than the younger to consider the option of being cared for by kin.
My brief review of personal care given by relatives has stressed the theme of variation, especially by gender.
In this respect at least family responsibilities do seem to be very different for women and men, both as givers and receivers.
There is obviously also variation by generational position with old age being the most likely — although not the only possible — time when anyone may need personal support from relatives.
In these situations we have clear examples of support being one-way, the principle of reciprocal giving necessarily being muted where one party needs substantial care.
However, it remains possible that people do see the support which they give to elderly relatives as part of a two-way pattern which stretches over time and across generations, and where they themselves will benefit ultimately from the support of someone in a younger generation.
In the case of carers who have their own children this is easier to see than for the classic (and disappearing) case of the single daughter who was presumed to be  childless; although in that case the assumption in the past was that the single daughter would be rewarded in material terms through being the major beneficiary of her parents' will, if they had money or property to bequeath.
We know rather little about what kind of bargains are struck at the present time although inheritance is always a possible way of ensuring that the balance of support does not tip too much in one direction, even if its use is not spoken about openly.
The theme of instrumentality does not come through so strongly in relation to personal care as it does in other types of support.
It is here that we do see examples of apparently selfless giving, where the carer's independent life effectively is suspended for the duration of the caring relationship, which may last many years.
In such cases, even if inheritance implicitly is involved, people do not present their own motivations for providing support as part of some bargain in which their own interests are a legitimate concern.
Recent studies which have looked at this issue report that people talk in terms of some blend of love and duty, affection and obligation (Ungerson, 1987; Lewis and Meredith, 1988).
Despite this, considerations of self-interest are not entirely absent.
Not all carers — still less potential careers — are people acting selflessly out of love or duty.
Especially in accounts of how one sibling became the main carer for a parent, there is a sense of people guarding their own position, lest too much should be expected of them.
Brothers are more readily excused than sisters, it would seem, although even here Lewis and Meredith report considerable bitterness on the part of carers who felt that their brothers should be playing a more prominent, if minor, role in the care of their parents.
As one of their interviewees put it,
I feel it's all wrong that the single one in the family should be the one who does everything.
At one stage I told him (the brother) that lots of single daughters dropped dead looking after their mother.
He just got in his car and drove off…he was a fine sort of brother really.
(Lewis and Meredith, 1988, p. 24)
The sense that many potential carers are guarding their own positions in situations where the care of a relative becomes a live issue in a family, is matched by the very clear message that older people in particular are wary of asking too much of their relatives, or of ‘having’ to rely on them.
Paradoxically, since it is in relation to personal care that we see examples of highly committed one-way support, the research evidence suggests that most people do regard it as legitimate for the parties to consider their own interests in this situation, even if it is possible to push that too far.
Except unusually, receiving personal care from relatives is not seen by either party as an automatic right.
Practical support and child care
Small-scale practical support, given either on a regular or occasional basis, is often seen as the essence of kin relationships.
Certainly the  British studies of the 1950s and 60s presented and popularized the image of the working-class family which was characterized by extensive and regular sharing of support, especially between women.
In societies where the organization of social and economic life is based much more closely on kinship than it is for most people in contemporary Britain, women's involvement in exchanging goods and services with female relatives plays an important role in maintaining the solidarity of the kin group.
An example of this can be found in Goddard's (1987) discussion of working-class women in Naples; whose lives are still based very much on this pattern despite economic changes.
What kind of practical support commonly is given to relatives in the British context?
It is unavoidable to begin by referring to Young and Willmott's (1957) study of Bethnal Green, and to the much quoted chapter in which they itemize how mothers and daughters and sisters constantly seem to be doing each other 's shopping, drying each other 's washing and looking after each other 's children for the afternoon.
In this period, the other influential work on family relationships was Bott's (1957) study, based on an intensive study of 20 married couples.
The message here is rather different from the  automic and unproblematic sharing of assistance portrayed in the Bethnal Green study.
Even in her small sample, Bott was able to document considerable variety.
She argues that it is families who see each other frequently where one finds most practical support being given, because frequent contact affords the opportunity for pressure to be put upon individuals to ‘keep up their kinship obligations’(Bott, 1957, p. 133).
Since women usually are more active than men in keeping contact with relatives, it is not surprising that they are more involved in the giving and receiving of practical support.
There have been no recent studies which have looked at patterns of exchange between kin as their central focus, but relevant data can be gleaned from a number of studies.
Of particular interest in this context is Cornwell's study of family relationships in Bethnal Green in the 1980s, in which she explicitly makes comparison with Young and Willmott's earlier work.
She shows that there remain some examples of extensive sharing of support between mothers, daughters and sisters, although her interpretation of this is far less romantic than Young and Willmott's.
In relation to child care, for example, she documents how assistance given by mothers to daughters typically is more extensive than between sisters.
In two instances in her small study, this meant that mothers effectively were caring for a baby instead of their daughter (Cornwell, 1984, pp. 86–90).
However, a comparable study which included women of different ethnic origins might show that support between sisters and sisters-in-law was somewhat more significant.
As Wilson puts it in her discussion of Asian women living in Britain, these relationships serve to ‘cushion a woman against the harshness of her life’(Wilson, 1978, p. 7).
It seems that it is of continuing importance for women to be able to call upon relatives to assist them with child care, and that this still is a  key element in women's organization of their daily lives, as it has been in the past (see for example Roberts, 1984).
Yeandle's (1984) study of the strategies which women use to combine paid work and domestic work emphasizes that female kin are a common and reliable source of assistance which enables women to combine the two.
She found that about two-thirds of the women whom she studied had relied upon female kin at some stage, and that most of the support which they received was child care, coming principally from mothers and mothers-in-law, but also sisters, sisters-in-law, aunts and grandmothers.
The findings of Yeandle's small-scale study are broadly supported by data from the Women and Employment survey, which covered the work histories of 6,000 women.
Of employed women who needed to make arrangements for a pre-school child, 34 per cent used the child's grandmother and 9 per cent used another relative.
Women who worked full time were particularly likely to use the child's grandmother (44 per cent of them did this)(Martin and Roberts, 1984, p. 39, table 4.10).
Help with child care, therefore, is important to enable women to continue in, or return to, paid work.
There is also some evidence that it is of particular importance when women (and less frequently men) are left as the custodial parent after a marriage ends.
Burgoyne and Clark (1984) report that this was seen as a major reason for returning to live with parents after the break-up of a marriage, and the assistance which grandparents gave with child care in the short term was seen as vital in helping their daughter or son to re-establish themselves economically and to form new relationships.
Regular assistance with child care certainly is important for many women.
But for many more the importance of relatives — especially of grandmothers — lies in their availability as people who can be called upon in a crisis, or as people to fall back on when other arrangements break down.
In her study of 61 white mothers conducted in London in 1983–4, Wilson (1987) found that none relied upon their children's grandparents to carry the main burden of child care while they themselves went out to work, but most regarded grandmothers as support which they could use on a more casual basis for babysitting, and as help in emergencies.
Cunningham-Burley (1985) found a rather similar pattern in a piece of work conducted around the same time in Scotland.
The birth of another child seems, predictably, to be a situation in which grandmothers are called upon for assistance.
The study of Bell, McKee and Priestly (1983) indicates that maternal grandmothers commonly are the people who care for older children during the period immediately following the birth of a new baby, although sometimes sisters and sisters-in-law also help in this way.
In general, practical support between relatives seems highly gendered, with women much more involved than men.
Examples certainly can be found of men giving practical support to relatives on a reciprocal basis, usually involving typically ‘male’ activities such as gardening and decorating (Pahl, R.E., 1984).
But most research studies suggest that sharing practical support is more characteristic of women.
It could be  that the available studies have concentrated specifically upon women, and that men do give assistance which is less visible.
On the other hand, since it is mostly women who are responsible for running households and caring for dependent members of their families, it is not surprising that they are involved in helping each other in these practical ways, which lend themselves to being organized on a reciprocal basis.
As with other types of support, we observe similar patterns in studies undertaken in different regional locations, and at different times over the past 30 years.
There is also some evidence to suggest that there is little variation by social class in the amount of practical support given and received.
This comes from the study by Goldthorpe, Llewellyn and Payne (1980, pp. 152–6) on patterns of social mobility for men, as measured by a comparison of the occupational status of different generations of the same family.
This work was based on a sample survey of over 10,000 men, and a few questions were asked about practical support between kin.
Respondents were asked to say whether they had actually received assistance from relatives at the time when their own children were born, and also to indicate whether they would turn to relatives for support in three hypothetical situations, of varying degrees of seriousness: to borrow tools or materials; if the respondent and/or his wife were ill for a couple of days; if illness lasted several weeks.
Where men had kin living geographically close, there was no significant difference between classes in the proportions who would turn to kin for support.
There was also little difference in the proportions who had actually received help from kin at the time of childbirth.
Emotional and moral support
The last type of assistance which I shall discuss here is emotional and moral support, by which I mean listening, talking, giving advice, and helping people to put their own lives in perspective.
This is support to which the family might seem peculiarly suited, since it is concerned with personal anxieties and fears, the realm of the intimate.
Routine support and crisis support Emotional support is given by relatives in a wide range of circumstances, not only in crises.
At the more routine end of the scale, studies of the relationship between mothers and daughters, from Young and Willmott onwards, document how daughters turn to their mothers when they are anxious about their children's health, or unsure about some aspect of child rearing (Young and Willmott, 1957), despite the tendency of professional advisers to devalue ‘old wives’ tales'.
Blaxter and Paterson's more recent study, undertaken in Scotland, suggests that mothers remain an important source of advice to, and support for, young women who are concerned about health matters in relation to their own children — at least for working-class women, with whom their study was concerned.
At the same time, some women in the  older generation believed that they were a less significant source of advice and support for their daughters than their own mothers had been for them, and all were concerned to ensure that their support did not amount to ‘interference’(Blaxter and Paterson, 1982, especially pp. 174–9).
A slightly different example of emotional support which is a routine part of women's lives is provided by studies of women who have recently migrated to Britain.
For example, a study of women of Pakistani origin living in Bradford shows that the kin group provides a key structure for the guidance and emotional support of women who are newly arrived from Pakistan (Saifullah Khan, 1977).
In calling these examples ‘routine’, I do not mean to deny their importance to the receiver, nor that they may be very demanding for the giver.
But they are of a different order from the kind of personal crisis which people experience as distressing or disabling, such as the break-up of a marriage.
How important are kin in giving personal support in these circumstances?
The interesting study by Brannen and Collard (1982) on the process of seeking help when marriages are failing, suggests that kin in some ways are less important than earlier studies had suggested.
Although kin might be an important source of practical help once the marriage had actually ended, people who were undergoing marital difficulties were more likely to turn to someone they considered an ‘outsider’ for emotional support or guidance.
This was particularly true of people who had close knit kin networks, who were unlikely to use individual kin as close confidants, and who often said that there were certain kin — usually parents — whom they would definitely not consult (ibid.
Pp. 118–25).
Who gives moral support to whom It seems that patterns of emotional support in crisis situations may be somewhat different from those which I have labelled ‘routine’.
In the more routine situations, there seems to be a common pattern of support between parents and children, especially mothers and daughters, followed by siblings.
There is evidence that the latter increases in importance as people get older (Jerrome, 1981).
There is also evidence that younger people expect to transfer the source of their main emotional support to their spouse when they marry.
In their study of newly-wed couples, Mansfield and Collard found that most expected to be able to apply the contemporary idea that marriage should involve close psychological intimacy to their own circumstances, and many of the women especially were rather disappointed as a result.
As one of their interviewees put it referring to her parents,
Now I'm married I've grown a little away from them, but I miss having them to talk to.
I don't talk to Alan much as I'd like to because he doesn't respond, doesn't discuss.
(Mansfield and Collard, 1988, p. 170)
Data from this study also show that some people do retain relationships which they use for confiding and support, especially with their mothers, and this is regarded as appropriate, especially for women to get support with concerns that essentially are ‘women's business,.
The preference for the parent-child relationship as a source of routine moral and emotional support seems to hold good for the white majority, but perhaps less so for people with different ethnic cultural backgrounds.
In her study of young unemployed men and women of Asian descent, Brah (1986) indicates that they received that emotional support from various numbers of adult relatives.
They felt this was important in helping them to get through the difficulties associated with unemployment.
In relation to support in personal crises, apparently people are more selective in seeking help both from relatives and non-relatives.
This conclusion about the selective nature of close confiding is supported by evidence from a variety of sources.
Hoyt and Babchuk (1983), in a large study done in the United States, found that people were highly selective in the kin whom they named as confidants and distinguished between people in equivalent genealogical positions, naming one child or sibling as a confidant but not others.
In the British context, Wenger (1984) found that married people were most likely to name a spouse as the person in whom they could most easily confide; people who had never been married were most likely to name a brother or sister; widows were most likely to name a child; and in general, the likelihood that a child would be named increased with age.
Another very important factor in the selection of a person in whom one confides seems to be the length of the relationship's history.
Wenger's data show that 43 per cent of elderly people named as a confidant someone they had known for at least 50 years, and 75 per cent named someone they had known for 30 years.
These data suggest that the selection of a relative who gives moral support is related partly to the composition of the kin group and partly to the quality of a particular relationship over a long period of time.
Our understanding of the process of close confiding, and of gaining emotional support from relatives and friends, is greatly enhanced by the linked studies undertaken by Brown and Harris (1978) and O'Connor and Brown (1984).
The former is a large scale study of women with depression, and offers an explanation of why certain women develop the clinical symptoms of depression, which focuses on the significance of a close, confiding relationship.
Women who had such a relationship with a husband or male partner were much less likely to develop depression than those who did not.
The smaller scale study by O'Connor and Brown (1984) takes further the concept of a ‘very close relationship’ by examining the circumstances under which women develop these, and with whom, in the context of how women manage disruptive life experiences.
It is clear from these data that relatives are by no means the only, or even the major, source of support in such circumstances.
Less than one third of respondents who had a mother living included her as a person to whom they felt very close, and hardly any had what could be described as a ‘true’ close relationship with their mother (using criteria developed from the Brown and Harris study).
This study further shows that one can distinguish clearly between the  kind of ‘very close relationship’ which will provide emotional support in times of crisis, and closeness in other senses.
Women had relationships with relatives which were close in terms of the frequency of contact, but which did not form the basis of a confiding relationship; similarly, they had relationships in which there was quite a high degree of practical inter-dependence which did not function as very close in the confiding sense.
This study underlines the highly selective nature of relationships which can be used for emotional support in life circumstances which are personally distressing or disruptive.
Certainly such support is not a routine feature of family relationships, even between parents and children.
It will be apparent that much of this discussion has concerned emotional support given to women rather than men, because there is far more empirical evidence about women's close relationships, largely leaving invisible the question of where men derive their emotional support.
Some information can be gleaned, although it tends to be more sketchy.
For example, Ambrose, Harper and Pemberton's (1983) small study of men after divorce found that just over half their sample relied on parents and/or siblings for support, but they give little detail about the type of support offered and it may well have been practical as much as emotional.
As with other types of support, it is clear that there are considerable variations, especially by gender, in the extent to which emotional support is given within families.
For some people it may be of crucial importance, for others the family simply is not a significant source of emotional support.
Between whom does support flow?
The evidence reviewed here suggests that a good deal of support of various types does pass between members of families.
But who are we really talking about?
Who counts as ‘family’ for the purposes of giving and receiving support?
Does that vary for different types of support?
In the rest of this chapter I shall slice the data in the opposite direction and look at which kin relationships provide the basis for mutual aid, beginning with parents and children.
Parents and children
Popular images of parent-child relationships put them in a special category, distinct from other kin relationships, and suggest that this is where we will find the strongest feelings of duty and obligation.
Parents, especially mothers, always retain a special bond with the children they have borne; children owe a permanent debt of gratitude to the parents who have reared them.
Biology seems to be the foundation of social obligation most obviously in the case of parents  and children.
Offering support to parents or children is just part of human nature.
How does this popular imagery accord with the reality?
There is a sense in which parent-child relationships form the core of kinship in many societies, but the particular shape and form which they take can vary considerably.
For example in China, as in many other places, there is a strong expectation that married sons will live with their parents and this continues to be seen as a desirable option, despite the practical difficulties created by restricted housing conditions in the urban environment (Croll, 1978; Wolf, 1985).
Both the idea that it is desirable for adult children to live with parents, and the custom that it is most desirable for this arrangement to be with the husband's rather than the wife's parents, contrast with ideas commonly held in Britain about desirable relationships between parents and children in adult life.
What does the evidence tell us about the quality and character between parents and children in Britain?
Despite the fact that these relationships are characterized by stronger obligations than any others, we find that in practice there is a wide range of experience of what parents and children actually do for each other.
Gender is a key source of variation as is ethnicity, which cross-cuts gender because ideas about men's and women's roles in the family do vary among the ethnically diverse groups of which the British population is now composed (Anthias and Yuval-Davies, 1983).
A further source of variation is generational position, with some changes occurring in the type of support which is given and the direction in which it flows over each person's life course.
Parents to children I shall begin by looking at support which flows from parents to children, examples of which can be found in all the categories which I have listed, although personal care in a sense is the least important because most adult children do not need it.
But in all the other categories — economic, accommodation, practical and emotional support — the evidence which I reviewed above suggests that parents are regarded the most appropriate relatives to offer support, subject to their capacity to do so.
There also seems to be an expectation that children will be favoured over other relatives when assistance is given.
That expectation is built into inheritance laws.
It is also reflected in an interesting way in data on help with finding employment.
Wilson and Pahl (1988) report from their case study data on one kin group, that all expected to help relatives find work if they could but there was an understanding that jobs would go first to ‘direct sons’ then ‘direct daughters’, followed by brothers, sisters, nephews, nieces.
The early phase of child-rearing is the time popularly associated with particular reliance upon parental support.
The evidence on child care reviewed above suggests that mothers continue to be an important source of support for their daughters, both in practical ways and by giving advice and moral support.
However, as I have already noted it seems important that this advice is given in a way which does not  compromise the adult child's independence and indeed their status as an adult.
This applies also to sons, even in situations where they are receiving significant financial or practical support from parents, as was the case for some of the interviewees in McKee's (1987) study of unemployed men.
She found that the recipients fought hard against the idea that they were ‘at the receiving end’ and went to great lengths to ensure that their parents' support was reciprocated in some way.
McKee suggests that it was important to them that they did not return to a pre-adult state of dependence upon their parents.
Whilst there may be a particular need for parental support in the early years of child-rearing there are plenty of examples of significant assistance being given in other circumstances.
Unemployment provides us with one such example.
Divorce is another, as I indicated above.
The desire to ensure that the adult child retains an appropriate degree of independence can be particularly tricky in these circumstances, especially if she or he returns to live in the parents' home and is dependent upon them for accommodation, child care, emotional support and possibly for money as well.
Sensitivity to this is reflected in data from Burgoyne and Clark's study of people in second marriages.
It is difficult to go back to live with your parents, as one interviewee put it ‘after having a home of your own and being a reasonably free agent’(Burgoyne and Clark, 1984, pp. 80–1).
Thus the theme of respecting the proper boundaries of independence between parents and children does seem to be present in a variety of situations where parents give support to their adult children.
Children to parents What about support which flows in the opposite direction, from children to parents?
The obvious starting point for this discussion is at the other end of the life course, with elderly parents who can no longer live independently.
As I have already indicated in the discussion on personal care, there is strong evidence that children, almost always daughters, do provide substantial amounts of personal care in these circumstances.
In a small proportion of cases children give their parents financial support (Qureshi, 1986; Qureshi and Simons, 1987).
More generally the evidence of the study of middle-class kinship by Firth, Hubert and Forge indicates that most people acknowledge that parents have a right to make demands upon their adult children, and that most children will do their best to meet those demands (Firth, Hubert and Forge, 1970, pp. 406–7).
However, the right to make such demands is not limitless, and in deciding how to respond children may bring in instrumental considerations.
For example, as I indicated in discussing personal care, it is regarded as legitimate for children to think about their own interests when deciding whether to support a parent, but this is balanced rather delicately with the morality of obligation and duty, so that children can quite easily get into the position where they are regarded as too self-interested.
As with support in the other direction, although it is widely regarded  as legitimate for parents to look to their children, it is also possible for them to overstep the boundaries, and the way in which support is requested and delivered is important.
Parents who make demands which are regarded as excessive are resented by their children (even if they actually meet some of those demands), as are those who engage in emotional manipulation or divide the sibling group against each other(Firth, Hubert and Forge, 1970, ch. 12).
Older people are acutely conscious of the possibility of making too many demands, and commonly try to avoid a situation where they have to rely on their children too much.
Again, this becomes apparent in studies of personal care, as I indicated above.
Foundations of parent-child support When we put the two halves of this equation together some important points emerge about the nature of parent-child support in adult life and about the ways in which that support is delivered.
The importance of according a proper degree of independence to the adult child is one of these.
The idea that elderly people strive for ‘intimacy at a distance’, as the preferred model for their relationships with their children, is a concrete expression of the norm that adult children's independence and autonomy should be respected and protected.
The common phrase ‘I don't want to be a burden’ encapsulates this.
On one level that phrase indicates that it is the old person's own independence which is being guarded, but on another level the idea of wanting to remain independent in old age is a way of according the proper independence to one's children.
In both the type of support given and in the way it is delivered, it seems of great importance to sustain a balance between dependence and independence which is regarded as appropriate by all parties.
Another way in which the question of balance arises concerns the direction in which support flows and whether this changes over the course of time.
In discussing economic support I indicated that the net flow continues to be from older to younger generations and normally this is not reversed.
Does this same pattern apply to other types of assistance?
There has been a lively debate in the American literature on this issue, with some researchers arguing that, if one looks at assistance of all types, the model is curvilinear in the sense that the middle generation in three-generation families is net provider of support in both directions (Hill, 1970).
Since this means essentially women, Brody (1981) coined the phrase ‘women in the middle’ to describe those people who have substantial responsibilities to both older and younger generations.
More recent evidence (Cheal, 1983) indicates that the flows in fact are linear in other types of support as well as financial, and that in most respects older generations in families are net providers to younger.
We lack up-to-date and large-scale British data on this issue but the model of linear flows, in which children are net beneficiaries, does seem to fit the evidence of smaller studies discussed elsewhere in this chapter.
One does not get a sense of a strong need for support from  parents to children to be reciprocated — certainly not in the short term, and possibly not in the long term either.
The other important dimension of parent-child support is gender, and there are several dimensions to this.
First, there is evidence that men, even where they acknowledge that they have responsibilities to parents or children, often exercise those responsibilities through their wives.
Sons commonly provide personal care and practical support for their elderly parents through the use of their wives' labour rather than their own (Qureshi and Simons, 1987).
Fathers, because ultimately they control financial resources, may be the people who sign cheques or who authorize the payment of money to their children, but it is often women who mediate and negotiate such gifts and loans (Morris, 1983).
Second, there is a sense in which the whole area of kin relationships is women's business more than men's, in that women have a stronger commitment to and interest in keeping the structures of support alive.
As Graham (1985) puts it a ‘sense of responsibility’ permeates women's approach to the whole issue of family relationships.
In practical terms, Cornwell's (1984) data show that men play a far less active role in family life than women, and even when they are giving direct and practical support to a relative, their commitments are limited and bounded.
This affects the key parent-child relationship in important ways.
People who superficially are in the same position in a family — brothers and sisters, mother and fathers — are likely to define their responsibilities very differently and, perhaps more importantly, to be expected by others to define them differently.
In Land and Rose's (1985) evocative phrase, altruism is ‘compulsory’ for women in a way it is not for men.
Finally, there is the question of mother-daughter relationships, which are said to have a special quality and status which has ramifications across the whole of family life.
The idea that it is entirely natural for mothers and daughters to be particularly supportive of each other recurs again and again in research studies.
An example from Lewis and Meredith's work illustrates the theme common to many other studies.
This comment is from a daughter who had been giving substantial care to her mother, and explained the situation thus,
My brothers couldn't wash her and dress her and wash her hair could they?…
I was the daughter, I would do it, yes.
(Lewis and Meredith, 1988, p. 24)
However, support between mothers and daughters is not a universal phenomenon and it varies widely in its scope.
Firth, Hubert and Forge (1970) in their study of middle-class families, found that about 15 per cent of parent-child relationships were ‘bad’(as perceived by the child and measured by items such as little or no contact, clear dislike from one party to the other) and about one third of those examples of ‘bad’ relationships concerned mothers and daughters.
Even where contact is frequent and based upon mutual affection, that does not mean necessarily that mothers and daughters are significant sources of support for each other, as I indicated in my discussion of emotional support.
Structures of support between mothers and daughters are subject to all the individual variations which I mentioned at the beginning of this discussion, and at a more collective level, ethnic and cultural variation is very important, with some cultural traditions placing a less strong emphasis on this bond than does white Anglo-Saxon culture.
For example in the case of people of Asian origin living in Britain, the expectation is much more likely to be that the main supportive bond, especially in respect of financial support, will be between sons and parents.
There is evidence that sons make considerable efforts to provide support for their parents even when they are in straitened circumstances themselves.
In her study of young Asian men and women who were unemployed, Brah notes that sons with widowed mothers felt under particular pressure to support them financially and practically, and when unemployment made it impossible for them to do so they felt ‘an acute sense of failure’ as one of her interviewees put it,
I can't live off my mother and my younger brother: I'm supposed to look after them and not the other way round.
(Brah, 1986)
Therefore the simple observation that the parent-child bond is where we find family duty and obligation most clearly expressed has to be modified with reference to the gender of the participants, and with reference to a particular cultural context.
Also the idea that a strong obligation exists between parents and children, which can be relied upon as a source of support in most circumstances, misses a point of prime significance, namely that such support must be negotiated and provided in a way which does not trespass upon the independence of either party, especially of adult children.
Because of this, much of the empirical evidence on parent-child support betrays a sense of wariness and carefulness about offering and accepting such support, which is far removed from the idea that it is the most natural thing in the world for parents and children to support each other.
Grandparents and grandchildren
Relationships between grandparents and grandchildren have an interesting and distinctive blend of closeness and distance.
They focus on the central parent-child bond, but at one generation removed and with a substantial difference in age between the two parties.
This blend of closeness and distance is represented in popular imagery of grandparents: they are people who spoil their grandchildren and are indulgent towards their misdemeanours, even if they have brought up their own children rather strictly.
Research evidence supports the view that this relationship is valued highly, especially by the grandparental generation.
Firth, Hubert and Forge report that their middle-class respondents almost always named grandchildren as well as children as being part of their close family.
However, in the younger generation, most people counted parents but not grandparents (Firth, Hubert and Forge, 1970, pp. 80–91).
There is a  clear sense therefore in which relationships between grandparents and grandchildren are not symmetrical, with the older generation placing more value upon this relationship than the younger.
In assessing patterns of support between grandparents and grandchildren (in either direction) in adult life there is a sense in which we are discussing a rather recent phenomenon, because of the changing age structure of the population and increased life expectancy.
In previous generations it was much less likely than it is now that grandparents would have lived to know their grandchildren as adults (see chapters 2 and 3).
There also is an empirical problem of understanding how support operates between grandparents and grandchildren, in that we must disentangle it from support given to and by the intervening generation.
For example, when grandparents look after their young grandchildren for an evening or for a week, are they helping the children or their parents?
Or if we find that a grand-daughter is assisting her own mother in caring for an elderly parent, whom is the granddaughter helping?
Is she giving assistance to her grandmother, or is she really helping her own mother to bear a heavy burden?
In practice one suspects that it would make little sense to the participants in any of these cases to ask who is really being supported:.
the answer would almost certainly be that both are.
These empirical difficulties tell us something important about the nature of support structures between grandparent and grandchild.
They are locked into a broader pattern of support which spans the three generations of parents and children, rather than existing on their own terms.
The well-known American research by Hill (1970) has demonstrated the interlocking nature of support structures across the three generations, and has shown that grandchildren do feel responsibility to give assistance to their grandparents in this context, although in practice they actually do less than the intervening generation.
Also in relation to the United States, Brody (1981) offers evidence from a three-generation study of women that the youngest generation felt more strongly than the other two about ‘grandfilial responsibility’, three-quarters of them saying that older people should expect help from their grandchildren, whereas less than a quarter of the oldest generation took this view.
Brody speculates that this finding (which runs counter to the evidence which I presented above that grandparents place more value on this relationship than grandchildren) may reflect the idealism of the younger generation and their lack of experience of situations where demands are actually made upon them.
Are these patterns reflected in the British context?
There is little up-to-date evidence, but that which exists broadly is consistent with them.
The idea that grandchildren, especially granddaughters, are a possible choice for the care of elderly people is the key element here, although it has to be seen in the light of the evidence (which I reviewed above) about who actually cares in practice.
Grandchildren do not appear on Qureshi and Simons's (1987) hierarchy of preferred carers, indicating that they are very much a minority group subsumed under ‘other  relatives’ and therefore much less likely to be providing personal care than their parents' generation.
We lack systematic knowledge of the circumstances under which grandchildren might take on significant responsibility for the support (either personal or financial) for their grandparents in contemporary Britain.
Support from grandparent' to grandchild is rather more straightforward, although again rather little evidence exists.
Given that the net flow of support is normally from older to younger generations, we should expect support in this direction to be more extensive.
Certainly we know that this happens when grandchildren are young, as I suggested in my discussion of child care and also of economic support.
Examples can be found of grandparents buying basic necessities such as food and clothing for their grandchildren, as well as more substantial purchases.
So far as assistance to grandchildren in adult life is concerned, the American evidence suggests that grandparents do assist financially and that they define this assistance as a gift, unlike financial support between the other two generations which is more likely to be defined as a loan, or as part of an exchange (Hill, 1970, pp. 69–70).
This is consistent with the idea that the older generation in a three-generation family occupies the position of net giver of support, and that this is regarded as proper in a normative sense.
As in the case of parent-child relationships we find here that one-way flows of support can not only be tolerated, but also in a sense are expected, provided the direction of the support is from grandparent to grandchild.
However, the form which such support takes means that it is not the kind of support upon which one could rely.
If it comes it is a bonus, something which literally is ‘in the gift’ of the grandparental generation.
Undoubtedly there are differences in people's experiences of support between grandparents and grandchildren, but we have so little up-to-date evidence on this issue that it is difficult to say how far such experiences vary systematically according to gender, ethnicity or social class.
Brothers and sisters
The relationships between brothers and sisters in any society are governed not only by personal likes and dislikes, but also by wider social and economic arrangements.
This is obvious if we consider societies which have systems of partible inheritance, where resources are divided equally between the surviving children on the parents' death.
Such arrangements require a high degree of co-operation between siblings in adult life, as is demonstrated by evidence from rural communities — France, for example(Segalen, 1984).
These arrangements also may be related to gender, as in the case for example of Tunisia, discussed by Cuisenier (1976), where Islamic law allows both women and men to inherit, but custom presumes that women will  not claim their share.
When women do try to make such claims, this sets up predictable antagonisms between brothers and sisters.
In a case like this, gender divisions interact with inheritance patterns to produce particular forms of relationship between brothers and sisters.
In the British context, does the degree of economic independence accorded to siblings mean that these relationships normally are an insignificant source of all types of support?
Evidence from recent empirical research suggests that siblings do provide a source of support in adult life, although this is of less importance between parents and children.
Allatt and Yeandle (1986) report findings from their study of young unemployed people that brothers and sisters give each other financial support to help cope with unemployment.
McKee (1987) reports that siblings of unemployed men were the second most important category (after parents) to give assistance.
The sort of help which siblings gave included loans and gifts of money (these came especially from brothers and sisters who were unmarried), gifts of food and clothing for the children (usually from married sisters) and help in finding employment for the male breadwinner (from brothers).
Wilson and Pahl (1988) also report from their case study data that siblings are an important source of assistance when one of them is stretched financially.
More generally, can we identify the circumstances under which siblings are likely to be a significant source of support?
First it seems that personal preference and liking is important, certainly to a much greater extent than in relationships between parents and children.
Most people feel an obligation to keep in contact with their siblings, but beyond that it is regarded as quite proper for relationships to vary in the level of intimacy and the type of support offered (Firth, Hubert and Forge, 1970; Allan, 1979).
La Fontaine, in her review of studies of British kinship suggests that there seems to be ‘a preference for particular siblings rather than a general solidarity with brothers and sisters’(La Fontaine, 1985, p. 54).
Second, ethnicity is important in two senses.
On the one hand, ethnic minorities currently settled in Britain have been here for a relatively short period of time, and it seems that circumstances of migration and initial settlement are conditions under which support between siblings assumes greater significance than it might otherwise do — a point illustrated by the patterns of chain migration and of joint households which I discussed earlier in this chapter.
This argument suggests that support between siblings may become less significant for the ethnic minority British population in the future.
On the other hand the cultural expectations which continue to be endorsed in Britain do embody — for some groups at least— a stronger commitment between siblings than is common in white British culture.
As Wilson (1978) points out, relationships between sisters and sisters-in-law are very positively valued across the whole of the Indian sub-continent, and patterns based on these relationships seem to be strongly established in the British context.
Third, there are important gender differences, both in the kind of support which passes between siblings (as in McKee's evidence, discussed above) and also more generally in the quality and importance of relationships.
Firth, Hubert and Forge (1970) suggest that by and large men have poorer relationships with their siblings than do women, and that relationships between sisters are more likely to be close and supportive.
Certainly there is evidence that in the past sisters provided very significant amounts of practical, moral and sometimes financial support for each other(Young and Willmott, 1957; Roberts, 1984).
Firth and his colleagues argue that the main reason for this gender difference relationships through which they can gain support for their domestic and child care responsibilities, whereas men's lives are more dominated by work and careers in which siblings usually cannot help.
That is a plausible argument and it points to the importance of economic factors and the prevailing division of labour in shaping sibling relationships.
Presumably in circumstances where brothers can help each other to find work, or in some other material way, there is an incentive to keep good relationships.
That argument certainly would be supported by evidence about migration to Britain, where brothers already settled are an important source of work contacts and economic support for new migrants (Oakley, 1979; Anwar, 1985).
Fourth, it seems that, as with parents and children, we need to be aware that there are likely to be quite wide fluctuations in support passing between siblings over the lifetime of each.
Jerrome's (1981) work on older women's friendships indicates that women's relationships with their sisters seem to be intensified in later life, even for people whose relationships had been poor when they were younger.
This intensification seemed to be triggered by the loss of other significant relationships, for example the death of a spouse, or retirement from paid work which removed relationships with workmates and colleagues.
Argyle and Henderson (1985), reviewing evidence about contact between siblings, suggest that this follows a U-shape, being high in childhood and teenage years, falling off in the middle of adult life, and then picking up again as the siblings move into old age.
Support between siblings contrasts with support between parents and children in two important ways.
First, it seems less reliable, in the sense that whether it is offered depends very much upon personal circumstances and personal liking, at least for the majority white community.
Except perhaps in rather trivial matters, there is no real sense that one can expect assistance from someone just because they are your brother or your sister.
Second, it much more obviously is two-way support, built upon reciprocal exchange between people who are in equivalent positions in genealogical terms.
One would predict that where a particular sibling is not willing or able to give support they are unlikely to receive it, except perhaps if they have given assistance in the past.
More distant kin
It is clear from the evidence on British kinship that people do acknowledge a wide range of uncles, aunts, nieces, nephews and cousins as forming part of their kin network in some sense, but whether these people place a significant part in structures of support is quite another matter.
In the structure of kinship which is reflected in British research studies — that of the white majority — considerable variation is found in the range of people who ‘count’ as part of the kin group for different purposes.
Simply knowing that two people are linked in a particular genealogical relationship does not necessarily predict that they will acknowledge any responsibilities towards each other, not even whether they have actually kept in contact at a minimal level.
The British data suggest that people commonly think about their total kin universe as divided into two or three categories (represented visually by concentric circles) and these categories do correspond with obligations acknowledged in practice.
This is reflected in a number of studies of kinship, but I shall use the terms employed by Firth, Hubert and Forge (1970, ch. 6).
First, there is the widest and most exclusive category of ‘named’ or ‘recognized’kin, composed of all the relatives whose existence I am aware of.
Second, there are ‘effective’ kin, the people with whom I keep in contact at a minimal level.
The third category is ‘intimate’ kin, the people with whom contact is close and fairly frequent (for other discussions of these divisions see Schneider, 1968; Allan, 1979).
When we are considering the support which passes between kin we can exclude the outermost circle almost by definition.
If kin are recognized but no contact is maintained, then clearly support is not being given.
However, it is important to note that such relationships, although dormant for a while, potentially can be reactivated and there is evidence that this does happen (Firth, Hubert and Forge, 1970, p. 155–6).
Moving to a different part of the country, for example, or even a chance meeting, may be the trigger to reactivate a relationship with someone in this outermost circle, thus drawing them into the second category.
The group which is relevant to the discussion of support is ‘effective’ kin, which itself is composed of an inner and an outer circle.
Precisely who falls into the outer circle of effective kin, or the inner circle of intimate kin, is not entirely predictable in individual cases, although people normally do have a fairly clear notion of two different categories, for whom different terms may be employed.
The terms used by the middle-class Londoners studied by Firth and his colleagues were ‘family’ for the inner circle and ‘relatives’for the outer, or sometimes ‘immediate family’, to distinguish their intimate kin (p. 156).
On the basis of this type of analysis, we can now pose questions about support between more distant kin in slightly different terms.
Does support between members of families really only pass between the inner circle of intimate kin?
Is there any sense of duty to give support to relatives in the outer circle of effective kin?
Do kin who are  more distant in genealogical terms necessarily fall in the outer circle?
Do they get defined into the inner circle if there is a history of reciprocal support?
We do not have adequate and up-to-date evidence which would enable us to answer these questions with certainty, but as elsewhere we can piece together clues from a variety of research studies.
Roberts's evidence suggests that there has been considerable variation historically in how far support structures extend to more distant kin.
Her Lancashire data show that families had strong support networks encompassing uncles, aunts, cousins, even great aunts and great uncles; others included none of these (Roberts, 1984, p. 169).
That variability is reflected in more recent empirical evidence, especially the study by Firth and his colleagues, which is unusual in giving specific and detailed attention to these relationships.
Their evidence suggests that, whilst people do exchange support with more distant kin, it is usually on a fairly small scale and whether one does this is treated as optional not obligatory.
Moreover there is a notable tendency to be selective, in that one positively elects to assist a particular aunt, nephew or cousin, with whom one happens to have a good relationship.
These good relationships are often the result of contingent factors such as living geographically close, sharing a particular common interest or (in the case of cousins especially) having spent a lot of time together in childhood (Firth, Hubert and Forge, 1970, ch. 12).
The picture which emerges from this study is one where assistance between more distant kin is of relatively minor importance to the total picture (although of course it may be very important in particular cases), and that whether it is likely to be significant is rather idiosyncratic and unpredictable.
Whilst in general it does seem that relationships with the ‘outer circle’ are not particularly important sources of support, one certainly can find predictable — not merely idiosyncratic — exceptions to that rule.
One such exception concerns circumstances where a particular person does not have close relatives, where there seems to be an expectation that kin in the outer circle should give more support than they otherwise might, as it were deputizing or substituting for the non-existent children or parents.
Examples can be found in the research literature on elderly people, where it is reported that those without children tend to form equivalent ties with whichever kin are available, typically a niece or nephew, although there is some doubt about whether such a person can properly be expected to provide such extensive or reliable support as a ‘real’ child (Townsend, 1965; Allan, 1983; Wenger, 1984).
Another important exception can be found in Grieco's (1987) data on the use of kin networks to secure employment, where she found that relatives as distant as cousins were as likely to be involved as close kin in arrangements which brought a number of male and female kin into the same workplace or firm.
The system works because membership of a particular kin group implies that this person is a good worker and in this instance family reputation extends quite a distance in genealogical terms, well beyond the inner circle of intimate kin, provided a family  member gives a recommendation.
As one of Grieco's respondents put it,
We're all workers in this family and always have been.
We've earned every penny we've ever had.
(Grieco, 1987, p. 87)
The idea that the ‘good name’ of the family is still coveted may be a little surprising in the 1980s, but these data show that there are situations where it is still very important and has direct consequences in material terms.
It would be misleading therefore, effectively to write off the outer circle of kin as significant sources of support in British society.
They may not be used routinely, but there certainly are circumstances in which they do provide assistance.
Nonetheless the majority British culture does contrast with many others in the relative unimportance of wider kin ties, including arrangements found traditionally elsewhere in Europe.
For example, all the work on Mediterranean societies notes a strong preference for marriage between cousins who are the children of two brothers, which contrasts sharply with traditional marriage customs in Britain (and elsewhere in northern Europe), where the marriage between close kin has been prohibited, although the range of kin to whom these prohibitions apply has been whittled down in the past century (Wolfram, 1987).
The effect of marriage between cousins is to secure and maintain the boundaries of the kin group and the resources which it controls, by ensuring that no one takes anything out of the kin group when they marry, and that strangers are not introduced (Tillion, 1983).
Using the wider kin group as the basis for organizing social and economic life may not be characteristic of contemporary Britain, but some of the groups who have migrated to this country since the Second World War have brought with them, and retained, a pattern of kin relationships which differs from the white British norm and which in some cases includes a preference for cousin marriage.
More generally, there is a wider range of kin whom one is presumed to have some duty to assist.
For example, migrants from Pakistan — both women and men — appear to retain a strong sense of obligation to give support to all relatives within their biraderi (sometimes spelled biradari)which contains a wide range of kin and can represent a network of mutual aid extending across continents (Anwar, 1985).
One can certainly see why it makes sense to retain these structures of support in a situation of relatively recent migration into a society which can be extremely hostile.
Although the cultural background is different, a similar pattern of using the wider kin network for mutual aid has operated in earlier migrations, for example migration from rural Lancashire into the growing industrial towns in the early nineteenth century (Anderson, 1971), or Irish migration to America and elsewhere (Arensberg and Kimball, 1968).
In that sense the present situation of recent migrants to Britain is part of a familiar pattern.
Whether structures of support within the wider kin network will continue to make sense when, and if, non-white citizens become accepted as full and established members of British society is an important topic for future research.
In-laws
Relationships with in-laws form a special category of kin relationships.
In his influential discussion of American kinship, Schneider argues that there are two basic principles built into the kinship system: blood and marriage.
Blood relatives in some sense are bound together by genetic material, but relations by marriage are bound together by law and a code of conduct which accompanies this (Schneider, 1968).
Broadening this analysis, we might note that there is considerable variation in different cultures about how the two principles of blood and marriage relate to each other, and therefore in the code of conduct upon which in-law relationships are based.
The different cultural traditions represented in the British Isles are no exception.
What importance do in-law relationships have, especially in relation to structures of support, in the dominant white British culture?
Wolfram (1987) suggests that a distinctive feature of British kinship is the concept of the unity of husband and wife, and thus a strong sense that spouses ‘own’ each other 's kin.
Research evidence suggests, however, that for the most part a mother-in-law is not treated as equivalent to a mother, nor a sister-in-law to a sister, and so on.
Also there is some evidence that in-law relationships entail different types of exchange: mothers do things for their married daughters whereas mothers-in-law give items to them (Argyle and Henderson, 1985, p. 223).
Relationships with in-laws, especially with parents-in-law, conventionally are regarded as problematic and therefore it is not surprising to find that patterns of support seem to be affected by the quality of the relationship.
Firth, Hubert and Forge report that some people get on with their mothers-in-law better than their own mothers, but for the most part these relationships are regarded as likely to be tricky: people treat them as an ‘occupational risk’ of marriage and regard themselves as ‘lucky’if they work out satisfactorily (1970, pp. 414–15).
Anxiety about in-law relationships, and evidence that some considerable adjustment can be necessary, is found also in Mansfield and Collard's (1988) study of the early years of marriage.
It was not uncommon for interviewees to report that at least one set of parents had been unhappy initially about their plans to marry and this was often connected in some way with disappointment or disapproval over the choice of spouse.
As with the other relationships considered here, there are clear gender differences, certainly in relation to support which passes between in-laws.
Cornwell reports that the men in her study have very little to do with their own families and even less with their wife's kin.
She cites one example of a man who spent several years living in his parents-in-law's house but still had little to do with them afterwards; another where a man had helped to nurse his father-in-law through an  illness, but when that was over had as little contact with him as he had before (Cornwell, 1984, p. 89).
Women, by contrast, not only support their own kin but their husband's as well in some cases.
In the evidence presented by Qureshi and Simons (1987) and also by Ungerson (1987) on who cares for elderly people, daughters-in-law ranked above sons as people likely to be providing such care.
Beyond the relationship between parents-in-law and children-in-law, there is little evidence of support, except in cases where for individual and idiosyncratic reasons people happen to form a good relationship, say with a sister-in-law.
Such situations seem to be experienced as appropriate and a bonus, but by no means expected.
Indeed, as Wolfram points out, such relationships are of so little importance within British kinship that there are no recognized kinship terms for many of these relationships gained through marriage (Wolfram, 1987, p. 4).
The pattern is very different in some of the minority cultures represented in the British Isles.
The sharpest contrast is with migrants who have brought with them the expectation that sons will bring their wives into the homes of their parents, where in some sense the wives will be under the authority of their mothers-in-law.
As I have indicated, shared households of this type are more common among groups whose ethnic origins are in the Indian sub-continent, than for white British people or for migrants from the Caribbean, although such households are often smaller than their equivalents in India, Pakistan or Bangladesh.
Such arrangements are also often associated with the custom of keeping men's and women's worlds sharply segregated, although as Saifullah Khan (1976) points out in her discussion of purdah in Bradford, the luxury of remaining truly separate could only ever be afforded by the comparatively wealthy.
What such arrangements traditionally have provided is a large group of women, related to each other as in-laws and living in the same household, who operate their own quite complex social organization in which each gains significant support.
In the more restricted circumstances in Britain, where such households are smaller and contacts between women in different households in some respects more difficult, women lose something of this support network although they may gain a greater degree of independence in their interactions with men.
It remains to be seen whether these arrangements will continue to make sense in the future.
Indeed Saifullah Khan was able to report even from her data collected in the mid-1970s that some recent migrants, especially those best equipped to survive in Britain economically without the support of kin, already were considerably relaxing arrangements based on the purdah system.
Looking at in-law relationships generally, it is apparent that one of their distinctive features in any culture is that they are conducted both through, and in a sense for the sake of, a third party.
There would be literally no relationship between a man and his son-in-law were it not for his daughter, and so on.
This means that support which in-laws  receive from each other is ambiguous in a way which does not apply to other relationships.
Is the support which is given to the son-in-law ‘really’ being given to the daughter by proxy?
In many cases the answers to that question would be difficult to unravel, and if challenged most people probably would say that they were doing both.
But there are some instances documented in the literature where people are quite clear that support given to in-laws is really being given to the blood relative.
In Grieco's study of the use of kin networks to gain employment for example, one of her female respondents, a worker in a tobacco factory in Basildon, told her,
If he weren't my son-in-law I wouldn't lift a finger to help him.
If she ever left him I'd cut him completely adrift.
I'm helping her really.
He thinks I'm helping him but I'm not.
I wouldn't give him the time of day if I could help it.
(Grieco, 1987, p. 28)
This raises interesting questions about what actually does happen to such relationships when the third party is no longer there, that is, when the marriage is broken through death or divorce.
Does the relationship continue as before?
Does it cease altogether?
Does something between those two extremes happen?
Is it different for marriages which end in death and those which end in divorce?
These are interesting questions of increasing importance as the divorce rate continues to rise, but we have little empirical evidence to go on.
In a sense these are situations where ‘the rules’ are currently being written through individual and collective experiences.
Some clues can be found in existing literature.
Schneider's discussion of American kinship argues that the removal of the third party makes the continuation of the relationship voluntary: the divorced or widowed spouse of a blood relative will still be treated as a relative only if there is a continuing relationship in the qualitative sense 1968, pp. 92–4).
Existing British evidence on widowhood seems to support that conclusion, reporting a tendency for many widows gradually to lose contact with their husband's relatives, although some do stay close (Marris, 1958).
Whether divorce operates in the same way as widowhood in this regard is really a matter of speculation at the present time.
In relation to white British culture in particular, various factors combine to create a sense of unreliability in in-law support: the ambiguity about whether the in-laws are ‘really’ part of your kin group; the possibility that the linking third party will be removed at some stage; the expectation that in-law relationships are likely to be tricky at an interpersonal level.
Conclusion
In this conclusion I shall not attempt to summarize the richness of the patterns which I have identified in the available data, concerning who does what for whom.
However, I shall return to the four themes which I  identified at the beginning, and which have been threaded through the discussion.
A reconsideration of these moves us onto a more analytical plane, and points the way forward to discussion in subsequent chapters.
Variations in the experience of kin support The issue here is whether variations in people's experience of support within families can be attributed to personal and idiosyncratic factors, or whether those variations are related systematically to the position of the parties in economic and social structures.
The evidence suggests that variations are systematic to an extent, but that this does not account completely for the considerable differences in family support which one can observe in practice.
In the preceding review, social class emerges as the least important of the major social divisions in structuring our experience of kin support.
This could well be a consequence of a lack of up-to-date evidence offering systematic comparisons between classes.
We need such data and it needs to be sensitive to regional variations.
But on the basis of evidence available now, it seems reasonable to conclude that class is not of the first importance in structuring our experiences of family life.
An exception to this general conclusion concerns economic support where class is important because, even using the rather crude categories of middle class and working class, we can see that these do represent different levels of access to financial and other economic resources.
Economic support of all kinds seems to be much more significant of middle-class kin groups, who on the whole have more to share and use that capacity in a distinctive way to enable family members, especially the younger generations, to maintain a suitable style and standard of living.
Researchers working in the 1950s perhaps could be forgiven for not recognizing the importance of ethnicity in family relations, since Britain was a more monolithic society in ethnic terms than it became subsequently.
We can see now that ethnicity is an important source of variation in individual experience and no studies of family life can afford to ignore it.
Indeed it is an important priority to generate new data which make ethnicity visible, because on the basis of existing evidence it is difficult to distinguish whether the different patterns of support which we can see in minority ethnic kin groups are likely to persist as patterns of settlement stabilize.
Without doubt variation by gender is a key element in patterns of support between kin.
In the data there is some support for the notion that certain matters such as child care and support for elderly people are regarded as women's business in families, while men's business is money; but it would be too crude to assume that this simple division of responsibilities could explain all the gender differences which occur in kin support.
In practice women and men are involved in different ways in giving and receiving support, but much of this is explained not by a cultural definition of what counts as women's business or men's business, but by three other factors.
First, women and men have different access to resources which could be shared, especially financial resources.
We saw that there is some evidence that, where women do have command over financial resources in a way normally associated with men, they share in financial support in families in a way rather similar to men.
Second, women and men have different responsibilities accorded to them in the domestic division of labour.
Men do not share support with child care simply because so few of them are responsible for the care of children, and so on.
Third, because women's and men's lives are organized very differently in our society as a whole, women seem to be more available to provide any assistance which involves input of time and domestic labour.
A sister with a part-time job looks more available to care for a parent than a brother who works full-time.
Since paid work still is much more likely to be distributed this way than the reverse, there is a built-in tendency for caring responsibilities to fall on women, even without cultural expectations that women are particularly suited to these tasks.
So both as givers and receivers of support, men and women normally are in very different positions and it is not surprising to find therefore that gender permeates all aspects of support structures.
Age and generational position are important in families almost by definition.
The evidence suggests that they operate in a particular way, namely that there are predictable patterns in flows of support between older and younger generations, in which support flows in both directions, but on balance the older generation are the givers and the younger the receivers.
Contrary to some popular images, normally this does not seem to be reversed in a significant way during the last years of life of the older generation, except perhaps where a person receives substantial personal care, but is not in a position to repay it through bequests after their death.
Regional variations have proved the most difficult to uncover.
The problem is partly conceptual, partly empirical.
Where research studies have been carried out in different parts of the country it is difficult to disentangle anything which might be attributed to regional variations specifically, from other systematic variations by gender, class, ethnicity or variations over time (that is where changes in patterns of family relationships have occurred between the 1960s and the 1980s).
Short of a series of studies which is designed directly to compare regional patterns, holding other variables constant, we cannot be certain that any observed variations can be attributed to, say, people's views about family responsibilities being different in the north-east of England from the prevailing norms in the south-west.
Without studies of that kind, which we certainly do not have, it is proper to remain agnostic on the question of whether regional variations are of any significance.
However, it is noticeable in a number of studies reviewed here that rather similar patterns are reported from studies undertaken in different locations.
To pick out just a few examples: grandparents treat their grandchildren in the same way whether they live in Aberdeen or London; middle-class people use  money to support their close relatives in similar ways whether they live in Swansea, Sheffield or London; people use their kin network to help them find employment whether they live in Glasgow, Basildon or Corby.
In so far as we have evidence about regional comparisons, it points to continuities rather than differences.
On the other hand, there are some regional variations in economic terms which may have increasing impact on the resources available to be shared in families, especially the rising value of property in the south of England and the better job opportunities there.
Reliability I posed a series of questions about whether support from relatives can be seen as reliable, and what reliability actually means in this context.
It seems that there are very few situations in which support from relatives is totally reliable in the sense that it would be given automatically, and without further thought, when a need is identified.
There may well be some examples of families which operate like that but it is not the general pattern, even in relationships between parents and children which come closest to it.
The real significance of reliability is something rather different: it is the reliability of knowing that there is something to fall back on, with family support acting as a safety net if really needed.
The analogy of the safety net seems to me to be a good one, not least because it is an image commonly employed in everyday life.
A safety net is something which you hope that you will never have to use, and you endeavour to arrange matters so that you do not need it, but if necessary it will catch you.
One gets this sense of the safety net in relation to various different types of assistance: money, child care, accommodation, even personal care, where it runs counter to the notion that the most natural first line of support for elderly and dependent people is their families.
The research evidence suggests that support from one's family should be the last resort and not the first, and that even then it must be handled carefully to ensure that each party retains a proper independence of the other.
That need to draw the boundaries of independence applies particularly to parents and adult children, between whom this safety net operates most predictably.
Instrumentality My focus on instrumentality has been concerned with the issue of whether people are allowed to act out of self-interest in family relationships.
The answer seems to be that this is regarded as quite proper if the advantage is mutual — possibly less so if it is not.
Indeed there is a sense in which it is positively desirable to act out of self-interest in offering support to a relative, since if the donor also benefits, there is less chance that one party will become over-dependent upon the other.
That consideration of one's own advantage can be entirely proper is particularly clear in relation to sharing accommodation, where it seems that it is the foundation of most such arrangements.
Particularly important is the evidence that, where elderly people are sharing with younger relatives, these arrangements often were entered  into in the first instance for the benefit of the younger as much as the older generation.
In arguing that the instrumental response is quite proper in some circumstances I do not mean to imply that it always can operate.
There are certainly some situations in which it would be seen as entirely inappropriate, for example in relationships between grandchildren and their grandparents, where support is normally given from the older to the younger generation, but in the form of a gift.
This is given out of generosity and grandchildren do not necessarily have the right to expect it.
Indeed, wherever assistance is defined as a gift (rather than, for example , part of a broader pattern of exchange), it is likely to be regarded as inappropriate that the potential beneficiary should behave in an instrumental way towards the potential donor.
Reciprocity The concept of reciprocity has been central to academic studies of kinship, especially in anthropology.
I shall deal with it more fully in chapter 5.
In reviewing the material in this chapter, I have simply posed the question about whether, and in what circumstances, support within kin groups can be one-way, or whether there is always some pressure to reciprocate.
Flows of assistance between generations provide us with an important example where, in practice, support is often one way, and where apparently this is regarded as quite proper.
Parents give to their children and their grandchildren and they continue to give.
Whilst certainly they may receive something in return, there does not seem to be a pressure to balance out the gifts.
One-way flows are tolerated here, perhaps expected.
Apart from these generational patterns of support between parents and children, there does seem to be pressure for assistance to be reciprocated.
In relationships between siblings or between other kin, the two-way principle seems to be the foundation of support structures.
Indeed, it is an important way in which the principle of maintaining each person's independence can be protected.
These four themes do seem to highlight some important features of support within families: how it operates and its meaning to people who participate.
The general picture which emerges is one in which, whilst a considerable amount of assistance does pass between relatives, the procedures for asking for, offering and accepting it are quite tricky to handle in practice.
There are very few cases in which it is automatic for one relative to offer support and unproblematic for the other to accept it.
In that sense, helping one's relatives, even one's parents or children, is by no means the most natural thing in the world.
There are no unambiguous rules about how this should be done, and there is considerable room for manoeuvre on both sides.
Because of all this, there is a sense in which all assistance between relatives must be the subject of negotiations about when it is to be given, by whom, for how long, and on what terms.
This conclusion  highlights the importance of seeing support between kin in the context of the interpersonal relationships of the parties to these negotiations.
I do not expect my father to lend me money simply because he is a father.
He is my father, and our relationship has a past, a present and an anticipated future, all of which will affect the terms upon which we can consider a transfer of money without compromising our own personal identities, or the relationship between us.
Despite the limitations of the available data, the picture which emerges from this review is complex and interesting.
People do give support to their kin but they do so in a way which is patchy, possibly idiosyncratic, and which certainly cannot be predicted simply from knowing how they are related to each other.
This chapter has been devoted principally to describing what happens; the rest of the book is concerned with understanding this rather complex picture.
DO FAMILIES SUPPORT EACH OTHER MORE OR LESS THAN IN THE PAST?
Introduction
How have patterns of support between members of the same kin group changed in Britain over time, and especially over the past two centuries?
Are the rather variable and unpredictable patterns of kin support, which I identified in chapter 1, of recent origin?
Have people lost a clearer ‘sense of obligation’ to assist their kin which existed in the past?
The expansion of the study of family history in recent years, and the coming together of historical and sociological concerns in this field in particular, makes it possible at least to attempt answers to these questions in a way that would not have been possible even ten years ago, for lack of appropriate sources of evidence.
At the same time, the limitations of the data are very apparent, and mean that the answers to these questions must be partial and to some extent speculative, rather than detailed and authoritative.
The most obvious limitation is that much of the available data concern relationships within households, rather than relationships between kin in different households.
Further, the data can be used to reveal a good deal about the composition of households — who lived with whom — but far less about the character and quality of relationships which people had with each other(Laslett, 1972a, p. 1; Anderson, 1980, pp. 36–7).
Where data do exist on support between kin across households, this tends in effect to be limited to documenting the networks through which support flowed and the kind of support which was given, and can give very little direct evidence about the underlying structure of social relations which supported these exchanges.
We often simply do not know in what ways people in the past were drawing on ideas about obligations, rights or duties when they provided assistance for their kin (Medick and Sabean, 1984, pp. 20–1).
In addition to the specific limitations, there is the general caution which should be  exercised in using historical data to document social change.
As Morgan (1985, pp. 169–70) points out in his review of studies in family history, history never just tells us a single story — there are many possible stories, depending upon what questions we ask.
There is also the tendency when comparing the past with the present to draw too sharp a distinction between ‘then and now’, a tendency often linked to a view of the present as either vastly superior or inferior to the past.
This last point is particularly pertinent to the issue of how responsibilities between kin have changed, because the idea persists that in the past there was a time when ‘the family’ had a stronger sense of responsibility towards looking after its young, old and sick members.
This notion has a strong hold on popular consciousness, political debate, and even some writing in social science (for further discussion, see Finch, 1987b).
By contrast, the present day is seen as a time when people's sense of duty and responsibility is much weaker, so that they are less prepared to acknowledge obligation or to take responsibility for kin.
For some commentators on the political right such as Marsland (1986, p. 87), the apparent weakening of family responsibility has been encouraged by the growth of state services which provide alternative sources of support.
When, if ever, did this golden age exist?
Assumptions vary: some people take the more recent past as their benchmark, others look to a more distant Utopia.
In contemporary political debate it is ‘Victorian values’ which are presented as the high point of family responsibilities, implying that Utopia existed somewhere around the middle to end of the nineteenth century (West, 1984).
In academic writings it is probably more common to look to an earlier period as the time when family solidarity was of prime importance.
In this perspective, it was industrialization and urbanization which triggered those processes and which led ultimately to a weakening of family ties, and especially ties with kin outside the so-called ‘conjugal family’ composed of a couple and their immature children (Morgan, 1975, ch. 2; Harris, 1983, chs. 6–8).
A completely contrasting interpretation of history is represented by MacFarlane's (1978) work on the origins of English individualism, where he argues that the structure of kinship which prioritizes the nuclear family and de-emphasizes other kin has been characteristic of England at least since the thirteenth century.
The scope of the discussion in this chapter will be broad and will cover the past two centuries, sketchy though that necessarily will be.
To structure the discussion, I shall focus on the idea of a golden age of family responsibilities in the past as the starting-point for understanding how these have changed over time.
That idea raises three interlinked questions, answers to which should enlarge our understanding of social change as it has affected family relationships.
These are:
1
Has social and economic change over the past two centuries led to a reduction in the actual support which kin give to each other?
2
Has social and economic change weakened people's sense of obligation or responsibility to provide support?
3
Has change had the effect not necessarily of reducing the amount of support, or of weakening the sense of obligation, but simply of changing its character?.
These three questions clearly overlap, but can be treated as conceptually separate, and it is helpful to disentangle them in this way at least initially.
I shall come back to them at the end of this chapter, having reviewed the empirical evidence.
The changing shape of kin groups
Patterns of support between kin cannot be understood without first making some reference to the ways in which the structure of the population, and patterns of family formation associated with it, have themselves changed over time.
These factors have affected profoundly the composition of families — quite literally, what relatives people actually have — and hence they form the essential building blocks from which family support is constructed.
Since there have been very significant changes in population structure and family composition over the last two centuries, any discussion of how family relationships have changed must always acknowledge that we are not comparing like with like — an observation which of course itself calls into question the over-simplified view of a gradual deterioration of family ties from pre-industrial society to the present day.
In chapter 3 I shall discuss more fully the question of how far these demographic structures do affect the nature of family obligations, at any given point in historical time, considering in particular how far demographic factors in the late twentieth century have given a particular shape to kin groups.
In this chapter, I shall set the context, by highlighting some of the key features which affected kin relationships in earlier generations.
The relationship between fertility rates and mortality rates has created a population structure which has varied substantially during the period in question.
In the mid-eighteenth century the expected age of death for a woman was 35; by the 1970s it had risen to 80.
In the mid-nineteenth century more people were being born by comparison with pre-industrial Britain, but also more people were dying relatively young.
This created a relatively youthful population with large numbers of young people (some of whom of course would die before full adulthood) and relatively few people over the age of 50.
This means that in individual families it must have been rather unusual to have grandparents surviving much beyond the infancy of their grandchildren, and thus relationships across three generations would have been comparatively rare.
There have also been changes in the length of a ‘generation’ and the overlap between generations in families as a  result of changing patterns of marriage and family formation.
The average age at which people marry remained more or less stable for the preceding two centuries until the end of the Second World War, when it began to fall, but there were notable changes in the pattern of childbearing, especially between 1870 and 1930.
Women started to have fewer children in total, and to concentrate childbearing in early adulthood, rather than spreading it throughout their fertile years.
Thus increasingly in the twentieth century children have been born when both their parents and grandparents were younger, further reinforcing the likelihood that the generations will overlap in adult life (see Anderson, 1985, for an elaboration of these patterns).
Another effect of high fertility plus high mortality in the nineteenth century was a much wider age spread between siblings than we have been familiar with in the twentieth century, with the older siblings (if they survived) being on the verge of adulthood while their younger brothers and sisters were still being born.
One consequence of this, as Hareven (1978, p. 62) has pointed out, is that the experience of parent-child relationships was very different for siblings at different positions in birth order.
For example, older children were much more likely than younger ones to overlap with their parents in adult life, whereas for younger children there was a good chance that, by the time they were grown up, their parents would be dead.
Again, the concentration of childbearing into a short period, which began in the late nineteenth century, now makes this much rarer.
The consequences of these same changes can also be seen at the other end of the life course, in old age.
Most obviously, both women and men can expect to have a recognizable period of ‘old age’ when they have ceased paid work, the creation of a standard age of retirement from work being a twentieth century phenomenon.
In terms of family responsibilities, the various changes I have identified have combined to produce a phase of life in later adulthood when people are free from direct responsibility for rearing children.
Such a period was largely unknown to earlier generations, and the implications of this change are especially important in women's lives (Titmuss, 1958; Anderson, 1980).
Finally, there have been changes over time in the rates of divorce and marriage, although the significance of these for patterns of kin relations may be not so obvious as it first appears.
In the nineteenth century, divorce was more or less impossible except for the very wealthy, initially only through a private Act of parliament.
Even after 1857, when divorce came easier, the numbers involved were not large, averaging about 600 per year up to the start of the First World War.
Thereafter the number of divorces started to grow rapidly and following legislation in 1971 which made divorce easier there was a further expansion.
There is some evidence that the rate of increase has slowed down in the 1980s, but there still were more than 160,000 divorces in 1985.
Remarriage after divorce is also a much more common experience than in the past.
In 1940 only 2 per cent of marriages involved a divorced partner; by 1985 this had risen to 33 per cent.
However, the proportion of marriages  involving widows or widowers has decreased steadily over the past 150 years (for an elaboration of all these trends, see Haskey, 1987a).
Patterns of disruption and reconstitution of kin groups do seem very different now by comparison with the past.
However, it is easy to overstate the significance of this change.
The ending of a marriage before old age and the creation of step-families through remarriage is by no means a recent phenomenon, but in the past these events occurred more commonly through the early death of one partner than through divorce.
Single-parent families headed by widows were fairly common, for example, in Anderson's study of mid-nineteenth-century Preston, and this was a circumstance in which people might well look to their relatives for support (Anderson, 1971, pp. 144–7).
The historical evidence does not really support the view that kin groups were much more stable in the past than in the present.
As Gittins has put it, ‘The commonsense notion that all families in the past were much more solidaristic and stable institutions cannot be borne out — death saw to that’(Gittins, 1985, p. 9).
This is not to deny that the ending of a marriage through death, and through divorce, are in many ways very different experiences, nor that they may be handled differently in families, but the point here is that the idea that kin groups used to be much more stable over time than they are today has to be modified by historical evidence.
In summary, the evidence shows that the shape of kin groups is subject to very significant variation over the course of time.
The importance of this for understanding structures of kin support are important.
It means that necessarily there have been variations in people's need for support from their kin, and in the capacity of kin to provide it.
Most importantly, there have been fluctuations over time in the actual existence of kin who might provide such support for each other.
What kind of assistance did kin give each other in the past?
A thorough and systematic evaluation of the kinds of support which have passed between kin over the past two centuries is a separate project in its own right.
I do not claim to be comprehensive in what follows, rather my aim has been to assess some of the main features of kin support in the past which have particular relevance to the central theme of this book — how important are duty, obligation and responsibility in motivating the support which people give to their relatives?
I have chosen to focus on three types of support which help us to address this question: sharing a household, money and practical support.
Sharing a household
Proceeding with due caution therefore, we can ask: what do we know about patterns of support between kin over the past two centuries?
I  shall begin with household composition, the issue around which much work on the history of the family has been centred.
We know that it is fairly uncommon for adult relatives to share households today: only 12 per cent of households contain three or more adults and not all of these will involve relatives sharing (Social Trends , 1988, p. 36, table 2.2).
The predominant interest of much of the historical work, especially the early work, on household composition, was to examine one of the key elements in the idea of a golden age of family support — that in the past it was common for members of the extended family actually to live together, and that a major effect of industrialization was to shrink the household, typically to the nuclear family unit.
The earlier work of historical demographers of households was concentrated on examining the simple measure of household size, and they were able to establish by a variety of evidence that the average size remained remarkably consistent between the seventeenth century and the twentieth.
In fact, the average household size remained between four and five throughout this period and only fell to three during the twentieth century (Laslett, 1972b; Wall, 1972).
Although the methods used in these studies have been criticized (Berkner, 1975) they have been very influential.
Certainly the simple notion that industrialization altered radically the size of the household cannot be correct, since the relatively small change which has actually occurred is of quite recent origin.
The large extended family household in any case seems only to have existed for a small minority, if at all.
Although the overall size of households may not have altered dramatically, this still leaves open the question of whether household composition has changed.
Did different people share households with each other in the past?
Was it more common for at least one or two adult relatives to be added to a household in addition to a nuclear family unit?
That question is more difficult, because of the level of detailed evidence which is required to answer it with certainty.
Wall's (1986) evidence suggests that there have been fluctuations over time in patterns of who actually shares households, but that these have not been in a single direction.
Between the mid-seventeenth and the mid-twentieth centuries there have been three discernible periods, each characterized by different patterns of sharing.
The picture is complicated by the existence at certain points in the past of a relatively large number of households which contained servants; but people classified as servants could also be kin, for example older children of a family whose parents could not support them economically.
They went to live with relatives, but also worked for them (Gittins, 1985, pp. 15–16).
Wall's (1986) evidence shows that the really notable change between the mid-nineteenth and mid-twentieth centuries was in the smaller number of people living in other people's homes as servants or lodgers.
The number of kin living together rose during the early industrial period (up to the middle of the nineteenth century) and remained fairly constant thereafter.
So far as elderly people in particular are concerned, there has been relatively little change in patterns of co-residence with relatives until the later part of the twentieth century; although there have been some fluctuations, the overall pattern shows more continuities than changes.
For example, most elderly people who are married have always lived only with their spouse, and small but fairly constant proportions have always lived in residential institutions of one kind or another (Wall, 1984).
If we look at the reasons why kin shared homes with each other in the past, three themes emerge which help us further to understand why there have been fluctuations in co-residence.
These are: demographic change, affecting the need to seek accommodation with relatives; the economic circumstances of all parties; changing ideologies of family and household.
Demographic change has affected most obviously the position of elderly people.
From about the middle of the twentieth century onwards, the number of elderly people in the population has been rising, and it will continue to rise until the end of the century.
This means that there are more people who might need support in old age, including sharing a home with relatives.
But at the same time the number of available children with whom they might reside is much reduced by comparison, say, with the mid-nineteenth century, because of the reduction in the birth rate.
Indeed as many as one-third of all elderly people have no surviving children (parker, 1985).
Thus we now have many more older people and many fewer children with whom they might live, and it is not surprising therefore that the last half-century has been characterized by a reduction in the proportion of single elderly people living with relatives.
Demographic changes of a rather different kind have had the effect of substantially reducing the categories of people who once lived with kin.
If we look at the evidence of Roberts's study of Lancashire households between 1890 and 1940, we see that the various categories of kin who co-resided included: unmarried daughters living with parents; unmarried brothers and sisters living with a married sibling; orphaned children; children whose parents were still alive, but who had gone to live with relatives because of parental poverty or lack of space in the parental household (Roberts, 1984, pp. 72–7).
In each of these cases, demographic change, coupled with a rise in living standards, has largely removed the need for these categories of people to live with relatives.
For example, almost everyone now marries at least once and the category of never-married people has virtually disappeared.
Increased life expectancy means that it is now a rare occurrence for children to be orphaned.
In chapter 3 I shall look more closely at the impact of these demographic patterns on the need for support from relatives.
My point here is simply that they do go some way to explaining why patterns of co-residence fluctuate over time.
The economic circumstances of both parties seem to offer another important explanation of why it is more common for people to share a home with relatives at some points of historical time than at others.
Michael Anderson's work has been particularly important in establishing the significance of considering the material gains for either or both parties, if we wish to understand why people lived with relatives in the past.
In his review of the historical data now available on household composition in the past, Anderson (1980) emphasizes in particular the distinction between the rural and urban economies.
If one takes simply the early industrial period, up to about 1820, it is possible to show that almost one third of rural households contained servants, typically young people in their early teens who left home to spend about 10 to 15 years in service before marrying.
However, in urban areas this was less common and there seems to have been more opportunity for young people to stay in the parental home for longer, because of the greater availability of work in the locality (Anderson, 1980, pp. 25–6).
Drawing on his own earlier study of Preston in the mid-nineteenth century, Anderson (1972) also has used arguments about economic advantage to examine the question of why the average household size seemed to be larger in the developing cotton towns than elsewhere.
Indeed, it is possible to show that there was a marked increase in the number of married children living with parents during the nineteenth century and into the twentieth century in cotton towns — quite the reverse of what one would expect if it is true that industrialization broke up the extended family.
Anderson argues strongly that such patterns can be explained only by looking at the material advantages and disadvantages of people living together.
He applies it to the particular case of young people living with their parents after marriage, by arguing that in the expanding industrial towns there was every opportunity for young people to be wage earners and therefore to be net contributors to the parental household, at a time when wages were at a very low level.
In the same period, kin links were an important mechanism for recruiting labour, and so living in the parental household would have given young people increased chances of finding work, as well as providing them with accommodation which they might not have been able to afford on their own.
However, material circumstances on their own do not account fully for changes in co-residence.
Ideological change apparently is a further element in explaining why it is more common to find people living with relatives in particular historical periods than in others.
Over the past century, there have been ideological pressures — expressed, among other ways, through public policies — to define what constitutes a ‘proper’ family, and to encourage people to live in these units.
As Davidoff puts it,
it was during the Victorian and Edwardian Periods that ‘the shape of the private household was being officially defined’(Davidoff, 1979, p. 78).
The desired family form was a household consisting of a married couple and their children, where the man is the breadwinner and the woman a domestic worker.
These definitions were consolidated further through public policies put into operation during and after the Second World War.
(Summerfield, 1984, ch. 3)
These ideological definitions of a normal or proper household therefore are of relatively recent origin.
Because they are also incorporated into, they are bound to shape, people's aspirations and their actions to some extent (see chapter 4 for a discussion of the impact of public policies on family responsibilities).
They have meant, for example, that housing policies have endorsed the view that each nuclear family should have its own household, and thus increasingly it has become possible for people to take that option.
As I indicated in chapter 1, it is now less common for young married couples to begin married life in the home of a relative, except on a very temporary basis.
In summary, the pattern of change in household composition certainly does not involve a simple shrinkage from large to small units.
Nor does it entail a straightforward shrinking to the nuclear family unit as a consequence of industrialization.
It is the case that typical households in the later part of the twentieth century are much less likely than they were in earlier times to contain anyone other than the conjugal family.
The pattern of movement, however, is not wholly in one direction.
It seems that people take kin, and indeed non-kin, into their households in situations where this is mutually advantageous, but the balance of those advantages fluctuates over time, and varies between different localities in the same historical period.
It is also very significantly related to the structure of the population and the composition of families, which affect both the supply of and the demand for shared households.
It is very difficult to say what part was played in these processes by notions of duty to assist kin, but the significance of the principle of mutual advantage, in understanding fluctuations in household composition, rather challenges the idea that people took relatives into their own home solely out of a sense of obligation towards them.
Financial support
The evidence about other types of kin support in the past — whether within or across households — is much more fragmented than evidence about household composition.
Financial support is perhaps the most accessible to documentation, although even this is not always clear, especially for the great majority of the population who did not codify their financial support for kin through wills and settlements, simply because they lived from hand to mouth.
For the classes who did have enough to bequeath, we have valuable evidence about the patterns of inheritance preferred in the early nineteenth century from a variety of sources, especially a study by Davidoff and Hall (1987) of 622 wills made in two different areas of England during the period 1780–1850.
As I indicated in chapter 1, whilst the system of primogeniture had been used traditionally by the aristocracy as a way of passing on an estate intact, the expanding entrepreneurial business class of the early industrial period tended to favour partible inheritance.
This meant that a man's estate was  increasingly likely to be divided between his wife (if she survived him) and his children, although not necessarily in equal measure.
One example given by Davidoff and Hall is of Samuel Galton, a wealthy Birmingham banker who had also bought land.
When he died, he divided his liquid assets and his land between his sons, having first provided for each of his daughters through setting up trust funds which would provide them with a good income.
This example apparently was fairly typical of the wealthy sectors of the middle class (p. 208).
It appears that in the earlier part of the nineteenth century a change took place in the kind of family responsibilities which are implied by inheritance practices.
Whereas previously those who had wealth to bequeath typically provided very handsomely for the eldest son, and at a much reduced level for the rest of their children, a practice became common which implied that children had roughly equal claims on a parent's resources, with some distinction made on grounds of gender so that women and men inherited different kinds of property.
This idea that parents have equal responsibilities towards their children has remained the dominant one in the twentieth century, as is evidenced by the contemporary research data on inheritance which I discussed in chapter 1.
Financial support between relatives has one feature which is not shared by other types of support, namely that it has been regulated by the law.
This applies most obviously to inheritance, but also the law has been used to regulate financial support in families in a different way, namely through the poor Law which has applied to many more people than ever have been affected by inheritance.
The vestiges of this remain in the legal requirement that spouses should support each other financially.
But until the poor Law was abolished finally in 1948, the principle of financial support between-kin applied more broadly.
In particular there was a requirement under English law for children to support their parents financially.
Sons carried this legal responsibility throughout their lives; daughters relinquished it when they married.
The nineteenth-century origins of these provisions are closely tied into a desire to hold down state expenditure and to ensure that the wealthier classes did not have to dig too deep into their pockets to support people who could not work for wages.
In that sense, the poor Law was a mechanism whereby one class imposed a particular view of family responsibility upon another.
However, we must beware of interpretations which are deceptively simple.
The role of the law in constraining and shaping responsibilities in families is an important topic in its own right and I discuss it in chapter 4, using the Victorian poor Law as a key example.
I mention it here in order to signal that the existence of legal rules and sanctions makes it more difficult to uncover from historical evidence why people in the past gave financial assistance to their relatives, if they did, and in particular, to decide how far such assistance was based upon feelings of obligation or duty.
How do we know whether people gave money to their parents because they felt a sense of duty to support them  financially or because they feared prosecution?
Does it even make sense to pose the question in this form? problems of interpreting the historical material are compounded by the fact that contemporary evidence from the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries tends to treat examples of working-class people who did not support their parents as evidence of individuals lacking ‘filial affection’(Anderson, 1977).
But of course, people may feel very affectionate towards their parents but be unable to give them money, or indeed, be able to give them money but feel that this is not the proper thing to do.
These issues are difficult enough to disentangle in contemporary research, and there are major problems in gaining access to data which would really enable those distinctions to be made in an historical context.
The evidence which is available does enable us, however, to draw some conclusions.
The most important of these is that there seems to be no evidence that people assumed automatic responsibility for their relatives — including parents — who were old, sick, or in some other circumstance where they were unable to work to maintain themselves.
The evidence suggests that even in the pre-industrial period there was no automatic assumption of financial responsibility for elderly parents.
This emerges clearly from Clark's (1982) discussion of social security in medieval England, where the emphasis is upon the comparative unimportance of financial support from kin, although this certainly existed.
Clark demonstrates that older people tried, where possible, to set up contractually based arrangements (some of them enforceable through the courts) to secure their livelihood and care in old age, through a system whereby they surrendered some of their rights to their land to a specified individual, in return for agreed services —‘individually arranged pension benefits’(ibid.
P. 308).
The fact that the transfer of property rights was only partial and conditional gave them the guarantee of security in old age, and the people involved in such transactions were not necessarily children or even relatives.
The services promised were to provide a room, fuel, clothing, to wash clothing, or to visit if sick.
The theme of mutual advantage rather than a sense of duty in financial relationships between kin again emerges from this example; or to put it another way, it suggests that historically in Britain financial relationships between adult kin have been regarded typically as two-way exchange rather than one-way support.
One can find examples from the more recent past to support that view.
For example, Ellen Ross's (1983) discussion of the lifestyle of the working poor in the East End of London, in the period leading up to the First World War, contains evidence about financial relationships between young working adults and their parents, based partly on the surveys of Charles Booth (1892b).
She suggests that the ‘board’ money which young people paid for living in the parental household was seen as an exchange, especially for daughters: they handed over their wages to their mothers and in exchange their mothers equipped them to enable them to go into service.
The resistance to the idea of one-way financial support can also be  deduced from evidence about the circumstances under which people tried to evade legally defined financial responsibilities to kin.
I shall discuss these in detail in chapter 4.
But at this point it is worth mentioning briefly that there are plenty of examples of people ‘losing touch’ with their elderly parents as a way of avoiding maintenance payments, during the period in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, when certain Boards of Guardians were trying rigidly to enforce financial liabilities.
A rather similar pattern can be seen in the very different circumstances of the inter-war economic depression, when the Household Means Test meant effectively that young working adults living in the same household as their unemployed parents were expected to support them financially.
Many young people with the encouragement of their parents, left home at this time to avoid these responsibilities.
Both these examples raise issues other than the question of whether support is one-way, but they do indicate that there certainly have been historical circumstances in which people have felt that the requirement to provide financial support to parents, in circumstances where they were apparently unable to reciprocate, went well beyond their normal expectations of support between kin.
Financial need, even on the part of a close relative, has apparently never been seen as a situation which required an automatic response.
Even when people could give money to relatives, it has never been obvious that they should do so, whatever other circumstances obtain.
We also learn from the historical evidence that gender has been an important source of variation in people's experience of financial support within families.
In the past women's capacity to give assistance was even more constrained than it is now, by their lack of control over financial resources.
This was actually recognized in the poor Law which limited women's liability to support their parents to unmarried women, thus reinforcing the idea that a married women's economic position is complete dependence upon her husband.
Practical support
Practical support provides the third example which I shall use in this discussion of patterns of support in the past.
Child care is one obvious example, but there are also the many day-to-day tasks which enable households to be maintained and to function at a reasonable level of efficiency.
Hareven, in her discussion of early industrial society in America (1978), suggests that this type of exchange was more common than sharing households, but that it could only operate on a reciprocal basis.
Between close kin it was possible for the exchanges to be one-way over a longer term, one person a net ‘giver’ at a particular point in time because of a reasonable confidence that he or she could be a net ‘receiver’at a later stage.
But between more distant kin, routine day-to-day assistance had to entail exchange of a two-way kind in the short term because ‘the need for reciprocity [was]dictated by the insecurities  of urban life,(p. 65).
Because of their place in maintaining and servicing a household and its members, it is of course likely that most of these exchanges entailing practical support were between women.
Another interesting feature of exchanges of this type is that, under certain conditions, money could be used to fulfil one part of the  bargain , i.e. if practical services were being offered in only one direction, or if those services went beyond that which could be contained in normal, on-going reciprocal exchange.
For example, Ross (1983, p. 12) cites evidence of young working adults paying their younger siblings to perform services such as cleaning their shoes.
Roberts (1984, p. 180) found examples of women paying their mothers and mothers-in-law to look after their children while they went out to work.
She comments that people seemed to feel that child care was an appropriate service for kin to perform for each other, but also that they should not be exploited.
In common with other types of support which I have considered here it seems that practical help, even when on a fairly small scale, has never been given to relatives automatically and without some assessment being made of the wider social context.
Reciprocal exchange of services seems to be a particularly important feature of this type of support in the past, as it is indeed in the present.
Givers and receivers of support
The idea that patterns of support in the past were linked to mutual advantage emerges in relation to all three of the types of support which I have considered: sharing households, financial support, and practical day-to-day services.
The picture is incomplete, however, if one thinks solely in terms of undifferentiated ‘kin’, without asking between whom these services flowed.
We need to look, therefore, at how the patterns of support varied between those two major divisions in kin groups: gender and generation.
Women and men
First, variations by gender.
In the past, did different types of support, or varying amounts of support, flow between women and men and have those gendered patterns changed over time?
This obviously is a very difficult question to answer, given the lack of detailed evidence about precisely those kinds of day-to-day support where gendered patterns are likely to be most apparent.
Financial support, however, is relatively easy to document where it concerns those wealthy enough to have money, property and other possessions to dispose of in wills, or indeed in their lifetimes.
As I have already indicated the evidence here suggests that although English inheritance law traditionally privileged the eldest son, from the early nineteenth century onwards the equal claims of all children began to be acknowledged, although daughters and sons received different types of bequest (Davidoff and Hall, 1987).
The English Poor Law also allocated differential responsibilities to women and men, in respect of giving support to relatives.
Looking at examples of day-to-day practical assistance, it is apparent that women have been involved in exchanging this with other women much more commonly than men have been involved in exchanges with women, or with other men.
One possible explanation lies in the division of labour between women and men.
Because women have been allocated the tasks associated with running a household and rearing children as their particular responsibility, one could argue that they need practical day-to-day support in a way which men do not.
It is likely that they will seek this support from other women rather than from men, even their husbands, because the tasks involved have been defined as women's work.
Thus in the past women had a particular interest in maintaining a pattern of exchanges with female kin, in which they both gave and received day-to-day support.
I made a similar argument in chapter 1 about practical support in contemporary society.
That is an hypothesis about the foundations of practical support between kin in the past which could be tested systematically against historical data, although it would be a major task and certainly is beyond my scope here.
However, it is relatively easy to find illustrative examples which suggest that, in the past, the sharing of day-to-day assistance between kin was rooted in the responsibilities allocated to women in their domestic lives.
Elizabeth Roberts, in her study of working-class women in three Lancashire towns from 1890 to 1940 (Roberts, 1984, pp. 169–81), demonstrates the importance of women helping other women in extended family networks, through minding children, caring for the elderly, providing clothing, and sometimes taking a relative's child into their own home.
Men also provided some support for their relatives, usually minor property repairs or help with an allotment, but the volume of this was much less.
Jamieson (1986) in her study of working-class mothers and daughters in urban Scotland in roughly the same period, found that young adult women living in the parental home would take on domestic work to assist their mothers routinely and extensively, in a way not replicated by their male counterparts.
Again, in Ellen Ross's study of the East End of London before the First World War, the theme of women assisting other women comes across strongly.
With both kin and neighbours, women shared ‘extensively and unsentimentally’ on the basis of reciprocal exchange (Ross, 1983, p. 6), including such items as food, clothing, domestic items, such as washtubs, and small amounts of money, such as a penny for the gas.
There was indeed, she argues, a tendency for women to bypass support from men and to rely on other women as being more dependable sources of support, a tendency found in other cultures of the very poor (p. 6).
In such circumstances as these, the major example of men assisting their kin seems to be the use of kin networks to secure employment (Anderson, 1971, pp. 111–23; Roberts, 1984, p. 180).
If the above argument is correct one might expect to find that, in other situations where the division of labour is less fixed, there would be  more diverse patterns of kin support across gender lines.
Whether this is the case in contemporary societies is an issue to which I shall return in later chapters.
However, even where a less rigid gender division of labour prevails, it seems to be the case that women commonly act as the ‘kin keepers’, that is to say, the people who keep up regular contacts with members of the wider kin group.
In so far as women have these contacts rather than men — even if sometimes they are, as it were, on behalf of men — it is likely that they are in a position to mobilize support in a way that men are not.
That would lead to a situation where more assistance passes between women than between men even in situations where their ‘needs’ are more similar than in the examples I quoted above.
Only in the case of money, over which men may retain control even when the domestic division of labour is less rigid, might one expect them to be more actively involved in exchanges of support with kin.
Again, this is an hypothesis which would repay systematic investigation in respect of historical examples with contrasting forms of division of labour.
Older and younger generations
The second major principle along which kin relations are divided is that of generation.
I noted in chapter 1 that the contemporary evidence suggests predictable patterns of the flow of support between generations.
Has this changed over time?
This question cannot be considered separately from the issue of how ‘needs’ for different kinds of support vary between generations and, for an individual, across a lifetime, and how both of these vary historically.
A useful way of considering this is to use the concept of the dependency ratio, that is the ratio of people who are out of the labour market in relation to those who are in it.
This, it can be argued, is socially constructed and varies over time.
I shall discuss the implications of the dependency ratio for the construction of family obligations in more detail in chapter 3.
The point on which I want to concentrate here is that during the last two centuries changes in the law and in employment policies progressively have excluded both the youngest and the oldest generations from the labour market, and therefore from the means to support themselves through earning wages.
The impact of that has been different for older and younger generations and has affected the position of each generation in relation to financial support from relatives, and also assistance with accommodation.
In the twentieth century increasingly it has become possible for older people who have withdrawn from the labour market to support themselves from resources provided by the state rather than rely on their families; the same has not been true of the youngest generation.
I shall consider briefly how these historical changes have affected patterns of support between family members.
Young people So far as children and young people are concerned, it is well recognized in historical work on the nineteenth century that the  growth of state intervention to control the employment of children, and to establish and expand compulsory education, had the effect of altering the balance of obligations between parents and children.
The effect was to make it difficult for children to contribute to their own support, let alone the support of other people, thus removing the reciprocal nature of support between the young and their parents' generation, and establishing childhood and youth as a period of one-way dependence of the young on their parents (Pinchbeck and Hewitt, 1973; Anderson, 1980; Gittins, 1986).
By the end of the nineteenth century, children under school-leaving age effectively could not be contributing J wage to the household economy and had become very clearly a net drain on resources.
The effects of the economic burden which children imposed were felt first in the middle classes, for a variety of reasons, and led to significant family limitation in the late nineteenth century, as Banks's (1954) classic study shows.
Of course there was still some opportunity for children to earn money while they were at school, and where those opportunities were taken there is evidence that parents considered this as part of the household income and expected it to be handed over (Jamieson, 1986).
There were also a whole range of ways in which children could contribute to the household economy through domestic labour and child care, both within their own households, and as part of the pattern of exchange between kin and neighbours.
Ross (1983) cites evidence of mothers ‘loaning’ the services of daughters in particular.
They were used to perform tasks such as child care or running errands as part of the system of exchange in which their mothers were involved.
There certainly were opportunities, therefore, for children and young people to contribute both directly and indirectly to the household economy even before they entered the labour market, and on balance the evidence suggests that girls were likely to be more substantial contributors than boys, especially in the provision and exchange of domestic services, although boys may have had more opportunities to earn money.
However, all of this has to be set in the context that whilst still at school children were dependent for their own basic economic support upon the parental generation.
By the later part of the nineteenth century the pattern of inter-generational exchanges which had characterized pre-industrial and early industrial society clearly had shrunk to a pattern of very limited contributions by children to the household economy, except for those children who were allowed to work as ‘half timers’ until this possibility was also removed in 1918 (Hurt, 1979).
After leaving school the situation of course is different, although the position of young wage earners in the household may well have depended upon the employment opportunities available for them in the local economy.
Anderson (1971, pp. 125–7) argues that the good wages which young people could earn in the cotton towns in the mid-nineteenth century altered the balance between parents and children and put them on more equal terms when they shared a household, and also made it more possible for them to leave the parental home — although boys did this more often than girls.
Anderson's comparison is  with the rural economy of the period, where young people were more dependent upon the family for access to their livelihood.
His argument has relevance for any set of historical circumstances, including the present day, in that it suggests that relationships between young adults and their parents, including patterns of reciprocal exchange between them, are closely related to the capacity of young people to earn a wage.
The major point which I want to take from this discussion of young people's situation is that their need to be supported economically by their parents, and more generally their position in structures of reciprocal support within families, to a large extent depend upon factors outside the control of individual families: laws relating to schooling and employment, and the operation of the labour market.
Since these factors can and do change, the position of the younger generation in structures of family support must be seen as specific to particular points in historical time.
The major changes in their economic position which began in the late nineteenth century and have lasted until the present, essentially are responsible for creating the dependence of younger people which now appears such a natural part of human life.
Older people I have indicated already that the exclusion of older people from the labour market over the same period has had a somewhat different impact upon their position in reciprocal support within families.
However, we can see that their position also is constructed largely by factors which are outside the control of individuals.
Evidence from the middle of the nineteenth century, in Anderson's study of Preston, indicates that older people were involved in structures of family support very much on a reciprocal basis.
His work demonstrates that an older person was much more likely to be taken into the household of a relative if they were able to contribute something in return, for example doing domestic work, or looking after children while their mother went out to a job.
Of course it is more likely that women rather than men would be in a position to offer such assistance (Anderson, 1971, pp. 139–44).
At the beginning of the twentieth century, Poor Law administrators were still noting that older women seemed more able than older men to survive without any apparent source of income, because of the domestic services which they could perform (Roebuck and Slaughter, 1979).
Against the background that people expected support for an elderly person to be reciprocated in some fairly immediate way, the pressure to exclude older people from the labour market was accompanied by a pressure to give them some independent means of support which would prevent their having to rely on their children or other relatives.
This was reinforced further by demographic changes which, by the early years of the twentieth century, already meant that an increasing number of people survived into old age without any children at all.
Even if they had been willing to rely on relatives, they could not do so (Anderson, 1977).
The idea that older people should leave the labour force at some point gained ground in the earlier part of the twentieth century with the popularity of ideas about scientific management, which implied that older people were bound to be inefficient workers.
Older people were not necessarily unwilling to be excluded, as the existence of ‘retirement movements’ in various industrialized countries demonstrates (Guillemaud, 1983).
The issue of retirement had never been on the agenda previously, quite simply because people died much younger in earlier generations.
However, there was considerable pressure for the terms of retirement to be such that older people could maintain economic independence.
Although some could do this through using their savings or drawing on insurances, many could not, with women much less likely than men to be able to support themselves by these means (Roebuck and Slaughter, 1979).
The issue was resolved eventually in the introduction of old age pensions, in a limited form, for the first time in 1908.
Only people over 70 were eligible, and initially there was an income test and also a test of good character.
People who had been convicted of criminal offences, including drunkenness, or people who had habitually failed to work, were not to be supported from state resources.
It was, as Thane puts it, ‘a pension for the very poor, the very respectable and the very old’(Thane, 1982, p. 83).
Nonetheless the principle of retirement pension was accepted from this point onwards, and it enabled older people to maintain their position as active partners in structures of kin support, at least in financial terms.
Unlike younger people, who have become more dependent upon the ‘middle’ generation over the last century, the position of older people has moved, if anywhere, in the direction of greater independence.
However, the situation of older and younger generations is similar in a different sense, in that in both cases the position of individuals within those structures is determined very largely by factors outside their control — very obviously so at the time when the issue of old age pensions was first on the agenda.
Thus there have been changes over time in patterns of support between generations, but these are not necessarily a result of individuals' changing beliefs and values about family responsibilities.
Indeed, factors such as changes in employment law, in regulations about compulsory schooling, and the introduction of state benefits have very obviously shaped such changes.
Processes and principles of kin support in families
Certain themes emerge from this discussion of patterns of kin support in the past which give some clues to the type of social processes that underlie the giving and receiving of support in families, and the principles upon which it is based.
I shall draw out three of these themes, each of which serves to raise further questions about understanding family obligations in contemporary societies.
Reciprocity in family exchanges
The first of these concerns the reciprocal nature of kin exchanges.
In relation to all the major types of support I have considered — the sharing of households, the giving or lending of money, the provision of practical support — the principle that support is most likely to be given if the advantage is mutual, or if there is a clear expectation that assistance will be given in return, is a prominent feature.
The idea that people operate ‘strategies’ in which they assess a range of options, and act to maximize their opportunities, has become an increasingly important insight in historical work on the family, and one which accords an active role to human beings in constructing their own lives, rather than seeing individuals at the mercy of large scale social forces (Morgan, 1985, p. 175).
It also has been the subject of considerable historical debate.
The common ground between historians is that reciprocal exchange on the basis of mutual advantage is the essence of support between kin, making the family a group whose relationships are rooted in material considerations and not simply one which is bound together by moral imperatives and ties of affection.
Historians with very different sets of concerns agree upon this (for example, Anderson, 1971; Humphries, 1977; Roberts, 1984).
Indeed, it would be difficult to imagine a situation in which mutual advantage was not a factor conducive to the development of structures of support.
The real issue, and one where there clearly is disagreement among historians, is how far support will be given between kin when the element of mutuality is absent.
In the past did people really deny support to relatives who were in no position to reciprocate, or at least who seemed unlikely to be able to do so?
Were such calculations always based on short-term considerations?
Or was it possible for one individual to be in the position of a net ‘receiver’ for some considerable time because of an expectation that they would be able to reciprocate at some stage in the future?
Did such calculations vary in different kin relationships, especially between kin who were closer or more distant in genealogical terms?
These are the key questions to be asked about reciprocity within families, both historical and contemporary.
The contrast between the two major opposing historical interpretations is brought out well by comparing two studies of urban Lancashire: Anderson's (1971) study of Preston in the mid-nineteenth century based on documentary data, and the study of Roberts (1984) of Preston, Barrow and Lancaster in the period 1890–1940, based on oral history.
This is a significant comparison, because of the key place which Anderson's work occupies in developing an interpretation of kin relations in the past which emphasizes the importance of calculations about the capacity of another person to reciprocate.
This work has also been significant in shaping the thinking of contemporary sociologists of the family (Harris, 1983, pp. 127–30).
Anderson does not deny that kin probably continued to be the main  and the most reliable source of aid for migrants into the expanding towns, as they had been in the rural communities (mostly in Lancashire and Ireland) from which the migrants came.
However, there was an important contrast between rural and urban settings.
In rural communities, pressures to conform to a fixed structure of normative obligations were strong, since most people's livelihood depended upon remaining within the family unit.
However, in the new urban environments it was possible for the young and fit to earn good wages and therefore to be independent of their families.
The effect, for them at least, was that these normative bonds were loosened.
At the same time, kin ties remained a structured link which offered the potential for mutual support, and this was probably more reliable than ties between non-kin and more acceptable than those bureaucratic forms of public support available in the period.
In a rapidly changing society, with many people living on the margins of subsistence, such support was limited in cost and likely to bring benefits to the giver in return.
Thus in this setting, ‘family and kinship relations tended to have strong short-term instrumental overtones of a calculative kind’(Anderson, 1971, p. 171).
In a later elaboration of his perspective, Anderson argues more generally that kin relations must always be understood in terms of the kind of calculations people make, and this should provide the starting-point for any analysis: ‘if we are to understand variations and patterns of kinship relationships, the only worthwhile approach is to consciously and explicitly investigate the manifold advantages and disadvantages that any actor can obtain from maintaining one relational pattern rather than another’(Anderson, 1972, p. 226).
The contrast with Elizabeth Roberts's position is stark.
She documents the extensive structures of support across households as well as within them, and finds little evidence of a calculative orientation towards kin.
Indeed she argues that support given to kin was often at considerable cost to the giver in terms of time, energy and even money.
People in her study, she argues, supported their kin out of a mixture of duty and genuine affection, plus feelings of pride, especially a desire to keep a member of one's own family out of the workhouse (Roberts, 1984, pp. 170–2).
How are we to reconcile or decide between these competing and very different accounts of the basis of support between kin in the past?
One possible interpretation is that, since they are talking about different historical periods, the nature of family relationships in Lancashire had actually changed between the middle of the nineteenth century and the early part of the twentieth (Lewis, 1984, p. 54).
That interpretation of an extent is consistent with Anderson's arguments, if one assumes that working-class life in Lancashire towns was more stable in the later period and somewhat less harsh, removing the absolute necessity for short-term instrumental calculation, while at the same time making predictions about the likelihood of reciprocal support in the future more reliable.
Another possible source of the difference in the two sets of data concerns gender.
Since Roberts's book focuses on women, she  necessarily highlights patterns of exchange which are specific to women, and it is quite possible that both duty and affection were (and are) more prominent in exchanges between women than when men are involved.
A further possible way of reconciling the two accounts is to say that both express important elements in kin relations, but each has to be modified with reference to the other.
The argument for taking this position is partly methodological.
Because the authors were using different types of data, it is quite possible that they have seen different dimensions of an essentially complex process.
Indeed, Roberts herself makes the point that, for example, Anderson's reliance upon census data made it difficult for him to see the extent of exchanges across households.
It would certainly not have given him access to the kind of personalized data about effective relationships which her oral history interviews unearthed.
At the same time, one must exercise a certain note of methodological caution about this kind of interview in which people in a sense present public accounts of private relationships.
In such a situation, the features of those relationships which reflect less well upon the interviewee may not emerge easily — an important point demonstrated very effectively by Cornwell's (1984) research on contemporary family relationships.
Anderson and Roberts can perhaps be seen as offering us different facets of essentially a similar situation, where feelings of affection and concepts of duty are taken into calculations about mutual advantage based on material considerations.
The result is patterns of support whose basis is probably far more complex than it appears to an outsider and which also perhaps includes the expectation that love and affection themselves will be reciprocated (Summerfield, 1986).
The work of historians on kin relations in the past raises some very important questions about the nature of reciprocity and how it operates in particular economic circumstances, which have direct applications to the present and the future.
The core of this is to understand the delicate balance between feelings of affection, moral imperatives of duty, and calculations about personal advantage and disadvantage, and to understand how the particular sets of economic circumstances in which women and men are placed shape the character of that balance at any point in time.
Maximizing resources
The second underlying process of kin support which is highlighted by the examination of historical evidence is the process of maximizing and making the best use of resources within the kin group.
The emphasis here is rather less upon the calculation of personal advantage, and rather more on the kin group as a co-operative unit, taking collective decisions which are to the advantage of all.
In fact much of the actual evidence that these processes have operated in the past concerns  households, rather than wider kin groups which operate across households (Chaytor, 1980).
This is as much a consequence of data on households being more easily available as necessarily a reflection of real differences between household and non-household kin.
Historical studies of strategies for maximizing resources are concerned with the household (and sometimes the kin group) as essentially an economic unit within which resources are shared.
Such strategies therefore vary considerably according to the economic conditions under which family members operate.
In the early industrial period, where there was an expansion of domestic industrial production, one can see very clearly that co-operative strategies were developed to ensure that the domestic industry was viable.
These strategies included the formation of complex households, containing several nuclear family units, as a response to the severe economic pressures which prevailed at that time (Anderson, 1980, pp. 77–8).
This of course is a situation in which the direct labour of family members was needed, and could be incorporated into a strategy for collective survival.
Once work for wages became the norm, different kinds of strategies necessarily took shape, although individual waged work did not remove the importance of the collective unit.
Wall (1986) argues that some historians have drawn too sharp a distinction between the ‘family economy’ and the ‘family wage economy’and that, in circumstances which offered possibilities for both, family production coexisted with waged work.
One example can be found in Osterud's (1986) study of the hosiery industry in Leicester, where some domestic production continued long after factories were established.
Of course it was convenient for factory-owners to build an element of flexibility into their businesses by using women as outworkers when they needed to.
But also one can see families in these situations creating maximum flexibility by using some members for household-based production and some for different types of waged work in what Wall calls the adaptive family economy: ‘their economic activities were diversified against the prospect of bad times and to make the most of the good’(1986, p. 294).
The picture which emerges from this kind of work highlights collective action and collective advantage, but often says little about whether all the individuals involved in this enterprise benefited from it in equal measure.
Indeed the whole concept of maximizing household resources tends to imply that all do benefit, although it can be very difficult to know the precise distribution of resources in such households.
However, such historical studies as do address this question indicate that all members do not benefit equally.
Again, gender and generation are the key principles dividing household members, with children and especially women receiving a smaller share of household resources than adult men (Rathbone, 1924; Oren, 1973).
Thus the co-operation of kin either within or across households to maximize resources contains an element of mutual support, but is structured by gender.
The obligation to pool and share resources with one's kin would be felt differently by women and men.
This is  highlighted in Gittins's (1986) study of a Devon town in the years 1850–1930, where she argues that relationships with kin were more important than marriage for the women in terms of the structures of support within which they were engaged.
Further, women felt a responsibility to remain locked into that system of kin support in a way not replicated for men, who were more at liberty to ‘get better jobs, migrate, emigrate and abrogate all responsibility for parents and siblings’(ibid.
P. 264).
Women, on the other hand, were more confined by a sense of responsibility to kin,
the most salient and persistent attitude to work and families was the overriding sense of responsibility they felt to parents, brothers and children.
This responsibility might or might not involve wage labour, marriage and unpaid domestic work, although there was always some of it whatever situation they lived and worked in.
(Gittins, 1986, p. 262, italics original)
In fact Gittins sees women as individuals who use such structures to maximize their own resources as well as feeling responsibility to support others, and she argues that women are involved in an informal economy to a far greater extent than are men.
In that sense women have a greater range of strategies for maximizing support at their disposal, although of course their capacity as wage earners in the formal economy has usually been far more limited than men's.
Typically women have been engaged in exchanges of goods and services based on kinship, but these have also helped to create women's kin relations in particular forms and based upon essentially economic relationships: the care of each other 's children; lending and borrowing money and other items; lending and borrowing children's labour.
Gittins's work is useful not only because of the way in which she highlights gender, but also because her empirical data broaden out from the household and show that women at least have, under certain circumstances in the past, been involved in the use of kin relations to maximize resources across households.
The corollary is that they have accepted a range of obligations to provide support for non-household kin.
Patterns of support over time
The third theme which emerges from historical studies is also concerned with maximizing resources and acknowledging obligations, but introduces an important additional perspective, namely time.
It is obvious that historical perspectives oblige one to give due weight to the passage of time and to see ideas about duty or obligation, and patterns of support associated with them, as features of family relationships which are adapted to suit the prevailing economic and social conditions.
That is an extremely important insight into the nature of family obligations, and is significant for understanding the nature of contemporary obligations (see chapters 3 and 6 for further discussion).
Introducing the perspective of time also requires us to consider an individual's ‘lifetime’, and how the lives of specific individuals are  woven together over the lifespan of each.
We can then see that any person's inclination to acknowledge obligations and responsibilities to specific relatives is subject to change over time in ways which are patterned and predictable, at least in part.
This perspective gives us important analytical tools for understanding the nature of contemporary obligations to kin, as I have argued elsewhere (Finch, 1987c).
The particular focus which I find valuable is the concept of the ‘life course’, which is different from the more orthodox conception of the ‘life cycle’ and ‘family life cycle’, in that it allows for more variation and does not assume that family relationships go through a series of modifications which are totally predictable in advance.
By developing perspective, historians of the family have influenced considerably the work of other social scientists in recent years (Morgan, 1985, pp. 177–9).
A key figure in the development of concepts of the life course has been Tamara Hareven.
She argues that a central task of the historian is to understand the interweaving of three elements: historical time, family time and individual time.
By ‘individual time’ she means individual life transitions and how they are shaped into an individual timetable (for example, into marriage, childbearing, or retirement).
‘Family time’, refers to the ways in which the individual timetables of members of a family group are woven together, to keep the family unit as a viable concern, or to maximize resources.
The central empirical question which arises out of this perspective is: How far, in a given set of historical circumstances, do individuals feel constrained to bring their own timetables into line with family time by, for example, postponing certain transitions until the time is more auspicious for the family group as a whole?
Hareven's view is that economic circumstances have eased in the twentieth century, for most people, so that the alignment of individual time and family time has increasingly become a voluntary matter, whereas the stark economic conditions of the nineteenth century made this an absolute necessity (Hareven, 1978).
I would argue that this remains an issue open to empirical exploration even under contemporary conditions (Finch, 1987c).
This concept of individual timetables enables us to get away from the focus on the family or household as an undifferentiated unit, and to understand something of the complex patterns which evolve when individuals' lives are woven together over the period of their lifetimes.
In this perspective, individuals are both part of the group and separate from it.
Further, decisions about the needs of kin, and whether one has a duty to put them before one's own interests, cease to be static sets of responsibilities and become matters for judgement at a particular point in time, with such judgements being related both to the economic circumstances then prevailing, and to the situation of all the other members of the family group.
The focus on timetabling also adds a different dimension to the concept of reciprocity in family responsibilities, in showing how the nature of the calculations which individuals must make itself changes over time.
Indeed, the three themes which become visible through  historical material — reciprocity, maximizing resources, and timetabling — all clearly are interwoven in practice.
Conclusion: what has changed?
I introduced this historical discussion by posing three questions about whether there has been a reduction in people's actual support for their kin, or in their sense of obligation to kin, or simply change in both.
We can return to these questions now, and draw together the strands of the preceding argument.
The main point which emerges from considering the historical evidence is that there certainly has been change in the amount and type of support offered, but that this cannot be seen simply as a decline from a high to a low point.
The idea that there was a golden age of family obligations in the past was born out of a desire to ensure that increasing numbers of elderly people (and other dependent groups) in the population did not become too heavy a burden financially upon the wealthier classes; hence the anxieties about whether working-class people had an adequate sense of ‘filial affection’, which can be documented from at least the nineteenth century.
But in reality the amount and type of support which kin give each other varies with the particular historical circumstances within which family relationships are played out, so that looking at patterns of support at different points in time means that one is not comparing like with like in quite significant ways: there is variation both in people's need for support and in the capacity of relatives to provide it.
These points can be illustrated in a variety of ways.
Simply looking at demographic patterns is one.
The ‘need’ for large numbers of very old people to be cared for, because they are unable fully to look after themselves is a phenomenon of the later part of the twentieth century, when the age structure of the population has shifted to give high proportions of older people, at the same time as advances in medical care have enabled many more people to survive into very old age, despite infirmities.
By contrast the nineteenth century was characterized by a youthful population structure and much shorter life expectancy.
Although it is true that more people would have contracted serious illnesses of a type which have now been eradicated — especially tuberculosis, which struck large numbers of people (women more frequently than men) throughout the nineteenth century — very few people would have survived into a long and infirm old age (Johansson, 1977).
The issue of whether female relatives — or anyone else — would provide unpaid care for relatives simply would never have arisen for most people.
It is meaningless therefore to ask whether people are less willing to look after their elderly relatives than in the past, when this particular dimension of family obligation was simply not put to the test for most people in previous generations.
Even if we make the comparison with  the earlier part of the twentieth century when people were beginning to live longer, the economic conditions of family life were so different as to make a decision to take an old person into one's home, if they could not maintain themselves, a very different decision from its equivalent today.
For the middle classes, able to live a comfortable life with servants to take care of domestic matters and to minister to the needs of dependent members of the household, giving a home to an elderly relative would not have meant the automatic provision of unpaid care by female relatives.
For working-class women, especially the many who lived still in conditions of severe poverty where their own wages were essential to the household, a decision to share a household with an elderly person simply could not mean full-time unpaid caring.
Even a writer such as Elizabeth Roberts, who has a very strong view of women's sense of responsibility towards their relatives during this period, acknowledges that old people living with relatives but unable to contribute any longer to the household economy might well be ‘neglected’ or ‘pushed into a corner’through force of circumstances: ‘Although the duty to care for relatives was a paramount one, rarely ignored, it is also true to say that the quality of care varied from the dreadful to the superb’(Roberts, 1984, p. 179).
The variation in people's need for support, and in the capacity of relatives to provide it, is not simply a matter of demography or the force of economic circumstances.
The history of the past two centuries in Britain demonstrates very clearly that both ‘need’ and ‘capacity’are socially constructed.
In particular, the acts of governments in shaping forms of social, political and economic life through legislation and social policies, determines them significantly.
This point will be considered in more detail in chapter 4.
Equally people's need for support from relatives specifically has to be related to whatever alternative provisions exist at any given time.
Offering a home to an elderly parent — or more particularly,not offering a home — can be a very different kind of decision, according to whether or not there are acceptable alternatives readily available.
The British approach to social policy as developed in the nineteenth century both understood this distinction and exploited it by making the workhouse the only alternative to family care and then deliberately creating conditions in workhouses which were both undesirable in terms of physical conditions and also reinforced a sense of shame, so that any relative who could be considered available would feel obliged to offer support.
This idea that relatives will acknowledge their responsibilities more effectively if alternatives are kept to the minimum has retained a strong hold on British social policy — a point to which I shall return.
When we look at circumstances in the past, and see the patterns of support between kin which prevailed at any given point, we are looking at situations very different from our own in important and relevant ways.
Those differences seem very largely to account for the variations in actual patterns of support which have occurred over time.
But what of an underlying ‘sense of obligation’?
It could be argued that  variations in economic and social circumstances are very largely responsible for shaping the visible patterns of support, but that these only occur because of an underlying sense of duty and responsibility towards relatives; this operates independently of external circumstances.
Could it be that this underlying sense of obligation has weakened over time?
Has there, for example, been a restriction in the circumstances in which it applies, or in the range of kin to whom it applies?
In principle, it would be quite possible to argue that this sense of obligation had weakened, even if the actual volume of support between kin remained at a substantial level, because more people are now in a situation where they need support, and because the economic circumstances of the majority of the population (by comparison with a century earlier) are much easier.
Therefore some support can be given at relatively little cost to oneself, and without really testing feelings of duty to their limits.
These questions are extremely difficult to answer from empirical data historically, but their importance means inevitably that I shall return to them in later chapters.
They relate closely to some key debates about the nature of historical explanation of family relationships and family change, as between the ‘household economics’ and the ‘sentiments’schools of historical explanation (Anderson, 1980).
Both schools of thought contain writers of diverse views, but to oversimplify, the former broadly can be characterized as writers who focus on the economic behaviour of members of households and families as the key to understanding family relationships and how they change.
The latter place rather more emphasis on the social values and cultural meanings associated with family life, and look at change over time in the sentiments, attachments and emotions associated with different family relationships — usually between spouses and between parents and immature children, although in principle the same kind of analysis can be applied to the wider kin group.
For example, the work of Stone (1977) is concerned with documenting the dominant pattern of change associated with family relationships since the sixteenth century.
He sees a movement away from a situation where there were extensive kin ties but a lack of really close relationships in the conjugal family, through the emergence of a family based on the patriarchal authority of the father, to a dominant form of family life which began to take shape around the middle of the seventeenth century, and was characterized by close emotional bonds between parents and children and a strong sense of privacy in the nuclear family household.
Similar analyses which place values and sentiments at the centre of family change are offered by Shorter (1975), Flandrin (1979) and also by Aries (1972), who is concerned mainly with the changing nature of childhood.
This complex debate cannot be dealt with in detail here.
But the general issues which it poses do have importance for understanding contemporary family life and responsibilities.
Writers in this tradition emphasize that there has been an historical change in the cultural and social meaning of the term ‘family’ over time, so that it has come to mean essentially the unit based on marriage and parenthood, with a  secondary role only accorded to other kin relationships.
Whilst the quality of empirical evidence on which their arguments rest is doubted by many commentators (Morgan, 1985, p. 165), the perspectives which they offer can be translated into important questions of contemporary relevance.
Do people now think of their ‘family’ solely or principally as a conjugal unit, according other kin a very limited place?
Are there a destructive set of values associated with family life in late twentieth-century Britain?
Do such values provide a central motivating force in behaviour between kin?
Do they operate independently of the economic and material circumstances in which individuals are placed?
Another slightly different angle on these issues is to consider the distinction between instrumentality and expressiveness which has been made use of by sociologists, and is usefully applied to a discussion of kin relations by Morgan (1975, pp. 78–85).
Much of the historical evidence presented in this chapter suggests that under the harsh conditions of poverty which prevailed for most people in the early industrial period, family relationships necessarily were highly instrumental, with support being offered only if there was some hope of mutual benefit precisely because anything else would have been an unaffordable luxury.
It is only as economic circumstances have eased, for most people at least, that the expressive aspects of relationships have become more prominent, although whether family relationships can ever be regarded as ‘purely’ expressive is very questionable (ibid.
P. 78).
The particular blend of instrumentality and expressiveness for given individuals is a matter for empirical investigation.
Thus a focus on the emotional dimensions of relationships — whether on feelings of affection or feelings of duty — tends to suggest that if there has been any discernible change in a single direction over time, it has been an increase rather than a decrease in the significance of the feelings which people have for their relatives.
That tentative conclusion probably is as far as one can go on the basis of empirical evidence.
So far as the actual patterns of support are concerned, one can say more confidently that these have not simply declined from a high point, but have undergone various changes and fluctuations, according to the circumstances under which people lived.
All of this makes sense in relation to the historical context of England in particular where, on MacFarlane's (1978) evidence, social and economic structures have been based upon a strong sense of individualism, and not upon traditional ties of kinship, for at least 600 years.
People in late twentieth-century Britain do not necessarily do less for their relatives than they have done for the past two centuries, nor do they necessarily have a weaker sense of obligation, but they do have to work out the nature of their relationships and the patterns of support associated with them, in circumstances which are very different from the past.
These differences, which mean that in comparing the present and the past we are not comparing like with like, are paralleled by changes in the composition of the population as a whole.
In addition to all the differences which I have itemized in terms of age structure, family formation and lengths of generations, we should note also that the British population in the past was less racially and ethnically diverse, being almost exclusively white.
The idea of the golden age in which family responsibilities were stronger than they are today is clearly a myth, without foundation in historical evidence.
Industrialization and urbanization did not destroy either domestic relations or kin relations but clearly they did — as Harris has put it — transform their character (Harris, 1983, p. 130).
However, this was not a once-for-all change.
The character of family relationships has been changing and continues to change to suit the particular circumstances in which individuals find themselves — often very subtly but sometimes quite visibly.
That conclusion in a way seems rather obvious and a matter of common sense.
So why does the myth of the golden age persist?
A full discussion of that issue is beyond the scope of this book, but I would agree with those commentators who argue that its persistence tells us a great deal more about the present than the past.
Laslett (1972a), for example, argues that the desire to believe that extended family households, and the relationships associated with them, were the norm in Britain in the past is a matter of ‘family ideology’ rather than ‘family experience’.
He places the blame squarely at the door of social scientists, whose theories have directed them to look for this pattern in pre-industrial and non-industrial societies.
I would agree that social scientists have probably helped to sustain the myth but not that we have created it: the power of social science is not that significant.
We need to look rather to the social conditions of our own time and the recent past to understand why such a myth seems plausible and important.
As Raymond Williams puts it, speaking not specifically about the family but more generally about myths of a rural past which was happier and more stable, such myths stem from the contradictions of the present which are difficult to contain.
They are idealizations which serve to ‘cover and to evade the actual and bitter contradictions of the time’(Williams, 1973, p. 45).
To understand the myth of the golden age in the past, we therefore need to understand family relationships and family responsibilities in the present and the circumstances in which they have to be worked out: the topic with which the rest of this book is concerned.