

Permissiveness
Accounts, discourses and explanations
There are essentially five broad approaches to the subject of permissiveness that may be identified.
For present purposes these are termed the ‘conservative-historical’, the ‘liberal-historical’, the ‘Marxist-Gramscian’ /Foucauldian, the feminist and the ‘Eliasian’.
The categories are neither intended to be mutually exclusive nor all-embracing.
Not every author who has something to say on the subject of post-war sexual morality is included in the following discussion of each of the five categories, but rather those who are considered to be most representative of each genre are discussed.
At its crudest the conservative-historical approach to permissiveness is but a mourning for a lost ‘golden age’, an expression of grief for the passing of a time when questions of morals supposedly appeared much simpler, more straightforward and certainly less contentious and open to question.
The liberal-historical approach by contrast is more forward-looking in character.
The tone is different; it is more optimistic, more likely to assume that the process of historical change being viewed has at least some positive attributes, and less likely to dwell on social ‘ills’ or problems.
It is, in a word, more modernist .
It would be dangerous to assume from this simplification, however, that the two perspectives can be easily separated by the ideological position each adopts, the former tending to see ‘permissiveness’ as bad, the latter seeing it as good.
This tends not to be the case.
Whilst the liberal-historians are less likely to be openly damning of the social changes they identify than are the conservative-historians, this should not be read as a sign of their approval.
Permissiveness is used almost universally as a pejorative term.
At the core of the conservative-historical position is the suggestion that the constitution of British society underwent a radical transformation in the 1950s and 1960s, and that this transformation included a significant alteration in the society's moral code.
The use of the singular ‘code’ is important as will become clear.
The position is most clearly illustrated by John Selwyn Gummer.
The essence of his argument is that, during the course of  the twentieth century, British society has been characterised by increasing economic regulation and increasing moral licence.
We are, he suggests, much less economically permissive than the Victorians, constraining business enterprise, terms and conditions of employment, advertising and so on, whilst morally and sexually becoming less restrictive.
Indeed ‘[w]e are as restrictive materially as the Victorians were morally’, he argues.
Gummer takes this argument one step further.
The new permissive society differs from its Victorian predecessor not only by virtue of its sexual and moral freedom, but also because it is characterised by lack of agreement over questions of morality, and over the role of the state in the enforcement of morals.
This is in direct contrast, he argues, to Victorian society:
In the nineteenth century, men had few such worries.
They accepted that the state had a duty to uphold morality and that private morality ought to be subject to the law as it affected society.
They then experienced little difficulty in deciding of what private morality consisted.
There was a consensus — at least among the articulate.
People knew what standards were and when they and, more particularly, others were falling short of them.
For this author, the crucial change has been the break-up of consensus.
Even though in the passage above Gummer undermines his own argument (through his use of the phrase ‘at least among the articulate’, he implies that this consensus is confined to a certain section of society) it is crucial to his thesis that the changes to be identified under the rubric of permissiveness should be viewed against the backcloth of an alleged Victorian moral consensus.
To anyone familiar with the writings of authors such as Gummer, who are critical of the changes that have taken place in post-war Britain, the characteristics he highlights will be similarly familiar.
Firstly, he identifies ‘a lack of respect for authority’ resulting from the decline of moral consensus or firm moral guidelines.
For such authors this generally means one of two things: diminishing respect by the young for adults, or diminishing respect by the working class for traditional, i.e. middle-class, values (religion, sobriety, hard work, etc.).
Gummer's attention is focused upon the young:
Thus youth, singled out as important by the commentators and advertising men, is increasingly unfettered by the conventional sanctions which a balanced community imposes.
It doesn't matter what Mrs Jones thinks because Mrs Jones doesn't know or care.
What is more, because this youthful community has little contact with the older generation it has increasingly little reason to see why it should defer to the older  generation's judgement.
It is here that the oft discussed breakdown of authority becomes most apparent.
The result of lack of respect for authority can be seen in higher, and ever increasing, crime rates, in increased drug use and sexual promiscuity.
One must add to this the spread and easier availability of pornography, television which not only normalises such changes, but on occasion appears to be in support of them, and the lack of a firm moral grounding in sex education.
All this, it is suggested, was met by very little resistance from the Church or other parts of the Establishment, and yet it would be wrong, he argues, to feel that there was popular support for permissive morality.
Gummer makes no pretence of objectivity in his text.
Although he suggests he is not wholly against the permissive society, all that he can find to say in its favour is that it points to the continual necessity to make traditional values relevant to contemporary society, to the fact that the importance of the family, ‘the very principles of order itself…are not…accepted by all’.
Gummer calls for the reassertion of the importance and centrality of the religiously sanctioned, monogamous heterosexual relationship to our culture.
Within such an institutional arrangement there is, by implication, little room for alternative practices, including those possibilities opened up by the women's and gay liberation movements of the period, and it is such an arrangement that constituted, for Gummer, the previously existing moral consensus.
Although the authors in this ‘school’ focus on different aspects of permissive Britain, they are all united by their acceptance of the idea that previously existing moral consensus has given way to confusion and uncertainty.
For the conservative-historians it was the Profumo affair that most forcefully illustrated the altered circumstances that 1960s Britain found itself in.
Christopher Booker's thoughts on the subject are worth quoting in full for he manages to incorporate a good quota of folk devils in his account, and provides almost a blueprint of the conservative-historical position:
The events of the following weeks and months had little real connection with the personal indiscretion of two summers before which was nominally their occasion.
The Profumo affair was merely the focus and catalyst for the coming to a head of that revolution in the mood and character of English life which had begun to show itself in the late summer of 1955.
It was the end of a trail which had had its beginnings in those first rumblings of Henry Fairlie against the Establishment and Malcolm Muggeridge against the Monarchy; a trail that had led on through the Angry Young Men and all the resentments sown by Suez, through the heyday of affluence, through all the mounting impatience  with convention, tradition and authority that had been marked by the teenage revolution and the CND and the New Morality, through the darkening landscape of security scandals and What's Wrong With Britain and the rising aggression and bitterness of the satirists, in ever more violent momentum.
And now, in that wet and windy June, the climax had arrived.
Not one ingredient was missing.
With Profumo's admission of guilt, all the swelling tide of scorn and resentment for age, tradition and authority, all the poisonous fantasy of limitless corruption and decay into which it had ripened, were finally unleashed in their full fury.
In Booker's eyes Profumo set the seal on the long process of British moral decline, the essence of which was a ‘lack of respect for authority’ in all its guises — the Establishment, the monarchy, political leaders, the Church and so on.
The essence of this constitutional malaise was the changing attitude of the young towards those in authority.
It was not that this could be attributed to a weakening of moral fibre on their part, but rather that they had grown up in a society in which there were few straightforward moral guidelines, and into ‘a community which is thoroughly confused about morals, and…their behaviour reflects that confusion’.
Confusion and uncertainty are the major characteristics of the permissive society according to the conservative-historians.
Pamela Hansford Johnson (1967) suggested that modern Britain was ‘affectless’.
It was a society, she felt, which was emotionless, in which people committed the most vicious crimes seemingly without motive or purpose, lacking all regard for human worth or dignity.
Johnson's book was written in response to the Moors Murders and the ensuing trial.
Although Johnson does not go so far as to claim that the affectless society was responsible for the Moors Murders, she does feel able to argue that the general atmosphere in society at the time had ‘infected’ the social system, and that ‘Brady possibly, Hindley almost certainly, have been victims of fallout’.
Beginning with the publication of Lady Chatterley's Lover , she argues, the floodgates to total permissiveness were opened and a society in which ‘the permissive intellectual's anything goes’ was created.
A series of murders of young children were, she implies, the corollary of the disintegration of moral rules characteristic of 1960s Britain:
It seemed to us that April that we were seeing one of the results of total permissiveness in a rather comely young man and woman, ill-educated, but neither of them stupid, on trial at Chester Assizes for multiple murder.
A wound in the flesh of our society had cracked open, we looked into it, and we smelled its sepsis.
It is no distance from this position to that adopted by Rhodes Boyson, quoted in the introduction.
Such commentators have argued that the breakdown of morality in the 1960s has had lasting effects on the social landscape.
As Brian Masters stated succinctly, ‘the generation of the sixties inherited such a[n] [established moral]code and rejected it; that of the eighties has had no firm code to inherit’.
By contrast, ‘moral collapse’ or synonyms for such a phrase rarely find their way into the accounts of the period provided by ‘liberal-historians’.
Much of this is because the changes identified in the 1960s are viewed through different historical lenses.
From this perspective the previously existing moral order is not seen as being wholly positive, and consequently its destruction — for both the conservative- and liberal-historians identify such a process-is not necessarily perceived as being problematic.
More particularly, different aspects and different consequences of this previous moral order are identified.
Bridget Pym (1974) emphasises the ‘joyless morality's’ concentration on the integrity of the family and monogamy as the only available form of sexual expression.
Fear of promiscuity and perversion, she argues, found expression in laws against abortion and homosexuality, and restrictive attitudes towards contraception.
Despite this very different interpretation of pre-permissive morality, there are nevertheless distinct parallels between the conservative- and liberal-historical analyses of cultural change in post-war Britain.
Both involve the identification of a previously existing, now largely defunct, set of moral imperatives which have given way to a new order in which control, particularly of sexual conduct, has diminished.
Both suggest that in the area of sexual morality the change has been towards less restraint, less control and more choice.
Writing in 1972, McGregor suggested that: ‘the last two decades have witnessed the cumulative removal of restraints both of custom and law upon behaviour, and upon their public portrayal in print or in the visual arts’.
For McGregor, as for Pym, the major changes centred around the family system which prescribed the conditions for sexual relationships, changes which resulted in loosened bonds of matrimony, increased choice and reduced frustration and suffering.
In this manner certain aspects, at least, of the process of permissive change are presented as having been positive and beneficial, in direct contrast to the view of the conservative-historians.
Marwick, like McGregor, looks at legislative change in the period, and describes it generally as both liberal and ‘civilising’.
Although he comes across exceptions to the rule, such as drug control, most legislation in the period, he argues, removed restraints, undermined fears and ‘encouraged the active sexual life as normal’.
He views the changes as involving the destruction of Victorian hypocrisy, quite unlike, say, Gummer's mourning  of the passing of Victorian consensus.
It is by no means all good news for the liberal-historians though.
Marwick, for example, highlights the rising crime rate from the mid-195Os onward, which included such highly publicised events as the Moors Murders, the Great Train Robbery, the Shepherds Bush police murders, and the arrest and trial of the Kray twins.
Although with regard to young offenders he cites possible mitigating factors such as the temptations of the affluent society and the frustrations of dead-end jobs, he nevertheless lays the blame at the door of the ‘new aggressiveness and hostility to authority’.
As has been argued above, there are certainly differences between the conservative- and liberal-historians on the question of ‘permissiveness’, but there are similarities as well.
Marwick himself illustrates the point well:
Perhaps the standards of civic loyalty and respect for law and order have never been as high as conservative romantics affected to believe.
There is no easy way of rooting out deviants in society; but certainly the special conditions of the late fifties onwards gave deviants full rein.
Coming from the critical position that they do, the conservative-historians have little difficulty in deciding whether or not the changes they have identified in either post-war sexual morality, or legislation relating to sexual morality, can be plausibly described as ‘permissive’.
The liberal-historians, on the other hand, tend to find themselves in a somewhat more tricky position.
Whilst they usually dismiss the more extreme claims made by the conservative-historians, they are, by and large, convinced that something approaching ‘permissive morality’ could be found in 1960s Britain.
For both the conservative- and liberal-historians legislative change is of central importance to an understanding of the permissive society.
The conservative-historical analysis takes certain legislative changes as being fundamentally permissive in outlook, and even suggests that the reforms of the law can be used as a barometer of the times.
Bernard Levin, for example, argued that ‘the sixties in Britain produced an extraordinary number of legislative reforms, which carried to extraordinary lengths the new spirit of tolerance and its codification in the law’.
The law is viewed as an index of wider social changes.
Christie Davies probably presents this argument at its starkest:
One demonstrable sign of the growth of permissiveness in British society has been the consistent tendency over the last twenty years for Parliament to alter laws governing moral conduct in a permissive direction.
Activities, which society had previously disapproved of and banned, are now permitted and can be freely indulged in.
The liberal-historians, on the other hand, whilst being generally more sceptical of the extent of permissiveness, nevertheless argue that 1960s Britain was characterised by a greater degree of freedom, the limited nature of which is nonetheless guaranteed by law.
Thus for both groups the major legislative changes of the period — the Obscene Publications Act, the Sexual Offences Act, the Street Offences Act, the Abortion Act, the Theatres Act — are significant for their ‘permissive’ or ‘liberalising’character.
Although interpretations differ, particularly ideologically, they share a common thrust.
This is also true of the Marxist, or more strictly, Gramscian approach to the question of permissiveness, taken by Stuart Hall and others, as well as what might be termed the ‘Foucauldian’ position.
It is a considerably more sophisticated approach though, as should become clear, not without its flaws.
The authors of Policing the Crisis , although concerning themselves primarily with the ‘mugging panic’ of the 1970s, also focus on what they take to be the changing moral climate in 1960s Britain.
The fundamental change is conceived of in terms of the ‘crisis of hegemony’ that is experienced by the modern capitalist state when the basis of its cultural authority becomes contested.
As the ability of the state to mould popular consensus diminishes, so the argument goes, the method by which hegemony is achieved moves from consent to coercion.
This can be seen, they argue, in ever more direct forms of state intervention.
More particularly, Hall et al.
suggest that the discrete moral panics associated with the permissive age, e.g. those around abortion, VD, drugs and pornography, form the backdrop to the ‘general crisis of the state’ which was identified in panics around violent conduct like ‘mugging’.
Little evidence is presented that would support the claim that the moral panics associated with permissiveness were linked to the latter panic over street crime.
Having suggested that the 1960s were characterised by a series of discrete panics around moral issues, there is neither an account — other than an essentially economistic one — of the aetiology of such panics, nor an explanation of the way(s) in which they can be considered to be discrete.
Hall et al.
do bring into play Becker's notion of ‘moral entrepreneurship’ and Gusfield's ‘moral indignation’to explain why certain social groups were prime movers in the development of moral panics over permissiveness in the 1960s.
The brief history of the National Viewers' and Listeners' Association in the following chapter suggests that this is, however, an incomplete conceptualisation.
The key point in the development of a general moral panic was, for Hall et al.,
not the watershed year cited by moral entrepreneurs and historians alike — 1963 — but rather 1966, when such diverse subjects as the dissemination of pornography, the capture of Harry Roberts, and the Moors  Murders all hit the headlines.
From this point moral indignation became more than simply a grassroots phenomenon.
Rather, ‘in these campaigns, politicians, Chief Constables, Judges, the press and media joined hands and voices with the moral guardians in a general crackdown on ‘youth’ and the permissive society’.
Moral regulation was now more often brought about through coercion rather than consent.
Laws which, in the early 1960s, had been ‘liberally interpreted and allowed to lapse’ were applied with increased rigour.
The liberal interlude, as they call it, where laws such as those over obscene publications were allowed to lie fallow, soon came to an end.
The laws, they argue, were soon dusted off and exercised to the full.
Stuart Hall employs a rather more sophisticated approach in an article for the National Deviancy Conference on ‘consenting legislation’.
In this he suggests that description in terms of either permissiveness or control would be too simple and too binary, and thus it is to the nature of reformism that one must look.
In the 1960s, moral reformism, he argues, was aimed most specifically at sexual practices, and particularly those of women.
The role of women from the 1950s on contained an inherent contradiction, he suggests, a contradiction between what have been termed ‘the ideologies of consumption and domesticity’.
For the new post-war ideology of consumption to be stimulated it was necessary for women to remain in the home, yet at the same time to enter the labour market to supplement the ‘main income’ to sustain the family's purchasing power.
During the 1960s, however, this traditional role was partially disarticulated, and replaced with a recognition of women's sexual pleasure and satisfaction.
This shift was largely made possible by the breaking of the tie between female sexuality and reproduction, particularly through new contraceptive techniques.
Women, Hall suggests, were the key interpellated subject of the new legislation:
Overwhelmingly, it was the position of women in the field of sexual practice, which provided the legislation with its principal object/subject.
What is proposed, in sum, was a measure of relaxation in the social and legal control of selected aspects of female sexual practice.
It meant, in effect, a new ‘modality’ of control over these aspects — a more privatised and ‘person-focused’regulation.
This ‘legislative moment’ incorporating all the major changes which Hall places under the title ‘legislation of consent’, lasted roughly from 1959 (Wolfenden, and the Obscene Publications Act) to 1968 (end of theatre censorship and the Wootton Report on drugs).
This was followed, the authors of Policing the Crisis (Hall et al.
1978) suggest, by two ‘waves’ of social reaction.
The first wave was organised around social, cultural and moral issues, the second around the politicisation of the counter-culture.
The major contrast between the two is that in the latter, ‘youth’ had become more than mere ‘agents’of change, and were identified as ‘subversive’.
In terms of concrete events, the first wave of the backlash was associated with Mrs Whitehouse,The Longford Report , the Festival of Light and the Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child (SPUC).
The second wave included such ‘events’ as the prosecutions of OZ ,IT and The Little Red Schoolbook .
Whilst this is a generally convincing thesis, closer examination reveals some historical inaccuracies.
The first wave of reaction is described by Clarke et al.
(1976) as an ‘organised anti-permissive backlash’.
Whilst what is meant by ‘organised backlash’ is never made clear, it is probably not unreasonable to infer that it implies that it occurred after 1968 and within a limited historical period.
Looking at the specific people and events mentioned, the degree to which one might talk of ‘organisation’ seems somewhat open to question.
Mary Whitehouse's ‘moral crusade’ began in 1963–4 with the setting-up of the Clean-up TV Campaign.
SPUC took off in 1966–7.
The Festival of Light was launched in September 1971, and The Longford Report was published in September 1972.
The earliest date at which these four could have formed part of an ‘organised backlash’ would have been at least eighteen months after what Hall et al.
(1978) describe as the ‘full repressive closure’ of 1970.
Furthermore if the idea of a first and second wave is to be sustained, then — in Clarke's, Hall's and others' formulations — it must be shown that one wave in some senses follows the other.
The three major trials mentioned by the authors as being part of the second wave — those of International Times (November 1970),The Little Red Schoolbook (March 1971) and OZ 28 (June 1971) all occurred before the publication of The Longford Report or the launch of the Festival of Light, put forward as being part of the first wave.
Whilst it is not incorrect to identify all of these as sources, or illustrations, of moral indignation of one sort or another — indeed there are significant connections between them — attempting to fit them into a historical framework which appears to allow only for movements in one direction, i.e. permissiveness followed by control, results in a degree of historical inaccuracy.
A slight reorientation of the approach taken by Hall and colleagues is to be found in the writings of authors like Jeffrey Weeks.
Weeks' approach is influenced by the French philosopher Michel Foucault and, whilst much of it is as essentially economistic as that of the Gramscians, it has a somewhat different slant.
For the Foucauldians sexuality is made meaningful through the discourses which shape it.
Sexuality is ‘organised’ by the state as a technique of social control.
Weeks argues that recent history has seen an explosion of speech surrounding sex and that the 1960s in particular‘experienced a  decisive, qualitative escalation of the volume’.
Looking at the age of the sexual revolution he isolates a set of changes that he views as having been particularly significant in shaping the period.
The first and most important of these (and the one that ties him most clearly to Hall et al.)
is the ‘commercialisation and commodification of sex’.
Although he avoids arguing that capitalism created a sexual morality to serve its own imperatives — it has no master plan —‘the best we can do at this stage is to suggest that the articulation between sexual mores and capitalism occurs through complex mediations — through moral agencies, political interventions, diverse social practices’.
What has happened, he suggests, is that capitalism's tendency to colonise and penetrate segments of social existence has led to the commercialisation and commodification of sexuality, particularly via the shift from production to consumption.
He gives as an example of this the growth of a ‘pornocracy’ and through the break-up of the sex-procreation nexus has come the increasing commodification of pleasure — the developing range of sex-pleasure items on the market.
As to sexual behaviour itself, Weeks argues in tandem with both Marxist and feminist theorists that the so-called sexual liberation of women occurred within the well-circumscribed limits of both the capitalist labour market and male-dominated and defined notions of sexual pleasure.
There was, however, he suggests, a shift away from legal moralism, and through the reformist legislation of the 1960s a certain amount of ‘piecemeal moral engineering’ was achieved.
Finally, he argues, none of the changes went unchallenged, and the transformations in regulation and domination that occurred in the period themselves resulted in new forms of resistance and, in particular, in the women's and gay movements of the 1970s and 1980s.
The consequence of this has been the incorporation into the political sphere of issues which were previously barely regarded as political at all.
Although a number of feminist authors have tended to view some of the 1960s legislation as ‘liberalising’, they have sought to distinguish the identification of such a trend from any notion of ‘liberation’.
Whilst legislative reforms such as changes in the abortion laws and the law governing homosexuality are viewed as essentially liberal measures, we are not to assume therefore that this was indicative of a period of unproblematically increasing sexual liberation.
For critics such as Sheila Jeffreys the so-called ‘sexual revolution’ was in fact a counter-revolution.
It was a smokescreen behind which the reconstitution of male domination was hidden:
Behind the baloney of liberation, the naked power-politics of male supremacy were being acted out.
The high priests of sexalogic, helped  by the pornographers, progressive novelists and sex radicals continued to orchestrate woman's joyful embrace of her oppression through the creation of her sexual response….
The 1960s was a period when greater opportunities were open to women and the ‘sexual revolution’, rather than being liberating, helped to diffuse the potential threat to male power.
It was not until the feminist movement re-emerged with vigour in the early 1970s that a critique of ‘permissiveness’ was constructed.
As feminist writers began to question male sexuality and, particularly, to consider male violence against women, so they questioned the nature of the revolution.
The authors who began to write about rape and related it to male power, male supremacy and male sexuality, questioned what they saw to be the essentialist constructions of female sexuality which continued to predominate within the age of sexual revolution.
The critique of male sexuality which originally focused on rape, developed through analyses of child sexual abuse and non-stranger rape — and later pornography.
Such work hit at the heart of the institution which the conservative-historians took to be so much under threat — the nuclear family.
Ironically, whilst such a group took the very existence of the family to be in danger from permissiveness, the developing radical-feminist position argued that the ‘talk’ of permissiveness was a means of disguising the threat that such an institution posed to women's real chances of liberation: ‘Rather than posing a threat to traditional patriarchal marriage the sexual revolution strengthened the institution’.
Feminist authors such as Jeffreys, like the conservative historians, are almost unremittingly critical of permissiveness and its products.
Although there is little of essence in common between the two approaches, it is perhaps not hard to see how on occasion unlikely alliances between radical feminist anti-pornography campaigners and moral entrepreneurs such as Mrs Whitehouse might have been countenanced.
Of all the recent authors it is perhaps Jeffreys who has developed the most thorough analysis of permissiveness or what she refers to as the ‘sexual revolution’.
She looks in some detail at the process by which the counter-revolutionary attack on women's liberation took place.
Focusing inter alia on the work of the sex radicals Reich and Marcuse, and the sexologists of Forum magazine and manuals such as Joy of Sex , she details the prescription of male dominance and female submission.
As she acidly puts it, ‘the liberation was not intended to liberate (women) from anything but their common-sense and their instinct for self-protection’.
An element which is largely missing from both the Marxist and feminist accounts, in contrast to either the conservative- or liberal-historical  approaches, is reference to the role of religion in contemporary society.
For both the conservative- and liberal-historians, the process of ‘secularisation’ is identified as a necessary if not sufficient condition for the rise of the permissive society.
From the Marxist point of view, a process such as secularisation takes a more secondary role in relation to features more closely associated with the functioning of a capitalist economy, and particularly changes in the class structure.
As an example, as has already been suggested, the authors of Policing the Crisis (Hall et al.
1978) explain the existence of moral entrepreneurial groups in the 1960s by reference firstly to their common location in the class structure, and only secondly by reference to their religious views, and their perception of the modern ‘secular’ world.
The following chapter on the role of the National Viewers' and Listeners' Association (NVALA) in the 1960s, and the following case studies, will consider evidence which casts doubt on this order of priority.
The Eliasian approach, as adapted by Cas Wouters, places even less emphasis on changing religious influences on contemporary moral codes than does the Marxist.
Indeed notions of moral indignation, moral panic or moral conflict are not used in this perspective at all.
The major focus is upon human interdependency, its levels of organisation, and the concomitant balance of social and self-controls that results.
That there have occurred changes which may be described as permissive is not doubted: ‘We have experienced a change in standards of conduct which one might also describe by reversing Caxton's quotation.
One might say: ‘Things formerly forbidden are now allowed’.
These changes have popularly become known by the name permissiveness.’
Wouters refers to this process as ‘informalisation’.
The major example that he gives of informalisation is what he takes to be the decrease of social restraints, particularly in the middle classes, imposed upon sexual behaviour and other connected spheres of conduct.
As a result of these changes it has become possible, among other things, to show more of the male and female body.
It has become possible to talk more freely and openly both about sexual experiences and other bodily functions such as menstruation.
In essence, he argues, certain forms of conduct which were once forbidden are now allowed, and are regulated much less formally than they once were.
These areas of conduct have become more subject to self-constraint and less subject to external constraint.
Having suggested the predominant direction in which the movement has gone, i.e towards informalisation, Wouters sets out to explain it.
In his first article on the subject the focus was on what he, following Elias, termed the ‘changing balance of power between the classes’.
Specifically he referred to the changing balance between the middle and working classes, but he suggests that the balance of power between the generations within  the middle class also changed.
It is not clear from the article to what extent it was Dutch society that he was basing his analysis on, but given that he appears to be making a general point about changes within Western Europe, it is important to point out that most of the literature on youth, adolescence and relations between the generations in Britain has tended to concentrate on, to use Elias' term again, the changing balance of power between the generations within the working class.
Wouters' more recent writings on the process of informalisation begin to plug another gap in his early conceptualisation by focusing on the changing balance of power between the sexes.
Wouters' project is to build upon Elias' theory of the ‘civilising process’, and to show how informalisation, far from contradicting Elias' thesis, can actually be incorporated within it.
Elias' theory of the civilising process has also been described as a history of manners, in which changing patterns of living are documented, and within which what he refers to as ‘affect’ becomes increasingly regulated.
Emotion becomes ever more constrained by feelings of shame, repugnance or propriety.
Changes in standards of conduct in Europe since the Middle Ages have so far generally proceeded, he argues, in the direction of increased civilisation:
Whatever may be the differences in detail, the overall direction of change in behaviour, the trend in the civilising movement is everywhere the same.
The change always presses toward a more or less automatic self-supervision, the subordination of short-term impulses to the commandment of a habitual long-term perspective, and the cultivation of a more stable and differentiated super-ego apparatus.
Wouters' dilemma is that the changes identified as being part of the process of informalisation appear to involve declining rather than increasing levels of ‘affect control’.
Informalisation or permissiveness is seen as involving increasingly less regulation and less formality over rules of conduct, a relaxation in standards that seems at odds with the civilising movement identified by Elias.
However, Wouters suggests that Elias was in fact aware that the process he had identified was not unidimensional:
One has the impression that in the time that followed the war, compared with the pre-war period, there occurred a change which might be called a loosening of manners.
A number of restraints imposed upon conduct before the war became weaker or have even disappeared.
Many things previously forbidden are now allowed.
Thus the movement, seen from close by, appears to go into reverse gear.
It appears to lead to a lessening of the constraints imposed upon the individual by the social way of life.
On closer inspection, however, it is not difficult to see that this is a rather  mild counter-movement, one of those smaller eddies that spring up again and again from the many-layered structure of historical change within every stage of more comprehensive processes.
In defending the theory of the civilising process, Wouters argues that informalisation is not inimical to civilisation, but can in fact be integrated into the overall theory.
He uses an example to explain how this is to be done.
Comparisons of pre- and post-First World War parent-child relationships show that such relations have become more informal, and that parents put, or intend to put, fewer formal restraints on their children.
In order to illustrate such an example he gives another example.
If children are beaten with a stick by their parents when they transgress, he suggests that they will tend to avoid transgressing on those occasions when their actions are not concealed from their parents.
They will not in this way learn to control those impulses which lead them to transgress.
Being governed more by fear than by guilt they will be unable to control their impulses when their parents — or other authorities — are absent.
Through this example, he suggests that, although a lessening of power inequalities — a concomitant of informalisation — involves a lessening of formal restraints, it also induces and requires more deeply built-in self-restraints.
In this way, it is justifiable to talk not only about changes in the pattern or type of self-controls, but also in the level of self-control:
Thinking of the almost natural way in which particularly young middle-class girls, but by no means only they, repressed all behaviour and thoughts concerning sex, one could say, that in many respects the preceding middle-class generations had to restrain their sexual — and possibly other — urges and inclinations, because these controls functioned quite blindly, beyond the conscious control of the individuals concerned….
In comparison, many people today have learned to a far greater extent to express these urges and emotions in a controlled way, that is also socially accepted.
Thus it would be wrong to suggest that the young can behave uninhibitedly in contemporary society.
They are, rather, expected to express their impulses in certain ways, ways that do not transgress against the more lenient standards of modern times.
At this point, one encounters two similarities between Wouters' analysis and those of the conservative- and liberal-historians.
First of all, he accepts that standards are more lenient than those of the preceding periods.
Thus, whilst he has rebutted the charge that permissiveness represents a simple diminution in control, he nevertheless asserts that within the new control structure there are greater possibilities for the expression of emotion.
The  second point of similarity emerges from the point of his analysis where he talks of changing codes of conduct.
With the changing balance of power between the working and middle class, it is suggested that we have witnessed the destruction of traditional codes which have yet to be replaced by a similarly coherent new set:
One cannot quite understand the process of informalisation in European countries if one does not take into account that here too one can observe upward movements of working-class traditions and downward movements of middle-class traditions of conduct, although it is not possible to speak of the emergence of a new more firmly established code of conduct.
It is precisely because such a code does not exist, that we live in a period of uncertainty and experimentation.
The essence of his argument is that changes in behavioural codes reflect changes in the power and dependency relations they are rooted in.
The most recent wave of informalisation reflects a change in the balances of power between classes, the generations and the sexes.
As higher levels of self-restraint have been achieved, so the social regulation of behaviour has become more lenient, more flexible and more differentiated.
In this process of informalisation ‘dominant modes of social conduct’ have been violated by the upwardly mobile groups, and have given way to new codes which allow for a greater variety of behavioural alternatives.
CONCLUSION
All five major approaches to the subject of changes in post-war morality would accept, to a greater or lesser extent, that the term ‘permissiveness’, whilst not ideal, nevertheless does describe, albeit partially, the changes they identify.
Interestingly, it is only the conservative-historians who use the term ‘permissiveness’ to refer to changes in actual behaviour.
They reference rising rates of illegitimacy, abortion, venereal disease, crime, drug abuse and so on, as indicators of the fact that standards of behaviour are declining.
They suggest, by implication at the very least, that modern society is characterised by greater promiscuity, greater sexual licence, by altogether less controlled or constrained sexual behaviour.
The liberal-historians also tend to suggest that permissiveness has allowed greater freedom for sexual (and other forms of) expression, though for feminist critics this was simply a reordered means of continuing women's oppression.
Both the Marxist and the Eliasian approaches, on the other hand, although implying that there may have been great changes in sexual behaviour, fall short of actually saying so.
Hall et al.
talk of a ‘changing moral climate’ and point to legislative change that decriminalised certain  forms of behaviour, but further than that they do not go.
Wouters turns Caxton's famous quotation on its head and says ‘things formerly forbidden are now allowed’, but not only does he not go into detail as to what these things might be, he certainly does not suggest that ‘things now allowed are actively engaged in’.
For most commentators, permissiveness refers to a process of liberalisation, informalisation or differentiation in attitudes or moral rules.
Rarely is any reliable evidence provided which charts changes in sexual behaviour.
As was intimated in the introduction, although there is little evidence to suggest that sexual behaviour changed greatly in the period, the feeling remained for many people at the time that this was nevertheless what was happening.
Something was happening in Britain that allowed the period to be plausibly described, both at the time and later, as permissive.
For many of the authors discussed above, it was changes in the rules (however defined) governing behaviour.
Whatever these changes were, many who witnessed them found them worrying and unsettling.
The following chapter looks at the debates over permissiveness in more detail, by examining the preoccupations of the moral entrepreneurs of the period, and in particular, Mary Whitehouse and the National Viewers' and Listeners' Association.
Permissiveness and moral protest
Mary Whitehouse and the National Viewers' and Listeners' Association
As has already been suggested, so pervasive has the term ‘permissiveness’ become that there are few, if any, commentators who are prepared to argue that the term is one that mystifies rather than elucidates.
Many would argue that the idea of permissiveness has been overstated, exaggerated or misapplied, but few seem to doubt the underlying reality of this supposedly permissive Britain of the 1960s.
In this chapter, then, the term ‘permissiveness’ is subjected to further critical scrutiny, and an attempt is made to isolate those ‘factors’or characteristics that are most usually invoked by moral entrepreneurs in their discussions of the ‘permissive society’.
The chapter takes as its focus the work of Mary Whitehouse and the organisation with which she is most closely associated, the National Viewers' and Listeners' Association (NVALA).
THE NATIONAL VIEWERS' AND LISTENERS' ASSOCIATION
The NVALA developed out of an organisation called ‘The Clean-up TV Campaign’(CUTV) launched in January 1964 by Mary Whitehouse and Norah Buckland, the wife of the Rector of Langton in Staffordshire.
Both were concerned with what they saw to be ‘declining standards’ on television, and the problems that they felt were created or exacerbated by this ‘decline’.
Feeling that little was to be gained by personal protest either to the BBC or through their local MP to Parliament, they decided that the best approach was to issue a Manifesto.
It is worth reproducing the Manifesto in full at this point, for many of the major planks of future NVALA ‘policy’ were contained in this Manifesto in embryonic form.
It read:
1.
We women of Britain believe in a Christian way of life.
2.
We want it for our children and for our country.
3.
We deplore present day attempts to belittle or destroy it, and in particular we object to the propaganda of disbelief, doubt and dirt that the BBC projects into millions of homes through the television screen.
4.
Crime, violence, illegitimacy and venereal disease are steadily increasing yet the BBC employs people whose ideas and advice pander to the lowest human nature and accompany this with a stream of suggestive and erotic plays which present promiscuity, infidelity and drinking as normal and inevitable.
5.
We call upon the BBC for a radical change of policy and demand programmes which build character instead of destroying it, which encourage and sustain faith in God and bring Him back to the heart of our family and national life.
The campaign was launched via an article in the Birmingham Mail with a promise from Mrs Whitehouse to hold the initial meeting in Birmingham Town Hall.
The meeting took place on 5 May 1964 and was attended by approximately 2000 people, causing The Times to comment:
Perhaps never before in the history of Birmingham Town Hall has such a successful meeting been sponsored by such a flimsy organisation.
There are no committee members, no officers, and no hard plans for the future, except for the hope that the people at this meeting will go out and spread the word in other parts of the country.
Telegrams of ‘interest’ and ‘support’were received from the Archbishops of Canterbury and York respectively, and by the end of the year Mrs Whitehouse and Mrs Buckland were claiming to have over a quarter of a million signatures on the Manifesto.
As Tracey and Morrison point out, however, CUTV were soon criticised for their negative stance and consequently metamorphosed from being merely a protest group into a campaigning organisation with more reformist goals.
By November 1965, the National Viewers' and Listeners' Association was being launched in London to the full glare of press publicity by James Dance, MP for Bromsgrove, by then another leading figure in the campaign.
The first aim of the NVALA was to establish a Viewers' and Listeners' Council which would consist of elected representatives of the ‘churches, women's organisations, magistrates, doctors, educationalists, parents, youth, social workers, police, political parties, local government and writers’.
The aim of this Council was putatively to ‘represent the opinions, ideas and experience of the whole country to the broadcasting authorities’.
Where was it that Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA actually claimed to gain support?
On the one hand there have been those who have claimed that, at least in the early days, the campaign was no more than the minority group Moral Re-Armament (MRA) by a different name; on the other there is Mrs Whitehouse herself, who clearly believes that the organisation represents the ‘silent majority’ in the country.
As to the former suggestion the position  seems fairly clear.
Mrs Whitehouse, at what was a troubled period in her personal life, joined the Wolverhampton Oxford Group in 1935.
The Oxford Group was founded in the early years of the century by Frank Buchman, a Lutheran Minister, whose controversial evangelistic movement was based on the four principles of Absolute Honesty, Absolute Purity, Absolute Unselfishness and Absolute Love.
In a speech in 1938, Buchman suggested that ‘…nations must re-arm morally’ and the phrase stuck, the Oxford Group becoming known thenceforward as the Moral Re-armament movement.
Tracey and Morrison (1979) in their book on Mrs Whitehouse point to several similarities of outlook between supporters of the NVALA and MRA.
They argue that, for Whitehouse in particular, though after the war her formal ties with the Oxford Group diminished, her years of close association with it provided her with a very clear intellectual approach to the perceived ills of the modern world.
Mrs Whitehouse herself has never sought to deny the intellectual and theological debt she owes to the Oxford Group and the MRA, but has been quick to silence those critics who have suggested the existence of more formal links between the NVALA and MRA.
From its Midlands grassroots in the Clean-up TV Campaign, the NVALA has grown into an organisation with over 30,000 members, and has on several occasions organised nationwide petitions which have secured a formidable number of signatures.
It is the success of these petitions that Mrs Whitehouse feels are a more realistic indicator of her support, and she claims that the 31,000 or so members who pay the small annual subscription are but ‘the tip of the iceberg’.
She estimates that the NVALA has the block support of organisations totalling up to three million people and, in defence of the NVALA's ‘mandate’, points to the memberships of the British Humanist Society and the National Council for Civil Liberties (now Liberty) which she quotes as standing at 2,000 and 6,000 respectively.
Whatever the reality of the membership and support situation, two important points emerge from a reading of the NVALA literature and Mrs Whitehouse's autobiographical writings.
Firstly, as has already been suggested, she feels that the true campaign she is involved in gives a voice to Britain's silent moral majority.
Secondly, and related to this, opponents of the silent majority are seen as being a small, but fairly influential and vociferous elite.
This elite, otherwise referred to by Mrs Whitehouse as the ‘humanist lobby’, is left in no doubt by her that it is the influence of their humanism to which she most vociferously objects:
It is vital to any understanding of the present state, both of public debate and personal morality, to realise the part played by what might generally  be called the ‘humanist lobby’.
This works, not only through the British Humanist Association, but through the various other anti-Christian pressure groups which proliferated in the 1960s…
and, she continued, ‘today's militant humanists not only reject God, they are anti-Christian, from political as well as‘theological’ conviction’.
The ‘humanist’ pressure groups, and what she identifies as a ‘secular intellectual elite’, were the major protagonists for ‘permissive’change in the 1960s, according to Mrs Whitehouse.
These groups represent a minority opinion, she suggests, and it is up to the NVALA and groups like it to defend and reassert ‘traditional’ values before humanism takes a grip of society generally, rather than just at the BBC where it is viewed as already having a stranglehold.
To confirm her assertion that there are radicals and revolutionaries in every corner of contemporary social life who are campaigning to overthrow the ‘traditional’ moral order, Mrs Whitehouse reels off a formidable list of ‘folk devils’.
Pride of place in this list goes to Hugh Carleton Greene, Director-General of the BBC from 1960 to 1969, who Mrs Whitehouse viewed as being almost single-handedly responsible for all the ills of the supposed ‘permissive society’:
If anyone were to ask me who, above all, was responsible for the moral collapse which characterised the 1960s and 1970s, I would unhesitatingly name Sir Hugh Carleton-Greene….
He was in command of the most powerful medium ever to affect the thinking and behaviour of people — television.
His determination to give the freedom of the screen to the protagonists of the new morality, excesses of violence and sex, had the most profound effect upon the values and behavioural patterns of the day.
There are two important points in this quotation which will be returned to during the course of this chapter.
The first is Mrs Whitehouse's emphasis on the power of television as a medium, the second the notion of the ‘new morality’ which was widely used in the mid-1960s and which Mrs Whitehouse focused upon in her attacks on both broadcasting and the ‘South Bank’theologians.
Most prominent among the ‘South Bank’ theologians was John Robinson, the Bishop of Southwark, whose book,Honest to God , divided theological opinion when it was published in the early 1960s.
Robinson had argued that the Church was in a critical position in that it was becoming ever more remote from modern society and that it must therefore rethink its position.
For Robinson, it was necessary to cease to talk in terms of moral absolutes and, consequently, he argued, ‘nothing can of itself always be labelled as wrong’.
This position, part of a wider body of thought known as ‘situational ethics’, was anathema to Mrs  Whitehouse and her supporters, whose world-view was constructed very much in terms of absolutes.
However, the significance of the ‘South Bank’ theologians was not only to be seen in their effect on the Church, but also, according to Mrs Whitehouse, in their affinity with the secular intellectual elite which held sway in the 1960s:
The significance of the support for the Southwark [sic]theologians which flooded in from left-wing humanists, will not be lost on anyone who had learned, the hard way, that these people, who reject all concept of man as a child of God both for themselves and everyone else, make common ground with soft permissives wherever they can find them — in or out of the Church.
Representing the ‘degenerate youth’ in Mrs Whitehouse's litany of folk devils was Richard Neville, who, as one of the defendants in the OZ trial, represented the antithesis of all that Mrs Whitehouse wished to see in modern youth.
Neville and his co-defendants James Anderson and Felix Dennis, were found guilty in 1971 of publishing an obscene article, namely OZ 28 , otherwise known as Schoolkids' OZ , and were given prison sentences ranging from nine to fifteen months.
The sentences, however, were suspended and reduced on appeal.
For Whitehouse, Neville's avowed ‘revolutionary’ stance was aimed particularly at the young and innocent and was a form of ‘ideological warfare’from which they needed to be protected.
Mrs Whitehouse had no doubts about the damage of Neville's influence, nor the response of parents:
But thousands of parents who had seen their children's life-style changed through the impact of the underground press were only too well aware of its significance.
They knew Richard Neville not as some hard-done-by  humorist but as the author of the paperback Playpower which became the handbook of the international drop-outs and bemused pot-smoking youngsters, persuaded to believe that society was rotten, life was too tough and the odds too heavily stacked against them — the best thing to do was to drop out and bum around.
Themes that arise time and again in Mrs Whitehouse's writing are present in this passage: firstly, the power of the media to shape and influence opinion and behaviour — in this case the medium being an underground magazine; secondly, the idea that permissive changes were focused upon the young; and finally that the political intent behind the attack on traditional morals is essentially revolutionary.
This particular passage ends with the sentence: ‘the purpose of the underground press is ‘not so much to dissent as to disrupt’, and its editorial policies explicitly and implicitly seek to overthrow society as we know it, and of this it makes no secret’.
The  list of folk devils doesn't end with Greene, Robinson and Neville, however, although they represent the three crucial strands in Mrs Whitehouse's philosophical position — broadcasting, the Church and rebellious youth.
Also in the list and discussed below are: Alex Comfort and Dr Martin Cole in the area of sex education, John Calder the publisher, John Trevelyan the erstwhile film censor, Roy Jenkins, Labour Home Secretary in the 1960s, as well as John Mortimer, the barrister, novelist and playwright, and what Mrs Whitehouse referred to as his ‘travelling circus of expert witnesses’ who were regularly in court to defend publications charged under the Obscene Publications Act.
There were many others playing more minor roles.
Nevertheless, this list covers a group of people whom Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA saw as being in the frontline of the attack on established values.
In each of the areas of major concern for the NVALA, there appeared to them to be influential individuals whose determination to ‘push back the frontiers of permissiveness’ was seen as the greatest threat to traditional Christian morality.
3 BROADCASTING AND THE NVALA
Mrs Whitehouse's concern with the output of the major broadcasting companies began in the early 1960s and is still going strong today almost thirty years later.
It is worth paying particular attention to one of two programmes or issues that particularly disturbed Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA for they sum up quite neatly the major ways in which broadcasting is seen by them as falling short of the standards that, they suggest, ought generally to apply.
The late-night satirical shows such as Not So Much a Programme ,More a Way of Life and That Was the Week That Was (TW3) were among the first to cause the NVALA concern.
TW3, staffed by the likes of David Frost, William Rushton, Bernard Levin (who in later years became a critic of ‘permissiveness’), and a future bête-noir of Mrs Whitehouse, John Mortimer, was, in its short history, massively popular and controversial.
In 1963, having perhaps insulted one Prime Minister too many in the run-up to a general election, TW3 was taken off the air, although it was stoutly defended by Hugh Greene.
Mrs Whitehouse viewed these programmes as having no redeeming qualities whatsoever, and it was not long before she herself became the subject of a satirical programme in her own right.
Entitled Swizzlewick , it ‘starred’ a Mrs Smallgood, a Councillor Salt — the chairman of the NVALA committee was a Birmingham councillor by the name of Pepper — and Ernest the postman, Ernest being the name of Mr Whitehouse and ‘Postman's Piece’the name of the house they were living in at the time.
The programme marked perhaps the beginning of Mrs Whitehouse's attempts to influence the  content of particular programmes.
She was sent the script for one of the episodes — she has never said by whom — and was so enraged by one scene in which the councillor was to have been seen leaving a prostitute's room doing up his trousers, that she sent it straight to the Postmaster General, the Minister responsible.
In the end the scene to which she had objected was cut and, directly or indirectly, Mrs Whitehouse became persona non grata at the BBC for eleven years.
The BBC at this time was also thought by Mrs Whitehouse to be ‘theologically biased’.
It was what she saw as the excessive time and attention given to the ‘South Bank’ theologians which she objected to most strongly, feeling that it would only be a matter of time before the Governors took action to alter the position.
She wrote to the Director General, was invited to meet, and met, his Deputy, Harman Grisewood, who impressed her with his sympathy for her concerns.
However, not long after, Grisewood resigned and Mrs Whitehouse later said that he was, to her mind, ‘too sincere and too gentle a Christian to be at ease amongst the demolition men who frequented the BBC at the time’.
Little seemed in Mrs Whitehouse's eyes to change at the BBC and, in early 1964, the Corporation's Charter was renewed for a further twelve years without any of the additional ‘safeguards’ that Mrs Whitehouse would have liked to have seen written in.
It was roughly at this time that the Clean-up TV Campaign was launched.
The ‘theological bias’, the humanism, the anti-establishment propaganda, the ‘declining’ moral standards, and the increasing use of ‘foul’language, for which Mrs Whitehouse continually criticised the BBC, were almost all to be found aplenty, she felt, in one particular television programme, and the battle over this series is in many ways illustrative of the wider battle between the NVALA and the Corporation at this time.
Till Death Us Do Part , with its intended anti-hero Alf Garnett, was one of the BBC's most popular shows in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
There has been much written about the central character in the programme and Johnny Speight's intentions in creating a ‘foul-mouthed bigot’ such as Garnett.
Speight described it as follows:
To me there are prototypes of Alf all over the country: far too many of them in fact.
And if I didn't use words like ‘blast’ and ‘blow me’and so on, he wouldn't be a real character.
And he is a real character.
But what I set out to do was to show the idiocy of his ideas by bouncing them against other ideas, some of them perhaps equally extreme and absurd.
Two episodes in particular are mentioned by Mrs Whitehouse as exemplifying the series' worst qualities.
The first is described by Tracey and  Morrison as the ‘Virgin Birth’ episode because of its controversial subject-matter.
The offending section involved Alf and his wife Elsie discussing a conversation they had ‘unfortunately’ overheard in the pub.
The conversation concerned the question of Mary's virginity and why she had had only one child.
Mike, their son-in-law, then suggested that as that was two thousand years ago, ‘they could have had another fifteen hundred by now’ and, sensing his in-laws' disapproval, continued ‘unless they're on the pill’.
Mrs Whitehouse wrote immediately to the Minister of Posts and Telecommunications to complain about the episode, receiving an apologetic reply from Lord Hill of the BBC.
The second episode which Mrs Whitehouse says she remembers with a mixture of ‘amusement and incredulity’ involved a scene in which Alf and his son-in-law were in the living room reading: Mike, a football book, and Alf a book that cannot at first be seen.
Alf is periodically nodding at his son-in-law and suggesting that he would be better off if he read the book Alf has in his hands.
The book turns out to be Mrs Whitehouse's newly published volume,Cleaning-up TV .
Mrs Whitehouse describes the rest of the scene as follows:
The whole episode was built around the book and before very long, and not for the first time, the fascist implications were there again, not only as far as Alf was concerned but, by implication, involving me too.
The whole country needed ‘cleaning up’, particularly of the ‘coons’, Alf ranted (can anyone imagine that happening now?).
And with the usual loud-mouthed flourish he marched off to the lavatory taking my book with him.
The twist to the story came when the old man was found to be a carrier of the very germs that he blamed the coloured people for bringing into the country.
How else could he have contracted them but by reading my book?
So what was the best thing to do with that?
Burn it, of course.
And the programme ended as it dropped onto the fire to a chorus from the rest of Alf's family of ‘unclean, unclean’.
Although many areas of British social life were attacked in Till Death , it was the general ridicule to which Christianity was subjected that caused Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA most difficulty.
That this was true for NVALA supporters generally and not just for their figurehead is shown by the large correspondence the programme generated within the Association.
As will be seen throughout this chapter, this is perhaps the central plank in the overall ideological position adopted by Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA.
The declining importance of religion in social life in general, and in particular the declining influence of Christianity on the great moral questions of the day was (and is) the spur to action that has kept the NVALA going for over twenty years.
Although the campaigns in which  Mrs Whitehouse and her associates have been involved during this period may, on the surface, seem particularly disparate and eclectic, if one looks below the surface — as Tracey and Morrison have done particularly thoroughly — then it is the diminishing influence of the Church in moral issues that lies at the heart of NVALA action and concern.
Apart from the issue of declining moral standards, which Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA thought characteristic of television and the BBC in particular, from the early 1960s onward, there is another important strand in the NVALA stance with regard to the media.
It is one thing to assert that things are ‘not what they used to be’ and that this is part of the more ‘general malaise’in society.
It is quite another to suggest, as they did and still do, that television in general, and Hugh Greene's BBC in particular , were also somehow partially, but nonetheless importantly, responsible for bringing about, or encouraging, the decline in standards that, they argue, characterised the 1960s and 1970s.
Television, for the NVALA, is a uniquely powerful medium, and one therefore that can have devastating effects on the social fabric if it is not checked.
If we consider this aspect more closely, another important strand in the Whitehouse/NVALA ‘philosophy’ becomes apparent.
The BBC is seen by Mrs Whitehouse as not only reflecting the changes that were occurring in that period, but also as actively encouraging or even precipitating them.
She suggested in Cleaning-up TV that the forces pushing for ‘permissive’ reform were in large part the British Humanist Association, the National Secular Society, the Homosexual Law Reform Association and the Abortion Law Reform Association.
That, as pressure groups, they are free to campaign openly for the changes, Mrs Whitehouse accepted.
However, she felt that they had a particularly powerful and inappropriate ally in the BBC.
She said at the time ‘no-one has given the BBC a mandate to promote their causes.
It is surely no coincidence that plays dealing with homosexuality and abortion were shown on BBC at the time when these issues were to be debated in the House of Commons and the Press’.
The BBC was, then, in her view, a propagandist for the various liberal and humanist causes circulating in the 1960s.
Mrs Whitehouse is concerned not only that television companies are using their influence to promote political causes but, as was suggested above, that they are in many ways responsible for the ‘moral decline’ which she has identified.
This power can be seen very clearly in her attitude towards two major events in recent years: the 1981 urban riots and the 1985 Brussels football tragedy.
Mrs Whitehouse was one of the first commentators (there were many others) to suggest that the television coverage of the urban riots could have a ‘copycat effect’.
She criticised the showing on television of ‘pictures of young black teenagers taking calculated — and cheerful — running kicks at  plate-glass shop windows, coolly helping themselves to the goods inside, shoes, shirts or whatever they could lay their hands on’.
In response to the news coverage of the disorder, she sent telegrams to both the BBC and the ITA asking them to ‘please consider whether the massive television coverage of acts of vandalism and violence is contributing to the spread of the riots’.
Both companies issued statements saying that there was no conclusive evidence that television could affect behaviour in the manner suggested, but Mrs Whitehouse has still claimed that the coverage in the following days had been considerably transformed, using ‘stills’ rather than action sequences, and long shots rather than close-ups.
The use or significance of ‘stills’ and long shots in this context is that they tend to lessen the impact of the coverage, making it less attractive and exciting, thus diminishing, so the argument goes, the likelihood of imitation.
In much the same way, she suggested that in the aftermath of the tragedy at the Heysel Stadium in Brussels, the television companies might care to take a long hard look at themselves when seeking to account for the behaviour of the young fans at the European Cup Final:
Of course the culprits in those terrible events must be punished.
But do not let us allow their punishment to salve our consciences.
No requiems should give us peace.
The answer lies deep in us all and demands a whole reorientation of our values.
That will perhaps take generations.
But one practical contribution could be made at once by the IBA and the Governors of the BBC.
Let them govern, not sit comfortably back with the occasional ‘tut tut’ after the event.
On both these occasions, Mrs Whitehouse suggested that the declining moral standards which she feels characterise the output of both broadcasting companies are not unconnected with the violent scenes witnessed in Brixton, Toxteth and Brussels.
In the case of the urban riots, it is the nature of the television coverage which is in essence inciting other young people in different parts of the country to civil disobedience, whereas in the case of football violence, the implication is that the perceived lack of moral leadership by the broadcasting corporations has led over a period of years to a general moral climate in this country which fails to provide adequate controls over the behaviour of the nation's youth.
The strand of the overall Whitehouse philosophy that was referred to above, and which, perhaps, is only implicitly suggested by the two examples discussed, is the particularly vulnerable position which, she feels, young people occupy, especially with regard to the pernicious influences of the mass media.
OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS AND THE NVALA
The NVALA's concern for the welfare of children — young people would perhaps be a more accurate term, given the ages Mrs Whitehouse generally included in her statements — extends further than television to the printed picture and word.
As will later become clear, Mrs Whitehouse has been involved in many campaigns in this area but there are two in particular which are of immediate relevance to this discussion.
The first of these campaigns involved OZ magazine whose editors were prosecuted for obscenity.
OZ 28 , the Schoolkids' Issue , took such a name because it was largely written and edited by children, a fact that was largely ignored during the trial.
Indeed, during what was the longest obscenity trial in British publishing history, great play was made of the involvement of schoolchildren, one of the charges being that the editors:
had conspired with certain other young persons to produce a magazine that would corrupt the morals of young children and other young persons and had intended to arouse and implant in the minds of these young people lustful and perverted desires.
It was the fact that the young were the supposed ‘object’ of the publication that most concerned Mrs Whitehouse.
Indeed, after the three defendants successfully appealed against the prison sentences she accused them of endangering British youth:
I do not have anything personal against the three men but I think it is an unmitigated disaster for the children of our country.
If they cannot be protected by the law from this kind of material then the law should be tightened up.
The other related campaign in which Mrs Whitehouse was involved at this time — and more centrally than in the OZ case — was the prosecution brought against the publisher of a book of advice for schoolchildren called The Little Red Schoolbook .
The book was small in format, although 208 pages long.
It was divided into chapters, each of which contained advice on a separate topic such as homework, teachers, discipline, drugs, etc.
The central cause for concern was the 20-page section devoted to advice on sexual matters.
Although proceedings were not instituted as a result of Mrs Whitehouse's intervention, she had nevertheless brought the book to the notice of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
This publication is of particular interest here because it pulls together several themes pertinent to a consideration of Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA.
When considering Mrs Whitehouse's views on the links between sexual and political revolution, the book will surface again.
At this point, it is sufficient to note the focus of concern in the note she sent to the DPP:
I would like to draw your attention to the chapter on sex.
This book is now being sold freely to children of all ages and it is intended by the publishers to be read by children of eight years upwards.
In my view this book would deprave and corrupt young children and I draw your attention in the sincere hope that you will find it possible to take action against the publishers.
Protection of the young has ostensibly been a central and ever-present concern in Mrs Whitehouse's and the NVALA's campaigns ever since they began.
The following heartfelt plea towards the end of Mrs Whitehouse's book,Whatever Happened to Sex?sums up her thinking on the subject:
Public opinion long ago condemned and outlawed the exploitation of child labour by nineteenth century industrialists.
Yet, today, our society ruthlessly exploits the minds and emotions of young people — and now, may God forgive us, the bodies of children — for financial and political capital.
Children are fodder, not for industry, but for ideas.
They are no longer sent up chimneys, but they are pressured into alien patterns of behaviour to line the pockets of unscrupulous publishers and to further the cause of revolution by stealth.
A nation's youth is its greatest asset.
We are poor guardians if we do not ensure its unalterable right to childhood, to mystery, to dreams, to tenderness and to love; if we do not realise that by ceasing to provide authority we may also cease to care; if we do not conscientiously maintain the spiritual foundations without which the young cannot build anew; if we do not teach that there is a third way, neither reactionary nor libertarian, which still waits to be explored.
It is clear from the last sentence in the quotation that Mrs Whitehouse does not view her position in the way some of her critics have done in the past, as reactionary or illiberal.
She argues for a ‘third way’, and it is this ‘third way’ that is the subject of this chapter.
SEX EDUCATION AND THE NVALA
Another area of concern for Mrs Whitehouse, which also takes as its focus the young, is sex education.
Sex education draws together much of the Whitehouse ‘philosophy’, for not only does it explicitly focus upon the young, but also it carries at least an implicit stance on the role and utility of the contemporary family.
The issue also raises questions about love, sex, marriage, religion and morals.
Sex education as a subject is important in any discussion of the work of Mrs Whitehouse, because her experiences of it as a teacher and parent, indirectly, if not directly, led her into the public domain of the politics of sexual morality.
As a teacher in the early 1960s at Madely Secondary Modern School in what is now Telford New Town, Mrs Whitehouse was Senior Mistress ‘responsible for the moral welfare of the girls’.
In that connection she became involved in the Headmaster's plans to invite marriage guidance counsellors to present several sex education films.
She and other teachers insisted on the right to attend these lessons, and were taken aback by what they perceived to be the absence of a moral framework in what was, as it turned out, an ‘entirely factual’ approach to sex education.
After this, the school itself took complete responsibility for sex education and, as was mooted in public debate in the late 1980s, they operated a system of ‘opting in’ rather than‘opting out’by which parents were asked whether they wished their children to participate.
Although Mrs Whitehouse recounts stories of the ‘embarrassing’ moments she experienced when discussing certain matters with her pupils, it appears from her accounts of this period that the school-based sex education programme she was involved in was, for her, a positive and satisfying experience.
All this was to change, however, in the year she describes as ‘extraordinary’, 1963, as a result of what she took to be the effect that television was having on public debate.
She describes the incident that sparked off, or at least increased, her concern about the content of contemporary television programmes, as happening at the height of the Honest to God debate.
The girls came into school discussing the merits of a programme they had seen the previous evening, a ‘religious’ programme,Meeting Point , which had been about pre-marital sex.
One of the girls had apparently rushed into class to inform her teacher, Mrs Whitehouse, that she now knew what was ‘right’.
This, it turned out, was ‘that we shouldn't have intercourse until we're engaged’.
The incident is particularly revealing of Whitehouse's position, and indeed made a ‘tremendous’ and lasting impression on her.
As far as the programme itself was concerned, she felt it was a ‘classic example of the way in which the BBC, with its penchant for ‘South Bank’ religion was allowing itself to be used as a launching platform for the ‘new morality’’.
Essentially, Mrs Whitehouse's argument was that ‘traditional’ Christian morals were no longer adequately presented on television, and that a new radical theological orthodoxy was in the ascendant.
The result of this change was that one could no longer rely on notions of ‘sinfulness’ being used with regard to certain acts.
Particularly important in this context for Mrs Whitehouse was the position adopted by the representatives of the Church:
My objection was not to discussion of the subject, but to the refusal of those who might be expected to be clear and able spokesmen of the Church to commit themselves to a firm position on right and wrong.
The programme remains as a landmark in the creation of the ‘permissive society’ and a classic example of the power of television to create and change patterns of thought and behaviour.
Mrs Whitehouse clearly felt that the religious spokespersons should be able to deal in terms of‘moral absolutes’.
‘Right’ and ‘wrong’are, for her, immutables drawn from religious teaching, which are necessary as a context for sex education, and around which a previously existing consensus was being subverted by ‘propagandists’for ‘permissiveness’.
Mrs Whitehouse was also centrally involved in two major public campaigns which had at their heart questions of sex education and, in particular, what children should be shown or told.
The first campaign centred around a sex education film entitled Growing Up , made by a Dr Martin Cole, of Birmingham University.
The film was controversial for its explicitness.
It contained a 15-second sequence of copulation, and shots of male and female masturbation.
According to Mrs Whitehouse, it not only condoned, but advocated, teenage sex, and finally ‘brought out into the open, in no uncertain fashion, the nature of the contemporary assault upon the young and upon the ethical structure which should support them’.
Mrs Whitehouse's response is an interesting one.
She wrote to the then Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Michael Ramsay and, in her own words, issued a challenge to him.
She asked him whether he would see the film and ‘issue a statement about it both to encourage anxious parents and to ensure that the Church was seen to be caring about the matter’.
The reason for approaching the Archbishop in such a manner was essentially to ‘force his hand’ as, according to Mrs Whitehouse, he had frequently seemed unwilling to become involved in public debates on questions of morals.
Having complained on several occasions of the Church's reticence over taking the moral lead, on this occasion her plea was successful.
The Archbishop did issue a statement condemning the film as ‘diverging from Christian ideas of education’.
The female teacher who took part in the film lost her job, and the film itself was never shown in schools.
The second campaign was one already touched upon, that against The Little Red Schoolbook .
As has already been suggested, the 20-page section on sex was the subject of most of the furore.
The book is quite explicit, and at no point does it describe practices as ‘right’ or ‘wrong’.
It was viewed by Mrs Whitehouse as ‘another threat to the rights, the security and the character of the child’.
The ‘rights’ she is referring to are, she would suggest, rights to ‘innocence’, and the ‘security’of moral certainty.
The  book's candid discussion of sexual matters, the fact that it was aimed at children as young as eight, and the lack of a Christian moral framework — as well as its perceived ‘revolutionary’ nature which will be discussed later — all therefore contributed to its downfall.
Mrs Whitehouse believed that sex education, and in particular, discussion of sexual issues on television was coming to be dominated by atheists and humanists, with a concomitant decrease in emphasis on the ‘proper’ moral context of sexual behaviour.
This moral context would, for Mrs Whitehouse, stress the need for chastity, for an avoidance of pre-marital sex or ‘trial marriage’, an emphasis on marital fidelity, as well as, by implication perhaps, support for the view of homosexuality as ‘unnatural’.
LATER CAMPAIGNS: BLASPHEMY AND HOMOSEXUALITY
In 1976, a Danish film-maker called Jens Jorgen Thorsen came to Britain with the intention of making a film, provisionally entitled The Many Faces of Jesus .
The intended film was to be about the sex life of Christ, and supposedly was to involve both heterosexual and homosexual acts.
Given the outlook of Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA, it is not surprising that, on learning of Thorsen's intention to film in Britain, immediate action was taken.
Mrs Whitehouse wrote on behalf of the NVALA to the then Home Secretary, Roy Jenkins, asking if he would declare Thorsen an ‘undesirable alien’, to which they received a negative reply.
Opposition to the film was, however, building up more generally, with many column inches in the national press devoted to the story, and to indignant letters from outraged readers.
Both Cardinal Hume and the Archbishop of Canterbury declared their intention to fight the making of the film, and the Prime Minister declared that Thorsen would be ‘a most unwelcome and undesirable visitor to these shores’.
If this list of opponents to the film makes impressive reading, then it was soon to become even more so.
In response to a letter from an NVALA member, the Queen replied expressing her concern that such an ‘obnoxious’ film might be made in Britain.
The NVALA got hold of a copy of the proposed script for the film, arranged to have it translated, and sent a copy on request to the Shadow Home Secretary, William Whitelaw.
Another request was made by the NVALA that Thorsen should not be admitted to the country, and he was indeed excluded ‘on the grounds that [his]exclusion [was]conducive to the public good’, when he tried to enter early the following year.
At what should have been a time to reflect on a most successful campaign to unite both Church and public in defence of fundamental Christian belief, Mrs Whitehouse was ‘rocked’ by the breaking of another controversy.
This one, however, was to be far more personally taxing for  Mrs Whitehouse, for the apparent consensus of opinion that surrounded her campaign against Thorsen evaporated as quickly as it had developed.
In November 1976, Mrs Whitehouse first came across edition 96 of Gay News .
It contained a poem by James Kirkup entitled ‘The Love That Dares to Speak Its Name’.
The title of the poem was a reference to a poem by Lord Alfred Douglas entitled ‘The Love That Dare Not Speak Its Name’.
Tracey and Morrison describe the poem and its general tenor as follows:
The deletion of the negative by Kirkup matched well the new more assertively public attitude of homosexuals in the 1960s and 1970s; his means, the depiction of a homosexual relationship between a Roman centurion and the crucified body of Christ, depicted in the most physical sensual terms, was nothing if not polemical.
It even raised adverse comments within the correspondence columns of Gay News itself.
Mrs Whitehouse's response was again immediate, and she says that she thought that the poem was ‘like the recrucifixion of Christ, only this time with twentieth-century weapons’.
She wrote straight to her solicitor, and by the end of the month had applied to a judge of the High Court for leave to institute a criminal prosecution for blasphemous libel.
There are two facets of the campaign that are important for the discussion here.
The first is Mrs Whitehouse's relationship with, and attitude toward, the Church, and in particular the Church leaders' response, or lack of response, to the claimed blasphemy of the poem, in contrast to the Church's response in the Thorsen case.
The second is Mrs Whitehouse's attitude to homosexuality and homosexuals, which became quite a major issue during the course of the case.
The poem, and the editor of Gay News , Denis Lemon, were vigorously defended in public by, among others, the National Secular Society, the Rationalist Press Association, and the Defence of Literature and the Arts Society.
Mrs Whitehouse, in turn, began to organise those organisations on whom she felt she could count for support.
She wrote to the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, but both declined to appear as witnesses in the trial, Dr Coggan arguing that a jury were far more likely to be influenced by ordinary people testifying to the poem's blasphemous nature than by ‘professional’ Church leaders.
Mrs Whitehouse, in her account of the campaign, argued that the real reason why they did not wish to become involved was because of the topic of the poem — homosexuality — rather than its blasphemy.
The Church, then, neither publicly condemned the poem, provided explicit support for Mrs Whitehouse, nor even appeared able to produce a united front in response to the prosecution.
Mrs Whitehouse consequently felt particularly isolated:
In no way could I ever have imagined that this poem could have done anything but rouse the Church to action.
Now I find myself alone — that is irrelevant in terms of what happens to me, but for the idea that the Lord was homosexual, and for the perverted practices on his dead body not to be seen to be blasphemous if the case is lost — about that I am lost for words!
Although on several previous occasions Mrs Whitehouse had felt that either the response, or the public face that the Church presented was unsatisfactory — for example over the Honest to God debate — this case, with the vociferous support for Gay News , made her feel particularly vulnerable.
At the finish, Lemon was found guilty, and received a suspended prison sentence.
Mrs Whitehouse proclaimed herself very happy with the outcome, although she had no wish for Lemon to be jailed.
Tracey and Morrison suggest that what she was trying to achieve in bringing the prosecution ‘lay not in punishing Lemon, nor in a sense bringing back to life the blasphemy laws.
Both those were necessary means towards a much more profound end, which was re-establishing the role of God within social life.’
The Gay News Defence Committee organised many forms of protest, including a march and meeting in Trafalgar Square which attracted 5,000 people.
Mrs Whitehouse was portrayed in many circles as being anti-homosexual.
This opposition, she felt, was orchestrated by the ‘homosexual/humanist/intellectual lobby'-adding homosexual to the usual list — who were well organised and united in a way the Church was seen not to be.
Mrs Whitehouse's attitude to homosexuals and homosexuality, though, is somewhat more complex than was perhaps allowed for at the time.
She sets out her position in detail in her book Whatever Happened To Sex?(1977), and repeats it in full in A Most Dangerous Woman?(1982) in her own defence.
She is also quoted at length by Tracey and Morrison (1979).
What she wrote is worth repeating here:
When I say what is true — that I am not against homosexuals as people, but believe homosexual practices to be wrong, I am very conscious of the inadequacy of what probably sounds a very negative declaration.
Homosexuals have as much right to be understood, to be treated with compassionate love as the rest of us.
And as people they should be ‘judged’ no more, no less, than are those of us whose problems are perhaps less obvious but equally undesirable.
Compassion without patronage, but without compromise — how to achieve it?
The natural repugnance which most people feel when homosexuality and lesbianism is mentioned can result in a harshness of attitude and thinking, which is, at least, unhelpful and certainly as unChristian as the perverse practices which are condemned.
But to go to the other extreme and elevate people suffering from such abnormalities into a norm for society not only threatens society but is dangerous to the individuals themselves, since it excludes them from the consideration of help and treatment.
Society to its shame, once hurled that word at the homosexual.
In our crazy ‘value — free’ society the ‘shame’is now attached only to those who dare to say that homosexuality is less than ‘gay’.
Such an attitude is as dogmatic, doctrinal and restrictive in its own way as was the fearful silence or sniggering scorn of earlier decades.
Mrs Whitehouse was accused at many points of being motivated by ‘hatred’ of homosexuals and, whilst the extract suggests that her attitude was not one of ‘hatred’— indeed far from it — by including in her attitude to homosexuality such words as: undesirable, repugnant, perverse, suffering and abnormal, it is also easy to see how the gay community might be less than happy with the description.
Mrs Whitehouse's position was, then, that homosexual behaviour was abnormal and sinful.
Given that, as Tracey and Morrison point out, her stance on sin would also involve condemning a number of heterosexual practices — her position was not simply something that was specifically ‘anti-homosexual’.
Her attack on the poem in Gay News was an attempt to reassert the importance of Christianity, to reestablish the centrality of ‘traditional’ Christian teaching, which would provide the moral basis for a society in which homosexuality would be once again viewed by all as perverse, yet requiring of sympathy and treatment.
Homosexuality, though, was, not really the target.
It was the ‘symbol’ of a wider goal:
Whitehouse's was not primarily an attack on homosexuals: it was in the first instance an attack on the imputation of a sexual context to Christ's death; in the second it was a confrontation with an anti-Christian and, to her, sexually-obsessed society, and it was this latter symbolic aspect to the events of the blasphemy trial which was the main point.
The issue of ‘homosexual practices’ was to rise again in another case in which Whitehouse was a central figure.
In 1980 the National Theatre staged a play entitled The Romans in Britain in which there is a scene where three Roman soldiers sodomise a young Briton.
The scene caused quite a stir, and although there were threats about grants being withdrawn etc., there was no talk of prosecution.
Mrs Whitehouse was determined that something should be done, and arranged for a QC to visit the theatre and watch a performance.
John Smyth QC reported to Mrs Whitehouse that, ‘having seen the play I have no doubt whatever that a prima facie case exists that a criminal  offence has been committed’.
An application was then made to the Attorney-General for permission to take action, but this was turned down.
The solution to this problem was for Mrs Whitehouse personally to take a private prosecution of the play's director, Michael Bogdanov.
The statute chosen for the prosecution was the Sexual Offences Act, under which it is a criminal offence to procure persons for acts of gross indecency in a public place.
The hearing was held at Horseferry Road Magistrates Court where it was eventually decided that there was a case to answer, and Bogdanov was committed for trial.
The trial did not last long, for once the Judge decided that public performance in the theatre was in fact covered by the Sexual Offences Act, 1967, and that Mrs Whitehouse was therefore able to bring a prosecution, the case was withdrawn.
There was some confusion in court as to whether a private prosecution can be withdrawn once it has been decided that there is a case to answer.
In the end, the Attorney-General issued a nolle prosequi and the case came to an end.
Much was made in the press of the sudden climax to the case.
Some argued that the case had been brought to an early end as there was little chance of the prosecution being successful, others suggesting that the case had in all but final verdict already been won.
Mrs Whitehouse suggests that having achieved what she argues they set out to do — show that the Sexual Offences Act covered all ‘public’ acts of gross indecency, including simulated acts in the theatre — it would have been oppressive to have continued a private prosecution against the director of the play.
This is not inconsistent with statements made by Mrs Whitehouse in previous cases.
As was shown at, for example, the close of the Gay News case, Mrs Whitehouse suggested that she was pleased that the paper's editor, Denis Lemon, was not sent to prison for she had nothing against him personally.
However, what is slightly more problematic than the end of the prosecution is why it was brought in the first place.
In the previous two cases considered above, it was explicit attacks upon the Church that prompted action by Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA, but there was no such dimension in the Romans case.
Mrs Whitehouse explains the rationale thus:
I have felt troubled because I am lacking in regard to‘The Romans’ prosecution the same sense of identification with Jesus that I felt in the blasphemy case.
That was very personal; this is not.
But of course they are quite different by their very nature.
Last time it was an expression of love, this time a matter of law.
Which brings me to the heart of the matter — how important is it to God that the law is upheld?
In that such material on stage degrades not only those who play but those who watch — it is important.
I need to see this action as one step — even if we lose it will  perhaps serve to show the nation how far it has fallen, that it no longer is concerned that such things happen in its midst.
For Mrs Whitehouse the case was but one step in the attempt to preserve our ‘national morality’ and our ‘culture’.
Many cases documented in the following chapters on obscenity, in which Mrs Whitehouse was involved, be it either centrally or peripherally, may, quite unlike the Gay News or Thorsen cases, have no direct or obvious link with Christianity.
Both those cases involved blasphemies, Mrs Whitehouse felt, and therefore there was no question in her mind that she would become involved.
To understand her involvement in the cases where there is no such link, it is to her explanation of her involvement in the Romans case to which one must turn.
Each of these campaigns must be viewed, as she says, ‘as one step’ towards the protection of traditional values and morals, and the re-establishment of a society in which those values are paramount.
CHRISTIANITY AND POLITICS
There are a number of connections between elements in the Whitehouse/NVALA philosophy and aspects of the relationship between law and morality described by Lord Devlin in The Enforcement of Morals .
In both, it is assumed that the criminal law can and should be used to protect or to reinforce moral principles.
In both, it is argued that the basis of moral principles in this has been, is and should be, Christianity.
A third connection between the two is the importance attached to the notion of a ‘shared morality’.
Lord Devlin argued in The Enforcement of Morals that a shared morality is necessary for the continued existence of society, an assumption also central to Parsonian sociology.
This is the manner in which he justifies legal intervention.
For if a shared morality is necessary in this sense, then anything which threatens it also threatens society, and the law may therefore be used to protect it.
Hart, in criticising Devlin's position, suggested that his conception of morality was like that of a ‘seamless web’ where attacks on one part were seen as threatening the life of the whole.
A closer look at the Whitehouse/NVALA stance on the ‘politics of morality’ makes visible a somewhat similar position.
Turning once more to the campaign surrounding The Little Red Schoolbook this point should become clear.
Mrs Whitehouse, as has been shown, drew the attention of the DPP to The Little Red Schoolbook (LRSB)as soon as it was published in Britain, arguing that it was a ‘threat to the rights, the security and the character of the child’.
For Mrs Whitehouse and her supporters, publications such as this were dangerous not only because of their sexual content, but  because of their political stance.
Mrs Whitehouse, for example, says she received a phone call at the time of the case from an evangelist who was travelling in Denmark.
The evangelist had managed to obtain an affidavit from one of the three Danes responsible for the publication of LRSB but who had since become a Christian, stating that ‘Mao money’ had financed the publication of the book in Denmark.
Ross McWhirter, a supporter of the NVALA and a campaigner in his own right, wrote to the Guardian and made the point even more clearly.
He said ‘the real issue is, in my submission, that the book is not only obscene, but also seditious’.
The link between what are referred to as ‘sexual anarchists’(for example, David Tribe of the National Secular Society) and ‘political anarchists’(for example , the publishers of the LRSB ) is one that is frequently made in Mrs Whitehouse's writings.
Her concern is not a narrow one of how sexual matters should be treated and presented, but how one is to construct and preserve a society in which the dominant values are Judaeo-Christian.
The campaign against the LRSB illustrates this well:
It is part of our thesis that sexual and political revolution go hand in hand and that indeed the first is prerequisite of the second.
That The Little Red Schoolbook was a revolutionary primer there can be no question.
Morality is attacked for political reasons, she argues, and the political beliefs at the core of the attack are fundamentally anti-Christian.
Political and sexual revolution is a recurrent theme in Mrs Whitehouse's books and articles.
Whilst she frequently attacks Marxism and Communism, it is not simple political opposition, but rather an attack on what she sees as the effects of the spread of Marxism for Christianity, for ‘it is of no mean significance that the secular/humanist/Marxist philosophy makes the destruction of Christianity one of its main priorities.
It understands its importance in relation to character and morale, to the standard of values and behaviour.’
Not only does Mrs Whitehouse believe that Christianity is under threat from political revolution, but also that it is the last line of defence against such revolution.
The ‘permissive revolution’ was, for Mrs Whitehouse, in many ways a political revolution.
In her terms, there was a plot by — whatever one might wish to call them — Marxists, Communists, Humanists, Libertarians, etc. to transform society.
This revolutionary change would be achieved most simply by attacking moral standards and promoting sexual revolution.
Whitehouse considered moral order to be synonymous with Christian moral principles, and therefore any attack on the former was perceived as being an attack on the latter.
The full-scale attack which she believed to be taking place was therefore seen as a fundamental and all-encompassing attack upon Christianity.
There were, of course, many very clear signs that organised religion was feeling the effects of rapid social change, and this served to reinforce the general philosophical position adopted by people such as Mary Whitehouse.
Max Caulfield, in his biography of Mrs Whitehouse, sums up the argument in one sentence, saying ‘as to the purpose of all this frenzy it was easy to explain that the forces of revolution, unable to achieve their objectives at the ballot box or, because of the existence of the nuclear bomb, by full-scale war, were endeavouring to encourage moral decay’.
How does Mrs Whitehouse make the connection between sexual and political revolution?
She has, she suggests, ample evidence from history.
One example that she uses is Nazi Germany:
Both before, and when, the Nazis took over Poland they flooded the bookstalls of that country with pornography.
This is a fact.
Why did they do so?
Because they believed — and we had better believe it also — that if they could make individuals conscious only of the need for personal gratification, they would have neither desire nor energy to combine and work for the downfall of the enemy.
The Nazis' scheme was the deliberate use of pornography as the means of social castration.
Having established both the ‘purpose’ of revolution, and the existence of what appears to be ‘revolutionary change’, the final task is to find the revolutionaries.
A number of people who have been singled out by Mrs Whitehouse as playing particularly crucial roles in the process of supposedly ‘permissive change’ have already been mentioned.
Perhaps one person in that list, however, stands out, as representing in the early 1970s almost all that Mrs Whitehouse was fighting against.
Richard Neville, one of the editors of OZ , was referred to frequently by Mrs Whitehouse, as a revolutionary.
She has made much of statements made by Neville, and has quoted him as saying that ‘the weapons of revolution are obscenity, blasphemy and drugs’ and as further saying during the OZ trial that the whole point of pornography was to promote promiscuity.
In the passage quoted from Whatever Happened to Sex?when Richard Neville was discussed above, Mrs Whitehouse described his book Playpower as ‘the handbook of the international drop-outs’, the purpose of the underground as ‘not so much to dissent as to disrupt’ and the implicit and explicit goal contained in OZ editorial policies as the overthrow of society.
Whether or not the likes of Richard Neville were accurately described in this manner by Mrs Whitehouse and other members of what Neville and his associates perceived to be the ‘establishment’, or whether they could genuinely be described in Cohen's (1988) terms as ‘folk devils’, ‘persons emerging to become defined as a threat to societal values and interests’, it is clear that, for Mrs Whitehouse, they represented a grave threat to all that she held  dear.
As has been suggested, it was particularly the perceived threat to the importance of organised religion that they represented which galvanized Mrs Whitehouse and others into action.
In the course of this discussion it is Christianity, and the Christian basis of ‘moral values’ which have emerged as the key to understanding Mrs Whitehouse's and the NVALA's response to the cultural, social and political transformations occurring in post-war Britain.
Included in this overview have been the campaigns against the Thorsen film and James Kirkup's poem in Gay News , where blasphemy was the central explicit issue; Mrs Whitehouse's criticism of television, in particular the BBC's supposed bias toward ‘South Bank’ theology, and Till Death Us Do Part 's irreverence towards Christianity; the perceived lack of support for the NVALA from Church leaders.
It has also been suggested that there were many signs available to Mrs Whitehouse that, in her terms, all was not well within the Church, and that this reinforced her view that the established order was under threat, and that urgent action was necessary.
THE NEW MORALITY
Perhaps the most symbolically significant event in the general area of religion and morals in the early 1960s — if not the whole period under discussion — was the publication of John Robinson's Honest to God in 1963.
The ‘radical theology’ contained in the book formed the basis of the movement called ‘situational ethics’which proposed that ‘our moral decisions must be guided by the actual relationships between the persons concerned at a particular time in a particular situation, and compassion for persons overrides all law.
The only intrinsic evil is lack of love.’
For Mrs Whitehouse, the publication of Honest to God , although it was only one — albeit significant — event, was a key moment in the emergence of what both she and John Robinson described as ‘the new morality’.
Mrs Whitehouse felt that this ‘new morality’ was given far too much publicity and even support by the BBC, particularly at the expense of the proponents and supporters of ‘traditional Christian ethics’.
She identifies a ‘golden age’ of broadcasting, which was essentially contemporaneous with the ‘Reithian’era at the BBC, where some sort of Christian moral absolutism held sway.
With the continued rise of secular attitudes, it became increasingly apparent to the Church — or certain sections of it — that it was, or was in danger of, becoming ever more marginal or peripheral to contemporary social concerns.
There were basically two major responses: firstly by those who tried, in a manner similar to Mrs Whitehouse, to re-establish the importance of the Church through a critique of contemporary social forms.
That is, Mrs Whitehouse and the traditionalists within the Church were extremely  critical of what they perceived to be the ‘character’ of modern society, and their solution was largely backward-looking, dominated by the desire for the retrieval of a ‘bygone golden age’where traditional religious teachings and the Church generally were a more central part of the social fabric.
The second response was more forward-looking and concentrated on presenting the Church in a manner that would be more acceptable to, more relevant to, and essentially more ‘in-tune’ with contemporary social concerns.
These more ‘radical’ theologians formed the basis of the intellectual group that was identified with the ‘new morality’.
For Mrs Whitehouse, this radical theology constituted a new moral orthodoxy, and one which, in an inaccurate paraphrasing of John Robinson's argument, it was believed that ‘God is Dead’.
Here Mrs Whitehouse spells out the message:
One would imagine that it is a long, long way from the Church to Soho.
But most certainly the road to the latter, with its decadence and exploitation, has been made a great deal smoother, shorter and more popular by the compromise and self-interest of the clerics and assorted fellow travellers of the so-called ‘new morality’ school.
The permissive society did not begin with the publication of Dr John Robinson's Honest To God but this certainly smote the ramparts of the established Church which, until that point, had been seen — mostly with approval — as the defender of the faith and of public and private morality.
According to Mrs Whitehouse, there was a time not so long ago when the Church was, and was seen to be, the defender of both public and private morality.
Thanks to, among others, John Robinson and the radical theologians, however, the way has been paved for humanist concerns to become more widely accepted and for the established Church to lose its importance in the areas of both public and private morality.
This is also the essence of Mrs Whitehouse's campaigns.
Her long-term goal is the re-establishment of a society in which the Church once more occupies this central role.
The 1960s seemed to her, and her supporters, to be a watershed in the history of Christianity.
For Mrs Whitehouse it seemed that the Church was under a concerted attack and that, if it was not vigorously defended, then there would be nothing to prevent ‘the tide of permissiveness’ or the advance of the ‘new morality’.
Publications in the 1960s, such as Honest to God and Toward a Quaker View of Sex , represented for her the encroachment or infiltration of a new moral orthodoxy into the Church itself.
As has been suggested, the existence, seemingly side by side, of two distinct moral codes — a traditional Christian position and the ‘new morality’— and the public ‘battle’ between the two, as new ideas came into conflict with old, gave the impression to many that the Church could no longer present a  united front.
For those like Mrs Whitehouse, who believed in the importance of moral absolutes and moral certainty, this was a crucial period.
The Church appeared no longer to be the guiding force that she believed it once had been, and felt it ought still to be.
Ha aim has been to return British society to that former ‘golden age’.
OTHER MORAL ENTREPRENEURS
The National Viewers' and Listeners' Association is by no means the only ‘moral entrepreneurial’ group of this sort, although it is one of the most long-standing, and it has, through Mary Whitehouse, generally achieved a higher profile than many of the others.
During the period under discussion there have been a considerable number of such pressure groups — for example, the Nationwide Festival of Light; the Order of Christian Unity; the Responsible Society; the Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child, LIFE, as well as a host of other, smaller groups — most of which actually originated in this period.
The Nationwide Festival of Light (NFoL) developed largely as a result of the work of one person, Peter Hill, an evangelical Christian who, on returning to this country after several years abroad, was shocked to find explicit sexual material on open sale.
He believed that there should be some form of demonstration against such displays and set about organising the ‘march for righteousness’.
This was to be a ‘one-off’ event and was not conceived of as the beginning of a moral protest movement or group.
The Festival of Light rally — the name had been thought up by Malcolm Muggeridge — took place in Trafalgar Square in September 1971, and attracted between 25,000–30,000 people.
The success of the one-off rally prolonged the life of the movement and although it kept its basically evangelical outlook for a couple of years, Roy Wallis suggests that the likes of Peter Hill began to be replaced by a leadership that was ‘more directly concerned with the civic-political aspects of moral reform, rather than with evangelism.’
With the changing outlook of its leadership, the NFoL's early concentration upon opposing pornography broadened out into a general opposition to the modern permissive society.
As with the NVALA, it was a return to what was perceived as a now lost age of Christian orthodoxy that was being sought:
Literature distributed at the rally and the speeches from the platform stressed respect for the Ten Commandments, deplored the loss of a firm traditional moral stand by national leaders, and called for a return to Christian moral standards, buttressed by firm legal controls and sanctions.
The Nationwide Festival of Light is still in existence, although it has by now even outgrown its original name.
In 1983 it became known as CARE (Christian Action Research and Education).
The name change was necessary, it was argued, because the original name referred to a single event that had taken place over a decade previously, that it gave the wrong image, and didn't properly describe the work being done by the organisation.
The stated aims of the organisation continue to be those originally associated with the NFoL, namely: ‘the advancement and propagation of the Christian Gospel in particular as it bears on or  affects national or individual morality and ethics’.
Another organisation whose concerns and objectives have changed and broadened during this period is the Order of Christian Unity (OCU).
Founded in the 1950s to encourage ecumenicalism, by the early 1970s the OCU had become a campaigning moral protest group, opposing abortion, liberal divorce laws, and seeking the ‘advancement of Christian values’ in education and broadcasting.
The Responsible Society is the one organisation working in this general field that is not explicitly Christian in outlook.
Indeed, in proclaiming its independence, the Responsible Society argues that it is not affiliated to any political party, pressure group or religious body.
Whilst it does not have the theological aims of the NVALA, the NFoL/CARE or the OCU, it still appears to have developed in response or opposition to many of the same social trends highlighted by those other groups.
The Responsible Society was formed in 1971 by a group of people ‘concerned about the damage being done to human dignity, welfare and happiness by the misuse of new social freedoms’.
One of their original sponsors was Pamela Hansford Johnson.
‘Sexual irresponsibility’ is the Society's major concern and their aim is to encourage responsible sexual behaviour through education.
Such behaviour is seen as taking place within ‘the basic unit of society’, the family, ‘which is founded on marriage’.
In a pamphlet entitled ‘Saying NO isn't always easy…!’, the message is that ‘casual sex’ should not be confused with sexual liberation:
Real freedom comes from being true to your real beliefs.
Saying ‘no’ isn't negative —‘no’to ‘having sex’is saying ‘yes’to a real caring relationship for the future.
Sex is only really fulfilling when it's part of the total commitment of marriage.
Responsible behaviour, they suggest — and this is another point of contact between their views and those of the NVALA, the NFoL, etc. — is also firmly heterosexual.
They accuse the gay community of propagandising and leading the young to believe that, if they're actively heterosexual, then they must be repressing their homosexuality.
‘Don't be fooled’, they warn, ‘It's rarely a biological condition.
It's more a matter of conditioning.
You don't have to be gay.’
What, if anything, connects these groups?
They all arose, or at least underwent significant transformations, in the period generally described as the ‘permissive age’.
They are all oppositional in character.
Although they vary either in their particular concerns or in the foci of their campaigns — even the Responsible Society, which states that it does not take part in demonstrations and public protests, campaigns through its literature — it was ‘permissiveness’ or their particular interpretation or conception of permissiveness that was the galvanizing force behind their development.
The central concern for all these groups is with what they perceive to be declining moral standards.
THE EMERGENCE OF MORAL CAMPAIGNS
It is not immediately obvious why moral campaigns should have developed in post-war Britain.
Why should organisations such as the NFoL, the NVALA and others have developed when they did?
A number of authors, whose work will be considered below, have attempted explanations largely in terms of social class.
It is suggested that support for such organisations is drawn disproportionately from the middle class, and in particular those sections of the middle class that feel most at threat from the structural changes taking place in contemporary British society.
Other authors have suggested that it has been the process of secularisation which has been most central in giving rise to moral protest groups.
The final attempts at explanation have been in terms of‘cultural defence’ and see moral protest groups arising in response to broader cultural changes, as opposed to changes in class structure or the role of religion.
Examinations of the development of protest groups such as the NVALA invariably begin with the work of Howard Becker and his notion of ‘moral entrepreneurship’.
Moral entrepreneurs engage in the process of establishing moral rules by attempting to define certain actions or forms of behaviour as deviant.
As such, the term has been seen as being a particularly appropriate description for the endeavours of organisations involved in ‘moral protest’.
Perhaps the most widely quoted and influential study of ‘moral entrepreneurship’ is Joseph Gusfield's study of the American Temperance Movement.
Building on Weber's conception of ‘status’ and the way in which such social honour is differentially distributed between social groups, Gusfield notes that, at times of (rapid) social change, certain groups may experience an increase or loss of social honour.
During periods of change such as this, what he refers to as ‘status movements’ may emerge which attempt, through symbolic rather than instrumental means, to  increase or simply maintain the prestige or honour of a particular social group.
Using this approach, moral reform movements are viewed as a form of status politics.
By seeking support for a set of values or beliefs, the social honour of the group(s) that adhere to them is symbolically affirmed.
Gusfield does not suggest, however, that all moral reform movements are identical in approach and he distinguishes between two basic types.
The first he refers to as ‘assimilative’, the second as ‘coercive’.
The first, as is implied by its name, is sympathetic and persuasive, attempting to ‘convert the deviant’ to the dominant way of thinking and behaving.
The coercive approach to moral reform, however, seeks either to change the law, or at least, to invoke legal sanctions in its attempt to reaffirm the status attached to a particular social group or class.
The assimilative approach, Gusfield suggests, is associated with groups that are largely secure, where the values and opinions they hold either are, or are perceived to be, supported by the majority of the population.
Coercive reform is associated with groups that feel threatened, with groups that feel their social superiority is being challenged or diminished.
In his study of the Women's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU), Gusfield argued that the movement shifted from assimilative to coercive reform as the old middle class lost ground to upwardly mobile immigrant groups and the new middle classes.
As such, temperance became a significant symbolic difference between the old and the new:
The establishment of Prohibition laws was a battle in the struggle for status between two divergent styles of life….
A function of Temperance activities was to enhance the symbolic properties of liquor and abstinence as marks of status.
The important word here is symbolic.
According to the argument, it was the passing of the law that was important to the reformers, not how effectively it was enforced afterwards.
The values and beliefs of the reformers were enshrined in the law; ‘it was their law that the drinkers had to avoid.’
As Gusfield argued:
Status issues function as vehicles through which a non-economic group has deference conferred upon it or degradation conferred upon it.
Victory in issues of status is the symbolic conferral of respect upon the norms of the victor and disrespect upon the norms of the vanquished.
A certain similarity may be noted here between Gusfield's interpretation of the aims of the WCTU and Mrs Whitehouse's explanation for some of her own actions.
Of all the campaigns Mrs Whitehouse has been involved in, one of the most contentious was the private prosecution of Michael Bogdanov over The Romans in Britain .
What was particularly contentious  was the way in which the prosecution was eventually withdrawn.
Although she was accused of backing down, Mrs Whitehouse firmly suggested that she had achieved what she set out to do, i.e. to show that certain acts could be defined as indecent within the parameters of the law as it stood.
There can be little doubt that this was in essence for Mrs Whitehouse a symbolic or political victory.
The intention behind Mrs Whitehouse's actions was not that Bogdanov should be punished, but that the values and beliefs espoused by the NVALA should be seen to be supported, to be successfully and, above all, publicly defended from attack.
Suggesting, however, that the notion of ‘symbolic politics’ as used by Gusfield may be pertinent in some respects for an analysis of the campaigns of the NVALA and comparable groups, is not to argue that the full-blown theory of status politics used to explain the rise of the WCTU in the United States can be simply and completely applied to the ‘moral crusades’of the so-called ‘permissive era’in Britain.
Although other American sociologists such as Zurcher and Kirkpatrick have (not uncritically) applied Gusfield's theory to contemporary anti-pornography movements, the most recent attempts at explaining the rise of groups such as the NVALA and the NFoL have been very critical of the theory of status defence.
Wallis originally explained the rise of the NVALA in terms very similar to those used by Gusfield.
He has, however, in his more recent writings on this subject, repudiated this earlier position.
Wallis is critical of Gusfield for failing to provide evidence of motivation in his study of WCTU participants in the movement.
Whilst, on the surface, Gusfield's argument may seem a plausible one, Wallis argues that ‘there are clearly other grounds for moral indignation than resentment at lost status’.
He suggests that Gusfield fails to provide evidence of such motivation in the accounts of movement participants.
Indeed, Wallis argues that these would in fact be most unlikely.
Wallis further throws doubt on Gusfield's claim that he had in fact identified a status group.
Much of the evidence, indeed, suggests that a substantial section of support for the WCTU came from the working class, and that it was not  homogeneously white, Anglo-Saxon, Protestant, old middle class as Gusfield claims.
Far from identifying a ‘status group’, Wallis argues that in fact the WCTU were in fact a ‘cultural group’.
Their crusade was to preserve a particular style of life, or culture, from increasing erosion in American society.
This he refers to as ‘cultural defence’.
Although Wallis is extremely critical of Gusfield's theory of ‘status defence’, his own notion of ‘cultural defence’ is linked to Gusfield's through Weber's conception of ‘status groups’.
Thus, whilst Wallis and Gusfield disagree over the likely causes of resentment, both appear to be identifying ‘status groups’ as central to moral campaigns.
Wallis' identification of ‘style of life’ as the crucial component of moral entrepreneurial  groups is also a characteristic of ‘status groups’as identified by Weber.
Such ‘status groups’, he suggests, engage in ‘cultural defence’, which he describes as follows:
There is no reason to believe that an increasing disparity between the standards of morality and behaviour which one has grown up to believe were true and right and those displayed and legitimated in the surrounding society can not of itself provide the ground for commitment to a movement of moral reform.
One fundamental question remains, however.
That is, why is it that some people rather than others who experience the type of disparity described above become committed to a movement for moral reform?
The hypothesis put forward by Gusfield, that it is those people who have experienced status erosion who become committed, remains at least a priori plausible.
This is not to say that Wallis' notion of ‘cultural defence’ loses any value it may have.
Rather, it is to say that Gusfield's theory may continue to have explanatory power, particularly with regard to the initial motivation of participants in such a movement, and that where Wallis' work is important is in pointing to the cultural concerns that may also underpin the rise of specific moral entrepreneurial groups.
The earlier part of the chapter sought to describe in some detail the major concerns articulated by Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA, the most basic of which, it was suggested, revolved around the perceived declining centrality of organised religion in British social life.
The NVALA's long-term goal has been the re-establishment of a society in which the Church once more occupies a central role.
This basic argument tallies with the general thesis put forward by Tracey and Morrison in their study of Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA.
Those authors suggest:
What is clear is that for [Whitehouse]and others like her, there is a determination to restore a Christian culture to Britain, and in that battle the greater availability of sexually explicit cultural forms, the easier access to abortion and divorce, the legitimation of homosexuality between consenting adults and so on are developments which must at all costs not only be stemmed but at some ill-defined date in the future actually reversed.
It is a crusade to recapture Jerusalem, nothing short of a call for a new theocracy.
What Tracey and Morrison argue, although they do not use terminology derived from Gusfield or Wallis, is that the discrete campaigns engaged in by Mrs Whitehouse and the NVALA were important symbolic battles in a larger cultural ‘war’.
It is a movement of ‘cultural fundamentalism’ dedicated to the reassertion of ‘traditional’values in the face of massive cultural change and, in particular, the process of secularisation.
There is ample evidence on which to argue, following Wallis and others, that the NVALA's campaigns should, in the first instance, be viewed as shot through with ‘cultural fundamentalism’.
The same almost certainly applies to the NFoL, the OCU and even to the Responsible Society although their focus is a secularised version of the NVALA's.
The concern of these groups has grown in response to a perceived widening of the gap between cherished moral values and actual day-to-day behaviour.
Their general aim has been to recreate a perceived ‘golden age’, to secure a return to a status quo ante, where, they believe, divorce rates were low, children respectful of adult authority and, most importantly, where religion was the binding force, the ‘social glue’ which provided moral authority.
Whilst Wallis' notion of ‘cultural defence’ has been utilised here in addition to, rather than in place of, Gusfield's notion of ‘status defence’in accounting for the activities of the NVALA, Wallis' explanation is perhaps not as comprehensive as it might be.
That is, we are provided with only a partial picture of the cultural position that the NVALA are defending.
Whilst the major focus in their campaigns may have been the declining centrality of the Church, the other major reformist concern is explicitly with the family and, by implication at least, with women and youth.
The major ‘victim’ of permissiveness according to Mrs Whitehouse has been ‘the child’.
Indeed, the major underlying concern in debates over pornography, homosexuality, abortion, the age of consent, divorce and drugs during the period under consideration here has been the welfare of children.
By association, therefore, there is a direct link, according to the ideology of groups such as the NVALA, with the role of the mother, and the strength of the family.
As was noted in Chapter one, Stuart Hall has argued that the key interpellated subjects of new legislation in the 1960s were women.
It can further be argued that the principal objects, or targets, of the new legislation were not only women, but also children.
The cultural position being defended by the NVALA consisted of a society governed by a religious moral consensus and also, crucially, built on the back of the traditional nuclear family.
The debate over the family, its constitution and its role, forms a second major focus of organisations such as the NVALA, the NFoL and the Responsible Society.
Indeed, Simon Watney suggests that this ‘concern’ underpins the current so-called ‘panic’over AIDS:
We are not, in fact, living through a distinct coherent and progressing moral panic about AIDS.
Rather, we are witnessing the latest variation in the spectacle of the defensive ideological rearguard action which has been mounted on behalf of‘the family’ for more than a century.
As the Bergers (1984) point out, the ‘family has become a problem’ in contemporary society.
This has not consisted simply of middle-class reformers defining the working-class family as problematic, for which there is a long tradition.
The ideological net has widened so that the idea of ‘the family’ as a given and immutable social unit is no longer accepted, rather, the family is generally problematised.
It is the resolution of this problem that groups such as the NVALA seek.
Their symbolic political struggle is in defence of a cultural order in which there exist strong moral rules to provide solutions to the problems of the appropriate constituents and roles of the family.
Many of the commentators on the ‘permissive era’, discussed in Chapter one, have suggested that it was a period characterised by radical changes in both behaviour and the rules that govern behaviour.
Such commentators have, however, singularly failed to provide evidence to support the first argument, that there were radical changes in behaviour.
And they have too readily assumed that legislative changes, such as the Obscene Publications Act, 1959, the Sexual Offences Act, 1967, the Abortion Act, 1967 and others, are sufficient evidence in support of the second, that the rules governing behaviour changed.
The lasting impression of these accounts is that everyone agrees that there was a ‘permissive age’, or a process of change that can be described as ‘permissive’, but that no-one can actually agree what constituted ‘permissiveness’.
The overview presented here suggests that many things happening in the period were seen as being representative of significant social changes.
These changes were of particular symbolic importance for moral entrepreneurial groups, and brought into sharp relief what appeared to be the declining importance of certain social arrangements concerning the family, and certain moral ideals and values affecting the social significance of Christianity.
Most moral entrepreneurial groups contend that a (partial) sexual revolution has taken place, though little evidence of radical changes in sexual behaviour is forthcoming — other than evidence of a circumstantial kind.
However, legislative change is generally treated by both moral entrepreneurs and other social commentators as being an accurate and reliable index of general changes in ‘standards’ or the rules governing behaviour.
The moral protest groups, by and large, have adopted what Gusfield has termed a ‘coercive’ approach to moral reform.
Several of the legislative changes during or around the 1960s are viewed by them as being ‘permissive’ and as therefore sanctioning many of the forms of behaviour to which they object.
Their response has been to aim for legislative repeal or reform.
The chapters which follow look more closely at some of the relevant legislative changes that took place during this period, and the background and responses to these reforms.
The Wolfenden Report and legislative change
The decade after the end of the Second World War saw a substantial increase in the number of prosecutions for offences such as‘gross indecency’, importuning and indecent assault.
Indeed, the size of the increases, together with the publication of the Kinsey Report in 1948 (which suggested that homosexual behaviour was more widespread than had been commonly thought) and the media-highlighted prosecution of Lord Montagu of Beaulieu on an indecency charge in 1954, culminated in what may reasonably be described as a ‘moral panic’ over homosexuality.
Although it was later denied any truth by Wolfenden, it has been suggested that the immediate post-war period witnessed a ‘witch-hunt’ or ‘purge’of homosexuals.
It has been claimed that the ‘purge’ occurred at the point at which Sir Theobald Mathew, a devout Catholic, was appointed as Director of Public Prosecutions in 1944.
Mathew believed that the war was responsible for an upward trend in homosexual behaviour and, together with Herbert Morrison, a policeman's son, Labour right-winger and Home Secretary in the Attlee Government, sought to put an end to it.
According to Hyde, the ‘purge’ only really took off after the Burgess/Maclean scandal in 1951 when the two diplomats fled to the Soviet Union.
The clampdown was continued by the appointments of Sir John Nott-Boyer as Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police — his stated aim was to ‘rip the cover off all London's filth spots’— and a new Home Secretary, Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe, whose attitude toward homosexuals was that they were, in general, ‘exhibitionists and proselytisers and a danger to others, especially the young.
So long as I hold the office of Home Secretary, I shall give no countenance to the view that they should not be prevented from being such a danger.’
The threat to the ‘young’ mentioned here by the then Home Secretary was probably the fear most frequently expressed by those who later resisted legislative change in this area.
The possible corruption of youth was to be a powerful motif in future campaigns.
In 1953–4, the prosecutions of Lord Montagu, Peter Wildeblood, Robert Croft-Cooke and Michael Pitt-Rivers focused the nation's attention on this campaign.
Their trials, the sentences imposed on them and the police methods that had been used, caused a public outcry and put the government under great pressure.
The increase in the number of prosecutions did not result, however, in a feeling of sympathy for homosexuals, but rather the feeling, as John Wolfenden expressed it, that ‘nobody had any idea how much of it there was…but there was an impression that it was increasing; and there was a feeling that if it was then it ought to be curbed’.
Pressure on the government to intervene had come as early as 1952 with the publication of the Church of England Moral Welfare Council's Report entitled The Problem of Homosexuality which advocated reform of the law.
The Report distinguished between homosexuality as a ‘condition’ and homosexual behaviour, and, although it advocated the removal of the latter from the criminal law, it remained firm in its condemnation of homosexuality.
Not long after its publication, the Montagu trial took place at Winchester Assizes, and the twelve-month prison sentences that he, Wildeblood and Pitt-Rivers received added fuel to the reformist fire:
Regardless of the guilt or innocence of the defendants, of their social status, and of the humanity of the law relating to homosexuality, the Winchester trial provides, by itself, ample reason for an inquiry into the present methods of the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Police.
It also makes abundantly clear the need for a permanent committee…to review and as occasion demands to recommend reforms in the whole of our criminal law and procedure.
Although the New Statesman suggested that it was possible abuses of the law that required assessment, much of the pressure for change, as has been suggested, came from those who viewed with concern what appeared to be the increasing visibility of homosexuality.
As with the area of homosexual conduct, the origin of public concern about prostitution lay, not in some liberal or permissive attitude of tolerance, but in a ‘moral panic’ over what was believed to be the increasing visibility of a form of deviant behaviour, this time over the increasing visibility of prostitutes and prostitution.
John Wolfenden described the feeling well:
…there was increasing public concern at what was regarded as the growing shamelessness of prostitutes, in the streets of London and some other big cities.
Granted that prostitution was not itself an offence against the law, soliciting was, and it was becoming more open and more persistent.
Besides breaking the law they were, by flaunting themselves  and pestering passers-by, causing an intolerable degree of embarrassment and giving visitors a deplorable impression of London's immorality.
Wolfenden also hints at the other motives behind the widespread public indignation.
Firstly, the Festival of Britain in 1951 and the Coronation in 1953 had focused the eyes of the world on Britain's streets, and the number of tourists over here in those years gradually gave rise to concern over the embarrassment caused by prostitution.
In particular, it was feared that London was becoming known as the ‘vice capital of the World’.
Secondly, as Smart points out, later in the 1950s prostitution came to be linked with fears about immigration, not only, she suggests, because prostitutes were often linked with pimps who were, for example, Maltese, West Indian or Italian, but because it was also believed, for instance by the Wolfenden Committee and many in Parliament, that the ranks of prostitutes were being swollen by large numbers of immigrant women.
In April 1954, the government announced that it was proposing to appoint a Departmental Committee to examine and report on the law on homosexual offences and the ‘parallel’ problem of the law relating to prostitution.
Sir John Wolfenden, the then vice-chancellor of Reading University, was chosen to be its Chairman, a job which he was to hold for the three years that the Committee took to produce its Report.
The terms of reference of the Committee were that they were to consider, firstly, the law and practice relating to homosexual offences and the treatment of persons convicted of such offences by the Courts; and secondly, ‘the law and practice relating to offences against the criminal law in connection with prostitution and solicitation for immoral purposes’.
It is important to note here that its terms of reference precluded any consideration of the moral basis of either of the two areas to be investigated.
All that the Wolfenden Committee was empowered to do was to consider the usefulness of applying the criminal law to these specific offences.
Unlike its recommendations on homosexual conduct, the section of the report that dealt with prostitution was largely uncontroversial.
The Committee recognised that the greatest public concern had arisen as a consequence of the ‘presence and the visible and obvious presence of prostitutes in considerable numbers in the public streets of some parts of London and of a few provincial towns’.
The major plank of what has been termed the ‘Wolfenden philosophy’ was a distinction between ‘public’and ‘private’behaviour.
Private behaviour was viewed by the Committee as the personal and private responsibility of the individual, and the law, it was argued, should only concern itself with those activities which constituted offences against ‘public order and decency’.
Along with this distinction between ‘public’ and ‘private’, the Wolfenden Committee also  distinguished between ‘crime’and ‘sin’, making it clear that it was only concerned with the former.
(However, there can be little doubt that the Committee considered homosexual relations to be sinful).
Despite the differences in the content of, and the public reaction to, the two halves of the Report, it had, as has been suggested, an underlying philosophy which informed the proposals in both areas.
As John Wolfenden pointed out:
…the two halves of our recommendations were governed by the same logic.
We had argued, to put it very briefly, that since one of the law's concerns was the preservation of public order and decency, steps ought to be taken to remove the affront to public order and decency which was presented by the obtrusive presence of large numbers of prostitutes openly soliciting on the streets.
At the same time we argued that private morality or immorality was a private affair and therefore that ‘there must remain a realm of private morality or immorality which is…not the law's business’.
It followed, or so it seemed to us, that while steps should be taken to clear the streets of soliciting prostitutes, the behaviour of consenting male adults in private was their affair and not the laws'.
On these grounds the Wolfenden Committee decided that the abolition of prostitution was not something that it ought to recommend, or that if it did, could have any chance of success.
It therefore asserted what it considered to be the position at which the public/private distinction should be fixed, a position which would allow prostitution to be effectively a private matter as long as it was not conducted on the streets.
The logical extension of this was, of course, increased commodification of prostitution, such as the increased use of advertising, but the Committee felt that the establishment of call-girl systems, for example , was a fair price to pay to free the major cities from what was visibly ‘offensive or injurious’.
The Committee's recommendations on prostitution were acted upon with far more haste than those concerning homosexual conduct.
Indeed the Street Offences Bill was in Parliament not much more than a year after the Report had been published.
In debate, the Home Secretary reiterated Wolfenden's general position over the legal position of prostitution:
…it is not the object of the Bill to make prostitution illegal, or to provide a cure for prostitution.
The object of the Bill is to help to clear the streets, and, for this purpose, to make it possible to charge prostitutes who ply their trade in the streets and to stiffen the penalties against them.
The first major recommendation in the Bill was that the requirement to establish that the conduct of the prostitute caused annoyance to inhabitants, residents or passers-by should be removed.
This increased the ease with which the police could prosecute prostitutes, as they no longer required the  assistance of an ‘offended’ member of the public, despite the fact that it was the supposed ‘public nuisance’of street prostitution that had given rise to the need for legislation.
The second section of the Bill enacted other parts of the Wolfenden proposals by increasing the penalties liable for offences under the new law, such as loitering, soliciting, keeping or managing a brothel, or living on the earnings of prostitution, etc.
The Bill, although subject to some criticism in Parliament, had a relatively quiet passage, and became law less than two years after the publication of the Wolfenden Report.
The Act provided no definition of a ‘public place’, but it refers to any place to which the public have access, irrespective of whether or not they have a legal right to go there, even when there are particular and restricted rules of entry.
It would only become a private place if the entry was restricted to a specific class of persons only, although even this is unclear.
As will be seen in Chapter four, those who, like Frederick Shaw, try to by-pass the law by publishing a directory or ‘contact magazine’, could be guilty of publishing an obscene article, living off the earnings of prostitution, and conspiring to corrupt public morals.
Other pieces of legislation such as the Vagrancy Act 1898 and the Licensing Act 1964 have been used to tighten up what could be seen as loop-holes in the law.
The ownership of massage parlours and saunas is also no protection against charges of, for example, living off the earnings of prostitution.
By using the dichotomy between ‘public’ and ‘private’, the Wolfenden Committee was able to propose an extended series of controls over prostitutes, particularly over those who were highly visible, although the law — the Street Offences Act 1959 — in practice has also been extended to other less visible sectors of prostitution.
Essentially the Wolfenden recommendations and their legislative enactment were a public denouncement of prostitution and an affirmation of the importance of ‘normal’ sexual relationships (monogamous and within the family).
To use Greenwood and Young's terminology, it was the ‘ghettoisation’ of one class of women, a reiteration of the division between ‘normal’and ‘deviant’and the embodiment of this division in an Act of Parliament.
This is seen, for instance, in the denial to prostitutes of ‘normal’ family relations through the existence and increased harshness of the offence of living on the earnings of prostitution, which effectively stops them from living with a partner.
Smart makes the point that prostitutes became the focus of a moral panic in the 1950s, in spite of the growing liberation of female sexuality.
She could, however, have taken this point one step further, for, given that the central organising theme of the Sexual Offences Act was the re-establishment, albeit in a modified form, of male control over one area of female sexuality and thereby indirectly over female sexuality as a whole, it would  seem highly likely that the choice of prostitutes as ‘folk devils’ occurred in large part in response to this growing liberation.
Prostitutes, that is to say, therefore became the focus of a moral panic in the 1950s, at least partially because of the growing liberation of female sexuality.
The legislative response reasserted the fundamentals of the status quo: the relatively dominant position of men, the need for monogamous sexual relationships and the primacy of the family.
The Wolfenden Committee's ‘utilitarianism’, i.e. its declared aim of non-intervention where no public harm was caused, must be judged in the light of its recommendations, as must its supposed ‘liberality’.
Its major recommendation, and certainly the one for which it is most often remembered, was ‘that homosexual behaviour between consenting adults in private be no longer a criminal offence’.
It is important, however, not to read into this recommendation more than was intended for, as will become clear, it was never the intention of either the Wolfenden Committee or those who were eventually successful in their campaign to incorporate the majority of its proposals in the criminal law, to remove the stigma from homosexuality.
The Report states that the ‘limited’ modification to the law that it proposed ‘should not be interpreted as an indication that the law can be indifferent to other forms of homosexual behaviour, or as a general licence to adult homosexuals to behave as they please’.
In this extract, some indication is given of the ‘limited’ nature of the reform being proposed.
There is a reference, firstly, to ‘other forms of homosexual behaviour’, and secondly, to the fact that the proposed process of decriminalisation should only apply to adults.
For this purpose, ‘adulthood’ was fixed at 21.
This was despite the fact that probably the most influential piece of evidence they received during the three years they sat, the Church of England Moral Welfare Council's (CEMWC) updated report,Sexual Offenders and Social Punishment , recommended a universal age of consent of 17.
The CEMWC's suggestion of 17, as opposed to 16 as the age of consent then was for heterosexual relations, was made on the basis that the higher age would provide ‘better protection of youth’.
As was suggested above, the young were consistently represented as being in need of protection.
At one point in the Report, the Wolfenden Committee argued that it was illogical to presume that boys needed greater protection from ‘would-be seducers’ than do girls.
Nevertheless, it went on to argue that a higher age of consent was necessary to protect the young from ‘attentions and pressures of an undesirable kind’.
The Committee was explicit about what it considered these pressures to be, saying that they had ‘encountered several cases in which young men have been induced by means of gifts or money or hospitality to indulge in homosexual behaviour with older men’.
The Committee were particularly concerned about the  possible corruption of the young.
That is, although they generally rejected the idea that people might be ‘converted’ to homosexuality through seduction, they suggested that some might be tempted into other corrupt activities:
…a boy or youth who is induced by means of gifts whether in money or in kind to participate in homosexual behaviour as a source of easy money or as a means of enjoying material comforts or other pleasures beyond those which he could expect by decent behaviour, and we have encountered cases where this has happened.
Indeed, it is our opinion that this source of corruption is a more likely consequence than the possible conversion of the victim to a condition of homosexuality.
As was suggested earlier, the arguments put forward both by reformers and their opponents were closely tied to what they considered to be the especially ‘sensitive’ position of the ‘young’in modern Britain.
Indeed the Committee even extended this logic to a position whereby they felt themselves able to justify the decriminalisation of adult homosexual behaviour in private as a form of protection for the young:
With the law as it is there may be some men who would prefer an adult partner, but who at present turn their attention to boys because they consider that this course is less likely to lay them open to prosecution or to blackmail than if they sought other adults as their partners.
If the law were changed in the way we suggest it is at least possible that such men would prefer to seek relations with older persons which would not render them liable to prosecution.
The Report, as well as recommending that homosexual relations between adults in private should no longer be an offence, and that the age of consent should be 21, also sought to increase substantially the maximum penalties in respect of certain offences.
The only dissenting voice in the Committee over its central recommendations with regard to homosexuality was that of James Adair who, in his minority report, argued that the implementation of the major recommendation would lead to a weakening of the criminal law.
This was firmly denied by the Committee, both before and after publication, who argued that to urge a change in the law was not necessarily to approve or endorse homosexual behaviour.
To an extent, Mr Adair's fears were reflected by some of the national press after the Report's publication.
The Mail ,Express and Sunday Times were worried about its effect on moral standards, but the majority of the national press were most favourable, particularly the Daily Mirror which exclaimed, ‘Don't be shocked by this Report.
It's the Truth, It's the Answer.
It's Life.
The balanced and reasonable manner in which the Report was written and presented, produced on the whole the same characteristics in the media coverage of the proposals it contained.
Indeed, it is undoubtedly the Wolfenden Committee who were responsible for the generally high level of debate concerning reform of the law in this area in the following eight or nine years.
The months after the initial furore over the Report's publication were fairly quiet, particularly as far as the possibilities of legislation on the matter were concerned.
The subject returned to the public eye, however, with the formation by two Cambridge graduates of the Homosexual Law Reform Society, a pressure group whose aim was to see the Wolfenden proposals enacted.
The Reverend Andrew Hallidie Smith and A.E.
Dyson then went about the task of enlisting support for the organisation, a process which was successful, as can be seen from the thirty-three signatories (including Lord Attlee, the Bishops of Birmingham and Exeter, Isaiah Berlin, Julian Huxley, Bertrand Russell) to the letter that appeared in The Times in March 1958.
The first appearance of the Report in Parliament was in November 1958, when the Home Secretary, R.A. Butler, moved the motion that ‘this House takes note of the Report of the Committee on Homosexual Offences and Prostitution’.
Butler, far from pressing for early reform of the law, was at pains to dispel the fears of those who felt that the recommendations of the Report would lead to a sudden increase in homosexuality, or to its condonation:
An impression has undoubtedly gained ground — which I do not think is fair to the Wolfenden Committee — that the Committee desired to legalise homosexual conduct.
This gives a sort of impression that it wished to make it easier.
In fact what the members of the Committee wished to do was to alter the law, not expressly to encourage or legalise such practices, but to remove them, like adultery and other sins, from the realm of the law.
What has since been called the ‘Wolfenden strategy’ is made explicit here.
It consisted of an alteration of the relationship between law and morality that allowed the Committee to recommend a partial decriminalisation of homosexuality, rather than a defence of homosexuality itself.
The essence of the change was the removal of sin from the ambit of the law.
Butler nevertheless felt the public would still misunderstand the intentions of the proposed legislative change, and argued that they would be deeply outraged by what they perceived, however mistakenly, to be the approval by Parliament of homosexual conduct, which was still regarded as a great social evil.
Therefore, despite the fact that a little over a year had passed since the Report had been received, he suggested that the interval between  publication and the debate was not a matter for regret.
Even before the debate took place,The Times was able to sum up the situation accurately:
Parliament debates the Wolfenden Report today.
It is a foregone conclusion that the homosexual laws will not be reformed yet.
It is equally a foregone conclusion that reform must come eventually.
For the majority of well-informed people are now clearly convinced that these laws are unjust and obsolete in a society which refuses to punish lesbian practices, prostitution, adultery, fornication or private drunkenness.
There were those in Parliament who felt that things had already gone too far, despite the Home Secretary's reassurances that it was too soon for legislation.
James Dance, the MP for Bromsgrove and future Chairman of Mary Whitehouse's ‘Clean-up TV Campaign’, had the following to say:
There are far too many people looking into the mind of the murderer and not at the agony of mind of the relations of the murdered person.
There are far too many people looking into the minds of the Teddy cosh-boys and not into the minds of the old ladies who have been coshed.
In exactly the same way, too many people are looking into the mind of the homosexual rather than considering the repugnance that is caused to millions of decent people all over the country….
I feel that it was the condoning of these offences which led to the fall [sic]of Nazi Germany.
Yes that is perfectly true.
I believe that here at home if these offences are allowed to continue unchecked our moral standards will be lowered.
Although it is difficult to assess its importance, on the eve of the second reading debate a letter appeared in The Times , signed by eight peers, including Lord Devlin.
It is worth quoting in full:
Sir — In 1957, the Wolfenden Committee recommended, after three years study of evidence, that homosexual behaviour between consenting adults in private should no longer be a criminal offence.
This proposal has been endorsed by the British Council of Churches, the Church Assembly, and the Moral Welfare Council of the Church of England, a Roman Catholic Advisory Committee, appointed by the late Cardinal Griffin, the Methodist Church, and leading spokesmen of many other leading Christian denominations, as well as by prominent humanists.
It has received the support of the Howard League for Penal Reform and the Institute for the Study and Treatment of Delinquency, and also of other experts in Criminology, including several judges, as well as of very many doctors, psychiatrists and social workers.
The great majority of national daily and weekly newspapers have strongly and consistently advocated the reform.
In February of this year  a resolution calling for its enactment was passed by the Liberal Party Council, and it has also been supported by many individuals and groups in both the Labour and Conservative parties.
Seven years ago a distinguished list of signatories wrote in your columns that the existing law clearly no longer represented either Christian or liberal opinion in this country, and that its continued enforcement would do more harm than good to the community as a whole.
We hope that in response to the Motion calling attention to the Wolfenden Committee's recommendations which Lord Arran is to move in the House of Lords on May 12, Her Majesty's Government will now recognise the necessity for this reform and will introduce legislation.
The letter was signed by the Bishops of Birmingham, Bristol, Exeter, London and St Albans, as well as by Lords Brain, Devlin and Robbins.
Having received its second reading, the Bill went to Committee where many amendments were tabled, such as the raising or lowering of the age of consent, but few were accepted.
Baroness Wootton tabled an amendment that, had it been accepted, would have made it no longer an offence ‘to procure or conspire to commit a homosexual act which by virtue of this Act is not itself an offence’.
The question arose after the Ladies' Directory case in which Frederick Shaw was convicted of ‘conspiring to corrupt public morals’, and in which one of the Appeal Judges, Lord Simons, had stated that ‘there remains in the courts a residual power to conserve not only the safety, but also the moral welfare of the State’.
Baroness Wootton's fears were in fact well grounded for six years later IT were convicted of ‘conspiracy’ when they published a list of ‘contact’advertisements for homosexuals.
A private member, Humphrey Berkeley MP, picked up Arran's Bill after its successful third reading and introduced it in the Commons.
The Bill looked like being reasonably successful despite a reported last-ditch effort by the Bill's Conservative opponents.
According to the Observer on 6 February 1966, it was revealed at a meeting of the Conservative backbench 1922 Committee that a ‘private and anonymous circular’ had been distributed with the warning that it should be destroyed immediately after reading.
It simply appealed ‘to all Conservatives to stand up and be counted against Humphrey Berkeley's Bill in favour of homosexuals’.
At its second reading in the Commons, the Bill passed by 164 votes to 107 and, just as its progress seemed assured, a General Election was called and Parliament dissolved.
When Parliament sat again, the government announced that there would not be a ballot for Private Members' Bills in the first session, and therefore there was no possibility of homosexual law reform, a decision which prompted the Earl of Arran to reintroduce his  Sexual Offences Bill into the House of Lords to keep up the pressure.
Just as he did this, the government had a change of heart and decided that there would after all be a Private Members' ballot.
Arran announced that he would prefer a Bill of this nature to be introduced in the Commons, but that he would keep his Bill going in the Lords until an MP could be found to sponsor an equivalent measure in the other House.
Arran's Bill again went through the Lords without too much trouble but, by this time, a sponsor had been found, and Leo Abse introduced the Sexual Offences Bill in the Commons in July 1966, although its second reading was delayed until 19 December.
By this time, all the arguments had been well rehearsed in both Houses.
The reformers consistently stressed the need to remember that, whilst the liberalising tendencies of the proposals were making all the headlines, a set of controls was also included which was an essential part of the package.
The dominant message that was being provided for the public was that the law reform being proposed was essentially ‘permissive’ in character.
The restrictions that were also part of the reform, however, were by and large ignored by the media Abse, in his speech during the second reading, spelled out to the House what these controls involved.
Firstly, he pointed out that the Wolfenden Committee had recognised in its Report that, for the preservation of discipline and for the protection of those of subordinate rank, the services might wish to retain section 6 of the Army Act which provides for the punishment of those guilty of ‘disgraceful conduct of an indecent or unnatural kind’.
Under the Bill introduced by Abse, these controls were not only maintained but extended, so that, in addition to the Army Act, section 66, it would be possible to take proceedings under section 64, with reference to ‘officers who behave in a scandalous manner’; or under section 69 of the Air Force Act, with reference to air force discipline.
Secondly, in accordance with the Wolfenden recommendations Clause 2 of the Bill set a penalty of five years imprisonment for the offence of buggery committed by a man over 21 with a consenting youth over 16.
The maximum penalty for gross indecency committed by a man over 21 with someone aged under 21 would be increased from two to five years, as would be the penalty for the offence of attempting to procure or procuring a man under 21 to commit an act of gross indecency.
The penalty for an act of buggery against a boy was life imprisonment.
There was no doubt in Abse's mind who these controls were designed to protect:
I believe that those provisions make it abundantly clear that the penalties that will be visited upon those who attempt to corrupt youth will be stern and relentless.
No-one except those who are wilfully blind to the nature of our proceedings can possibly spell out of the Bill any condonation  whatever of homosexual conduct which can affect young people in their formative years.
There are distinct parallels here between the statements made by those such as Leo Abse who were in favour of homosexual law reform, and the position adopted by those who opposed ‘permissive’ reform of all kinds.
For both groups, the key subjects were ‘youth’.
It was the young who needed to be protected, and this realisation could be, and was, used both to justify limited reform and to resist it.
The reformist position was reiterated in debate by Dr David Owen:
Let us deal with the suggestion that it would be psychologically damaging to the country to show that the House condones homosexuality.
If that feeling comes out from the debate it will be the direct result of misreporting, because no Hon.
Member whatever viewpoint he or she put forward, has condoned homosexual behaviour.
The Bill lays down very clearly that under certain circumstances the House is increasing the penalties, that it is trying to stamp out corruption of youth and minors, which is possibly the most important element in the Bill.
What the proposed Bill actually did, in fact, was to give the representatives of the law far greater scope for intervention in the conduct of homosexuals than in the case of other sexual activities.
For, as Giles Playfair rightly pointed out, when children under 16 are thought to be the victim of indecent assault, they would not, as could homosexuals under these proposals, be also treated as the culprits.
He argued that the purpose of the age of consent included in the Wolfenden proposals was ‘not only to deter the old from corrupting the young, but to deter the young from allowing themselves to be corrupted and, furthermore, from misbehaving with each other’.
After around twelve years of what had been almost continuous debate, the recommendations of the Wolfenden Committee were about to reach their legislative conclusion.
Lord Arran, who had been instrumental in the success of Abse's Bill by his efforts in the Lords, was given the final word in that House.
As one might expect, given the two-sided nature of the debate and the legislation that grew out of it, his closing speech was not the singularly ‘permissive’ one some might have expected:
I ask those who have, as it were, been in bondage, and for whom the prison doors are now opening to show their thanks by comporting themselves quietly and with dignity.
This is no occasion for jubilation, certainly not celebration.
Any form of ostentatious behaviour, any form of public flaunting, would be utterly disgraceful and make the sponsors of the Bill regret what they have done.
Homosexuals must remember, while there may be nothing bad in being a homosexual, there is certainly nothing good.
The Bill went on to receive its third reading in the Commons, and received the Royal Assent on 27 July 1967.
Writing about the passage of the Bill through Parliament, Nigel Warner suggests that the net result of the fact that Abse's Bill merely amended earlier legislation prohibiting homosexual behaviour, rather than repealing it, is that such behaviour remains unlawful, except for the circumstances included in the new Act, and he quotes Norman St John Stevas' recognition of this fact.
Stevas said that the Act ‘would create no recognised status for homosexuality.
It would remain contrary to public policy.
Homosexual relations would give rise to neither rights nor duties’.
It is this ‘position’ that homosexuals find themselves in modern Britain that requires further consideration.
As has already been suggested, and will be discussed in detail in Chapter five, the Sexual Offences Act was put under the microscope during the IT case in the early 1970s.
IT was one of several ‘underground’ magazines which found themselves in court in this period.
Knuller Ltd, the publishers of the magazine, had offended sensibilities by printing on an inside page, under a column headed ‘Males’, a series of ‘gay contact’ advertisements.
The publishers were convicted on charges of ‘conspiring to corrupt public morals’ and ‘conspiring to outrage public decency’.
They appealed on several grounds, but particularly that ‘an agreement by two or more persons to insert advertisements in a magazine for the purpose of homosexual acts taking place between consenting adult males in private did not constitute an offence’.
The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeals, but granted leave to appeal to the House of Lords on the grounds that points of law of general public importance were involved.
In rejecting that appeal, Lord Reid stated:
There is a material difference between merely exempting certain conduct from criminal penalties and making it lawful in the full sense.
Prostitution and gaming afford examples of this difference.
So we must examine the provisions of the Sexual Offences Act 1967 to see just how far it altered the law.
It enacts, subject to limitation, that a homosexual act in private shall not be an offence, but it goes no further than that…
I find nothing in the Act to indicate that Parliament thought or intended to lay down that indulgence in these practices is not corrupting.
Lord Reid summarised the situation quite succinctly.
In employing essentially utilitarian criteria, the Wolfenden Committee gave rise to legislation which decriminalised certain forms of homosexual conduct.
Neither the Committee nor the sponsors of the subsequent legislation  suggested that this should imply greater tolerance of, or a lessening of the stigma attached to, homosexuality.
Although both of these may have been indirect or possibly unintended consequences of the legislative change, homosexuality was still open to interpretation in law as immoral and corrupting.
The Sexual Offences Act of 1967 was also limited in its geographical scope, for it was not until 1980, and the passage of the Criminal Justice Bill of that year, that the law was altered in Scotland in this regard.
Indeed, an attempt at reform had been tried in 1977 and failed.
It was not until the European Court of Human Rights ruled in 1981 that the law in Northern Ireland was in breach of its convention that the process of reform started there, bringing change that was fifteen years behind England and Wales, and twenty-five years after the publication of the Wolfenden Report.
Homosexuals are still discriminated against in many areas, such as over the custody of children, in employment, in education, by the police, and in the media.
Despite the fact that the Criminal Law Revision Committee and the Policy Advisory Committee have recently considered the question of homosexuality, there appears to be little possibility of change in the conditions of lawful homosexual conduct.
The position in the armed forces has been reiterated in Parliament.
The Police Federation has made it clear that any proposals to reduce the age of consent would be vigorously resisted.
Much of the concern expressed prior to the passing of the 1967 Act centred around the supposed vulnerability of children, and this has made the possibility of a lowering of the age of consent a remote one.
Linked to this have been a series of vigorous campaigns against paedophile organisations, including the use of the conspiracy laws.
Finally, there is also the question of the policing of the offences defined by the Act.
Between 1967 and 1977, the recorded incidence of the offence of indecency between males approximately doubled, and the number prosecuted, trebled.
Although the number of recorded offences in that decade was not as high as it had been in the 1950s it is nevertheless an important trend.
It is possible that this increase may have been, on the one hand, indicative of a greater frequency of homosexual activity ‘in public’ and, hence, of a degree of ‘permissiveness’.
On the other hand, it may have been indicative of the increased regulation that went along with this.
Walmsley points out that most of the increase involved the conviction of persons aged over 21 whose partners in the offence were also aged 21 or over (the offence generally occurring, or at least being detected, in public conveniences).
It appears therefore that whilst ‘private’ homosexual conduct may have been decriminalised, the ‘public’margins came to be increasingly policed.
Walmsley looks at several possible explanations and concludes that the change is largely due to the Act itself, firstly in the simple sense that the passing of the 1967 Act brought to an end a trial period of uncertainty for the police by making quite clear that, although in the future homosexual acts in private between consenting adults were to be legal, such acts in ‘public’ as defined by the Act were not.
This provided the police with a firm indication of where their duty lay.
More importantly, perhaps, Walmsley argues that the 1967 Act, because it introduced summary trial for the offence of indecency between males, made it easier for the police to bring prosecutions, for when there are no minors involved, the Director of Public Prosecution's consent is unnecessary.
This makes the processing of such cases, where the magistrates court is involved, a particularly quick affair, indeed, less trouble for all those involved, including possibly the offenders.
The important point for present purposes, however, is that, in this and other ways, the Sexual Offences Act is not a piece of legislation which can be simply and easily  categorised as ‘permissive’.
Those who advocated reform argued consistently that it ought not to be interpreted as a permissive move for two reasons.
Firstly, homosexual conduct, although no longer subjected to criminal penalties, except when it occurred in clearly defined public circumstances, would continue to be viewed as morally reprehensible; and secondly, the move did not imply a relaxation of control over homosexual behaviour or was not intended by its main supporters to imply such a relaxation of control.
What was hoped would occur was a shifting of responsibilities from ‘external’ control to ‘self-control’.
This was the essence of Lord Arran's final speech in the Lords debate on the Sexual Offences Bill, when he pleaded for homosexuals to ‘comport themselves quietly and with dignity….
Any form of ostentatious behaviour, any form of public flaunting would be utterly disgraceful.’
This was explicitly recognised by the Wolfenden Committee:
Unless a deliberate attempt is to be made by society, acting through the agency of the law, to equate the sphere of crime with that of sin, there must remain a realm ,a sphere of private morality and immorality which is, in brief and crude terms, not the law's business.
To say this is not to condone or encourage private immorality.
On the contrary, to emphasise the personal and private nature of moral or immoral conduct is to emphasise the personal and private responsibility of the individual for his own actions, and this is a responsibility which a mature agent can properly be expected to carry for himself without the threat of punishment from the law.
The debates in parliament, and the legislation which they preceded, had a ‘dual’ nature or character.
On the one hand, as far as the criminal law was  concerned, they removed one set of controls entirely, whilst on the other hand, a new and sometimes increased set of controls was introduced to deal with those forms of homosexual conduct which were still considered to be ‘public’ and criminal.
This ‘double taxonomy’ took the form that it did partly as a result of a generalised concern over the perceived vulnerability of the young.
As such, much of the debate over homosexuality was intimately bound up with the wider argument that has already been identified over the role and significance of the modern ‘nuclear’ or ‘bourgeois’family.
It was the defence of this social unit that set many of the boundaries to the debates and limited the eventual legislative reform.
The view that this was a central organising feature of the Wolfenden Report is reinforced by the Committee's approach, in its proposals on prostitution, to what it saw to be ‘legitimate’ avenues for female sexuality.
It was the phrase, ‘in private’, that was the critical one in the change to the law recommended by the Wolfenden Committee, and it is the distinction between public and private that also effectively separates the two major camps in all the morality debates in this period.
The Wolfenden Committee, in distinguishing between public and private behaviour, also drew a distinction between ‘crime’ and ‘sin’, and concluded that ‘as a general proposition it will be universally accepted that the law is not concerned with private morals or ethical sanctions’, and further, ‘it is not the duty of the law to concern itself with immorality as such…it should confine itself to those activities which offend against public order and decency and expose the ordinary citizen to what is offensive or injurious’.
In this way, the Committee was able, quite consistently, to propose what, on the one hand appeared to be a relaxation of the law in the area of homosexuality, whilst on the other hand it recommended stronger sanctions in the area of prostitution.
What appeared to be a more liberal approach towards homosexual relations could be adopted because of the essentially ‘private’ and ‘invisible’nature of the behaviour, whereas a seemingly more punitive line was adopted in relation to soliciting because of its ‘public’and ‘visible’character.
The importance of the distinction between ‘public’ and ‘private’can be made somewhat clearer by considering an important jurisprudential debate that took place largely in response to the deliberations of the Wolfenden Committee.
In 1958 Lord Devlin, a practising Judge, was invited to deliver the British Academy's second Maccabean Lecture in Jurisprudence.
The lecture he gave and the responses it provoked form perhaps the most widely read debate in jurisprudence in Britain in the period since the Second World War.
His lecture took as its starting point the distinction drawn by the Wolfenden Committee between public and private behaviour, and what it  thus considered to be the proper role of the criminal law in these areas.
The questions provoked by the Wolfenden approach were not new ones (John Stuart Mill and James Fitzjames Stephens had both discussed such issues) but they were particularly topical at this point, for questions of law and morality were at the forefront of public consciousness at this time because of, for example , the Wildeblood/Pitt-Rivers case.
The positions outlined by Lord Devlin in the lecture referred to above, and the reply by his major critic H.L.A.
Hart, in his book Law, Liberty and Morality can be used as models of the relationship between the criminal law and contemporary moral rules or mores.
Devlin suggests that, at first, he read the Wolfenden Report's formulation of the functions of the criminal law with ‘complete approval’.
However, on reflection and after further study, he was persuaded that he was, in fact, wrong.
His lecture was an outline of his reasons for believing that he was wrong.
He opened by stating that he felt ‘that a complete separation of crime from sin would not be good for the moral law and might be disastrous for the criminal’.
Is there a jurisprudential justification that can be advanced for such a feeling, he asked, and if so, how should the relationship between the criminal law and the moral law be stated?
In approaching these questions, he first argues that the criminal law has always been concerned with morals, or moral principles, and that these moral principles are, in this country, inextricably tied to religion —‘the moral standards generally accepted in western civilisation being those belonging to Christianity’.
He uses the attitude of the criminal law towards consent as an example of what he believes to be the necessary connection between criminal and moral law.
Under the criminal law, he argues, a victim cannot, except in a limited number of quite specific circumstances, consent to the commission of an offence against themselves.
So, for example, the consent of the victim is no defence to a charge of murder or, in the case of an assault, ‘that the victim thought his or her punishment well deserved and submitted to it’.
This illustrates that the law does not exist simply for the protection of individuals, for if it did one would be able to refuse its help if one did not want it.
There is a parallel here between Devlin's argument and that used by Durkheim in The Division of Labour in Society .
The law, Devlin argues, exists in order in some way to protect society:
There is only one explanation of what has hitherto been accepted as the basis of the criminal law and that is that there are certain standards of behaviour or moral principles which society requires to be observed, and the breach of them is an offence not merely against the person who is injured but against society as a whole.
There are therefore, Devlin suggests, many matters of private morality which are brought within the ambit of the criminal law, for if everything that was not designed to preserve order and decency or to protect citizens were removed from the criminal law, several crimes would cease to be just that, e.g. euthanasia, suicide, attempted suicide, abortion, incest between brother and sister, etc.
Having set out his stall, Lord Devlin goes on to ask himself three questions, the answers to which, he suggests, will provide the evidence to back up his earlier assertion.
His questions are:
1
Has society the right to pass judgement at all on matters of morals?
Ought there, in other words, to be a public morality, or are morals always a matter for private judgement?
2
If society has the right to pass judgement, has it also the right to use the weapon of the law to enforce it?
3
If so, ought it to use that weapon in all cases or only in some; and if only in some, on what principle should it distinguish?
Devlin answers question one positively in two ways.
Firstly, he points to the recommendations contained in the Wolfenden Report and argues that if society were not able to pronounce homosexuality morally wrong, then there would be no basis for a law which aims to protect youth from ‘corruption’, or for punishing men who live off the earnings of a homosexual prostitute.
Secondly, he suggests, an a priori argument may also be advanced: ‘What makes a society of any sort is a community of ideas, not only political ideas, but ideas about the way its members should behave and govern their lives; these latter ideas are its morals.’
If then, as Devlin contends, all societies have a moral structure, on what basis should society use the weapon of the law to enforce its moral rules?
The answer to the first question determines how the second should be answered, he argues, for if a recognised morality is crucial to the continued existence of society (and this is clearly what he is arguing), then just as it would use the law to safeguard any other essential part of its structure, so ‘society has a prima facie right to legislate against immorality as such’.
Finally, and in answer to the third question, Devlin is critical of the apparent necessity, according to Wolfenden, for special circumstances to exist in order to justify the intervention of the law.
For Wolfenden, these special circumstances were defined as the ‘provision of sufficient safeguards against exploitation and corruption of others who are especially vulnerable because they are young, weak in body or mind, inexperienced or in a state of special physical, official or economic dependence’.
Devlin's argument is that ‘exploitation’ and ‘corruption’are such nebulous terms that almost any field of morality could be defined in a way to allow at least the theoretical intervention of the law.
It is therefore not possible to set a theoretical limit to society's power to use law to enforce moral rules, i.e. it is not possible to define an area of morality into which the criminal law may not under any circumstances intervene.
Then, in perhaps the most crucial passage in his lecture, Devlin argues:
Society is entitled by means of its laws to protect itself from dangers, whether from within or without.
Here again I think that the political parallel is legitimate.
The law of treason is directed against aiding the King's enemies and against sedition from within.
The justification for this is that established Government is necessary for the existence of society and therefore its safety against violent overthrow must be secured.
But an established morality is as necessary as good Government to the welfare of society .
Societies disintegrate from within more frequently than they are broken up by external pressures.
There is disintegration when no common morality is observed, and history shows that the loosening of moral bonds is often the first stage of disintegration, so that society is justified in taking the same steps to preserve its moral code as it does to preserve its Government and other essential institutions.
(my emphasis)
The suppression of vice is therefore, Lord Devlin argues, just as important as the suppression of subversive activities, and just as it is impossible to point to an area of morality which should not be subject to the law, so there is no area of morality which can be described as ‘private’.
This brings us to his third and final question, which is, should the law be used in all or some cases, and if only the latter, on what basis does one make the decision about where and when to intervene?
Before answering his final interrogatory, Devlin asks a further question.
How are we to discover society's moral rules?
How are those concerned with the law to ascertain society's moral judgements?
In answer, he uses the idea of the ‘right-minded man’, the ‘reasonable man’ or ‘the man on the Clapham omnibus’:
For my purpose I should like to call him the man in the jury box, for the moral judgement of society must be something about which any twelve men or women drawn at random might after discussion be expected to be unanimous.
This type of definition (i.e. one that implicitly assumes that there are general positions which average or ordinary people occupy and agree upon) is similar to that utilised by many moral entrepreneurial groups in their attempts at redefining, for example, obscenity.
The assumption — which is also contained in Devlin's quasi-functionalist explanation of the role and ubiquity of a moral structure for any given society, that there is a basic  consensus surrounding questions of morality — is something that was then, and is still now, widely held by those in particular who want to repeal or reform what they perceive to have been the ‘permissive’ legislative changes of the 1960s.
Society has the right, according to Devlin, to protect itself from immoral acts, and these acts are immoral if, by definition, every ‘right-minded’ person could be assumed to consider them so.
In direct criticism of Wolfenden, he argues that one cannot make a simple distinction between public and private morality.
The courts have to try to strike a balance between the two.
Devlin completes his lecture by returning to a question he had briefly considered at the beginning, and one which is central here; that of the relationship between the Church and the moral order.
Devlin felt that the relationship was a straightforward and uncomplicated one: there was, he believed, little difference between Christian morals and ‘those which every right-minded member of society is expected to hold’.
Although, with study, one could no doubt detect gaps, nevertheless, ‘for the purpose of the limited entry which the law makes into the field of morals, there is no practical difference’.
And importantly he concluded:
It seems to me therefore that the free-thinker and the non-Christian can accept, without offence to his convictions, the fact that Christian morals are the basis of the criminal law and that he can recognize, also without taking offence, that without the support of the Churches the moral order, which has its origin in and takes its strength from, Christian beliefs, would collapse.
This again, of course, has direct parallels with the general position adopted by groups such as the NVALA and the NFoL.
H.L.A.
Hart's Law, Liberty and Morality , like Devlin's work before it, was inspired by the debates fostered by the publication of the Wolfenden Report.
The central question addressed by Hart is: ‘is the fact that certain conduct is by common standards immoral sufficient to justify making that conduct punishable by law?
Is it morally permissible to enforce morality as such?’
Essentially, Hart follows John Stuart Mill in answering ‘no’, and suggests, as Mill did, that power can only be used over someone against their will in order to prevent harm to others.
On the other hand, he points out that Devlin had in fact answered the question in the affirmative, and had justified this response by suggesting that, just as society can take steps to preserve itself against acts of treason, then so it may protect itself from attacks on established morality, for this too can threaten society's existence.
As has been noted, the debate between Hart and Devlin was in part stimulated by the publication of the Wolfenden Report, and Hart begins by noting  the striking similarity between J.S. Mill's argument outlined above and the position adopted by the Wolfenden Committee in s.13 of their Report:
[The]function of [the criminal law], as we see it, is to preserve public order and decency, to protect the citizen from what is offensive and injurious and to provide sufficient safeguards against exploitation or corruption of others, particularly those who are specially vulnerable because they are young, weak in body or mind or inexperienced…
As suggested above, one of the central planks in Lord Devlin's argument that the law does not simply exist to protect the individual, but also to protect society, was the fact that in all but a few cases the victim may not consent to the commission of an offence against themselves.
This is challenged by Hart who suggests that, far from simply being an example of the law enforcing a moral principle — for example the sanctity of human life — it may on the other hand ‘perfectly well be explained as a piece of paternalism, designed to protect individuals against themselves’.
This, as should by now be clear, is a crucial distinction in this argument, for it underpins (along with the public/private distinction utilised by Wolfenden) many of the conflicts and disagreements over morality and the ‘proper’ role of the criminal law during this post-war period.
The adoption by Hart of a position which accepts the possible paternalistic role of the criminal law requires a ‘certain modification of the laissez-faire principles propounded by John Stuart Mill’.
In so doing, Hart argues, it is not necessary to abandon the position that resists the use of the criminal law to enforce morality.
One merely has to allow that harming others may itself be resisted by invoking the sanction of the criminal law.
This is the basis of the distinction between ‘paternalism’ and what Hart calls ‘legal moralism’, for:
It is too often assumed that if a law is not designed to protect one man from another its only rationale can be that it is designed to punish moral wickedness, or in Lord Devlin's words ‘to enforce a moral principle’.
Thus it is often argued that statutes punishing cruelty to animals can only be explained in that way.
But it is certainly intelligible, both as an account of the original motives inspiring such legislation and as the specification of an aim widely held to be worth pursuing, to say that the law is here concerned with the suffering , albeit only of animals, rather than with the immorality of torturing them.
Hart then moves on to consider Devlin's assertion that attacks upon, or threats to, the established morality of a society, are also attacks upon, and threaten the continued existence of, that society.
He questions the validity of such a statement and argues that, in Devlin's formulation, it was intended to be a statement of empirical fact, or more likely an a priori assumption.
Devlin, he suggests, provides no evidence with which to support the statement, and further no reputable historian has argued that deviation from sexual morality could be seen, like an act of treason, as threatening society's existence.
Hart accuses Devlin of moving from
the acceptable proposition that some shared morality is essential to the existence of any society, to the unacceptable proposition that a society is identical with its morality, as that is at any given moment of its history, so that a change in its morality is tantamount to the destruction of a society.
Devlin has, however, been defended against such a charge by several commentators, and one of these, Basil Mitchell, argues that it would be fairer to suggest that Devlin's position is that there are no types of immorality which are not in some way capable of threatening society, and which could therefore be considered to be ‘outside’ the scope of the law:
So the argument would appear to be this.
We do not know just how much cohesion is necessary for a society to exist, but we know that some cohesion is necessary.
Some degree of shared morality is essential to this minimum of cohesion, and any weakening of moral belief may reduce it below this minimum; hence we cannot bind ourselves not to use the law to safeguard existing moral beliefs, no matter how peripheral they may appear to be.
Nonetheless, Hart is highly critical of Devlin's identification of society with its shared morality and he further accuses Devlin of conceiving of morality as a ‘seamless web’, so that those who deviate from one part of it are almost bound to deviate from the whole.
Although there is little or no evidence to support the contention that those who deviate from shared sexual morality are likely to be ‘deviant’ in other ways as well, it was argued in Chapter two that it is precisely this quality that Mrs Whitehouse felt she had detected in young ‘revolutionaries’such as Richard Neville.
The importance of this part of the debate is that it illuminates one crucially important difference between, on this occasion, Devlin and Hart: that is, the disagreement over whether or not it is possible for there to be areas of behaviour which, whilst they might be considered to be ‘immoral’, could also be considered to be ‘private’.
Clearly, Devlin does not believe this to be possible, whereas Hart insists that it must be.