

Rethinking child care policy
Mike Fisher, Peter Marsh and David Phillips with Eric Sainsbury
The raising of children is an intensely private family matter which is nevertheless the subject of equally intensive public debate and concern.
We have all been children, some of us are parents, and we all in various ways take responsibility for children.
We are all curious to know what really goes on in other families and all equally determined to preserve the privacy of our own family life.
Despite this interest in the way families raise their children, there nevertheless remains a fundamental belief that parents have an inviolable right to determine their children's upbringing independently of outside interference.
The families and the professionals have been concerned with the care of children and with negotiating the criteria that govern state intervention in that care.
Changing families and changing policy
The public system of child care in the UK has been dominated by the twin themes of rescue and compensation.
The law has long recognised the right of society to remove children from parents who are believed to be damaging them and, in recent times, has become alert to more subtle kinds of damage.
This judicial readiness to sanction rescue was revised in post-war years in the light of Bowlby's work on maternal deprivation.
However, the effect of Bowlby's studies has been contradictory.
In one sense, he re-emphasised the sanctity of the maternal relationship and its centrality to psychological health.
This served to raise the rescue threshold by warning of the possible damage to the child of removal from the family.
In another sense, however, the research could be interpreted as pointing to the necessity to ensure that, once crossed, the threshold of removal should lead to a particular, compensatory form of care in recognition of the child's maternal loss.
These themes are alive and well in British child care policy at both a national and a local level.
These psychological principles which once guided thinking about the planning of child care services are, of course, founded on particular notions about the composition of ‘normal’ families and about the nature of family relationships.
The child's alleged psychological need for unbroken maternal presence fits neatly with dominant conceptions of ‘proper’ family life, in which the mother's role in upbringing far outweighs that of the father.
Such a view of family life coincided in the UK with an intense concentration during the 1950s on the mother as the primary guarantor of children's health and welfare (Oakley, 1981; Wilson, 1977) and aligns  comfortably with the period's economic boom and reconstructionist philosophy.
These are, however, highly questionable principles in the moral and practical minefield of child care policy.
The decision about whether and when to intervene in unhappy families cannot be resolved simply by reference to psychological theories, nor can it be based on folk precepts about not interfering.
When to intervene, who should be given powers to do so, and with what long-term aims, are questions which challenge our fundamental social organisation and values.
Moreover, these traditional wisdoms of family life do not survive modern scrutiny.
In the first place, the very composition of families is changing.
The pattern of permanent two-parent, two-children families has shifted, and the boundaries of family membership are now more fluid (see Rapoport et al.,
1982).
It is becoming more common for families to consist of a series of parent figures in various relationships to a series of children.
As is so often the case, the evolving terminology used to describe families epitomises these changes.
When the family norm was permanence, the term ‘broken family’, with its aura of irretrievable loss and disgrace, was used.
A current term, ‘reconstituted families’(Burgoyne and Clark, 1982), describing families where a new parent figure is incorporated, neatly encapsulates the concept of an evolving family unit whose nature is changed, rather than destroyed, by the arrivals and departures of various members.
Related changes have also occurred in the nature of parenting itself.
The concept of the father's and the mother's discrete and unconnected contributions to the psychological and physical well-being of the child is less tenacious in modern child psychology.
The ‘discovery’ of the role of the father in child development, in particular his ability to achieve significant interaction with the child despite the apparent handicap of significantly less time to do so (see, for example, Lamb, 1981), has led to a revision of the basic tenets of parenting.
So too has the rise of feminist versions of the nature of parenting, in which, for example, the daily physical care of children has been demystified to lay bare the sheer labour involved, and hence the need to share this burden equally rather than regard it as an unequivocal privilege (see, for example , Oakley, 1974).
Increasingly parents regard their contributions as interchangeable and allocate parental roles on the basis of competence, availability and equality and not simply gender.
These changes have considerable implications for the criteria for social work intervention in the lives of families and for the nature of public child care provision.
Political dimensions of child care policy
If these changes in family structure and parental roles are of recent origin, current political dimensions of child care policy, which have rarely been more prominent than today, surely have a longer history.
The tension between the rights of parents, of their children, and of the state, which attracted increasing legislative attention in the UK during the nineteenth century, continues to be demonstrated in the concerns of pressure groups in recent years.
The increasing emphasis on the rights of children in the campaigns of Equality For Children and of Justice for Children are mirrored in increasing legislative concern for the child's wishes.
Equally vociferous are the parent-oriented Campaign For One Parent Families and the Family Rights Group, whose arguments for the rights of parents in the face of state intervention have contributed to the pressure which produced the recent DHSS Code of Practice relating to access to children in care.
Thus the pendulum of public pressure swings back and forth, reflecting the unresolved tensions within public policy.
In political terms, the relationship between the family and the state has always included at its core both the right of the family to raise children as it sees fit, and the corresponding right of the state to intervene if the family's care or control falls short of what the state requires.
Law and custom thus defend the family as the prime agent of socialisation only in so far as it fulfils the task currently prescribed.
The construction of the task is a dynamic process which varies from age to age and society to society.
A constant theme in this process has been the family's duty to take responsibility for its members, to inculcate socially acceptable behaviour, and to safeguard virtues in danger of erosion through either time or opposition.
Thus hard work, education and moral tutelage are some of the guiding principles behind parent-child relationships, and much parental ingenuity and anxiety is expended in finding opportunities to introduce or reinforce these messages.
However, in legitimating these tasks, the legal framework established by the state has inevitably suffered from some confusion over whether it is primarily directed at helping families to achieve social control of their children or at ratifying state intervention.
The evolution of British law governing the moral and physical welfare of children exemplifies this confusion.
Legal authority over children was vested in kin until the demand, engendered by the industrial revolution, for cheap factory labour from children (Alcock and Harris, 1982; Morris et al.,
1980; Dingwall et al.,
1983) caused children to work outside the parent's sphere of authority, rendering children's behaviour and working circumstances a target for state as well as family control.
Thus the generation of the framework of British child welfare legislation never derived simply from the interests of the child; instead the dominant force was the need for social regulation.
As Dingwall and his colleagues (1983) comment, ‘Attention was first focused on protection from children and only latterly on protection of children.’
There is, in fact, a tension between legal concepts designed to facilitate state control over family life, and those designed to protect the family from undue state intervention and to boost family autonomy.
Nowhere is this tension better demonstrated than in the provision of the British system of social services.
The particular relationship between  the state and the family embodied in the system of public welfare gives rise to considerable concern over the extent to which such provisions boost or erode family autonomy.
Family responsibility to care for its members has become shared with health and education authorities, social security and social services to a greater extent than ever before, and there has always been a concern that the welfare state may undermine family ties and produce welfare dependency.
One political response to this has been to attempt to reinforce the role of the family as the primary carer, and to identify why some families appear throughout generations to be unable to solve their problems without recourse to public assistance.
The identification of family authority over children with the interests of the state is strongly aligned with the political view that the family should be encouraged to accept total responsibility for its members.
Such a strong family unit has both emotional appeal, as underpinning moral virtues under current threat, and considerable economic appeal, as reducing the demand for costly public care of dependency groups.
This philosophy finds expression in some recent social thought and has been most notably promulgated in the area of social services, producing on the far right a philosophy of welfare in which the care of family members is increasingly seen as a private problem, to be undertaken using family resources only, and to be underpinned only in extreme circumstances by a residual network of statutory services.
In the UK (and the USA) this has been the recent drift of government programmes.
In Britain, the Social Services Minister, Sir Keith Joseph, made the now famous speculations on the inadequacy of working-class parenting and the need for better ‘preparation for parenthood’.
The funds given by the DHSS under Sir Keith for research into the ‘cycle of deprivation’ were the practical expression of this policy.
At the inception of this UK research programme designed to examine the intergenerational transmission of poverty, Harriet Wilson (1974) investigated the relevance of Sir Keith's ideas on ‘preparation for parenthood’ to resolving the problems of poor families in inner cities.
She concluded that the research indicated the need not for social training, but for:
large-scale fiscal measures to speed up slum clearance and housing schemes, to improve local amenities, to boost family incomes by generous family allowances, to improve the job market in the inner city, and to implement the proposed extension of nursery provision.
Not surprisingly, the research commissioned by the DHSS failed to identify any attitudinal mechanism by which poverty was somehow ‘transmitted’ from parent to child.
Instead, the studies pointed to a complex exchange between traditional attitudes and stark economic deprivation of the kind described by Wilson (see Blaxter and Paterson, 1982; Coffield et al.,
1982).
Despite this, primary preventive measures of the sort recommended by Wilson have not emerged in public policy.
Furthermore, the fear that the welfare state is undermining family responsibility is unfounded (Longfield, 1984).
Policy changes are being  pressed on the basis of myths.
British studies of family life and family preferences for care for dependants indicate that family members have essentially retained their primary caring role, and prefer care in partnership with public agencies rather than wishing to hand it over (see Moroney, 1976; West, 1984).
The child care legacy
In relation to child care policy, this fear of undermining responsibility results from a fundamental misunderstanding of the role of parents, and reinforces the antipathy between public and private care of children.
As other commentators have noted (Millham et al.,
1984), the history of social policy in this field has bequeathed a legacy of disregard for the potential of the family as a continuing source of security for children identified in some way as being at risk.
This disregard of the family's potential for constructive future contact where the question of the adequacy of a child's parenting has arisen, has led to a polarisation of public care and private family life.
Public care is seen as inevitably damaging the psychological health of the child and as a verdict on the parents' abilities to offer appropriate care.
By contrast, the family remains the haven of proper child development.
The evidence presented earlier indicating that there are many different patterns of family composition, and that caring is frequently shared with others than the direct family, changes radically our conceptions of what help is relevant when parents find child care difficulties beyond their solution.
Clearly the very notion that responsibility for child development is best shared among a range of people, with stimuli for education and play, attention for health matters and so on deliberately shared between parents and professionals, has immediate implications for the public response when families encounter difficulties in child care.
Add to this the notion that in very many families, as a matter of daily routine, the simple care of children (other than for educational or health purposes) is entrusted to minders, friends and wider family, and it is clear that there is no such thing as the exclusive care of children by their parents.
All parenting is shared between the family and the wider kinship and friendship network, and between this system and state provision.
The consequence of this is that public services designed to develop the potential of children and to safeguard their health and welfare must aim for an approach which incorporates the concept of partnership at its core, and that the legal framework relating to intervention in families should recognise and encourage this sense of partnership.
In some services, this recognition already exists, at least in a rudimentary form.
Few dispute that the health of children is primarily the responsibility of the parents, and much intervention is designed to educate parents in the physical care of their children.
Nursing and medical intervention is therefore dependent  on parental notification, and subsequent care, particularly in relation to young children, can often be exercised only through the parents.
However, imperfectly practised, this approach at least recognises that health care intervention must supplement that of the parents rather than substitute for it.
It is this emphasis on supplementary rather than substitute care (Davis, 1981), growing out of a recognition of the fundamentally shared nature of parenting, which should be the driving force behind a new direction for child care policy.
Collaboration or compulsion?
It is, of course, nothing new to propose that the legal framework of child welfare and professional intervention should reflect the need to work with, rather than against, families.
As the government circular explaining the 1948 Children Act (Circular 48/160) put it:
To keep the family together must be the first aim, and the separation of the child from its parents can only be justified when there is no possibility of securing adequate care for that child in his own home.
Much of the legislation governing public intervention in family life is in fact concerned with laying a duty on public authorities to ‘diminish the need to receive children into or keep them in care’(Child Care Act 1980, S. 1), while the terminology of the law emphasises the reception of children into care, rather than the popular phrase ‘taking them into care’.
This is not mere semantics.
Public authorities have extensive discretion in their operation of the law relating to child welfare (Alcock and Harris, 1982), and are legally empowered to offer a preventive service aimed at supporting families in their caring for children.
The popular image of the ‘welfare’ removing children, however well it may reflect the service given by social services in the eyes of its recipients and of ratepayers, is only a pale reflection of the legal obligations on public authorities.
As with every area of social welfare, practical intervention and the legal authority for it may be worlds apart in their nature and effects.
The potential emphasis in the legislative framework on permissive intervention, implying the co-operation of families in ensuring the adequate care of their children, relates primarily to services designed to prevent the need for admission to care.
In its practical implementation by public authorities, the legislative framework may well give some scope for recognising the potential of family care prior to care.
When admission has taken place, however, the legacy of public and professional attitudes towards parents whose children have entered public care often appears an insur-mountable obstacle to any further constructive contact between parents and their children.
The aura of compulsion in the public child care services has been extensively analysed in recent years.
Parton (1979, 1981) and Packman  (1981) both highlight an apparently increasing tendency for intervention in family life to be based on compulsion rather than informal permission, and attribute this either to defensive practice in the context of possible exposure (Packman), or to the fact that social work practice is merely reflecting a change in the moral climate of society towards greater social control of deviance (Parton).
As this is being written (in 1985), the publicity given to the case of Jasmine Beckford, who died after she was returned from public care to her parents' care, will ensure that social workers will once again be reminded of the need to respond to the apparently contradictory demands of society both to intervene effectively and to respect family autonomy.
These theories regarding the increasing use of compulsion have been criticised by Dingwall and his colleagues (1983) as lacking in authoritative statistical basis, and lacking any overview of the relative , as opposed to absolute , use of compulsory intervention.
According to these critics, the use of compulsory powers to protect children is, in fact, declining in relation to the number of children who may require such protection.
Although the question whether there is any way of determining those in need of protection is at the heart of this debate, this is unlikely to be the prime determinant of professional practice.
It seems clear that, no matter how those at risk may be identified and quantified, social workers will, in practice, increasingly want to ensure that their actions are directed by legislative requirements, both as protection for themselves and as a means of pointing to at least some external criteria for the validity of the protective actions taken in respect of children.
Thus there seems a prima facie risk that social work intervention will increasingly be characterised by recourse to legal justification, and that, regardless of the debate about whether compulsion is on the increase, the public care of children will be further identified with compulsory removal and thus as antipathetic to family care.
The findings from this study point to an alternative way forward.
The clients' contribution
This danger calls increasing attention to a second issue, namely how such intervention is experienced by families.
The analysis of the effects of social policy by interpreting official statistics remains the favourite method of social commentators, despite now extensive evidence that such an approach relies on social indicators which are at best artificially constructed and at worst downright misleading.
In the area of child care policy, juvenile crime is the prime example where figures based on actual offences overlook both the discretion applied by law enforcement agencies and the effects of detection efficiency.
There is now evidence both that the police charge some children and not others (Cigourel, 1967; Parker et al.,
1981), and that the actual rate of offending is much higher than that  revealed by official figures (Hindelang, 1976; West and Farrington, 1973).
Clearly, an accurate account of the effects of social policy in the area of juvenile crime could not be undertaken by reference solely to official statistics.
The same is true of the effects of social services' intervention in the lives of families.
For many years, until Mayer and Timms published The Client Speaks in 1970, it was accepted practice that the effects of social work intervention were assessed by asking social workers to describe their practice and (sometimes) by objective assessment of clients.
The concept that social intervention could have effects unintended by the practitioners, and which could be revealed only by asking the clients for their subjective impressions, took a long time to achieve currency, and had to do battle with the time-honoured attitude in professional practice that the client could not be expected to know what he, or more usually she, wanted.
The even more extraordinary notion, that clients' opinions could be used to reshape social work practice into a more effective intervention, and that social policy itself could be responsive to the views of its recipients, has taken even longer to achieve respectability amongst social commentators.
Launched by Mayer and Timms and continued by, among others, Sainsbury and his colleagues at the University of Sheffield, this new approach to the evaluation of social work has revealed previously uncharted areas of knowledge, and has been extensively reviewed in recent years (Sainsbury, 1980; Craig, 1981; Rees and Wallace, 1982; Fisher, 1983).
One overriding finding from these reviews is that social work has many effects on its clients of which its practitioners are unaware and which they cannot intend.
The potential for misinterpretation and imperfect communication in the interactions between workers and clients is enormous, and no analysis of the effects of social work intervention can be complete without some attention to the views of those on the receiving end.
This dimension to social policy is especially relevant to the question of how public intervention in the lives of families where child care difficulties have arisen can be most effective.
As we have seen, for example, the raw fact that an admission to care takes place as a result of a care order made by the court, and thus appears in official statistics as further evidence of compulsion, may tell us little about how this action is experienced either by the child or by his or her family.
Our research revealed that a significant number of such admissions were, in fact, perceived by the parents as a direct result of their requesting help, and that in such cases the parents actually welcomed the care order as an attempt to meet the needs of their children.
This is not to say that all care orders were welcomed by the families; and there is clearly the possibility that, while this intervention was favoured by the parents, it was resented by the children.
Nevertheless, such findings illustrate the dangers of using apparently incontrovertible facts to develop an argument about the changing nature of public intervention in child care.
Our evidence points to the need both  to be sensitive to the many different recipients of public policy and their potentially different views on its effects, and to the need to understand the meaning, to those on the receiving end, of actions taken in the name of public policy.
A new approach
Our argument is therefore that evidence about the changing nature of family life, about the characteristics of present-day parenting, and about the views of clients, points to a clear need to review both the legal/moral framework governing state intervention in the lives of families and the professional practice of those working in child care.
We accept the view advanced by Parton (1981) that all debate over the proper role of the state in guaranteeing acceptable family life for children centres on judgments of what is acceptable parenting and child behaviour, and that such judgments are essentially influenced by the ideological context.
In the end, as Dingwall and his colleagues (1983) point out, child care policy amounts to a statement on what constitutes ‘the good society’.
We are convinced that the philosophy which was originally intended to predominate in the post-war UK child care legislation — namely that the work of public agencies was to provide supportive services to families, part of which could include admission to care as a means ultimately of preserving family relationships in the long run — has been lost from current practice.
This loss is both accidental, in the sense of resulting from neglect and omission, and deliberate, in the sense that current social policy is founded on myths and misinformation about family life which tend to polarise the public and private care of children.
In our view, this philosophy of partnership with clients, in which the primary caring role of the family is reasserted but effectively supplemented by public services, must be reintroduced into national policy and practice.
The ‘good society’ must, in our view, treat those in need of child care services as fellow citizens rather than as ‘inadequate’parents or children.
Two value positions in recent child care law and practice
Lorraine M. Fox Harding
Interest in this area arose originally from a consideration of the concept of ‘parental rights’, of how this concept is defined in law and social services practice relating to child care and adoption, and to what extent it might be reasonable to speak of there being any extant meaningful ‘parental rights’ in the contemporary scene.
While a broad historical trend was noted towards the limitation of the once near-absolute rights of parents over children by state agencies, with the declared objective of protecting the child's interests and welfare, it seemed that in recent policies a number of different themes could be identified, involving potentially conflicting values and assumptions about children, parents, the state and the rights and roles of different parties in the child care situation.
A study of the literature relating to recent child care legislation, policy and practice, together with a number of interviews carried out with individuals prominent in this field (academics, practitioners and representatives of pressure groups) focusing on policy shifts during the 1970s, suggested that at least two broad value positions, differing from each other on child care policy in important ways, might usefully be defined.
These two schools of thought are termed here the ‘kinship defenders’ and the ‘society as parent protagonists’.
It is suggested that views diverge on the central question of the rights of parents to custody and control of their children in relation to the right of the state (acting through courts and social work agencies) to intervene in the parent-child relationship, to remove children from their parents, to allocate their care and control to other parties, and to determine their subsequent upbringing.
To some extent these differing viewpoints may be regarded as ideological positions advanced in the defence of the interests of particular groups, notably the natural parents and the ‘substitute carers’(foster- and adoptive parents).
The differing viewpoints are here polarised into the two major value positions set out below, though it is recognised that these positions represent relatively extreme points on a dimension of views, rather than two all-embracing categories.
Other viewpoints may be defined which occupy an intermediate location between these two, and there are also schools of thought which are not readily assimilable to the dimension suggested, for example those which put emphasis on a radical definition of ‘children's rights’.
A ‘practitioner’ view was also identified which was pragmatic, accepting elements of both the major value positions outlined here but being more aware of the need for different approaches in different individual cases, and more concerned about matters of detailed practice than of principle (though this may mean simply that values and principles were not made explicit).
The ‘kinship defenders'
The position of the ‘kinship defenders’ may be briefly outlined as follows.
In this view the natural — that is, biological — family is perceived as being of unique value to the child and as being, for the vast majority of children, the optimum context for their growth, upbringing and development.
State intervention should therefore be directed to preserving, supporting and strengthening the family unit; only in unusual and extreme situations should it be disrupted.
Where obviously inadequate parenting occurs, the response of the statutory services in most cases should be to support parents and help improve their parenting, whilst keeping the child within the family.
Commentators in this school tend to emphasise class and economic variables as factors producing poor standards of child care, and to de-emphasise parental culpability and personal inadequacy.
Thus, in this view parents as well as children tend to appear as victims and, in particular, working-class parents are seen as vulnerable and powerless vis-à-vis statutory agencies.
It is thought that the separation of children from poor parents, the keeping of children apart from parents and the removal of parental rights are undertaken too readily by these agencies.
Ideally, steps should not be taken to remove children from parental care unless there is clearly no other way to prevent harm to them and unless other options, such as day-care, financial and housing help, have been investigated first.
When children have been removed, positive efforts should be made to rehabilitate them with their parents as soon as possible.
Of the ‘kinship defenders’, the most notable is probably Holman, whose position is outlined in his pamphlet Inequality in Child Care and elsewhere.
He argues that a good deal of the apparent need for substitute child care is produced by social deprivation and its attendant pressures, rather than by parental inadequacy or culpability per se .
The ties between parents and child are strong; parents may be forced into, rather than willingly accepting of, separation from their children; when separated, they may not want to make the final break via adoption.
The response of the social services to poor standards of parenting should be the provision of more supportive services to enable natural families to cope better, rather than facilitating the removal of children to substitute care and the ultimate separation of adoption.
Holman speaks emotively of parents ‘losing’ their children, which suggests that he identifies the wishes and feelings of parents as being of not insignificant importance alongside the needs of children.
Indeed, in writing about unmarried mothers and child separation, he specifically states that the wishes of the mothers should be taken into consideration more strongly in the legislation concerning the future of their children.
Holman is critical of the 1975 Children Act for taking no cognisance of the link between child separation and poverty.
The major child care need is to provide the necessary environmental facilities to prevent families from breaking up, or to bring separated families together again.
In Holman's  view — and in contrast to beliefs held in some quarters — social work practice tends not to encourage contact between parents and children in care, or the reunification of separated families.
In support of this contention he quotes research done by Thorpe, who found in a study of long-term foster-children that only 27 per cent had contact with their parents every six months or more frequently and that over 60 per cent of natural parents did not know where their children were living, with only 21 per cent feeling encouraged by their social worker to maintain contact.
In only 5 per cent of cases was rehabilitation considered by the social worker to be a possibility and in no case at all was there any definite plan towards rehabilitation.
Holman stresses that lack of contact did not necessarily reflect parental wishes (in fact nearly half of the parents wanted their children back), but parents felt they were being tacitly excluded by the agency.
In a recent article Holman reiterates his arguments.
In his view, in the 1970s the drop in children available for adoption led adoption pressure groups to advocate a kind of fostering closer to adoption, with the natural parents having fewer rights to intervene in the foster placement.
At the same time, influential psychodynamic doctrine held that children can only relate to one set of parent figures and that psychological ties are more important than biological ones.
The 1975 Act contained various provisions to limit parental rights, the effects of which were to increase the likelihood of parents losing touch with their children and to encourage quasi-adoptive fostering exclusive of natural parents, while no extra community resources were provided to prevent children having to leave their parents at all.
Since 1975 community services such as day care, which have a role in preventing reception into care, have contracted under government spending cuts.
In the light of these cuts, much might be achieved by stimulating localities to care for their own children — that is, by the greater use of informal sources of substitute child care.
And Thoburn's research has shown that persistent social work can in fact bring about the return of children to natural parents who previously could not cope.
Other writers in the field have made similar points.
Tunstill attacks practice guides for social workers issued by the Association of British Adoption and Fostering Agencies, for emphasising the removal of parental rights and placement of children for adoption and long-term fostering.
Tunstill is critical of these guides for leaning heavily to the side of the substitute carers and for stressing the advantages of removal from inadequate natural parents and placement with long-term substitute families if the child is in care from an early age and if the relationship with the natural parent is not consistent and affectionate.
She suggests that this is a hard-line criterion against natural parents which does not take account of social workers' failure to encourage regular contact between natural parents and children in care.
It is also worth mentioning some of the work of Wilson, who, though mainly concerned with factors influencing delinquency, comments that material shortages in the home and poor environmental conditions adversely affect child rearing.
Life in the slum  forces parents to adopt child-rearing methods of which they do not approve, and Wilson concludes that ‘in the world of poverty the material preconditions necessary for child-centred parenting do not exist’.
This underlines the argument that it is poor children whose rearing is most likely to appear to agencies to be unsatisfactory.[…]
A number of pressure groups should also be referred to as being among the ‘kinship defenders’.
The British Association of Social Workers attacked the care provisions of the 1975 Act as an attempt to undermine working-class parents in particular.
In their response to the Houghton Report which preceded the Act in 1972, BASW argued that the law should not allow parental responsibilities to be removed (under Section 2 of the 1948 Act) unless there were good reason to suppose that the local authority's judgment of the child's interests was better than the parents'.
They also stressed the difference between adoption and fostering, not seen as simply one of length of placement: often the aim of fostering was restoration of the child to the natural family, or at least the maintenance of contact with it.
And BASW were generally unhappy about the introduction of arbitrary time limits into the legislation.
The Child Poverty Action Group, in their comments on the 1975 Act when it was still in bill form, stressed the link between poverty and children being received into or committed to care, and the fact that the latter often occurred because of a lack of housing or day-care facilities.
The Group believed that the Children Bill further eroded the already inadequate rights of poor families by allowing for the progressive transfer of parental rights to foster-parents and by widening the powers to dispense with parental consent to adoption.
The National Council for One-Parent Families is, understandably, concerned about the number of one-parent family children who go into substitute care, arguing that they are more vulnerable to separation because the help they need is often withheld.
Many social workers fail to visit on a regular preventive basis and requests for assistance or cries for help are often ignored.
It is argued that lone parents have children taken away from them as a punishment for their failure to cope with society's shortcomings and its failure to offer adequate support.
Some quotations from individuals interviewed on child care policy illustrate further the main concerns of the ‘kinship defenders’.
Points raised frequently by these respondents concerned the nature and problems of adoption, the difficulties of the ‘time limits’ provisions in the 1975 Act and the value of the natural family for the child.[…]
One respondent in this school of thought commented on the strength of the bond between even inadequate parents and children, saying: ‘The astounding thing, in my experience as a social worker, is that for the most part kids are crazy about their parents, even when they're being badly treated.’
Questioned as to whether she thought there really was a blood tie, this respondent replied:
Well, I think the children don't like being taken into care, for the most part.
It isn't what most of them want.
And parents have to be appallingly bad before they do.
I'm not talking about the Maria Colwell…
I'm talking about  the whole grey area, where Social Services Departments define parents as inadequate or not good enough or just generally at risk.
My experience is that kids really like their parents best, unless the very worst is going on.
This respondent was also concerned about the failure of social workers to work for rehabilitation, stating, ‘There are lots of social workers who think it quite appropriate to take a child away from dodgy natural parents and work avidly towards replacing it with adoptive ones.’
Another respondent commented on the child's relationship to the foster family and the natural family as follows:
I see fostering, except under exceptional circumstances, as the in trust for the natural family' thing, and I think some of the efforts made to safeguard the child are in fact safeguarding the foster-parents…
I think there's always a danger of being a bit simplistic about children who I think have a right to their own family, and that doesn't just mean parents, it means grandparents, people who can talk to them about their past, the past of the family.
And a third reiterated that it is the poor who come into contact with Social Services Departments, while:
middle-class people, rich people, go elsewhere; they go and see their GP, they have a wider network of people that they could perhaps draw on; and if they don't they have the nine-to-five freedom from their children, the release from the pressures of having kids around; they have boarding schools which are a legitimate way of getting rid of our children if you have the money to do it.
The central concerns of the kinship school hardly need restating.
There is a focus upon natural families, and in particular poor natural families, whose ties are threatened by the powers of courts and social workers to remove children and keep them away from their parents, perhaps permanently.
The alternative and desired emphasis of policy would be to provide more resources to parents caring for their children at home so that they could do their job better, and to reunite with their parents, wherever possible, those children who have been removed.
The 1975 Children Act, however, constitutes a step in the opposite direction.
The ‘society-as-parent protagonists'
In contrast to the ‘kinship defenders’ the ‘society-as-parent protagonists’seem to place greater faith in the possibility of beneficent state intervention to protect children's well-being.
Indeed, the responsibility and necessity for such action to defend children against parental mistreatment is strongly emphasised.
When parental care is inadequate, children should be placed with those who are best able to care for them.
Because of the emphasis on good care rather than biological bonds, this school of thought tends to hold a fairly favourable view of good substitute carers and to wish to strengthen their position vis-à-vis the natural parents.
A high value tends to be placed on certainty and permanence, so that when a child is removed  from his natural parents and rapid rehabilitation seems unlikely, he should not be confused by multiple parent figures or uncertain plans for his future.
It may then be better for his welfare to sever contact with the family of origin completely and enable the substitute carers to assume the full parental role.
The emphasis is on the child as a unit distinct from his [or her]family, and on the responsibility of society to care for [the child]in the best way possible — if necessary by giving care of him or her, permanently and legally, to adults other than the parents.
This view is critical of the concept of ‘parental rights’ which is seen as being still too influential in popular thinking about parents and children.
Proponents of this view tend to see the idea of parental possession as one that is still protected and upheld by the law and by social agencies; and they believe this state of affairs to be damaging to children, given that parents' and children's interests sometimes conflict.
Kellmer Pringle is among the most outspoken proponents of the society-as-parent type of view.
She is critical of attitudes stressing the paramountcy of biological parenthood as being ambivalent and contradictory.
In her view society overvalues children's ties with their parents and is too slow to cut them permanently.
Society suffers from a misplaced faith in the ‘blood tie’ and an over-romanticised picture of parenthood.
The idea that children belong to their parents like other possessions over which [the parents]may experience exclusive rights has no factual foundation and should be rejected; children are only on temporary loan to their parents.
Kellmer Pringle argues that we need a concept of responsible and informed parenthood and a recognition that the ability and willingness to undertake the responsibilities of parenthood are not dependent on, or necessarily a consequence of, biological parenthood.
The stress is on psychological parenthood.
Kellmer Pringle believes that we go too far in asserting that the way parents bring up their children is solely their own concern.
In law and practice, we often act as though the overvalued blood ties ensured satisfactory parenting, with the result that the child's wellbeing is sacrificed to that of the adult.
Tizard puts a similar, though less emphatic, case in Adoption: A Second Chance , which reports a study that compared children in institutional care in early life who were subsequently adopted, with similar children who were restored to their natural parent.
Tizard's findings led her to conclude that the adopted children were the most fortunate — as a group they had fewer problems than the restored children.
With reference to the natural mothers whose children had been restored to them, she says, ‘The blood tie by no means implied a love tie’, and comments that the adoptive mothers were warmer on the whole than the natural mothers.
In Tizard's view, fostering does not offer children the security of adoption: the uncertainty disturbed the children and contacts with the natural parents aroused anxiety in them.
Her study suggested that social work decisions were influenced by a number of underlying and often implicit assumptions, which included the primacy of the blood tie and the primacy of natural parental possession.
The parents' right to dispose of their child  overrode considerations of the child's own rights: it was accepted that children should be put in care while the parents made up their minds whether to relinquish them or not.
Parental contact, though irregular, prevented the child from forming an alternative parent-child relationship.
Tizard argues that her study, together with others, suggests that attempts to restore a child to his [or her]natural family may not be in the best interests of the child.
Children need someone unconditionally and permanently committed to them, and it is difficult to see why a parent who takes no responsibility for a child's care has a right to prevent someone else from doing so.
However, Tizard does acknowledge that the issue is complicated by social inequality — children who come into care tend to come from the most powerless sector of society.
In some cases, parents would have been able to keep the child if minimal material assistance had been available.
There is therefore a need for better family support services.
Another study which brings forward similar, though not identical, conclusions is that carried out by Rowe and Lambert,Children Who Wait .
This was an influential study which broadly supported the view that permanent substitute parents should be found for children in long-term care.
The study investigated children in care whose social workers wanted to find homes with substitute families for them, taking as two basic assumptions that every child has a right to a family of his [or her]own, and that adoption and fostering are not completely separate categories but have a considerable area of overlap.
It was found that 22 per cent of the whole group of children were thought to need a substitute family; and permanent substitute families were being sought for nearly three-quarters of these.
Forty per cent of the children needing placement were considered to need permanent foster homes, 6 per cent direct adoption and 26 per cent a foster home with a view to adoption.
It was found that decisions about placements were often long delayed while efforts were made to solve the family's problems.
Yet rehabilitation was only expected for a minority about 25 per cent— of all the children in the study.
There was little parental contact — and here the findings of Rowe and Lambert echo those of Thorpe, though different conclusions are drawn from them.
Only 5 per cent of the children saw their parents as often as once a month; 41 per cent had no parental contact.
The longer the children stayed in care the less parental contact they had.
In discussing the implications of their study, Rowe and Lambert say ‘rehabilitation for children in long-term care is still for the most part a slogan rather than a reality’.
They emphasise that most of the children judged by their social workers to need placement needed permanent rather than temporary substitute families.
They see a need to identify those children requiring new parents, and believe that social workers should be more committed to placing children with new parents in permanent homes; and they note a greater commitment to this policy in the United States.
In Rowe and Lambert's view, then, a child should either be speedily  returned to his [or her]own family or, if this is not possible […]securely established in a permanent substitute family.[…]
The most important pressure group which may be associated with the ‘society-as-parent’ school is the British Agencies for Adoption and Fostering (BAAF), formerly the Association of British Adoption and Fostering Agencies (ABAFA).
Particularly relevant here is their publication Terminating Parental Contact , which considered whether, and in which circumstances, a parent may be prevented from personal contact with a child in care.
This paper stressed the need to make plans for children based on a realistic assessment of whether or not rehabilitation with the natural family is possible and to consider the purpose of parental contact and its effects on the child.
The starting point in assessing the value of contact should be: is it of benefit to the child and, if so, how?
The authors say that this is a somewhat uncommon approach to the problem, as access to children in care is more often discussed in terms of the benefit to the parents.
But if there is some doubt about the child returning home, then it is necessary to ask if the benefits of contact outweigh the drawbacks.
Visits may strengthen bonds with a parent who is unlikely to resume care, and then constitute an obstacle to finding an appropriate placement.
As an alternative to actual contact, knowledge about the family of origin can be supplied through discussion, photographs, letters and family albums.
Again, there is a concern about certainty in the placement situation.
Uncertainty about the future and lack of continuity of decisions make it hard for the substitute parents to make a strong commitment to the child and include the natural parent.
The paper goes on to say that since ‘there is an assumption in our society that the blood tie or relationship with the parent is the ideal, then any alternative is seen as a failure rather than as something in the child's best interest’.
This tendency to see alternatives as second best, it is argued, inhibits decisions.
It is useful to refer again to the practice guides which the then ABAFA produced to the 1975 Children Act (1976 and 1977)(and which were criticised by Tunstill).
These guides, dealing with the Act in general and with the assumption of parental rights, aimed to help social workers understand the new legislation, making use of case histories and similar exercises.
The emphasis was on the termination of parental rights in favour of long-term fostering and adoption; Tunstill comments that, in three out of the four case histories in the guide to the assumption of parental rights, the only possibility of a ‘happy ending’ was by means of such steps.
Similar points were made in the guides as in Terminating Parental Contact .
Children are seen as needing long-term substitute families if their own parents cannot meet all their needs; if for example, there is no consistent or affectionate relationship with the parent, or if contact is only sporadic.
The ‘society-as-parent’ school is further illustrated by quoting from respondents interviewed by the author, though fewer of these took this position than were committed to a ‘defence of kinship’view and their views tended to be less strongly and less explicitly-stated.
Like the first group of respondents, they had comments to make on the ‘time limits’ provision in the 1975 Act, on the conflict between the child's rights and interests and those of the parents, and on adoption.
One respondent argued in support of time limits as follows:
It is always my hope and belief that by alerting social workers to the danger for children and parents of the passage of time and requiring them to point these out to the natural parents, that one would be avoiding that sort of drift, and collusion with parents of ‘Oh don't worry, you get yourself together and then we'll think about him coming home.’
I mean, there's an awful lot that goes on!
As though it doesn't matter that time is going on.
She saw the 1975 Act's emphasis on adoption as positive.
It would:
make people think more in terms of adoption for some children, but the problem is authorities don't do anything, they just drift with them…
I would rather see a few children unnecessarily separated from their parents than thousands of them just remain without any parents at all![…].
In general, then, supporters of the ‘society-as-parent’ view tend to favour changes in the 1975 Children Act which facilitate the removal and transfer of parental rights.
Rowe, for example, believes the Act will be recorded in history as ‘another milestone in the long progress towards recognising children as persons and not the possessions of adults’.
Proponents of this approach tend to feel that the changes made so far do not go far enough, however, and that excessive consideration for the biological parent-child relationship is still being allowed to put the child's future at risk.
An example might be the provisions which state that the child's welfare is to be the first consideration in decisions relating to adoption and children in care (Sections 3 and 59).
To some commentators this appears to leave too much scope for giving continued weight to parental wishes, and they would like to see the sections worded ‘first and paramount consideration’.
Areas of convergence between the two positions
Before summarising what appear to the writer to be the major points of difference between the two value positions, it might be advisable first to outline their apparent areas of agreement.
It should be noted that both points of view would claim to be centrally concerned with the well-being of children.
The problem arises over the interpretation of the concept of welfare, or the child's best interests, and of other concepts much used in child care practice, such as‘neglect’, ‘ill-treatment’ or being ‘in moral danger’.
Walton has commented usefully on this, arguing that the use of the phrase ‘the best interests of the child’ has often confused rather than helped child care debates, creating the illusion that these interests constitute an objective fact.
Walton argues that views of ‘best interests’ are  rather always contingent, depending on the particular position and assumptions of the person expressing them as well as on objective circumstances.
Phrases like this are often used like the jargon of politics, as deceptively simple slogans.
The term ‘best interests’ is used to justify action which is taken with respect to children, but it is open to abuse, creates confusion and draws a veil of ignorance over important issues.
In Walton's view, there is a need to consider factors to be taken into account if the phrase is to be infused with greater meaning, and to clarify whether what is meant is the best interests of all children in a particular community, or of deprived, maladjusted or delinquent children, or of one particular child.
Otherwise there is a danger that the phrase will be used merely symbolically, to create the illusion of change, to deflect criticism, or to discredit opposition (because no one would want to be seen to oppose ‘the child's best interests’).
Walton stresses that there is no simple concept or criterion of the child's best interests which can be applied in a crude rule-of-thumb way, and no group or individual which has sole authority to assume that generally it has the best conception of the child's interests.
Both schools of thought defined here, then, would claim to have as their central focus the child's welfare, although it appears that the ‘society-as-parent’ school more often uses this phrase or phrases like it, while the other group tends to talk about the family.
Another area of apparent convergence is that both schools of thought would acknowledge that in some situations parental care is so bad that children should be removed and kept away from their parents.
That is, this viewpoint is not the monopoly of the ‘society-as-parent protagonists’.
The difference is one of emphasis, of how and under what circumstances children should be removed and when parental contact should be maintained and restoration to the parent attempted.[…]
Thirdly, it seems that both groups of critics would want to see greater support given to natural families, in general, to help them to care for their children more effectively and to prevent the need for substitute care arising.
Again, the difference is one of emphasis.
The ‘kinship defenders’ are more concerned to press for policy changes, such as more day-care provision to help one-parent families, as urgently necessary; the other group perhaps sees such changes as more long term, as not immediately related to the needs of the children who are currently the subject of placement decisions.
But they are not entirely unsympathetic to natural parents.
Tizard, for example, mentions the need to support the natural parents to enable them to care adequately; Kellmer Pringle has advocated payment for mothers who stay at home to care; and a further interviewee who may be identified with the ‘society-as-parent’ view had this to say in answer to the argument that the 1975 Act put already powerless parents in an even more powerless position:
I think I would respond by saying that I wouldn't in any sense dispute the need to try to prevent things getting to that point.
But I can't accept the argument that because you make provision to deal by law as well as by practice with the situations where things have got to that point in order to  safeguard children, that you are thereby saying that you are going to take more children from their parents!
I mean, I think that one should put as much service as one possibly can into the preventive end — I can't see it as an either/or!
Major differences between the two positions
The differences between the two value positions outlined are somewhat blurred by the apparent consensus on certain general points — the primacy of the child's welfare as a guiding principle, the need for child removal in some cases, and the need for broad preventive, parent-support policies.
However, it is suggested that these points of convergence should not be allowed to disguise important differences in values and assumptions between the two positions.
An attempt is now made to summarise the major areas of disagreement or difference of emphasis, under the following nine headings:
1
Differences on the importance of the blood tie and the natural family.
2
Differences on the effects of uncertainty and multiple parent figures.
3
Different views on the emphasis currently given to prevention and rehabilitation in practice.
4
Different views on the success of adoption.
5
Different views on the nature of fostering.
6
Difference on the adequacy of professional and court decision making and the effectiveness of state intervention generally in child care matters.
7
Different views on the existing balance of power between natural parents, statutory agencies and substitute parents.
8
Differential awareness of the class transaction element in child care.
9
Different concepts of the causes of, and remedies for, unsatisfactory parenting.
The importance of the blood tie and the natural family
On the whole the ‘kinship defenders’ defend the biological parents and their value to the child, and the ‘society-as-parent’school supports the psychological parents — those who have given most care and attention to the child and stand in a close, loving relationship to him [or her].
It is not clear to what degree the kinship defenders would want to preserve the link with biological parents who are in no way the psychological parents as well— that is , how much they value the blood tie as such.
Perhaps in attacking child removal the kinship defenders have mostly in mind cases where the biological parent is also the psychological parent, albeit an inadequate one.
However, one ‘kinship defender’ interviewed did speak of children ‘having intense feelings for their own parents even if they've never seen them’.
2 The effects on the child of uncertainty and multiple parent figures
The ‘society-as-parent’ supporters seem preoccupied with the necessity for certainty, permanence, security and a stable bond with a single set of parent figures in a relationship where both sides feel safe enough to make a long-term commitment.
Those who defend the kinship bond find more acceptable a situation where, say, a child may maintain an active relationship with his [or her]natural parents while living with foster-parents, or may even remain in contact with them after adoption.
It should be noted, however, that a concern for certainty and a single set of parent figures might also imply support for a position of minimal state intervention.
3 The emphasis currently given to prevention and rehabilitation with natural parents in practice
While both groups of thinkers tend to admit the lack of preventive policies and the need for more resources here, the kinship school is more acutely conscious of this and perhaps more optimistic about what preventive services might achieve in terms of better parenting.
It would therefore like to see a shift in priorities to prevention rather than substitute care.
['Kinship defenders']also feel that insufficient work is carried out by social workers on the rehabilitation of separated families, while at least some of the ‘society-as-parent’ school seem more aware of situations where rehabilitation is attempted inappropriately, and perhaps foisted on an unwilling parent, and feel that social workers should be discouraged from holding out unrealistic hopes of restoring the child.
One interviewee commented:
This business of planning rehabilitation and planning adoption — fostering with a potential view to adoption simultaneously, which is what seems to happen now — seems to me absolutely dotty!
With one hand people are placing children while on the other hand they are still encouraging the natural parents to think there's some chance of having them back!
Well this is unfair to everybody.
4 The success of adoption
On the whole, the ‘society-as-parent’ school tends to look more favourably on adoption.
Tizard's study, for example, gives a positive picture in terms of the effects of adoption on the child's development and the creation of an affectionate family unit, as compared with long-term fostering or restoration of a separated child to the natural mother.
The kinship school, however, tends to have two kinds of reservation about studies which seem to demonstrate the success of adoption.
One type of reservation relates to the class nature of adoption: it is thought that the observed beneficial effects of adoption stem mostly from the tendency of adoption to move children to a somewhat higher social class than that of the family of origin.
Holman, for example, in an article analysing the class nature of adoption, notes the gross underrepresentation found in studies of adoption of Classes IV and V among adoptive parents.
The other reservation concerns the long-term effects of adoption, which it is thought may damage personality and identity.
It is hypothesised that most existing studies of adoption are not sufficiently long term to, demonstrate these effects.
An interviewee of the Holman group observed, ‘My experience as a child care officer was that some of the worst adoption breakdowns and problems were for kids in their adolescence.’
There is some evidence that adopted children make greater use of the psychiatric services than the general population, though this could be due to class factors.
In general, it is more difficult to trace adoption breakdown than foster home breakdown, as the families concerned will not necessarily return to the agencies involved in the original placement.
So it can be argued that adoption is in fact a less successful aspect of child care policy than it appears.
5 The nature of fostering
The ‘kinship defenders’ tend to see adoption and fostering as qualitatively different types of care, the distinction being not merely dependent on the length of the placement.
Holman has distinguished between ‘inclusive’ and ‘exclusive’fostering, with a preference expressed for ‘inclusive’fostering in which the natural parents are actively involved in the placement.
‘Exclusive’ fostering, where the foster-parents tend to treat the child rather as though he [or she]were their own or they had adopted him [or her], is thought to be damaging to the child's identity, as well as hindering restoration to the natural parents.
By contrast, those who support the ‘society-as-parent’ position see adoption and fostering not necessarily as mutually exclusive, but as both being forms of substitute care whose boundaries may be blurred.
Long-term foster placements may turn into de facto or, eventually, legal adoptions.
One of the basic assumptions of Rowe and Lambert's study was that adoption and fostering are not completely separate categories but overlap.
In the ‘society-as-parent’ view, long-term, exclusive fostering would not necessarily be deplored, although there may be a wish to see it achieve the more secure legal status of custodianship or adoption.
6 The adequacy of professional and court decision making, and the effectiveness of state intervention generally, in child care matters
The ‘kinship defenders’ are generally far more sceptical than the other group about the adequacy of both courts and social services agencies in making decisions about child placement and protecting the child's interests and well-being.
While natural parents may be inadequate, even neglectful and cruel, this has to be balanced against the unsuitability of state agencies to fulfil the parental role, particularly in the long term.
Removing a child to public care is no magic answer to ill-treatment in the natural home, but may result in, for example, placement in a series of unsuitable foster homes, resulting in a cumulative experience of rejection and failure.
Indeed, substitute child care might be worse than the situation from which the child has been removed.
(There have been cases, for example, of child deaths in supposedly supervised foster homes.)
The ‘society-as-parent’ protagonists seem to place rather more confidence in society's ability, acting through its official agencies, to make wise decisions on the care of children.
The state and its machinery is generally viewed as beneficent in this context.
7 The balance of power between natural parents, statutory agencies and substitute parents
The ‘kinship defenders’ see the natural parents who come into contact with statutory agencies as being in a relatively weak position, with their rights severely eroded by various legal provisions, most recently the 1975 Act which strengthened the powers of both local authorities and foster-parents to an unacceptable degree.
Draper says, ‘the dice are loaded against the parents’; Holman that the 1975 Act ‘concentrates exclusively on facilitating the removal of children from their families and on reducing the rights of natural parents’.
The ‘society-as-parent’ protagonists, on the other hand, tend to see parental rights as a force still to be reckoned with in law, agency practice and social attitudes.
Kellmer Pringle, for example, attacks the idea (presumed still commonly held) that children are comparable with other possessions over whom parents may exercise exclusive rights; Tizard objects to the way in which parents were able to prevent others from providing permanent care for their children, although they did not do so themselves.
This school would like to see the balance of power shifted further towards statutory decision makers and those who provide substitute care.
8 The class transaction element in child care
Undoubtedly, the Holman kinship school is more aware of the class nature of child care services and policy (as indicated above, under 4).
The people who lose their children to public care are, disproportionately, socially deprived, lower-class parents who are prey to such disadvantages as low income, inadequate housing, homelessness, living in deprived inner-city neighbourhoods, unemployment or erratic employment, and frequent changes of home.
Social workers, judges, adoptive parents (and, more recently, professional foster-parents) are largely middle class and apply middle-class values and norms to child care situations, resulting in what is in effect discrimination against the poor.
While there are inadequate middle-class parents, they suffer less visibility than poor parents, and have a wider range of child care options available to them.
A crude summary of this political position would be that child care policies remove the children of the poor and attempt to absorb them into  the middle class.
Schorr, for example, has described adoption agencies as ‘a system for distributing children from the poor to the middle class’.
The ‘society-as-parent’ thinkers, on the other hand, tend to perceive child care matters in personal rather than political terms and are more inclined to the views expressed or implied in the following comments by respondents from this group: ‘you could never have done anything with this poor mother’, and:
I think those are perhaps the hardest cases, where the parents are not able to cope because they just cannot cope, they are subnormal, and you can't in any way say that they are to blame, they're just totally inadequate people.
This relates to the final major point of difference between the two positions.
9 Concepts of the causes of, and remedies for, unsatisfactory parenting
In the view of Holman and others who take a similar approach, bad parenting is firmly linked with social deprivation and its concomitant pressures on families.
Holman stresses that poor parents may well share the child care values and objectives of the wider society, but are prevented from achieving them by depriving environments.
He comments:
It is a sobering thought that probably many of the parents whose children are in public care were born with capacities similar to readers of this paper.
Given similar external circumstances, we might well have reacted as they have done, and we would have lost our children.
The remedies for bad parenting thus focus on reducing social deprivation through provisions such as day care, financial support and community action by groups of parents.
The ‘society-as-parent’ thinkers, as indicated above, are more likely to construe unsatisfactory parenting in terms of personal inadequacy.
(Holman would characterise this as ‘blaming the poor’.)
The remedies, looking at it in this light, would be, in the main, individualised help or the removal of the children to a ‘fresh start’ with more adequate parent figures.
The two value positions in context
It may legitimately be asked whether and how the two positions defined may be connected with, or reflect, wider intellectual traditions or ideological stances.
For example, may the two schools of thought be most usefully seen as integral to broad political perspectives which propose contrasting views of the state, social work as a part of state intervention, social institutions, and the relations between socioeconomic groups?
Or may the most helpful interpretation be to align the two child care positions with opposing camps in the field of psychological explanation?
Only a lightly sketched attempt is made here to place the ‘kinship  defenders’ and the ‘society-as-parent protagonists’in the context of broader viewpoints and sets of values; a thorough analysis could be a very lengthy exercise.
It is suggested that a useful starting point might be to classify the nine major points of difference which are outlined as distinguishing the two value positions.
The following categories of difference seem to emerge.
Firstly, differences one and two, concerning questions of (1) the blood tie and the natural family and (2) the effects of uncertainty and multiple parent figures, seem to be essentially differences relating to conflicting ideas about child psychology .
Secondly, the following four differences, concerning (3) the emphasis in child care practice on prevention and rehabilitation,(4) the success of adoption,(5) the nature of fostering, and (6) the adequacy of state intervention in child care, reflect different views on child care policy .
Thirdly, the three last differences, relating to (7) the balance of power between different parties,(8) the class element in child care, and (9) the causes of, and remedies for, poor parenting, represent broader ideas about society — about power, social relations and social influences.
It is argued that the first and third categories of difference, the psychological and the social or political, constitute the most useful bases from which to consider the link with broader intellectual positions.
The psychological assumptions underlying the ‘society-as-parent’ position may be seen as broadly deriving from psychoanalytic theory.
It is not so clear what the theoretical foundations (within psychology) of the kinship school might be.
The notion of identity and of healthy identity stemming from knowledge of and contact with one's family of origin seems to be a crucial concept.
And it may be noted that Holman draws on psychological research to emphasise the adverse effects on children of separation from their parents, of the failure to develop relationships at all, and of disruptive family relationships.
He also argues that poverty causes lowered self-respect and self-image, and cites data showing two contrasting behavioural reactions to this: withdrawal and aggression.
The political assumptions are perhaps easier to identify.
The ‘kinship’ school may reasonably be associated with a radical analysis of society which stresses the importance of class and power.
Child care policies are seen as part of a structure of political and economic relations in which dominant groups control subordinate and, in particular, deviant groups by a range of sanctions.
Dominant values are upheld and dominant interests protected in the name of universal interests — in the child care case, in the cause of child welfare, which is assumed to be some kind of objectively assessable ‘good thing’.
In reality, according to this view, only certain groups of children and parents are interfered with by state agencies, with the objectives of upholding dominant values about child rearing, maintaining particular sorts of socialisation, and, to some degree, redistributing deprived children to members of more powerful social groups who, for various reasons, desire to care for them.
Finally, the ‘kinship defenders’ are in harmony with a radical view of society in putting some emphasis on working-class self-help and self-determination, rather than on state paternalism, in finding solutions to social and personal problems (for example, Holman's suggestions about informal child care resources).
If the ‘kinship’ school may be located within the broader framework of a power or class analysis of society, the ‘society-as-parent’supporters might be defined as belonging more to what might be termed a ‘personal.
responsibility analysis’ which broadly takes the existing political and economic structure of society for granted, or which does not relate it very strongly to individual families' difficulties.
The ‘society-as-parent’ school perhaps falls into a tradition of paternalistic state intervention in the cause of social welfare, which has its roots in the nineteenth century; a tradition in which the values of the dominant class have been imposed on the poor for their own good, and in which the children of the poor have been removed to make a ‘fresh start’in what were adjudged more favourable circumstances than those of their origins.
The possibility that this approach might appear to poor parents as a punishment for their poverty was not considered to be a significant part of the equation.
Welfare, in the broader view of which this approach to child care might be deemed a part, is construed in individual terms: individuals are deemed responsible for their conduct, and little weight is given to structural, environmental and material determinants of behaviour.
Conclusion
Two value positions in child care have been defined, which differ on questions of child psychology, child care policy and the broader social framework in which child care policy is located.
In general, one viewpoint leans towards a class or power analysis of child care, while the other tends to take the existing social structure as given and to construe child care issues in more individualistic terms.
Material has been brought forward from the literature and from interviews to illustrate and refine the differences between the two schools of thought.
Apparent areas of convergence, such as an ostensible focusing on the ‘welfare of the child’, should not be allowed to disguise what are regarded as real differences stemming from different psychological and political assumptions underlying the two positions.
What kind of permanence?
June Thoburn
There is no doubt in my mind that issues surrounding permanent family placement with a child's own family are very similar to those which surround permanent family placement in substitute families.
Because of my research experience working with two aspects of permanence, related in my book Captive Clients (1980) and the evaluation of The Child Wants a Home project (Adoption and Fostering , Vol. 9, No. 1), I find it particularly sad that when the term permanence is mentioned in British social work circles it tends to be seen as synonymous with adoption.
In the average social work department that would be the first reaction of social workers when permanent placement was mentioned.
The Select Committee on Children in Care (para. 191) commented:
There is at the moment, considerable confusion over the significance of the search for permanence in a placement.
It should not have become a synonym for adoption.
The search for permanence, in our view, could be accomplished in many ways including custodianship, long-term fostering, or even in some circumstances a stay in a residential home or, of course, rehabilitation with a child's natural family.
By contrast, in America permanence planning and research into permanence are always seen as including rehabilitation with the child's natural family as a major permanence option.
In this country we discovered the value of prevention and rehabilitation in the 1950s and 1960s and our belief in permanence achieved through working with a child in his own family was given legal sanction in Section 1 of the 1963 Act.
Our permanency planning has been a two-stage affair, but we never got our preventive and rehabilitative act together properly in the 1960s.
The research of Jane Rowe and Lydia Lambert, published in Children Who Wait in 1973, showed us how inadequate our work had been in that respect.
We therefore moved over to the second limb of the permanency strategy, the strategy of placement in substitute new families preferably for adoption.
The Americans were actually behind us in discovering the importance of preventive and rehabilitative services, but when they got round to looking for permanence for children in care their strategy was a combined one of permanence with natural families and permanence with new families.
The biggest difference one sees in practice is that in America permanence placement units employ workers who are specialists at working with natural families, whereas in this country, as far as I know, the units employ only specialists in adoption and fostering.
Even so, they find that their skills do enable them to get children back to their own homes, although this as yet is a secondary role.
I very much hope that we will soon move forward to see permanence units which employ staff equally for their ability to work at getting a child back with natural families as for their skills in working with substitute new families.
It is an interesting question whether the sort of workers who are good at getting children back with their natural families are different from those who are good at placing children with new families.
It may be that we need to experiment with permanence units, some of which will specialise in achieving permanence through the return to natural families, and others in achieving permanence by placement with new families, and also having units which combine the two functions.
The Americans do not seem to have had problems in setting up units which seek to provide permanence by offering specialist and intensive social work services both to natural families and to children joining substitute new families.
Although many local authorities in their strategy documents state that they aim first at rehabilitation, I remain unconvinced that they are devoting the same resources in terms of skilled social workers with small caseloads and adequate financial support to natural families, as they do to finding and supporting new families.
Towards the end of the research on The Child Wants a Home project we noted more flexibility in the way in which placements were effected.
This probably reflects a change in the children to be placed.
In the early stages many of the children had been in residential care for periods of years, had little or no contact with members of the natural family and had lost all serious hope of returning there.
Towards the end of the research most of the children referred had been in care for shorter periods of time and were still in more or less meaningful contact with members of their natural families.
I would like to suggest that a rigid model of permanent placement and of methods of achieving it is no longer appropriate, given the much wider range of needs of children.
I for one very much welcome the possibility of custodianship as yet another route to permanence for children in care, or at risk of coming into long-term care.
Routes into permanence
Thus, the routes to achieving permanence are numerous.
I would suggest that, leaving aside permanence achieved by return home to the child's natural parents, relatives or close friends, and permanence in some cases achieved by residential care (and I think we should look very carefully at the work of the Children's Family Trust and at the Ockenden Venture, where results are extremely promising), there are sixteen different routes to achieving permanent family placement with substitute families.
These are:
1
Secure fostering with the current foster family.
2
Secure fostering with a new foster family.
3
Custodianship with foster parents or relatives with whom the child is already living.
4
Placement before custodianship with known relatives or friends.
5
Foster placement with strangers with a view to custodianship if all goes well.
6
Foster placement with a new family with a view to adoption if all goes well.
7
Foster placement leading quickly to adoption.
8
Placement directly for adoption.
The eight routes can each be with or without contact with natural parents or siblings placed elsewhere, making sixteen routes in all.
So how does one decide which of these routes would be appropriate for which child?
How does one assess the needs of the children?
And what do I mean when I use the term ‘permanence’?
I am thinking of the child becoming part of a new family so that the new parents become the ‘psychological parents’, and thus offer a sense of security, a sense of belonging, of being loved, until the child reaches adulthood and beyond.
It is what John Triseliotis has referred to as ‘a family for life, with its network of support systems not only for them but also for their future children’.
So what are the needs of children which we hope will be met by placement with new psychological parents?
Security, a sense of belonging, family life, being loved and loving, are benefits which we hope a child will achieve through such placements and which will be put alongside the other important need to be met by any placement, the child's need for a sense of his or her own identity.
We are aiming to provide these two sets of things for the child in care, not as ends in themselves, but in order that children may develop a sense of their own self-worth, and research tells us that we have to get the balance right between these two important sets of needs for this end to be achieved.
When we undertook our study we found that the categorisation usually made of the special needs of children was insufficiently detailed.
We found that in each case it was necessary to think of three dimensions.
Most often only the problems of the children were given as the significant handicaps to placement.
However, we found that the age of the child was an important dimension and, perhaps most important of all, the nature of the child's previous relationships and the attitudes of the child and significant others towards the continuation or termination of those relationships.
There were two other important factors to be considered.
First, the temperament of the child (…) and particularly the child's ability to withstand stress and uncertainty.
And second, the attitudes and temperament of any family with whom the child is already living and where either the parents have already become the psychological parents or else the intention is that they should become so.
There is an important parallel here with relationships between adults.
For some adults cohabitation before marriage is unthinkable (in Asian families, for example); for others the idea of marriage without first living together to get to know each other is equally unthinkable.
For some the strain of living together without legal ties leads to considerable anguish.
For others there is no problem and complete trust in a verbal commitment.
Some adults are more ‘possessive’ about their partners, whilst others are more willing to share.
Similarly, some children and some substitute parents need the certainty of the legal tie of adoption.
To others it is of little significance.
They feel totally secure within a fostering relationship.
We are not here just talking about ‘inclusive’ or ‘exclusive’families in Robert Holman's terms.
Some families who need the certainty of legal adoption are none the less more than willing to allow their child to continue contact with members of the birth family.
They may be more willing than some social workers.
We found new families insisting on meeting and keeping in contact with natural parents, when social workers, especially from the referring authorities, were discouraging this.
Social care planning
The social care planning role requires workers to be familiar with the research findings which are beginning to appear not only on permanent family placement but on children coming into care, such as the cohort studies by Jean Packman (1984), the Dartington Group and the National Children's Bureau; Jane Rowe's study on long-term fostering (1984); and John Triseliotis and Russell's (1984); on adoption and residential care.
Cumulatively these studies are telling a very similar story.
What they seem to be saying about outcomes of adoption is quite positive but nevertheless we should be warned that the heady days of ‘no child is unadoptable’ are in the past.
It would seem that it is particularly difficult for older children (over twelve), institutionalised children, or children with behaviour or severe learning difficulties, to settle in new families, at least without serious and lasting problems.
It would also seem that the time before adoption for such children is quite long, that some for whom adoption was the plan will not be adopted even though they will stay with their new families, and that long-term support by specialist workers will be necessary for many of these children.
Interestingly enough, the really hard to place child would appear to be not the young mentally or physically handicapped child, but the older child coming into care from a muddled family situation, possibly where child abuse or neglect have figured in his early life.
I think that we must still look cautiously at adoption without consent.
The very positive research findings about children who have been adopted (including those described by Triseliotis who were placed later from disturbed backgrounds), are all largely about children who were adopted with their parents' consent.
We do not, as yet, have enough long-term studies of the minority of children adopted without consent, especially if contact was artificially terminated and if the child was aware of a battle between the two sets of parents.
Research studies, however, including (…) those of Wolkind and Kozaruk (1983) on children placed through the Adoption Resource Exchange, and Reich and Lewis (1986), and Maca-skill  (1985a) concerning the agency Parents for Children, indicate that children who have been placed against their parents' wishes seem to be settling quite well, but there are insufficient numbers, followed up for insufficiently long, for us to know what the impact of adoption of older children without consent is going to be in the long term.
The requirement in the Adoption Agency Regulations to counsel the parents specifically about all the alternatives to adoption, and to make sure that their views about these different alternatives are placed before the court, together with the fact that guardians ad litem and reporting officers will also be scrutinising this element of the work, should lead to more careful practice at this stage.
I hope that these factors, together with custodianship and more willingness to look at open adoption by the judiciary as well as by social workers, will diminish the number of occasions when adoptive placements have to be made against the wishes of the natural parents, and/or children.
Regarding work with the children and the new families, my plea for a more sophisticated approach in assessing the needs of children and finding the appropriate routes to permanent placement for each child leads me to the conclusion that the nature of the social work service to each child and family must vary according to their needs and their wishes.
I am convinced by recent research findings in America and Britain that social work practice can either foster a sense of permanence or detract from it, and that in the past our treating permanent substitute families as if they were temporary has been a cause of insecurity.
John Triseliotis has used the term ‘constructed insecurity’.
Jane Rowe's study of children in long-term foster care reinforces my view that social work practice often actually creates or increases a sense of insecurity.
In looking at routes to permanence I have already indicated that I believe that long-term fostering will be the best route for a number, albeit a diminishing number, of children in care.
However, some children who will eventually pass out of care through custodianship or adoption will spend periods, sometimes periods of years, in care after moving to permanent new families.
Social work practice with these families should concentrate on constructing a framework of security from the matching stage onwards, and this must mean delegating the maximum degree of responsibility to the new family to do things their way which the law allows.
It also means that it is extremely important to get the matching stage right because no amount of back-seat driving will persuade new parents to change their basic way of running their family.
For example, if continued family contact is in the child's best interest, social workers should make sure at the matching stage that the proposed new parents really believe so too.
Once a child has been placed, workers will need to be guided by the new parents and the child about the how and the when of contact and, of course, once adoption or custodianship orders are made, social workers no longer have the right to give directions, although they may have an important role, when asked, in providing a conciliation service between custodians or adopters and natural parents, if there are  disagreements about contact.
In other words, I argue that the social work service offered to permanent new families, whatever their initial or planned legal status, should be different from that offered to the majority of foster families.
A rethink is needed at all stages from recruitment, training and approval through to the post-placement and post-adoption support.
The specialist placement agencies have pioneered this work and certainly my own study, and those of research colleagues looking at other agencies, have shown that the model that they have pioneered is seen by the families and the children as appropriate.
These studies show us that many of the families who successfully parent hard to place children are not conventional, middle-class, two-child families.
They sometimes have unusual parenting styles and some, though by no means all, find that having a social worker looking over their shoulder makes them feel uncomfortable and unnecessarily unsure of themselves.
It is up to social workers and the legal system to find ways of supporting rather than hindering parents and children in the difficult task of building themselves into a new family.
This does, I believe, mean that a rethink is urgently needed about the boarding-out regulations, reviews and some other aspects of social work practice, which are appropriate to social work with permanent new families.
Essentially it is about increasing the authority of the new family and playing down the authority role of the social worker.
What then are the more detailed conclusions I came to about the nature of the social work service?
I found myself constantly making a connection between what new families were saying to me about what they found most helpful from a social worker and what I as a social worker find most helpful from a team leader.
Essentially they wanted a consultancy service from a social worker who was basically a colleague sharing their frustrations and difficulties but also their joys and successes and recognising their own expertise and greater knowledge of detail; a sounding-board off which to bounce ideas about how to solve a problem; someone concerned about quality control, providing an inspectorial service so that the child's interests could be safeguarded (but this aspect they saw as being of prime importance at the approval and matching stage).
They acknowledged that the inspectorial role was always there, but wanted somebody who felt comfortable with this role, neither over-nor underemphasising it.
A social worker, they felt, should have information available or at least provide access to good information systems which the family could itself use.
They wanted advice but also to be free to decide whether it was or was not good advice.
They wanted practical help without being forced to beg for it.
If therapy was needed for the child, they wanted to share in the offering of help and particularly valued taking part with the workers in life-story work.
If the family themselves needed therapy, again there are parallels with the relationship between the social worker and team leader.
They needed the worker to care about them, to be willing to sit down with them and help solve a problem and be a good listener.
However, if more than that was needed and the family began to have  more serious problems, then on the whole it seemed to be better to bring in an outside agency unconnected to the placement process.
Family therapy techniques, emphasising as they do the role of the parents and the necessity for them being fully involved in solving their own problems, were considered helpful.
However, there are dangers here.
Families expressed resentment if they came to think that they were being considered as a ‘problem’ family, and were quick to point out that had it not been for the arrival of the new child, they would not have needed the services of the family therapist.
The initial stages of negotiating the nature of the family therapy, and why the family needs it, must be extremely important.
The use of family therapy techniques throughout the process of recruiting and training new parents, and preparing children for placement, helps them to be familiar with such techniques and to acknowledge their value when problems develop.
Work with children
All the children we spoke to stressed that the social worker from the placement agency was the family's social worker and not their social worker, and this was a position of which they very much approved.
All the children we spoke to about reviews found them either an unnecessary irrelevance or else an extremely threatening or distressing event.
When considering the form of review, it seems essential to differentiate between what is appropriate for a child in a temporary or therapeutic placement, and what is appropriate for a permanent family placement.
Finally, a plea to those preparing children for permanent placement, especially if they are older.
Please do not talk in terms of adoption but rather in terms of finding a permanent, new family.
We are beginning to see that even in those cases where the child and the new family intend the placement to be adoptive, adoption sometimes does not happen.
When a placement does run into problems, Catherine Macaskill (1985b) has warned us of the dangers of thinking that adoption will solve the problems:
A widely held opinion was that the security of adoption would ameliorate difficulties in the problematic placements.
I searched in vain through the ensuing histories of children for any evidence to validate this belief.
The more common response was a temporary lull in the onslaught of behavioural difficulties for a few months before and after adoption.
As the formality of adoption receded into past history, leaving the same accumulation of problems, hope began to wane and problems took on a different perspective.
Some of the children in our study felt desperately disappointed that they had not been adopted, and yet they did have a home which would continue to be available to them in their adult life and had found a kind of loving, though perhaps not the all-accepting, all-loving parent of their dreams.
In other cases, the ‘will they or won't they adopt me’ issue came to dominate the placement to the exclusion of all other considerations.
If social workers  continue to tell children that the only way of achieving permanence and security is through adoption, children will continue to believe this.
In my view the challenge to us all is to find adoptive families for those children for whom this is appropriate and to offer security to those new families and children for whom adoption is not appropriate, and to convince them.
that they do have a secure future together.
Transracial placements: conflicts and contradictions
John Small
Introduction
This chapter focuses on one of the most fundamental yet controversial areas of social work practice, namely, transracial placements.
By this is meant placement of black children in white homes.
The problems experienced by foster- and adoptive parents who are caring for black children are qualitatively similar.
Consequently the arguments presented here in respect of adoption practices are equally valid for fostering.
This chapter includes an examination of the concept of race and uses several frameworks to demonstrate how racial identity confusion in black children is rooted in the family and society, and therefore cannot be separated from the power relationships within society in general and social work agencies in particular.
Different groups of transracial adopters and their dilemmas are identified and the implications for their children illustrated.
Gill and Jackson's research in 1983 will be critically examined, and in particular the failure to recognise the identity needs of black children in a racist society.
If ‘these black children have been made white in all but skin colour…have no contact with the black community and their ‘coping’ mechanisms are based on denying their racial background' (p. 137), we must surely question Gill and Jackson's conclusion, that:
they feel confident in using the term ‘success’ to describe the experiences of the majority of these families and children and there is little evidence that a group of similarly aged white children growing up with their natural parents would not include a number of children experiencing similar or greater difficulties'. (pp. 132–3)
Certainly white children in substitute white families, or their biological families, do not deny that they are white, nor want to be black.
For them the vital issue of racial identity confusion does not exist.
Many white people do not understand the conflicts and the suffering experienced by those who are confused about their racial identity, and the following brief accounts illustrate the dilemmas.
Many transracially adopted children are aware that the darker their skin colour the more undesirable they are to white society; and many feel it is better to be white than black.
One adoptive parent of a black child heard the child saying ‘I'm glad I'm not black, the black children get teased; but I don't want to be brown either, because everyone notices me because I'm different.’
Mother replied, ‘But it is nice to be different; people are all different and it would be boring if we all looked the same.’
Parents may understandably often try to deny the reality of their black children's  unhappiness because they like to think that their children are secure and happy, thus reflecting their success as adopters.
The denial of the reality of the visibility of the black child in a white family creates the preconditions for the phenomenon of identity confusion.
Many, although black, will grow up believing or wishing that they are white.
Yet ‘they will be.
moving out into a society which is significantly racist in its attitudes and its distribution of opportunities.
They will be moving towards establishing their own families and racial background will be an issue’(p. 136).
These children will not always live in the protective arms of the family, they will have to make decisions about jobs, marriage, political and social commitments based on where in society they feel that they are able to find a place.
Many of these children do not have skills to relate to black people and they will experience rejection by white society (Ladner, 1978).
Yvonne, placed transracially and now twenty-four years old, will never forget the day when she and friends were playing in the park and saw a black man passing by.
The white youths began yelling ‘Nigger, nigger, go back to where you come from.’
The girls continued to play.
One of the youths walked over to the group, looked at the black girl and said, ‘By the way, you are a nigger too.’
That was the first knowledge that Yvonne had of being black.
‘I was devastated.
I really did not want to be black because it was different to what my parents and the other children were.
It was something totally new to me.
I hated being black.’
To tell the child that colour in this society does not matter is to ignore the racism in the society.
Transracial placements: a question of power
Transracial adoption, the adoption of children by parents of different racial origin, developed in earnest in the mid-1960s and has been on the increase since then.
In part it was a response to the needs of childless white couples for whom white infants were no longer available for adoption.
It gained momentum with the philosophy of the assimilation of the immigrant child into society.
The black community thus became a ‘donor’ group for white society.
This usually entailed placement at a very tender age, because it would be difficult for some parents to deal with the issue of race and colour if the child had developed a sense of racial identity and pride in his or her heritage.
This could prevent the possibility of identification with, and integration into, the white family.
Transracial adoption was also encouraged by developments in child care practice designed to reduce dramatically the number of children living in institutions, of whom a disproportionate number were and still are black (Raynor 1975; Rowe and Lambert, 1970).
There was too the erroneous belief that black substitute parents could not be found (ABAFA, 1976).
New Black Families has demonstrated unequivocally that black homes can be found for black children (Small, 1982b).
The choice for the children  trapped in the welfare system is therefore not solely between white families and a life of institutional care as we are led to believe; there are black families willing and capable of opening up their homes to these children, but there have been policies and practices which have prevented this development.
Paradoxically, Gill and Jackson's book appeared at a t–me when there was a great deal of activity in the black community directed towards finding black families for black children, thereby making it progressively unnecessary for transracial placements to continue.
Nevertheless, finding more black adoptive families will necessitate more black social workers in the key agency posts that determine policy, more black social workers involved in family finding and child placements, and recognition of the strengths of black families.
The one-way traffic of black children into white families begs fundamental questions of power and ideology.
It raises questions as to the type of relationship which exists between black and white people and, furthermore, the type of society that those involved in the practice are creating.
Transracial adoption encourages the phenomenon of racial identity confusion described in other contexts by Fanon (1968), Naipaul (1961, 1962) and Rushdie (1981).
‘They did not…see themselves as black or show any real sign of having developed a sense of racial identity’(Gill and Jackson, 1983, p. 139).
This often leads black children to deny the reality of their skin colour and to reject people of similar race and colour.
White liberals have recognised the problem and made attempts to recruit black parents in the 1970s (ABAFA, 1976).
The first black adoption agency, New Black Families, began to tackle the problem in 1980.
While some workers believe that the best place for a child is within a family, and that it is better for a child to be placed transracially than to have no family, anxiety is increasing about the outcome of transracial placements.
It is of crucial importance that, while Social Services Departments, voluntary agencies, and professionals are adjusting their views and talking about issues relating to transracial adoption, the matter should be dealt with in a sensitive way.
That is to say, when there is a shift from traditional methods in the placement of black children then careful consideration should also be given to the implications that this will have for black children, the black community and adopters.
It is certainly not the intention of the black community to undermine the good work being done by current transracial adopters and foster-parents, who have opened their homes to black children.
Transracial placements and the social environment
The social context of transracial adoption raises several fundamental questions.
First, is the best place for a child with a family?
If the answer is  yes, should it be a family similar to the child's racial and cultural origin?
If the answer is again yes and such a family is not available, should the child remain in institutional care, or should the child be placed transracially?
If we believe that the child should be placed transracially as an alternative to institutional care, then social workers must resist the massive denial or evasion of the negative consequences of some transracial placements for black children when the substitute parents have not been prepared or perhaps are very unsuitable to care for a black child.
Out of the multiplicity of factors influencing the development of the personality of the black child the following are the major influences.
The first is the estimation and expectation of others: the majority of society and the ‘significant others’.
The latter, who have the most profound impact on the personality or the self of the child, are those individuals with whom the child interacts most closely and who give him or her security.
These ‘significant others’ over time actually become a part of the psychic structure of the child from which develops the concept of self.
Reality is usually defined by parents, as the most important ‘significant others’.
Children will adjust their behaviour to meet parental approval.
This may not include positive valuation of black people or different ethnic backgrounds.
Thus, at least until adolescence, the black child is likely to share these values.
The most recent findings have highlighted some of the fears of the critics of transracial adoption; ‘These black children have been made white in all but skin colour’(Gill and Jackson, 1983, p. 137).
Curiously, Gill and Jackson are aware of the problem of identity confusion but believe that it can be avoided if black children are placed transracially when very young: ‘it is possible that older black children may, by the time a placement has occurred, have already internalised a definition of themselves as being black and that this definition may jeopardise the possibility of integration and emotional identification within a white family’(p. 138).
The argument seems to be that the world of reality and the concept of self are or should be structured by white parents and society.
Thus children should be placed transracially at a very young age, so becoming ‘white in all but skin colour’.
If they already have a concept of themselves as black it will be too late to ‘turn them white’.
Bean, writing a year later in 1984, supported this view by saying that ‘when the adopted child is an older child who has already acquired a cultural background and a set of cultural responses, these will have to be unlearned if he or she is to acquire a new cultural identity’.
A crucial aspect of a child's interests is thus ignored.
Jackson herself saw the danger in 1976: ‘Unless you can accept a child's colour, you will always be rejecting a very important part of him’(p. 4).
Sadly, this principle does not seem to have informed the later research.
As racial tension increases, social workers must adapt themselves to the prevailing racial climate.
They must take a leading role in giving direction to families who have expressed interest in providing a home for a black child.
For example, they must be helped to recognise that, in a society  which is hostile and oppressively racist to black people, the black family has to develop coping mechanisms which allow the group to maintain dignity and self-respect and which help the family to survive in a psychologically healthy way.
These survival mechanisms of the black family have to be extended to the black community generally in its economic life, education and social relations.
These experiences are outside those of white society.
Consequently most white families are ill-equipped to provide the environment to prepare the black child for the tremendous task ahead.
It is these survival techniques which provide the cultural and psychological framework that gives energy and support to black children.
The desperate wish to care for a child, however sincere, is not a guarantee that white adopters will provide such an environment.
If the black child is placed in an environment which is hostile, the inevitable consequence of this will be repeated attacks on the child's personality which will cause severe damage to his or her self-esteem.
It should be clear that if a child is placed in an ethnically insensitive white community he or she will fail to develop the mechanisms necessary to survive in a racist society.
If Britain were not a racist society, transracial adoption would not be an issue; but as long as race relations continue their current path transracial adoption must be an area of concern.
Since the aim of adoption must always be to provide a child without parents with an environment which will foster normal development, the commitment must be to the child, not to the parents or to the agency.
The characteristics of transracial adopters
The limited systematic study of transracial adoptive couples in Britain shows some general characteristics.
First, transracial adopters tend to belong to relatively high socioeconomic groups.
Second, they often live some distance from the black communities and so their black children tend to be socially isolated from immediate relatives and from other black people.
The literature further suggests that transracial adopters are often very self-confident people with a resilience to stress.
They often approach agencies that have a policy for placing children transracially; they may prefer children who are racially different from themselves.
Their motivation to open homes to black children appears often to have a strong moral and ethical base (Fricke, 1965; Roskes, 1963).
These values, held usually with great sincerity, deserve examination because they may have unintended harmful implications.
Some parents only want to adopt a child of two black parents, that is of African, Afro-Caribbean or Asian origin.
The rationale behind this decision may be to make it abundantly clear that the child is not the product of the adopters' relationship with each other or with anyone else.
These adopters often see themselves as helping the ‘poor blacks’ with the  fantasy or rescue mission born out of collective guilt.
It is as though they are saying ‘Look at us, we are not like others because we even adopted a black child.’
They may feel responsible for the racial injustice which other white people have inflicted on blacks, and see these injustices as entailing all manner of pathology for the black community, with its strengths and survival denied or not recognised.
These assumptions will be detrimental to the black child if he or she is seen as being rescued from a life of misery.
Embracing such a cause does not ensure a black child's welfare and may, unwittingly, damage it.
This group of adopters may include those whose motivation is largely intellectual or political.
They cannot become emotionally involved, and if faced with difficulties they withdraw their interest because their motivation and commitment are often very superficial.
It is possible too for some adopters to attempt to improve their self-image if they believe, perhaps subconsciously, that ‘having a black child in the family confirms our self-worth because they are much less than we are’.
Others may adopt because it is a dramatic way of rejecting what their family and society stand for.
A second group are the adopters who are prepared to adopt a child of two black parents or a child of one white and one black parent, and to accept the child as he or she is, recognising the difference in racial and cultural origin.
Some of these parents may also wish, through adoption, to protect children against the social order, but they are ‘real’ parents in that they are prepared to go beyond their own concerns and hold the child's interests as their priority.
(The guidelines towards the end of this chapter can be used to identify this group of parents.)
Many such adopters are anchored firmly in their beliefs; they are open-minded and not contented with stereotypes or a superficial view of society.
They are also very confident people with a secure sense of their own identity, and are able to resist the various pressures brought to bear on them by friends, relatives and society.
They eventually become black families in white skins.
A third group are the colonialists and the neo-colonialists with experience of colonial societies.
They often feel they know it all and tend to give the impression that they are ‘experts’ on blacks.
They are often the most difficult to assess since their experience usually lies outside that of social workers, who may be suspicious of such applicants' knowledge but uneasy about rejecting their apparently confident experience.
Some transracial adopters will only adopt a child of ‘mixed race’.
These adopters do not want society to say that they have a black child, that is, a child of two black parents.
A child of ‘mixed race’ is therefore seen by them as not black and not white, but closer to white than black.
They perhaps feel that since there is a degree of whiteness in the child they will be able to identify with that.
Some of these families may never be able to accept the blackness of such a child, but, at the same time, they know that he or she is not really white.
It is often the children of such families who have the most profound racial identity crisis.
Colour and identity
If a healthy personality is to be formed the psychic image of the child must merge with the reality of what the child actually is.
That is to say, if the child is black (reality), he or she must first recognise and accept that he or she has a black psychic image.
There are several black children who have grown up in children's homes with purely white staff, and others who have been placed with white families who are isolated geographically and have no contact with black people (Gill and Jackson, 1983, p. 134).
Some of these children are saying that they are not black or that they do not want to be associated with other black people.
What seems to have happened is that they have internalised the negative images that are attributed to black people and do not feel that they should identify with them.
This can happen when an institution or family is racially sensitive, in the white sense, but ethnically insensitive to the child's background and needs.
This may sometimes be the result of lack of information and reluctance on the part of the carers to take measures to correct this.
Many families often feel that assisting the child to reinforce his or her identity in terms of colour and ethnicity will probably render the child unable to form a healthy attachment to them; the child may feel that he or she should belong to a black family.
Many people also feel that there is no necessity to deal with racial issues since the child is seen as part and parcel of the family and ‘a child is a child’.
Within my own practice, I have never met a white child who says he or she is not white; neither have I met a black child growing up in a black family saying that he or she is not black.
It should therefore be clear that there are factors operating within the family and the society which contribute to this pathological state.
Gill and Jackson had the ideal opportunity to demonstrate how the phenomenon of identity confusion could be understood through the process of racial discrimination in society, a path whereby children of minority groups tend to internalise the values of the dominant society, and internalise derogatory values about themselves.
Milner (1975) has summarised and contributed to the long history of research which demonstrates black children's denial of their colour (Clark and Clark, 1947), and their preference for white identity (Goodman, 1964).
Social workers must recognise, therefore, that in racist societies they are working with a potentially vulnerable group.
But that is not the end of the story.
As black communities became aware of the effect that society was having on their children, they forged a conscious approach to provide a buffer between racism and the self-esteem and self-worth of their children by raising the level of consciousness of the strengths of black traditions and family life.
They have fought against the pressures to make black people invisible and their efforts have, in part, been recognised by wider society (Milner, 1981, 1983).
Black people have thus carved a social and political path more conducive to the psychological well-being of their children, who do not  now misidentify their ethnic origins.
They have a sense of worth anchored in positive racial identity although they still perceive, correctly, that whites are the most favoured social group (Davey et al.,1980).
It is curious and extremely unfortunate that this evidence has been ignored and the significance of racial identity minimised.
Fundamental dilemmas in transracial placements
The acknowledgement of differences?
Transracial adopters face the profound problems of defining their position as a family and in society.
Should they see themselves as all other parents in the general population, or as different?
If they decide on the former, then they may deny differences between themselves and their child but they must, in the interests of the child, differentiate the child and his or her natural parents from themselves in terms of race, colour and sometimes culture.
Recognition of differences and the acknowledgement of attachment struggle together and are major difficulties.
There are several ways in which this dilemma could be resolved.
The family may choose to minimise differences and emphasise the need to attach and integrate the child within the family network, perhaps from the moment the child enters the family, as part of the love, warmth and attention which a young child needs and which is the hallmark of good parenting.
Others may try to steer a middle passage.
Then there are those families who emphasise differences by their awareness of the racial origin of the child.
Thus they try to help the child to develop a concrete sense of identity based on the child's race, colour or ethnic origin.
All of these approaches involve acute dilemmas for the families.
Some families wonder whether they should request information about the background of the child and, if this is supplied, how it should be used.
Should it be taken seriously, or should it be ignored?
If the family should choose the first method, for example, ensuring that a life-story book is provided, then the child has the option of an identity outside his or her adoptive family.
If they choose to ignore the historical background of the child and feel that thus they will be better able to identify with him or her, then in times of crisis the child will have no solid racial and cultural identity and the family may not have the information to help the child in these crucial times.
Some transracial adopters may prefer to isolate themselves from the cultural background and ethnic origin of their child because it is easier in the short run to escape conflicts.
Then there are others who are satisfied with superficial information because they feel that if more is revealed then conflict could arise in the family.
In cases where a child is born out of wedlock, these families may  struggle with their conception of what a normal family should be and various moral issues.
Families with such children are sometimes in a moral trap.
They fear damaging the child within their secure family relationship.
Their dilemmas are similar to those of many adoptive families but are exacerbated by the racial and ethnic issues already discussed.
When it is difficult for the family or the child to attach themselves to each other, then at the end of the day the child will leave the family and become attached to the black community.
The ‘closed’ family system as a contributory factor in racial identity confusion
Most transracial families operate a closed family system (Gill and Jackson, 1983, p. 104).
They are closed in the sense that the black child is cut off from the black community and all interaction takes place within a white social structure.
In such a setting, all lines of authority descend from white society, all interaction takes place between members of the white society and there is no interaction which would enable a bicultural existence (p. 134).
To protect the black child we need to develop strategies to enable the white family to become open so that there can be reciprocity between white and black society.
The child's psychic structure must not only be that of his or her white parents and of white society.
If a child does not know any other black people, he or she does not value them; all his or her values descend from the adoptive parents.
The child may rationalise the situation by saying that the family is the only family he or she knows and thereby acquire a psychic balance.
Creating links with the black community may not be easy, and some families will try to maintain their original form by blocking out positive responses from black people to the child and other members of the family.
These positive responses are desirable and would indeed change the nature of the family and would be in the best interests of the black child and his or her parents, but may not be seen in this light by the white family.
To adopt or foster a black child means that the family is no longer white, if the interest of the black child is considered paramount.
They can no longer live as a middle-class white family geographically isolated and alienated from other black people.
The families cannot remain within the confines of the white world without serious psychological damage to the black child:
White parents who adopt black youngsters must also be willing and able to identify not only with their black children but also with black people generally.
They cannot be permitted to isolate their child and view him or her as different from other blacks; rather they must perceive their child to be an extension of other black people.
(Ladner, 1978, p. 288)
Fortunately, some transracial adopters are able to speak for themselves and are therefore able to correct in some ways the folly of others:
The black culture will have a significant, if not dominant, place in your family perspective because every other influence will be portraying and reinforcing the white culture — hence a token attempt with a few books and the occasional embarrassed conversation will not combat it.
Think how it feels to be a black child looking at books, advertisements, films, TV, and hardly ever seeing a similar face — the message that comes across is that there is no place for black people in our society.
(Parent to Parent Adoption Service, 1983, p. 3)
Mixed race: its meanings and implications
The concept of mixed race, which has become part of conventional social work language, is misleading because it causes confusion in the minds of transracial adopters.
It can lead them to believe that such children are racially distinct from other blacks.
Consequently, they may neglect the child's need to develop a balanced racial identity and thereby a well-integrated personality.
The term ‘mixed race’ should therefore not be used by administrators or professionals, and should be discouraged among people who want to provide homes for black children.
Many black people find the term derogatory and racist because they feel it is a conscious and hypocritical way of denying the reality of a child's blackness.
Certainly, mixed race children are regarded as black by society and eventually the majority of such children will identify with blacks, except in instances where reality and self-image have not merged (Bagley and Young, 1982).
Indeed, Gill and Jackson (1983) found no difference in racial identity between so-called mixed race and black children.
It is therefore more appropriate to use the term ‘mixed parentage’ instead of‘mixed race’.
The term ‘mixed race’ is also inaccurate.
The majority of the people from the Caribbean, and to a lesser extent from Africa, are of ‘mixed race’ although they are not regarded as such by professionals and transracial adopters.
Their various racial mixtures, for example, African and Chinese, Indian and African, white and African, are the result of miscegenation under slavery and colonialism.
Out of this process come the different shades of black people's skin colour which we see on the streets of London.
These people and their children differ from the so-called mixed race children only in terms of time, and are only a few generations removed from the point at which the mixture occurred.
If there is a need to ascertain the race of the parents of the child then this can be done by describing each parent.
For some prospective adopters, the lighter the skin, the more powerful the attraction; the darker the skin the more powerful the repulsion.
We should constantly be aware that when most people use the term ‘mixed race’ they do not mean a child of Indian and African parents, nor a Chinese and a person of African descent, they generally mean the child of a white person and any other person who is not white.
Nevertheless, in this society any child who has the slightest taint of black is seen by the majority as black.
This is indeed unfortunate, but in a society where race  and colour has been made into such an issue, for those children there are no ‘in-betweens’.
‘Mixed race’ children are cemented in their blackness.
Many families who are misled into believing that ‘mixed race’ children are not black will go on to think that their children are capable of becoming culturally assimilated colourless Europeans.
As a consequence, the child will be given a white mask (Fanon, 1968).
The child in such an environment is given maximum protection from exposure to his or her real self, or from those who will act as a mirror to reflect the child's racial image.
But can the child transcend the blackness and wear the white mask with pride?
I would suggest that in this society it is not only impossible but psychologically dangerous.
It may be that those parents do not consider colour to be important, but such a blind attitude towards the role of group differences in the society is unwise.
It is possible that parents do convey to their children that they themselves do not judge and relate to people on the basis of their skin colour, but they should also tell the child that many people in the society do.
Failure to do this will obviously leave the child unprepared to understand and deal with the first time he or she is called ‘nigger’, or some other racial slur.
(Ladner, 1978, p. 125)
The trauma of experiencing racism is inevitable, and this experience will result in a sudden and rapid disintegration of the white mask with all the consequences that depersonalisation brings.
The majority of these children have not been given the tools to function as black people.
Consequently, they are likely to be equally rejected by some black people who may say that they are not black enough, not in the colour sense of the term but in culture and attitude.
Some children may therefore adopt a black mask which they wear fiercely but weakly.
Professionals must recognise this process.
The development of positive identity
It is possible, but rare, for black children in white families to form a positive identity.
Gill and Jackson (1983) found that five of the thirty-five children were to some degree proud of their colour but only a small minority of the children had positive feelings about their colour.
The parents of these five children had made some effort to give the children pride in racial background.
No such efforts had been made for the children who preferred to be white or by those parents who brought up their children ‘entirely white’.
Gill and Jackson go on to identify eight ‘black and mixed race couples’, seven ‘mixed race’ children and three black children, and use this sample to demonstrate that racial identity confusion, as they found it in the transracially placed children, could also be found in black children in black families and ‘mixed race’children in ‘mixed race’families: ‘They provide an interesting comparison…because…same race placements are  increasingly regarded as the ideal by social workers…and it is in the black and mixed race couples that (it is said) the child will come to develop a strong racial identity’(p. 129).
They report that, like the transracially adopted children, none of this sub-group used the term ‘black’ when referring to racial background.
The parents did not have a policy of stressing racial pride or identity and these children did not identify with the black community.
They regarded themselves as ‘coloured’ or ‘halfcaste’and at least one wished to be white; they had no sense of racial pride.
Consequently, they are roughly equivalent to the transracially adopted children.
This argument highlights flaws in the study as a whole.
First is the difficulty of depending substantially on parents' responses.
Green and Shapiro (1974) caution: ‘parents [are]usually the persons best informed about their [the children's]behaviour —[but]are also the most emotionally involved and usually the most biased in their favour.
Case records, social workers’ reports and teachers' evaluations all have inherited biases and limitations' (p. 90).
Second, the instruments used for white middle-class parents may not be equally appropriate for black parents because they may fail to take account of different subjective experiences and racial and ethnic backgrounds.
Third, this sub-sample of seven parents is an inadequate basis for Gill and Jackson's major claim.
Only three of the couples were black, and five of the children were ‘mixed race’ thus further complicating the analysis.
Fourth, the two researchers were white and so handicapped in their assessment of black families and children.
It is possible too that the black couples who were allowed to adopt in the period of the study were ‘white parents in black skins’.
The resistance then to black families adopting makes it likely that successful selections in the 1960s and 1970s depended heavily on identification and involvement with white society, with the neighbourhood, the school and friends being predominantly white.
Towards the interests of the black child
Given our understanding of the dynamics of transracial placements what should be the essential ingredients of any substitute home for black children?
In addition to the ingredients necessary to enhance the normal development of any child, such placements should be capable of:
(a)
enhancing positive black identity;
(b)
providing the child with the ‘survival skills’ necessary for living in a racist society;
(c)
developing cultural and linguistic attributes necessary for functioning effectively in the black community;
(d)
equipping the child with a balanced bicultural experience, thus enhancing the healthy integration of his or her personality;
(e)
providing continuity of experience based on the reality of British society;
(f)
minimising alienation from the black community;
(g)
enriching the environment of the child's cultural heritage by balancing the black community response to its heritage.
Many transracial adopters find it difficult to refer to the child as black, and moreover they feel, as we have seen, that telling the child about his or her ethnic origin is potentially dangerous (Gill and Jackson, 1983, p. 130).
It is indeed the fear of those families which contributes to negative self-concepts in the children.
They should be helped to recognise that racism is a reality in society and that, although they cannot protect the child from it, they can prepare him or her to deal with it when it is encountered.
Consequently, helping the child to develop a positive racial identity and pride in being black is an essential component of good parenting in a transracial setting.
It is crucial to good self-concepts and for the healthy integration of the child's personality.
White families who have adopted or who are currently fostering black children should be given training.
These training sessions could be conducted along the lines of pre-adoptive and foster care classes (Small, 1982a).
The outline presented below is in note form with issues which could be used in training.
Guidelines for selection and preparation
1
The geographical location of the prospective family must be considered carefully since it is important for the child to see black people:
(a)
to reduce the feeling of isolation;
(b)
to mirror the blackness of the child;
(c)
to provide black role models;
(d)
to protect the child from racial attacks and abuse.
2
The family should be sensitive to the prevailing race relations climate and be cognisant of the possible effect of this on the child's identity formation.
3
The family should have clear concepts of what a multiracial society is, or should be, and should be willing and able to provide the child with a balanced view of the different races.
4
The family must be prepared to have black friends to demonstrate to the child that blacks and whites do have common interests and can interact harmoniously.
5
The family must be prepared to develop contact with the black community in order that the child does not feel that he or she is being  cut off from his or her roots, which often creates the condition whereby negative images emerge.
6
The family must be willing and able to carry the child's past into the present and sustain it into the future, thus linking the child with its ancestral past in a positive way.
7
The family must be able to accept the child as a black child in a positive way and not dismiss the child's colour as insignificant, because in society generally the truth is the opposite.
8
The family must be prepared to find ways and means of linking the black child with other black children.
9
The family must demonstrate that it has the capacity to work with its conscious or unconscious feelings of threat from blacks.
10
The family must be prepared to foster an awareness of the child's religious background.
Lifestyle of the family
1
Reality for the child is defined and controlled by the family.
Consequently, the neighbourhood they live in, the interests they have, the lifestyle of their friends and colleagues, will necessarily determine what is reality for the child.
These issues must be confronted.
2
The attitude of the extended family and friends towards black people and to a black child being part of their family, must be ascertained.
3
The family must be able to demonstrate its willingness and ability to differentiate between different lifestyles, race and colour without inferring the inferiority of one and the superiority of the other.
4
The motivation for wanting a black child should be carefully examined.
Is it ideological, is it guilt, is it to fight a political battle, or to make a political statement?
Is it religious, or is it out of pity?
Is it concern for overpopulation?
Is it to resolve curiosity about black people, or is it an experiment?
Is it a second best, or in line with current fashion?
5
Every effort should be made to discover whether the family have the ability to put themselves in hypothetical situations and conceptualise and deal with the difficulties that are likely to arise with the black child, particularly during adolescence.
What, for example, is the prevailing attitude in the family towards the black child dating the neighbour's daughter?
Can they deal with what may appear to be sexual threats, and the reality of mixed marriage?
6
If there are no institutionalised support systems, particularly in relation to adoption, can the family, friends and local community help the black adolescent to overcome these difficulties?
7
Can grandparents accept that they have black grandchildren which will change the nature of their family?
Identification with white adopters and the black community
1
Can the family provide the environment for bridging the gap in the interests of the child's personality?
2
Can the family accept what may not be the attractive child in terms of race and colour that they initially wanted?
3
Can the family help or allow the child to develop a black personality without feeling that a wedge is being driven between the family and the child; does the family expect the child to be a white person in a black skin?
4
Can the child or children of the prospective family accept and relate meaningfully to the black child?
Socialisation outside the family
1
The attitude of neighbours and parents to black children mixing with their own children should be ascertained.
2
What opportunities exist for relationships as either boyfriends or girlfriends?
3
What opportunities exist for socialising with two cultures?
4
What is the attitude of friends, neighbours and the community to mixed marriages?
Adaptation of family and child to existing and future conditions
1
Can the family deal with conflicts about colour within and without the family?
Is the family aware of the stresses and strains that will be brought about for the child and family if the child should experience rejection on the basis of colour; can it deal with this type of problem?
2
Can the family provide the child with the skills that the black person learns in the black community: the skills to cope with racism?
Can the family provide the cultural and linguistic skills necessary for the child to relate to, and be accepted by, black people?
3
Can the family accept the fact that not all people in the UK are white, and those who are not white are, by definition, black?
The school environment
1
Is the school multiracial?
If not:
2
What is the prevailing attitude of teachers towards black people generally?
3
What expectations do teachers have for black children?
4
What concept does the school have of a multiracial society?
5
What is the attitude of pupils in the school towards black people?
6
The attitude of families towards black children attending the same school as their own children?
Professional/client relationships: creating a ‘working alliance’ with people with learning difficulties
Ann Brechin and John Swain
Introduction
Relationships between professionals and people labelled as having a mental handicap have their origins in past and present social structures and attitudes.
Within this broad context of changing patterns of social organisation, social and professional constructions of mental handicap have led to particular attitudes and practices being adopted.
In the Western world, two approaches have come to dominate in the course of the past 50 years: a medical approach and an educational approach.
The growing consumer movement, reflected in this instance by the burgeoning of self-advocacy, and the advent of the normalisation movement has impinged very little as yet on these strongly established professional traditions.
Reactions to change have tended to involve attempts to encompass new approaches within existing frameworks of practice and thinking.
Yet the concept of self-advocacy and the parallel emergence of normalisation, demand a radical revision of professional roles and approaches.
Assumptions about the nature of the professional/client relationship will have to change significantly, if professionals are going to keep pace with the changes which are coming increasingly from sources beyond their control.
In this chapter, we shall be exploring the nature and implications of existing professional approaches, and the growing awareness of the importance of professional/client relationships.
We shall be considering how new styles of relationship might be defined and generated; relationships which would be more in tune with the increasingly influential changes in philosophy and policy, and which can support, in turn, the development of new professional attitudes and practices.
Historical perspectives
Various constructions of people with learning difficulties have existed down the ages as society has attempted to define and make sense of patterns of behaviour which differ from the norm.
Wolfensberger (1969) provides a useful review of historical perceptions, as does Kurtz (1981), and Ryan and Thomas (1987).
Concepts of people with learning difficulties as sub-human; as a menace to society and to the genetic make-up of the race; as eternal children; or as objects of pity, are all beliefs with a long  history which still have some currency today.
It is worth noting that these accounts do not include any history of the views of people with learning difficulties themselves.
In general, the documented history has concentrated on changes in legislation, buildings, numbers of people and terminology.
A part of the history of perceptions of people has been the changes in the labels that have been used over the years.
The terminology adopted in this chapter, ‘people with learning difficulties’, is a reflection of an increasing readiness to attend to the views of the people themselves.
Self-advocacy groups, particularly, have laid emphasis on potential to learn rather than status-quo labelling, and on differences between people, of degree rather than kind.
Such terminology will undoubtedly continue to change as social constructions of disability evolve.
Before examining the more recent developments in self-advocacy and normalisation, however, we need to consider the two approaches which have been prominent and have dominated the emergence and style of professional practice over the past 50 years: the medical and educational approaches.
The medical approach
From the medical perspective, the problem, if it is a ‘problem’, is seen as located in the individual, its origin lying in an innate physiological disorder which brings it into the realm of medical jurisdiction.
Thinking and practice impose what has been called the ‘sick role’(Tuckett, 1976) on people with learning difficulties.
The assumptions and implications of this have been exhaustively written about,(e.g. Mittler, 1979; Ryan and Thomas, 1987) in relation to mental handicap, and on a broader front on medicalisation in general(Illich, 1977; McKnight, 1977; Kennedy, 1981).
In essence, the effect of medically conceived interpretations and solutions has been to provide institutional care settings and services, often taking over pre-existing custodial arrangements, in which basic nursing care, supervision and protection have been provided, with drug therapy as the major planned ‘intervention’ or treatment.
Decisions about management, life-styles and living arrangements, even about educational capacity have been taken by doctors with a consequent decrease in the power of individuals and their families to plan and control their lives.
The impact of such approaches on relationships has been essentially to increase dependency with stereotyped perceptions leading to self-fulfilling prophecies (Edgerton, 1976; Ryan and Thomas, 1987).
People labelled as ‘mentally handicapped’ have been perceived as sick and incurable, as dependent, and as ineducable.
In return, they have, not surprisingly, behaved in ways which confirmed these perceptions.
Essentially, the medical approach has painted a pessimistic picture.
Retarded development, disturbed patterns of behaviour, inability to form relationships or to be self-sufficient have been seen as resulting from disease or physiological abnormality.
Yet, although this defines the individual in ‘a sick role’, no cure is available.
A counsel of despair was offered for many years, which, in effect, said, ‘put them away and forget them’.
Against such a background of hopelessness, compounded by living circumstances which were at best dreary and unstimulating for patients and staff alike, and at worst a contravention of basic human rights and dignity, individuals had no opportunity to develop any other picture of themselves.
The picture was provided for them in terms of medical explanations with patterns of behaviour, development, and any personal or emotional problems accounted for by their medical condition.
Diagnosis and treatment were in the hands of the medical experts who held the franchise on knowledge.
Professional/client relationships were thus inevitably one-sided with all the power and knowledge (at least that which was perceived as relevant) resting with the medical profession.
At best the relationship was paternalistic, at worst it was authoritarian and dehumanising.
The educational approach
A second major influence which has had a dramatic effect in the second half of the century has been the educational approach.
Interestingly, though, the close ties with and influence of medicine have meant that only recently has an educational approach begun to emerge which is freed from the decision-making power of the medical profession, and from the diagnostic and treatment framework.
With improvements in educational technologies, more detailed understanding of how behaviour is controlled and developed, and a greater focus on curriculum planning has come a flood of new opportunities for people with learning difficulties.
The recognition that, given appropriate opportunities, time, and carefully devised teaching strategies, even people with very severe learning difficulties can make progress has led to a new commitment.
The aim of this approach is not so much to offer care and protection, but to help people to reach their ‘full potential’.
While this has only relatively recently become widely influential, affecting policies and services across the board and not just in the formal educational sphere, Ryan and Thomas (1987) point out its longer history.
They quote Seguin, for example, as saying as far back as 1846:
While waiting for medicine to cure idiots, I have undertaken to see that they participate in the benefit of education.
The educational regimes apparent in early asylums pay tribute to the humanitarian spirit which existed at the time.
Ryan and Thomas quote from a description of Earlswood Asylum, opened in 1855, where ‘everything is done that can make learning enjoyable’.
With the growth in numbers in asylums, however, and the take-over by medical men rather than educators, the early conviction that education could lead to improvement and a return to the community was eroded and replaced by the more pessimistic approach reflected in the oppressive institutions of this century.
The re-emergence of interest in the potential of education coincided with the development of more effective teaching strategies, and the inclusion of all children within the education system, although even here Ryan and Thomas suggest:
Psychologists in the last 20 years have had to rediscover much of what was already known and practised by the 1860s.
The opening up of educational strategies and opportunities has had to include, of course, a broadening of the more traditional educational curriculum, with a recognition that the development of basic social skills, including methods of communication, may be the important focus.
Such new developments have led inevitably to new kinds of relationships.
Not only in school contexts, but in hospitals and day centres and at home, the new relationship has become a teacher/pupil one.
Successful teaching requires that learning should take place.
This provides a valuable feedback loop, in one sense, which forces the ‘teacher’ to seek more appropriate methods or goals if the first strategies are not successful.
In another sense, though, it also puts an onus on the individual with learning difficulties to accept the role of learner in the relationship — perhaps for life (Tomlinson, 1985).
Opportunities for continuing education in adulthood are increasingly recognised as desirable, but when people are put in a position of having an obligation to learn with no prospect of ever quite passing the test and graduating to full citizenship, this may not be so desirable.
There are some within education who quarrel with an approach which, with an emphasis on objectives and skill development, appears to require little more than continuing compliance from pupils.
Goddard (1983), for instance, argues that education should involve setting in motion a ‘process’ of active development which can enable ‘the individual child to unfold his or her unique personality’.
Nevertheless, the enthusiasm for developing skills grew.
It was quickly recognised that effective learning could most easily take place when opportunities were created frequently throughout each day, in a relaxed familiar setting and with a trusted companion.
Parents and direct care staff were the answer and ‘parents as teachers’ became the byword of many teaching programmes.
The ideal environment has come to be seen as one which offers continual opportunities to maximise learning, and succeeds in engaging the attention and motivation of the individual for as near to 100 per cent of his/her time as possible.
Anything less involves wasted potential and the limiting factors are seen as the time and energy of the carers.
The incentive and justification for all such activity is the goal of ‘independence’; independence which is presented as the state to which we all  aspire.
Leaving aside for now the question of whether independence is appropriate as the ultimate goal for us all, it is important to recognise the inherent difficulty and contradiction in trying to achieve or work towards independence through a teacher/pupil relationship which remains essentially a dependent one.
Of course, that is not in essence what education is intended to be about.
The ‘leading out’ implied by the name strikes a better chord.
Unfortunately, in the realm of education, particularly for people with learning difficulties, attitudes and practices mitigate against this happening.
In general it seems that the greater the learning difficulties, the more didactic is the approach and the more controlling the relationship.
The aims, the curriculum and the methods used are predicated upon, on the one hand, assumptions of incapacity and unsatisfactoriness, and, on the other hand, assumptions that the only worthwhile goal is ‘independence’.
This is then defined in a normative sense which must therefore inevitably exclude these pupils from its attainment.
If these arguments need rehearsing, they are most thoroughly explored and exhaustively referenced in a recent book (Wood and Shears, 1986).
The authors argue:
We are not suggesting that the tasks and skills children with severe learning difficulties are taught in schools under the new orthodoxy are of no value, or that they may not be useful to the children, either now or in later life.
What we are suggesting is that such an education does not add up to learning to be independent, to participating in and contributing to one's own community, either as a child or later as an adult, as the aims of education purport.
Rather the objectives/skills analysis curriculum actually teaches dependence, in that it does not teach the children to challenge the system they are in and the places they will graduate to.
The curriculum is not seen in terms of constant amelioration of handicapping conditions, but rather in terms of making up for deficiencies which are constantly imputed to the child.
The curriculum, as it is, functions to make children with severe learning difficulties as near normal as possible —the means to the end — not to enhance who they actually are.
(Wood and Shears, 1986, p. 40)
Such contradictions are integral to educational relationships with other adults also.
Under the tutelage, very often of the psychologist, nurses, care staff, ATC instructors and parents acquire the new educational methodologies which enable them to develop a more effective teaching role.
What this usually means in practice, however, is that they can more effectively control and manipulate the behaviour of their ‘pupil’.
Parallels between the medical and educational approaches
In one sense the educational approach is the polar opposite of the medical one, in directing attention to the possibilities of improvement and change, rather than to the physiological account of permanent impairment.
In another sense, however, the approaches stand alongside each other.
Both  assume that existing social constructions of normality define the goal to which people with learning difficulties must aspire; both define and understand the ‘problems of mentally handicapped’ people in such a way as to indicate clearly the impossibility of ever achieving that goal (the best hope being to build up patterns of skills which approximate to ‘normal’behaviour); and both create a professional/client relationship which enshrines the professional in a world of exclusive and privileged knowledge, and consequently entombs the individual with learning difficulties in a fundamentally dependent role.
Self-advocacy and normalisation: impact and implications
Against this backdrop of professional attitudes and practices, the self-advocacy and normalisation movements have struggled to emerge.
Both movements are concerned ultimately with individual human rights, but their origins and protagonists are different.
On the one hand, the self-advocacy impetus has grown with the increasing emphasis on consumer sovereignty and an awareness of the potential power and influence of self-help pressure groups.
The professional role has been minimal, and, where it has been relevant has been facilitative rather than directive or initiating.
Normalisation, on the other hand, has been a largely profession-led push towards service revisions.
The two developments have emerged in parallel, developing separately, but inevitably influencing and interacting with each other.
It will be argued here that their aims can and should converge.
Self-advocacy is in essence about a process of self-actualisation.
It is about people coming to identify and express personal feelings, wishes and circumstances and coming to understand what contributes to the positive and negative of their existence.
It is about opening up ideas about the range of choices which could and should be available to them.
Any professional approach that does not concern itself with supporting and facilitating these same processes of growth for people with learning difficulties must be seriously open to question.
Similarly, approaches which seem to imply a pre-knowledge of the aims and goals of other people's lives, and lack the willingness to retain an open mind, to live with uncertainties, possibilities and transitions — these too must be seen as professional approaches with little to recommend them.
When we look at the normalisation movement we can see that it has implications for professional approaches, but it will be argued that the concept itself has been open to more than one interpretation leading to differential impact on professional practice.
These interpretations can be reviewed and considered in the light of the aims of the self-advocacy  movement, with the question being posed — does this interpretation of normalisation and the implications for professional practice appear to support and facilitate the open-ended processes of growth emerging from the advocacy movements?
We are suggesting, in effect, that this can be used as a kind of litmus test of appropriateness against which professional approaches can be measured.
The early voices expounding and refining the idea of normalisation and its implications came from Denmark, Sweden and the United States (e.g. Nirje, 1969,1980; Bank-Mikklesen, 1969; Wolfensberger and Glenn, 1973; Wolfensberger, 1980).
These were quickly taken up and written about in the British context (e.g. Thomas et al.,
1978; O'Brien and Tyne, 1981).
One of the earliest definitions of normalisation at an international symposium saw it as ‘making available to the mentally retarded patterns of everyday life which are as close as possible to the patterns of the mainstream of society’(Nirje, 1969).
Nirje's more detailed definition included reference to the importance of normal rhythms of life, daily, weekly and yearly; normal developmental experiences such as leaving home in adulthood; and normal respect and understanding (Nirje, 1980).
Wolfensberger in the United States has focused attention specifically on the implications for service delivery and has developed an assessment procedure aimed not at individuals, but at the quality of services.
PASS (Programme Analysis of Service Systems; Wolfensberger and Glenn, 1973) evaluates services in terms of how far they comply with appearances, practices and settings which would be valued by the rest of society.
Again, this has been taken up in this country with workshops on ‘PASS’ and ‘PASSING’being widely networked largely through the energies of CMHERA.
Within the movement, definitions have shifted over time.
A critical account of such shifts (Baldwin, 1985) suggests that this has made evaluation of the concept particularly difficult to achieve.
We are suggesting here that normalisation, over and above these many attempts to define it coherently and carefully, is open to different interpretations in practice.
In our view, two common interpretations of the term are unfortunate and probably unintended by at least some of the protagonists of the concept.
The third interpretation seems to us to be the one which is in line with the philosophy of valuing and supporting each individual, reflected in the growing advocacy movement.
The first, and perhaps commonest interpretation of the term, is the one which takes it to be about normalising people, i.e. making people as close an approximation of normal as possible.
A clear example of this was presented in the recent critique by Sinha (1986) of the goals of psychology.
Contrasting practices of differentiation, ‘preserving the ‘normal’ through the exclusion of the deviant', and the newer approach of normalisation, he sees normalisation as ‘predicated upon the changing of the subject so classified, towards normality’.
Moreover, he suggests that ‘the predominant model for the implementation of normalisation practices utilises behavioural pedagogies and objectives-based curricula’.
Sadly, he may  well be right.
Professionals do tend to see normalisation in terms of practices designed to change the individual.
It is perhaps not surprising that such an interpretation should come to the fore in the implementation of normalisation.
It is precisely in line with the common professional assumptions outlined earlier and fits comfortably within the existing style of professional/client relationships.
In particular, the straightforward application of goal planning or Individual Planning approaches (Schachter et al.,
1978; Blunden, 1980; Humphreys et al.,
1985), as if their underlying assumptions were in line with the principles of normalisation, highlights the apparent feeling amongst professionals that all that is necessary is to change the name and call what they are doing ‘normalisation’ and all will be well.
The authors have argued elsewhere (Brechin and Swain, 1988) that the skill-development focus of goal planning and Individual Planning can be at odds with an approach that emphasises an individual's right to be valued for what he/she is, and to have opportunities for an ordinary life made available unconditionally.
The second kind of interpretation is perhaps the extreme of the position that Wolfensberger espouses.
Seeking to ensure that people are seen to live in pleasant, ordinary homes, are seen to drive in ordinary vehicles (not Sunshine buses, for example), go on ordinary holidays (not with large groups of other people who also have handicaps), wear attractive clothes, have attractive hairstyles, receive the same kind of support services as other people, and now, with social role valorisation (Wolfensberger, 1983) be seen to have appropriate, valued roles in society; seeking all this begins to sound dangerously close to a marketing strategy.
The product, i.e. the person in this case, becomes secondary to the packaging and to the image that is projected and promoted.
In the midst of this sales hype, what rights does the individual retain to be as he/she wishes to be?
Must the individual bend to comply with (usually) middle-class value systems in order to achieve some kind of acceptance?
Normalisation in this sense begins to sound like superimposing a currently fashionable veneer without any attention to the detail of what lies underneath.
In terms of the professional/client relationship, how easily this translates into the professional working to make the individual with learning difficulties socially acceptable — again on other people's terms.
Both these interpretations of normalisation seem to be in danger of losing sight of the individual at the centre of things.
The relationship which is implied between professional and client by these assumptions still tallies with the traditional relationship.
It remains inherently dependent from the client's point of view.
Behaviour, development, appearance, social role, etc. are still judged against a ‘given’ of social norms accepted as appropriate goals by the professional and the task is to bring the ‘deviant’individual into line as far as possible, by modifying or repackaging or both.
‘Success’ inevitably remains elusive by definition unless the individual escapes the label altogether.
This account sounds extremely critical of professional practice, and it should perhaps be made clear that such approaches have, paradoxically, contributed to considerable progress.
Finklestein (1980) described this same paradox in relation to people with physical impairments.
In the field of mental handicap the growth of the self-advocacy movement reflects the ability of a spirit of self-determination to emerge in the face of and (paradoxically) with the help of, an oppressive and dependency inducing style of professional help.
Many professionals, of course, struggle to escape from this difficulty.
Others fail to recognise its existence.
In the remainder of this chapter, we shall try to outline:
firstly, the interpretation of normalisation which seems to us to be in line with the sense of direction of the self-advocacy movement recognising that people with learning difficulties need to be seen as autonomous individuals with their own rights of self-determination;
secondly, our reading of the way that professionals and people with learning difficulties are working towards recreating the relationship between them, including an outline of a support structure developed recently by the authors (Brechin and Swain, 1986, 1987) designed as a tool to help shape a more equal relationship, or ‘a working alliance’ as it has been described elsewhere (Deffenbacher, 1985; Egan, 1986);
thirdly, some principles of professional practice which may be drawn up on the basis of these discussions.
A preferred interpretation of normalisation
We have referred earlier to a third interpretation of normalisation which we see as being in line with the spirit of much that has been written, particularly in the earlier days.
More recent summaries of these earlier statements are available (Bank-Mikklesen, 1980; Nirje, 1980).
This account of normalisation focuses on opening up a range of life-style opportunities which are available to the rest of the population but which have tended to be closed to people with learning difficulties.
Some inherent problems remain in a concept premised on the desirability of normality, in whatever sense it is interpreted.
If it is used, however, to highlight commonly experienced deprivations and restrictions, and stimulate a move away from those towards a range of service provisions and life-styles which would normally be seen as more adequate, more acceptable, and even more desirable — which would, in short, be valued by most of that society — then normalisation must offer some hope of a breakthrough.
Such an emphasis shifts the focus away from modifying or repackaging  the individual on to a concern to minimise the restrictiveness of opportunities.
As such, it is not at odds with the ‘litmus-test’ of self-advocacy, seeming to support a view of people as potentially autonomous and with a right to self-determination within a less restrictive social milieu.
What it does not do, of course, is to prescribe an appropriate style of professional practice.
The principles of normalisation relate to a style of living towards which people with learning difficulties and their supporters can aspire.
It does not suggest how their relationships with each other may have to change as part of the process.
The tendency is, then, for professional/client relationships to continue in the existing mode — even, as suggested earlier, pushing their interpretation of normalisation principles into line with their established practice in order to reduce the dissonance they might otherwise experience.
It seems essential to look explicitly at the implications of the interpretation of normalisation for professional styles of working.
Towards a working alliance
What are the alternatives to the more traditional professional/client relationship?
Are there alternatives to the modifying or repackaging strategies which aim to reduce deviance?
What measures of success might there be if the goal of changing client behaviour in some way is no longer centre stage?
It is too simplistic to suggest that by offering improved opportunities in a less restrictive setting, individuals with often severe learning difficulties, frequently additional disabilities, and histories of damaging experiences, will thereby have access to improved, more satisfying life-styles.
Access requires more than just the existence of possibilities.
Professional roles in offering support both directly and indirectly through other helpers will remain important in facilitating this process of accessing opportunities.
But how can this role be described?
It has been suggested that the self-advocacy movement offers a model of growth and development against which professional assumptions and approaches can be tested.
This is not to argue that professionals should try to replicate the process of supporting self-advocacy, but it is to suggest that the aims, mode of operation and the nature of the professional/client working  relationship should, at the very least, not be in conflict with the emergence of self-advocacy.
Williams and Shoultz (1982) set out their view of some of the processes at work in self advocacy, and the following account is built around their observations.
Such skills as are implicated in those two lists are essentially relationship skills and are arguably as relevant to individual professional/client relationships as they are to work with self-advocacy groups.
In exploring what this may mean for professional practice, it may be helpful to look at other attempts to reconstrue the nature of professional activity.
Models do exist which move away from the tendency to pathologise the individual.
Perhaps the most useful body of literature and experience to look at is that which addresses approaches to counselling.
Stemming largely from the work of Carl Rogers (e.g. Rogers, 1951, 1978), a school of thought has grown up emphasising both the centrality of the relationship between professional and client and the concept of personal growth — a growth which is essentially self-defined and personally experienced.
Others such as Maslow (1973) had  proffered similar views about the potential of human development given appropriate nurturing opportunities for growth.
Such ideas have been extended and broadened (see, for example, Egan, 1986; Murgatroyd and Wolfe, 1982) to encompass the notion of ‘helping skills’ or even ‘human relationship skills’(Nelson-Jones, 1986).
The term ‘working alliance’,(Deffenbacher, 1985) also seems to lay an appropriate emphasis on the concept of partnership.
Though they seem to have great relevance here, approaches to ‘counselling’ have tended to emerge and operate mostly in the context of more able, verbal and reflective groups in society.
Working with people whose verbal skills and ability to conceptualise may he limited or sometimes non-existent, offers a particular challenge.
Elsewhere the authors have explored in more detail the nature and relevance of such approaches to people with learning difficulties (Swain and Brechin, forthcoming).
Here we shall move straight to looking at how such principles may be extended to encompass this challenge.
In practice settings, those involved are often struggling to find ways of resolving the dilemmas they face.
Established methods and approaches are often the products of outdated assumptions, and professionals are  forced to invent, adapt, adjust on a day-to-day basis.
Few guidelines, other than very broad statements such as‘the use of culturally valued means to enable people to lead culturally valued lives’(Wolfensberger, 1980) exist to translate the new expectations into styles of working practice.
Shared Action Planning (Brechin and Swain, 1986, 1987) is an attempt to take up this challenge.
A method or approach to working together has been devised with the explicit intention of creating a relationship and setting in motion a process which supports the moves towards normalisation whilst still tallying with the emergence of self-advocacy.
The process which is generated becomes in effect an end in itself, creating as it does a working alliance within which both partners develop a shared approach to identifying and tackling goals and problems.
Pitt (1987) describes succinctly the incorporation of the approach and its direct relevance to the broad aims of normalisation and self-advocacy within a developing community support service.
A radical approach to shared assessment, which emphasises the importance of getting to know and understand each other; the identification of aims in terms of what people would like to see happening; and a process of considering plans for action which recognises the existence of different perspectives, moves the focus away from the usual concern with the individual and how he/she should change, to focus instead on the role of other people and wider circumstances.
The professional as mediator is frequently the picture which emerges.
But, whatever the plan for action arrived at, it is the process of travelling, and the nature of relationships generated on the journey which is of prime concern in Shared Action Planning.
Interestingly, Egan's discussion of the concept of a working alliance makes a similar point (Egan, 1986).
He cites Deffenbacher (1985) as suggesting that many of the outcomes of the helping process such as the development of goals and plans, happen inadvertently, with the most important focus being the client/helper relationship.
Drawing out principles of professional practice
We have been concerned here with the need for consistency in the principles underlying different movements, attitudes and approaches.
The assumption tends to be made that principles of normalisation, the self-advocacy movement, and professional/client relationships will somehow remain in tune with each other.
The reality seems to be somewhat different.
Interpretations of normalisation are too easily made to fit with long-established assumptions and practice.
If this pitfall is to be avoided, it is suggested that careful attention is needed to the way in which normalisation is being interpreted.
New methods and structures may be needed to help practitioners develop new relationships and styles of working.
Finally, attention to the nature of  relationships and the aims of self-advocacy may serve as a litmus-test to measure the appropriateness of other approaches.
Out of this, we can arrive perhaps at some principles of practice which can be seen to be both compatible with normalisation (in our preferred sense) and supportive of self-advocacy.
Six principles of practice
We would suggest that from the perspective of people with learning difficulties , a working alliance with professionals should seem:
1
to be an entitlement rather than an imposition;
2
to promote self-realisation rather than compliance;
3
to open up choices rather than replace one option with another;
4
to develop opportunities, relationships and patterns of living, in line with their individual wishes rather than rule of thumb normality;
5
to enhance their decision-making control of their own lives;
6
to allow them to move at their own pace.
Such principles of professional practice, measured as they are in terms of the client's perspective on the relationship, are, on the face of it, clear and straightforward.
Abiding by them, indeed trying to find ways of moving towards them, is, however, infinitely more problematic.
This chapter has explored some of the issues and challenges involved in helping such process of change to take place.
Effective co-operation in child protection work
Wendy Stainton Rogers
Children and young people have a right not to be mistreated, and are entitled to expect that adults will intervene to help them if they are being abused or neglected.
But they also have a right to the love, support and long-term commitment that their families are usually best able to provide.
And children facing troubles have a right not to be subjected to the ‘system abuse’ that may arise because of clumsy or inadequate professional intervention which — however well intentioned — can make them feel even more vulnerable, manipulated or ‘kept in the dark’.
To fulfil their obligations to children and young people, it is not enough for individuals who are concerned with protecting children to do their own jobs properly.
It is equally important that their different roles and functions are properly co-ordinated with each other, so that the participants in the process are mindful of all of the child's needs and rights, that they keep each other well informed, ensure that nothing gets ‘left out’ and yet avoid duplication.
And in all this, as so eloquently argued by Lord Butler-Sloss in her report to the Cleveland inquiry (DHSS, 1988a), children must always be treated as people, not as mere objects of professional concern.
Therefore, possibly more than in any other work concerned with children and young people, it is in the sphere of child protection that all of the people involved — whether they are professionals, volunteers or the child's parents and wider family — need to be able to work together.
Sadly, it has been all too often the case that it is precisely in this area that individuals and agencies have found it most difficult to co-operate.
In the inquiries into the deaths of children like Maria Colwell, Jasmine Beckford and Kimberley Carlile (DHSS, 1982; Blom-Cooper, 1986, 1987) the observation has been repeatedly made that children who were known to be ‘at risk’ were failed by those given the statutory duty to protect them, because of poor communication, mistakes about knowing who was (or was not) responsible for undertaking particular tasks, and, it has to be admitted, professional rivalries and jealousies.
Similarly, with regard to the recent events in Cleveland (DHSS, 1988a), it was not the good intentions of individual professionals that were criticised so much as their inability — or unwillingness — to operate as a team with a common purpose.
It is easy to assume (as some politicians have done) that the mistakes were simply due to professional bungling or individual pigheadedness.
A more thorough analysis suggests that, although professional incompetence and ‘personality conflicts’ were certainly involved, in every case there were also some very genuine reasons why it proved so difficult to work harmoniously together.
In this chapter I shall argue that such problems  are rooted in a variety of differences in values, practices, perspectives and professional ethos, arising out of a range of social, cultural and historical processes.
To tease out their effects, I will begin by briefly outlining the procedural and organisational framework intended to promote interagency co-operation.
Next, I will examine some of the reasons why this cooperation is so hard to achieve.
And finally, I will explore some suggestions about how such problems may be overcome.
The procedural and organisational framework
Roles and responsibilities
Three main agencies share the primary responsibility for the protection of children — the police, social services and health authorities.
In addition the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) alone amongst the voluntary organisations has statutory powers in this area.
(This is not the case for the Royal Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, RSSPCC.)
Each has particular duties with regard to preventive work, investigations, monitoring and support.
Other agencies (such as the education service) and organisations (such as the Family Rights Group and self-help groups such as OPUS, the Organisation for Parents Under Stress) also serve important functions.
Table 6.1 sets out the main responsibilities of different professionals within the main agencies.
It is the Social Services Departments (Social Work Departments in Scotland, and Health and Social Services Boards in Northern Ireland) that have the principal statutory duty to protect children.
Where children are considered to be ‘at risk’ within their families, the social service agencies have a statutory duty to monitor their continued safety, and to co-ordinate services to help their families look after them properly.
Where the risk is considered too serious for the children to remain in their family, they have a duty to provide alternative care, in foster homes or other forms of residential care (and there is a duty to monitor children's safety and well-being in these situations also).
The other agencies and bodies are expected to carry out their particular functions under the co-ordination of the ‘lead’ social service agency.
More detailed information about the roles and responsibilities of the different workers, agencies and organisations can be found in Dingwall et al.
(1983) and Osborne (1989).
The machinery of interagency co-operation
There are three main ways in which interagency co-operation is organised.
These are: Area Child Protection Committees, case conferences, and Child Protection Registers.
Area Child Protection Committees (formerly Area Review Committees)
Area Child Protection Committees (ACPCs), based upon the boundaries of local authorities, are intended to provide a forum for developing, monitoring and reviewing child protection policies in a particular locality.
Although there is some variation from area to area, each committee is made up of representatives of the key agencies who carry sufficient authority to act on their agency's behalf.
Those would normally include:
social services;
NSPCC (in some areas only);
health authorities, including health service management, medical services,(e.g. paediatricians), psychiatric services (e.g. child psychiatrists), and nursing;
family practitioner services, including GPs and health visitors;
education services, including the education authority and teachers;
police;
probation service;
armed forces (where appropriate).
More specifically the roles of the ACPCs are to establish and review local interagency guidelines about procedures; tackle significant issues that arise, and establish good practice; offer expert advice about the handling of cases in general; make policy and review progress about prevention; and oversee interagency training.
Work is often delegated to specific working groups, which frequently co-opt specialists and experienced fieldworkers.
Case conferences
Case conferences are the main procedure by which interagency co-operation is initiated and maintained at case level.
Whenever child abuse is suspected, a conference will be held at an early stage in the investigation and decision-making processes.
For efficiency and confidentiality, the conference is expected to have a clear set of objectives, and to be restricted to those people directly involved with the child and the family concerned, and those who need to know about or have a contribution to make to the tasks involved.
The formal duties of the conference are to decide whether or not to place a child's name on the Child Protection Register and, if so, to appoint a ‘key worker’ who then assumes the main responsibility for overall coordination of any subsequent work with the child and the family.
This may not be the person with the most frequent face-to-face contact with the child or family, but he or she has the task of ensuring that the statutory responsibilities of the social service agency are fulfilled towards the child, including the regular reviewing of the case, the completion of assessments and the provision of services.
As well as these formal duties, case conferences have three further functions in relation to interagency co-operation:
1
Providing a forum for discussing and sharing information about the child and the family, and in particular the allegations or suspicions of abuse.
The aim is to assess what has happened, and to decide whether the child needs protection.
2
Promoting collective planning and decision making to devise an overall protection plan for the child, which integrates the work of the agencies concerned and divides up tasks in an economic and functional manner.
The plan should include:(a) ensuring the child's immediate safety;(b) assessing the child's situation and likely needs in the future; and (c) providing the services needed by the child and family.
3
Recommending actions, tasks and responsibilities to each agency.
While it remains (in theory at least) the prerogative of each agency to decide whether to co-operate with the overall plan, they are at least expected to notify the key worker if they intend to deviate from what has been agreed.
The key worker is responsible for monitoring the plan worked out to protect the child, and for co-ordinating all interagency activity in order to make sure it is carried out.
Conferences are normally convened and chaired by social services, or (in some parts of England and Wales) by the NSPCC on their behalf, but may be requested by any of the other agencies.
If the child in question is placed on the Child Protection Register, review conferences must be held regularly to monitor the child's safety and to review his or her registration.
However, case conferences are not just a forum for professional decision making.
Department of Health guidelines (DHSS, 1988b) suggest that they should also offer parents an opportunity to have their views and wishes heard and that parents should be invited, where practicable, to attend part, or if appropriate the whole, of the case conference.
Until recently this has been a rare occurrence, but increasingly local authorities are devising strategies to involve parents in case conferences, despite professional reluctance in some areas and the genuine problems that this poses.
At the very least parents should be kept fully informed about the purpose of the case conference, and arrangements made to ensure that their views, and accounts of what happened, are heard.
This includes making sure parents know the reasons for professional concern, the statutory powers, duties and roles of the agencies involved, their legal rights, and any changes in the family which the agencies consider necessary in the interests of the child.
They must always be informed afterwards, in writing, about the outcome of the conference.
Child Protection Registers
The Child Protection Register provides a central record of all children in a given area who have been identified as abused, or who are considered to be at risk of abuse, and who therefore are currently the subject of an interagency plan to protect them.
The intention is to offer a speedy point of enquiry for professionals from different agencies who may be worried about a particular child.
The register is held by social services or, in a few areas, by the NSPCC on their behalf.
Information is kept separately from other records, in conditions which safeguard its confidentiality.
Registration is reviewed at least every six months.
Department of Health guidelines (1988b) suggest five categories of registration, which are not necessarily exhaustive or mutually exclusive:
neglect
physical abuse
sexual abuse 
emotional abuse
grave concern (e.g. where another child in the household has been identified as abused)
The register is managed by a ‘custodian’, an experienced social worker with appropriate knowledge and skills in child abuse work, who is available to provide advice to professional staff making enquiries.
Custodians are expected to inform each other immediately when children are moved from one part of the country to another, and the child's name should be immediately registered in the new locality, pending a case conference.
If at any time the whereabouts of a child on the register are not known, it is the custodian's specific responsibility to set in hand immediate action to try to trace the child.
The key worker should regularly check that the child's whereabouts are known, and inform the Child Protection Register's custodian immediately if the child goes missing.
Reasons for poor co-operation
There are four main explanations for the failure of this machinery for cooperation, and for the conflicts and dissensions that often emerge between the different agencies and organisations with a duty to protect children:
the differing — and often conflicting — values, ideologies, cultures, ground-rules and practices of the various professions and groups involved;
a lack of clarity in the boundaries and lines of authority and decision making between one agency and another;
the consequences of historical prejudices and more immediate interprofessional jealousies between groups and individuals.
Different functions
Each of the participating agencies has a different job to do, a different area of activity, and different interests and concerns.
Some have a focused role at a particular stage (e.g. the role of the paediatrician during an investigation), whereas others have a more diffuse role that spans all the stages (e.g. the NSPCC).
Similarly, within any stage, different agencies may need to focus on different aspects.
For instance, during an investigation, the police must concentrate upon collecting adequate and appropriate evidence for a possible prosecution, whereas social workers are concerned to gain much broader information about the child and the family's situation and resources.
Traditionally these different functions and objectives have been regarded as somewhat incompatible.
The police, for example, might worry about consulting too closely with social workers in case the validity of the evidence they gained might be threatened.
Doctors have been concerned that requests for repeated medical examinations, while justified for the purposes of forensic evidence, might be detrimental to their primary responsibility for the child's health and well-being.
Increasingly, however, the professionals concerned are finding ways in which they can do their own jobs properly, while working together for the child's benefit.
For example, police surgeons and paediatricians are learning to conduct medical examinations in partnership, and social workers and police officers are being trained to conduct joint interviews with children where sexual abuse is suspected.
The need for good teamwork is now being recognised as essential.
Different perspectives
Professionals involved with child protection define and explain it in different and sometimes conflicting ways, and adopt quite different stances about the way it should be undertaken (Stainton Rogers and Stainton Rogers, 1989).
For example, they differ in whether they consider all adult-child sexual relationships as abusive, and in their judgements about the relative effects of different kinds of abuse.
Some take a highly individualistic approach, regarding child abuse and neglect as primarily the actions of particular persons; others adopt a broader perspective, seeing poverty, disadvantage and exploitation to be just as abusive as individual cruelties.
Some people stress the need to protect innocent children from the misuse of adult power; others see the way forward as one of liberating and empowering children, even if this places them at risk.
Some seek to keep the family together at all costs; others, particularly in relation to sexual abuse, argue for the exclusion of the abuser from the home.
Some of these conflicts can be identified with particular ideologies.
Feminists, for example, are highly critical of some family therapists.
To them, seeking to explain and treat the ‘problem’ in terms of the dynamics within a family is morally indefensible — it lets the abuser ‘off the hook’and blames the child, or more usually the mother, for colluding with or even encouraging the abuse (see, for example, Nelson, 1987; MacLeod and Saraga, 1987).
Given that these viewpoints and value bases are so antagonistic, and yet rarely made explicit, it is not surprising that different groups find it so hard to trust and respect each other.
Even outside these types of confrontation, the very differences in language and traditions can lead to a breakdown in communication.
Fred Sedgwick, a teacher, captured this recently in an article describing a case conference he attended (Guardian , 28 January 1989).
His account has the doctor describing the mother in question as a ‘silly girl who ought to have her tubes tied up’, the social workers ‘dressed in natural materials’ and  concerned to achieve ‘a caring situation for the whole family’and the policemen ‘all in matching fawns and beiges’talking in language ‘clipped yet verbose, impersonal and jargony’.
Teachers, he admitted, are no better: ‘How committed to learning we are.
How clever our sarcasm is.’
Lines of authority and decision making
As well as government guidelines (DHSS, 1988b) most professional bodies (e.g. General Medical Council, 1987) instruct their members to share information about allegations of abuse.
However, given that only social workers have a legal responsibility to investigate allegations, and other professionals (e.g. priests) may be under an obligation to protect confidentiality, social services face the dilemma of undertaking the ‘lead agency’ role, while having no authority to insist that other professionals pass on information to them.
Similarly, while there is a growing willingness by agencies like the police to be guided by a case conference in decisions, they can, if they choose, act independently.
Even within agencies, the aims and approaches of people at different levels of the professional hierarchy are often at odds.
Peter Dale (1989) talks of ‘defensive practices’ where managers may choose to play safe in order to avoid criticism ‘if anything goes wrong’, whereas their staff, more closely in touch with children and families, may prefer to employ a strategy of rehabilitation.
And behind all the distinct and conflicting perspectives described earlier, underneath all the rhetoric about ‘working together’, are barely hidden power and status differentials.
Doctors, health visitors, social workers and police — even parents — may sit round a table at a case conference ostensibly discussing a ‘team decision’ which is ‘in the best interests of the child’.
But they are far from equal in their ability to achieve the outcome they want.
Case conferences do not have the status of a court of law and so parents have no right to challenge decisions that are made.
A single voice, if it comes from somebody sufficiently powerful, can overturn the consensus arrived at by the rest (Sedgwick wryly ends his article by saying that the child's name was put on the ‘register’, the doctor having used his influence to overturn the decision made by the rest).
Professional prejudices and jealousies
The different approaches necessarily adopted by professional groups may give rise to stereotypical ‘cardboard’ images of each other.
The other day a friend described another woman to me as ‘a typical social worker, you know, all Freud and knitted lentils’.
Stereotyping can be dangerous when it allows us to distance ourselves from others, and to fail to see the individual through the distorting lens of our own prejudice.
It can be used defensively to convince ourselves we do not need to take their ideas, understandings and values seriously, and to reinforce our own superior knowledge.
This is all the more true when we share our prejudices with our colleagues and friends, competing with each other to paint ever more rude or ridiculous portraits of whatever ‘out group’ we have chosen as our prey.
Of course, the motivation for playing this game is all the stronger when we have reason to resent the ‘out group’ for being more powerful or better resourced than we are, or not subject to the strains, pressures and tensions we face (of course , because they are an ‘out group’we know little about the problems that they have and we do not).
This is as true of child protection work as of any other field, and indeed perhaps the very dangerousness of the work (for professionals and clients alike) and the appalling nature of some of the cruelties and neglects make such professional jealousy and prejudice all the more likely.
Improving co-operation
Very little research has been conducted to discover how the barriers to effective co-operation might be knocked down.
Specifically in terms of child protection, the best-known British work has been carried out by Hallett and Stevenson (1980).
Stevenson herself has written more recently (Stevenson, 1988) reviewing the main themes that have emerged, and is well worth following up.
Drawing upon her work I would suggest the following guidelines for improving co-operation:
Clear and agreed definitions of the functions and tasks of each agency and each worker need to be identified, and agreed boundaries established so that all workers know their own roles and responsibilities and understand each other 's.
Everybody should know the boundaries of their own competence, where and how their activities touch on those of others, and in what circumstances they need to consult others or keep them informed.
Specific individuals need to be identified within each agency who are willing, competent and have the resources to make their work with child abuse and neglect a major commitment.
These people need to be enabled to act as representatives for their agencies and as link-persons with other agencies.
Regular, well-organised and properly established channels of communication between the different agencies need to be set up and maintained, both on a case-by-case basis and at a higher managerial level.
Work needs to be done to agree how these forms of communication will operate, and to ensure they are maintained and followed, despite crises and other pressures.
The people concerned need opportunities  to develop the necessary competencies to ensure effective intra- and interagency communication.
Ways of overcoming ignorance and prejudice about each other 's functions, ways of working and training, need to be found, both by the sharing of information and by such endeavours as joint training schemes and regular forums for discussion and debate.
Common goals, common commitment and common terminology need to be defined, while respecting and valuing differences in values, approaches and specialist language and skills.
Procedures for tackling problems when they emerge must be specified, so that they can be dealt with before they become intractable.
This involves a willingness to acknowledge that co-operation can be difficult and that mistakes will occur, and a commitment to making the solving of problems a priority, rather than allowing them to fester.
Opportunities need to be made for individuals to develop good working relationships with others from the different agencies, at all levels from grass-roots workers to senior managers.
Ways must be found to ensure that all professionals involved in child abuse work are fully informed about the local arrangements for interprofessional co-operation, and are regularly kept up to date with new developments.
These principles are easy enough to state, but much more difficult to accomplish.
They will not merely ‘happen’ but need to be put into action by deliberate planning and the creation of active programmes of work and staff development.
The problem is, of course, that child abuse work is all too often conducted under enormous time and resource pressures, and may at times have to be done under the glare of unwelcome publicity or in the aftermath of an incident that has aroused public concern.
It is in these situations, particularly following a public inquiry into a case where a child has died, that poor co-operation tends to be most exposed.
This tends to make invisible the enormous amount of good co-operative work that is already being done.
We hear very little about those localities where people are working away quietly with encouraging results, and about the many examples of excellent collaboration that protect so many children.
However, it does highlight a major problem that we have so far not considered — some would argue it is the major reason why interagency cooperation is so difficult — and that is lack of resources.
At a recent conference for teachers, a great deal of anger was expressed about a DES circular.
It specifies a large number of actions to be taken, including the appointment of teachers in each school with, among other duties, a responsibility for interagency liaison.
But the document commented that the recommendations ‘had no resource implications’.
‘How’, the teachers asked, ‘are we to be trained and to find the time to do the job, without any extra resources?’
A point that is often forgotten is that effective co-operation is not just a matter of professionals working with each other.
Professionals need also to work together with parents and other carers of children.
Tunnard (1989) makes some excellent suggestions about ways this can be achieved, including: improving ways of providing emergency protection for children at times of crisis by drawing upon the support of the extended family and local community; involving parents in decision making, providing parents' representatives and encouraging the development of local support groups; improving what happens after separation by offering children and families choices about what can be done, and ensuring contact is promoted and maintained; dealing with sexual abuse cases in ways that help non-abusing parents to avoid taking a defensive position and that give them the resources and support they need to be able to protect their children.
Her article is clearly argued and worth reading in full.
And finally, we must always remember that the most essential form of co-operation must be that between the ‘helpers’ and the ‘helped’.
Adults who seek to protect children and act as their advocates need to work with and not just ‘for’ children and young people.
They have a duty to make sure that the best principles of co-operation are applied to all they do in relation to each child in the name of the ‘child's best interests’.
Children and young people are entitled to the same levels of respect, consultation and competent practice that we advocate for ourselves as professional workers.
In defence of residential care
Lorraine Waterhouse
We put them to bed, we wake them up, we laugh and we cry with them’(Berridge, 1985, p. 54).
Introduction
Research findings of decision making in child care have revealed some disturbing features in contemporary practice.
Social workers demonstrated a professional preference for children remaining with their natural families, and regarded admissions to care as tantamount to failure.
Residential institutions were doubly punished: admission to care was bad enough, but admission to residential care was even worse.
In this paper the unfairness of this professional attitude is argued and encouragement given to the need for residential care to be seen as part of a continuum of services for children in care.
The idea of partnership between residential workers and fieldworkers is offered as one means by which a spirit of mutual respect and co-operation can develop between them.
The consequences of two critical changes in child care policy and practice for day-to-day work in residential homes are discussed.
A final section outlines three policy and practice themes arising from recent research which could point the way ahead.
Changes in child care policy and practice
The past fifteen years have seen critical changes in child care policy and practice with important consequences for the balance between residential and other forms of child care.
First , there has been a notable increase in the use of fostering, and a slight decline in the use of residential care (DHSS, 1982).
Second , there has been a definite increase in the proportion of older children admitted into care, and a decrease, although less marked, in the number of very young children admitted.
These outcomes were the result of new policy initiatives and practice methods in child care.
A policy of normalisation to ensure that the circumstances of children in care should be as near to those of children not in care, to be achieved through planning for permanency, was formulated; and a practice of finding alternative families for children as the first choice, using residential care mainly as a brief transitional experience, was implemented.
The initiative was taken first in relation to young children, and an almost  universal policy was adopted to prevent the reception into residential care of young children under five.
This changed not only the nature of provision for young children, but also the use made of residential care and the patterns of referral to it.
Young people approaching the age when they would no longer be the formal responsibility of the local authorities became the primary consumers of residential care for several reasons: first, many had been placed with a family and temporary readmission to residential care was needed when such placements broke down; second, some did not wish to join a new family and preferred group living amongst other young people and appointed caregivers; and third, some were admitted to a residential setting for help with specific problems or as part of a strategy to prepare them for independent living.
Children's homes, therefore, were left to care for an older group of children, many of whom were experiencing severe problems and anxieties about their future, and showing serious emotional and behavioural symptoms.
The care staff in such homes understandably felt inadequately trained to respond to this new pattern and were no longer certain about their roles, so clearly defined in the past as parental.
While previously residential care had been seen as the solution for many young children, it was now considered as part of the problem .
The move away from residential to alternative family care shaped the form of subsequent endeavours to help children.
Social work intervention concentrated on planning for children in care, and resource finding focusing on families and not institutions.
In practice the solution was to find the right placement for the children, rather than try to help the parents, child or care staff to adjust to each other.
Casework with parents, therapeutic work with children in care, and skills training for residential workers and field workers were now of secondary importance.
What consequences follow from these two main changes for day-to-day work in residential homes?
Two issues in particular stand out which may pose serious dilemmas for residential workers in caring for children and young people.
First , the fact that those in residential care are young people not children;second , that the main emphasis in child care work has been on the discussion of personal family relationships and in working towards the return of children to their own families or placement with another family.
Practice issues in the residential care of young people
Young people, not children
Residential workers have been left to care for troubled young people just as professional interest in residential communities was declining.
The composition by age of children in children's homes had always included  some adolescents but they had never been together in such large numbers before.
While these changes were taking place, I had the opportunity to visit a number of local children's homes.
Staff in these homes, particularly those who had committed much of their working lives to children in children's homes, were distressed and confused by these changes.
As one residential worker remarked: ‘I wouldn't mind if only they weren't adolescents.’
This observation is critical.
Daily encounters in residential settings underwent a major change because the needs of young people are different from those of children.
The needs of young people
Young people have conflicting needs.
Like children, they require a sense of security, of belonging, and of their own importance to others, yet as young people they need also a sense of growing independence, of self-assertion, of occupational skill and of responsibility.
They share this psychological conflict in growing up with other young people, not in public care.
Just as parents sometimes feel caught in the middle of competing demands which arise from this conflict, so also do residential workers, often in more extreme ways.
Why is this?
Packman et al.
(1986) found that young people admitted to care had experienced and continued to experience during the admission highly disturbing and unpredictable family relationships.
Many young people have more than one admission to residential care and many moves between settings (Millham et al.,
1986).
Although adolescents are not as vulnerable as young children to the effect of parental separation, contact between young people and their parents becomes less frequent the longer they remain in care (Millham et al.,
1986).
Residential workers are faced with youngsters who are not only anxious and resentful about family events, but may also be mistrustful of those who try to help them.
Field social workers visit children and young people in care less frequently over time and then only briefly (Millham et al.,
1986).
In consequence residential workers may become the main caregivers for young people in residential care.
Because of what has gone before, young people coming into residential care need security and a sense of belonging, neither of which they may have experienced in great measure before.
To expect them to stride manfully towards independence is rather like asking them to dive before they have been taught to swim.
And yet, to try and care for them, to protect them, is to touch a sensitive wound.
Fisher et al.
(1986) and Morgan Klein (1985) describe convincingly the conflict which young people in residential care experience between longing for their parents to provide for them and the growing realisation that this may only ever be partial.
Residential workers have the difficult task of finding a balance between guiding young people forward, perhaps before they are ready, and caring for them in a personal way which does not threaten loyalty to their parents.
As a result the tension which this conflict inevitably creates makes it difficult and sometimes impossible to get close to young people in residential care.
An illustrative case
John , 13, who lived with his young mother and maternal grandmother in a small sparsely furnished council flat on a large housing estate, was seen by a student training to be a social worker.
The student described an overwhelming sense of poverty and decay.
John's father left the family when John was seven, although he had spent long periods away when John was younger.
The health visitor referred John to a voluntary family agency in the city because of his non-attendance at school and his increasingly aggressive acts at home.
The student found John big for his age, stony faced and sullen.
The family were visited at home until John was admitted into a local residential home.
During the visits to the flat, the student fully expected to establish a relationship with John.
The student was to be disappointed.
He tried different approaches: he tried going out with John; talking with him; sitting with him; even designing a game for him based on football which the student knew interested John.
The student wrote of his experience:
At each attempt John invariably left the home having completely ignored what I was saying.
This in fact became very difficult for me, personally as well as professionally.
In my, albeit limited, experience of working with clients, I had never before been unable to establish any kind of empathic relationship.
I felt frustrated that I was not able to offer real hope or solutions.
The situation at home was fast deteriorating as my relationship with John worsened.
One incident stands out in particular as a point when I felt there was little more I could do:
I had called round at the house early in the week to check on how things had gone over the weekend.
I found John to be, as usual, watching the television, and after getting no response I sat and chatted to his mother.
Suddenly John stood up, kicked me on the shins and walked off to his bedroom bemoaning the fact that he couldn't get ‘peace’ to watch the television.
I decided to follow him to his bedroom to confront him with this unacceptable behaviour.
He swore at me to get out.
I stayed, nonetheless, and tried to reason with him.
I said that I accepted that maybe he hated me and that he wanted nothing to do with me.
However he knew, as well as I did, that the behaviour was not on, nor could he avoid school for evermore.
Unfortunately, I said the longer he chose to ignore me and others who were trying to find out what was making him so unhappy, the more chance there was that decisions about his future might be made regardless of his willingness to discuss his situation.
This was greeted by yet another rush of insults.
He pushed past me and ran out of the house.
John's behaviour seriously deteriorated.
He tried to burn himself.
After a long search a place in a local residential home for young people was found.
The residential staff helped John, his mother and the student to see the move as positive.
John responded well to the admission.
He became communicative for the first time.
The student was cautiously optimistic for the future.
Discussion
Three points arise from this example.
First , the student thought that no communication existed between himself and John because the encounters were negative.
Yet there was communication, albeit of an unhappy quality.
It is possible to speculate that John's anger may have stemmed from the student turning his attention to the mother; but whatever the explanation, John responded and reacted to the student.
The problem for the student, which residential workers may also face, was to know how to shift this embryonic relationship into a form which was less disturbing to both.
Second , the student wanted to appeal to the rational side of John, to that side of him which could see the futility of his actions.
None the less, he was aware of John's vulnerability and John's need to be protected by adults against his destructive impulses.
Appealing to rationality fuelled John's anger; protective overtures won disdain.
The student bravely and patiently spoke with John throughout the contact.
He had to content himself with the fact that it was mostly a one-way affair.
The student's willingness, however, to involve John and to try and behave fairly towards him were acts which potentially respected both his rationality and his vulnerability.
Finally , the student questioned whether he had helped John.
There is no simple answer but I think he may have halted a destructive spiral.
John's extreme aggression to himself and others was a sign that he was no longer responsive to self-control or the standard of protective control which his family could offer.
Although John's overt behaviour was sometimes violent, it seems likely that it masked a pervasive sense of anxiety, although the precise nature of the anxiety was not clear.
The student found it easier to curb his own aggressive feelings to John when he defined John's anger as a partial manifestation of anxiety.
In practice the student endeavoured to respond not to the aggression but to the idea that this big, angry and intimidating young man was probably the more frightened of the two of them.
The student was not capable of protecting John in his family, but the recognition of this need was brought to fruition in the planned admission to a residential home.
This admission to residential care restored some external order in John's life, which in turn may have helped to re-establish a view of himself as someone capable of personal relations with others.
It is important, however, to bear in mind that the student responded to John's distressed and distressing behaviour when he was reasonably satisfied that he, as a student social worker, was neither provoking the behaviour nor sufficiently able to help John's mother and grandmother look after John.
Had the student acted without regard to either of these considerations, then the act of admission to residential care might have come to represent for John an aggressive act against him rather than one which was intended to be supportive.
Residential workers may also be uncertain whether they have helped the youngsters in their care.
Morgan Klein (1985), in her study of Scottish  youth in residential care, concluded from her interviews with young people that they do want help, are often puzzled when communication fails to occur, and are bereft when it is abandoned.
Such help is more complex than has been conveyed by my observations of the student's work with John.
Residential workers significantly contribute to the psychological development of young people in their care when they stand by them in the face of the young person's opposition or retreat, and when they continue to strive to know and understand them.
Even if residential workers are not able always to succeed, then at the very least young people may come to see these efforts as an indication of their own importance for others.
The emphasis on family relationship and restoration to the family of origin
The emphasis in child care practice on families before institutions has contributed to a definition of the aims and the means of helping young people which accentuates personal, family relationships.
Residential workers were expected both to prepare young people for joining a new family and to respond to them if and when these new family relationships failed.
This deliberate emphasis on the young people's unreliable and hurtful past relationships poses a dilemma for residential workers.
Should they concentrate mainly on enabling youngsters in their care to manage family relationships, or should they endeavour to help young people develop cultural and social interests and to further their practical competence in preparation for future citizenship?
If the focus of helping young people in residential care were redefined to identify the development of personal self-worth as a primary aim , then it would be possible to achieve this by including both dimensions, neither to the exclusion of the other.
To illustrate:
A former social work student, after completing her training, went to work in a residential unit for adolescents.
Most of the young people had suffered several foster placement breakdowns, and some had been in trouble with the law.
I interviewed the student after she had worked in the residential unit for one year.
She described her working experience as ‘worse than anything I had ever imagined’.
The reason for this was the violent behaviour of the young people to the staff, and sometimes of the staff to the young people.
Weekends and weekday evenings were the most difficult to manage; times when the young people were unoccupied.
The student described an aimlessness.
Sometimes group outings were arranged, but often they were cancelled when the young people behaved badly; sometimes the young people went out alone; often nothing happened.
The young people became restless; angry exchanges amongst them and between them and the carers erupted; occasionally the police were called.
The cycle began again.
The student found that it was not uncommon to regard the young person's stay in residential care as temporary.
Because the emphasis was on family placements, residential workers and families expected other plans to be made.
These plans did not always materialise and even when they did, they happened only slowly.
The student observed: ‘If only we could stop waiting and do something .’
I think she has a fair point, even if there were better times in this home and altogether better times in other homes.
If it were possible in the residential care of young people to replace their sense of failure in personal relationships with successes, small or big, in other aspects of their lives, then the experience of residential care could be seen as beneficial in its own right, whatever the outcome of work to restore family relationships.
This might create a balance in the day-to-day encounters of young people and carers between, on the one hand, issues concerned with the young person's feelings and behaviour towards others and, on the other hand, the appreciation and learning of skills associated with a range of activities and interests.
This balance is more in keeping with the needs of young people and takes into account the low self-esteem of many of those in public care.
A greater emphasis on cultivating young people's interests and creative activities in art, music, literature and sports could lessen their self-doubt in residential care, further their competence, and create a sense of achievement.
In recent years there has been a move to teach young people in residential care practical skills such as cooking and budgeting which they will need when they leave care.
To take this initiative and extend it to include a range of interests which they can use, whether or not they are employed in the future, might help them to be on a more equal footing with their peers who have not been in public care.
Should their personal and family relationships remain or become negligible, then they might leave residential care supplied with skills and interests which they did not have before coming into care.
This in itself would constitute a major achievement and would give recognition to the important contribution of residential workers in preparing young people for citizenship.
At the same time, it would provide variety in the work of residential carers, and give purpose to the daily encounters which would be less demoralising for all concerned.
I do not wish to suggest that helping young people with personal family relationships is unimportant; far from it!
I wish only to encourage the development of an already existing trend which recognises that personal self-worth depends not only on relations with others, but also on the development and mastery of creative, intellectual and physical interests.
I do not see why these opportunities should be less available to young people simply because they are in public care.
Nor do I see why caregivers should be expected to sustain a focus on personal relationships which would not ordinarily exist in the encounters between young people and adults.
This raises the more general question of the overall policy and practice likely to influence the nature and scope of residential social work in years  to come.
The final section of this chapter deals briefly with some recent research studies and identifies the main policy and practice themes arising from these, as a pointer towards the future work of residential social workers.
Recent studies in decision making in child care
Between 1981 and 1986 nine major research studies (Adcock, 1983; Berridge, 1985; Fisher et al.,
1986; Hilgendorff, 1981; Millham et al.,
1986; Packman et al.,
1986; Rowe et al.,
1984; Sinclair, 1984; Vernon and Fruin, 1986) funded by the DHSS and the ESRC, broadly concerned with social work decisions in child care, were completed.
These studies were based on observed patterns of practice from 1979 to 1982, in forty-nine local authorities in England and Wales, and included approximately 2,000 children (DHSS, 1985).
Although, with the important exceptions of Berridge (1985) and Fisher et al.
(1986), the studies are primarily concerned with fieldwork practice, a number of findings emerge which are highly relevant to residential services for children and young people.
It is these which I will emphasise.
It is important, however, to remember that the studies, whilst representing a considerable achievement, were not comprehensive on two counts: first, they did not include Scotland or Ireland; second, the principal informants were field social workers and not residential care staff (DHSS, 1985).
Finally, the findings are not necessarily consistent with each other, although substantial areas of correspondence exist.
Policy and practice themes in the residential care of children and young people
The themes to be discussed are: admission into care: the last resort; the compulsory nature of most residential admissions; and the relationship between field and residential workers.
Admission into care: the last resort
Residential care continues to form a major part of the experience of children and young people in care.
It performs important functions in times of crisis, both when children enter care and when foster placements break down.
Millham et al.
(1986), for example, found that of the 450 children coming into care in five local authorities in England and Wales, residential care accounted for 51 per cent of all admissions (p. 80).
Despite this, Fisher et al.
(1986), Millham et al.
(1986), Packman et al.
(1986) and Vernon and Fruin (1986) all found that field social workers, and sometimes  residential workers, associated the provision of care for children and young people with failure, and thought that good social work practice meant avoiding the use of care, especially residential care.
Consequently, field social workers delayed the decision to admit young people to care, and, subsequently, were forced to do so when events had overtaken them.
(Vernon and Fruin, 1986).
Social workers appear to expect few benefits to accrue from residential care.
They do not, for example, expect that young people might be helped by residential workers to become better people, to develop new interests and to learn new skills.
Nor are social workers' preconceptions changed by the experience of using residential placements.
Fisher et al.
(1986) followed fifty-five children admitted to care, most of whom were young people in residential care.
They found that field social workers were on the whole critical of the residential experience.
They complained of frequent staff changes resulting in a lack of consistency between residential workers and inadequate control of the youngsters.
Why is residential care looked on with special pessimism by social workers?
It is not mere chance that admitting children into residential care is seen as a last resort by field and residential social workers, but it is, I wish to argue, the logical outcome of what has gone before.
The research of Rowe and Lambert (1973) undoubtedly led to a major reform in child care policy and practice by documenting through its research findings the plight of children in care, of whom more than 50 per cent were accommodated in residential settings.
They found that a large proportion of the children had already spent the greater part of their lives in care.
The children had little contact with their parents, and the longer they remained in care the less contact they had.
There was little planning by field social workers for the children's futures.
Whilst Rowe and Lambert took exception to the then prevailing view that children should, and more important could, be returned to their own families, they were strongly committed to family care as the main form of substitute care for those children who could not return home.
Rowe and Lambert concluded that residential care was of value for some children, but not usually for young children except very briefly.
The fact that at least half of the children who waited in long-term care were in children's homes became the more powerful message.
That children also lingered in foster homes without any definite plan for their future care was taken seriously, but the indictment was levied more against the former than the latter.
Findings of successful residential care were given little attention.
It is possible to argue that the research of Rowe and Lambert was influential for the growth of an ideology about the supremacy of the family as the basis for alternative public care of children and young people.
Rowe and Lambert, in describing the aspirations of social workers in child care before 1970, thought that the failure to plan for children in public care stemmed in part from a rejection by social workers of state care for  children as a permanent alternative to care by the natural family.
Hence, an illusion that the children would sooner or later return home was sustained, mitigating the need to plan for another outcome which, in any case, was considered inferior and likely to do as much harm as good.
To trace the thread further, Rowe and Lambert not only articulated the prevailing ideology of the need and right of children to belong to families, but also asserted their support for it.
They knew from their own and others' research that there was a diminishing prospect for children returning home once they had been long in care.
A compromise was needed.
Permanent family placements for children in care would provide such a compromise.
Family placements offered a context for growing up in care that was consistent with their belief in the children's psychological need to belong to families.
Many of the children in care were young, and unless positive steps to plan for their future were taken, they would continue like the older children in their sample to wait for lengthy periods in care.
The momentum engendered by the moral and political appeal of ‘a family for every child’ was very strong.
Residential institutions lost favour and became associated with, if not blamed for, the lack of professional vision and determination to plan for the long term future of children.
But other factors also prevailed.
There was a political will in Britain and in the United States to reduce spending on institutional care and to promote cheaper community-based services, not only in child care but also in other sectors of public care such as mental health and mental handicap.
Professional aims and social and economic policies were in alignment with each other.
Yet Mary Ann Jones, author of the major American study A Second Chance for Families (1976), ruefully remarked: ‘The money which should have been saved from the reduction in institutional care was never transferred to support the financing of the new community services.’
It is now recognised that the costing of community-based care to take account of the wider back-up services on which it must depend is a complicated calculation which was not available with any degree of sophistication at the height of the movement away from institutional care (Knapp, 1986).
Apart from considerations of cost, the changing forms of family life also supported a move to substitute family care rather than institutional care.
Whilst at one time the personal characteristics of children, and the circumstances in which they were received into care, set them apart from other children not admitted into care, the norms of family life for children inside and outside of public care could no longer be regarded as so different from each other.
Just as some children in public care had experienced the break-up of their parents' marriage, or other family changes, so also had many children not admitted into care.
That the family was no longer a single entity, but included a variety of arrangements for caring for children, allowed extension of the net for suitable placement for children in public care.
If children outside of public care could be brought up, for example, in single-parent families, then so too could children on the  inside.
The need for institutional care was diminished.
Residential care for children and young people became a last resort.
How fair is the view of residential care as a last resort?
There is no doubt from the studies of Millham et al.
(1986) and Packman et al.
(1986), that social workers since 1973 have pursued family placements for children in' care, although not exclusively.
It is also clear that family placements are no panacea.
They frequently break down, dealing, as Berridge (1985) argued, a very personal blow to the children and young people; they are difficult to find; they demand, if they are to work, levels of support which field social workers cannot guarantee; and some young people, and some children, do not want them.
Furthermore, there has been a tendency to ignore the value which children, young people and their parents place in residential care.
Some young people in care have voiced for a long time their preference for residential rather than fostering care (Page and Clark, 1977).
Some, but not all (Triseliotis and Russell, 1983), find residential care less intrusive and less disruptive to their relationship with their parents.
Others prefer residential care because they are more likely to be placed with their brothers and sisters and friends, whilst in foster care solitary placements are more often the norm.
Parents too appear to prefer residential care (Aldgate, 1978) and are more likely to visit their children in residential care than in foster placements (Packman et al.,
1986; Rowe and Lambert, 1973).
Less rivalry and conflict appears to develop between parents and residential workers than between parents and foster-parents.
Parents regard residential workers as professionals working on behalf of an institution; foster-parents are seen as no different from themselves (Morgan Klein, 1985).
Finally, Fisher et al.
(1986) discovered that parents understood and expected care to mean residential care, and that both they and the young people were cautiously optimistic that some good would come from the admission.
When the views of those who have experience of residential care are taken into account, and when the finding that fostering does not necessarily prove a permanent solution for young people in care is assimilated, then residential care is at least equal in its advantages to foster care.
There can be little justification in the pursuit of a child care policy which relegates the residential care of children and young people to second best and a last resort.
Nor can it be concluded that this state of affairs is anything other than unfair to residential workers and the institutions they serve in order to help young people.
Not only must they care for distressed and disturbed young people, but they must do so under a cloud.
The compulsory nature of residential admissions
Packman et al.
(1986), in their study Who Needs Care?examined child care decision making in two English local authorities which involved 361 children from 266 families, all of whom were considered for care during  1980–1.
They found that 161 of the children were admitted, and for the remaining 200 children the initial decision was that they should not come into care although subsequently a significant proportion did.
Outcomes for the children and young people were analysed according to the legal route which was taken as the basis for the child's admission into care.
Of the 161 children admitted to care, 90 were compulsory admissions and 71 were voluntary (p. 74).
Of particular importance for the residential sector was the fact that 75 per cent of the children admitted compulsorily were placed first in some form of residential care, with half of them in observation and assessment centres or in reception homes (p. 162).
The practical importance of this legal bias for parents' and children's readiness to co-operate with residential staff and make use of the placement is clarified by Packman when the association between compulsory admissions and emergency admissions is made.
Compulsory admissions were also emergencies.
Emergency admissions to residential care were unplanned with no chance of preparation for the child or of pre-placement visits by the child and his or her family.
Restrictions on the visiting of parents and relatives to the children were common, with 71 per cent of the parents subject to limits on the frequency and timing of contact (p. 163).
The limits were instigated by the social worker or the residential staff, but were not a condition imposed by the court, and they remained largely unchanged over time.
This trend towards compulsory admissions of young people to residential care is the reverse of that intended in the Children Act 1975, which stresses the importance of considering the child's wishes and feelings, having regard to his age and understanding (Children Act 1975, Ch. 5.3).
The precipitate nature of the admissions and the legal imposition which propels them means that residential staff are faced with outcomes of decisions in which they and the families played little or no part.
If field social workers define child care services mainly in terms of planning and resource finding (for better or worse), they may well consider their main work ended once the children enter care.
The quality and quantity of contact by field social workers with the children and the families quite quickly begins to fade, and residential workers are left alone to care for the children.
Although the pressing need to plan for children in care is now well documented (Millham et al.,
1986), and whilst most social workers would accept this need, the sense of failure which surrounds admissions, compounded by the instigation of compulsory measures of care, depletes any expectation that good might come from the admission.
No doubt this is what Vernon and Fruin (1986) are referring to when they characterise the outlook of fieldworkers, once children are in care, as one of ‘wait and see’.
But the repercussions for residential workers, because they are not involved administratively in decision making (Packman et al.,
1986), is that they too must ‘wait and see’.
This is precisely what the student referred to earlier in this paper identified while working in residential care.
Parents and children are acutely vulnerable under circumstances of  compulsion and emergency which are regular occurrences in residential admissions.
The residential staff are presented with an unenviable task.
Not only do the social workers regard the admissions as a failure, but the parents may be poorly informed about the purpose of the admission, its duration and the expectations which it places on them.
The children, at least the younger ones, become bewildered and distraught.
It is not a prepossessing start, as the following example from my past experience as a social worker suggests.
A young boy,Michael , was admitted to compulsory care against the wishes of his parents and placed in a group home.
The father had punched Michael, then three, and caused bruising to his face.
The father, so angered by the compulsory admission, became threatening and abusive to residential staff.
Restrictions were imposed on the father, allowing him regular but infrequent access.
Contact between Michael and his parents became erratic and unhappy.
Michael was fostered when he was six, only to have it break down, much to his devastation.
I saw Michael on a regular basis in the children's home to which he returned.
The residential workers found him evasive in the account he gave of his actions and feelings.
He was destructive of the other children's toys and refused to have any personal belongings in his shared room in the home.
When I played with him he enacted pretend battles between warring camps of soldiers.
The side which lost were reprimanded for their weakness; the side which won could have anything they wanted from new horses to new leaders.
Michael, I suspect, considered himself to be on the losing side and probably wished he was on the winning side.
He said, on repeated occasions, that he did not want any more families.
Those who cared for Michael gently encouraged him to accept his toys and belongings again.
Further attempts at fostering were not tried, and the residential workers saw themselves as the main people in Michael's life.
In time Michael too came to accept their centrality, although for a long time he asked when he could go home to his parents.
There are aspects of practice in Michael's case which probably would not happen now.
It is unlikely that he would have gone to a children's home in the first place and stayed for as long as he did before fostering was tried.
One attempt at fostering would not have sufficed and now, no doubt, more attempts would be made.
The compulsory and emergency nature of the initial admission, however, is no different from the trend in current practice.
A question remains about the impact of this forceful intervention on the family and the caregivers and its significance for the subsequent course of events in Michael's life.
The relationship between field and residential workers
One underlying theme which runs throughout the accounts of child care practice in the recent DHSS studies is the complex and largely unsatisfactory nature of the relationship between field and residential social workers.
Whilst the problematic nature of the traditional pattern by which responsibilities  have been divided between them is well recognised, there is little evidence which can be used to evaluate what would happen if other arrangements were tried.
Furthermore, unless the exclusive control for the welfare of the children and young people is transferred to the residential sector once they are received into care, then some division of labour is inevitable and necessitates decisions about when fieldwork ends and residential work begins.
The underlying assumption identifies fieldwork with the job of linking with the family and through this contact planning for the children's future.
It is based on the hope that the fieldworker will provide continuity of care for the young people before and after admission.
The residential workers are traditionally on the receiving end, responsible for the immediate and daily care of the children and young people, but having less involvement in planning, discussions with the family and contacts with other services.
Berridge (1985), for example, describes the considerable isolation of residential workers, not only in a personal sense, but also professionally.
Apart from the Heads of Units, they rarely have contact with other similar services.
Organisationally the residential workers work as part of a team in a place which is separate from fieldworkers, who are members of another separate and distinct team.
For residential and field social workers to work together a bridge has to be found.
Several specific, and probably longstanding, complaints by the residential workers of field practice were graphically documented in the DHSS studies.
Residential workers are not involved in decisions as to whether, when and where to admit children into care; fieldworkers fail to provide basic information about the personal histories of the children and young people admitted to care; young people are admitted to care precipitously, without warning or preparation; fieldworkers sometimes fail to keep in touch with the young person and the residential staff once the child is admitted; discharge for the young people can be as sudden as their arrival.
These complaints define, for a start, some of the problems which have to be overcome.
Surprisingly, no mention of the role of the key worker is made in the studies, and the conclusion must be drawn that this arrangement is either not very common or, if it is used, has done little to resolve the problems for which it was intended, many of which are listed above.
The reasons for these difficulties are complex.
Some undoubtedly arise from attitudes, and others are a function of organisational structures (Newman, 1975).
In the first case, fieldworkers may have wished to retain certain functions, such as working directly with children and young people, as their prerogative, because they considered themselves to be better trained to undertake these tasks, albeit with limited time at their disposal and with, in some instances, limited skills.
They may also have had misgivings about the power and influence of residential staff over children, and the potential abuses which could and sometimes do occur.
Secondly, the organisational model which until very recently has characterised the residential sector has been a centralised one, in which most administrative decisions are taken by the management staff in the headquarters of local authority social work departments.
Residential staff and  fieldwork staff operate under different auspices within the same local authority.
Residential admissions are taken from a wide geographical area, rather than locally.
For changes to occur, field social workers have to form a partnership with their residential colleagues, so that together they can make available as comprehensive a service as possible to families in need of help with and for their children.
Residential workers need to take part in the decisions as to whether to admit children to care, and, if so, when and on what basis.
In order for this to happen a decentralised partnership between residential workers and social service teams is required, which ensures joint participation and influence in child care decisions.
A decentralised model was adopted in the psychiatric department of a children's hospital in which I worked.
Nursing staff from the in-patient unit experienced many of the same problems towards the out-patient teams as residential workers had in relation to fieldworkers.
Representatives from the out-patient teams, together with representatives from the in-patient unit, formed a new and supplementary in-patient team.
The remit of the in-patient team was to oversee admissions and discharges, and to devise and carry out treatment plans in hospital for the children and their families.
Individual nurses took responsibility for particular functions, for example securing adequate historical information about the children, monitoring treatment progress and liaising with teachers and parents.
Representatives from out-patient teams played a more active part in stressful daily decisions about child care management.
Tensions continued but the opportunities to discuss and resolve them were improved by regular and closer collaboration.
This was a small initiative.
The outcome was positive in so far as nursing staff who looked after the children were happier about the admissions themselves, and were clearer about the purpose of the admission.
Outpatient representatives understood better the daily issues of residential care and were able to convey these to their colleagues.
Nursing staff, on the other hand, began to participate in out-patient team discussions and contributed at an early stage to identifying children and young people who might benefit from hospital admission.
The precipitous discharge of some young children, I think, was avoided.
Conclusions
The research findings here reviewed suggest that residential work continues to be a vital part of child care.
It is certainly much more than ‘the chilly anteroom to a warm foster family’(Millham et al.,
1986, p. 82) that the attitudes of some field and residential workers would suggest.
Moreover, the residential sector serves the important functions of observation, assessment and containment of some of the most troubled young people in care.
Nearly 80 per cent of the children and young people in  Millham et al.'s study (1986) had experienced residential care during a part of their admission to care.
How should the residential task be pursued?
First , there is a need for a continuum of services in which residential care is positively included for children and young people who may be or who are in need of public care.
Residential care should not be used as a last resort.
Second , there is a need for partnership between residential and field social workers, which is reflected in decentralised structures where joint participation in child care decisions is possible.
Third , the move towards compulsory admissions to residential care should be discouraged in favour of voluntary and planned admissions.
Fourth , residential workers should concern themselves with the personal self-worth of young people as future citizens, thereby giving equal value to the encouragement of intellectual, creative and social skills on the one hand, and success in personal and family relationships on the other.
Finally , residential workers have an important part to play not only in standing by young people, but also in communicating with them about their experiences and in helping them to explain and discover meaning in their lives.
Finally , it is clear that neither residential nor foster care is a ‘perfect’ institution.
Both have their critics, and justifiably so.
But parents, children and young people do not regard coming into residential care as an admission of failure.
Nor should they; nor should field and residential social workers.
For some young people it is the preferred option.