

Aims and Methods
OURSELVES AND OTHERS
Ethnocentricity is the natural condition of mankind.
Most peoples of the world do not, in their conservative heart to hearts, like foreigners and display feelings of hostility (often tinged with fear) towards them.
This indeed is one of the most widespread ways in which people declare and affirm their identity — by saying who they are not.
Today, however, especially among the younger generation, we see a very different set of attitudes in western countries.
Under this new dispensation things foreign and far removed from our own polluted urban world acquire all exotic piquancy, an exciting glamour, which causes them to be approached with a mixture of reverence and hope.
For all its faults, it can at least be said for the modern world that it has produced a substantial body of articulate opinion that blends passion with compassion in its concern for the impoverished and starving peoples of the world.
This expanding (though by no means unambiguous) sense of common humanity is encouraged by the rapidity and intensity of modern communications and by a growing awareness that mankind as a whole may face extinction unless some more harmonious and rational adjustment can be achieved between the world's rapidly growing population and its dwindling natural resources.
Ironically, the sudden realization by the oil states of the Third World that they possess a powerful weapon capable of commanding world attention and respect adds a new element of self-interest to this wider sense of common human identity.
This extension of the boundaries of acknowledged humanity, however fitful or partial, is especially favourable to social anthropology, which is by tradition a Third World subject.
In fact it is the Third World subject, the authentic founder of Black Studies, the original academic discipline devoted to the study and understanding of alternative cultures, institutions and beliefs.
Here comparison  is of the essence, and concentration of social anthropology on the differences and similarities between tribal and industrial cultures and institutions the world over gives it its unique character.
Writing in 1783, long before social anthropology had assumed any coherent shape or even possessed a name, the eighteenth-century French social philosopher, J. J. Rousseau proclaimed our guiding assumption: ‘One needs to look near at hand if one wants to study men: but to study man one must learn to look from afar: one must first observe differences in order to discover attributes.’
It is this comprehensive perspective on the human condition that social anthropology seeks to achieve.
Clearly there are many ways of studying man, and the phrase ‘I am interested in people’ that is often used to express and justify an interest in social anthropology is encouraging — but not very enlightening.
We need to be much more precise about the aspects of man that engage our attention and the methods of study we propose to adopt.
This book seeks to present social anthropology as a humanistic discipline which, by its very nature, claims to be less ethnocentric and insular than history or sociology but which has strong and significant links with both these subjects as well as with social psychology and psychiatry.
(I use ‘psychiatry’ here in the broad sense to refer to psychiatric theory as much as therapy and to include depth psychology, i.e. various forms of psychoanalytic theory.)
That it has also close ties with comparative religion scarcely needs to be said.
We study peoples rather than people .
Our primary units of reference are ‘societies’, that is, distinct and relatively autonomous communities whose members' mutual social relations are embedded in, and expressed through, the medium of a common culture.
Culture is a key term here.
Not only does the possession of culture conventionally mark the great divide separating humans from other animals, but different human societies tend to possess distinctive cultures.
Culture is thus the protective shell of a community and cultural distinctions become, to some extent, an index of social identity.
We assume this, of course, when we associate variations in speech or accents and life style, that is cultural differences, with variations in social class or place of origin.
Our everyday awareness of these value-laden distinctions makes it all  the more necessary to stress that in social anthropology (and sociology)‘culture’ is a neutral term.
It is not something that I have and you do not, or vice versa; nor is it a commodity with which some people have the good fortune to be more generously endowed than others.
It is thus not employed in the sense in which people speak of being more ‘cultured’(or ‘cultivated’) than others.
For our purposes, culture is simply a convenient term to describe the sum of learned knowledge and skills — including religion and language — that distinguishes one community from another and which, subject to the vagaries of innovation and change, passes on in a recognizable form from generation to generation.
Culture thus transcends the lives of its living exponents in any one generation: if it did not it could not survive.
Its component elements are absorbed in the first few years of life largely unconsciously, and later more deliberately by informal and formal learning processes.
Socialization inevitably takes place within and through the medium of a particular cultural tradition.
When people do not know how to bring up or what to teach their children their cultural heritage is indeed in jeopardy.
CULTURE AND RACE
This is the place to emphasize that culture is a very different thing from ‘race’— if, that is, we are to understand race in its scientific sense of a genetically distinctive breed.
In popular speech, when people expatiate upon the virtues or vices of the British, Scottish, Welsh, Irish, Jewish or any other so-called ‘race’, they are really talking about particular cultural attitudes and characteristics.
By appropriating the term ‘race’ they seek to invest these cultural stereotypes with a unique finality and metaphysical value, implying that culturally patterned behaviour is genetically determined.
But there is no general evidence that distinctive cultural traits are associated with particular genes.
No geneticist has yet isolated a Jewish gene or a British gene transmitting specific cultural attributes.
If culture were transmitted genetically it would scarcely be necessary to expend such time and energy training children: it would be so much easier!
It is precisely because there is no direct correlation of such a kind  between genetic make-up and culture that we can afford to ignore race as a significant variable in our discussion of different social and cultural arrangements.
Genetics and biology have little to tell us that is relevant, except in so far as these sciences throw light on human nature in general.
Racism, and racial antagonism and conflict are therefore, paradoxically, essentially social and cultural rather than biological phenomena: it is not biology but culture that makes ‘race’ socially significant.
Social racism, which is a form of chauvinistic nationalism or tribalism, exists quite independently of the geneticists and biologists for whom alone the term race has some residual scientific validity.
Social circumstances in which one dominant ethnic group or ‘race’ confronts others may engender a climate favourable to research aimed at exploring possible relationships between genetic and cultural phenomena.
The recent revival of interest in the relationship, if any, between race and intelligence (notoriously difficult to assess in absolute terms that are cross-culturally valid) is itself a social phenomenon, reflecting our ethnically mixed contemporary environment.
On a wider front, men everywhere seek to view their way of life and culture as part of the natural order of things, as indeed a fact of nature.
So, as the song has it, we do what comes naturally, and we ‘naturalize’ those whom we adopt fully into our own community — those who are born into it need only be ‘socialized’.
In the same idiom which would transform facts of culture into facts of nature we speak of ‘natural rights’ and ‘natural justice’.
Our more significant and currently fashionable meeting-point with biology is not at the level of race, but at that of species.
As the immense success of works by Desmond Morris and other popularizers of ethological research on primates demonstrates,Homo sapiens never tires of contemplating the behaviour of his nearest animal kin.
Some presumably find this reassuring.
Certainly the popularity of ethology is a testimony to the deep-seated character of western civilization's abiding concern with the nature-nurture problem.
In fact, as Lévi-Strauss has helped us to recognize in his distinction between ‘nature’ and ‘culture’, it is in all likelihood a universal human obsession.
Having invented and evolved culture, man, it seems, never ceases to marvel at his own  creation.
In the process he endlessly ponders the point at which his culture stops and his nature begins, where — as Shakespeare poses the issue in The Tempest — Prospero ends and Caliban begins.
CULTURE AND COMMUNITY
But we must now leave these tangential matters and return to the task of establishing what social anthropology is and does.
We study different cultures and the communities that produce them, placing our primary emphasis on social relations and treating culture as a vehicle or medium for social interaction rather than an end in itself.
Here British social anthropologists part company with many of their American colleagues, who give priority to culture and to cultural patterns, underestimating (as it seems to us) the social dimension.
Naturally those anthropologists who grant culture such imperative force tend to see social relations as the product of cultural patterning and conditioning, and thus tend to concentrate on child-rearing practices, enculturation, and socialization.
Continuity and discontinuity are similarly measured and interpreted as essentially cultural phenomena and so discussed in terms of‘acculturation’.
For us, on the other hand, the dialectic between culture and society is weighted in the opposite direction.
Social relations rather than their cultural vestments have priority.
Social life obviously encompasses a vast range of activities and beliefs and is of bewildering complexity.
Our first aim, therefore, is to isolate significant typical events and units of social life and activity, and then to probe for the underlying blueprint, often implicit rather than explicit, that will show how they fit together into a meaningful pattern.
Our interest is not simply in any one department of social life but rather in all these in a community, and especially in their mutual interdependence as parts of a whole.
If communities can be thought of as houses, we are as concerned to discover what goes on in the bedroom, bathroom and kitchen as in the dining-room and sitting-room.
We see action in one area not as self-contained or hermetically sealed, but as spilling over to affect and be affected by what goes on elsewhere under the same roof.
This holistic, comprehensive, catholic approach (whose history we shall briefly review in the next chapter) is usually called  ‘functionalism’ or ‘structural functionalism’.
Its abiding concern is with the interconnectedness of things, with all the links in the social chains that bind individuals together as members of a community.
Words and actions are full of subtle meanings which, to be fully explored and understood, have to be set in a much wider social context than that of their immediate occurrence.
What people do, and say, and say they think, has a logical coherence and consistency that relates to the overall social structure of the community.
Community life cannot continue successfully unless there is some such orderly structure of mutually reinforcing expectations and ‘roles’, some organization of interlocking parts which click together to form a harmonious whole.
This stress on the interdependence of social phenomena, though it may be circular and is not exhaustive, takes us a long way in understanding the basic dynamics of community life.
Social life can thus be viewed as a kind of theatre, an image which, of course, has always appealed to dramatists and poets.
From this perspective, we set out to discover the plot of the social drama which the members of a particular community are in effect engaged in presenting, the parts or ‘roles’ that its members assume, and their mutual interaction as the play proceeds.
What is the play really about?
Are there significant sub-plots which cast some of the characters in the drama in a very different light from that in which they are officially cast?
What room for manoeuvre is there in different productions of the same play?
How far can the actors depart from their parts with improvization and adlibbing and yet remain within the accepted, culturally defined, conventions?
How do we evaluate their performance?
In real life the situation is more complex than in our simple analogy.
For a start, the actors all play many different roles, shedding old and assuming new parts with bewildering speed and ease: sometimes indeed they play several different roles at the same time, representing different things in different relationships.
Nor do they necessarily all share the same interpretation of the events in which they participate; rival themes are thrust forward, and the same lines are used to justify contradictory claims and interests.
How these are to be assessed poses delicate problems for the social anthropologist as he attempts to evaluate local ideology  and its relationship to economic and political commitments.
What binds all these discordant currents into something that can be called a community?
What weight is to be attached to environmental and other external pressures in understanding how its members live together?
If these pressures increase or decrease dramatically how will this affect the stability of the society?
What will it take to shake the actors out of their accustomed parts, forcing them to assume completely novel roles?
What, finally, is the vital, dynamic core of the community that gives it its uniquely distinctive character?
What really makes it tick?
ALLIED APPROACHES
Particularly if we adopt a ‘transactional’ perspective, emphasizing inter-personal exchanges and transactions, study of the forces animating community life inevitably brings us very close to psychiatry and social psychology where the roles people play are also of critical importance.
There are many problems which cut right across the artificial frontiers separating these subjects, particularly when attempts are made to interpret thought and feeling.
It is very unfortunate therefore that, in Britain especially, social anthropologists have, on the whole, displayed towards colleagues in adjacent disciplines so little of the ecumenical tolerance with which they habitually approach exotic tribesmen.
There are many reasons for this.
The most significant is probably the persistence of past misunderstandings.
In the name of their founding ancestors, some British social anthropologists still feel obliged to take up defensive positions against imaginary enemies who died long ago.
They seem blissfully unaware that their opponents have long since abandoned the positions at issue and now share important common ground with them.
Disciplinary frontiers should be channels of communication, not iron curtains of mutual unintelligibility and mistrust; this regrettably narrow-minded approach misconstrues the complementary aims and interests of these cognate subjects.
As social anthropologists our major concern is with those ideas and ways of behaving which a given community takes for granted as the ‘natural’ order of things.
These deeply ingrained socially appropriate  patterns of thought and behaviour we call ‘norms’, since they are endowed with normative force and moral value by their adherents.
Of course, in our actual observation and collection of data we move from particular individuals and instances to the general, abstracting from the particular what we see to be shared and are told is socially expected and approved.
We look at the individual to discern the imprint of society: it is what he shares with his associates, not what distinguishes him from them, that directly interests us.
For us the individual is a microcosm of the social macrocosm.
His private emotions and idiosyncracies, and difficulties he experiences in internalizing the social norms of his community are his business.
They are not on our agenda, at least not until they become such a common feature, shared by so many others, that they qualify as ‘social phenomena’.
Here, of course, as at so many other points in the blurred frontier zone between social anthropology, psychiatry and social psychology, the key question becomes: What is the threshold incidence which transforms individual into social phenomena?
The more individualistic the inner life of individuals the more clear-cut the demarcation line between our subjects.
If the Anthropologist studies alien communities the psychiatrist or analyst (once known as ‘alienist’) thus treats alien symptoms in individual patients.
He examines why certain individuals cannot easily accept the ways of thinking and behaving that their social milieu thrusts upon them.
The psychiatrist explores the roots of personal deviance, ‘inadequacy’ and ‘alienation’— not the grounds of conformity and compliance.
But the treatment usually consists in trying to help the alienated patient to come to terms with his situation, which means accepting his position in society and the norms of conduct he finds so disturbing.
Despite the impact of liberalizing currents which encourage more give and take, this modifying or normalizing function  continues to play a major role in psychiatry.
The patient, if the treatment is successful, learns ‘to live with his problem’.
Nevertheless, despite his vital if sometimes reluctantly assumed role in maintaining the norms of society, the psychiatrist is often in danger of under-valuing the weight of the social pressures bearing on his patient and of assuming ethnocentrically that his own  and his society's moral standards enjoy universal validity.
Psychiatrists are more easily shocked than is generally supposed.
The practitioner in psychological medicine may over-emphasize the physiological dimensions of his patient's illness, or, if psychoanalytically inclined, exaggerate the significance of childhood and prenatal experience.
The social anthropologist, for his part, while stressing the importance of social interaction (and thus joining forces with much that is practised in the name of ‘psychodynamics’) is often over-simplistic in the unacknowledged psychological assumptions he makes about people's inner feelings and mental states.
He is prone to speak and write at one moment as though motives were transparently obvious, and at the next as though they were inscrutable mysteries far beyond the range of his competence.
In reality both the social anthropological and the psychiatric (or psychological) approaches are mutually helpful and necessary if we are to achieve a balanced perspective on man as a sentient being.
In order to define mental alienation and abnormality, the psychiatrist must first know what is normal, accepted and socially approved; since these vary in different cultures and subcultures he will be completely at sea outside his own milieu unless he takes account of the cultural factor.
In this process in which the psychiatrist (or psychoanalyst) looks outwards from the individual psyche into his patient's social network, he inevitably moves into territory which the social anthropologist (and in Europe the sociologist) regards as his — hence, of course, the boundary disputes alluded to above.
Equally, when the social anthropologist attempts to assess the impact of socially enjoined behaviour or beliefs on the inner feelings of the people he studies, he likewise trespasses upon the psychiatrist's (and psychologist's) territory.
This is especially obvious, for instance, when we examine culturally stereotyped responses to danger and stress, and attempt to evaluate their impact on the feelings of our informants.
Social tension, as we shall see, is an assessment of social relations that springs readily to the lips of anthropologists but is rarely examined with much psychological sophistication, or even an awareness that it is a psychological phenomenon as well as a social one.
Then there is the problem of deviance.
Stereotyped deviant behaviour is inevitably a social phenomenon, and concerns us almost as much as it does social psychologists or psychiatrists.
We cannot afford to ignore the fact that mental illness is culturally patterned, and even goes in fashions.
Again, different ‘normal’ individuals play their social roles with more or less commitment and conviction, and the individual's actual repertoire of roles usually does not exhaust his range.
Actors are often bigger than their parts.
The unfulfilled potential for new roles cannot be completely and unreservedly surrendered to the psychiatrist.
We are interested in the social implications of personal ambition, greed, anger and hatred.
No one who aims to study real life can possibly ignore these factors.
Social life is very far from being governed by shrewd logic and sweet reason.
If our frontiers with psychiatry and psychology (including social psychology) are problematic and ill-defined, the situation is even more confused with sociology (and in some respects history).
Some authorities hold that social anthropology is really a sub-division of sociology, a broadly-based comparative ‘trans-cultural’ or cross-cultural sociology.
Others assert that anthropology is the tree and sociology the branch.
Fortunately, since both cases can be argued persuasively, we can ignore these contentious reflections of academic imperialism and simply note the more striking differences in emphasis in the work of those who study man under these rival, though sometimes combined, banners.
Distinctions exist both in the kinds of problems that are selected for study and in the manner in which they are tackled.
THE PARTICIPATING OBSERVER
Let us take methods first.
The modern social anthropologist relies heavily on the research procedure known as ‘participant observation’.
This requires him to immerse himself as thoroughly as he can in the life of the community he is trying to understand.
He must know the local language sufficiently well to follow what is going on round him and to record it with accuracy and subtlety.
Within the limitations imposed by his hosts and his own inhibitions and scruples, the anthropologist has to mix in with local  society and become the life and soul of the party.
Total immersion is impossible or extremely rare and few anthropologists go completely native: most guardedly keep their distance yet observe and participate sufficiently to allow them to study things in their context.
Empathizing as far as possible with his hosts, the anthropological research worker seeks to seize the essence of life around him and to incarnate its animating spirit.
He dashes about from place to place and function to function endeavouring to record all aspects of the local scene, trivial as well as tragic.
His range of interests is as large as life: births, marriages, deaths, quarrels, reconciliations, rhetoric, religion, cultivation, animal husbandry, home-crafts, politics — all claim his attention and are (or should be) faithfully reported — warts and all.
The minimum required of the social anthropologist is that he should write the biography of the people he studies.
If he has no contribution to make to anthropological theory, he can at least do that.
As he rushes hither and thither, his note-books become crammed with an amazing collection of miscellaneous information which is so diverse and uneven that it gives colour to and so in a way explains Robert Lowie's famous definition of culture as a ‘thing of shreds and patches’.
All this material he gets, whenever possible, at first hand, or at any rate from those to whom he is prone to refer in unguarded moments as ‘reliable informants’.
In some cases the problem is to get taciturn people to talk.
In others the difficulty is to stop loquacious informants from pouring out an endless stream of words which they positively insist on having recorded.
Whichever way round it is, the task, complicated by the anthropologist's limited mastery of the vernacular, is apt to be taxing and to require tact and patience of a high order.
As he pores over all this raw data the field-worker discovers certain interesting patterns and principles in terms of which his information makes sense.
These have to be tested and followed up in new lines of inquiry.
The anthropologist's appetite for information and his curiosity are boundless, and he is naturally particularly attracted by those avenues of inquiry where the answers come hard, suggesting that he has touched on a sensitive and hence significant vein.
The field anthropologist is thus in  some respects a kind of cross-cultural private eye, relentlessly pursuing clues to lay bare the soul of his foreign hosts.
The social anthropologist is equally, of course, an entrepreneur whose special expertise lies in mediating between exotic cultures and his own, and he has the same vested interests as other go-betweens.
So it is not surprising that each field-worker tries to select an unstudied people, or if that fails, a community whose present circumstances render them acutely interesting for ‘theoretical reasons’.
For each piece of field research aims at achieving a ‘scoop’ which will redound to the anthropologist's credit, and the more interesting and exciting the raw data the better.
There is always the lurking fear that some hostile critic will ask the returned voyager the old, but still highly relevant question: was his journey really necessary?
Did he really need to go so far to learn so little?
It is at this point that the anthropologist, when pressed, retreats into impenetrable jungles of ethnographic fact.
And it is by the quality of these records that he brings back that he will ultimately be judged.
The ‘ethnographic facts’ are indeed our golden fleece.
If you identify strongly with those you study you may not appreciate the extent to which you have been brain-washed.
In the culture in which he specializes the anthropologist is admirably sociological; but as soon as he steps outside it to engage in comparative studies and generalization he becomes paradoxically culture-bound, unwittingly taking unique cultural forms as universal facts.
Hence, to an extent which is often hard to gauge accurately, high-sounding ‘theoretical’ debates between leading members of the profession are partly arguments between the cultures they were privileged to study.
In this ethnographic imperialism if in no other way, the cultures anthropologists study and plagiarize gain their revenge.
As Malinowski's own posthumously published field diaries record, this cross-cultural experience, involving a massive exposure  to what we nowadays call ‘culture-shock’, is likely to be as gruelling psychologically as it is physically.
Foreign communities, whether tribal or otherwise, are no more anxious than you or I to be subjected to intensive and embarrassingly close scrutiny by a tiresome stranger whose aims and intentions may be, to say the least, puzzling.
Although surprisingly few of our colleagues have died ‘in the field’, it is nonetheless fitting that field-work should have assumed the character of a tribal ordeal or initiation rite the performance of which, under appropriate conditions, is virtually indispensable if one is to gain professional status.
C. G. Seligman did not exaggerate when, many years ago, he declared: ‘Field research in Anthropology is what the blood of the martyrs is to the Church.’
It is our counterpart to the psychoanalyst's ‘training analysis’(or simulated illness and cure), a traumatic endurance test in which the tyro anthropologist discovers almost as much about himself as about the people he has come to study.
In this type of work the researcher's personality inevitably bulks large and has to be taken into account in the evaluation of his reports (a critical task which colleagues assume with un-becoming zeal).
Not all traditional or other communities singled out for study get the anthropologists they deserve, or vice versa although a surprisingly high proportion seem to.
Nevertheless there are few social anthropologists whose field experiences are so hair-raising and disastrous that they fail to develop strong loyalties towards their exotic patrons.
Here Colin Turnbull's much publicized indignation at the depraved behaviour of the famine-stricken it is exceptional.
Every anthropologist, after all, lives off those he studies, and he should not fail to recognize and respond to this basic fact.
While one may sometimes wonder whether some of one's colleagues were quite as warmly welcomed as they make out, most returned field-workers readily assume the role of genial impresarios or spokesmen for their exotic hosts.
They may indeed be able to voice interests and demands which their sources are unable to express through any other channel.
This traditional spokesmanship, which can imply serious responsibilities, is naturally becoming less significant today as modern communications and education reach into the furthest quarters of the globe.
We catch an echo of it however in that curiously possessive rather than patronizing way in which anthropologists are given to speaking of ‘their people’(just as the people sometimes speak of ‘their anthropologist’).
What this implies and should express is the field-worker's moral commitment to his foreign hosts; this can be the source of much personal anguish and heart-searching.
Whatever his private political convictions, and whether he angrily denounces it as ‘ethnocide’ or not, no anthropologist worth his salt can dispassionately contemplate the destruction of a traditional way of life which he has learnt to appreciate and admire.
And yet this may be part of the price which has to be paid if a larger population is to survive.
For the wider economic and political interests of a country may be in complete conflict with the wishes and needs of a constituent community which an anthropologist happens to have studied.
If, as is sometimes the case, he is actually in a position to influence the course of events, how should he then act?
Ethnocide or something approaching it revolts him, but he does not usually wish to champion the preservation of cultures simply as museum pieces.
The dilemma is a very real one in the contemporary Third World and does not, unfortunately, admit readily of simple, universally valid answers.
FACTS AND FIGURES
Subjectivity and personal involvement are part of the price the social anthropologist pays for his most cherished and characteristic research strategy which, within the limits we have indicated, we can succinctly describe as ‘going native’.
On the surface at least, the methods of sociology are very different.
The empirical sociologist is nothing if not businesslike, ‘objective’ and above all ‘scientific’.
He designs careful and often elaborate questionnaires which he or his assistants administer to statistically significant sample groups in the population under investigation.
Statistical (and often computer) analysis of the respondents' answers may  with luck reveal statistically significant trends in opinion, attitudes, or behaviour.
The research procedure here usually assumes that people can read and write (which can be a serious limitation), and it also conveniently throws the burden of veracity on one's informants.
People must fill up their questionnaires conscientiously and honestly.
Since, however, those who carry out surveys of this kind are seldom able to control their sources, even cleverly-designed trick questions may fail to yield anything but superficial or ambiguous results.
Certainly it is frequently difficult to know ‘what to make of’(a revealing phrase) data collected in this fashion, unless the whole enterprise is very carefully controlled and supplemented by on-the-spot observations made by experienced researchers.
However sophisticated the machinery of ‘data-processing’ and costly the enterprise, the outcome is unlikely to be of value if the information collected is spurious in the first place.
Here the old adage ‘ask a silly question and get a silly answer’ still applies.
As a contributor to a recent survey on ‘comparability in social research’, published under the auspices of the British Social Science Research Council, sagely observes: ‘a great deal can go wrong at the recording stage which may make subsequent analysis difficult or even impossible’.
The most amusing commentary on the limitations which are inherent in this type of research, however, is perhaps that enshrined in the Indonesian concept of a ‘statistical Muslim’(or Islam statistique ), a person who, while not actively practising the faith, so records his identity for census and other purposes.
Imagine what the results would be if someone were to base a study of active religious adherence on the laconic entries made under the heading ‘religion’ on hospital admission forms in Great Britain!
For all its faults and notwithstanding the low reputation it has acquired through its use to collect trivial information, the social survey technique can undoubtedly produce a wide range of useful statistical data.
In literate urban societies it can provide valuable quantitative information on such topics as education, health, housing, social class, racial attitudes, income distribution, family-structure, the mass media and so on, thus contributing to the identification and understanding of important social issues.
This of course is not the end of the sociologist's interest or expertise.
The sociologist can also examine his data analytically in the light of hypotheses developed by his more theoretically inclined colleagues on such matters as urban alienation, juvenile delinquency, football hooliganism, dangerous driving, the generation gap, secularization, and race relations.
What is often lacking, however, in sociological research is a concerted effort to examine social data functionally in order to discover significant, rather than merely self-evident, correlations between different patterns of belief and behaviour.
Here the missing link is frequently the directly observed contextual detail which is so crucial in anthropological field work.
The proliferation of statistical data is, paradoxically, often ultimately less illuminating than a much more narrowly based, but correspondingly more intensive, case-study.
From this caricature (for that is all there is time for here), it can be seen that in its empirical tradition, sociology (and to a considerable extent social psychology also) deals primarily with western industrial society, which it examines descriptively in a somewhat piecemeal fashion.
Thus, except where comparative material from more exotic regions is included (as it may be), sociology tends to take western values and assumptions for granted; like history it is consequently inclined to be more ethnocentric than social anthropology.
Hence, there is perhaps a certain poetic justice in the traumatic methodological heart-searching in which so many sociologists are at present engaged as they roundly reject the old ‘value-free’ claims of their intellectual ancestors and aggressively expose the latent political biases of their colleagues.
But as we contemplate these bitter internecine struggles we should not be too unsympathetic or complacent.
It is silly to exaggerate differences when the similarities are also significant.
When it is fortified by ‘in-depth’ interviews, and addressed to the intensive observation of what people actually do as well as what they say they do, sociological research merges indistinguishably with the work of social anthropologists.
This blurring of disciplinary frontiers is further encouraged when those few social anthropologists who can count, or have convenient access to mathematical aids, follow sociologists in succumbing to the lure of statistics and the computer.
Methods can easily converge and so can the problems and topics studied as well as their location.
So in fields such as economic and social development, and urban studies, social anthropologists no longer exercise a monopoly in Third World research.
From the other side, an increasing number of social anthropologists are bringing their subject home to investigate small communities or self-contained sectors of western society, the traditional domain of sociologists.
Our colleagues thus are now to be found participating and observing in villages and urban enclaves in Britain and America as well as on the ski-slopes of Europe, and are also making forays into factories, prisons and hospitals to see whether they can produce more interesting and unexpected findings than those already provided by other techniques of research.
It would be narrow-minded and bigoted not to welcome these convergent developments.
For the social sciences have more to gain from each other than they have to lose, and the precise origin and pedigree of new findings and theories is of little importance so long as they extend and expand our understanding of the world.
Once these ecumenical gestures have been graciously made, however, it needs to be repeated emphatically that the most valuable thing about social anthropology is its uniquely privileged relationship with exotic traditional societies.
The beliefs and behaviour of remote cultures challenge most profoundly our own ethnocentric experience and assumptions, and compel us to recognize the amazing variety and versatility of human social arrangements, moral standards, and cosmologies.
TIME AND SPACE
This cross-cultural spatial perspective complements the temporal perspective of the historian, which it enlarges and enriches.
In their encounters with the ghostly figures of past eras and periods, historians frequently adopt much the same holistic approach as we do.
As one member of the profession has aptly observed: ‘It is not  too difficult — it does not wrench the mind too painfully — for the historian or the humanist to accept the notion of ‘living his way’ into the totality of a culture.
On the contrary his heart may be gladdened by the new and heady sense of actuality that accompanies this type of study.’
It would be a cold anthropological heart that would not respond to these stirring words.
But the mind-stretching impact of the historian's research tends to be limited by the fact that (usually at least) he is working within his own cultural tradition.
Unlike the anthropologist he can never have the excitement of actually directly confronting his subjects in the flesh; and he is dealing with people who, temporally distant though they may be, are ultimately his own kith and kin.
The past that historians study thus normally embraces, and even plays a part in shaping, the world they themselves inhabit.
As it unfurls the panoramic vistas of past periods and epochs within the European cultural tradition, history builds a view of ourselves as the inevitable continuation and culmination of everything that has gone before.
It traps us and pins us down in time, urging us to agree with Kierkegaard, that if life can only be lived forwards, it can only be understood backwards.
History thus cuts man down to size by reminding him of his origins: its characteristic insight is hindsight.
Our subject points towards wider horizons, offering a further dimension of perception and perspective, giving us at least the illusion that we transcend the confines of time.
This, however, is one of those voyages in which ultimately, and often without warning, the traveller confronts himself.
We discover how exotic peoples meet the universal basic human needs of food, shelter and sex in unexpected ways and with highly original and thought-provoking theories about the meaning of life and the nature of the human condition; in so doing we begin to perceive the relativity and arbitrariness of our own basic postulates.
We thus engage in cultural confrontations in which we suddenly perceive how our vision is clouded and distorted by hidden assumptions that we did not know we entertained.
This is  humbling.
But it is also exhilarating, liberating and profoundly humanizing.
THE CROSS-CULTURAL PERSPECTIVE
This new self-awareness, which the contemplation of alien cultures and institutions promotes, throws light on our own past as well as present.
We are prone to over-emphasize our rationality and to under-rate the very significant part played in our lives by beliefs and ideas that we normally categorize as irrational and absurd, and readily disavow.
We are equally ready to project this highly idealized picture of ourselves onto our own past and do not know what to make of the weird mystical ‘fantasies’ in which our ancestors seem to have indulged.
Perhaps they did not really believe in them — or did they?
Our study of exotic tribal religions, however, enables us to come to terms with this tantalizing problem at a safe distance; indirectly it makes it easier to realize that it is not the presence of such beliefs that is odd or unusual but their absence.
We also learn that family structure and sentiments which we take for granted are by no means universal, that forms of government that seem inevitable and natural are not necessarily so; we confront the unpalatable finding that a strong sense of brotherhood and identity within a community usually implies equally strong hostilities towards outsiders.
More positively, we discover how problems that result from the shrinking of family ties to what we call the ‘nuclear family’ are alleviated or avoided in the more flexible kinship arrangements of many tribal peoples.
But such benefits as we may find here and elsewhere entail countervailing disadvantages.
Those who live permanently in them do not always share our nostalgia for big, happy extended families: nor do all those who participate in that often-associated matrimonial arrangement, polygyny, find it equally attractive.
Any careful cost-benefit analysis will show that every social practice and institution has limitations and presents difficulties as well as opportunities.
Some societies and cultures may indeed be more pleasant to live in, just as some seem more exciting and others nastier.
However, social anthropology can offer no general  panacea for our present ills and discontents.
Although it certainly has a romantic streak, our subject is a serious academic discipline; it is not an intellectualized transcendental meditation in which exotic beliefs are wrenched crudely from their setting to be appropriated in the selfish pursuit of some second-hand, simulated, and ultimately spurious nirvana.
Nor do we seek to pass judgements, or to rate one social system as morally superior to another in any overall sense.
I know of no scientifically valid calculus that would enable to to do that, and in any case the project would be stultifying.
Our findings have relevance for moral philosophy, but the philosophers can be left to draw their own conclusions — as they will do in any case.
Finally, in this brief introduction, what of the unflattering charge that social anthropology is the ‘child of imperialism’(some would say bastard) and so carries an incapacitating stigma?
It is not surprising that this denunciation is so regularly and vehemently levelled by Americans, especially bourgeois ‘children of capitalism’, who have evidently commendably sensitive consciences.
Understandably outraged by the revelations that colleagues had been implicated, however unwittingly, in the notorious Project Camelot, linked with CIA activities in Cambodia, American Anthropologists have often tended to assume that those working in ‘colonial situations’ elsewhere must have been similarly employed as, in effect, government agents.
It is not difficult to understand this assumption, even when its projection elsewhere may be unjustified or oversimplistic.
At the same time, American anthropologists are acutely aware, to the point of self-caricature, that the North American Indians have for generations provided a conveniently accessible exotic backyard for ethnographic research.
So in the United States, perhaps more clearly and explicitly than elsewhere, social and cultural anthropology is frequently perceived as a form of academic activity rarely purged of exploitation.
Put simply; our subjects are our copy, their customs the ‘trophies’ we collect.
No wonder the mysterious Amerindian guru, Don  Juan, with uncharacteristic directness calls his anthropological mouth-piece, Carlos Castaneda, a ‘pimp’.
The description is embarrassingly accurate.
Beyond providing local amusement as a curiosity and practical help during his actual field-work, the crucial issue thus becomes: what more comprehensive return is the anthropologist to make to his former hosts after he has left them?
With this in mind we must consider the derogatory accusation of colonial compliance (if not complicity) in British social anthropology.
I think that, as children have a habit of doing, British social anthropologists and many of their French, Belgian and American colleagues rebelled against their colonial ‘parents’.
Above all else it was the circumstantial and highly sympathetic accounts of complex and sophisticated tribal institutions and beliefs produced in the crucial inter-war period which finally destroyed the archaic stereotype of the rustic tribesman as a congenitally incapacitated simpleton, incapable of rational reasoning or civilized living.
Whatever their private political opinions (in many cases left-wing), they collected and published with dedication and enthusiasm exciting new evidence which forced informed European opinion to discard the hackneyed image of the poor, benighted savage.
This first-hand testimony, delivered with appropriate scholarly documentation, helped restore to the so called‘primitive’ his full humanity and dignity; it became intellectually inadmissible for tribesmen to be regarded as museum specimens who would remain for ever wayward children of nature and wards of paternalistic colonialism.
The Rise of Modern Social Anthropology
THE VICTORIAN LEGACY: EVOLUTIONISM
Our Victorian founding fathers did not, of course, hold such enlightened views on the mind and character of the ‘savage tribesman’.
This is not surprising; and we should not fall into the obvious trap of righteous indignation after the event nor judge them too harshly.
The information available over a century ago on the customs and beliefs of exotic tribal peoples was incomparably poorer than it is today.
Scientific field-research, treating the cultures of tribal societies with the same respect and scholarship as that lavished upon the great civilizations of antiquity and the East, is scarcely more than fifty years old.
A hundred years ago the reports of travellers, colonial officials and missionaries were, with a few striking exceptions, amateur works which, however well-intentioned, often conveyed a misleading and partial picture.
Such incomplete and imperfect evidence naturally limited the validity of inferences and generalizations based on it, although this was seldom apparent at the time.
Let us, however, also pay tribute to the high-minded humanitarian concern displayed, however patronizingly, by so many of our Victorian predecessors.
No matter how wild their theories (and some were very wild), their hearts were often manifestly in the right place.
Tribesmen might indeed be benighted savages, but they could still stir the liberal conscience — especially when their very primitiveness and simplicity made them all the more vulnerable to exploitation by unscrupulous Europeans.
It is thus a matter for pride that some of the most eminent of the first anthropologists were really ‘philanthropologists’, men of the moral calibre of Thomas F. Buxton (1786–1845) and Thomas Hodgkin (1798–1866).
These great Quaker figures, both of whom had played leading roles in the anti-slavery movement, founded the Aborigines Protection Society in the early 1830.
And this organization, which sought to protect the rights of the newly colonized, provided much of the original intellectual and moral impetus which led ultimately to the formation of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain.
The Institute was opened in 1871 with the object of promoting the scientific study of man, past and present, from all points of view — biological, social, and cultural.
It remains the major national learned society for British anthropologists and is without doubt the most prestigious body of its kind in the English-speaking world.
It was several years, however, before social anthropology was to emerge as a distinct discipline, separate from other branches of anthropology, and to receive that accolade to which all subjects aspire — a secure place on university curricula.
In practice, the subject was first introduced under the older and more inclusive names ‘anthropology’ and ‘ethnology’at Oxford in 1884 and at Cambridge in 1900.
The first university professorship bearing the title ‘social anthropology’ was that held on an honorary basis at Liverpool University in 1908 by Sir James George Frazer (1854–1941), author of the mammoth Victorian best-seller The Golden Bough (first edition 1890) which, with its strong appeal to a readership brought-up on the classics, did much to establish the new subject's credentials.
Courses at the London School of Economics, which became social anthropology's chief centre in Great Britain (and for a time in the world), began with the appointment in 1910 of C. G. Seligman.
With Rivers he had participated in the famous Torres Straits expedition and was freshly returned from new research in the Sudan.
Despite, or perhaps because of, this late arrival social anthropologists are much given to tracing their intellectual pedigree to as remote and as illustrious ancestors as they can uncover.
Some indeed go back to Plato; others have recourse to Herodotus.
Rather than strain the reader's credulity by indulging in equivalent flights of genealogical fantasy, I shall start with our Victorian predecessors, since most of the currents of modern social anthropology (as of sociology) can be traced directly back to them.
Our curtain rises, then, in the nineteenth century, when the study of man was treated as a kind of history and more especially of that generalizing sort usually known as ‘universal history’ which is so well represented today in the works of Arnold Toynbee.
At that time, European scholars were fascinated by the technological and, as they saw them, moral triumphs of their age, and obsessed with the necessity for progress in all fields of human endeavour; they felt a positive obligation to contemplate continually the long, hard road along which man had struggled in his search for perfection.
Perhaps it was reassuring to ponder the primeval origins from which man's ascent had commenced long, long ago.
It seems also that the regular equation of ‘primitive’ tribal customs with the earliest forms of European prehistoric culture provided an acknowledgement of common humanity, but one which was appropriately abridged and indirect.
Our colonizing ancestors could not deny (although some attempted to) that they were dealing with representatives, however imperfect, of a single human species —Homo sapiens ; but they could assert that the tenuous affinities they were prepared to recognize lay with their own most remote and primitive forebears.
And if some savage peoples had so clearly fallen behind in the race, others, as some authorities maintained, might well represent not simply retarded, or imperfectly evolved, but actually degenerate forms of earlier civilization.
Such backsliding was not necessarily incompatible with the general movement of mankind: evolution did not rule out devolution.
Such views, of course, helped to justify the treatment of newly colonized tribesmen as savages urgently requiring the European's civilizing attentions.
When Darwin appropriated this evolutionary perspective, and the morally convenient notion of the survival of the fittest, all nature seemed to chorus her approval of the unchallengeable truth of these basic facts of human and animal existence.
As Bertrand Russell remarks: ‘Darwinism was an application to the whole of animal and vegetable life of Malthus's theory of population, which was an integral part of the politics and economics of the Benthamites — a global free competition in which victory went to the animals that most resembled successful capitalists.’
It would be unfair to suggest that our Victorian predecessors deliberately compared tribal customs with those of early man in order to discredit the indigenous peoples they were colonizing.
The truth is that they had a narcissistic preoccupation with their own past; any information they could glean about ‘savage society’ was eagerly seized upon in the hope that it might shed further light on their own origins.
As one critic caustically observed, these early armchair anthropologists, who seldom had any direct acquaintance with the tribal customs that so intrigued them, appeared to be only interested in the living in order to better understand the dead.
This historical fascination inspired their limitless appetite for novel titbits of information on savage customs which would give substance to the shadowy forms of their own distant ancestors.
This method of reclaiming the dead, we may note in passing, survives in modern archaeology.
As he racks his brains to discover the purpose of some otherwise unintelligible artefact, the prehistorian turns hopefully to ‘ethnographic parallels’ from living cultures.
In this fashion the stoneage men of today throw light on those who have long disappeared from view.
So while we may decry our predecessors' excessive self-absorption, we have again to salute their ingenuity in developing a valuable and indispensable part of the archaeologist's armoury of techniques.
But this is a digression.
Victorian scholars were divided in their views of the precise nature and order of the stages of man's evolutionary progress.
But most agreed on the basic characteristics of the earliest ‘state of nature’ from which the great evolutionary adventure had begun.
As might be anticipated, this primordial zero-point represented the antithesis of almost everything they most cherished.
It was seen as an anarchic slough of disorder and despair.
In this primeval chaos man's unbridled egotism reigned supreme with no government to restrain it; property was not respected and no orderly means existed for its transfer from one generation to the next; marriage was unknown and mating was savagely haphazard and competitive.
This Hobbesian state was christened, not it seems without a certain relish, ‘primitive promiscuity’.
This fantasy world of natural lust, ironically, can scarcely ever have been more  closely realized than in the appalling conditions of the urban poor in the sordid back streets and alleys of prosperous Victorian cities; but it could not, of course, be permitted to endure for long in the theoretical world.
So, in this science fiction view of human evolution, primitive promiscuity was soon replaced by more orderly patterns of existence.
Intriguingly foreshadowing our contemporary women's liberation movement, some of these stalwart Victorians envisaged that the evolutionary struggle then involved domination by the female since, they argued, women first rebelled against these loose promiscuous relations to queen it over men.
Others stoutly denied this matriarchal ascendency, insisting that, following its promiscuous episode, early society soon settled down under a patriarchal régime in which the opposite sex knew its place and kept it.
Ultimately the final culmination was the same: anarchy eventually gave place to patrician capitalism.
This, for instance, was largely the thesis developed by the great English comparative jurist, Sir Henry Maine (1822–88).
Maine considered that laws inevitably bore the stamp of the social conditions within which they were enacted and applied, so the best way to discover the course of social evolution was to examine the changing character of legal codes.
He saw himself as an empiricist, attacking such woolly concepts as ‘natural equality’ and the imaginary ‘state of nature’beloved of the political philosophers.
His expert knowledge of classical history was sharpened by a deep interest in Indian law based upon his years of service there as a senior legal official.
Maine's most influential book,Ancient Law , was first published in 1861, ten years after the Great Exhibition.
This is a brilliant if, as we can now see, over conjectural study of the development of legal ideas and forms of social organization.
The argument runs as follows.
The typical organization of early society was based upon the patriarchal family.
By natural increase in population and with the adoption of strangers (who were treated as fictitious kinsmen), patriarchal families grew into clans such as those found in ancient Rome.
These later evolved into tribes, and these in turn swelled in size and complexity eventually to become fully-fledged states.
(A very similar evolutionary typology is still employed today, as we shall see, by one school of contemporary American anthropologists.)
Maine summed up the crucial developments of human history in his famous formula of the ‘movement of the progressive societies from Status to Contract’.
By this Maine meant that in archaic and primitive society a man's rights and duties were rigidly determined by his position at birth in a given family or clan.
However hard he strove, his destiny was fixed at birth by his parents' position, and such limited social mobility as might be achieved was rationalized (and thus concealed) in the language of kinship.
As society evolved, however, relations between people became at once more individual and flexible with a greater scope for the exercise of choice and free will.
Kinship was no longer the sole idiom for legitimate relations; voluntary contractual connections began to appear and gained ascendancy over those determined from birth by kinship.
This interpretation of the universal direction of progress is of course in keeping with the more liberal Victorian assumptions.
Maine was writing in the wake of the Chartist movement and a decade after the formation of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, the first professional union in Britain with a membership exclusively of apprenticed craftsmen.
Had he lived to see the present development of union organization, with its emphasis on restrictive employment and job demarcation, he might have wished to revise some of his views.
The British National Union of Students, with its mandatory membership, would have astonished him.
Unlike so many contemporaries whose first-hand experience of savage society rarely extended outside the senior common-rooms of Oxford and Cambridge, Maine had at least lived in India.
The importance of such direct, if only fleeting and superficial, contact with exotic cultures is further demonstrated by Maine's contemporary, Lewis Henry Morgan (1818–81), an American lawyer who inaugurated the study of kinship and whose works had an important influence on Marx and Engels.
After graduating, Morgan spent some time amongst the Iroquois Indians, who had fascinated him since his college days, and published his famous League of the Iroquois in 1851.
Amongst other things, it records a kinship system which struck Morgan as distinctly odd.
The Iroquois had, he reported, a ‘system of classification of kindred, both unique and extraordinary in its character, and wholly unlike any with which  we are familiar’.
A year later, however, he was intrigued to discover that the Ojibwa Indians, who were of different linguistic stock, had the same system.
Further research revealed that what had at first appeared to be a bizarre anomaly was in fact a cultural feature shared by many different Indian peoples.
This stimulated Morgan into mounting a much wider-ranging inquiry in the course of which, with the assistance of the American Department of Indian Affairs and other official bodies, he sent out questionnaires to government officials and missionaries in many different parts of the world seeking further information on kinship terminologies.
From an analysis of this large body of data, Morgan concluded that two contrasting principles underlay the terms used by different societies to describe and classify relatives.
The American Indian system tended to group together under a single term categories of kinsfolk whom we should recognize as distinct.
The word we translate in English as ‘brother’, for instance, would include those we distinguish as ‘cousins’; similarly a term such as ‘father’ might also include paternal ‘uncles’.
This economical use of a few key terms to embrace large clusters of kinsfolk Morgan called ‘classificatory’.
He contrasted this with the other type of terminology found amongst speakers of the ‘Celtic’ and Semitic languages, where most relatives had separate and unique kinship terms.
This type, which we find to some extent in English, clearly emphasized differences rather than shared properties, and Morgan labelled it ‘descriptive’.
The classificatory system can be conveniently illustrated by the patrilineal Omaha Indians among whom a man calls his mother's father, mother's brother, mother's brother's son, and mother's brother's son's son by a single term.
He uses one term to refer to his mother, to his mother's brother's daughter and to his mother's brother's son's daughter.
Thus here we see two terms used to distinguish relatives on my mother's side according to their sex.
In effect, all my mother's female paternal kin are called by the same term that I apply to my ‘mother’; and all her male paternal kin are designated ‘mother's brother’ without reference to their generational position.
Here the generation-gap is very effectively bridged.
Like so many of his contemporaries, Morgan was an evolutionist.
Consequently he assumed that tribes possessing the classificatory kinship system, even if now separate and speaking different languages, must once have shared a common origin.
As he saw it, his discovery of the two types of kinship terminology afforded a powerful new research tool to investigate historical connections and to reconstruct links which had otherwise disappeared or been forgotten (as well they might, since they had probably never existed!).
Although this interest in pseudo-historical connections was Morgan's primary concern, he was also one of the first anthropologists to understand that the names used to designate relatives are not simply determined by linguistic rules without reference to social factors; kinship terms have an important social dimension, since relatives grouped together and called by the same term exhibit, at least in certain respects, shared patterns of behaviour.
If, for example, I call my mother' brother's son by the same term that I apply to my mother's brother, the implication is that I share a common relationship with both.
Again, if I call my mother and her sister by the same term ('mother'), then both behave maternally towards me — though not necessarily with the same intensity of feeling.
Having thus grasped the important principle that kinship terms reflect social usage, Morgan was able to go further and indeed to anticipate later research in his perceptive assessment of the social advantages of the classificatory system.
Such a system, as he saw, minimized the differences which might otherwise be drawn between distant and close kin.
It extended the web of relationships under the mantle of a few comprehensive terms of relationship connoting close, primordial loyalties.
The brotherhood of man did not end with the immediate family of siblings at which it began.
For these and other achievements Morgan has indeed some claim to be considered ‘the founding father of kinship studies’, as Meyer Fortes has pointed out.
But we must now return to England to consider briefly part of the lively contribution to the developments we are discussing made by Sir Edward Tylor (1832–1917).
It was Tylor who first taught anthropology under this name at Oxford in 1884 and he carried forward and extended  some of the theoretically more important strands in Morgan's work.
When he noticed that linguistic usage could reflect social usage and that classificatory kinship systems encouraged group solidarity, Morgan made what we would now call a ‘functional’ interpretation of social phenomena.
Tylor's work which, especially in the field of religion, is currently enjoying something of a revival, displays further and more explicitly recognized examples of this functionalist way of understanding society.
But, like Morgan, his main orientation was historical and he contributed to evolutionary theory by introducing the term ‘survival’ for those customs or beliefs which, like the human appendix, linger on anachronistically out of context.
These, he argued, can often provide the keen evolutionist with important clues to earlier historical connections.
In the present context, Tylor's most interesting contribution was his pioneering application of statistics to the analysis of social phenomena.
This ‘piece of social arithmetic’, as he modestly called it, was published in 1889 and was addressed to the problem of understanding the exaggerated lengths to which many tribesmen were reported to go in avoiding their in-laws.
Very sensible, the reader may think.
Quite true.
But, as Tylor noticed, while some cultures prescribed very strong avoidance behaviour between sons and parents-in-law, others were more concerned to keep daughters and parents-in-law from each others' throats.
Other societies again seemed remarkably latitudinarian, scarcely appearing to notice that a problem existed.
Were such variations arbitrary, or could they be explained in any logically consistent fashion?
Tylor decided to investigate, guided by the shrewd hunch that there might be statistically valid correlations between avoidance behaviour and choice of residence at marriage.
Surveying reports on the relevant customary behaviour in 350 separate ‘societies’, Tylor was able to demonstrate that, when the newlyweds set up house with the wife's kin , avoidance behaviour between the latter and the husband occurred more frequently than could be expected on the basis of mere chance.
Similarly, when the wife lived with her husband's kin,she was then obliged to avoid them .
To clinch the matter, Tylor discovered that in those  cases where the couple lived independently of either group of kin, avoidance behaviour was haphazard.
Tylor's next step was to show that these statistical correlations, or ‘adhesions’ as he quaintly called them, could also shed light on other puzzles.
Thus a particularly bizarre practice, for which with typical resourcefulness Tylor coined the name teknonymy , involved calling a married person not by his own name but by that of his children.
Here Johnny's father, David, would be referred to as ‘Father of Johnny’, and Johnny's mother Mary would similarly be called ‘Mother of Johnny’.
(This procedure is reminiscent of the Christian and especially Catholic usage in which the Virgin Mary is known as the ‘Mother of Jesus’.)
Again, Tylor was able to prove that these curious forms of reference were not distributed round the globe by arbitrary acts of providence.
On the contrary, they went hand-in-hand with the correlations already established between avoidance behaviour and residence at marriage.
If, for example, a man was known as ‘Father of James’ the probability was that he lived with his wife's people and dutifully avoided his mother-in-law in the appointed manner.
Tylor had thus isolated three separate customary practices and elegantly demonstrated that they formed a mutually associated complex, each element varying with the others.
Although he was more concerned with the general evolutionary history of mankind than in analysing societies as self-sustaining wholes, here he was busy making functional associations almost in spite of himself!
What is more, he was demonstrating the functional inter-relation of social phenomena with greater statistical skill and sophistication than most British social anthropologists could manage today.
The work of his modern American successor in this field, George Peter Murdock, covers a wider range of kinship data and is generally more ambitious in scope in its systematic search for the determinants of different systems of kinship terminology.
These achievements do not exhaust Tylor's contribution to the developing trend of functionalist logic which we can detect in these evolutionary writers.
Anticipating much later research, Tylor also made the seminal suggestion that the choice of residence  at marriage exerted a crucial effect on the way kinship was reckoned in a society.
This link between marriage and kinship, the two abiding pillars of much anthropological theory, was further emphasized in Tylor's pithy comment that, in the history of human development, the choice facing many tribal peoples was the stark one of marrying out or dying out.
Threatened groups bring in wives from outside and thus establish important social links promising external support and succour.
Such ties of marriage create alliances which, as Tylor shrewdly saw, may help to discourage enmity or to compose differences between otherwise mutually hostile tribes.
This ‘survival-kit’ view of the functions of out-marriage (or ‘exogamy’as the Scottish writer J. F. Mc Lennan christened it, in contrast to ‘endogamy’or in-marriage) has a thoroughly modern ring about it.
As we shall see later, there is therefore some force in the stock examination question: was Tylor the first alliance theorist
FUNCTIONALISM: DURKHEIM'S CONTRIBUTION
The functionalist tendencies we have detected in Tylor loom much larger in the work of his French contemporary, Emile Durkheim (1858–1917), the last and greatest of the forerunners of modern social anthropology to be discussed here.
Durkheim is generally regarded as the founder of modern comparative sociology (a distinction which to some extent Marx and Weber must also be allowed to share).
In common with other scholars we have considered, Durkheim was essentially an armchair theorist who seldom stirred outside his study, or beyond his own milieu, except to give lectures or to participate in learned debates.
He was a socialist, a democratic reformer rather than a Marxist or revolutionary syndicalist, and believed passionately in the transforming power of secular education.
Sociology in the final analysis existed to provide a theoretical basis for socialism and secular education which were its practice.
Thus educational policy (over which Durkheim succeeded in exerting a dominant influence in France), rather than revolutionary political change, represented the true key to the utopian transformation which he envisaged.
Born at Épinal in the Vosges, Durkheim was Jewish and brought up to be a rabbi which, however, he did not become, turning instead to the new science of sociology.
He taught this subject first at Bordeaux and then from 1902 until his death in 1917, at Paris.
His doctoral thesis took the form of an analysis of the effects of various degrees of economic differentiation in different societies, and was not very favourably received by his examiners.
Nevertheless, the book which he based upon it and published in 1893 under the title De la Division du travail social: étude sur l'organisation des sociétes supérieures is without question one of the most influential and stimulating in the whole field of the social sciences.
Although Durkheim remains less well-known popularly than Marx, his ideas have exerted a greater formative influence in the development of anthropological (and sociological) theory.
In contrast to Maine and others including the English social philosopher Herbert Spencer, Durkheim maintained that increasing economic specialization did not necessarily entail the growth of individualistic competitiveness and social atomization.
Nor,pace Marx, did industrialization inevitably result in capitalistic alienation (although Durkheim did acknowledge that in ‘abnormal’ circumstances anomie might result).
On the contrary, under favourable conditions (which were never clearly specified) the rise of economic specialization led to the development of a new and improved kind of social cohesion and one largely inspired, it would seem, by utopian socialism.
The division of labour itself was not, as economists had long held, caused by a desire for greater productivity.
Rather, increased productivity followed from increasing economic specialization which, in turn, had been produced by a massive increase in the ‘density’ of society.
Durkheim developed this ingenious thesis by contrasting the economic and social conditions in primitive and modern societies.
As he read the evidence on primitive societies, where of course there was far less economic specialization, social cohesion was of a very rudimentary kind.
Its basis lay in the simple attraction of like for like, since the constituent units in such ‘segmental’ societies were all-of-a-piece.
Carve them up however you wished, you would always end up with an array of monotonously similar looking bits.
In a passage which reads very oddly indeed today and betrays his naïveté, Durkheim even went so far as to claim that such was the depressing degree of homogeneity in primitive society that its members were actually physically indistinguishable from each other!
The primitive sympathetic magic which kept such simple tribesmen together Durkheim christened ‘mechanical solidarity’.
In striking contrast, modern industrial societies were characterized by heterogeneity, and were held together by a superior bonding principle which, following the centuries' old analogy between the body-politic and the human organism, Durkheim chose to call ‘organic solidarity’.
Its basis lay in the attraction of opposites.
In an argument where the central issue was social cohesion it was clearly necessary to find some means of measuring this elusive force.
Here Durkheim took a leaf out of Maine's book and decided to adopt law as an objective measure of social solidarity.
This led him to compare the legal codes of archaic and modern societies in much the same manner as Maine had done.
He concluded that legal processes could be divided into two contrasting types.
One species of law, which he called ‘restitutive’, was concerned essentially with restoring social harmony; the other, its opposite, was repressive penal law, inherently punitive and vengeful.
The latter, Durkheim asserted (wrongly, as later anthropological field studies were to show) predominated in primitive conditions and could thus be employed as a measure of the mechanical solidarity present.
Punishment, Durkheim maintained, was neither corrective nor deterrent in intention; it was a passionate reaction on the part of society which, in taking what amounted to collective revenge on the criminal, symbolically reaffirmed and restored the moral values and common loyalties which he had desecrated: symbolic lynching in which an outburst of punitive indignation against the criminal healed the injuries which he had inflicted on society.
Such punitive gestures fulfilled the important function of maintaining mechanical solidarity at the requisite pitch.
And, paradoxically, as Durkheim was to recognize, a certain amount of crime might even be necessary to keep society in a healthy state, on its toes — as it were.
Criminals were thus in some sense public benefactors (this clearly being a case where crime does pay!).
Modern industrial society with its superior ‘organic’ solidarity could dispense with these primitive aids to cohesion and develop the more civilized, less emotional and, above all, rational legal processes which Durkheim took to be characteristic of progress.
This in essence is Durkheim's utopian version of Maine's thesis.
As I have implied, many of Durkheim's conclusions are tautological or based upon inaccurate assumptions and evidence.
But it is an impressive tribute to the persuasive power of his challenging presentation that despite so many deficiencies his argument remains fresh and stimulating.
Why is this so?
Mainly, I think, because he finally established the explanatory power of functionalism; he showed more clearly than any of his predecessors how much more profoundly we understand man's social life when we see it in all its functional complexity.
Earlier writers had given hints of the rewards that lay in store for those who followed this intellectual path.
Durkheim opened the floodgates and offered what amounted to a radically new way of making sense of social institutions and their inter-relations.
It is a measure of his success in launching this new functional approach that we now take it so much for granted that we forget, and even find difficulty in appreciating, the novelty which it represented at the time.
That said, we must note that in common with so many other innovators, Durkheim's insights can also be found to some extent in the works of others.
Apart from his own native predecessors (principally Condorcet and Comte), and the post-Kantian German philosopher, J. G. Fichte, there are many parallels (as well as differences) in the ideas of the English schoolmaster, inventor, philosopher and Fabian, Herbert Spencer (1820–1903), whose exceptionally voluminous writings make him the father of British sociology.
Yet, somehow, even when he gets his facts wrong and becomes trapped in a spiral of tricky tautologies, Durkheim's way  of putting things has a brilliant radiance which few other sociological theorists can match, far less surpass.
Where Marx's analysis emphasized the importance of economic resources and their control, Durkheim maintained the primacy of social institutions, which he saw as functionally linked components of the composite social organism.
From this perspective, Durkheim enabled us to see how different social structures (rather than systems of production)‘generate’, as we would now say, distinctive patterns of belief.
Whatever their ultimate truth or falsity, beliefs and ideologies could thus be subjected to exactly the same kind of functional analysis as other social phenomena.
They had no specially privileged status.
This treatment removed ideology and conceptual systems from the sequestered domains of philosophy and theology which have never been quite the same since!
Here, as a subtle and admirably thorough critique of his achievement by a philosopher, Steven Lukes, points out, Durkheim anticipated Wittgenstein by at least half a century in showing how concepts were (socially generated) collective representations.
This highly illuminating way of regarding beliefs and concepts not in terms of their ultimate truth or falsity, but as the product of specific social conditions, is best illustrated in Durkheim's book Les Formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse (1912).
In The Division of Labour primitive and industrial societies were contrasted, since each was held together in a different way and by a distinctive kind of social glue.
Here the argument is rather different; Durkheim argues that, if it is desired to penetrate and isolate the quintessential features of religion, then the best way of proceeding is to examine religion in its most primitive (earliest), purest, and most elemental form.
First, of course, you have to locate your most primitive tribe.
Fortunately for Durkheim this did not present too many difficulties.
There was a relative abundance of recent information on the totemic beliefs of the supremely ‘simple’ hunting and gathering Australian Aborigines, who were generally regarded as, in Frazer's phrase, ‘humanity in the chrysalis stage’.
Durkheim had little difficulty in employing this material to demonstrate how beliefs in the mystical powers of  animals and other ‘totemic’ forces reflected the structure of Aboriginal hordes and their component divisions.
Totems, he argued, were mystically charged symbols of group cohesion and identity — badges of belonging.
They acted as emblems or mascots, symbolizing group loyalties.
Religion, which for Durkheim involved the separation of the sacred and the profane (as in Judaism), was an essentially social phenomenon.
Likewise Durkheim's thoroughly Jewish God was a commendably sociable figure charged above all else with the maintenance of social order and morality amongst the faithful.
Indeed, God was society deified.
Or, as he put it slightly differently on another occasion, ‘religion’ is ‘the system of symbols by means of which society becomes conscious of itself; it is the way of thinking characteristic of collective existence’.
In the final analysis, religion was thus to be seen as the emotionally charged product of intense social interaction ('collective effervescence')—esprit de corps elevated to the metaphysical plane.
(With the privilege of hindsight, some may see here an anticipation of the modern emphasis on transactions and interaction as the basic nexus of symbolic life.)
And as the handmaid of religiosity, ritual's part was to express and impress those sentiments of group adherence on which the orderly life of the social organism depended for its survival.
This arguably ‘establishment’ and certainly consensual presentation of religion finds surprisingly strong echoes in some of Marx's writing on the same topic.
But it contrasts with the latter's general emphasis on religion as an abortive form of protest by the underprivileged:'…the sigh of the oppressed creature, the sentiment of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless conditions…the opium of the people!’
The general theory of society which is enshrined in these two books is spelt out with great verve, but not without ambiguity, in Durkheim's methodological manifesto Les Règles de la method sociologique .
Here we need only underline a few key concepts.
Durkheim defines the sociologist's data as consisting of ‘social facts’.
These are customary ways of thinking and acting  to which each individual member of society feels compelled to conform.
Personal idiosyncracies are not relevant here: what really matter are those sentiments and axiomatic patterns of thought and action which come, as we would say ‘naturally’, as a result of having been brought up or ‘socialized’ in a particular society and culture.
Since these ‘facts’ belong to the group as a whole and since the latter is more than the sum of its parts, they have a transcendent reality of their own and cannot simply be reduced to the individuals in whose conduct they manifest themselves.
By the same token, collective beliefs and behaviour cannot be explained in terms of individual psychology.
They require a special new social psychology for, as Durkheim circuitously asserted, only the social can explain the social.
Hence Durkheim insisted that to understand one set of social phenomena we must see them in the round — in their wider, social context.
Society is a dynamic organism: the destiny of its component parts and their significance lie in their contribution to the survival of the whole.
This holistic approach, a kind of social determinism, is the essence of functionalism, and its discovery frees those who seek to understand social institutions from the dead hand of historical determinism.
If history is not quite bunk, at least it is far from everything.
Origins are certainly often interesting, but they do not necessarily have much to do with the present functioning and meaning of things.
The contemporary meaning and significance of phenomena may have little to do with the shape and form which links them, however remotely, with the past.
Like words, social institutions, customs, and beliefs all change drastically over time.
To take a rather obvious example, women's liberation today is better understood in the light of its ambient social and economic circumstances than as the inevitable culmination of the nineteenth-century suffragette movement.
MALINOWSKI AND RADCLIFFE-BROWN
Durkheim's work marks the turning point between evolutionism and functionalism and provides the bridge to Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown, the authentic founders of modern social anthropology.
As befits two rival prima donnas , each of these formidable  figures gave a characteristically distinctive twist to his version of functionalism.
Malinowski (1884–1942), an emigré Pole, was trained first as a scientist and this may explain the strongly biological orientation of his functionalist theories.
These were developed in England where he had come in search of further anthropological inspiration after reading Frazer's Golden Bough .
In Malinowski's view man is an animal, even if sometimes a relatively cultured and social one.
His physiologically based needs, or appetites, demand satisfaction, which is achieved through society's various culturally defined institutions.
Thus marriage regulates sexual drives, economic institutions provide sustenance, and law and politics establish a regularized basis for necessary social cooperation and interaction.
This Hobbesian approach finds difficulty in offering a plausible explanation for the existence of religion and art.
These less direct consequences of man's animality could, Malinowski argued, be understood in the light of their integrative contribution to man's social existence.
Thus magic was a crutch to which men turned when their technical expertise failed them, myth provided a justification or ‘charter’ for existing social and political activities, and ritual offered comfort in time of distress and despair.
All this was consistent with Malinowski's over-riding view of culture as man's distinctive form of biological adaptation.
This down-to-earth, no-nonsense conception of man as an imperfectly socialized animal places much less stress than Durkheim on society as a metaphysical good to the preservation of which all activities are ultimately directed.
Malinowski's natives were real people; not over-socialized cardboard figures locked in everlastingly mindless mechanical  solidarity .
Social life for Malinowski was like capitalism for Keynes: ‘a going concern’, in which individuals interacted with each other in pursuit of mutually rewarding transactions.
Here the guiding motto was: you scratch my back, and I'll scratch yours — a process to which Malinowski usually referred in more dignified language as ‘reciprocity’ or ‘give and take’.
Since Malinowski made no secret of his earthy, materialist view of man's motives it is odd that it has taken modern exponents of transactional analysis and game theory so long to recognize his pioneering achievements in this field.
These ideas on culture and society are, as one would expect, a product both of Malinowski's own flamboyant personality and of his experience as a field-worker.
Durkheim belonged to that contemplative school of armchair theorists epitomized by Sir James Frazer, who is supposed to have solemnly replied ‘God forbid!’ to the innocent questioner who asked if he had ever lived amongst ‘savages’.
Frazer's disciple, Malinowski, was of a very different mettle.
Although he was not the very first, he has come to be regarded as the pioneer, bush-whacking anthropologist, the originator of the doctrine that until you have lived cheek by jowl with an exotic tribe and spoken their language fluently you cannot claim full professional status.
Ironically enough, his main field experience occurred as a fortuitous consequence of the First World War.
He had been a research student at the London School of Economics under the direction of C. G. Seligman since 1910.
The outbreak of war found him in Australia where, with his teacher's patronage, he was attending a meeting of the British Association as secretary of the anthropology section.
As soon as hostilities started, the question of Malinowski's possible internment arose since, although Polish, he was technically an Austrian subject.
The Australian authorities took a commendably enlightened view of the matter, however, and allowed him to carry out research on the Trobriand Islands close to New Guinea.
There he flung himself into the local setting with characteristic abandon and commitment, participating in the daily round of village life with an eagerness and zest which he attributed partly to his Polish temperament; there he established standards of meticulous and painstaking observation and inquiry which have been an inspiration to social anthropologists ever since.
His graphic accounts of this experience established him as anthropology's Conrad and gave the subject the fiercely empirical tradition which is its hallmark in Britain to this day.
Malinowski was a prolific writer and also a uniquely gifted teacher, training, largely by the socratic method, a whole generation of brilliant disciples; true to their master in their fashion they have created modern social anthropology with cross-fertilization from Radcliffe-Brown.
These are remarkable achievements and it would be unreasonable to expect Malinowski also  to have made theoretical contributions of comparable significance.
The functionalist method which he so strenuously championed amounted, in fact, to little more than acknowledging that every custom or institution, however strange and bizarre, served some contemporary purpose.
Life was vivid and alive.
It was not cluttered up with redundant ‘survivals’, to be understood retrospectively by reference to assumed evolutionary historical stages.
Such a nostalgic obsession with the past was a natural outcome of the chair-bound anthropologist's myopic glance.
Once you abandoned the theorist's armchair and his gloomy study and actually got out there among living tribesmen, then and only then could you really understand what was going on.
With this fresh perspective exotic rituals which made no sense in the silence of the scholar's study except as echoes of past glories fell into their natural place as living parts of the throbbing actuality of real flesh-and-blood communal life.
Redundant customs had no place in Malinowski's view of the world.
There everything was, as the modern phrase has it, ‘all go’.
This healthy utilitarianism was, as has been said, ultimately referable to biologically grounded needs and drives.
The sociological strain is weak in Malinowski's writing, and this may be connected with his unique absorption in a single exotic culture.
In any event, it fell to Professor Radcliffe-Brown (1881–1955), Malinowski's contemporary and rival, to redress the balance in the direction of the sociological theorists.
In the process, Radcliffe-Brown, who was a more skilful theorist than field-worker, supplied British social anthropology with a theoretical framework to temper and guide the empiricism which it derived from Malinowski.
Indeed, it is largely through Radcliffe-Brown's writing that Durkheim has made such an impact on social anthropology.
Radcliffe-Brown was also a functionalist but of a less programmatic sort; he developed a more sophisticated terminology and theoretical approach, and in many respects improved on Durkheim.
Where Malinowski had invoked the aid of reductionist principles borrowed from biology, and concentrated on man's cultural adaptation, Radcliffe-Brown re-asserted the  social basis of all customs and institutions.
Society for him, as for Durkheim, was an organism of which each constituent part existed to contribute to the well-being of the whole.
He introduced the term structure to emphasize that social life must be founded upon an orderly, organized basis, a determinate framework of positions, roles and expectations which remains constant over considerable periods of time.
It is only within and in relation to this ‘structure’ that institutions have functions to fulfil.
Their primary purpose is the conservative one of helping to sustain and maintain the existing order of things.
Thus for the structural functionalist we may say that the ends (social solidarity) always justify the means (social institutions).
That institutions work in this way, contributing to the general status quo , becomes taken for granted by Radcliffe-Brown.
Once this is accepted we can seek out the logical consistencies in contextual use which constitute ‘structural principles’ and which make sense of otherwise apparently baffling practices and beliefs.
At the same time and again harking back to Durkheim, at least in the case of tribal societies we usually know very little of their past through lack of documentary sources, so we can ignore this ‘conjectural history’.
If the past is inscrutable, it is better to concentrate on the more accessible present, which is sufficiently complicated to require our fullest concentration.
This is Radcliffe-Brown's prescription.
One of the most impressive demonstrations of the virtues of this contextual, or holistic, approach is that offered by Radcliffe-Brown himself in a paper entitled ‘The Mother's Brother in South Africa’ and first published in 1925.
The factual data concern a South African people called, the BaThonga, who had been meticulously studied by the Swiss missionary Junod and described in impressive detail in his classic monograph, published in 1913,The Life of a South African Tribe .
Junod was particularly struck by the behaviour expected of people in their capacity as ‘sister's son’ or ‘mother's brother’.
The salient characteristics of this relationship were:
1
Throughout his life the uncle is expected to display particular care and attention towards his sister's son.
2
Thus, if his sister's son fell sick, the maternal uncle would readily sacrifice on his behalf.
3
Despite the kindness on the uncle's part, however, the nephew was permitted many liberties at his expense.
Such indeed was the uncle's indulgent good humour that the nephew could even steal his dinner without incurring his wrath.
4
In the same spirit, the nephew could with impunity even steal the sacrifice prepared in honour of the spirits by his uncle.
Surprisingly this otherwise sacrilegious act was readily condoned.
5
Finally, on his uncle's death, the nephew inherited some of his property and might even claim his widow!
What is to be made of this extraordinary permissiveness on the part of the maternal uncle?
First of course we need more information.
The BaThonga are a patrilineal people, that is, kinship in blood is traced principally through the male line on the father's side.
A son belongs to his father's clan and inherits property and position in his father's patriline.
This makes the special position of the maternal uncle seem even more anomalous, and led Junod to suppose that we could only understand this peculiar relationship if we assumed that it represented an anachronistic throwback or ‘survival’ of an earlier matriarchal stage.
This evolutionary explanation was, Junod proposed, the ‘only one possible’.
Radcliffe-Brown, however, elegantly shows us how we can make sense of all this without invoking the tenuous spectre of an earlier ‘matriarchal’ stage which he points out would actually have quite the opposite influence.
He notes first that the ‘permissive maternal uncle’ is by no means a phenomenon unique to the BaThonga.
On the contrary it is quite common — though by no means universal — in other patrilineal societies.
It must, logically, be explicable in terms of other shared social circumstances.
When we approach the problem in this open-ended, context-sensitive way, probing deeper into linked relationships, we notice that the permissive relationship is paralleled by another which  is its opposite in some respects.
This is the coldly correct relationship which prevails in these patrilineal societies between the nephew and his paternal aunt.
If my maternal brother is all sweetness and light, my father's sister is a real dragon — a cold, formally distant aunt with whom no liberties are possible at all.
If then, we have two significant relationships here rather than one, and each is the counterpart of the other, what common factors make sense of both?
The solution, Radcliffe-Brown argues, lies in the underlying ‘logic’ of classificatory kinship systems, and especially in the principle he calls the equivalence of siblings .
What this means is: if I have a particular type of relationship with someone, I will enjoy the same relationship (more or less) with his or her sibling (brother or sister).
Thus in societies where kinship is an important determinant of behaviour, brothers and sisters are expected to present a common front to the world.
It is important to emphasize here that we are discussing standardized behavioural norms and not private feelings or idiosyncratic behaviour.
With this in mind we can see that the indulgent familiarity of the maternal uncle towards his nephew matches the mother's generous affection towards her child.
What goes for the mother goes for her brother also.
Equally, the frigid formality of the paternal aunt echoes the stern authority of her brother, the child's father.
Moreover, the respect which informs the child's relations with his paternal relatives is here heightened by the sexual difference between nephew and paternal aunt.
This aunt is in some sense a kind of female-father figure, just as the maternal uncle is in a sense a male version of the mother.
This interpretation assumes that institutions (such as the licensed disrespect and ragging between nephew and uncle) are not aimless social eccentricities, but function logically and coherently.
So once we adopt this purposive,functional approach and set the problem in its structural context social behaviour makes sense without invoking hypothetical historical antecedents.
Junod, it will be recalled, proposed that the maternal uncle's indulgent behaviour was to be explained by an earlier matrilineal (or ‘matri-archal’) phase which had left its mark on the now formally patriarchal BaThonga.
This was a pseudo-historical theory for which  there was no hard evidence.
It was also, as Radcliffe-Brown observed, both unnecessary and unlikely.
For in matrilineal societies where kinship is traced through women on the mother's side of the family, the mother's brother does not usually behave in this fashion towards his sororal nephew.
Quite the reverse.
Here a child belongs to his mother's clan, whose primary male representative and ‘father figure’ is the mother's brother.
In such circumstances wives produce children for their brothers, and the essential family unit consists of a brother, sister, and sister's children.
A man's heir is his sister's son and the relationship is thus fraught with strains which Jack Goody sees as inevitable between property-holders and heirs; the bond between uncle and nephew is in fact a direct counterpart of that between father and son in patrilineal societies.
Subsequent criticism of Radcliffe-Brown's admirably clear analysis by Lévi-Strauss, Goody and Needham centres on his ‘extension of sentiments’ from primary (e.g. mother) to secondary kin (e.g. maternal uncle) and points to his exclusion of other arguably relevant relationships such as those between brother and sister, and husband and wife.
Although it would not be difficult to defend the extension-of-sentiments argument on psychological grounds, this is not really necessary, since Radcliffe-Brown's analysis can be presented (as it is here) without recourse to assumptions about the relative priority of relationships.
The fact that not all societies that anthropologists call ‘patrilineal’ exhibit correspondingly warm relationships between sister's sons and mother's brothers does not necessarily invalidate the argument either; for, as we shall see later, definitions of what constitutes ‘patrilineal’kinship (or ‘matrilineal’for that matter) are seldom watertight.
Other defences could also be invoked.
Here it is sufficient to note that the analysis presented above offers a plausible interpretation of several distinct relationships by treating them not as unique isolates but as interlocking parts of a  larger pattern with a clearly defined structure.
Functionalism assumes that to a significant extent things are what they do.
Structure provides the framework in which functions are exercised.
Changes in social structure are thus likely to be accompanied by changes in the function of component institutions.
Similarly, when the functions of institutions alter radically we may expect to see corresponding structural changes.
DIFFUSIONISM: AN ALTERNATIVE APPROACH?
The linked analytical concepts of function and structure (introduced here in their rudimentary forms) developed naturally out of, and partly in reaction to, the historical, evolutionary approach; with them we have reached the central point of departure for most of modern social anthropology.
But before we try to make sense of other people's mystical beliefs in the following chapters, there is one further method of interpreting cultural and social facts which we must identify and assess.
This is the approach known as diffusionism , which remains part of the basic methodology of archaeologists and to some extent of historians.
It depends on the simple and indisputable fact that ideas and cultural artefacts travel, hopping from continent to continent and distributing themselves about the world in the wake of migrations and along trade routes.
Our mass communications make us take such processes for granted: we must remember that television and jet-travel have greatly expanded and accelerated the volume and intensity of such exchanges.
The essence of diffusionism is that where you find the same or similar techniques you propose the existence of some form of cultural connection or ‘borrowing’, especially when, in the case of material objects, the similarities do not stem automatically from the raw materials used, and where they are reinforced by large numbers of parallel instances.
The greater the identity in cultural forms, both qualitatively and quantitatively, the more they are likely to derive from a single common source.
This of course is what inspired Thor Heyerdahl's dramatic Kon-Tiki expedition in which he sailed on a raft from South America to Polynesia, thus hoping  to prove that he was following in the wake of ancient migration routes which could explain the cultural similarities he found between the two culture areas.
His more recent voyage on the Ra was based upon similar diffusionist assumptions.
Few other diffusionists have been prepared to test their theories so directly or adventurously.
This method of looking at cultural objects, developed chiefly by German and American scholars at the turn of the century, assumes in its extreme form that complex and exotic techniques can only be invented once in the history of mankind.
There are thus no cultural coincidences.
All common forms share a single, unique source.
Or, as the late Lord Raglan roundly declared (admittedly in a more restricted context): ‘savages never invent or discover anything’.
In prehistoric archaeology the only ‘hard’ data are often material products, and extinct peoples and societies become identified by their material relics as for instance ‘beaker-folk’or ‘basket-makers’; such similarities in technology can then be used to establish links between different sites and their inhabitants.
Typology becomes the primary means of identifying cultures and of dating them.
Thus, where substantial quantities of the same material equipment or products are discovered, archaeologists tend to assume that they must have been produced by the same people.
Similarly, where in different strata of the same excavation or in separate sites discontinuities in the styles of artefacts occur, these indicate that different manufacturing communities are involved.
So those relics of past civilizations which defy time and weather become, in effect, visiting cards as well as trademarks, and provide the key to the spatial and temporal connections of various ‘culture areas’, each identified by a particular assemblage of objects and cultural styles.
So strong is traditional archaeology's faith in the uniqueness of cultural forms and the rarity of innovations that it is prepared to go to inordinate lengths in the quest for similarities in design and style.
Thus local styles which bear some slight resemblance to a powerful foreign prototype may be written down as debased plagiarisms and classified as ‘degenerate’ forms or ‘skeuomorphs’, rather than evidence of an indigenous tradition with its own distinct characteristics.
One of the most ambitious and colourful of diffusionist theories is undoubtedly that advanced by the English anatomist Eliot Smith (1871–1937), a contemporary both of Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown, who sought to explain the global distribution of mummification and other exotic practices.
Elliot Smith traced mummification to Egypt, studying the crania of early Egyptian races.
He chanced to find an identical skull in Cambridge which, to his surprise, came not from Egypt but from the Chatham Islands, near New Zealand.
This conjunction sparked off his remarkable theory that from Egypt, where they had originated, an oddly assorted ‘culture-complex’ including mummification, sun-worship and large stone monuments had spread round the world.
Later, after plotting further distribution maps, this interesting conglomerate was expanded to include the swastika design, the tattooing of women's chins, ear-piercing, head-deformation, serpent-worship, the deluge myth and couvade — quite an assortment!
It is not difficult to see how this approach lays itself open to abuse and drastic criticism.
Cultural items are torn from their natural social context and lumped together, in the most arbitrary fashion, with similarly uprooted, and hence distorted, elements with which they may have no necessary connection.
The method can also be faulted by reference to that infallible test of relevance, ‘so what?’.
Even if it can be established beyond all reasonable doubt that certain cultural items were indeed originally developed in one place and thence diffused to another, by whatever means (not excluding industrial espionage), this may have no relevance whatsoever to their significance in the new environment.
Goods, especially ideological ones, have a habit of being tampered with in transit: they are notoriously subject to sea-changes.
Those  who receive them in an already altered form may impose a further change in their identity and meaning.
Take a very simple but nonetheless instructive example.
In the installation ceremonies of the Divine King of the Shilluk tribe of the southern Sudan one of the most cherished items in the ceremonial regalia is now apparently a Scottish international rugby cap — one of the more exotic relics of the British colonial legacy in Africa.
This borrowed item, no doubt bequeathed by some burly and well-meaning district commissioner, does not possess quite the same significance in this ambience as it had in its original context.
This diffusionist approach, which applies most readily to individual, concrete items of material culture, differs from the evolutionary method in the following ways.
It seeks the origins of the present not in the past which is temporally distant, but in external contacts which are spatially remote.
It is thus a kind of distributional history in space rather than in time — although in archaeology both chronological and spatial dimensions are involved, and is widely employed in modern geographical studies.
Both the diffusionist and the evolutionary methods contrast with the structural-functional, which is above all contextual, and seeks at least the primary significance of the present in the present rather than in the past.
These three contrasting ways of approaching the same data can be conveniently illustrated by applying them to that contemporary social phenomenon: student unrest.
When confronted with the difficult problem of explaining this the diffusionist will try to establish the movement's place of origin.
He will then produce an account of the insidious spread of revolutionary propaganda from overseas following the well-established ‘conspiracy theory’ so often presented by newspapers and politicians in search of convenient scapegoats for present discontents.
Your evolutionist, by contrast, will contend that these dangerous ‘counter-revolutionary tendencies’ are atavistic ‘survivals’of primitive aggressive behaviour which, in line with socialist policy, should be cannalised in more productive directions.
Finally, the structural-functionalist will rebut both these explanations.
His solution will be to seek causes of unrest and frustration within the contemporary physical and social environment in which workers live.
Since  many of these are so patent and numerous, his difficulty will be to isolate those factors which seem to be most significant in promoting discontent.
When we examine a specific case from these different points of view it becomes obvious that they may all contribute to our understanding.
Certainly, contrary to the opinions of some of their firmest advocates, they are not necessarily mutually contradictory.
Whether in relation to Polish politics or other social issues, in our communications-obsessed world only a fool would claim that the diffusion of ideas and techniques is unimportant.
And like the black writer, James Baldwin, few of us can resist the temptation of blaming the present — at least in part— upon the past.
If this achieves nothing else at least it helps shift the burden of guilt.
We are all structural-functionalists today, just as we are all in a way Freudians and Marxists whether we like it or not; but we must also recognize that we do gain additional insight into the significance of social phenomena when we know where they come from spatially and temporally.
Like those who practise them, customs and beliefs have inevitably both a past and a provenance.
No matter how ethereal they may seem, they do not exist in a timeless limbo but possess determinate antecedents in time and space.
Our awareness of these other dimensions helps us to correct the conservative,status quo -maintaining bias which functionalism so readily fosters and which, if unchecked, can seriously distort our assessment and understanding of the dynamic forces animating particular societies.
Social phenomena have a disconcerting habit of climbing up to positions of eminence from which they conveniently repudiate their humble origins; we must not be misled by this.
Above all, functionalism must not be allowed to become a kind of contagious magic characterized, in Frazer's definition, by the confusion of effects with causes.
Evolution (as a series of historical developments) and diffusion blend together to furnish the wider setting for particular customs and beliefs; they place the latter in situ, but they do not determine their meaning as functioning parts of a given contemporary social structure.
In this sense the contingencies of space and time, as it were, issue blank cheques.
Just as significantly, however, we are not entitled to infer the origins of social phenomena from their  current functions.
This tendency is the worst sin committed by over-enthusiastic functionalists.
Finally, in this summary and highly compressed review of our methodological origins, let us note how the French structuralism of Claude Lévi-Strauss, which enjoys such a vogue at present, stems directly from that of Radcliffe-Brown and Malinowski, and, in a sense, achieves a new synthesis between their styles of analysis and that of the diffusionists.
Of course this heady new movement has many other antecedents.
There is an exciting dash of Hegel's dialectic and of every version of Marx; and Freud and Jung are clearly important influences, to say nothing of Durkheim.
These are excellent ingredients for a cerebral cocktail, and Lévi-Strauss combines them brilliantly, producing what is in many respects an elaboration of Radcliffe-Brown's early version of structuralism.
He sees man, especially ‘primitive’ man, as a rustic philosopher of great intellectual ingenuity and artistic brilliance, a wayward mentalistic beachcomber, endlessly improvizing dazzling new patterns of culture from the flotsam and jetsam of other civilizations.
These patterns, however, are far from arbitrary: they represent variations on a series of interconnected themes.
The resulting ‘structures’ which can be discerned (at least by structuralists) dis-associate and re-form in exciting new transformations with kaleidoscopic ease.
Structure exists at various levels of consciousness (or unconsciousness) and although its relationship to mundane ‘reality’(the Marxist ‘infrastructure’ whose ultimate importance Lévi-Strauss periodically acknowledges) is often tangential and tenuous, it helps resolve such fundamental contradictions and antinomies as that between nature and culture, self-interest and the common good, and, more immediately, certain basic conflicts inherent in particular forms of social organization.
Thus the elements of structure have to behave purposively, working at and overcoming basic human problems.
As one follows Lévi-Strauss, or any of his leading adherents, down the misty corridors of thought, each offering access to a new and more profound level of structure, successive mysteries are revealed until, within the inner sanctum of the ‘deep structure’, we encounter ‘the human mind’(the usual translation offered by Lévi-Strauss's English supporters of his esprit humain).
As Lévi-Strauss himself acknowledges, all social phenomena can of course be said to possess or exhibit ‘structure’(i.e. some degree of orderliness and patterning), just as, with almost equal plausibility, they can be claimed to have some functional significance.
The truth is perhaps that Lévi-Strauss's conception of structure has no greater intrinsic value than Radcliffe-Brown's — although it is made to carry a vastly more elaborate analytical superstructure.
This, however, is surely not a matter for grave concern (except of course to ardent devotees) since the precise metaphysical status of the magic shibboleth is of much less interest than the insights which it has inspired.
And, as I hope to demonstrate from time to time in later chapters, it is as legitimate to utilize Lévi-Straussian notions where these seem appropriate and fruitful as it is to derive inspiration from Freud — without necessarily being a dogmatic, doctrinaire Freudian.
Much the same is true, I think, of those related and predominantly American trends variously called ‘New Ethnography’, ‘Ethnoscience’, and ‘Cognitive Anthropology’.
As the last title implies, anthropologists of this persuasion concentrate upon categories of thought and native philosophies or theories of knowledge (which they often call ‘conceptual systems’), drawing heavily upon linguistic theory and methods in an effort to achieve increasingly rigorous and exhaustive inventories of alien concepts and beliefs.
This development can only be welcomed when it inspires more scrupulous, subtle and sensitive scholarship in our description and analysis of other cultures.
This, after all is the basic aim of our subject: the translation of culture.
However, the danger evident in some of the work produced here is that, like diffusionism, it tends to examine particular cultural items without an adequate appreciation of their social context, and so may give a distorted picture of what are essentially social  phenomena.
It has been one of the traditional strengths of the structural-functional approach to explore the relationships between beliefs and the social nexus to which they belong, finding meaning not only in cultural form, but also in social content.
With this in mind, in the following chapter, I begin my account of modern social anthropology by showing what illumination this approach brings to beliefs which at first sight appear to require a great deal of explanation.
Misfortune and the Consolations of Witchcraft
Nothing distinguishes one community more sharply from another than its beliefs concerning the meaning of life, the position of men in the universe, and the ultimate significance of affliction and suffering.
We all like to pretend that unpleasant things, and especially death, do not really happen — except to others (and preferably those we dislike).
Yet when we are involved personally we are forced to acknowledge their existence and to try to understand them.
Thus the ways in which we interpret and come to terms with these unpalatable facts of life reveal our deepest and most cherished cultural assumptions.
We may begin by looking closely at religious and philosophical beliefs which, at first glance, seem particularly remote and baffling, and to many simply ridiculous.
Witchcraft beliefs provide the ideal starting point.
While such beliefs enjoy a certain vogue in fringe cults in our own contemporary society, our dominant scientific tradition has persistently dismissed them as ‘irrational’ superstition, based upon an essentially mistaken view of the world, and thus quite unintelligible, except perhaps as a confession of ignorance.
It is ironic that the present undiscriminating reverence for exotic mysticism risks misunderstanding such beliefs for the opposite reason; that of accepting them at face value uncritically and out of context.
This new attitude assumes that beliefs in occult power are solidly based in a true and more profound understanding of ultimate verities.
Few anthropologists share this optimistic view and I certainly do not believe in witchcraft.
I make this declaration because one of my aims in this discussion is to show that we do not need to share other people's beliefs in order to understand them sympathetically: we can see the sense in beliefs even when we are convinced they are based upon false premisses.
By following the functionalist approach  pioneered by Durkheim and Radcliffe-Brown, we can appreciate that the most erroneous of assumptions may yet serve as a perfectly sound basis for a coherent and logically satisfying system of beliefs.
This appreciated, we can come to terms with the initially disquieting fact that the success and persistence of an ideology is, alas, no guarantee of truth.
Its viability depends less on the final validity of its basic assumptions than upon its own internal logical coherence and appropriateness in the lives of those who acquiesce in or profess it.
Truth and logic do not always walk hand-in-hand: like the fool and his money they are easily parted.
And, as we shall see, even where they directly contradict the evidence of the senses, false beliefs may yet continue unabashed and display a quite remarkable resilience.
Every self-respecting ideology develops its own complex defence mechanisms which cunningly conceal, or paper over, the glaring discrepancies and inconsistences which inevitably arise between what ought to happen and what actually does.
The elaboration of new countermeasures as an established ideology reacts to increasing pressure has, up to a point at least, the immediate effect of shoring up its shaky foundations and further entrenching its spurious validity.
ZANDE WITCHCRAFT
We shall take witchcraft beliefs, mainly in tribal contexts, as our point of departure for a wider-ranging general discussion of tribal religions.
It should be appreciated, however, that exactly the same kind of analysis as we shall develop here could be made equally revealingly of practical, everyday communism, Christianity, the apartheid philosophy of white South Africa, l the delusions of the mentally ill, or, as Ernest Gellner so tellingly shows, contemporary linguistic philosophy.2 So while our quest to understand the mysteries of witchcraft may take us deep into the inaccessible jungles of distant continents, we shall regularly encounter disconcertingly familiar images showing how dose to home we really are.
My text here is Evans-Pritchard's unrivalled study of the witchcraft beliefs of the Zande people of the southern Sudan as he found them in the late 1920S and early 1930S living under the generally benign rule of the British raj.
Before we confront their beliefs we need to know something of their setting, but this will not take long to recount; I shall adopt the anthropologist's familiar if sometimes confusing practice of writing in the ‘ethnographic present’ tense.
In the period under discussion, the Zande number about half a million and live mainly as cultivators growing maize, sweet potatoes, ground-nuts and some fruit; the presence of tsetse fly makes it impossible to keep cattle.
Fishing, hunting, and the gathering of edible roots and berries also contribute significantly to the Zande diet.
A homestead consists typically of a man and his wife (or wives) with their children, and in addition the families of a few other close patrilineal relatives.
These small communities are usually situated close to rivers and streams, along the sides of which gardens are cleared from the bush.
Settlements are not, however, permanent since the Zande are shifting cultivators, scratching a living in one place and then, when the soil is exhausted, moving on elsewhere to open new gardens and fields.
Politically, Zande society is hierarchically organized, although their traditional empire with its constituent kingdoms and chief-doms has, naturally, been considerably affected by the imposition of European rule.
But the aristocrats of the Vongara clan who supplied all the kings and most of the chiefs retain much of their status as a ruling élite.
In the present context, however, we need only note that one of a chief's most important traditional roles is his judgment in cases of witchcraft accusations brought before him.
Here the veracity or otherwise of charges of witchcraft activity is tested by the chief's own oracle, which is credited with almost infallible powers.
2 WITCHCRAFT AND SORCERY
Before we can proceed further we have to grasp a fundamental distinction which the Zande draw between two kinds of occult power, the first of which we shall call ‘sorcery’ and the second ‘witchcraft’.
As the Zande see it, sorcerers are people who employ magical spells, rites and medicines to achieve their fell ends.
Their malevolent apparatus is tangible and external to themselves.
Witches, in contrast, do not need any of these aids; their power consists in their own innate psychic capacity to cause harm.
Their weapon is malicious thought itself, not techniques which, in principle, can be detected and observed.
Zande witches are thus very different figures from the ‘witches’ in Macbeth, who in these terms are ‘sorcerers’.
But what is the basis of their psychic malevolence?
Zande consider that this innate capacity has its seat in a distinct physical organ within the witch's stomach.
Before they were colonized the Zande regularly carried out autopsies on the dead bodies of suspected witches, to see whether their bodies revealed any trace of the deadly ‘witchcraft substance’(mangu) or essence in the small intestine.
Red eyes to the Zande are also a sign of witchcraft, and red-eyed individuals are feared and treated warily.
The propensity to engage in witchcraft is considered to be hereditary, passing from father to son and mother to daughter.
Zande thus believe this power to be sex-linked and consider that it increases with age: children may be capable of bewitching, but the power is weakly developed in them; in mature adults it is more strongly realized.
Finally, in addition to sorcerers and witches proper, Zande also recognize a related if less dangerous category of malevolent people whom they refer to as ‘gall-bladder men’.
These are bad-tempered, ill-disposed characters with the touchy disposition we imply by the word ‘liverish’.
This distinction between witchcraft and sorcery (which, incidentally, is seldom drawn so sharply by other peoples) is neatly paralleled in the contrasting effects which Zande assume each to possess.
Sorcery is considered the more deadly force; appropriately it is an upper-class phenomenon which affects persons of quality but is not employed between commoners.
Witchcraft in contrast  is thoroughly plebeian: princes and chiefs are neither accused of it nor attacked by it.
Hence Zande conceptions of mystical malevolence mirror their hierarchical structure: other aspects of the social system are reflected in the fact that witchcraft is never suspected between closely related kinsmen.
And — to us this comes as a surprise — witches are as likely to be men as women.
Here at least sexual equality (of a kind) reigns.
We shall return later to the problem of discovering who bewitches whom.
WHAT DOES WITCHCRAFT DO?
First we must ask what are the things that witchcraft and sorcery are believed to bring about.
The answer is virtually every conceivable misfortune and illness.
If your crops fail, or grow much less prolifically than your neighbour's, then it is due to witchcraft.
If you have bad luck in the chase, if your wife is persistently flighty and difficult, if a chief favours your rival and ignores your requests for attention, then the cause is or may be witchcraft.
If your children are stricken with a serious disease, if you or your wife fall ill, then again you suspect witchcraft.
Even death is viewed by the Zande as the result of witchcraft.
The Zande in effect maintain the pretence that people should never die; mortality, which they lament, they ascribe to witchcraft.
This reluctance to accept death as a ‘natural’ and inevitable stage in the cycle of life recalls the doctrine set forth in the Old Testament and enshrined in orthodox Christian teaching.
As St Augustine maintained, man's original state knew neither evil nor death: God did not create death, which was consequently contrary to the ‘Laws of Nature’.
Despite this interesting parallel with our own cultural heritage, the emphasis and indeed the trust which the Zande appear to place in witchcraft as a prime mover seems bizarre and even absurd.
Faced with such apparently perverse ways of thinking it is easy to conclude that they cannot possibly reason as we reason.
For if they are so obsessed with witchcraft and sorcery, how can they possibly also comprehend those empirical chains of cause and effect which we take for granted and employ as the touchstone of rationality?
Must we then conclude that the Zande are in these  terms irrational, incapable of rational, cause-and-effect reasoning?
The answer is emphatically no, for when they want to, the Zande are as down-to-earth and pedestrianly matter-of-fact as we think we are.
Are we then to assume that the Zande and other people with similar beliefs in occult power are virtually schizophrenics, with their minds split between two irreconcilable ways of comprehending the world?
Again the answer is certainly no.
As is so often the case, the source of our difficulties is not what we are discussing but how we are discussing it: it is we, not the Zande, who are at fault.
For as closer inspection shows, the significant thing is that common sense and the mystical are invoked by the Zande at different levels of interpretation.
They explain different things, or different parts of the same thing, and can thus coexist without creating deep conflicts in those who employ them with admirable discrimination and precision.
In fact as we shall see, witchcraft (or sorcery) is generally invoked to explain why misfortunes befall particular victims, whereas how they occur is explained and understood in the prosaic matter-of-fact fashion we think of as being empirically true.
Take a typical illustration.
If a man walking through the forest barks his shin on a tree stump this is caused not by witchcraft, but by carelessness.
People should look where they are going.
Suppose, however, that the superficial injury swells up and develops into an incapacitating leg wound.
Such an unpleasant and unanticipated development radically changes the situation, and further and more profound explanations are clearly called for.
Similarly, a bad workman cannot blame witchcraft for his poor craftsmanship.
If an ill-designed and poorly constructed house collapses, how can you expect otherwise?
If a canoe capsizes or sinks because it was manifestly badly built then no further explanations are required.
The Zande do not expect things to work unless they are properly made.
Yet when some well tried and normally successful technique fails, then clearly something is wrong, and you suspect witchcraft.
An expert potter who sedulously observes all the taboos of his trade may find that a whole batch of carefully turned pots crack in firing.
If his materials and workmanship were of their normal high standard, he is entitled to some explanation for this unexpected outcome.
From these examples it will begin to be apparent that witchcraft is invoked as a causal explanation of irregularities .
It can also be seen that it provides a deeper cause than that supplied by ordinary, everyday reasoning.
Further light on Zande explanation is provided by their reaction to suicide.
Zande say that a suicide takes his own life ‘because he is bewitched’: ‘witchcraft’ killed him.
But if you ask how the dead person died, Zande will explain the cause of death in terms (say) of hanging: hanging ‘caused’ his death.
If it is then asked what drove him to this desperate end, Zande will refer you to the particular tensions and stresses of his life.
It may be that he had quarrelled bitterly with his kin and could see no remedy for his plight.
Here, of course, Zande are reasoning as we reason.
In general, however, we would stop at this point and accept as an explanation that he killed himself because he found his personal circumstances intolerable and sought to escape from them.
Zande, in contrast, do not stop here: there is still the question why, in all these circumstances, the suicide took his own life.
People, after all, are often involved in disputes and difficulties with their relatives, but only a minority commit suicide.
Thus where we might add that he killed himself while the balance of his mind was disturbed, Zande would say he did so because he was bewitched.
Hence Zande and other peoples with a similar witchcraft philosophy invoke the notion of witchcraft to explain why particular abnormal events occur to specific individuals.
Their understanding of how they happen is the same as ours.
Yet for them a description of the full circumstances of a misfortune or disaster is not sufficient in itself.
There remains the more fundamental question of why it should befall a particular person at a particular time and place.
This is something which we can only discuss vaguely in terms of chance and probabilities, or if we believe in divine determinism dismiss fatalistically as God's will.
The Zande, however, are more honest and uncompromising: they do not dodge the issue since they maintain that accidents never happen.
If a Zande is severely wounded by a wild animal while he is out hunting, Zande will say that his injuries are the direct result of the animal's attack.
But they hold it is witchcraft which singled out this particular victim for attack and made him the target of  the animal's assault.
They even describe this ‘final cause’(or, if you prefer, ‘last straw’) action of witchcraft in terms of a vivid hunting metaphor.
Witchcraft, they say, is the ‘second spear’.
What they have in mind here is the common situation that, while hunting, the quarry is first wounded by one hunter's spear but ultimately brought down by another spear thrown by a second huntsman.
Here then is an explicit recognition of multiple or plural causation, with witchcraft (or sorcery) playing a final, and decisive, part.
Let us not forget, however, that witchcraft is by no means the excuse for all mistakes and misadventures.
Certain things can never be blamed on or explained in terms of witchcraft.
Lying is never due to witchcraft, nor can it excuse adultery; a thief cannot plead in mitigation that he was bewitched, for witchcraft is not recognized as a cause of theft.
And although, as we have seen, witchcraft may be a cause of death, it is not the only one.
In fact it does not enter the picture at all in those cases where people die as a result of deliberate assault or murder.
Witchcraft thus cannot be easily applied to circumvent or violate customary norms of behaviour.
On the contrary, it works within the framework of the Zande legal code and studiously observes all its provisions and prescriptions.
At the same time, it is not alone in the field: there are alternative mystical explanations of misfortune.
Sickness may be considered to be a punishment inflicted for neglect of certain taboos.
The Zande, in common with many other African peoples, believe leprosy is due to incest.
Ancestral spirits also exercise a shadowy effect, punishing those who fail to pay them the requisite respect.
The presence of these additional mystical agencies complements the non-mystical causes already examined and thus expands the range of explanation.
So, far from being obsessed by witchcraft and sorcery as the causes of every unkind stroke of fortune, the truth is that Zande recognize many overlapping and reinforcing causal agencies.
This luxuriant multiplicity means, of course, that different parties will explain the same events differently according to their selective, subjective view of the situation.
What I and my friends put down to evil witchcraft, my enemies are likely to attribute to incompetence  or bad management.
A good illustration, increasingly common in contemporary Africa, concerns success and failure in examinations.
Those who fail or do poorly in an examination, or some other competitive test, find consolation in the wiles of witchcraft.
They have not been permitted to show their true ability because of the malignant witchcraft of their rivals.
The latter, naturally, are unlikely to accept this interpretation of the results; they have little sympathy for those who have performed badly due to their inherent lack of ability or inadequate preparation.
In this context the situation which arises when a person dies is very instructive.
It will be recalled that except in cases of manifest homicide, death in general is attributed to witchcraft.
But British administration made it impossible to charge someone openly with killing another by witchcraft.
Witchcraft was no longer a recognized cause of death since the British authorities considered such beliefs as absurd as they were uncivilized.
The Zande found this very perplexing and assumed, perfectly logically, that by suppressing sanctions against witches, the British were inevitably condoning and even promoting witchcraft activities!
So they had to resort to indirect tactics.
These usually consist of ‘vengeance-magic’ against the suspected, but unchargeable witch.
Such counter-magic is carried out clandestinely.
The only public sign that magical vengeance has been successfully practised against a suspected witch-murderer is the cessation of mourning by the family of the original victim.
All these accusations, rebuttals and counter-accusations are largely covert and known in detail only to the prince or chief whose judicial oracle confirms or refutes all witchcraft-murder accusations; hence the same death appears in different guises to the various parties concerned.
When, for instance, someone in our family dies, we assume that our bereavement is due to witchcraft.
Others, however, assume the reverse.
For them the death in our family is the result of their successful and fully justified vengeance-magic in return for an earlier killing in their family.
So one killing, mystically interpreted either as the result of witchcraft, or of its antithesis vengeance-magic, cancels another and the slate is wiped clean.
Clearly everything depends upon the point of view that is adopted, and upon rival interpretations of the same events.
Zande  conceptions are sufficiently flexible to permit the selection of explanations according to one's position and interests.
Contradictions which might seem likely to undermine the system have often the reverse effect.
Consider the following sequence of events.
A dies and his next-of-kin begin practising vengeance-magic against a number of suspects one of whom is B. B eventually dies, to the gratification of A's family, who regard his demise as a judgment.
Not long after, however, they hear that the late B's family have stopped mourning.
This shows that B's family consider that their vengeance-magic has in turn successfully accomplished its object.
This assumes, of course, that B's death was not the consequence of A's vengeance-magic and that B was not a witch but the innocent victim of someone else's witchcraft.
In these circumstances A's party resolves the conflicting information at its disposal by concluding that B's family are simply bluffing to hide their guilt.
Evidence which could potentially threaten the whole system of beliefs in the efficacy of witchcraft is thus reinterpreted in consonance with the basic premisses which it challenges.
DETECTING THE WITCH
We now return to the specific issue of how the victim of misfortune sets about discovering the malevolent author of his distress.
As one would expect, the Zande have many different oracular and divinatory techniques for detecting witches; only two of these will be considered here.
The first is the seance with the ‘witch-doctor’, a magician, part of whose practice is detecting witches and providing vengeance-magic for the recently bereaved.
From this perspective, the witch-doctor is clearly on the side of the angels and his business is highly legitimate.
But there is a darker aspect for he is liable to be suspected of misusing his magical powers as a sorcerer or purveyor of evil spells and potions.
We shall return to this point later.
In his socially approved role as witch-finder, the witch-doctor receives clients, listens carefully to their problems and in the divining sessions points to their probable origin.
Good, that is to say successful, witch-doctors possess a well-informed knowledge of local gossip.
This helps them to respond sensitively to their clients' suggestions and to furnish a diagnosis and accusation of guilt which is highly acceptable to the victim.
A guessing game goes on with the diviner responding to the client's cues so that at the end of the consultation, the client departs with all his worst suspicions amply confirmed.
Although this type of divination is clearly readily subject to manipulation, Zande are naturally disinclined to admit this; they regard it as a mystical process on a par with other oracular procedures where human bias is less obvious.
The second and most important divining technique involves an oracular substance (benge ) which is credited by the Zande with possessing the power of distinguishing between contrary propositions and thus solving human dilemmas.
It is a powerful alkaloidal poison, but the Zande do not see it as an ordinary poison but as an autonomous mystical power capable of issuing decisions which are taken very seriously indeed.
The oracle is employed by administering standard doses of benge to a live chicken.
The client then addresses the oracle: ‘Oracle if such is the case, kill the chicken’.
And in confirmation with a further chicken, ‘Oracle if such is the case, spare the fowl’, or vice versa.
Verdicts are thus delivered by the mystical substance benge on the propositions which the client formulates to test his suspicions.
If the outcome of this simple test with two chickens is not satisfactory, the questioner can resort to further tests with other fowls and doses of benge on a ‘best out of three’ principle or some other convenient formula.
Vacillating individuals, requiring constant reassurance, would evidently need a large supply of chickens and of the benge oracular material.
As Evans-Pritchard explains, ‘in every Zande household there is a fowlhouse, and fowls are kept mainly with the object of subjecting them to oracular tests.
As a rule they are only killed for food (and then only cocks or old hens) when an important visitor comes to the homestead, perhaps a prince's son or perhaps a father-in-law.
Eggs are not eaten but are left to hens to hatch out.’
Since the Zande distinguish benge from ‘ordinary’ poisons and  regard it as a mystical truth-drug, Evans-Pritchard maintains that those who employ it as an oracle do not manipulate it deliberately.
Nevertheless, there does seem to be ample latitude in determining how many tests will be conclusive in a given case.
And even if this does not enable the desired result to be obtained convincingly, there are further possible ploys which are readily available.
If, for instance, later events show an oracular verdict to have been wrong, those concerned may take the view that the original judgment was false because the oracle itself was bewitched!
False prediction may also be attributed to the client's failure to observe taboos or other procedural shortcomings in the conduct of the oracular ritual.
In the same fashion, if the witch-doctor offers advice which turns out to be wrong, you write him off as a quack and change your doctor.
You do not condemn the whole of his profession, nor question the validity of the underlying mystical assumptions upon which it is based.
After all, when our western doctor's diagnosis or treatment turns out to be ineffective we may regard him as a useless quack, but we do not also conclude that the entire system of medical science is erroneous.
So in the Zande system, even when things do not turn out as they should, the ultimate effect is a reinforcement of faith in the efficacy of mystical power.
Yet we must not get their faith in witchcraft and magic out of proportion.
Zande also freely recognize non-mystical causation and can be breezily matter-of-fact when they choose.
However attractive its revamped image may appear to those disillusioned by the inadequacies of western scientific rationalism, the stereotype of the totally mystical tribesman remains as misleading and inaccurate as ever.
Particularly in the early stages of field-work, the anthropologist is often much more naive than the people he studies.
It is not uncommon, for example, for anthropologists, noting meat and other sacrificial offerings placed before the gods, to ask, somewhat incredulously but with appropriate reverence: ‘And will the gods come and eat the food you have prepared?’
Of course, the stock answer such questions receive is: ‘You must be joking.
The gods are not like men.
They do not eat food as we do; they only consume the essence.
How stupid you anthropologists are!’
To drive this point home, let us leave the Zande for a moment and consider the following experience of a research student working in the Cameroon Republic.
Penny Wright (to whom I am indebted for this story) was attending a healing ceremony which involved the temporary burial alive of the patient in this case a child.
After several hours of interment and long and complicated ritual preparations, a series of oracular tests was performed to discover whether it was time to open up the ritual grave and recover the cured patient.
Receiving a positive answer, the covering was hastily removed and the ritual experts and relatives of the child anxiously pressed forward, peering into the pit to see how the child was.
Suddenly at this culmination point in the healing rite, the whole assembly became unaccountably convulsed with mirth, and the puzzled anthropologist, note-book at the ready, pushed her way forward to the front of the crowd.
As she soon discovered, the explanation for this unseemly merriment was that when the priest directing the operations had solemnly inquired how the sick patient was, the child had irreverently blurted out: ‘I am bursting, let me out, I want to pee.’
We must now consider the procedures followed by the Zande once a witch has been detected.
Having divined the source of his miseries, the bewitched victim reports to the chief's court, where he submits his accusation for verification by the chief's own oracle.
If the accusation receive official confirmation, a messenger is sent to confront the witch and to ask him with all due civility to cease his evil influence.
The standard reaction when you receive such charges is to draw yourself up in a dignified manner and disclaim all knowledge of the dastardly deed.
This is done politely, and you are careful to add that if anything unfortunate has happened, it was certainly not deliberate, and you wish the sick person a speedy recovery.
Here we encounter the intriguing problem of how much witchcraft is considered by the Zande to be a conscious or unconscious process.
In general the Zande stoutly maintain that  witches are conscious agents.
Yet Evans-Pritchard records that he never met a Zande who admitted to practising witchcraft, although when pressed Zande might acknowledge that witchcraft substance could act on its own account, perhaps even against the conscious intentions of the person concerned.
Evans-Pritchard's conclusions, which his data amply confirm, is, as might be anticipated, that the Zande are inconsistent in evaluating intention or volition in acts of witchcraft.
While the accuser asserts that deliberate malice is involved, the accused protests his innocence, politely but firmly disclaiming any malevolent intentions.
THE NEXUS OF MISFORTUNE AND CONFLICT
Why all this politeness?
All the parties are in close and fairly intimate contact and there is no point in gratuitously annoying and antagonizing people — especially since the oracles may have made a mistake.
Now we reach the really interesting question: who are Zande witches?
The answer is potentially everyone, but more particularly your neighbours, friends, and acquaintances anybody with whom you have dealings, and especially those you envy because of their success, or fear because of your good fortune.
If you are a commoner they will not be among the nobility, since you cannot hope to compete with them, nor will they be people living far away with whom you have no dealings.
Unlike many other peoples, the Zande are refreshingly direct in their witchcraft.
They accuse as witches those whom they hate and fear, and they do not readily accept substitutes.
Here Zande clearly exemplify the principle, enunciated by Tacitus and endlessly repeated by modern psychiatrists, that it is a basic characteristic of the human mind to hate the man you have injured.
So it is evident that witchcraft (or sorcery) is a particular cultural conceptualization of envy and guilt: these are the emotions which it expresses and upon which it feeds.
In common with these base emotions it receives general condemnation as an anti-social force which, by its very nature, is inherently immoral and despicable.
Those who practise witchcraft are, by definition, in the wrong: if they had right on their side they would hardly need to descend to such mean tricks as witchcraft.
It also follows that witchcraft regularly appears in disputes which are outside the law.
These typically concern matters which are either too petty to receive formal legal treatment, or too involved to be brought to court.
They may, however, follow court cases when the unsuccessful party seeks to redeem his position by recourse to these extra-legal (and illegal) processes.
There is thus clearly a close relationship between witchcraft (or sorcery) accusations, and aggression and social tensions.
One of the most unambiguous demonstrations of this comes from New Guinea where the virtual abolition of tribal warfare achieved by relatively recent European rule has been accompanied by a marked increase in the incidence of sorcery accusations.
Amongst the Zande, as we have seen, such disputes take place between neighbours who share many common interests but are nevertheless in frequent competition.
And for a succinct description of that social nexus that fits the Zande like a glove we can go, for a change, to sixteenth-century Essex.
The Puritan Elizabethan clergyman, George Gifford,’ had this to say on the typical witchcraft setting:
Some woman doth fall out bitterly with her neighbour; there followeth some great hurt….
There is suspicion conceived.
Within few years after she is in jar with another.
He is also plagued.
This is noted of all.
Great fame is spread of the matter.
Mother W is a witch…well, Mother W doth begin to be very odious and terrible unto many, her neighbours dare say nothing but yet in their hearts wish she were hanged.
Shortly after another falleth sick and doth pine….
The neighbours come to visit him.
Well neighbour, saith one, do ye not suspect some naughty dealing; did ye never anger Mother W?
This brilliantly condensed vignette reveals clearly who is being attacked.
The real victim, the actual target among the Zande and usually elsewhere also, is not the supposedly bewitched subject, but the accused witch (or sorcerer).
This, after all, we ourselves acknowledge in our own world when we speak of ‘witch-hunts’ against communists in America, or counter-revolutionary capitalists in socialist states.
And although we have generally ceased to  believe directly in witchcraft, the irrational charges levelled against coloured immigrants in Britain smack strongly of the witchcraft accusation.
Certainly they impute to the accused a degree of mystical malevolence just like that implied in witchcraft charges.
Since, moreover, witchcraft is inherently immoral and the witch is the epitome of evil, what better method could possibly be devised to discredit rivals and enemies?
The accusation which expresses the righteous moral indignation of the accuser immediately puts the accused in the wrong; and that is especially satisfying when you want a scapegoat to blame, or when you wish to gain an advantage over an enemy.
Further, since witchcraft represents a wanton defiance of commonly accepted standards of decency and propriety, the fear of being so accused tends to exert a constraining effect.
It is dangerous to be too conspicuously successful, or to step out of line.
Now the witch naturally takes his form and character from the society which conceives him.
Thus he attacks what people at a given time and place hold in highest esteem, and people's fears of witchcraft correspondingly reveal their deep-seated cultural preoccupations.
So leaving the Zande again and moving back to our own cultural tradition at the time of St Augustine of Hippo (354–430), we find the public orators and professors of late antiquity understandably fearful lest their memories might be stolen by witches.
Memory-snatching was in these august circles a supposedly favourite trick of witches.
In Elizabethan England, it is recorded that the vicar of Brenchley in Kent who kept losing his voice during services blamed this on the malicious witchcraft of one of his parishioners.
Unsympathetic members of the congregation remained unimpressed, however; they maintained that the source of the vicar's problems was the French pox!
More generally in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century England and Europe, children, livestock, milk and crops were believed to be vulnerable to the witchcraft of jealous neighbours.
Witches were also particularly  threatening to fertility and sexual potency.
Those every day things which are at once most vulnerable and most valued are most readily menaced by that satanic subverter of brotherly love and good-neighbourliness — the witch or sorcerer.
Witchcraft conceptions represent, as Monica Wilson has neatly expressed it, the ‘standardized nightmares’ of the community, the horrifying spectre of what it most fears and dreads, the sinister antithesis of all its hopes and expectations.
Hence as the enemy of society the witch comes to be viewed as the embodiment of all those dark forces which threaten cooperation, group cohesion, and the entire moral order.
Blending indissolubly with the untamed forces of hostile nature, the witch becomes the vicious foe of everything that society approves.
In this symbolism every virtue finds its corresponding vice.
Fraternal loving-kindness runs rancid in obscene incest.
The bonds of brotherhood are treacherously betrayed by ungovernable selfishness and egotism.
The cult of the ancestors is grotesquely desecrated by satanic, cannibalistic orgies at their shrines.
Like a dreaded vampire, the witch feeds illicitly on the blood of its unsuspecting prey, the good citizens who go about their daily tasks with cheerfulness and open-heartedness.
Frequently, the witch or sorcerer inflicts his final coup de grâce by tearing out his victim's heart and ravenously feasting on it.
Imagine then what Africans in South Africa must think of the miraculous transplant surgery of Dr Christian Barnard!
For them Dr Barnard's achievements are like prophesies fulfilled.
Modern technology and international publicity and acclaim simply confirm one of the oldest and most widely-distributed suspicions on the African continent, that the foreign usurper lives literally, as well as metaphorically, by sucking the life-blood of his black subjects.
In this context the remarks of a wise old West African (Bangwa) witch-doctor, comparing witchcraft and modem science, seem eminently appropriate.
The ever-present anthropologist to whom we owe this quotation (Penny Wright) was told: ‘Just as native doctors here meet in the witch bush to find new medicines, scientists in your place meet in their witch bush to invent new things.
They all sit together with their ‘tigers’.’
OTHER AGENCIES OF MYSTICAL ATTACK
We can now appreciate how accusations of witchcraft or sorcery establish a satisfyingly significant linkage between misfortune and enmity.
As Evans-Pritchard succinctly sums it up for the Zande: ‘Every misfortune supposes witchcraft, and every enmity suggests its author’.
When we blame our ills upon someone we call a ‘witch’ we proclaim our own innocence at their expense.
We appeal to all good men and true to rally to us and vent our outrage against the object of our fully justified indignation.
So, in effect, we turn adversity to profit: we parade our infirmities and at the same time make quite sure that someone else suffers also.
Witchcraft and sorcery, which in any case few other cultures distinguish as sharply as the Zande, are not the only mystical responses to the experience of affliction in tense relationships.
A less drastic course than either (or their more common hybrid form) and one preferred in certain contexts in many cultures, is to blame the injury sustained on a puckish nature-spirit or demon.
Again the victim of affliction protests his own innocence, but in this case at the expense of a mischievous spirit rather than of a person.
Such afflictions typically assume the form of ‘spirit-possession’, where the victim's illness is diagnosed as a form of bodily intrusion and possession by the disease-bearing spirit.
Here spirits are credited with acting like pathogenic microbes which directly assail the human body and threaten its health by sapping its vitality and energy.
(An alternative though sometimes coterminous interpretation is in terms of‘soul-loss’.
According to this theory of disease, which is strongly held in many societies, virtue, as it were, drains away from the stricken victim and his powers and health fail accordingly.
Normal health can only be restored by recovering and replacing the missing organs or essence which have been abstracted.)
Spiritual afflictions of this kind are notoriously prevalent amongst women.
So, for example, among the Muslim Somali of north-east Africa, married women are frequently prone to mysterious complaints which are diagnosed by the experts as possession by evil spirits.
These latter are exceedingly demanding; treatment consists of discovering their requirements and agreeing to  them on condition that the human victim is released from their power.
It is a striking fact, by no means lost on the men who have to pay for them, that the spirits which so plague their womenfolk have expensive tastes and invariably request such items as costly perfumes, jewellery, fine dresses, and delicious foods and sweetmeats.
So the therapy really consists in spoiling the patient, while ostensibly meeting the demands of the spirit as revealed to the expert therapist.
During treatment, the possessing spirit often communicates its demands by making the patient ‘speak with tongues’.
And although the spirit may have promised to remove its baneful influence once its requirements are met, relapses are very common.
Indeed, it is not so much that the invading spirit is definitively exorcized from its human host, as that the host learns to live with her familiar who may make his presence felt whenever his mistress is in difficulties.
Thus some women, especially and significantly those who have difficult relationships with men, find themselves drawn into membership of clandestine women's groups which meet from time to time to honour their spirits.
Here possession has been transformed from an undesired, unsolicited illness into an ecstatic religious experience, and the most committed enthusiasts are considered to be ‘married’ to their spirits who ‘ride’or ‘mount’their human hosts.
Such celestial unions may compete with their earthly counterparts, and the idea that the spirits should sexually possess their devotees is by no means excluded.
Spiritual congress of this kind is, in fact, found all over the world and throughout history — as the biographies of famous Christian and other mystics confirm and occurs more often than is generally supposed in our own contemporary Western world.
This erotic association, frequently strengthened by the most militant cult leaders being free-living divorcees and prostitutes, confirms men's worst suspicions and prejudices about what their wives are really up to.
Certainly it contrasts with the picture the women paint, in which the cult is an innocent healing rite designed to rehabilitate sick wives and thus enables them to resume their wifely roles with renewed energy and zest.
It is consequently scarcely surprising that Somali men tend to be very ambivalent in their attitudes towards these women's ailments, especially  since some impatient husbands find that the best cure is often a good beating!
But, at the same time, they also believe in the reality of these demons which their Muslim faith recognizes and explicitly describes in the Koran.
The spirits, for their part, are said not to like men.
Why should women resort to such devious tactics?
The reason is, I think, partly that in this particular society men rule the roost and women have a low status and few rights they can directly exercise.
Divorce is common and easily obtained by men: women can only achieve it with difficulty.
So with the legal dice against them, women are forced to adopt such oblique means of redress and appeal as possession ‘illnesses’.
Through the effects which it exerts on men, spirit-possession is in fact one of the most prized and successful weapons at the disposal of Somali women.
The element of feminist protest which can be discerned here is even more obvious in a kindred possession illness affecting women in the smart suburbs of Khartoum, capital of the Sudan.
Here, exactly as amongst the Somali, possessed wives — or at least their spirits — regularly demand gifts from their domineering husbands including, sometimes, costly gold teeth.
When they become possessed by their spirits, these demure, purdah-confined ladies undergo a remarkable change.
Their possessing familiars are sharp-tongued vipers which berate the women's husbands in a fashion that no self-respecting man could tolerate directly from his wife.
These are two examples of women in traditionally male-dominated societies using an indirect form of mystical attack.
The possessed woman, like her bewitched counterpart, becomes the immediate centre of attention and care, and although she exerts pressure upon her spouse the latter is not assailed as radically as he would be were he accused of being a witch.
It is one thing for a man to yield to his wife under pressure from a spirit, and quite another to be declared a witch.
The point to make here, then, is that possession of this sort, which is very common in many societies, embodies the spirit of protest; those who ‘speak in tongues’ regularly adopt an appropriately shrill commanding tone.
This aspect of these cults is well illustrated in the classic nineteenth-century Fijian manifestation of flower power known  beguilingly as the ‘Water Baby Cult’.
There, in the early days of contact with whites, young men and minor chiefs excluded from positions of authority in the traditional establishment were suddenly and unaccountably seized by capricious water-spirits.
They were thus inspired to assume flower names, and attracted a great deal of attention and interest — precisely, in fact, what they had previously been denied.
This example conveniently makes the point that it is not only women who are vulnerable to the attentions of these rebellious spirits.
Socially disadvantaged men are also prone to similar afflictions; and in some cases, with a commendable absence of male chauvinism, both sexes of a depressed class or group may be equally at risk.
Thus in caste-bound India the role of spirit-inspired priest or ‘shaman’, the onset of which is announced by a possession ‘illness’, is a career enabling low caste men to climb to positions of eminence and power.
In this vein, Gerald Berreman recounts the poignant success story of Kalmu, the blacksmith's son, whom he first encountered in 1958 as a thirteen-year-old drop-out from the village school.
After a youthful marriage ended tragically with the death of his wife and two children, the grief-stricken Kalmu began to behave bizarrely and showed signs of being possessed by a powerful local deity.
The deity speaking through this humble medium commanded sufficient authority to mobilize the local people into building a new temple for the god and a house for his servant.
So Kalmu was launched on a highly successful career as a shamanistic seer and miracle-worker which enabled him to acquire both wealth and power and hence to compensate very effectively for the severe disabilities under which he laboured on account of his low caste origins.
To illustrate how the inequalities which underlie such possession afflictions are always and necessarily relative (rather than absolute), we may end this short list of examples by referring to the Santeria cult currently popular amongst Cuban refugees in mainland America.
Despite their often middle-class origins, these uprooted opponents of Fidel Castro, who have never gained the support they anticipated would enable them to return in triumph  to their native land, find consolation in the arms of the Santeria spirits, which are of partly African origin.
Indeed, so successful and all-pervasive is this new syncretic religion amongst the refugee Cuban community that a widely ramifying economic ‘support-structure’ has mushroomed up in its wake.
In Miami alone there are reported to be more than fifty botanicas — shops selling all the necessities of the cult — and there are also pet-shops specializing in the doves, chickens and peacocks which devotees require for the rituals.
Such spiritual afflictions, then, are to be found in circumstances where other secular means of ventilating grievances or pursuing vital interests are blocked, or very restricted.
In some circumstances both possession illnesses and witchcraft and sorcery accusations afford a protest which falls short of actually severing the relationships causing the cramping pressures.
As has been indicated above, it seems possible to distinguish between these two aggressive strategies in terms of their relative severity.
The possession attack seems on the whole to be a milder and less radically challenging assault than that conveyed by charges of witchcraft or sorcery.
In a number of cultures where both mystical strategies are available we find that social inferiors employ possession against superiors whose ultimate authority they grudgingly accept, whereas witchcraft (or sorcery) accusations are reserved for challenging unacceptable authority.
Hence the mystical angles of the polygynous family triangle may assume the following shape: co-wives accuse each other of witchcraft, but do not accuse their husband.
In their competitive interaction with their common spouse, they bid for affection and attention through the appealing medium of bouts of possession.
Witchcraft and sorcery accusations, then, are often selected as the most effective and appropriate means of destroying relationships and discrediting rivals in a thoroughly nasty way.
In many central African societies indeed, accusations of witchcraft (or sorcery) provide the normal and expected accompaniment to the break-up and dissolution of previously united kinship groups.
Families too big to be happy, and whose continued existence as single units cramps ambitious junior members, fall apart with a rancorous outburst of witchcraft charges.
So, in effect, such accusations of mystical malevolence may help to ‘blast away’ redundant or obsolete links in the social structure of a community, thus paving the way for healthy new growth.
From this demolition-perspective we see that, paradoxically, witchcraft can play the maverick, exerting radical as well as conservative effects.
Sometimes the accusers are not diehard reactionaries defending the existing order, but radical innovators seeking to change it.
This, indeed, seems to be the dominant pattern in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century rural England, where the anonymous charity provided by the new poor laws represented a serious attenuation and curtailment of older sentiments of communal loyalty.
The typical witch was now the poor neighbour, begging food and drink from people who had once been willing to acknowledge these claims, but did so no longer.
In the new context, these were quite out of keeping with the times, for the poor had to change as well as everyone else.
Charity did really begin at home and should stay there, with, moreover, an appropriately restricted definition of what was ‘home’ and what was not!
So those who persistently demanded succour when they were no longer entitled to it and irritatingly pricked the conscience of the rich were particularly apt for denunciation as witches.
In this period charges of witchcraft involving satanic pacts with the devil were freely employed by politicians to explain the otherwise puzzling success of their opponents.
Cardinal Wolsey, like Anne Boleyn, was thus supposed to have bewitched Henry VIII, and Oliver Cromwell was accused by his enemies of being in league with the devil on the eve of the battle of Worcester which he won.
At the time of the Great Rebellion, the Calvinists believed firmly in the power of witchcraft, while the Catholic Royalists opposed the witchcraft persecutions.
The Great Rebellion can be regarded in part as an anti-witchcraft movement, like those which sweep through traditional African societies in a utopian quest for a new world cleansed of sin and hatred.
Witchcraft is often found hovering round the figure of the apocalypse.
These cursory snippets frown past, for that alas is all there is space for here, at least show how the contemporary anthropological understanding of witchcraft throws new and (at least in some quarters) welcome light on what were until recently unusually dark and baffling corners of our history.
Our ‘witchcrazed’ ancestors, as so many of the older school of historians are apt to paint them, were of course no more crazy and no more mystical than the Zande — nor were they any less rational.
It is a cardinal error, and one to which intellectual historians are especially prone, to suppose that people can only think in terms of one set of assumptions.
True some modes of thought are in certain circumstances and periods dominant over others; they may even hold the envied status of an official orthodoxy.
But none are so pervasive, nor so completely satisfactory, that they rule out the need for other lines of explanation.
In a later chapter I refer to the modern notions of witchcraft and satanism which receive such wide publicity today.
The Natural Order
HONOURING THE DEAD
In the previous chapter I deliberately held open the question whether Zande witchcraft should be classified as ‘religion’ or as something different.
This is an issue which we must now confront by considering what range of mystical activity the term religion includes and where its outer limits lie.
We can usefully begin our discussion here by taking up a very important and characteristic religious theme: the ambiguity or ambivalence which is so often such a striking feature of mystical power.
Take Zande magic for example.
In itself it is neutral — neither good nor bad.
It acquires a moral value according to the use made of it.
Thus vengeance-magic launched against witches is a perfectly legitimate and morally acceptable course of action; but recourse to similar magical practices directed against honest, upright members of the community is bad and is in fact sorcery.
It is the ends not the means which are decisive here.
This ambiguity comes out very nicely in a different way in the case of the religious concepts and behaviour of an East African people called the Lugbara, who live in Uganda.
These tribesmen have traditionally an uncentralized political organization in which the most significant positions are held by elders heading small locally-based clusters of agnatic kin.
Such units, consisting of a few closely related families, contain between a dozen and sixty individuals who live together and cultivate under the direction of their elder, whose chief responsibility is the allocation and control of arable land.
The elder's secular authority is very significantly reinforced by his monopolistic control of the relations between men and the ancestors.
He is the custodian of the shrines at which offerings are made to the ancestors of the group which he leads.
As the guardians of customary morality, the ancestors judiciously  appraise the actions of their descendants, punishing any who commit such ‘sins’ as flouting the elder's authority or threatening the harmony of the group over which he presides.
Such sinful deeds include disrespectful behaviour towards an elder, fratricide, incest, and — naturally — impious neglect of the ancestors themselves.
For these and other misdemeanours the ancestors are apt to inflict crushingly punitive illnesses and misfortunes.
Hence, as in so many other traditional cultures, the victims of affliction are thus revealed as criminals; in contrast to the situation in Samuel Butler's allegorical novel Erewhon , it is not so much that sickness in itself is a crime as that it is a symptom and consequence of criminal activity.
The underlying moral assumption is the smug conviction that the good and just prosper because they so deserve: lack of success is proof of immorality — there are no deserving poor!
This callous view of suffering which smacks strongly of the protestant ethic (epitomized in the complacent exhortation: God helps those who help themselves) has a very familiar ring and is clearly seen today in the attitudes towards the mentally ill held by all but the most enlightened members of western societies.
Here then, amongst the Lugbara, we see a thoroughly moralistic creed, based upon and administered by ancestor spirits, and applied for and to the benefit of the village elders.
The ancestors rarely act on their own initiative: generally these avenging angels of justice are invoked by the local elder.
Typically, it is in response to his self-righteous complaints about the failings of his local flock that the ancestors spring to his defence.
Indeed one of the most compelling demonstrations of the elder's power is his claim to have called down ancestral affliction upon a morally negligent member of his community.
What the elder thus proclaims is that he has a ‘hotline’ to the ancestors, that they are on his side and, in effect, do his bidding.
As the ancestor spirits are such realistic replicas of living elders it is perhaps not surprising that they should work in such close and harmonious collaboration.
Certainly we see here a very close relationship, of the kind envisaged by Durkheim, between society on the one hand and religion on the other.
The religious or mystical order clearly supports the secular establishment, rather than opposing it as in some of the spirit possession cults we reviewed in the previous chapter.
That at least is the static picture.
Now let us assume a more dynamic perspective and consider how this religion actually works over time in different phases of the life-cycle of the local group.
Like their individual members, these tiny political units exhibit a cycle of birth, growth, and decay.
As a group swells in size with natural increase of population and with new members joining it from outside, it eventually reaches a point where it ceases to enjoy an optimum exploitative relationship with its physical and economic resources.
It becomes too big and unwieldy and no longer possesses sufficient land to satisfy the needs of all.
Initially nothing succeeds like success: but eventually success exceeds itself, and decline and despondency set in.
In this more fiercely competitive situation people quarrel more readily and more often, and the elder who had been such a paragon of gentle paternalism finds things increasingly difficult.
The community he rules is no longer the united, happy family it once was.
Factions form around a few pushing militant figures who begin to question the old man's waning powers.
On the mystical plane we find a sombre reflection of this unhappy state of affairs.
The elder reacts violently to every action which he construes as an attack upon the dignity of his office and frantically invokes the support of the ancestors.
Every case of sickness or misfortune is claimed by him as a judgement against the upstarts who dare to challenge the legitimacy of his rule.
But in the end his efforts inevitably prove unproductive.
After all, he is treading a very delicate path.
There is a limit to the exercise of power, particularly when it takes the form of affliction and distress.
Those who, as the Lugbara elder does, assume responsibility for the cruellest and unkindest strokes of fortune may provoke a dangerous backlash — which is exactly what happens.
The elder's opponents and detractors claim that he has gone too far, that he has overstepped the bounds of acceptable discipline.
The Lugbara assume that elders who abuse their position are witches, so the suspicion that he is a witch is broached and rapidly gains ground amongst the dissidents.
The elder and his dwindling following claim that misfortunes are the judgment of the outraged ancestors; his opponents — led by those who covet his position — claim they are due to intolerable acts of malicious witchcraft, providing incontrovertible  proof that their author is no longer fit to retain his exalted office.
As this view wins general favour, the elder is denounced and discredited.
One or more factions, under their triumphant new leaders, hive off to live elsewhere, leaving the old man with the shattered remnants of what was once a large, confidently prosperous community.
The new leaders will in their turn suffer the same fate: but that is an irony of life which is not apparent to everyone.
Amongst the Lugbara there are thus at least two alternative mystical theories of disease and affliction.
One sees them as judgments inflicted by the ancestors: the other views them as the consequence of the envious spleen of anti-social, perverted witches.
To return to our original point-the ambivalence of mystical power — the same misfortunes are open to two conflicting but ultimately complementary explanations.
By ascribing unjustified adversity to the malice of witches, the Lugbara are able to maintain their central doctrine that the ancestors are just and good.
Witchcraft thus disposes of the thorny problem of the existence of evil.
Finally, let us note that the inherent ambiguity exemplified here is even more obvious when the righteous indignation of established authority is directly expressed in mystical sanctions which do not require the intervention of a third party such as the ancestors.
The best illustrations of this are in societies where the authorities bring defaulters to heel directly by the power of their curse.
Amongst the Nyakyusa of Tanzania this power is known literally as ‘the breath of men’ and is clearly conceived of as a ‘murmuring’afflatus, which marshals and expresses the public  opinion of the community.
Its basis lies, significantly, in ‘pythons in the stomach’ which are also the source of witchcraft.
More generally, the ambivalent obverse of the elder's curse is the evil-eye — one of the most condensed and concentrated forms of witchcraft.
The distinction between the indignant glare of justified moral condemnation and the baleful gaze of malevolent envy is, obviously, tenuous and arbitrary.
WITCHCRAFT IN RELIGION: MAIN AND MARGINAL CULTS
Witchcraft is for the Lugbara, as for many other peoples, one side of a coin on whose other face the ancestors smile benignly.
The main focus of their religious activity is the ancestors, with witchcraft and sorcery acting as subsidiary and opposed mystical forces representing disharmony and disorder.
The Lugbara also believe in a single omnipotent deity as the ultimate creator of life and the dispenser of death.
This highly ambiguous power also animates socially approved diviners, and is connected with their opponents, witches and sorcerers.
In his benevolent aspect he is the source of rain and hence petitioned to alleviate drought, and also to prevent meningitis.
In this fashion, the Lugbara deity represents certain general phenomena and inescapable universal afflictions such as death (which they also connect with witchcraft).
But his importance is slight compared with that of the ancestors who, as the censorious champions of local morality, are the main religious cult of the Lugbara; and this central morality religion is, as we have seen, complemented by the marginal witchcraft cult.
How do these findings bear upon our earlier discussion of Zande witchcraft?
While I certainly accept that the witchcraft beliefs discussed so far could be considered as a variety of religion, this Lugbara data and certain clues in Evans-Pritchard's account suggest that witchcraft (or sorcery) is only part of Zande religion.
They also have a cult of ancestors (or of the dead) which seems to be concerned with morality and to provide the anticipated antithesis  to their witchcraft beliefs; and there is further evidence of belief in a higher — if generally otiose — central deity.
Thus, reviewing the Zande material in the light of our widening experience, we can again detect what may be seen as a main morality religion (the ancestor cult) co-existing with a subsidiary, or ancillary, marginal witchcraft cult.
One final point before we leave witchcraft — at least for the moment.
In the Lugbara case, the ancestors make no bones about their direct administration of the moral code: if you do not toe the line they quickly bring you to your knees with a few sharp, salutary lessons.
In other religions, however, the forces of order are more devious and underhand.
Punishment affords them little pleasure and they seek to maintain an untarnished image of uncompromised benevolence.
The problem therefore arises of achieving this enviable state and yet ensuring that sinners do not go unpunished.
As the reader may already have guessed, the solution again lies in that endlessly resourceful answer to moral dilemmas — witchcraft.
As, like Pontius Pilate, the ancestors gladly wash their hands of the sordid business of administering justice, witchcraft readily steps forward to take the necessary action, acquiring in the process an even more clearly defined moralizing character.
The situation now is that witchcraft is only really effective against sinners.
The righteous need have no fears.
They are exempt from its noxious effects, for goodness is its own protection.
By removing their normal protective cover from those who commit moral wrongs, the ancestors (or other central powers) deliver the guilty into the hands of their secret police — the witches and sorcerers.
Again, we should note the interdependence and mutual necessity of the main and minor channels of mystical power.
The true significance of witchcraft is only disclosed when it is set within its full configuration of mystical forces; the same applies to ancestor cults.
To discuss these, or any other religious forces, in isolation is to misunderstand them.
Here successive interpretations of that classic case, the traditional Chinese ancestor cult, provide an object lesson.
Despite a lingering tendency to see the Chinese cult of the dead as a simple and direct projection on to the mystical plane of the strict code of filial piety controlling the behaviour of sons towards their fathers, recent studies by Sinological  anthropologists are increasingly adopting a wider cosmological perspective which places the dead, where they naturally belong, among the other spirits and forces of traditional Chinese religion.
MAIN MORALITY-RELIGIONS
In the Lugbara case it is easy to see the hand of Durkheim.
Or at least, it is as if the Lugbara had read the great French social philosopher's work and devised a religion faithfully mirroring their social structure.However, many traditional societies with a similar secular structure have very different mystical concepts and religious beliefs.
To emphasize the point that there is no simple, necessary, deterministic relationship between the forms of religion and society let us briefly examine the religion of the Nuer.
Like the Zande they live in the southern Sudan and have been studied by Evans-Pritchard, so that at least the personal equation can be held constant in comparisons between these two cultures.
As it happens, the Nuer have a social organization which is very similar to that of the Lugbara: so alike are they, indeed, that Middleton describes the Lugbara with virtually the same terminology as his teacher, Evans-Pritchard, uses in describing Nuer society.
A case of forcing one set of data into mother's mould to make them look alike?
No; the most remarkable features of the two descriptions of religion are not their similarities but their differences.
Although the two peoples share a similar type of political structure, their religious beliefs present a striking contrast.
Like the Lugbara, Nuer society is politically uncentralized and based on a segmentary system of interlocking patrilineal descent groups which will be discussed later in chapter 10.
Thus, if we assume a simple deterministic relationship between the social and religious orders (as anthropologists all too often do), we can expect that Nuer religion similarly extends, as it were into the skies, its own secular lineage structure.
The result would be an ancestor cult similar to that of the Lugbara.
This, however, is not the case, for although Nuer ancestors do receive some attention from their descendants this pales into insignificance in comparison with the cult of the deity kwoth who is the unchallenged central focus of Nuer religiosity.
Kwoth is the creator and mover of all living things, vaguely associated with the sky and sometimes said to be like the wind.
He is the source both of good and of bad fortune, the ultimate centre of the dynamism of the cosmos in man's experience of his physical and social world.
In his role as creator and protector of the Nuer nation, he is sometimes addressed respectfully as ‘father’ and as ‘owner’of all things.
All that exists, having been created by him, is his property — his to withhold, to bestow, and eventually to reclaim.
So Nuer readily acknowledge that when they pray and give thanks to kwoth with appropriate offerings they restore to him what is already his.
Ideally they offer cows or oxen, saying sometimes with a mixture of petulance and resignation: ‘God take your cow!’
This is the pastoral idiom of sacrifice.
In actual fact, all that may be offered may be a few strands of tobacco which, in many contexts, are assumed to suffice.
Another acceptable substitute is the wild cucumber, the full-scale slaughter of an ox being reserved for occasions of serious distress when, as in some intractable illness, god's help is urgently sought.
To the Nuer, god appears both as lofty and remote, though omnipotent, while sometimes approachable and near-at-hand: indeed on some occasions he is felt to be too close for comfort and is earnestly beseeched to withdraw his presence and leave his people in peace.
Above all, god represents the moral order of the Nuer world, rewarding, the upright and just with success and prosperity, and visiting sinners with affliction and adversity.
The most heinous offences are incest (i.e. sexual relations, and above all marriage, within the exogamous lineage), adultery (which contaminates all the parties involved including the innocent spouse), disrespectful behaviour towards one's relatives by marriage, and other transgressions of this sort.
These sins may be seen to menace lineage identity and solidarity — the paramount Nuer virtues.
In his role as friend and protector of the Nuer universe, and more especially of its constituent lineages, god is seen in specific manifestations or ‘refractions’, which introduces the familiar theological  problem of the one and the many.
In the widest context, god is single and indivisible; in more parochial settings he appears in more familiar and less diffuse forms.
The degree to which the entire godhead is evoked as a unitary spiritual conception depends upon the circumstances.
God is all things to all Nuer; they see him with as many different faces as they divide their own society into separate kinship groups.
It is thus possible, indeed common, for each of two rival lineages to claim, as the British and Germans did in the First World War, that ‘God is on our side’.
Each party singles out a different manifestation appropriate to its position: but ultimately both admit in a wider, more inclusive, context that there is only one god.
Here Nuer theology seems to echo the thoughts of the ancient Sicilian philosopher Empedocles who spoke of god as ‘a circle whose centre is everywhere and whose circumference is nowhere’.
The extent to which the total, composite deity is called upon to explain an event depends upon its generality and universality.
Great and widespread calamities, showing no respect for the divisions Nuer draw amongst themselves, clearly reveal the hand of god in his most omnipotent, transcendent form.
Lesser and more particular disturbances can be ascribed to more immediate punishment for specific sins.
There is far more to Nuer religion than this cursory sketch can convey.
My point, however, is that here we encounter a main morality-religion sustained by a complex and composite spiritual hierarchy which is a veritable fount of divine justice and retribution.
One might well say that the Nuer sound as though they came straight out of the Bible — the Old Testament rather than the New.
The organization of their religious concepts, god and his component spirit-refractions, certainly reflects the social order in a highly Durkheimian fashion.
But, and this is a major qualification, the nature of the mystical powers involved, their shape and distinctive characteristics (or phenomenology) are not predictable from the social organization.
Things would all be much easier for sociologists of religion if they were.
The point, then, is that what the Lugbara achieve in one religious mode, the Nuer do in a very different style.
A final example of religion as a maintainer of law-and-order is  provided by the Akawaio Indians of Guyana.
They are also a politically uncentralized people, but not based on lineage ties.
There is no Chinese-box style articulation of segmentary groups; each small cultivating community situated on a river bank has a high degree of autonomy and is generally hostile towards its neighbours.
In this case it is again not the ancestors who are important, but a rather diffuse constellation of nature spirits.
These differ from those of the Nuer in that they do not fuse together into a single, all-pervasive deity.
The diversity of the spirits thus directly parallels the Akawaio social order.
But there is the same substantial caveat which we registered in the case of the Nuer: the particular kind of mystical powers which sustain the social order cannot be predicted from the social order.
As we have noted, the Nuer have fairly definite ideas about sin, certainly if pressed they would happily deliver a sermon on the subject.
The Akawaio are less forthcoming.
The spirits which are the focus of their religious concern are not regarded as being directly moralistic in such an explicit fashion as their counterparts among the Nuer.
Yet they can be shown to be in some sense the implicit guardians of morality.
For, like the Lugbara ancestors, they are held responsible for sickness and affliction, especially when they occur in contexts of social strife and conflict.
In general, the Akawaio consider that breaches of the brotherly love which should inform relationships between members of the same community will attract the anger of the spirits, who then bring illness and adversity as punishments.
Thus, to some extent in company with our contemporary psychiatrists, these Carib-speaking Indians trace the causes of illness to unsatisfactory and rancorous relationships within the community.
The cure lies in identifying the disturbed relationship, making such reparation as seems appropriate, and so restoring peace and tranquillity.
The spirits thus exhibit a praiseworthy concern for the psychological health of the community.
The trouble with this and other moralistic creeds is that they do not allow for the righteous manifestly not enjoying the fruits  of their exemplary conduct.
When, like Job in the Old Testament, the just are unjustly treated and disaster strikes a respected pillar of society, serious difficulties arise.
How are these to be surmounted?
The Lugbara solve this problem by appealing to witchcraft.
How the Nuer cope with the same dilemma is not entirely clear from Evans-Pritchard's account.
For their part the Akawaio Indians deal with the matter in what is, in effect, an inverted version of the Lugbara solution.
As will be recalled the Lugbara trace the causes of unmerited misfortunes to those power-hungry elders who hang on to office, although no longer capable.
The Akawaio are more extrovert.
In probing the sources of undeserved distress they generally look outwards to the people across the valley, or over the hill.
Each Akawaio settlement is a tiny republic whose patriotism bristles with hostility towards other, rival communities.
The impressive sense of internal cohesion at the price of external hostility is epitomized in the ambivalent role of the shaman, or inspired priest, in each community.
Through trance experiences stimulated by drinking tobacco juice, the shaman (or his spirit) flies into the skies to commune with the spirits, and discover and remedy the causes of affliction in his village.
With these techniques the shaman guards and protects his human flock, interceding, when necessary, with the gods on their behalf.
His external image offers a remarkable contrast to this picture of dedicated pastoral care.
Externally, in his relations with other villages, he becomes the vehicle and focus for the xenophobic fear and animosity between rival communities.
So, manifestly unjustified afflictions in one village are ascribed to the malicious witchcraft of the shaman across the river.
Here again we can discern two contrapuntal mystical currents; each of which plays a major positive role on its home ground and a negative and malign one elsewhere.
One village's benevolent deities are, in effect, another's malevolent demons.
From this perspective we can return again, and finally, to the ambivalence of mystical power which has caused so much unnecessary confusion in anthropological writing on religion, magic and witchcraft.
Having defined witchcraft and sorcery as intrinsically evil, anthropologists are often embarrassed when they find them employed quite openly and without moral censure: indeed  in some societies in New Guinea and west Africa, people positively exult in their prowess in these occult arts and enjoy a corresponding respect.
It is these positive examples of what is generally taken to be a negative force that have given rise to such concepts as ‘white’(i.e. good) witchcraft; they are part of our European tradition and lend a certain credence to Margaret Murray's exaggerated presentation of a satanic underground cult of evil co-existing with orthodox Christianity.’
The examples we have reviewed enable us to see clearly that mystical power may assume many contrasting shapes and forms, but that what determines its moral evaluation is simply the purpose for which it is employed.
Among the BaKongo and many other African peoples, both chiefs and sorcerers are commonly considered to be capable of killing people by occult means, but only the former do so legitimately.
COSMOLOGIES
The data are piling up thick and fast, and it is time that we paused to examine how far we have travelled and which direction we should now follow.
We began with Zande beliefs in witchcraft to explain particular misfortunes in tense relationships, one method of explaining mystically (and transcendentally) human misery and of rallying support and succour to the victim of misfortune.
We saw too that however mistaken its basic assumptions might seem, this pattern of thought did make sense.
At that stage we ignored other possible religious beliefs.
Then, widening our focus, we looked at Lugbara witchcraft and the ancestor cult which complements and completes it.
We saw that witchcraft could serve as a very important ancillary force subtly dealing with the manifest existence of evil.
This led us to concentrate our attention on what we may term ‘main morality’ religions where, whatever their nature, the spirits involved act as the puritanical censors of traditional morality.
We then widened our discussion further, taking the Lugbara, Nuer and Akawaio as examples to demonstrate how the same censorious moral role is played by different mystical powers: the converse is the same type of mystical power playing different roles in different religions.
One community's kind spirits are, as we have seen, another's dreaded demons.
Contrary to what is often supposed, especially by the more engagé workers in comparative religion, there is no cross culturally valid catalogue of phenomenologically distinct kinds of beneficent or baneful powers.
Mystical forces are judged by their fruits.
While a given social system probably has a finite set of religious requirements under given conditions, these can be satisfied in many and perhaps even an infinite variety of ways.
The social structure in a particular environmental setting creates, as it were, religious expectations.
The specifications required to meet these can be readily elicited and catalogued.
What cannot be deduced or predicted is precisely how the specifications will be met, nor which materials will be employed.
In this respect the relationship between society and religion can be compared to that between families and the homes they live in.
Families of the same size and income have roughly similar functional requirements; having established these basic and essentially ‘objective’ requirements, however, it is obvious that they can be satisfied in different ways and styles.
Taste is not an objective facet of family size.
The same goes for religions.
Every religion has to meet certain basic standards, but styles, designs and materials vary widely.
Different societies of the same structural type have, evidently, contrasting religious tastes.
Furthermore, to pursue this metaphor, having selected a particular spiritual decor and furnishings, those who live in it come to be influenced by its stylistic and symbolic properties as well as its more obvious functional or utilitarian appropriateness.
And just as it has been designed to satisfy their requirements (not always necessarily with equal success), they come to find themselves serving its interests.
So religions, symbolic systems, and ideologies develop a metaphysical life of their own and acquire qualities which stubbornly resist being reduced to mere reflections of the social order.
Certainly there is at least always an important ‘feed-back’ effect between beliefs and society.
To this extent, Marx's bold assertion, ‘Man makes religion: religion never makes man’, greatly over-simplifies the complex realities of the relationship between the social and religious orders.
Yet whatever the actual characteristics imputed to the mystical powers selected, seemingly arbitrary, for a given role, most religions appear to possess two complementary categories.
One is charged with upholding the moral order, while the other equally essential class helps to explain inappropriate affliction.
This is why it seems sociologically useful to distinguish between main and marginal cults.
But, of course, religion is not only concerned with morality or finding consolation in adversity.
Wider and more general problems in human existence and experience have to be brought within man's comprehension.
Man needs to relate to, and therefore to interpret and understand, his climatic and environmental circumstances, and bring these into connection with his social and personal life.
The term ‘cosmology’ or ‘world-view’is a convenient shorthand way of referring to these wider, environmental referents of religion.
Cosmology thus seeks to make sense of ecology.
And here, as at more specific levels of religious conceptualization, we can again discern logical patterns and relationships.
This leads us directly to the topic of symbols and their meanings.
THE WILDERNESS
We can conveniently begin with a widely drawn cosmological contrast, that between the secure realm of human habitation and activity, and the wild wasteland which surrounds and threatens it.
With all its biblical and other evocative resonances (as for instance the ‘enchanted forest’ of fairy tales), the wilderness begins where the warm sphere of human interaction ends.
The boundary separating these two domains is thus a function of a community's isolation and lack of effective communication with, and control over, its surroundings.
Modern technology pushes our wilderness completely off the inhabited globe into space.
This last-to-be-colonized region still retains some mystery and glamour as an unsubjugated never-never-land where, in science fiction at least, almost anything can happen.
The drama of the space race derives very largely from this being the last wilderness left.
Those peoples with less elaborate technologies and a narrower range of effective communications and intercourse live much closer to the wild; for them, it is the antithesis of the mastered, lived-in realm of normal everyday social intercourse.
This contrast between ‘culture’ and ‘nature’, as Lévi-Strauss phrases it (although both are of course cultural conceptions), can be illustrated by the Lele people who inhabit the Kasai region of the Congo basin in central Africa.
The Lele are subsistence cultivators, growing maize, ground-nuts, and raffia palms from whose fronds they weave mats which are used as a special currency — a rare case of money really growing on trees.
Villages are sited in clearings in the forest, and these two opposed domains — village and forest — are strongly emphasized in Lele cosmology.
The forest is important as a source of food, since some gardens are situated in it, and it supplies palm wine, fibre for making clothes, wood for house construction and also a variety of sacred medicines.
It has sublime importance, however, because it is the scene of the hunt, itself as much a prestigious and sacred activity as a means of acquiring meat.
So the forest has a sacred character too; men may go regularly into it, but women are not permitted the same ease of access.
Every third day they are not allowed to enter the forest; and on all important religious occasions — at mourning, the birth of twins, the appearance of the new moon, the departure of a chief, in menstruation or child-birth — they may not enter the forest until special rituals have been performed by men.
Ultimately the forest is hallowed because it is the abode of spirits which haunt streams and their sources.
These spirits of the forest are considered to control the fertility of women and to prosper men's hunting.
All the beasts of the forest are under God's power though allocated to the Lele for food.
Of these animals, water-pigs are those most highly charged with mystical power; they wallow in water, which the Lele believe to be the place of spirits, so the association is plain.
Fish likewise are connected with the forest spirits, and thought dangerous to women: pregnant wives, for instance, should not eat fish.
Certain bush-bucks  which, like spirits, sleep by day and move by night are similarly regarded as spirit-animals, so their flesh is forbidden to women.
Clearly the Lele world-view is built upon a series of structural associations and contrasts.
There is a loose connection between men, forest and spirits, and they stand in collective opposition to the world of women which centres on the villages and the clearings.
Women keep the home fires burning while their menfolk hunt and commune with sacred things.
The land outside the village, but in the clearings on which wives grow ground-nuts, is in revenge mystically fenced off to men.
In general, women and their activities are mystically potent, but also dangerous and threatening to men.
The femininity of women threatens to pollute Lele masculinity: in common with our own and many other cultures, the Lele display a form of the Delilah-complex, although in their case the common association between women (as wayward creatures of nature) and the wild is virtually stood on its head.
Before hunting Lele men abstain from sexual intercourse and avoid all contact with menstruating women.
This, of course, is not to say that there will be no hunt-ball afterwards.
The hunt has strong religious overtones, and it can only succeed if harmony and peace prevail.
Disputes and enmity endanger it.
If the hunt produces a great quantity of game this proves that the gods are smiling because all is well in the community.
The hunt, indeed, is a spiritual barometer of brotherly love and communal affection, and, most significantly, ensures the fertility of women.
Here then we see how different social pursuits, areas of activity, and the distinction between men and women are woven together into a composite picture of the universe with a mystical connection between its components.
The Lele view of man's place in the universe and of the boundaries of experience is mystical.
Other tribal cosmologies exhibit analogous features some of which we shall consider later.
The point to emphasize here is the extent to which man's view of his environment is affected by his technological mastery of it.
There is a similar relationship between the individual and his surroundings which is suggested in a psychologist's perceptive formulation of the position: ‘Part of the intangible boundary of the self is marked off by what we can control.
When we can control, there the self is; when we are controlled, there the  world is.
Control is the capacity to alter objects and to determine experience.’
SYMBOLS
A further element of Lele thought illustrates another common principle of cosmological logic or, if you prefer, of religious symbolism: tribal systems of thought, and perhaps all closed or relatively closed systems of belief, tend to exhibit a strong and, as it must seem to some, edifying concern for tidiness.
An appropriate motto would be: tidiness is next to godliness.
We have already seen evidence of this in Zande witchcraft beliefs with their eager concern to assimilate and ‘naturalize’ new information so that it is consistent with the basic assumptions which Zande take for granted.
This striving after logical and formal consistency, even for symmetry (for there are certainly aesthetic considerations at work), is well shown in tribal taxonomies and folk natural history.
They exhibit to an exaggerated degree that intolerance and sense of unease we all show when faced with information or experience which we cannot readily assimilate and ‘make sense of’(as we say) by fitting it into our existing knowledge and categories.
For the experimental scientist such discordances and incongruities are the spur to new discoveries and lead to the development of new theories — or so at least we like to think.
But for those with a relatively static model of the universe and more or less fixed expectations, the discrepancies are deeply troubling if they cannot be ignored or resolved by supplementary perceptual categories.
Consequently what does not fit neatly into existing experience is anomalous and apt to seem mystically dangerous.
Such anomalies are like Bernard Shaw's conception of indecency, ‘matter out of place’.
All this is very abstract, so let us take a specific example by considering the significance of the pangolin for the Lele.
The  pangolin or scaly ant-eater, an animal rather like a hedgehog with a tail, is ritually dangerous to Lele women; but it is also the object of a male cult (notice again the sexual axis).
Lele men who have produced sons and daughters are allowed to join the pangolin club, whose rituals concentrate upon fertility and success in hunting.
Why is the pangolin dangerous to women, and why is it associated with a male fertility cult?
Lele describe the animal as follows: ‘In our forest there is an animal with the body and tail of a fish, covered in scales.
It has four legs and it climbs on trees.’
Here are our first clues.
The pangolin is a forest animal and at the same time a taxonomic enigma: it cuts across several distinct categories in Lele zoology just as it does in ours.
Hence in company with other anomalous creatures of the forest it is dangerous to women.
But what of its association with fertility?
As it is partly in the same taxonomic class as fish and water-creatures, it is associated by the Lele with forest water and hence with the spirits of streams.
Moreover, it is said to beget single young, unlike most other animals.
This habit of mono-reproduction is explicitly compared by the Lele to human reproduction.
Hence the pangolin suggests a link between animal and human kind.
The force of this interpretation is further strengthened by Mary Douglas's observation that Lele women who produce twin births are compared to animals, since multiple births are characteristic of animals rather than of humans.
Ideas of the parallel between normal multiple birth in animals and abnormal multiple birth in humans are widely distributed, and contribute to the significance of twins in many cultures.
For the moment let us simply note that natural history may have important ritual implications.
Although not the only source of mystical power, anomalous phenomena are often given special treatment if they are difficult to classify.
What does not fall into established categories from one angle may do from others; anomalies are always situational and relative, never, or very rarely, absolute.
Detecting them is a tricky business, especially in unfamiliar cultures and languages.
Despite the serious limitations to a general theory equating anomaly and mystical danger, there is respectable if sometimes ambiguous psychological evidence that what is perceived to be unclassifiable (and this is perhaps the  crucial thing) is cognitively and emotionally disturbing.
Words and names, as we all know from everyday experience, possess magical power: naming and identifying experiences and things imposes some degree of control over them and gives at least the illusion of bringing them within our power.
When we identify something we pin it down and are halfway to mastering it.
So great is our faith in identification, that we often mistakenly imagine that when a problem is diagnosed it is solved.
What seems initially unique and disturbing can become a well-known if regrettable fact of life shared with many others.
Generalization is often, initially at least, a sound antidote to bleak despair.
SYMBOLISM
This desire to classify and categorize experience, and thus to render it manageable, seems to be present or implied in all schemes of symbolism.
What is a symbol?
Following the Oxford Dictionary, which is here a more lucid guide than my more abstruse colleagues, we can say that a symbol signifies something other than or complementary to itself; it can therefore be used to represent, express, or image things which are external to it but to which it is linked in an appropriate fashion.
The crucial factor of associational appositeness relating a symbol to what it symbolizes is rarely seen directly and explicitly, although heraldry is replete with such purpose-built symbols.
An excellent example, for which we know the explicit intention of the inventors, is the London School of Economics coat of arms which has a beaver as key figure.
In the version drawn in 1921 by Sir Arnold Plant (then a student at the School), the beaver was selected to symbolize the School because ‘it was understood to be an industrious animal with social habits’.
It is not recorded whether those who designed this emblem were aware that ‘beaver’ is also slang for the female sexual organs.
So symbolism is a kind of sign language, or semaphore, a code only intelligible when you have the key.
Symbols possess both intellectual and emotional (or affectual) efficacy: think of the sign of the cross, the Nazi Sieg Heil , the masonic handshake,
Churchill's ‘V-sign’, or the more recent ‘up yours!’; the more polyvalent, multi-facetted, or ‘condensed’ symbols are in their range of reference and meaning, the greater their mystical (or metaphysical) significance.
As we saw earlier, a central godhead whose manifold characteristics can be all things to all men is more powerful than a more parochial and less versatile spirit.
But how are we to interpret the symbolism of other cultures; how can we crack their symbolic codes?
Eliciting and translating meaning accurately is difficult enough with explicit phenomena: how then are we to understand the implicit, inner significance of things whose nature depends on subtle allusions?
One solution is to assume that, since all men are in their most basic attributes ultimately alike and use similar mental processes, then they must mean the same things when they employ the same symbols and metaphors.
One system of universal interpretation sees a phallus in every elongated object and a vagina or womb in everything round or circular.
And if those whose symbols were thus explained hotly denied the interpretations, that would simply be further proof.
The beauty of such methods is that they can never be proved wrong since, by ignoring what the people concerned themselves think, you have removed any empirical basis for testing the interpretations.
There are other similar schemes of analysis.
As is well known, Freud saw the Oedipus myth as symbolizing a son's desire to possess his mother and kill his father.
But Fromm interprets it as a conflict between matriarchy and patriarchy; Jung sees it as a story of ethical conflict between laziness and duty; and Ferenczi argues that Oedipus himself is a phallic symbol since his name means literally ‘swollen-foot’.
As Anne-marie de Waal Malefijt, from whom I borrow these examples, wickedly observes: ‘If interpreters from similar cultural backgrounds cannot agree upon the meanings of symbols, how different must be the symbolic meanings assigned by people with different cultural experience!’
The psychoanalyst J. A. Hadfield has brilliantly shown that the trouble with this type of approach, even with material from one's own culture, is that it is essentially arbitrary.
It assumes everything, and this is the last thing the field anthropologist who tries to understand other peoples' symbols can afford to do.
He must start with the explanations and commentaries which his informants themselves offer about their symbols.
These must first be examined in the contexts in which they are usually employed, where they occur naturally, although subsequent generalizing discussion helps the anthropologist to improve his very superficial initial understanding.
Learning the meaning of symbols is part of the anthropologist's practical semantics: discovering the meaning of words, noticing when their use is appropriate and when it is not.
All this requires imagination, patience, considerable linguistic skill, but above all a rigorous respect for the facts.
These must come first; fantasy can come later.
With these exhortations in mind let us now turn to examples of anthropologists trying to elucidate the meaning of exotic symbols.
One of the most impressive of recent contributions is the meticulously detailed and subtly perceptive work of Professor Victor Turner amongst the Ndembu people, who also live in Central Africa and not very far from the Congo Lele.
The Ndembu fall within the so called‘matrilineal belt’ stretching across Central Africa from the Congo into Zambia and Malawi and are cassava cultivators, living in what is now the western province of Zambia, close to the Congo border.
Traditionally uncentralized politically, they live in small scattered villages, each composed of a number of matrilineally related men and their wives and children.
Turner follows Radcliffe-Brown's classic analysis of the religion of the Andaman Islanders which was first published in 1922 and heavily influenced by Durkheim and the French school; he sees the luxuriantly rich ritual and symbolism of the Ndembu as providing socially integrative forces compensating for the lack of a unitary political structure.
We need not take up the argument here: let us, instead, turn to the more interesting subject of the explanations offered by the Ndembu themselves for certain key symbolic motifs.
Before proceeding to details, however, we should note that the Ndembu are remarkably articulate in these matters.
Contrary to those who claim that tribesmen always think concretely rather than abstractly, the Ndembu have an abstract general term for ‘symbol’(chinjikikilu ) derived from a verb used in hunting to mean literally ‘to blaze a trail’(ku-jikijila ).
So a symbol is for them ‘a blaze or landmark, something that connects the unknown with the known’.
Things of this kind, Ndembu say, point towards or ‘reveal’ other things, using again a word employed in tracking and hunting.
These associations by no means reduce Ndembu symbolism to the level of boy scout bush manoeuvres, for as with the Lele and many other peoples hunting is a sacred rite, pregnant with religious significance.
Turner claims that each Ndembu symbol makes visible and accessible to purposive public action basic elements in their society and culture.
It is loaded with efficacious cultural and social associations, and these refer to natural and physiological facts of everyday experience.
Here, as elsewhere, a given symbol may have a wide range of meanings.
For example, white clay (mpende ) may represent such apparently disparate ideas and things as: semen, ritual purity, innocence from witchcraft and, at its most abstract, ‘togetherness with the ancestor spirits’.
The same symbol is encompassing a wide range of conceptions which, at least in some respects, share a common, underlying theme.
Take the tree the Ndembu know as mukula , a red gum.
This is symbolically invoked in contexts in which it is connected with, for instance: matrilineal descent, hunting, menstrual blood, and the meat of wild animals.
The link is a sticky red gum secreted by the mukula which coagulates quickly and is explicitly compared by the Ndembu to blood.
Consider now its contexts of use.
At boys' initiation ceremonies, a Mukula log is put near the place where they are circumcised.
As soon as the operation has been performed and while they are still bleeding, the young warriors are placed on this mukula log.
Ndembu explain that the mukula here represents the wish of the tribal elders that the circumcision wounds should heal quickly and cleanly for, as they observe, the mukula gum coagulates rapidly to form what looks like a scab.
Here the Ndembu employ a judicious mixture of Frazer's two cardinal principles of magical thought — association by contact and by likeness.
The Ndembu go  further, saying that in this context the red gum also represents masculinity, and the life of the adult male who, as hunter and warrior, will inevitably shed blood.
An even wider and perhaps more profound range of images is suggested by the mudyi tree.
At girls' puberty rituals the novice, folded in a blanket, is gently placed at the roots of a slender mudyi sapling.
Ndembu say that the sapling's pliancy stands for the girl's immaturity and youth: the tree is sometimes stated to be the novice's ‘matrilineage’, and its leaves her ‘children’.
The tree is also supposed to represent the growing maiden acquiring womanly sense or wisdom, and Ndembu sometimes say that she ‘drinks sense as a baby drinks milk’.
So, in a sense, this tree is the tree of life for Ndembu women.
Fortunately, the Ndembu are generously prepared to share the secrets of this symbolism with us.
They begin by observing that if you scratch the bark of this tree it immediately exudes beads of milky latex.
And the ‘milk tree’, as they appropriately call it, represents in their minds, and just as readily in ours, a mother's milk and its source, her breasts.
Following this train of thought, the tree also signifies a mother and her child and this Ndembu ‘madonna image’ is extended to include a matrilineal descent group, called literally a ‘womb or stomach’.
Casting this imagery into the past, the tree is also said to be the place where ‘our tribe and its customs began’.
So the milk tree becomes the seat of all mothers, the source of our ancestors and the place where they used to sleep.
To be initiated beneath the fecund fronds of this tree, with these deep resonances of meaning, is to be made ritually pure or white.
This sequence of interpretations is highlighted by a series of opposed associations: an uninitiated girl, a menstruating woman, and an uncircumcised boy are all alike in lacking whiteness.
They are all unclean; and in the boys' initiation rites we find that the mudyi tree also has its part to play in the symbolism of circumcision.
And when the whole gamut of richly charged contexts is reviewed, Turner concludes that the ‘milk tree’ represents in the symbolic life of the Ndembu their equivalent to Goethe's conception of ‘eternal womanhood’, an image which is peculiarly apt as their society is founded on the matrilineal kinship principle.
Red and white, the two colours so far mentioned, are joined by a third, black, to complete the Ndembu system of colour symbolism where the imagery reaches perhaps its most abstract level.
Teasing out the meanings of symbols in their contexts with the aid of the explanatory commentaries of his informants, Turner suggests that white signifies health, strength, fertility, the blessing of the ancestors — indeed harmony in society and nature.
Redness, on the other hand, which is associated both with the (destructive) shedding of blood and with the primordial ties of kinship in blood signifies at a more abstract level discontinuity, disharmony, and might acquired by, and displayed in, breaking the rules of order and harmony.
It is thus in one configuration of refulgent meanings the sign of male aggressiveness and manly virtue.
The last colour, black, is connected with the faeces and closes the circle since it is the colour of decay and of death.
ARE THERE UNIVERSAL THERE UNIVERSAL ARCHETYPES?
None of the symbolic usages reviewed so far is very difficult to follow.
It is of course true that the human body, its associated natural processes, and those of other living organisms, provide natural models that offer a finite range of symbolic themes which we can pick out in different cultures.
However, the same symbols may convey quite distinct meanings in different cultural settings.
A very obvious example can be found in colour symbolism itself.
In contrast to white, black is widely employed to represent evil, terror, darkness, decay, the appropriate colour for mourning — a range of depressing associations perhaps ultimately deriving from the alternation of night and day; we share these with the Ndembu and readily assume they are universal.
Certainly all known societies distinguish between night and day and most consider night to possess sinister qualities (often connected with the suspension of regular social intercourse).
However, we must not leap to conclusions too hastily.
Whereas in most Christian countries black is worn in mourning, in most Muslim ones white is the funeral colour, yet Christian and Muslim conceptions of the nature of the after-life and the significance of death are broadly  the same.
Similarly, white is also the colour of mourning in traditional China and there are other less well-known cultures where black is an auspicious colour.
The fact is simply that the two colours do not possess universal symbolic meanings shared by all the peoples of the globe.
With this cautionary illustration behind us we can now proceed to a more complex and interesting example.
In our own folk symbolism and in those of a number of other cultural traditions, ‘horns’ convey a sinister, demonic association connected with illicit sexuality, as in the expression ‘horny’.
Traditionally at least, horns convey to us the notion of the cuckold — the unfortunate, unmanly husband whose wife's unsated sexual passion finds its outlets elsewhere.
In that rich compendium of ethnographic treasures,Shakespeare's Bawdy , Eric Partridge tells us that the word horn stands for the penis in an extramarital adventure, as in the ‘horn of adultery’ or ‘horn-maker’(causer of cuckoldry).
It so happens that amongst the Nuristan Kaffirs in a remote mountain valley of Afghanistan, ‘horns’ have this aggressive manly sexual connotation.
But in this case they refer to licit, socially approved, marital sexual intercourse, to manliness in general, and are also directly connected with goats, the main livestock of the Kaffirs.
Thus to be ‘horned’ among the Kaffirs is not to be meekly cuckolded.
On the contrary, it is the proud assertion of belligerent warrior bellicosity, traditionally expressed in head-hunting raids against the surrounding Muslim population.
In this culture a soft feeble person is said to ‘lack horns’: men who have proved their manhood in war and battle, as well as in their marriage beds, are entitled to sport ornately carved horns on their door-posts.
Special ‘horn chairs’ are reserved for those who achieve the highest status in this fiercely competitive society.
(Most of these traits are shared by the famous Naga head-hunters of Assam whose evaluation of amatory success is, however, perhaps more ambiguous.)
Of course in both our own case and that of the Nuristanis horns express aggressive male sexuality.
But, and this is the point, the contexts in which this is displayed are opposite to each other.
We should misunderstand the Kaffirs completely if we simply imposed our folk symbolism on theirs.
Another instance of these elements combined in a slightly different way comes from a less remote and exotic source, the Sarakatsani shepherds of the Greek mountains studied by John Campbell.
Here our ethnocentric values receive a further jolt, since these pastoralists literally divide their sheep from their goats, associating sheep with men and goats with women.
It is women, not randy old men, who are explicitly linked in herd-management and symbolism with goats and thence, following the more familiar male chauvinist logic, with the Devil.
‘Women’, the Sarakatsani reason, ‘through the particular sensuality of their natures are inherently more likely to have relations with the Devil; and goats were originally the animals of the Devil which Christ captured and tamed for the service of man.’
Sheep, in contrast, are God's creatures, and the ideal image of the men who tend them is naturally that of the Good Shepherd.
CONTRASTING PAIRS AND THE MEETING OF EXTREMES
So far we have concentrated on the meaning of specific symbols.
But it is becoming increasingly plain that symbols do not stand alone and can be understood only in a wider context of associations and contrasts.
The problems raised by this gregarious tendency, and particularly by the recurrence of paired contrasting symbols, become very evident when we consider a bodily product which receives symbolic attention in most human societies and provides extremely expressive symbolic material — hair.
The stock psychoanalytic approach assumes a universal connection between hair and sexual virility, and it is certainly not difficult to find examples which fit this interpretation.
There are, however, other and perhaps socially more interesting aspects to explore.
One of these focuses on the contrast between short and long hair.
There is much evidence that, at least in the case of men, short cropped hair signifies the acceptance of discipline and compliance with authority, whereas long hair signals the exact opposite — defiance of the established order.
In our own world we and short-cropped convicts, crew-cut soldiers and service-men generally, monks and others equally ‘under orders’.
Long hair, in contrast, shows rejection of authority and is the preferred hair-style of rebels and revolutionaries the world over, of woolly-haired intellectuals, hippies, and others seeking freedom from traditional constraints and a world of exciting new potentialities.
Both in its title, and in its contents, the highly successful musical,Hair , brilliantly epitomizes these associations.
If we want to go further back in history (and are prepared to be suitably eclectic) we can find a similarly expressed contrast between Roundheads and Cavaliers.
Confirmatory evidence comes also from the use of close-cropping to humiliate and discipline dissident rebels and traitors.
When, at the end of the Second World War, France was liberated, those who had collaborated excessively with the Germans often had their hair cut off by the French Resistance.
Similarly, at the time of writing, presumed traitors to the Catholic cause in Northern Ireland regularly have their hair shorn and are then ‘tarred and feathered’.
The compulsory haircuts forced upon the long-haired defendants in the indecency trial of the underground magazine Oz , are a clear example of the disciplinary message conveyed by the cutting of hair.
It is thus by no means surprising that a contentious current issue in British schools is the permissible length of boys' hair.
Animals are often also hairy (a fact adroitly exploited in Desmond Morris's book The Naked Ape ), so that unkempt locks suggest some connection with animalkind as opposed to humankind and thus, as Lévi-Strauss would argue, signify the contrast between nature and culture.
It is easy to draw up a list of opposed attitudes and values, based on this antithesis, such as the following:
And so we could continue.
But we now have some understanding of the universality, or otherwise, of symbolic archetypes.
I do not pretend that this hairy example will stand up to intensive and searching cross-cultural scrutiny, since the elements in the contrasted pairs weigh slightly differently in different cultures; indeed, as with most linked social phenomena, one could find some cases of complete reversals (or in Lévi-Straussian terminology, ‘transformations’) in which, as the old phrase has it, the extremes meet.
Notice, however, that contrasts of this kind, and such other obvious ones as right-handed/left-handed, head/heart (or loins), mind/body (another variant?), up/down, cold/hot, dry/moist, male/female occur very widely, although in a bewildering variety of assortments and with different meanings in different cultures.
Lévi-Strauss has rendered social anthropology an invaluable service in emphasizing the significance of such contrasting motifs; although we need not go so far as him and turn our subject into an esoteric animal, vegetable or mineral parlour-game in which every card is a joker and can assume whatever meaning the player likes.