

Colonies and Distant Monarchs 1558–1649
When Elizabeth I came to the throne of England in 1558 she and her government in London ruled less land than her predecessors had done for hundreds of years.
For about four centuries the rulers of England had been trying to conquer and rule France, Scotland, and Ireland, but they had just lost their last foothold in France at Calais, their position in Ireland was as insecure as it had ever been, and the Scottish problem had taken an altogether new turn because Mary the Queen of Scotland could present a good claim to the English throne.
By the time of Elizabeth's death in 1603 Englishmen did not rule any more land outside the British Isles than they had done 45 years earlier but their seafaring position had been transformed.
Hakluyt was exaggerating when he said that Englishmen had excelled all the nations and people of the earth in their explorations, but he was quite right when he asked:
Which of the kings of this land before her Majesty had ever their banners seen in the Caspian Sea?
Which of them hath ever dealt with the Emperor of Persia…
Who ever saw…an English leiger [subject]in the porch of the Grand Signior at Constantinople?
Who ever found English consuls at Tripoli, at Aleppo, at Babylon, at Basra and who heard of Englishmen at Goa before now? what English ships did pass and repass the Strait of Magellan, traverse the mighty breadth of the South Sea [the Pacific], enter into alliance, with amity and traffic with the princes of the Moluccas and the Isle of Java, double the famous Cape of Bona Speranza and return home most richly laden with the commodities of China, as the subjects of this now flourishing monarchy had done?
None of this suggested that the English would go forward to build up the most wide-ranging empire that the world had ever seen, and even if Hakluyt had added that the English had made some attempts to settle in North America and had organized themselves for trade in the East Indies he would not have much altered the case.
But at least a dream of empire was not as impossible as it had been in 1558.
These steps into a wider world were part of a great process of expansion by western Europe that had already been going on for decades.
A hundred years before Elizabeth came to the throne no   member of the human race had ever been in a position to make a map of the whole world; civilizations had risen and flourished in different regions of the world but they had little or no idea of their geographical relationship to one another.
By 1558 the Portuguese voyages around Africa and into the Indian Ocean, and the Spanish voyages to America which led on by way of the Philippines to the circumnavigation of the globe had made it possible to draw maps which, though they were wrong in important details, showed what the world was really like.
The English had not taken any important part in this; voyages from Bristol at the end of the fifteenth century had reached a few points in North America and had opened up cod fisheries off Newfoundland, and in the 1550s London merchants had used the northern searoutes to start trading with Russia, but most of the nation's energies overseas in the first half of the sixteenth century had been devoted to the last and least rewarding of the attempts to conquer France.
Rivalry with France was one theme in the centuries of empire to come, but after the loss of Calais the English concentrated on capturing French colonies or in restraining French attempts to dominate Europe rather than on trying to make anything substantial out of the nominal claim to the French crown that English kings asserted until 1801.
During Elizabeth's reign the English had been concerned, as Hakluyt explained, with trade and with opening up new lines of commerce.
They looked along the Atlantic coast of North America for places in which to settle, and they might have been more successful in founding colonies if they had not at the same time been engaged in what they saw as a desperate struggle to save their religious and political liberties from Catholic Spain, although the Spanish would have said the war was to some extent intended to check the rather aggressive interpretation the English placed on the idea of the freedom of the seas.
It was only when this war was settled, and England embarked on a period of forty years of almost unbroken peace, that settlement began in North America and in the West Indies, and that trade with India became regular and organized enough for the English to set up trading posts there.
By the death of James I in 1625 the English had laid foundations for colonies in Virginia, in New England, and in some of the small West Indian islands that the Spaniards had not considered worth settling.
At the same time they had established bases in India in which they exercised some degree of local political authority, though only in the way that trading companies normally did when away from home, and with no idea of challenging the authority of the Great Moghul, the ruler of India.
During the reign of Charles I there was a great flood of emigrants to North America and the West Indies, and a third type of colony appeared in addition to the colonies for English settlement and the trading posts which needed political power to function effectively: the colonies which were emerging in the West Indies were beginning to turn  into plantations in the modern sense in which Englishmen directed the labour of other people.
Almost all the colonies the English ever acquired were of one or another of these three types, and in a number of other ways the overseas activities undertaken between the 1550s and the 1640s laid down the pattern for all that was to come.
The government's main response to the world outside the British Isles was to build a strong navy.
This was not done for imperial purposes, but once the navy had been developed it affected everything that happened in English policy.
The government certainly had no money to spare to help the colonies, and this introduced the general rule that English colonies had to cover their own costs, both in the sense that the government of a colony had to raise enough revenue to pay its own bills and in the sense that there were no subsidies to encourage people to stay in a colony where they could not earn their own living.
The result of these rules of practice was that the English set up colonies only in places where it was relatively easy to do so, at first because the places they went to were thinly populated, then because political disintegration in India enabled them to advance there, and because in the last phase of imperial expansion they had the sort of technological superiority needed for bringing most African rulers under their control.
Because it was easy to launch them, a great diversity of colonies sprang up and usually they were neither compelled by any external danger nor persuaded by any liking for their neighbours to come to closer terms with one another.
In fact, it was much more common for colonies to break up into a number of separate units as they grew larger.
This happened in New England over religious issues; it was to happen in a great many other places, usually for less solemn reasons, over the next three centuries.
The tendency to split up was strengthened by another result of the absence of involvement of the government in London: the colonists had to work out how to handle their local problems of administration and, while there was virtually no idea of challenging the power of the monarch in England, policies had to be decided much faster than the royal government could ever manage.
As a result it was accepted by the 1630s that English colonies could take most decisions for themselves, and this meant they developed the institutions which, over the course of time, grew in a way that enabled them to become self-governing and then independent by stages which could be so small as sometimes to be imperceptible.
Because they had to run their local affairs, English colonies were quite different from those the Spanish, the Portuguese, the Dutch, and the French established between 1500 and 1650, and at the time all the other European empires looked more durable than the English.
European Expansion Begins
Other European countries had entered the field distinctly earlier.
The decisive decade for exploration had been the 1490s: Columbus reached the West Indies (which at first he took to be a part of Japan), Vasco da Gama sailed around the Cape of Good Hope into the Indian Ocean, and Pope Alexander VI recognized that Spain's new interest in expansion would clash with Portugal's existing claims unless they were defined quickly.
The Treaty of Tordesillas of 1494 embodied his division of the world between them along a not-very-precisely defined meridian line running about 45° West.
This division, which quite unintentionally put the uncharted territory of Brazil into the Portuguese section, encouraged the Spanish and Portuguese to believe that they had a right, backed by a religious authority recognized by every country in western Europe, to all land that did not have a settled and effective government, and that they were entitled to monopolize the trade of these new territories.
European powers claimed monopoly rights over the trade of their colonies for centuries to come, though other Europeans defied these claims whenever possible, but nobody launched such world-wide claims as the Spanish and the Portuguese, and the Spanish claims became even more all-embracing when Philip II of Spain secured the crown of Portugal for himself in 1580.
These claims were never universally accepted; the destruction of the unity of Christendom by the Reformation helped to undermine the authority of the Pope to allocate territory, but it was Catholic France that first challenged Spain's position in the West Indies and that conflict had been going on for some years when in 1559, at the end of one round of European wars, France and Spain included in the peace treaty a clause which stated that fighting in regions west of the Azores or south of the Tropic of Cancer was not to be taken as a reason for resuming hostilities in Europe.
This clause, crisply abbreviated to the phrase ‘no peace beyond the line’, recognized that the Spanish were not going to admit that anyone was entitled to contest the Papal award and also that nobody else was going to take it seriously.
For over a century any non-Spaniards who entered the area claimed by Spain were likely to be called pirates.
Some of them undoubtedly were pirates in the straightforward sense that they were ready to seize and plunder any passing ship without regard to the religion or nationality of its owners, but Spanish charges ranged much more widely.
So far as they were concerned traders and sailors who had been blown off course were pirates; and in the range of activity between purely peaceful traders and pirates who were ready to attack ships of any nation there were some traders who were prepared to use force to make Spanish ports deal with them, and others who were willing to appear to use force in order to provide Spanish settlements with an excuse for trading.
The word pirate was perhaps not so strong a term    of condemnation as in later centuries: European rulers were only just beginning to acquire for themselves, on behalf of their states, a monopoly of the use of force.
By comparison with the rest of the world in the sixteenth century, some parts of western Europe might look like well-organized nations but it was still true that the main bond holding countries together was the personal loyalty that a local military leader felt to his sovereign.
By the end of the period of imperial expansion, in the middle of the twentieth century, it was widely believed that everyone in the world should be a citizen of an independent and sovereign state and should have the same rights as all the other citizens in the state, but in 1500 very few people would have understood such a notion.
The crumbling of the old idea of a state based on obligations and obedience may have helped increase the dynamic force that enabled European countries to spread their authority over most of the world; the very widespread acceptance of the new idea of a state based on independence and equality gave people outside Europe political principles which helped them in the later struggle to dismantle the European empires.
Map 1 Voyages of Discovery
Military leaders in the sixteenth century who could not find wars to fight elsewhere might turn on their own sovereigns and fight at home; there had been some decades of civil war in England after the English had been driven out of France in the middle of the fifteenth century.
But an out-of-work military leader more often found a war-ridden frontier where he could operate without needing to consult his king.
Subjects of the King of England had been doing this in Ireland ever since Strongbow's invasion in 1169.
By the fifteenth century the King of England was Lord of Ireland, though his new territory was separate enough to have its own parliament, whose power was reduced but not eliminated by Poyning's Law of 1495, which forbade it to pass any law that had not been approved in advance by the King and his council.
Centralization of royal authority went further in Wales, which in 1536 was put under English law (and language) and given a couple of dozen seats in the House of Commons.
For some centuries Wales had been an area where rather independent lords raised private armies to hold the Welsh down, and sometimes turned these armies against the king.
One of the classic formulations of the feelings of settled but militarily powerful people on the quiet side of a frontier about their neighbours on the less settled side is to be found in a nursery rhyme:
Taffy was a Welshman, Taffy was a thief,
Taffy came to my house and stole a piece of beef.
I went to Taffy's house, Taffy was in bed;
I picked up a marrowbone and hit him on the head.
This simple account of cattle-raiding followed by an expedition to punish the thieves explains the situation on frontiers all over the world, and of course these punitive expeditions (which sometimes took the form of pre-emptive  strikes by people who wanted to get their retaliation in first) were carried out without consulting any central government.
The most striking activity undertaken on a frontier without consulting royal authority — perhaps the most striking event in the whole history of European expansion — was the conquest of most of the American continent south of the Tropic of Cancer in the space of a single generation by a succession of Spanish military leaders.
Overseas expansion was often led by men with no clear instructions or with instructions that they ignored, but the Spanish conquistadores like Cortes and Pizzaro took this further than most.
Their sovereign was immensely puzzled by the process and strongly suspected that some of them intended to secede and set up independent states in South America, but the conquests attracted special attention and gained retrospective approval because they opened up a great wealth of silver and gold for the treasury of the King of Spain.
They gave the ruler of Spain, more often referred to as the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V, possessions of a type previously unknown.
Charles's territories could already have been described as an empire, in the sense that he ruled over a collection of different political units held together by the allegiance his subjects felt they owed him rather than through a sense of common institutions or common language which could serve as the foundation for a unifying national spirit.
The powerful states of the time normally were empires, and had been for many centuries, though a few shadowy forerunners of the nation state could be seen by 1500.
England was something like a nation by the closing stages of the Hundred Years War with France in the mid-fifteenth century, and France was certainly much more like a nation at the end of the war than she had been at the beginning.
England had probably lost in international importance during the fifteenth century, partly because of her defeat in the Hundred Years War, partly because of the success of the Habsburgs in building up their empire on the basis of dynastic marriages.
At the time empires were normal enough; it was nationalism that was unusual and, if it did develop, it might easily break Charles's empire into fragments because of the absence of linguistic or geographic unity.
Acquiring land across the sea added a new complexity to an empire.
It was unlikely that even a common language could create a common national spirit to unite Spanish-speaking people divided by the salt, estranging sea, but as long as empires based on the principles of allegiance to a monarch were the dominant form of political organization they were very well adapted to face the problems of expanding and then of ruling new subjects.
The expanding European states often brought the energy of incipient nationalism to their forward march, but more or less all the states they encountered outside Europe were organized on the principle of allegiance or loyalty to the ruler.
All that the Europeans had to do was defeat the existing ruler and proclaim that their own ruler had filled the vacant throne.
When rights of conquest or  hereditary rights had placed two or more territories under a medieval ruler, he was quite accustomed to finding that they were ruled under different constitutions and he would not think of trying to impose a uniform system of government on them; Queen Elizabeth had rights and duties in England that were rather different from the rights and duties she had in the Channel Islands, which were all that was left of William the Conqueror's Norman territories, and it was perfectly natural for each new English acquisition overseas to be won on terms that differed from what had happened previously.
In the sixteenth century the word ‘empire’ did not usually refer to a state with transoceanic possessions of this sort.
When Henry VIII and his Parliament said that England was an empire they simply wanted to say that it was a sovereign state independent of the Pope's judicial authority.
But when Dr Dee (a scientist too aware of his Welsh descent to want to use the word ‘English’) wrote about the British Empire in the 1570s he was discussing the prospect of possessions beyond the seas, which were likely to be linked to England by the bond of allegiance to the sovereign more than by anything else.
There were limits to the range of territory that could be held together in this way in the sixteenth century: towards the end of his life Charles V abdicated and retired to a monastery, leaving his German lands and his title of Holy Roman Emperor to the line of his brother Ferdinand, even though he would probably have preferred to keep the entire empire together and leave it to his son Philip.
Despite the partition, Philip received Spain, the Netherlands and ‘the Indies’, or South America, which meant that he inherited most of Charles's revenues.
Kings wanted to build up reserves of bullion for the very practical reason that it would enable them to recruit armies, and it was also true that gold and silver had a great power to dazzle men's minds.
It was one of the magnetic forces that drew them overseas, and led them to disappointment quite as often as to wealth.
The leaders who went out to any area of European expansion had to make all their own decisions because it would take months, if not years, for their sovereign to reply to any request for instructions.
So leaders, and their followers on the frontiers of empire, often looked like disobedient and violent men.
An understanding monarch reflected that disobedient and violent subjects were also to be found much closer to home.
At a time when important people wore swords as a matter of course, the assumption that the strong ruled the weak was natural enough.
It was an attitude of mind which had existed long before the sixteenth century; the great change was that an attitude which could be found in a number of separate societies was suddenly turned by the expansion of Europe into a force that altered the way that the whole world ran its affairs.
The English Commercial Offensive
In a world like this, merchant ships went around armed against pirates, and non-Spanish merchant ships which sailed to South America found that citizens of towns on the ‘Spanish Main' (the mainland area which is now the coast of Venezuela) would ask to be forced to trade.
This ambiguous situation led to the first English clash with Spain.
Hawkins, a Devon merchant, had seen that the demand for slaves from Africa was increasing in South America, and in 1562 he sailed — in the way many Englishmen were to do in the seventeenth and eighteenth century — to West Africa, bought slaves, took them to the Caribbean ports, and sold them at a profit.
When he did this again in 1564 he was received less amicably, and in 1568 he found a visiting fleet at San Juan de Ulloa hostile enough to alarm him.
The tension rose, and in the fighting that followed he was very lucky to get out alive.
Hawkins withdrew from this dangerous line of business, though he felt his enterprise in trying to open up a new line of trade deserved recognition and he put a black slave on his coat-of-arms.
His cousin, Francis Drake, who had also been among the survivors of San Juan de Ulloa, took a more aggressive attitude to the Spanish empire; as an uncompromising Protestant he felt that his country ought to be at war with Spain and, if it would not do this, he would fight on his own account, looking round for people prepared to invest in a private attack on the wealth of Spain.
If he had had any doubts about this, the Queen's attitude must have set his mind at rest: she had invested, on a commercial basis, in Hawkins's slave-trading and, less openly, she invested in Drake's plans for a non-governmental attack on Spain.
Between 1577 and 1580 he sailed around the world — the first Englishman to carry out the feat originally achieved by the survivors of Magellan's voyage 60 years earlier — plundering Spanish ships and towns of their gold and silver as he did so.
Officially England was at peace with Spain, and Elizabeth expressed official regret at Drake's activities.
But she and the other investors received 4,700 per cent on their investment, and she made Drake a knight.
England and Spain remained nominally at peace for another half-dozen years, but disputes about trading and commerce-raiding in South America were among the reasons why philip II tried to invade England in 1588.
The Spanish Armada was defeated so decisively that the English often reckoned that their command of the sea began then, although it was never secure until the end of the seventeenth century.
Without the naval strength established during Elizabeth's reign, imperial development would not have been possible; and the foundations of that strength had been laid earlier.
Fishing boats crossed the Atlantic for most of the sixteenth century, and in the middle of the century Henry VIII set out to encourage an artillery industry.
The manufacturers were very successful at making guns out of Sussex iron, which affected naval tactics for many years.
The sea powers around the Mediterranean used bronze cannon which were much more elegant and probably more accurate but cost about four times as much.
English ships could equip themselves with a heavy weight of broadside relatively cheaply, so that they were built simply to carry guns without worrying too much about anything else.
Other navies might stick to the old tactics of trying to board enemy ships and capture them, or concentrate on firing at the masts and rigging in the hope that successful shooting would disable the other side, but the English preferred to shoot into the hulls of their enemies because they knew that with enough time and enough shot they would destroy their opponents.
Map 2 Britain in Early Modern Europe
The war between England and Spain went on for sixteen years after the defeat of the Armada, with a good deal of the English effort being undertaken by private ventures like Drake's (though they were easier to acknowledge once war had begun officially).
It became clear that neither country could win a victory that would compel the other to surrender.
This failure to defeat England and a number of other setbacks showed that the power of Spain was declining, which was one of the major political changes of the first half of the seventeenth century.
But while England was coming to be seen as a reasonably important power after having looked very weak in the middle of the sixteenth century, a more conspicuous change was the emergence of the Netherlands.
The United Provinces, as they were then known, had been under Habsburg rule and began a 40-year war with Spain for their national independence in the 1570s.
In the early stages England had given them a certain amount of help, partly out of sympathy for their Protestant religious beliefs and partly to check the power of Spain — it was this war in the Netherlands, more than the troubles in South America, which convinced Philip that he should try to invade England.
By the 1590s it was clear that the Netherlands would become independent and would be very powerful at sea.
Even before the war with Spain ended in 1609 the Dutch were preparing to attack various parts of the empire the Portuguese had built up in the Indian Ocean in the previous hundred years, stretching as far east as Java and the other Spice Islands near it, and later on they also attacked the Portuguese possessions in Brazil.
When English merchants moved out into the world beyond Europe, it was natural enough that the Spice Islands became their ultimate objective.
Transport cost so much that it was virtually impossible to make a profit by importing anything that could be produced locally; although salt cod was brought across the Atlantic, in general nothing but luxury goods like gold, silver, furs, and spices would yield a reasonable return after paying for a costly ocean voyage.
Because transport costs were so high, trade could add a good deal to the national income of any country which was successful at it.
Once goods had been brought to a European port, they could be re-exported  at a higher price to other European countries that had no direct trade across the sea, so a good many of the calculations about trade were concerned with re-exporting goods which had not been processed into an improved form but were simply being sent to a place where they commanded some additional scarcity value.
Spices suited this situation very well: they had a high value in proportion to their weight, they could not be produced in Europe, and they were always valued by rich people who used them to mask the taste of the not-too-well preserved meat which was the best that anyone could hope for in the winter.
Going to the Spice Islands was only the last stage of increasingly ambitious ventures.
In Russia English merchants had gone some way south of Moscow, and trade was also being carried on in the Eastern Mediterranean or Levant.
These steps into new territory were too big and too risky to be undertaken by individual merchants.
In the sixteenth century the right to import commodities, or to process them domestically, normally rested on a grant of a monopoly.
Granting a monopoly was the easiest way for the monarch to encourage a trade or an industry, and was also a way to reward courtiers, who did not get salaries and hoped for substantial favours of just this sort.
Because grants to courtiers came to be seen as an abuse, monopolies to individuals were prohibited in 1624, but corporations could still receive them and they continued to be the basis for trade outside Europe in the seventeenth century.
It seemed obvious that the best form of organization for overseas trade was the one that was used first in exporting wool and then by the cloth traders, who still accounted for three-quarters of English exports in the first half of the century: all the merchants involved would sell together at a ‘staple’ town, usually in Belgium or the Netherlands, where they could avoid competing with each other and so increase their bargaining strength.
Merchants trading overseas had to cover the diplomatic and even military expenses which in later centuries would be met by their governments.
To deal with this, a group of merchants who wanted to trade in a particular part of the world would ask the monarch for a charter allowing them a monopoly of bringing goods from their chosen region into England, giving them rights to defend themselves against pirates and bandits with their own armed force, and letting them settle legal problems that would otherwise have to wait years until they got back to England.
This sort of approach suited the violent attitudes of the age: as much money was invested in expeditions for private warfare against Spain as in all the trading and land-settling companies of the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries.
Against this background merchants, or factors, trading a long way from their home base realized that the safest form of organization was to set up a factory or small enclave for merchants of the type that the Hanseatic League had maintained in London up to 1598.
A base like this could not resist the authority of the host  government but it could protect merchants against local hostility or the attacks of other traders.
Members of the merchants of the wool staple traded as individuals, but in 1552 the Muscovy Company was launched on a joint stock basis, allowing people to sell their shares without weakening the Company, and it began trading with Moscow by going north-east to the White Sea.
In the 1580s the Turkey Company and the Venice Company were founded, and in 1592 they combined to form the Levant Company, which learned enough about the riches of the Indies for various members of it to organize the East India Company, which had about £68,000 trading capital for its first voyage and a charter granted on 31 December 1600.
Its first governor, Sir Thomas Smith, had been to Russia for the Muscovy Company and was active in the Levant Company, and remained governor of the East India Company with two brief interruptions until 1621.
The Dutch launched their much larger East India Company with about £500,000 of capital two years later, and when the English company tried to trade with the Spice Islands the Dutch opposed it fiercely.
Its base at Amboyna was overrun in 1623 and some of its garrison tortured to death in an episode Dryden reckoned would still be remembered when he wrote a play about it in a period of anti-Dutch feeling 50 years later.
The English East India Company held a substantial base in the East Indies at Bantam until 1682, but very early in its history it decided to concentrate on the western Indian Ocean.
In 1605 it began trading at Surat, which was convenient for the Persian trade already developed by the Muscovy Company and also for diplomatic contact with the Moghul capital at Agra.
The Company devoted itself to building up a substantial trade in pepper which, while not as valuable as the most expensive products of the Spice Islands like nutmeg and cloves, still commanded a very steady market in Europe.
The problem was to find exports with which to pay for it; English woollens and iron products were not luxurious enough for the ruling class in India and were far too expensive for the vast majority of the population.
Living standards for most of the population were lower in India than in western Europe and silver bullion, which was the nearest thing to a common international currency at the time, had a higher purchasing power in India than in Europe, so that anything made by people who were paid European wages would be expensive in terms of silver in India.
The Company, from its very first voyage, exported bullion rather than English products and, when economists complained that this would lead to a loss of bullion which would cause deflation and depression in England, the Company replied that it exported between 50 and 90 per cent of its pepper to countries in northern Europe which paid four or five times as much silver as the Company paid in India, so that on balance its activities substantially increased the amount of bullion in the country.
Transport costs cut into that favourable balance; the Company reckoned it had to sell Indian cotton textiles at 2½ to 3 times their  Indian price to cover costs, and dividends were not normally above 7 or 8 per cent a year.
The Moghul Empire, which at that time covered the northern two-thirds of the Indian subcontinent, was at its most impressive; these were the decades of the Taj Mahal, the Red Fort at Delhi, and also of an attempt by the Muslim rulers of India to conciliate the Hindu majority.
When the Company retained a courtier, Sir Thomas Roe, to strengthen their position at Agra in 1616, he advised them that their factories need not be fortified because the Moghuls were perfectly able to keep the peace that traders needed, and could capture fortified towns if they set their minds to it.
On the other hand, strength at sea would help displace the Portuguese who had gained control of the Indian Ocean a century earlier, and this would please the Emperor; accordingly the East India Company armed its ships heavily enough to hold the sea against the Portuguese and against the local pirates.
Because the Company was intended to provide an opportunity for all English merchants interested in the Indian trade to take part, it did not treat shareholdings as permanent commitments.
Members of the Company put their money down on a separate basis for a distinct and limited series of enterprises; profits from the voyage would be divided in proportion to capital invested, but capital as well as dividends could be withdrawn when the enterprises were complete and all the goods brought back had been sold off.
Despite this somewhat unstable basis the Company did quite well until 1630 when trade was dislocated by a famine in Gujerat, and in the next few years its legal position was undermined because Charles I allowed the Courteen family — whose interests in the West Indies had suffered because he had given away their rights in certain islands inadvertently — to trade with India without any regard for the Company's charter.
The bases in India, of which Surat founded in 1611 and Madras founded in 1642 were the most important, kept going even when the Company in London was at its lowest ebb and the current stock had sunk to 60 per cent of its original price.
This gave continuity to the English connection with India, but by the middle of the century India was not at the centre of English overseas activity.
The eastern trade never disappeared, but trading posts were being closed down and the Indies were losing their hold on people's attention.
poets had referred to the riches of the east for many years, but in the early seventeenth century ‘My America, my new-found-land’ seemed a more effective phrase to represent emotional force and involvement.
The Tobacco Colonies
One of the attractions for Englishmen in the long wars with France had been the prospects of conquering and ruling new territories.
The end of the wars drove them back to the British Isles, and some of them turned to fight for  land in Ireland.
The struggle there in the sixteenth century became more embittered than ever because Ireland had remained Roman Catholic when England had become Protestant in the middle of the century.
The conquest of Ireland was the largest military undertaking of Elizabeth's reign, costing over £1m., or the total royal revenue for three years, which was far more than any other military or naval activities, and a new wave of English landlords was able to gain estates if they could hold the rebellious Irish population in subjection.
Some of the men who took part in this, like Sir Walter Raleigh and his brother-in-law Sir Humphrey Gilbert, were also attracted by the idea of getting lands on the other side of the Atlantic, and the success of the Spaniards encouraged them in the widespread belief that an immense amount of gold and silver was waiting to be discovered all over the Americas.
When Frobisher sailed to the north of America in 1576, inspired by hopes of finding a north-west passage to India or China in the way that hopes of finding a north-east passage had led to the voyage that opened up the Muscovy trade, he and his backers were excited to find what they thought was gold on the route.
More voyages were made in 1577 and 1578 to bring ore back, but the whole enterprise collapsed when the ore turned out to be only pyrites.
The fishing fleets that had gone to Newfoundland since early in the century indicated another possible area for settlement, and Gilbert lost his life in 1583 on the way back from inspecting the prospects for a colony there.
The first full attempt at establishing a colony was Raleigh's colony of Virginia, named for Elizabeth the virgin queen and located in what is now the Roanoke district of North Carolina.
After a voyage of investigation in 1584 a colony that was intended to be permanent was launched in 1585.
Although it was evacuated in 1586, new settlers came later in the year, and were reinforced in 1587.
In the next few years all of England's maritime energies were concentrated on resisting Philip of Spain's attempt at invasion, and by the time one of Raleigh's associates was able to visit the colony again in 1590 it had disappeared.
No further colonization could be attempted while the war with Spain went on, partly because ships bound for the North American seacoast were forced by the prevailing winds to go uncomfortably far north or dangerously close to the Spanish settlement in the south, but interest revived after peace was made with Spain in 1604.
By then Raleigh was in prison, charged with planning to drive the new king (James VI of Scotland, who in 1603 succeeded Elizabeth and became James I of England) off the throne, but the idea of a colony in Virginia attracted merchants from Plymouth and from London.
They got in touch with commercially-minded courtiers, including Roe, and in 1606 persuaded the king to issue a charter to the Virginia Company, dividing the North American seacoast from about 35 °N to 45 °N into a section for the Londoners including Sir Thomas Smith, who went south to the region of  Raleigh's original settlement, and a section for the Plymouth men who followed their fishing interests further north.
In the event the Plymouth group did very little after 1609 but in 1607 the Londoners committed themselves more fully than before and launched an expedition which founded a settlement at Jamestown in Chesapeake Bay.
Only then did it emerge that the settlers did not really know what they intended to do.
They knew only two ways to make money out of territorial expansion: to find gold and silver, or to make themselves into landlords with plenty of tenants to cultivate their new estates.
There was clearly no gold to dig up, and the Indians did not look like becoming docile tenants — the question was whether they might not instead drive the newcomers into the sea.
Perhaps the Indians would have done so if they had been conscious of any pressure of numbers on the land, but North America was not crowded and the Indians assisted the new settlers and showed them how to grow the local crops.
When the settlers got to Virginia, everyone expected the gentlemen of the party to run things, just as in England.
But being a gentleman in England was not just a matter of giving orders; it required considerable wealth, spent lavishly and in a way that commanded respect.
The gentlemen in Virginia were in no position to do this; they had very little money to spend in a gentlemanly way and no particular experience of colonization to give them any other claims to respect and obedience, as nothing got done and about 60 of the 100 initial settlers died in 1607.
A military man, Captain John Smith, pulled the colony together in 1608 but it became all too clear that the colonists were not even able to feed themselves; 1609 was remembered as ‘the starving time’ and the settlers were preparing to give up and leave for England when Lord De La Warr arrived with fresh supplies and new settlers in June 1610.
The difficulty for the Company in England was that establishing someone who had crossed to North America took an initial investment equal to about a year's wages, so the investors had to keep on providing supplies without seeing any sign of how the colony would repay them.
Francis Bacon who put money into an unsuccessful company to colonize Newfoundland wrote in his essay On Plantations (the word used then and for most of the seventeenth century for what would later be called colonies)‘You must make account to lose almost twenty years profit, and expect your recompense in the end.’
The dynastic change from Tudors to Stuarts in 1603 is sometimes said to have been accompanied by a shift from optimism to gloom, and Bacon certainly took an unusually sober approach.
Because John Smith's period of office had been reasonably successful, the Company put the colony under military discipline, which stabilized the situation and provided a more efficient system of government than trying to transplant a peculiarly English way of running things.
The first signs of a solution to the financial problem began to appear; the settlers started growing tobacco and by 1611 they were exporting it to England.
It sold at a  high enough price per pound to cover the cost of carrying it across the Atlantic, and Jamestown enjoyed a tobacco boom, though the increase in exports from 20,000 lb. in 1617 to 350,000 lb. in 1621 was not enough to enable the Company to show a profit, because the (wholesale, pre-duty) price fell from four or five shillings a pound to a shilling a pound at the same time.
Bacon, as an advocate of really long-term investment, said the concentration on tobacco was ‘to the untimely prejudice of the main business’, though it is not easy to see what he thought the main business of a plantation ought to be — his essay was full of sensible advice, much of it showing signs of the influence of the Virginia experience, but he never explained why people should want to support this sort of enterprise, unless it was to be part of a programme for sending people abroad to reduce overpopulation.
In 1619 Sir Thomas Smith, who had been treasurer of the Company since 1609, was pushed into retirement and the new directors led by Sir Edwin Sandys brought about two important changes.
One problem for the Virginia planters was that tobacco could be grown in England; James I agreed to help the company by making tobacco-growing illegal in England and, although people broke the law and tried to raise tobacco for much of the rest of the century, the American monopoly was eventually made effective.
This was not just a matter of helping a company and a colony in trouble; imports were easy to tax, governments found that luxury products were particularly satisfying because their sales were not depressed by high import duties, and tobacco paid duty at a shilling a pound or about 100 per cent of the wholesale price.
In theory an excise on home production of tobacco could have produced the same revenue as a tax on imports but in practice it took a strong and efficient government to levy an excise, while almost any government could find private businessmen who would pay a lump sum of cash in return for the right to collect the official rates of customs duties at a port.
Over three-quarters of the taxable imports into England came through the port of London, so that collecting the London duties provided a chance to become very rich; this was how Sir Thomas's father had gained his fortune and his title of ‘Customer’ Smith.
Other ports dealt very much in the coastal trade; if sea transport was expensive, land transport was prohibitively costly, and very slow, so that a number of small ports could flourish on goods being taken from one part of England to another.
Checking their activities to see that they were confining themselves to local products, and were not turning to smuggling was very difficult until improvements in transport and in the structure of government meant that the vast majority of imports paid duty.
So James had good reason not to trust a local market in tobacco, and to believe that he would do better if he kept it as a commodity to be imported and to pay duty accordingly, mainly at London and Bristol.
As soon as he had gained control, Sandys brought about another change in the Virginia Company's way of running things; he told the Company's  governor in the colony to have an assembly elected from among the colonists to give him advice and to act as the legislative body to pass any local laws needed inside the colony.
This was a third form of government, after rule by gentlemen and rule by military discipline had turned out not to be very successful, and most Englishmen would have found it rather less usual than either of the earlier types of government.
A few of the larger towns in England had the right to elect a council to run their own affairs, but the great majority of Englishmen lived in the countryside where Justices of the Peace ran things in the way that gentlemen had always done.
Companies like the Virginia Company ran their affairs through elected committees, and this may have suggested to Sandys that the colonists could run their end of the business with the aid of an elected system as well.
Virginia had no property qualifications to limit men's right to vote until 1670, and this was a little more like the usual arrangements in a company, where all shareholders were able to vote, than the position in parliamentary elections, where property qualifications for voting went on for hundreds of years to come.
Elected assemblies were uncommon enough in English life to encourage the Virginia assembly to treat the House of Commons as the natural parallel to its own position and to look to Commons precedents as a guide to its rights and duties.
This did not necessarily mean that they took a very exalted view of their own importance.
They could not easily have found any other body with which they could compare themselves, and in any case the House of Commons of the 1620s was itself not very important.
Passing new laws was not a common occurrence, and the Commons usually left the conduct of day-to-day policy, especially in foreign affairs, to the King and his council, with complete certainty that this small body was better informed than the Commons or even the average members of the House of Lords.
In Virginia, the Governor, appointed by the company and sent out from London, kept executive authority in his own hands.
He had a council to advise him on these policy decisions, and he and his council recognized the great similarity between the powers of the assembly and those of the House of Commons in passing laws and imposing new taxes.
Basing the structure of authority upon a governor, a council for day-to-day affairs, and an assembly to pass legislation, vote taxes, and express the trend of public feeling was an arrangement that would seem natural to anyone who knew about the English system of King, Privy Council, and parliament.
The structure turned out to be very durable; most of the colonial constitutions set up by the British in the next three-and-a-half centuries show similarities to the Virginia Company's way of doing things, though there were sometimes refinements, such as a legislative council created as an upper house to work with the assembly; and in several cases — especially when the majority of the population was not of British descent — the legislative body was appointed rather than elected.
This success in constitution-making did not bring success for the Virginia Company; Sandys was able to keep up emigration, but death and discouragement meant the population hardly rose above 1,000.
An unexpected Indian attack on Good Friday 1622, in which a large number of colonists were killed, dealt the final blow to the Company.
Spanish hostility was obviously a handicap to it, but when the charter was declared void in 1624 it was mainly because the Company was bankrupt; the Spanish objection was to the colony rather than to the Company, and the colony was allowed to survive.
Something permanent had clearly been created in Virginia and, shortly after coming to the throne in 1625, Charles I did what he could to stabilize the situation by declaring it a royal colony and taking into his own hands the power to appoint the governor.
This did not involve the King's government in any expense; if people went overseas, presumably they did it in order to make money, and the King could see no reason why he should provide any of his not very plentiful revenue to enrich them faster, though he might invest money of his own if he thought he had a reasonable chance of getting a dividend.
Economists were afraid that the country was over-populated and believed that the problems of poverty and unemployment would be reduced if the surplus hands and mouths would go overseas, but it did not follow that the government was going to pay for them to go.
All that the King could do was to provide some sort of legal foundation of government for Englishmen going to unsettled and thinly populated areas, which he did by linking the legitimacy of their governments to the legitimacy of his government.
He did not have the military power to offer protection to Englishmen overseas; if the Spanish from the south were to attack English colonies, they would have to defend themselves or rely on English diplomacy, because Charles could send neither ships nor troops across the Atlantic for help.
Most colonists remained loyal subjects of the King, but they paid very little money to him and his government and they received very little help, financial or military, from it.
The legal status provided by the King carried various legal implications with it.
The colonists remained subjects of the King of England and had to obey English law.
They were also subject to the English Parliament, which put them on a different footing from the King's Scots or Irish subjects, who had Parliaments of their own that were not subordinate to the Westminster Parliament in the way that the Virginia assembly was.
Parliament did not often pass laws with any wide-ranging implications, and the most wide-ranging recent laws, the religious legislation of the Reformation, were never applied at all precisely in America, but no legal framework could have been imagined for the colonies which gave them a legitimate position under English law without putting them under the legislative supremacy of Parliament.
By the time Virginia became a royal colony it was no longer the only English settlement in the Americas.
The Virginia Company had itself  produced a subsidiary company which occupied the islands at first known officially as Somers Islands — though when Shakespeare wrote The Tempest some people already called them the Bermoothes, and Bermuda it remained for posterity.
The subsidiary company did better than the Virginia Company, kept going for another sixty years, and in the 1640s provided most of the settlers who moved on to the Bahamas.
But there were more important developments in the North American seacoast and at the east end of the Caribbean.
At the time the Caribbean islands seemed the more attractive prospect, and in the first generation of migration more Englishmen went there than to the American colonies that developed north of Virginia.
There had been unsuccessful attempts even further south; the unfortunate Raleigh got himself out of the Tower by promising to find James 1 a supply of gold in Guiana, but he found no gold and he irritated the Spanish so much that they pushed James into having him executed in 1618 on the 1604 charge of treason.
But this had been an attempt to land on the Spanish Main, and the Spanish felt much less concerned about the long string of small islands in the Lesser Antilles at the eastern end of the Caribbean.
English merchants felt confident that money could be made out of settlements there, if only they could acquire enough influence at court to secure a charter to launch them.
They did not hope for any tangible support for their undertaking, but a charter would give them some standing in England, allow them to create a legal government, and possibly convince any enquiring Spaniards that they were not simply setting up a pirate base.
The Spanish were sometimes justified in thinking that a pirate base was precisely what English companies had in mind; in the 1630s the providence Island Company was set up by determined Protestants who thought that plundering Catholic ships would be rewarded in this world and the next, though other Englishmen, who settled informally on the east coast of central America, were concerned with felling trees and exporting logwood as a dye-stuff.
Charles was not inclined to look too hard at what he was giving away in the charters he issued, and he issued two charters, one to the Earl of Carlisle and one to Sir William Courteen, which covered the same islands, probably because people in England did not know much about the geography of the area and possibly did not much care.
To resolve the question, Lord Carlisle was given a charter that covered the whole area and the Courteen family were given, by way of compensation for their neglected rights, the permission to trade with India which caused the East India Company so much trouble in the 1630s.
But a colony which depended on a patent-holder in England was not likely to do very well, and Carlisle was among the least active of the patent-holders.
The desire to get land to cultivate as a farmer and proprietor or simply to get work as a landless labourer drew people to the islands in large numbers.
Apprehension about the Spaniards turned out to be unjustified; they had serious problems with the Dutch, who were moving forward in the West  Indies, and also with the trade winds, that blew from the east and made it very hard for ships from the Spanish Main or from the larger islands like Cuba to reach the smaller islands.
In any case occupying them was of little interest to the Spanish authorities, for the islands the English settled had a much smaller area than Jamaica, the smallest and least developed of the Spanish islands; later on, after it had been taken from the Spanish, Jamaica was the most important of the English Caribbean islands, but this only serves to show how small the English settlements were.
The newcomers were not able to brush aside the native Carib population with quite the contemptuous ease with which the Spaniards had conquered the mainland; attempts to settle in earlier years had been resisted successfully and in some islands the English settlers had to remain at least as careful about the risk of native attack as any community in North America.
This sort of pressure, combined with fear of the Spaniards, made it easier for the English to work with the French who were settling in the same region of islands than earlier or later generations would have thought possible.
The first effective English settlement in the West Indies, founded in 1624, was on the island of St. Christopher (later called St. Kitts) which was shared with the French, informally at first and then by a formal partition worked out a couple of years later which lasted until the British gained the whole island in 1713.
In 1627 a settlement was made on Barbados, which had two additional attractions: it was uninhabited, so the dangers of warfare with the Caribs did not arise, and it was so far to the east of the island chain that it was even better protected by the trade winds than any of the other islands.
In the course of two centuries of wars and battles and scuffles, in which all the other islands were invaded and many were conquered, Barbados remained untouched.
But the flow of immigrants went on, with very little space to receive the new settlers, so in 1628 some of them made the easy move from St. Kitts to Nevis, and a couple of years later made a slightly longer move and occupied the islands of Antigua and Monserrat, laying the foundations of English settlement in the Leeward Islands.
Almost all this expansion was based on tobacco.
Virginia's success had shown what could be done, and the West Indian settlement spent very little time considering any other commercial prospects for some years.
Conditions of work were not pleasant; landowners tried to get their estates cultivated by indentured labourers who had come out under a contract to work for some years for the man who paid for the journey or anyone to whom he sold the right to command their services.
The passage cost £6, or something like a year's wages and for repayment the indenture might run from four to seven years — though they would, of course, have to be fed and clothed in that period.
To encourage rich men to bring out poor settlers like this, a ‘head right’ system was used to give land -50 acres a head in the case of Virginia — to the landowner for each immigrant he had brought across the  Atlantic.
The indentured labourers hoped to be able to set up as independent farmers once they had worked off the costs of their passages, but the islands soon became so crowded that they were unlikely to be able to do this.
Many of them found it easier to move on to the North American mainland after their indentures had expired.
New labourers came out, many from Ireland where pressure on land was unusually severe; they came from southern Irish ports, so they could not have been directly affected by the English conquest and the Scottish settlement of Ulster at the beginning of the seventeenth century, but possibly Irish landlords felt that it no longer made sense to keep up private armies and turned men out of service for this reason.
The steady flow of emigrants from the British Isles meant that landowners in the West Indies did not need to look further afield to find workers for growing tobacco, for which they needed a relatively small labour force working all the year round.
In the 1630s the tobacco boom showed signs of having reached its peak.
Prices were falling and far-sighted men were looking for something else to cultivate.
The islands could hardly survive without an export crop: some progress was being made in establishing cotton-growing when, in the 1640s, English politics and Dutch commerce worked together in a way that decided the course of the West Indies for centuries.
Charles I and his Parliament quarrelled, and this led to the Civil War of the 1640s which ended with the defeat and execution of the King and, in 1649, the establishment of a republic.
While the civil war raged, the English government could not maintain even the rather shadowy control it had exercised previously.
The tobacco growers had been accustomed to trading practically exclusively with their home country for reasons of language and sentiment, because it was safer, and because England and the London re-export trade provided an adequate market for all the tobacco they could grow.
At just the time when the Civil War was weakening this commercial connection, the Dutch were trying to conquer the portuguese colony of Brazil.
In the end they failed, but during their period of dominance they entered the sugar trade very successfully and persuaded the English in the West Indies to grow sugar to take the place of tobacco; at first they thought they could absorb the English islands into the Amsterdam trading system, but while it quite soon turned out that this was not the case and direct Dutch influence did not last very long, the commitment to sugar dominated the islands for at least two hundred years and remained important long afterwards.
Growing sugar and preparing it for shipping to London was harder work than growing and curing tobacco, and a much larger labour force was needed for the process of harvesting the cane and crushing it which had to be done in a very short period of time.
Much the easiest way to assemble a larger labour force was to buy slaves, and the Dutch were ready to help with this, giving the fairly long credit that anyone who wanted to become a planter would  need in order to finance his purchases of slaves and of machinery to crush the cane and take the first steps in refining it.
Sugar leaped forward to dominate the market and to transform life socially and racially first in Barbados and then in the other English West Indian islands.
The smaller landlords who could not find cash or credit to equip themselves as sugar planters quickly sold out; land prices in the 1640s rose to heights which showed that the profits of sugar were being anticipated and capitalized generously.
This was pleasant for the small landowners, who could move on to Virginia and resume tobacco growing there, but less prosperous white men in the West Indies lost almost all hope of working up the scale to become modest farmers on their own land.
So small an area of land was available in Barbados when it turned to sugar in the 1640s that land prices were pushed up to ten times the level at which it had been sold for growing tobacco.
The island no longer gave men without much capital the economic opportunity sometimes to be found on a frontier, where land can be acquired cheaply by anyone prepared to make the great effort needed to clear it and plant the first crops.
It took fifteen or twenty years for the prosperous white planters to see the dangers of a community in which the vast majority of the population were slaves from Africa and there was no room for any white man below their own level of prosperity.
By the 1660s all the islands were committed to sugar and the white planters were taking drastic steps to prevent their white employees from leaving the islands and tilting the population balance still further towards the black slaves, but this of course made white employees all the more determined to avoid going to the West Indies.
A number of Royalist prisoners from the civil wars in England and Ireland were transported to the sugar islands in the 1650s as convict labour with the prospect of eventual release to become part of the white garrison, but this barely covered the losses from death and emigration.
At the beginning of the switch to sugar there were about 25,000 Englishmen in the West Indies and the figure rose to almost 40,000 in the 1660s — partly because more islands were captured or settled — and then hardly moved higher for over a century to come.
The black slave population increased quickly: by the 1660s the slave population exceeded the white population in the English West Indies taken as a whole, though this chiefly reflected the transformation of Barbados, which had turned whole-heartedly to sugar, reduced the number of small farmers, and established a slave majority by 1650.
The other islands followed and had slave majorities by the 1670s, and once they had done so the process was irreversible; white men could not be persuaded to come to an area where wages were set by the cost of slave labour.
In any case nobody wanted to reverse the process; tobacco had been a pleasant commercial curtain-raiser but by the second half of the seventeenth century people in England were convinced that the real attraction of possessions overseas lay in the sugar islands.
If anything, these developments strengthened the links with  England: the sugar planters, just like the tobacco farmers, needed a market to which they could send their staple export product, and England was turning into a market that was always ready to absorb new products for domestic consumption or for re-export through its expanding commercial system.
The Religious Colonies
On the North American mainland there were no equally dramatic economic developments, though there were prospects for quite considerable political changes.
The Plymouth merchants gave up the idea of founding a northern colony, though they were interested in the prospects for fishing and they traded with the Indians along the coastline.
A group of Puritans who felt that the Church of England was too close to the Roman Catholic Church had left England and gone to the Netherlands; they noticed with regret that their children were becoming Dutch in speech and habits, and some of them decided that their best prospect of remaining both godly and English was to get in touch with the Plymouth merchants, obtain from them financial support and the legal right to found a colony, and go somewhere in America where English bishops would not interfere with them.
They came back to England, recruited fellow-Puritans (so that the people from the Netherlands were only about one-sixth of the whole group), hired the Mayflower and sailed across the Atlantic to land at what they called Plymouth Rock in Massachusetts Bay.
Saying that ‘the Pilgrim Fathers will always hold a unique place among the venerated saints of mankind’ may be going too far, but their plain approach to life, the simple statement of belief they made on the voyage in the Mayflower Compact, and their peaceful settlements and good relations with the Indians among whom they settled were certainly in sharp contrast to what happened in most colonies.
They started off, like most other overseas enterprises, on a commercial basis by raising money from investors who stayed in England, and it took them about a dozen years or so to pay the investors off and become entirely free to run their own affairs.
They chose their own governor every year, though as they re-elected Governor Bradford thirty times in the next thirty-five years their policy suffered no lack of continuity.
Neither Bradford nor his successors obtained a charter for the colony, and because of this it was absorbed into the much larger colony of Massachusetts in 1691.
The change involved no religious problems because the larger colony had been launched for much the same reasons: a number of Puritans, of whom the largest single group came from East Anglia, had formed the Massachusetts Bay Company and obtained a charter to settle there in a firm determination to cut themselves off from England and the elements of Roman Catholicism they detected in the Church of England.
Most of the   people who went to Virginia or the West Indies were clearly looking for an opportunity to do better than they could in England, and if they made fortunes they would probably go back to England to enjoy their wealth, but the Massachusetts Bay Company was more concerned with escape from England or with the creation of a society that improved on its better aspects and rejected the worse.
Its charter, unlike most of the others, did not say that meetings of the directors of the Company had to be held in England.
So after a year's preliminary investigation they moved the charter and their centre of government to Boston (Massachusetts, though named after the East Anglian port) in 1630 and made it clear that they intended to cut off all official connection with the English government.
This was not as easy as they hoped; they knew that, however much it might disapprove of their activities, the English government certainly had no power to get its orders obeyed on the western side of the Atlantic, but their charter, which they hoped would make them independent of England, and on which they relied for the legal basis of their community, said — like all the other charters — that they must not pass laws that were not consistent with English laws.
This later led to more troubles than they could have expected, but in the 1630s they seemed to be effectively independent.
They had not gone overseas out of a belief in religious toleration.
Each one of them knew what he or she meant by true religion, and all of them were sure that the church and the government in England were wrong.
It was probably natural that the community they set up was so convinced of its own religious ideals that it thought toleration was harmful, but it was also natural that the strong-minded people who had committed themselves to this Atlantic crossing were not able to agree among themselves what was the true religion to which they were so committed.
Questions of religion mattered so much to the leaders of the colony that arguments in favour of religious toleration would have seemed to them simply a new onslaught on the purity of religion.
By restricting the right to vote to fully accepted church members, political power in Massachusetts was placed in the hands of the godly men who had led the expedition; those who had joined the expedition merely in the hope of a better standard of living found their efforts justified by success because, despite some difficult times in the 1630s, the labouring population in the colony by the 1640s was fairly certainly more prosperous than they would have been if they had stayed in England, and about 20,000 people had settled in New England at a total cost of about £200,000.
A more rigorous church system, which in any case allowed them a chance to work out their own salvation, may not have seemed too high a price.
Those who had come to New England to have an opportunity to practice their own approach to religion, and then found they did not agree with the views held by those who were in power, had a more serious problem.
Dissenting minorities were driven out by religious difficulties: Roger Williams left Boston within a year of arriving, though it was not until five years later that he made his way south through the dense woodlands to Rhode Island to launch the first settlement based on principles of religious toleration in 1636.
Several other groups made their way south in the 1630s to establish new settlements on the south shore between the Plymouth region and the Dutch settlement of New Amsterdam at the mouth of the Hudson River.
These settlements felt at least as detached from England as the Massachusetts Bay Company, and of course they had less of a legal foundation, because they had no charters of their own.
They were new colonies which were produced by the existing colonies, even if in no friendly spirit, and the possibility that colonies could produce new colonies was likely to make the task of the government in London even harder if it ever tried to impose a unified colonial policy.
Map 3 The Thirteen Colonies
In the absence of charters, the new colonies on the south shore devised constitutions of their own: Connecticut's Foundations in 1639 were primarily concerned to bring a group of separate towns, each with a rural hinterland, together as one colony with a congregational approach to religion which would avoid the dangers of conflict and division, while the Constitution of Rhode Island, established in 1643, took a long step further towards complete commitment to the view that no particular variety of religion would be given a special position and that everybody would be allowed to carry on worship freely.
Toleration as wide-ranging as this would not have been acceptable in England, where hostility to Roman Catholicism had been building up for seventy years since Mary Tudor's attempt to wipe out Protestantism.
Sir George Calvert, a politician at the Stuart court, had already shown his interest in colonization by trying to found a settlement in the Avalon district of Newfoundland, though this had failed partly because of the climate and partly because of the opposition of the fishermen who came from England every summer to use it as a base for fishing on the Grand Banks.
Early in the 1630s Calvert announced his conversion to Catholicism and, though Charles I valued his services and asked him to stay at court, he decided it could only cause trouble if he did so.
He set out to launch a North American colony to which Catholics could retreat to avoid the discrimination that seemed to have become unalterably established in England and in New England.
When Sir George died unexpectedly Charles gave his son the title of Lord Baltimore and continued to support the scheme.
Although the 1624 Act against letting an individual hold a monopoly meant that no businessman could take the place of a trading company, there was no reason why an individual should not hold a charter as a great landlord.
Some companies had suffered because their policies did not suit the King's diplomacy.
The primarily Scottish Nova Scotia Company had  established itself on the Atlantic seacoast north of Maine and the Canada Company had in 1628 captured the recently established French base at Quebec, but both of them had to give up their territory when peace was made with France in 1632, and they faded into financial oblivion.
So land-holding companies were not in favour, while the idea that land should be held by a great individual landlord fitted the way people thought society ought to be run.
The chartered company continued to be regarded as the best type of organization for carrying on overseas trade, but a grant to an individual proprietor began to be seen as the best way to set up a new colony to which settlers would come to cultivate the land.
The proprietor would choose a governor for the colony, paying perhaps more attention to making sure he was acceptable to the King than the chartered companies did.
While the Maryland charter gave the Calverts the same executive authority as the Bishops of Durham held on the Scottish border, it required them to make sure that the colonists had approved the laws of their colony before they came into effect; it may have been realized from earlier experience that an assembly was needed, or there may have been some feeling that a Catholic colony would have special problems.
Emigration to the colony went on happily enough in the 1630s.
The majority of the settlers were Protestant but the Calvert family influence, sometimes reinforced by having a member of the family go to Maryland as governor, was quite sufficient to protect the interests of the Catholic minority and secure religious toleration in normal times.
A period of disturbance was bound to give the more zealous of the Protestants a chance to try to gain power in order to persecute the Catholics.
When the Civil War broke out in England in the 1640s, it could be taken calmly enough in most of the American colonies because the colonists had no particular desire for changes; in Maryland the Protestants did want changes, and by 1655 they had taken power from the Catholic minority, though the new government was never completely in control of the situation and Catholics maintained a more satisfactory position than they could have in any other territory under English rule at the time.
Setting up so many colonies to give people a chance to practise religion in their own way had helped produce a great diversity among the English colonies.
Maryland was organized as a late and formal version of the feudal system, the Virginian way of life was always expected to reflect some memories of the heirs of the Elizabethan gentlemen and seadogs who had launched it, and Massachusetts and the other New England colonies that emerged from it retained a moral earnestness that sometimes survived the loss of the faith that had initially inspired the earnestness.
The attitude of the New England colonies was probably well suited to the commercial and industrial society that was emerging in the seventeenth century, but at the time they made less impression on the world than the others.
Despite the higher standard of living they were offering most of their inhabitants, they  were economically a little too isolated to attract much attention.
People in Europe saw the advantages of colonies most easily when the colonies produced something valuable that was not produced at home.
The southern colonies, in the islands or on the American mainland, offered tobacco and other products that could be exchanged for English exports or help the London re-export trade, but the agricultural products of New England were similar enough to those of England to mean that there were not many openings for trade, and this meant that the differences caused by religion were not healed by close commercial relations.
While the colonies looked to Englishmen like a widely diverse collection of territories with widely differing religious and economic foundations that had little in common, the other colonizing powers of Europe probably noticed their similarities rather than their differences.
By 1640 all the British colonies in the New World had assemblies of elected representatives to look after local problems of legislation and taxation and, while some of them had been created with royal authorization, some had plainly been set up in order to make independence possible.
By comparison with that of the rulers of France, the Netherlands, or Spain, the King of England's control over his colonies was very slight.
The English colonies looked rather like colonies of the Greek type, where emigrants set out from their native city to launch a new city and, while often cherishing a deep affection for the city that they had left, did not acknowledge a political obligation to obey it.
The other European countries acted much more like the Romans: they had conquered large existing populations in the territories to which they had gone, and had established substantial colonies that were ruled by the sovereign power at home much more directly than was the case in the English colonies.
The loyalty to the Crown of English settlers was not matched by any comparable institutional framework; a well-informed observer on the continent of Europe might reasonably have expected that the execution of Charles I would lead to the disintegration of his empire overseas and that the Republic would be unable to assert any authority at all over emigrants whose political links with England were already so relatively weak.
Monarchs and their Colonies 1649–1714
The new government set out in 1649 to establish its position with a degree of success which must have surprised everyone who knew about its problems and had not realized the great energy that religious faith gave to its leaders.
It transformed the way that the English dealt with the world outside Europe; even though Charles's son came back to the throne as Charles II in 1660, the Republic changed the direction of English imperial policy and set a pattern followed at least until the death in 1714 of the last direct descendant of Charles I to sit on the throne.
Queen Anne died a year after the signing of the Treaty of Utrecht, which had brought to an end a cycle of wars which, while primarily concerned with the balance of power in Europe, had given English governments an opportunity to take colonies away from other European countries and increase their empire by annexation as well as by settlement.
Annexation showed that the English government had much more power to take action outside Europe than it had possessed in the first half of the century.
This was one of the changes initially seen under the Republic: the capture of Jamaica in 1655 opened up a new road which encouraged rulers in the second half of the century to go forward and force other European powers to give up their lands on almost the whole of the North American coastline.
Cromwell, the head of state in the Republic, encouraged a reorganization of the East India Company, with a new charter which put it on a firmer basis.
The restored Stuarts also encouraged companies by giving them charters, and two or three trading companies did a lot to expand English interests, although settlement of land by commercial companies never regained its initial importance.
The Republic also pointed the way to the future in its attempts to regulate English trade in a way that would help English shipping though its efforts were not immediately successful; the monarchy took the same legislative approach, but was able to make its laws effective and on this basis set up a system of control of trade in the empire that survived until the middle of the nineteenth century.
One of the first problems faced by the Republic was that most of the colonies outside New England were loyal to the Stuart monarchs, and so in the early 1650s considerable effort had to be put into making them accept the  new government.
The restored Stuarts did not have to deal with any difficulty of this sort but they did have a general problem of making sure that the King's authority was accepted.
The idea that the colonies might be told to go their own way was not considered; an administrative system was set up to make sure that the King's orders were obeyed on the far side of the Atlantic as much as in the more distant parts of the British Isles — it was realized that he could not expect complete obedience, and in some respects the system was losing its impetus even by the beginning of the eighteenth century, but the shift from the Greek pattern of virtual independence to the Roman pattern of general obedience in the colonies had been made and there was no reason to think it would be reversed.
Continuity in Republican and Royalist Policy
In 1649 the government of the Republic was not at all sure that it could assert its authority over distant colonies; it had too many problems close to home.
Ireland had been in rebellion for eight years.
After the Elizabethan conquest there had been the usual influx of people wanting land, but the landlords of the traditional type had been supplemented by London-based land-holding companies and also by peasant emigrants from Scotland.
As a result the north-east corner of the island had become much more distinctly Protestant in population than the rest, though Protestant landlords owned property in a good deal of the rest of the island.
In 1641 there was a Catholic rebellion against the Protestants of Ulster, and English authority over the island was shaken.
However, much of the island remained loyal to the monarchy: the Republic was determined to subdue the Catholic Irish and the Royalist Irish, and it was not much concerned about any differences between the two.
Cromwell took his army across St. George's Channel and led it forward ruthlessly and successfully, and by 1650 it was clear that the English government was going to be able to reconquer the island.
For the next year or two Cromwell and his army were involved in the conquest of Scotland, and by May 1653 the Republic had more power to make itself obeyed over the whole of the British Isles than any monarch had ever had.
The Republic had then to face problems further afield.
Many royalists had gone into exile in the colonies, especially Virginia, and the new government could not expect its orders to be obeyed on the other side of the Atlantic.
The attractions of sugar-trading with the Netherlands reinforced the West Indian lack of enthusiasm for the new government.
But most of the English fleet had been on Parliament's side during the Civil War, and in 1650 the Republic decided it was strong enough to impose an embargo on trade and send out an expedition to make Virginia and the West Indian islands acknowledge its authority.
Deploying forces in America in this way was more ambitious than anything the monarchy had done, and the Republic's success in winning the obedience of the colonies and forcing the small  royalist fleet to give up its privateering activities showed how much more effective England's power had become.
Because the new government had an effective army it could raise much more revenue from taxes than the King had done, and so was more powerful than the monarchy had been.
It intervened to regulate trade; in 1651 the republican Parliament passed a Navigation Act which set out to protect the English shipping trade by laying down that imports could be taken to the ports of England or of English colonies only by English ships or by those of the country that produced the goods.
Despite the traditional virtues of the local oak trees, English shipbuilders had to import so much of their material, from ropes to masts, that English sailing ships were never quite as good as the best European ships.
Superior gunnery and, by the eighteenth century, larger fleets, gave the royal navy command of the seas, but merchant shipping needed a different type of help.
Legislation had been tried before, from the late fourteenth century onwards, but more effort was made to enforce the 1651 Act than had been done in the past.
Its effect on colonial trade was, in the eyes of the English government, a secondary matter.
Until the 1640s the colonies had taken it for granted that they would trade only with England, partly because Charles's government gave orders that they should, partly because the hostile Spanish colonies offered them no real alternative.
The success of the Dutch in the West Indian sugar trade in the 1640s showed that this natural monopoly of the colonies' trade would not last any longer, so English shipbuilders were gratified to find that the Navigation Act would limit the colonial trade to English ships.
The direct effect was to cut sharply into the Dutch carrying trade, by shutting re-exports from Dutch ports out of England (which compensated English colonies to some extent for losing their Dutch connections) and by forbidding the export of colonial products in Dutch ships.
The legislation was resented bitterly enough by the Netherlands to lead to a war in which the English Republic was able to assert itself against the Dutch Republic.
But when the great general of the Civil War, Oliver Cromwell, lost his temper with the Rump Parliament for trying to monopolize power, and made himself supreme instead, he regretted this war between Protestant countries and set out to make peace between them as soon as possible.
Cromwell's foreign policy has been called out-of-date, because he based it on the bellicose anti-Catholic and anti-Spanish feeling of the reign of Elizabeth.
If the objective of his policy had been to maintain a balance of power by opposing the strongest nation in Europe, he was no doubt picking the wrong enemy; France was the rising power, and later in the century English policy was devoted to holding her in check.
On the other hand an attack on Spain made very good sense for anyone who wanted to follow a policy of overseas expansion.
Her empire had become  unwieldy and, if its defences could be forced, it provided opportunities for trading and for  snatching a few of the less well-defended colonies.
In 1655 an expedition was sent out to attack Hispaniola (San Domingo); this was the first time the English government had sent a naval expedition to seize the colonies of another European nation, and lack of experience led to lack of success.
Penn and Venables pulled their forces together and, very much as a consolation prize, captured the island of Jamaica.
It was not thickly populated or well defended, but it was much larger than the islands the English already held in the Caribbean, so it provided land for English emigrants for some years.
It was also the first colony gained by conquest.
Until then the English had been sailing to places so far from effective Spanish opposition and so thinly populated that the government had not had to provide any help.
Jamaica indicated another approach to the art of colonization, in which the government took valuable colonies away from Europeans who had reached them first.
With this interest in the western hemisphere went a renewed interest in the East: in 1657 the East India Company was given a new charter and put on a much more durable basis.
Previously there had always been at least the possibility that it might be wound up after its current voyages were complete but under Cromwell the traders reorganized its joint-stock system so that, while individual owners might sell their shares, the Company was designed to go on trading forever; and almost all companies founded subsequently were organized in the same way.
The East India Company's nominal capital of £740,000 would have been about 2 per cent of the national income, though in fact only half of it was paid up until calls for fresh capital had to be made in the 1690s.
It still had its pepper trade and the factories in India at Surat and Madras, and at Bantam in the East Indies, with a number of smaller bases, and it was beginning to look for new opportunities.
After Cromwell's death in 1658 the republican system of government soon fell apart and in May 1660 Charles II returned peacefully to his father's throne.
Cromwell had seen that while a monarch with some claim to divine authority could rule three separate kingdoms separately by virtue of his three separate crowns, a republic had to have a parliament that united all of the British Isles.
Once he had acquired supreme power he created a House of Commons to which Scotland and Ireland elected members, though he ignored a request from Barbados for representation.
Charles II returned to the old system of three separate kingdoms, united only because the same man was head of each of them.
In religious matters the restoration of monarchy was followed by the decisive establishment of the power of the Church of England, and in constitutional questions Charles showed that he was much more resigned to the need to work with Parliament than either Charles I or Cromwell had been, but in colonial affairs there was no change of direction, though the new government may have been able to follow its policy with more continuity than its predecessor.
The restoration caused no trouble to the East India Company, which was quite soon able to turn itself into a distinctly royalist body and was given a rather wider range of political powers than it had possessed before.
The relaunched company was primarily concerned with exporting textiles, and in particular Indian cotton goods, which continued to be its main line of business throughout the century and a half in which it traded with India.
Muslins and calicoes became the fashionable fabrics, and under the determined leadership of Sir Josiah Child profits went up sharply if not always regularly in the 1670s and 1680s, so that the price of shares rose ninefold between 1660 and 1685.
These above-average profits depended to some extent on the Company's political influence in England; in India it was not powerful enough to control the market, but its charter gave it a monopoly in England which let it push prices up further than would have been practicable if non-members of the Company (denounced as ‘interlopers’) had been able to import cotton goods into England freely.
In India the power of the Moghul Empire was rising to its zenith.
The earlier Moghuls had ruled only the northern half or two-thirds of the sub-continent but Aurangzeb, who ruled from 1658 to 1707, set out to conquer the south and was almost completely successful in this.
Naturally he encountered no opposition based on nationalism, but his fervent support of Islam led him to abandon the tolerant policy his predecessors had adopted towards the Hindu majority, and this probably intensified resistance to his advance.
After the event it looks very much as if his campaigns overstrained the resources of his empire and made it impossible to hold together, but at the time he was seen as the greatest of conquerors.
As a feudal ruler he could not concentrate all power in his own hands, and the East India Company saw that it had to deal with a hundred local rulers.
The most that Aurangzeb could expect was to make the local rulers obedient to his authority, or else to replace them with deputies of his own who would be reasonably faithful vassals.
He knew that he would be rash to expect everyone to obey him all the time; he had secured the Moghul throne for himself by the skill with which he had played off his brothers against one another, and he distrusted most of the people around him.
The English were well informed about the manoeuvres that had made him Emperor, and Charles II's Poet Laureate, John Dryden, wrote a play about the struggle for the succession in Delhi.
It is a safe guess that no Indian thought of writing a play about the equally dramatic course of events that put Charles II on his throne.
Despite Aurangzeb's successful policy of expansion to the south, some Company employees suspected that his empire was not as powerful as it looked.
In 1686 they declared war on him in order to establish a separate company state from which they could trade.
The Emperor had no particular difficulty putting a stop to this, though the Company was able to re-establish its position by blockading shipping in the Bay of Bengal and the Emperor  forgave the Company in much the same way as he would have forgiven any of his nobles who tried to rebel but who was so powerful that it was neither convenient nor practicable to destroy him.
On land the Company was not really strong enough for such antics, but its naval superiority gave it a place in the third or fourth rank of powers in India, beneath the Emperor at the top and great rulers like the Nawab of Bengal in the second rank.
Its encouragement of textile production for its export trade helped the imperial revenue.
Even after the failure of the rebellion its position was secure enough by 1690 for Charnock to establish a trading station fairly far up the River Hughli, on the southern edge of the Bengal cotton-weaving district, and over the next hundred years Calcutta grew to be the effective capital of India and the second city in the British Empire.
Bengal textiles were vital to trade; after the founding of Calcutta they made up, taking one year with another, over 40 per cent of the Company's exports to England.
The inland location of the new base underlined the fact that the Company did not operate simply by coming to India, buying things and sailing away again.
Exports worth up to £0.5m. a year in the late seventeenth century were taken from India to England, often for re-export to the rest of the world, and this trade determined the flow of dividends.
But this was only the last stage in the process.
Acquiring the products to be exported from India was not so simple; the Company directors had to put down the ‘investment’, mostly in silver bullion though public pressure made them include some English products as well, and had to finance a good deal of the running costs of the textile production that they were encouraging.
The trading employees in India were not paid salaries in the modern sense of income they could live on; they got small retainers, starting at perhaps £5 a year, and it was taken for granted that they would supplement their retainers by trading, sometimes acting as agents buying the goods that would eventually be exported by the Company (though this could easily lead to fraud), but more often dealing for their own account.
While textiles were always the major item, the old trade in pepper was being displaced by the coffee trade with Arabia, and by the trade in tea, which then came exclusively from China.
As the fashion for silk and then for tea and a little later for porcelain developed, the Company looked for Indian products to export to China, and it began dealing in opium.
The Chinese market for it already existed, and the Company also found a new market for it in England, where it was used as a narcotic and as a pain-killer, for which it was much more satisfactory than the only available alternative, alcohol.
Apart from its own local trade in goods the Company covered some of its expenses by taking part in the carrying trade which flourished in the Indian Ocean, known at the time as the ‘country trade’.
Asian ships did not go round the Cape of Good Hope to trade with Europe, and East Indiamen, as the Company's ships were called, were so heavily armed and were so much safer from the risk of piracy that merchants found them useful carriers even though they did not sail as fast as local ships until the Company had its ships built of teak some decades later.
This trade in India and the Indian ocean was one in which the Company had no legal basis for claiming a monopoly, so other Englishmen, as well as the Dutch, the Portuguese, and the Indians, could take part; when the Company complained of ‘interlopers’, it was entitled to complain only about Englishmen who brought eastern products to the English or European markets.
There was no corporation tax or income tax to absorb a proportion of its profits, and the Company contributed to the king's revenue partly by paying customs duties on imports brought into the country, and partly by making nominally voluntary contributions to the exchequer.
All its imports could be seen as luxuries, and the Stuart government was very ready to see luxuries taxed; as James II put it to his Parliament in 1685, ‘Lay it on Luxury, as chocolate, tea, coffee, East Indian commodities as not necessary for the life of man, and on wine.’
The Company did very well despite this attitude to its imports; in the 1660s it made a number of loans to the government, amounting altogether to £130,000, and in the 1680s it regularly paid 10,000 guineas a year, which came to about 1 per cent of the King's total revenue.
It is hard to say how directly the King reminded the Company that it was doing well because it had been granted a monopoly of the English market.
Its profitable career showed that it was doing better than the trading companies launched in Charles's reign.
After the failure of Hawkins's attempt to open up a regular slave trade with South America, the English had paid only infrequent visits to the west coast of Africa, though a company to trade with ‘Ginny and Binny’(Guinea and Benin) had been launched in 1618.
It had established a fort at Kormartin in 1631, but by the 1650s it was fading into bankruptcy.
In 1660 the Company of Royal Adventurers had been formed to look for gold, but it very soon realized that the switch to using slaves in the West Indies to grow sugar had transformed the trading situation, and that the Dutch had done very well out of the new developments in the British West Indies.
To get into this trade, the Company was reorganized in 1663 and added buying slaves and shipping them off to the sugar islands to its original objectives.
The Company was not well organized, but even a strong company would have had difficulty resisting the attacks of the Dutch — now at the height of their power — on its forts in West Africa, which began before war had been declared in Europe.
By 1668 the Company had collapsed; when its successor, the Royal Africa Company, was launched in 1672 it had to tidy up the debts outstanding as well as restore the trade in gold and slaves from West Africa.
The gold was very fine, and, when minted, affected the currency: the Company issued a guinea coin to pay its dividends and had it specially   stamped with an elephant to show that it came from Africa.
The coin was meant to be worth a pound, but for all normal purposes the value of a pound was twenty silver shillings each weighing one-fifth of an ounce, and the golden guinea went to a premium above this.
Even when it was declared to be worth twenty-one shillings in 1717 it was undervalued; silver coins were exported to India where their value was still high, or to Amsterdam where they could be melted down and exchanged for gold, and Britain moved inadvertently to a gold standard.
Gold made up less than a quarter of the Company's exports from West Africa; its charter recognized recent changes in trading patterns by laying down that the Company was to provide slaves for the English colonies in the Caribbean, and then giving it a monopoly of the trade.
This monopoly was defended in the same way as that of the East India Company: the Royal Africa Company had to meet the expenses of building and manning forts on the West African coast as protection against other Europeans, and private traders could not have undertaken fixed costs of this sort.
The Company was not powerful enough to go inland and kidnap slaves, and had great difficulty keeping up its coastal garrisons in the unpleasant and unhealthy conditions in which they lived, but in any case, military expeditions to capture slaves were unnecessary.
As has been normal for most organized communities that are not based on a money economy, African society was based on slavery (in the sense of the life-long ownership of human beings who could be traded), which sometimes involved plantation work or even being used as a human sacrifice: there is no calculus to compare the disadvantages of local slavery with those of being taken across the Atlantic and used as plantation or mining labour.
African states went to war with each other often enough to have a large number of captives to sell, and competition among the slave traders encouraged this and pushed them into searching aggressively for slaves among their neighbours or else finding themselves enslaved by their  better-equipped rivals.
There is a story that an African chief said to a trader ‘You have three things we want, powder, musket and shot.
And we have three things you want, men, women and children.’
This was not the whole story of African trade, which included cotton cloth and metal goods as well as arms (and neither women nor children were much wanted by the slave traders), but European trade certainly made African states fight each other more often than before.
Getting the slaves across the Atlantic was always a difficult problem for the Royal Africa Company and for all the other traders.
The conditions for the crossing were not much worse than for the criminals who were just beginning to be shipped across from England in the 1670s, and the death rates were not much higher.
Financially, the slave traders had rather more reason to take care of the people they were carrying than the transporters of convicts or of indentured labourers did; all of these groups were being taken  over as a speculative venture on which the shipper got no return unless he delivered live bodies, but the slave traders had already paid out cash to purchase their slaves.
On the other hand the slaves were rather more likely to revolt at sea than anyone else, and they were much more likely to commit suicide or die of shock and despair.
The Royal Africa Company did no worse than other traders in taking slaves across, but its commercial difficulties with its customers were probably worse than the average.
Launching a sugar plantation took a great deal of capital and the planters were always short of money; many of them had bought estates at the high land prices of the boom, and most of them felt they owed it to themselves to live in a gentlemanly way that ignored debts.
The long credit that the Dutch had given the first planters to get them started in Barbados in the 1640s came to an end with the Dutch war of the 1650s, which made it harder for English planters to finance development when they wanted to grow sugar in Jamaica.
The Royal Africa Company had to provide slaves for English colonists as a condition of keeping the charter which gave it the monopoly of the trade, and the colonists added to the injury of leaving their debts unpaid the insult of complaining that too few slaves were being delivered.
This was true enough: the Company needed to sell about £100,000 of goods a year in West Africa to carry on enough trade to cover its fixed costs for shipping and for its forts; it was never able to manage this and in a good year it could only take about 6,000 slaves across, which might be worth £90,000.
But selling more slaves would have done it little good if it could not get paid for them, and in the 1680s the planters owed the company money for two full years supply of slaves.
The Company continued to hope for better times; its monopoly was left intact under Charles II and James II, and it did not realize how the deterioration of its forts in West Africa was eating up its capital and bringing closer the day when large sums would have to be spent on rebuilding them.
Another trading company with territorial interests was launched in 1670.
Two fur traders from the French settlement of New France on the banks of the St. Lawrence had been trying to convince their employers that the best way to develop the trade was to set up bases on Hudson Bay to which the Indians could come in their canoes down all the rivers that flowed into the Bay.
When they were unsuccessful in France they crossed to England and in 1668 an expedition was sent out to test their theory.
It did so well that the King gave a charter to the ‘gentlemen adventuring into Hudson's Bay’ which allowed them a monopoly of trade in the whole area of the rivers and streams running into the Bay.
The monopoly was normal practice, and the boundary chosen was intended simply to make sure that the Company did not go east of the Bay into areas claimed by New France; nobody had any idea that the river system of the Bay gave the Company an area — known as Rupert's Land after Prince Rupert, the Governor of the Company — that covered millions  of square miles to the west.
The Company did not send expeditions of its own into this area for over a century; like the East India and the Royal Africa Companies it established trading posts and waited for the local inhabitants to come and trade at them.
The Company's line of communication, which placed it fairly close to the centre of northern North America, was already long and was open only in the ice-free months.
Stretching it further by setting up trading posts inland seemed neither necessary nor prudent, so a network of Indian traders grew up which took the Company's goods inland.
The English products brought by the Company suited the Indians' needs; the woollen blankets and iron pots which had little commercial appeal in India or Africa were very appropriate for a cold climate in which metal was scarce.
The Company sold guns to the Indians, but not as part of a process of political disturbance like that caused by the slave trade in West Africa; Indian hunters quite soon preferred guns to bows and arrows for hunting, and hunting was the basis for the Hudson Bay trade.
For something over a century the major export item was beaver fur for felting and making into men's hats.
Other furs were attractive as novelties or as luxuries but the beaver trade was steady and reliable until silk hats replaced felted beaver hair in the early decades of the nineteenth century.
The Company got on as well with the local population as any European settlers anywhere in the world, but it was very exposed to attacks from New France.
Its bases around the Bay were staffed by a total of only a few hundred men.
Bringing a force north-west from the French colony on the St. Lawrence to attack them would be very difficult but, if a force could be brought at all, it would not have to be very large to capture all the bases.
This led to a great setback for the Company; by the early 1680s it seemed to have established itself, and paid its first dividends, at about 50 per cent a year, but it was then caught up in England's wars against France, the bases were captured, and no regular dividends could be paid until after it had got its property back under the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713.
Part of the reason why the shareholders had to wait so long for a return was that the original capital had been only 10,000 guineas, and the Company financed itself by fairly short-term loans from the merchants with which it did business, so the shareholders stood at the end of a long line of creditors but could expect substantial returns on their money in the end if the Company survived.
Land in the New World
In the 1670s the Hudson's Bay Company must have looked like one of the least important overseas concerns that Charles II and his government had to handle.
Much more attention was paid to the North American seacoast, where English colonies doubled in number and were treated more seriously  by London than ever before.
Charles's government was as concerned about trade as its predecessor and was not restrained by any deep Protestant sympathies, so it was naturally inclined to go to war with the Netherlands, and in the 1660s this was popular.
Charles's own inclination was always towards a pro-French and anti-Dutch policy, though marriages between the Stuart family and the ruling Dutch House of Orange slightly restrained him and by the 1670s most Englishmen were beginning to be a little worried by the increasing power of France.
Parliament never voted enough money for a naval war with the Netherlands to be decisively successful, so the most substantial result of the anti-Dutch policy was that in 1664 the English seized New Amsterdam, and kept it in the 1668 peace negotiations by handing over in exchange the English colony of Surinam in Guiana.
The Dutchmen of New Amsterdam were the first community of any substance outside the British Isles to be absorbed into England's possession by conquest but they were close enough to the English in religion — the line of really intense division between groups in the seventeenth century — for there to be no prolonged resistance.
They had no other Dutch communities to look to; they kept their own language for over a century and the switch of allegiance from one ruler to another was one that nobody at that time found at all difficult.
The new colony was divided among a number of courtiers; the largest section went to Charles's brother, James, Duke of York, who renamed New Amsterdam after his own ducal title, and just to the west two families from the island of Jersey, the Berkeleys and the Carterets, received a grant of land which they named after it.
They divided the territory in two, though it was reunited thirty years later.
West New Jersey, the southern part of the colony, which was owned by the Berkeleys, did not flourish and was sold to two Quaker families.
Their purchase encouraged another courtier, of an unusual type, to ask for a grant of land.
William Penn, a son of the admiral who captured Jamaica, was a friend of the Duke of York and had become a Quaker of the quieter second generation that followed George Fox in his beliefs but not in his attacks on all symbols of the established order.
Penn wanted to set up an area of toleration for Quakers something like Lord Baltimore's Catholic colony of Maryland and, as the Stuarts owed his family money, they gave him the land grant as part of a financial settlement.
In 1681 he launched Pennsylvania (which included three counties that in 1702 became Delaware) as an immense private estate to which settlers were welcomed and where they could buy land on relatively easy terms.
Because of this and because the colony was committed to religious toleration for everybody, it attracted a great many immigrants.
Within a dozen years Philadelphia, its capital, was among the half-dozen largest English towns in North America and, although it had a population of only a few thousand people, very few towns in England apart from London were much larger.
Expansion south towards the nearby colony of Maryland went on fast  enough for a pair of surveyors, Mason and Dixon, to have to draw a boundary between the two in 1702, though this line was not completely accepted for some decades.
Philadelphia stood on the edge of land that had never been occupied by Europeans, and so the Pennsylvanians had to work out their relations with the Indians.
On the whole they managed this in accordance with Quaker principle, avoiding local warfare and paying a negotiated price for land.
It would still have been very difficult to explain to the Indians that they were selling their land in perpetuity, and of course nobody could have had any idea of the immense flood of immigrants that was going to cross the Atlantic.
In the seventeenth century North America was so thinly populated that it was hard to think that a particular piece of land had scarcity value.
The most influential philosopher to think about the problem of the ownership of empty land, John Locke, served as a secretary and adviser to yet another of the courtier-backed expansion schemes of Charles II's reign; he was agent to Lord Ashley, who later on as Lord Shaftesbury became a famous Whig leader but in 1663 was a well-placed courtier and one of a group who got a charter for a colony south of Virginia to be called Carolina.
The proprietors could not do much more than launch a rather fragile settlement around Charleston, and even this could not be occupied continuously until 1681.
The northern section of the colony was settled by people from Virginia rather than emigrants brought out by the proprietors, and the southern section by emigrants from Barbados as well as from England.
In 1691 the Company recognized this and set up two separate administrations, though they were run by the same governor until 1710.
Locke's argument about property started from a simple view of what he understood the  situation to be in America: the land was empty, unclaimed, and ought to become the property of the first cultivator.
This showed how very different everything was from the situation that had developed in England over the course of centuries, and colonial developments always gave Englishmen the idea that they were moving into empty land and seeing what could be made out of it.
One odd aspect of the policy of the Carolina proprietors was their attempt to create in America a very formalized version of what had grown up in England.
Locke could have learnt from his Carolina experience that the old English approach to property, based on the tenants' allegiance to the landlord, was no longer fully accepted and certainly was not suitable for export to a new territory.
The original outline for settlement looks both feudal and foolish — foolish because the men of importance were to be ranged in a tidy hierarchy with outlandish titles like cacique and landgrave, and feudal because it rested on the assumption that the proprietors would get a permanent rental income from politically loyal and economically co-operative tenants.
Most of these schemes of settlement by proprietors which included half  the mainland colonies in the seventeenth century, assumed that the proprietors would become great landlords of the old English type on a very grand scale.
Charles II found land grants very convenient; he could give them to people who at the beginning of the century would have asked for monopolies and he could feel confident that these grants would not rouse the hostility in England that monopolies had caused.
But the settlers who had come to America to look for land did not like the proprietors' form of ownership.
The old feudal tenancy, with its claim to perpetual rents, had disappeared in England in the 1660s and in the colonies Americans wanted to avoid being tenants of any sort.
With so much land to be disposed of, it was hard to make them put up with anything less than freehold tenure, and so it was almost impossible for the proprietors to make very much out of their estates.
Locke's philosophy about property accepted the settlers' point of view: in his theory it is the man on the spot who is doing something to the land (though mainly by directing the labour of the people he has brought over at his own expense) who is justly entitled to ownership.
In the West Indies pressures on land had already become intense; the proprietors were replaced by royal governors, and external danger made the government's support for the islands essential.
The French, the Dutch, and the Spanish were ready to attack them, and over so widely scattered a set of islands the attacker would always find some weak spot to invade and devastate.
The successful invasions by the French in 1666 and 1667 inflicted losses on the Leeward Islands that the planters found hard to survive, and these attacks forced the authorities in the West Indies to realize the dangers caused by the shift in the population balance.
They tried bringing out political prisoners after rebellions in Britain, they tried kidnapping new recruits, and they tried legislating to keep up the number of white men that planters must employ, but white men still left for England or went on to new parts of the Americas rather than compete against slave labour.
This was only one of the disadvantages of a slave labour force.
Assembling slaves required capital, or at least credit, to get started, and the slaves had to be trained and had to be watched in case they rebelled.
On the other hand they were available, recruiting them was simpler than persuading workers to come out from England, and they could never leave to work elsewhere.
The English government maintained a small military force in the islands but it was not large enough to guarantee the English population against slave revolt or foreign invasion, and the settlers had to make an effort on their own account as well.
This was not very difficult; the Spanish still did not recognize other colonies in the Caribbean and the old rule of ‘no peace beyond the line’ went on, so that West Indian governments could still recruit on an official basis men who were committed to fighting  against the Spanish whether the governments thought they were at war or not.
The Spanish naturally thought these irregulars were pirates and their position was certainly ambiguous.
In  the 1660s Henry Morgan, who had been recruited to help defend the islands, could be seen as the most outrageous of pirates or as a bold seadog who, in the course of active defence of the islands, led his men through extreme hardship to the capture of Panama, which was then brutally plundered.
Charles II's response fitted the occasion.
He summoned Morgan back to England in disgrace, and made him a knight.
This happened at a turning-point in Caribbean affairs, for in 1670 the Spanish accepted the inevitable and by the Treaty of Madrid acknowledged the English colonies in the West Indies as legitimate settlements, though the logging settlements on the central American mainland were left in an ill-defined position.
After this the irregulars could no longer claim the benefits of an ambiguous position; either they were adventurous sailors who were willing to settle down and live peaceful lives once the Spaniards stopped harassing them (and Morgan showed the way by becoming Deputy Governor of Jamaica), or else they were straightforward pirates who were ready to plunder the ships of any nation including their own.
The next fifty years were the classic age of piracy when men like Teach (Blackbeard) plundered in all directions and buried their fortunes on treasure islands, but after their main base in the Bahamas was brought under control by the British government in 1718 the Atlantic was made reasonably safe from this.
The Indian Ocean was still far from safe and the East India Company went on building ships to resist attack.
Charles II managed to induce the Barbados assembly to grant him the revenue forever from a tax of 4½ per cent of the value of all sugar exported from the island, and the Leeward Islands settled on the same terms and were briefly united under the same governor as Barbados.
The grant was voted more because Charles ended disputes over land titles running over the previous twenty years than because the West Indians believed they ought to support the English Exchequer, but a permanent colonial contribution to the home government was — at least for England — a new and interesting departure, though one that had no sequel.
All sorts of small items of royal expenditure were charged to the Barbados and Leeward revenues but no other colony saw any reason to make a similar grant.
Efforts were made to persuade Jamaica to follow Barbados, and a twenty-one year grant to cover the island's own expenses was voted in 1683, but this grant was not large enough to provide any surplus to spend elsewhere and was not much more than a recognition that the government in England was not going to spend its money covering the costs of local government for Englishmen who had gone overseas.
The cost of keeping up a navy was already the really large item in the expenses of empire, but the English needed a navy for their own safety from invasion as well as to protect their trade, so the colonies — and perhaps particularly the West Indian colonies — got some benefit from money the English would have had to spend in any case.
While the King found it convenient to have a source of income that Parliament could not touch or question, people in England did not reckon the advantages of colonies in terms of the grants of revenue that they could make.
The government had been thinking about ways for the administration to maintain some degree of control over the colonies since the mid-1650s; in 1675 Charles set up the first organization to establish any record of continuity, a sign that his possessions overseas were settling down into some sort of discernible order.
The Lords Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, who quickly became known as the ‘Lords of Trade’, were the direct descendant of a committee of the Privy Council suggested by Ashley, on which Locke had served.
By the time the new committee got its name, Ashley had left the court, and the court was losing touch with part of the merchant interest.
The Lords of Trade were Church of England men, but this hardly entered into their ideas about possessions overseas.
Most of the empire for which they were responsible had been settled by people outside the Church of England, of whom the majority were nonconformist Protestants, though there were a fair number of Roman Catholics in Maryland and in the West Indian islands to which Irishmen had gone.
As their title suggested, they were much more concerned with trade, and this probably reflected the general English attitude inside and outside the government.
Only some large religious or political issue would induce people to take the very considerable step involved in emigration if they had any established position to keep them in England — younger sons, the poor, and those with nothing to lose might easily be more ready to travel, if they could get the financial backing needed, or were willing to go as indentured labourers.
The sense of panic about over-population that had swept across England in the late sixteenth century, and had made emigration look like the answer to problems of poverty and disorder, had died down and there were even suggestions that a substantial population helped economic expansion.
Nobody suggested discouraging emigration, but it was certainly not welcomed as eagerly as in earlier decades, and the flow may have declined a little.
By comparison with other European empires overseas, the English could feel they were doing well enough.
The Spanish empire was still pre-eminent, it covered the larger part of the New World, and extended to the Philippines in the Pacific.
This whole area had blossomed as a great region for settlement, in which the Spanish language was steadily being forced upon the survivors of the original population and to which Spanish emigrants went out as regular reinforcements to maintain the conquests of Cones and Pizzano.
There had been virtually no further expansion after the fifty years of extraordinary growth in the first half of the sixteenth century.
Spain stood very much where she had done when Philip II came to the throne, except that the Netherlands had broken free and had set up an empire based much more on trade than on overseas settlements.
The Dutch might have been willing to see a world without territorial empire, if only it had been possible to keep up a trading system on that basis.
Their ports and forts in the Spice Islands or the West Indies or the West Coast of Africa were intended as supply bases for shipping and not as the starting point for territorial expansion.
In 1652 they had established a very well-placed port at the Cape of Good Hope as a supply depot, but the Dutch East India Company was always a little worried when settlers at the base interpreted their responsibility to provide food for passing ships as a reason for pushing on into the hinterland.
Other Dutch bases provided no such opportunities for settlers to move inland, and the directors preferred expansion to be restrained in this way.
This was largely because the Dutch were conscious that they were operating on a narrow margin, and they did not want anything to distract them from their main purpose, which was to bring goods for trade and re-export to their great complex of ports, banks, and merchant houses around Amsterdam.
The French stood in sharp contrast to all this; their main energies were directed at expansion in Europe, with the Netherlands marked down as a particularly attractive target, but they were so rich, so dynamic, and so confident in the second half of the seventeenth century that they were quite willing — as asserted in the motto of their great king, Louis XIV,nec pluribus impar — to fight several enemies at once.
They set out to develop an empire and wage European wars at the same time, though their empire was unlike any of the others: it cost them money.
The King of Spain got money from his empire in the form of bullion from its mines and, after the 60-year period from 1580 to 1640 in which Spain ruled over Portugal, so did the Portuguese empire.
Like the Spanish, the Portuguese had not made new acquisitions since the great days of the sixteenth century, and they had lost their possessions in the Spice Islands, but Brazil continued to flourish and was beginning to emerge as the world's main source of gold.
The French settlements along the river St. Lawrence had no such attractions; the peasant farmers who settled along the river were probably better off than if they had stayed at home, but they could not produce enough revenue to support the fairly lavish military, civil, and ecclesiastical establishment that had been set up there as well.
The Spanish could pay for such things out of their gold and silver; the English could not afford such things, and ran fairly frugal colonial administrations, whose pay was often in arrears whether it was supposed to be paid by the English government, the colonial taxpayers, or the company which had a charter to operate in the region.
Only the France of the Sun King could afford the luxury of overseas development for its own sake, or at least for the sake of a distant and ill-defined future.
In England the Lords of Trade certainly had no money to spend on the colonies; and would have been quite as surprised as any earlier generations at a suggestion that they ought to be spending money on them.
People who had gone overseas had  probably made a wise choice and were likely to be doing better than they could have done at home, so the government felt it had done enough for them already.
This of course helped make sure that people of established wealth did not go to the colonies.
The Lords of Trade did not go themselves.
Some noblemen went out as governors because they needed the money and, perhaps because they were habitually lavish about their spending, were usually rather popular.
Governors were almost always sent out from England rather than chosen from among the men on the spot.
Normally they were military officers, partly because the army provided a supply of trained talent, partly because they were likely to pay attention to orders from London, and mainly because the organization of defence was the crucial part of their work.
The governors of royal colonies, appointed by the king, were expected to maintain a rather dignified and aloof attitude and it was thought that they might find it hard to do this if they had lived in the colony as subordinates or as private citizens in the past.
The East India Company and other companies like the Royal Africa Company and the Hudson's Bay Company rarely brought in men like Roe to help with work at the top, and normally expected to promote people who had spent their lives working for the Company.
When a colony was launched as the property of a single owner he, or one of his family, might go out to oversee the administration but he was unlikely to cut his links with England, if only because it was important to be able to maintain the court favour which was part of the political strength needed by anyone who wanted to run a colony on his own.
Stuart Rule in North America
In 1675 the Lords of Trade had ten colonies on the North American seacoast to think about, stretching roughly from Portsmouth (in what was still part of Massachusetts) to Charleston, a length of coast running about as far from north to south as that of Britain.
The territory was not densely settled and while emigrants to America might be loyal subjects of Charles II, in Virginia, or might be deeply distrustful of him on religious grounds, as in New England, they were not certainly united with one another.
If they ran into trouble they hoped — without too much justification — for help from England, and they knew they were most unlikely to get it from their neighbours.
Their Lordships also had to look after half-a-dozen Caribbean islands, of which the newest, Jamaica, was much the largest and looked like providing the best prospects for the future.
The shift from tobacco to sugar cultivation in the West Indian islands was now almost complete, and the cultivation of food crops was being steadily abandoned to leave more space for the specialist production of still more sugar.
The Lords of Trade did not have to take such a close interest in the activities of the chartered companies, but the three large companies trading outside Europe were clearly providing London with  trade that could not come in any other way.
Trade with Russia might survive if the Muscovy Company went out of business, but it was not easy to imagine that trade with Hudson Bay (with all that it did for London furriers and re-exporters) could continue if the Company lost its trading rights, and the Royal African Company was believed to be necessary for the slave trade until the 1690s, and the East India Company kept its position in trade with India for over a century after that.
The duties of the Lords of Trade reflected the approach of their contemporary, Lord Halifax, who said ‘we fight for trade, the fairest mistress men ever knew’.
They made the Navigation Acts effective; in the colonies the legislation came to be known as ‘the Acts of Trade’, which expressed rather well the way that, while the Acts' main importance to England lay in their encouragement to shipping, their main impact on the colonies came in the way they affected the pattern of trade that was developing.
The authority of government was still exercised more directly through the law courts than in later centuries, and the authority of the Lords of Trade was underlined when they received the power to hear appeals from courts in the colonies.
This enabled them to control the activities of people who did not expect the Navigation Acts to be taken seriously.
So many exceptions had been made to earlier Navigation Acts by royal licence that it had sometimes looked as if they were intended to raise revenue rather than to direct trade, and in the 1660s there had been a few signs that the legislation which Charles had inherited from the Republic and had then extended might still be treated in the same way.
In the 1670s it became clear that this was not the case and that the English really did intend to have a network of trade among all English possessions to give the colonies a safe if restricted market in England and to allow England — and London in particular— the whole re-export trade from the entire empire.
Parliament listed a number of goods, known as the ‘enumerated articles’, which the colonies were not allowed to send anywhere outside the empire, and which were to be carried out only in ships from England or from the country of origin.
The ‘enumerated articles’ included most of the more important English imports from areas in the temperate zones and almost all the goods exported from the tropical and semi-tropical regions in which the colonies most committed to trade were to be found.
While England thus had a monopoly power to buy colonial products, the sugar and tobacco and other products of the colonies were more or less guaranteed the entire English market by a system of preferential tariffs.
The tax on foreign sugar was well over Mice that on English West India sugar in 1661 and the margin was widened later.
Bounties, or subsidies, were paid to colonial producers of naval stores and of indigo dye.
Measures like this gave the colonies a secure market and also provided larger supplies of tropical goods than could be consumed in England, so that English merchants could  develop their re-export trade with the rest of the world.
Their position was strengthened by the Staple Act of 1663, which prohibited the colonies from trading with European countries or their colonies.
Most items produced in Europe paid practically no English duty if they were to be re-exported to the colonies, but a few, including iron and steel, were taxed at a rate which made continental products very expensive and thus gave English manufacturers a clear field in the colonial market.
On balance the trading aspects of what came to be known as the Old Colonial System probably favoured England more than the colonies, though the colonial monopoly of English markets was a substantial counterweight to English monopoly of colonial trade.
Whatever its actual effect, the English wanted at least to make sure that they would not be out of pocket over expansion in America, and the fear that they would lose money was expressed by the economist Charles Davenant when he wrote in 1698: ‘it cannot reasonably be admitted that the mother country should impoverish herself to enrich the children nor that Britain should weaken herself to strengthen America.’
By the second half of the seventeenth century English politicians realized that military and naval support of the colonies was going to cost money.
The colonies had at first been left to look after themselves because the king had no money to spare for defending them nor any forces he could send across the Atlantic, but after 1650 it was accepted that the colonies had a right to expect to be protected against European attack, though not against Indian or other local problems.
The Navigation Acts were not in the first instance devised to make up for the fact that some English revenue was devoted to colonial defence, but defending the colonies came to be seen as an integral part of the Old Colonial System.
The Navigation Acts were complicated and applying the regulations would have been harder if there had been a great deal of trade between the colonies, but in the seventeenth century most of the trade of each colony on the American mainland or in the West Indies was with England rather than with other colonies.
In Virginia, dependence on a one-crop export trade led to trouble: the price of tobacco continued to fall after Charles's restoration, and thus was the main reason for Bacon's rebellion in 1675, which was put down by the government of the colony before royal troops arrived from England.
Virginia like most of the mainland colonies consisted of a few ports with an extensive hinterland that was left untouched until the coastal sections had been fairly fully settled.
Carrying anything by land was still expensive, even in settled areas, and was even more expensive when there were no roads — Roger Williams travelled only 50 miles from Boston to set up Rhode Island but this was a serious matter when it meant marching through uncut forest.
Trade by water was easier; the sugar colonies had a  very saleable product close to the sea and as they concentrated more and more on sugar they imported their food, first from England, then from Ireland, and by the eighteenth century from New England and from the Carolinas.
This was not what English food exporters wanted but, as it kept down the cost of provisioning the sugar plantations, it was supported by the sugar industry in England.
Apart from this there was not much trade between colonies.
Colonial merchants might not like the English monopoly of trade, but they wanted their markets in England, so there was unlikely to be opposition to the general principles of the Acts of Trade.
The Lords of Trade did not like colonies owned by a single proprietor.
No new ones were created after Pennsylvania, and over the next fifty years the government bought out most of the proprietors' rights.
The existence of separate colonies with separate governors was accepted with much less question.
Perhaps because the problems of transport eroded their feeling of unity, colonies often split in two: the Three Counties separated from the bulk of Pennsylvania to become Delaware, and Carolina was reorganized as two separate administrations.
The reunion of divided colonies was very rare; the reintegration of the two parts of New Jersey was the only successful seventeenth-century example.
In the West Indies the original unity laid down in the Carlisle grant disintegrated as the Leeward Islands broke away from Barbados and Jamaica was set up with an entirely separate governorship.
The Leeward Islands had tried to ignore Carlisle's lieutenant-governor as early as the 1630s, and when the islands became royal colonies in the 1660s they were treated for a short time as separate communities, with each island being regarded as an individual colony.
Stapleton brought the Leeward Islands together again by 1682 and the Codrington family managed to keep them united until after the end of the seventeenth century, but the general tendency to fragment into separate colonies seemed irresistible to people on the islands, no matter how foolish it seemed to British administrators who saw them as tiny communities that on a map of the world looked very close together.
None of this was the assertion of a separate nationality; they were all subjects of the King of England, and relied on this for their safety, but this reassuring English presence only encouraged them to manage their own local affairs in smaller and smaller units.
One instructive attempt at unification was made.
For fifty years Massachusetts had behaved as if its possession of its own charter made it into something very like an independent state, and the Stuarts set out to reduce its power.
In 1679 the territory of New Hampshire was carved out of it, and was established as a separate colony.
Charles and his brother James also attacked the charter itself in the courts.
The Stuarts liked using charters as a way to give royal encouragement of development and enterprise, as was shown by the large number of them they issued to trading companies and to colonies, including some like Rhode Island and Connecticut which they  could not have found politically very sympathetic.
But when the City of London emerged as the last centre of strength for the Whig opponents of royal policy at the beginning of the 1680s, it was asked by a writ of quo warranto to show that it was entitled to all the powers it had been exercising.
The City turned out to have exceeded the authority given in the charter, which was then revoked and a new charter issued that sharply limited its powers.
The same line of attack was used against Massachusetts; the charter had already been under examination, and in 1684 the courts ruled that Massachusetts had exceeded its authority and the charter was forfeited.
No new charter was issued; James set out to create a Dominion of New England which would have united Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Hampshire, and the New Jerseys with his own colony of New York.
The constitution of the Dominion, which was to have a governor and council but no elected assembly, was a long step away from the normal pattern of colonial constitution-making, and showed how irritated Charles and James had become with elected parliaments and assemblies, and with disloyal Massachusetts Puritans, by the 1680s.
They were obviously much more concerned with problems of the world outside Europe than any previous rulers had been.
One of Charles's most fruitful contributions to knowledge of the wider world was his establishment in 1675 of Greenwich Observatory, which was intended quite as much to assist sailors with the problems of navigation as to carry on scientific research.
The great problem for any navigator was to know where his ship was: it was relatively easy to determine the latitude, which measures distance north or south of the equator, but it was much harder to find the longitude, or distance east or west of a fixed meridian — a line from pole to pole running through all the points at which the sun is at its highest at the same moment.
All over Europe sailors had been accustomed to drawing a meridian through a point in their own country or through the furthest point to the west out in the Atlantic that they could determine with any certainty, and English sailors had usually taken their fixed meridian from a point west of the Lizard (the last promontory of land they could see as they left the English Channel).
Greenwich was set up as a new meridian which would suit the astronomers' convenience, and the government relied on them to make the new meridian into a suitable base-line for calculating the longitude.
This meant either working out very accurate tables of the movements of the moon or devising a chronometer which could keep time for a voyage of months or years without relying on a pendulum that would be disturbed by the rolling of the ship.
Progress was slow, but by the mid-eighteenth century success had been achieved in both methods of calculating longitude: the Greenwich astronomers had worked out the tables for the movements of the moon and an English watchmaker, John Harrison, had made a chronometer that kept  such perfect time that it could meet the requirements of any sailor.
Greenwich had begun producing a return on the money spent to launch it as an astronomical and nautical centre well before that: in the early eighteenth century French charts were still better than any others, but the table of wind movements, trade winds, and monsoons that Halley published in 1686 was a great help to navigation.
In 1600 ocean voyages were a rarity in England, but by 1700 ordinary English ships were able to find their way around the Atlantic and Indian oceans with little difficulty, and the money that Charles spent on Greenwich was among the most useful items of government expenditure of his age.
Earlier monarchs had spent very little on such things and had not done much about the world outside Europe or about the development of their colonies.
Even the Republic had felt far from confident about forming a long-term colonial policy; Cromwell's Council had invited merchants to say what should be done, but had not had time to do much more than conquer Jamaica and revive the East India Company.
Charles behaved rather like a landlord who could take a long view of the future and expect his possessions to provide him with an income in the fullness of time.
The term plantations, still applied to the colonies, indicated the way in which a return on investment was expected from them.
The Lords of Trade asked merchants and other interests to give their opinions about policy; a number of ministers had grants of their own for settlements in North America and clearly expected to benefit as landlords, though they did not go out like the Penns and the Baltimores to take an active role in running their properties.
James Duke of York was unusually deeply interested in colonial affairs and colonial investment: apart from his ownership of what had been New Amsterdam, he was a governor of the Hudson's Bay Company and of the Royal Africa Company, and several of the politicians at court invested in these companies and even held posts in them.
Later on this might have led to complaints about the possibility of corruption; at the time it was simply seen as evidence that politicians were committing themselves fully to their work.
Neither politicians at court nor governors in the colonies were expected to live on their salaries; having outside interests would not cause any trouble if it simply supplemented their salaries, though it would be used as an additional reason to attack them if they followed policies the king disliked.
Despite this increased activity the power of the kings of England in their colonies was still much smaller than that of the kings of France or of Spain.
When James succeeded his brother Charles as king in 1685 he showed that he was willing to make the power of the Crown more effective in North America by pressing on with the creation of the Dominion of New England, but he had neither the surplus revenue nor the obedient bureaucracy needed to run a system like that applied by continental monarchs.
James was by European standards a clear-sighted ruler who wanted to gain a little more of  the authority over his subjects to which all kings were entitled, but by the standards of Englishmen he was a ruthless tyrant with the additional vices that he wanted to promote the cause of Roman Catholicism and was willing to infringe the rights of property.
Late in 1688 he was overthrown by a revolt in which most of the powerful men in the country rose against him, though they would probably not have rebelled if William of Orange, the ruler of the Netherlands who became William III of England, had not organized an invasion.
The Struggle with France Begins
Once William and his wife Mary (who had a better claim to the throne than her husband) were established as joint rulers in England they had, like the Republic thirty years earlier, to bring the rest of the territories of the King of England into obedience to the new authority.
In Scotland the resistance to the change was crushed quickly enough.
William had to fight a much more serious war in Ireland, where the Catholic majority naturally saw James as their best hope for power; the successful defence of Londonderry and the victory at the Boyne in 1690 became immovable parts of the Protestant tradition; the Treaty of Limerick and the Protestant failure to honour the treaty's promises of religious toleration became unforgettable parts of the Catholic view of the history of Ireland.
In North America these struggles were not so clear cut.
James's Dominion of New England collapsed almost at once.
There was so much hostility to his Catholicism and his attack on chartered rights that it might have been thought William and Mary would have had no difficulty establishing their authority in America, but this was not what happened.
Whether because people really did not know how to interpret the revolution in England or because they wanted fairly complete independence and correctly suspected that William was going to exercise much the same overall powers as Charles and James had done, there was a revolt in New York that took some months to suppress and the colonists of Massachusetts at the beginning of the 1690s were no more reconciled to English rule than in the past.
The difficulties this attitude could cause the colonists were already becoming clear before William had completed the work of setting up governments in North America that would co-operate with him.
As far as William was concerned, seizing the English throne was just one move in his struggle to resist the growing power of France that had already lasted twenty years and would take up the whole of the rest of his life.
By the 1680s the power of France was beginning to alarm Englishmen as well.
From 1066 to 1558 France had been the country that England would fight if she was going to fight anyone, but for over a hundred years that role of the perpetual enemy had been taken by Spain or — in the minds of a few people — by the  Netherlands.
William's accession to the English throne marked a return to the attitude of hostility to France, and for almost all of the following 125 years England was either at war with France or preparing for war with France or recovering from war with France.
Most of these wars started over European issues.
Englishmen were afraid that France might be able to dominate Europe and were determined to hold her in check.
Of the seven wars with France that can be counted between 1690 and 1815, only one was indisputably a war about colonies, but of course all of them affected the colonies and their inhabitants.
By the end of the struggle France had lost almost every single colonial possession she had, so that French imperial history had to begin all over again in the nineteenth century, but nobody in 1690 could have guessed at such a result.
Colonies were very handy bargaining counters if a state wanted to concede something less important than territory in Europe, but it was hard to imagine that any country would want to take all of its rivals' imperial possessions.
The struggles in the West Indies in the 1690s were probably less devastating than those of the 1660s, and the French missed a chance to press home an attack on Jamaica when it was at its most vulnerable, just after the great earthquake of 1692 had destroyed the original capital of Port Royal.
But on the North American mainland, colonies had been affected very little by the earlier wars among European countries; except for the brief clash that had led to the Dutch loss of New Amsterdam the colonies had fought only with ill-armed Indians and had won their little wars without help from England.
After King Philip's War, a relatively serious struggle with Indians in New England in the 1670s, this had ceased to be any serious danger and the frontier had been reasonably peaceful.
By the 1690s the northern colonies were spreading north and west in a way that was quite likely to lead to an eventual conflict with New France, though the distance between the English and the French colonies was still too great for a full-scale conflict to be possible.
Bringing up supplies over long distances through dense woodland in King William's War (as the struggle of the 1690s known in England and Europe as the War of the League of Augsburg became known in America) was so difficult that launching an attack was more a matter of logistics than of strategy.
The war was unlikely to become much more than a dispute over frontier posts, in which success would depend to a considerable extent on winning the support of the Indians who lived in the wide area between the colonies.
The French carried out a successful attack on Albany, which was very close to the northern frontier of New York settlement up the Hudson Valley, but it was still not likely that they could reach the coastal towns which were the heart of English settlement.
It would have been at least as hard for the English to move north and attack the St. Lawrence Valley.
English forces and the New Englanders worked together reasonably well in operations on the seacoast to capture Port Royal in Nova Scotia, but this was  a long way from the centre of French settlement and the port was returned at the end of the war.
Even this limited warfare showed the most independent-minded of the colonists that the English connection had some practical uses, and the English government did its best to live up to the implicit bargain that lay behind the Navigation Acts.
The southern colonies did not contribute much to the war in America and though they were called on to help, there was no co-ordinated organization for strategy.
The strain of conducting frontier warfare against the French and their Indian allies, without assistance from the south, forced the Massachusetts assembly to ask for help from England in terms that showed a reasonable willingness to co-operate with policy laid down in London.
The English response to the pressure of war was to attempt to unify the system of government in much the way that Charles and James had tried.
Lord Bellomont's position as Governor in New York, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire, and military commander in Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Jersey was similar enough to the position held by the Governor of the Dominion of New England to show that unification was not just an eccentric idea launched by James II.
No single administrator was appointed to hold these posts together after the death of Bellomont and the problems of unified defence in North America remained unsettled.
The English government continued to think that the mainland colonies were much safer from attack than the West Indian islands, but the dangers of war in North America were becoming more obvious.
The men who overthrew James II denounced him for being an enemy of the type of established property that depended on charters like those of the City of London or the colony of Massachusetts.
The new, limited monarchy of William III that replaced James was expected to show much more respect for established interests.
But the new government could see the advantages of a unified system of empire, and the need for instruments of organization like Bellomont's extended governorship, just as its predecessor had done.
The House of Commons was moving forward to assert a greater degree of control over the colonies than before; partly to evade this, William created a Board of Trade and Plantations, made up of civil servants and privy councillors, that was unlikely to pay much more attention to the Commons than its predecessor, the Lords of Trade, had done.
In its first twenty or thirty years of life the new Board was rather more active than the Lords of Trade; between 1720 and 1760 effective executive power passed to the Secretary of State in charge of relations with France and southern Europe, though the Board still served as the main clearing house for the American pressure groups which could keep up London connections; in the last twenty years of its life, when Gibbon was a member, it was as complete a sinecure as he could have wished because power had now passed to the holder of a new Secretaryship of State.
The original board (linked by the presence of John  Locke to the Carolinas and the colonies of the 1660s) helped to unite the two New Jerseys, and continued the policy of encouraging proprietors to sell or give up their special powers and turn their domains into royal colonies.
This process had begun when James turned his own proprietorship of New York into a royal colony on becoming king, and over the next forty years Maryland, the re-united New Jersey, and the two Carolinas all became royal colonies.
Charles II's expansion into North America had been a process of expansion by proprietors, but this was almost all dismantled in the following generation.
A certain amount of the Stuart expansion had been carried out by chartered companies, and the enemies of James II showed relatively little regard for the rights laid down in these charters.
The companies had been closely linked with the King's court, and were also open to attack because they were monopolies.
The Hudson's Bay Company was so deeply involved in the struggle with the French in North America, and came so close to being overwhelmed, that nobody stepped forward to try to take its place.
The Royal African Company came under criticism from the West India sugar planters, who clamoured for more slaves to be supplied without explaining how they would be paid for, and also from other English merchants who thought they could do a better job of supplying slaves.
As a result the Company lost its monopoly; after 1697 all English merchants could trade with West Africa, though they were supposed to pay a tax of 10 per cent of the value of goods exported from England, the proceeds of which went to the Royal Africa Company to enable it to keep up its forts on the West African coast.
The revenue was never enough for this, and the Company began declining into bankruptcy much faster than before.
Over the next ten years it kept going by making a succession of calls on its shareholders for additional funds; by 1708 it was fairly clearly insolvent, and after 1713 it almost completely ceased trading.
The low price of sugar before 1690, the dangers of war after 1690, the Company's inadequate provision for depreciation, and the planters' unwillingness to pay their debts, might between them have ruined the Company in any case, but the end of the monopoly must have contributed something to the collapse.
The claims of the opponents of monopoly turned out to be reasonably justified; more and more slaves were shipped across the Atlantic by the independent traders, and the government found itself drawn further and further into keeping up the forts that provided English traders with a base of operations in West Africa.
Challenging the East India Company was a larger issue.
Nobody thought trade could be carried on in India without a network of factories and fortifications, which meant that there would have to be a company with a charter to run them — the idea that the government might provide them would have struck the merchants as inappropriate and would have alarmed the politicians who would have had to impose taxes to pay for them.
A new  Company was organized from among merchants who had tried to trade with India on their own account, and from employees of the old Company who disliked Child's leadership.
The open and public part of the contest between the two companies for the monopoly of the Indian trade (apart from the normal process of lobbying, in which it was said very large sums were spent on bribery) was devoted to finding which of them would lend more money to the government.
These loans were much larger than anything known before, running into millions when hundreds of thousands had been the previous limit.
The difference was that until 1688 loans had been made directly to the King: he ran the government as an extension of his private household and, although he was the richest individual in the country, he was in many ways just a private borrower like any other and a prudent lender would not trust him with a loan that would run for a long time.
After James II had been overthrown, a new system of government began to develop under which Parliament met every year and voted taxes annually, the King chose ministers who were acceptable to Parliament, the administrative departments became independent of direct royal intervention (though the King still had a great deal of authority over his ministers) and Parliament took responsibility for national financial policy.
Loans were handled as the National Debt rather than the royal debt and it became possible to raise long-term loans with the authority of Parliament behind them, and even to float loans on terms which meant that the principal would never be repaid but that, because the interest would be paid regularly forever, it would be possible to treat the bond for the debt as an asset which could be bought and sold.
The Bank of England began its career by lending the government £1.2m. in irredeemable bonds, and in return was given a pledge that no other joint-stock company would be allowed to open a bank.
Anyone else looking for commercial privileges would naturally be expected to provide an attractive loan, and in 1698 the new East India Company won the right to the monopoly of Indian trade with Britain by lending £2m. at 8 per cent.
Parliament had some regard for the rights of property; the old Company was allowed to run in competition with the new one for a few years, and of course in India the old Company had advantages in organization, in diplomatic connections, and in possessing established forts and factories.
The old Company invested heavily in the shares of the new Company, so that its shareholders would in any case not be totally excluded from Indian trade, and the companies moved towards a compromise.
Working out the details took time, but the United East India Company came into existence in 1709, and combined the assets of the two existing companies, at the price of enlarging their loan to the government to £3.2m. and reducing the interest charged to 5 per cent.
During the dispute the political strength of the textile importers was reduced, and the English manufacturers of woollen and linen goods  obtained some degree of tariff protection against Indian goods.
No doubt they were helped by the government's needs for revenue in the period of the wars against Louis XIV, but neither this nor the nominal prohibition of textile imports from India in 1720 caused the Company or the Indian textile trade much trouble.
Unprinted goods were given exemptions for the sake of the English textile printing industry, fashionable Indian muslins were smuggled in from the Channel Islands, and the re-export trade to the rest of the world was unaffected, so Indian exports rose steadily.
In the first half of the eighteenth century the London trading turnover of the Company ran between £1m. and £2m. a year, of which about half went on bullion and other items to export, perhaps a sixth on transport costs, and a third for English customs duties.
The establishments in India, with their low-salaried staff and their substantial share in the country trade, were self-supporting and profits on trade were about 5 per cent of turnover.
The old Company had paid lavish dividends of about 20 per cent at first, which had led to calls on the shareholders for more capital in the 1690s; after 1709 the new company paid dividends starting at 8 per cent and declining as the years passed.
The capital accounts were dominated by the loan to the government, which was increased by a further £1m. in the 1740s, and it was the decline in interest paid on the government bonds rather than a fall in trading profits that led to declining dividends.
This was a very modest setback compared to the disaster that overtook the only independent Scottish attempt at colonization.
Scotland was an unhappy country in the late seventeenth century, partly for reasons beyond the control of politicians or merchants; the climate grew steadily harsher, for these were the worst years of the ‘little ice age’ that ran from 1500 to 1850 and must have had some general effect of encouraging emigration from Europe.
But Scotland also suffered from internal religious differences, and from the effects of the Navigation Acts after 1660 that cut her off from a good deal of overseas trade.
William III made sure that the crowns of his new territories stayed on the same head, but he still had separate governments in his different kingdoms.
In the late 1690s the Scottish government gave its support to a proposal intended to enable the country to escape from all its economic problems: a trading company was to be launched which would set up a commercial centre at Darien on the Panama Isthmus.
The idea attracted immense enthusiasm among all classes in Scotland, and led to disaster.
However well placed the site might be for access to trade routes, it had an unhealthy climate and was in Spanish territory.
For two years the colony  staggered along, with much the same problem as the early English settlements in Virginia which had failed to find any line of activity in the first three or four years that would bring in money.
The English discouraged the colony, the Spanish first watched it carefully to see that it showed no sign of succeeding and eventually in 1700 they captured it.
Nothing was left of the hundreds of thousands of pounds — perhaps as much as half the floating capital of Scotland — that had been invested and over half the colonists were dead of hunger or disease.
The English were blamed, and yet Darien was one of a number of events that convinced the Lowland Scots that they should try to reach better terms with England before attempting to become independent; in 1707 England and Scotland became united with a single government and a single Parliament, and one of the terms of the Union was that the Darien investors should be reimbursed for their losses.
Lowland fear of the Highland Scots was another powerful motive for Union, but the effect was to give eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Scotsmen opportunities in the British Empire that had previously been closed to them.
And these opportunities were very considerable; later generations might see the eighteenth-century empire as a monument to the constrictions of mercantilism, but at the time people saw it as the largest area of unrestricted trade in the world and it offered excellent prospects for men like the sugar and tobacco merchants of Glasgow.
Apart from developing a wide range of trading opportunities, the newly-United Kingdom was acquiring a position of great strength at sea and some military importance on land.
After a quarter century of peace, broken by underfinanced wars against the Netherlands, England had undertaken a quarter-century of wars against France that ran almost without interruption from the day William III came to the throne until the death of Queen Anne.
These wars were inspired by a belief that Louis XIV of France hoped to become the overlord of Europe, and that he wanted to restore the Catholic James II or his descendants to the throne.
Particularly because of this latter fear, an effective navy meant a lot to the English in these wars and they spent money quite lavishly to keep it strong.
This was no new departure: Charles I had wanted a strong navy, though his reliance on unparliamentary taxation to pay for it had led to trouble; the Republic had gone further afield than previous governments and had won some notable successes; and Charles II and his brother James had tried to build up a strong navy without becoming too caught up by the House of Commons and its desire to control policy by controlling finance.
Charles's Navy had fought very well against the Dutch in the 1660s until the money ran out, and had kept going in the 1670s satisfactorily enough.
In the 1680s the navy had not succeeded very well in its primary purpose of preventing invasions.
In 1685 two small-scale but embarrassing attacks, by the Duke of Monmouth in the west of England and the Duke of Argyll in Scotland, had been defeated on land but the initial landings had been carried out without the navy being able to stop them.
William III, helped by the ‘Protestant wind’ that kept the English navy pinned in harbour while William's Dutch fleet could choose a convenient place to land, was able to carry out a successful invasion with quite a substantial military force, so the  events of the 1680s underlined the possibility that James II might be able to make a successful return from exile.
His prospects were obviously improved by the French navy's success at Beachy Head in 1690, and suffered a setback when the English won a battle off La Hogue in 1692.
After this Louis XIV spent relatively little money on his navy; he had to defend his frontiers against the threat of invasion by land through Belgium, and naval supremacy was always for him a secondary consideration.
Apart from the risk of invasion, English trade was also in danger; the interception of the Smyrna convoy in 1693 was said to have cost English merchants £2m. (which would have been something like 3 per cent of the gross national product).
Much of this would have been intended for re-export, rather than directly for consumption, but as half of England's total exports by this time were re-exports rather than domestic products the commercial community suffered enough of a loss to show why the English had to be far more concerned about command of the sea than any other country except the Netherlands, and also how fragile that command was before 1700.
When the war came to an end England had spent about £40m. on it, or something like 10 per cent of the national income each year of fighting.
Very few territorial changes were made at the end of the war, and none of any significance overseas.
Politicians could see the peace was unlikely to last long because of the problems of the succession to the throne of Spain and her colonies.
No solution was found: within a few years the European powers were at war again, essentially over the question whether Spain and her colonies were going to pass into the hands of a relation of the King of France or a relation of the Holy Roman Emperor; in the end they passed into the French line of descent, and in the eighteenth century policy towards France had always to be conducted in the light of the possibility that the French and Spanish government might ally for war.
This might suggest that France won the War of the Spanish Succession but nobody in Britain and not many people in France saw the result this way; it was regarded more as a struggle in which the British asserted themselves militarily on the continent of Europe and began to show signs of a policy of taking over the smaller colonies of other European powers by conquest.
The fighting in Germany and in Belgium has always attracted more attention than other aspects of the war.
Marlborough's campaigns have commanded the admiration of military analysts; his successes showed that Britain could conduct a war on land, and made it clear that the balance of power would be maintained and Louis XIV would not be able to establish France as the dominant power in western Europe in the way that had seemed probable in the 1680s.
The attention of people in Britain was focused on the area where Marlborough was campaigning, particularly because this was the area of the greatest military and financial commitment, but this was not the whole of the struggle.
Naturally enough, war raged fiercely in Spain; in 1704 the English captured Gibraltar and held on to it, initially as a base for their  communications in Spain; a good deal of the naval activity of the war took place around Spanish waters and the English managed to stop the Bourbon forces from setting up any effective siege of Gibraltar.
Moving further into the Mediterranean to protect the Habsburg lines of communication with Italy, they captured the island of Minorca in 1708.
Gibraltar and Minorca remained in British hands throughout the war, and were formally transferred to Britain by the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713.
Extracting this sort of consolation prize from the Bourbon candidate was the first stage of Britain's advance into the Mediterranean, which in the nineteenth century was followed by a series of acquisitions which led to control of the route to the east.
In America the war was not much more decisive than its predecessor, but British successes in Europe and claims to compensation to make up for the fact that the Bourbons had secured the Spanish throne meant that Britain kept her gains instead of returning them as she had done in 1697.
An expedition sent north from New England captured Port Royal on the Nova Scotia peninsula, as in the previous war, but this time Britain retained the peninsula, which was the most settled and prosperous part of the region known as Acadia.
The French kept the two substantial islands now known as Prince Edward Island and Cape Breton Island, just to the north of the peninsula, and also the area of the mainland between the peninsula and the St. Lawrence which is now known as New Brunswick.
But there was still a French-speaking population on the peninsula itself; transferring a population to a new ruler in this way was common enough in Europe, and the only unusual thing about this transfer was that the British promised to let the inhabitants retain their Catholic religion without enforcing the laws restricting the civil rights of Catholics that had been passed at Westminster.
Catholic priests came to the Acadians from New France, and tried to make sure that the Acadians would not become reconciled to British rule.
The British also conquered the island of Newfoundland, and were not faced by any such problems there.
The English had been fishing there for over a century, and had been settled for over fifty years, so they had a strong position for making the French give up any claims to settle there.
The French retained fishing rights and rights to use the western shore as a base which turned out to be a source of dispute for almost two centuries, but the British were clearly establishing their control over the whole Atlantic seacoast.
The Treaty of Utrecht was not the triumphant dictation of terms to a prostrate enemy that some Whigs would have liked, but it provided something for almost all overseas commercial interests in Britain and in her possessions overseas.
These gains were the by-products of a war fought mainly for reasons connected with the balance of power in Europe, but they were attractive enough to encourage the British to think about further involvement outside Europe.
Perhaps they helped persuade the British to follow a policy which kept them out of almost all the continental wars of the next quarter-century.
Peace and War 1713–1763
The long wars against France had left the British more confident about their position overseas than before, but not necessarily more interested in activity outside Europe.
Between 1713 and 1763 they paid little attention to the colonies in America, and at least for the first half of the period it was hard to see what else could have been done.
A framework for governing the colonies across the Atlantic had been set up but the British government of the early eighteenth century was not at all energetic in handling problems inside Britain and was most unlikely to exert itself about things further afield.
Some people felt that choosing as Queen Anne's successor in 1714 a ruler from Germany, who might neglect British interests for the sake of his Electorate of Hanover, was already a warning that the British should be careful about any overseas entanglements.
For twenty-five years Britain took little interest in the outside world and even managed to remain at peace with France.
After 1739 this all came to an end, and Britain spent the next quarter-century at war with France, directly or by proxy in the colonies, with only a year or two of armed truce.
This second set of wars was much more obviously concerned with colonial problems and ambitions than the wars at the beginning of the eighteenth century, and the result in 1763 was a dramatic conclusion to the overseas struggle which left no doubt of Britain's imperial supremacy, even though its effect on European affairs was less clear-cut.
The overseas struggle had become closer to a world-wide contest; the fighting outside Europe before 1713 had been confined to North America, but between 1739 and 1763 the British went far enough afield to attack the Philippines and — what was much more important — the struggle had spread to India.
Between 1690 and 1713 the weakness of the Europeans in India, and the power of the Moghul emperors, had kept the peace.
By the 1740s the Moghul central government had grown too weak to impose peace on Europeans, in the 1750s the British and the French took an important role in struggles among Indians, and by 1763 the British had made themselves rulers of one of the most important regions of India, though they had not yet worked out a legal form to express the new reality in India.
Early Eighteenth-Century Britain
The British emerged from their wars against Louis XIV in a calmer flame of  mind than they had been in during the disturbed and excited seventeenth century.
It was not necessarily a kindly mood — the number of types of crimes that carried the death penalty went up steadily in the early eighteenth century — but it was practical rather than cruel.
Some of the increase in capital offences was perhaps due to a more precise and less summary handling of the law, which meant that in practice fewer people were executed; and certainly the more formal use of transportation to the colonies gave the authorities more flexibility in punishing crime.
From the 1650s onwards, judges had ordered convicts to be transported, but they had only been able to do this by passing a death sentence and then getting it commuted.
Prisoners offered the choice very rarely preferred death to the colonies but, because they were essentially treated in the same way as indentured servants, they could only go to America if a merchant was willing to take them on the basis of a calculation that he could sell their services at the other end.
Particularly during the French wars, no merchant might be willing to take them, and then they had to remain in Newgate prison.
But after the wars were over the government cleared off the backlog of prisoners by arranging, in the 1718 Act, to pay a subsidy to merchants to take them across the Atlantic, and it also gave the judges the right to impose a sentence of up to 7 years transportation.
The old process of commuting death sentences also remained in effect, and the result of these arrangements was that about half of all eighteenth-century felons were transported, so that about 30,000 were sent to North America in the next 60 years.
This was greeted with mixed feelings in America, but treating the world outside Europe as a handy alternative to the gallows certainly showed a brisk and practical approach.
A century earlier, in Shakespeare's day, that world had been a mysterious place; Othello could tell his travellers' tales of the men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders and, while the references to Bermuda in The Tempest were up-to-the-minute, they came in a play that was a collection of fairy stories.
When Defoe wrote about the world outside Europe for an early eighteenth-century audience, he could take a much more realistic approach.
Robinson Crusoe was far too busy cultivating his island on the basis of hard work helped by all the capital goods he had salvaged from the shipwreck to have any time for fairy stories.
Gulliver's Travels went back to telling fantastic tales, but Swift wrote the book in the same realistic style as Defoe, and took it for granted that his readers would find it quite natural that at the ends of the earth men were just the same as in England — petty, trivial, grasping, and generally unpleasant.
Very few writers had actually been to the world outside Europe.
The most successful writer who had lived in an English colony was Aphra Behn, who was brought up in Surinam before it was transferred to the Dutch in 1668, and her most important novel of American life,Oronooko , was so completely sympathetic to the Indian hero that it should be considered as an early  contribution to the cult of the noble savage rather than a book which could help its English readers understand the wider world.
While writers simply reflected people's greater knowledge of the colonies and did not do much to increase it, the churches made quite substantial efforts to keep in touch across the Atlantic.
Most British churches and sects had supporters in America.
Even colonies which did not have direct religious origins would have religious commitments; Virginia had been launched in as secular-minded a mood as almost any colony but it remained firmly attached to the forms of the Church of England, though the lack of regular episcopal organization made its clergy more responsive to the wishes of their congregations than was usually the case in England.
By the end of the seventeenth century the Anglican church in England was developing institutions to serve American needs: the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge was launched in 1699 and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts in 1701 so that the established church could help its brothers in the colonies who were exposed to much more competition from other Protestants.
The early career of the great missionary John Wesley showed the problems facing Anglicans in an area without bishops; when he went to preach in the newly-launched colony of Georgia from 1735 to 1737 the Church of England made no provision for his activity, and he went out attached to the Moravians.
The church was held back from full-scale episcopal organization by the thought of the expense and the political commitment involved at a time when ‘a prince of the church’ was a perfectly reasonable way to describe a bishop.
The Bishop of London, who was responsible for church organization in America, suggested in 1749 that a bishopric should be created for the American colonies; nonconformist Protestants in England and in America opposed it strongly enough to lead the government to lay the idea aside.
And Anglican laymen in America may have felt that a bishop from across the ocean would be harder to influence than the local clergy, many of whom were American by origin, though in several cases they had gone to Britain to complete their education.
These problems of religious organization were the concern of a minority.
Many more people thought of the works outside Europe in a way that still reflected the idea of El Dorado, or at least of immense profits, and the idea was exploited in vast manipulations of the stock exchanges in France and Britain around 1720.
Apart from her territorial gains, Britain got the right in the Treaty of Utrecht to sell 4,800 slaves a year in Spanish America which, at a normal profit of about £4 a head, might yield £20,000, and in addition one British ship a year would be allowed to visit Cartagena and trade there.
It was fairly clear that there was going to be some smuggling as well but, even allowing for the often-repeated story that other ships lay over the horizon and sent boats in to add to the stock on board the single ship, the net profits from the ship could hardly have been much more than twice those of the  slave-trading.
In 1710 financiers in the City of London had formed the South Sea Company to bid for the right to use the privileges they expected Britain to get at the end of the war.
Even though the annual value of these rights could hardly have been as much as £100,000 a year, the Company was ready to outdo the Bank of England and the East India Company and take on £9½m. of the National Debt, which would have been about a quarter of the total outstanding after the Treaty of Utrecht.
Under the scheme holders of government bonds could choose to exchange them for South Sea Company shares, and the government would pay interest on these bonds to the South Sea Company at a lower rate than it paid previously — the South Sea Company was doing much the same thing as the East India Company, providing the government with a loan at a reduced rate of interest in exchange for overseas trading privileges.
There was no adequate trading base for this financial performance, and it is most unlikely that the promoters ever thought that there was.
They expected to make their profit by pushing the price of the shares up, so that they could buy the government bonds for a relatively small number of shares.
In France there had already been speculation, followed by disaster, when John Law persuaded the government to unite all the French colonies into a single vast Company for trading up the Mississippi and in the Indies, which was then used as the base for a wild expansion of the French currency.
In the summer of 1720 the South Sea Bubble burst, and the dream that El Dorado might be found in the outside world faded a little further, though the Company went on endeavouring to use its Utrecht trading privileges for another thirty years.
Legislation had been passed, at the height of the bubble, to stop the creation of new joint-stock companies, which ruled out one of the ways in which the British had organized their expansion overseas, Walpole, the Prime Minister who picked up the pieces after the collapse, was first of all concerned to make sure that the King and his government did not run into any more trouble, which meant a programme of no new taxes, no wars, no new assertion of authority, and much less expansion than either before or after.
This was a sensible policy which would bring stability to Britain, and took it for granted that stability would mean that relations with the colonies would remain unchanged.
Neither of the kings whom Walpole served as Prime Minister was firmly seated at the centre of political power in the way their predecessors had been.
George I and George II were Germans by birth and upbringing, and were on the throne simply because all the heirs with better hereditary claims were disqualified by being Roman Catholics.
While they were accustomed to being absolute rulers in Hanover they realized that being King of England was more important than being Elector of Hanover and they spent most of their time in England, but they never felt entirely at ease in the forty-six years during which they ruled in London.
Before 1688 kings had been able to choose their ministers and to wield sufficient power to keep them in office unless the Commons used the exceptional procedure of impeachment to try to prosecute them for political misdemeanours.
Between 1688 and 1714 monarchs had changed their ministers fairly frequently but they did not defy changes in public feeling and were always able to gain a majority in Parliament for the man they chose.
After 1714 the balance shifted to a point where the King and the Commons had something like mutual vetoes: the King chose the ministers and could normally be sure of not having to put up with a minister he disliked, but the Commons could reject a minister they disliked by refusing to vote for the taxes he proposed, thus pushing the King into dismissing him.
The King and his politicians were usually on good enough terms to avoid these extreme steps but as the decades passed the King found he was sharing more of his power with Parliament.
British and French Colonies in North America
Much the same pressures could be seen at work, in a less decorous way, in North America.
The colonial assemblies saw themselves as bodies parallel to the House of Commons and they felt they could use their authority over finance to control the royal governors.
They voted the local taxes for the governors' salaries which might be as high as £2,000 a year (a hundred times a labourer's wage, and 40 per cent of the prime Minister's salary), and sometimes they felt governors should earn their salaries by letting the assembly have its own way.
The pressure was less intense in the sugar islands, where British garrisons and naval support were visible, but life for a governor on the mainland was difficult and grew harder as memories of the wars against the French became dimmer.
Seventeenth-century military men with a habit of authority and experience of command were succeeded by eighteenth-century gentlemen and noblemen whose family connections and political influence in London were less relevant to problems in the colonies.
Judges were as  irremovable in the colonies as in England, but colonial assemblies could apply pressure to them by declining to vote their annual salaries.
The governor had other officials whose posts entitled them to sit in his executive council, but although they might have looked like potential ministers the legislative assemblies could not use them to control the governor and, as the governor had no automatic right to dismiss his councillors, he could not use them as his ministers either.
A few posts were filled by the vote of the assembly but most office holders were appointed by the government in London.
If the Secretary of State had regularly taken the governors' advice about appointments, patronage might have been used to control the assemblies — some governors, notably in Massachusetts, were able to get their own way in their assemblies much more often in wartime and, while this was partly due to patriotism and partly due to fear of the French, it does appear  that war contracts could build support in what had not always been promising soil for the governors.
But most of the time colonial appointments were made in a way that reflected friendships and pressures in London.
Posts in Britain were normally filled in this way, and people in London would have said that appointing officials in the colonies in a different way would have implied that the colonies were not a normal part of the British structure of government, People in America would have replied that the colonial structure of government was different in one important way because the colonists paid the taxes for these official salaries.
In Virginia and in the West Indies the assemblies voted a more or less perpetual grant of taxes; in New York and New England there were annual struggles over the revenue.
Because they had no way of driving out of office the men who ran the executive in their colonies, the colonial assemblies could not assert themselves in the same way as the Westminster Parliament, and had to fall back on using the seventeenth-century approach of saying that there should be redress of grievance before taxes were voted to run the government.
Even when a governor accepted the assembly's idea of what was a grievance, his instructions from London limited his freedom of action, usually in the interests of uniformity of imperial policy — one problem was that some American colonial assemblies had Scottish rather than English ideas about divorce and the indissolubility of marriage, but the governors were instructed to veto bills allowing divorce, in order to reduce the difficulties foreseen if each different part of the empire had its own laws about marriage.
The governors stuck reasonably well to their instructions on this and other matters and, while they did not always understand the new societies in which they were serving, eighteenth-century attacks on their competence were certainly on some occasions political propaganda that colonists were naturally tempted to launch against men who were carrying out the policy of a distant monarch and government.
‘Salutary neglect’ is a description that fits the colonial policy of the British government in the first half of the eighteenth century, particularly when it is compared with the fairly active government of the late seventeenth century.
Governments in Britain in the eighteenth century did not do very much; some of the neglect of the colonies simply paralleled what was happening in the British Isles.
But the royal power of veto over the legislation of the colonial assemblies was still active at a time when it was dying out in Britain, and it could be exercised either by governors on the spot or by the government in London.
Apart from legislation which might break up the unity of imperial law, some colonial legislation was likely to affect the interests of people in Britain directly.
For instance, coin and currency were always in short supply in the colonies and the British government in a mood of less than salutary neglect did nothing about it, so colonies sometimes passed laws to make bills of exchange into legal tender.
These bills of exchange almost  invariably sank to a discount in terms of sterling, which meant that British merchants exporting to America lost money if they were compelled by colonial legislation to accept them as payment.
Even if the government neglected to veto legislation of this sort, the Westminster Parliament could in theory pass laws to repeal colonial legislation, but in practice Parliament did not legislate on issues that could be seen as internal concerns of the colonies and did not go round picking up loose ends left by the governors.
It kept the Navigation Acts up to date, but under Walpole's premiership in the 1720s and 1730s it passed so little legislation of any general application even within Britain that it was quite natural for it to do nothing about the colonies.
The growth of the colonies was likely to force new departures in policy and legislation on the British government; the American population rose from about a quarter of a million at the beginning of the century to about two million by 1776.
Something under half the increase in population consisted of white immigrants, about equally balanced between free settlers and indentured labourers, with the transported convicts forming a small minority of the total.
The population was becoming less markedly English than it had been at the beginning of the century, with a large number of Ulstermen (who felt the operation of the leasehold system was squeezing them out of land they had conquered and settled in Ireland), Scotsmen, and Germans among the settlers.
It was a prosperous community: going to America was a big step to take, and one that would not be taken by people with prospects at the top of English society unless they were going out to fill a government post, but for anyone else it was likely to lead to a higher standard of living than could reasonably be expected in Britain.
There were no large cities to compare with London, but then London had no rivals in Britain either.
New York and Philadelphia were rather like rich country towns.
They were several weeks journey from London, but towns like Liverpool or York were several days journey from London, so that the colonists might feel distant but not uniquely isolated from the metropolis, and had closer ties with it than many parts of the English countryside.
The colonists had enough newspapers to take any visiting Englishman aback, and were developing industries fast enough to disturb the balance of the integrated commercial system: in 1699 Americans were forbidden to spin woollens for export, even to another colony; in 1732 a similar limitation was placed on the manufacture of hats and caps; and in 1750 the Iron Act allowed them to smelt iron ore into pig iron but forbade them to go any further in processing it, though in the event the American colonies were producing more iron and steel than Britain by 1775.
Nobody suggested that the Parliament at Westminster did not have the authority to pass such legislation, perhaps out of a feeling that Britain was paying enough for the defence of America to be entitled to impose a unified industrial policy, possibly more out of a feeling that it would be hard to enforce.
When Parliament in 1733 passed the Molasses Act which  tried to help planters in the British West Indies by imposing prohibitive duties on New England's imports of sugar, rum, and molasses from non-British colonies, the Act was not properly enforced and Americans came to speak of its having been ‘nullified’.
North America became more of a market for British manufactures, as part of a triangle of trade that financed increased British imports from the West Indies.
In 1740 Britain exported about £0.7m. to North America and about the same amount to the West Indies, but twenty years later the West Indies took £1m. and the mainland took £2m., while imports from the West Indies ran at £1.8m. and from the mainland at £0.6m.
Part of the deficit of the mainland colonies with Britain was covered by their exports to the sugar islands, part of it by increased indebtedness to British merchants.
In 1732 a new colony — the fourteenth British colony on the Atlantic seaboard — was set up in Georgia.
The philanthropic General Oglethorpe intended it initially as a place where people released from debtors' prison could make a fresh start in life.
In practice few debtors went out, but the settlers were helped liberally with private and public funds administered by the charitable trust created to run the colony.
The trust ran it for twenty years as something like the proprietors' colonies of the previous century, but in 1752 it became a royal colony.
The settlers complained that the trust tried to lay down too many rules about what crops to grow and when to grow them.
These complaints may have been justified but the settlers had another dispute with the philanthropists; they agitated to be allowed to own slaves like their neighbours to the north and eventually they were successful.
As slaves were to be found in all the American colonies and were an important, though perhaps not a vital, part of the economy of Virginia, Maryland, and the Carolinas, the Georgians were asking only that they should be allowed to do what everyone else did.
The British colonies were steadily filling up the Atlantic seacoast and populating the area fairly densely.
The establishment of Georgia completed the process of coastal settlement, and it was close enough to the Spanish colony of Florida to open up a new area of conflict.
Military costs were still well under control; the mainland colonies cost only about £20,000 a year, though the West Indies garrisons cost rather more.
The French approach to North America had been rather different; they had penetrated to the interior by the two great river systems, the St. Lawrence and the Mississippi, and began developing them as a single communications route linked by the Great Lakes and running through the hinterland west and north of the British settlements.
The French were few in numbers, depended on the support and sympathy of their home government, and aroused very little public enthusiasm in France.
Two novels of the 1720s point the contrast in public attitudes to the American colonies of the two countries in an odd way: the Abbé Prévost's Manon Lescaut and Daniel Defoe's Moll Flanders are  about prostitutes, both of whom are transported to the new world, but Manon dies from exposure in the arms of her faithful des Grieux after walking six miles from New Orleans, while Moll Flanders settles down with her fifth husband to reckon her net worth in cash and tobacco before returning from Virginia to London.
The Abbé's morality may be more edifying, but Defoe's book is the product of a society that saw colonies as attractive and profitable places that people would like to move to (though, of course, pro-emigration literature had appeared ever since the Elizabethan plays Westward Ho and Eastward Ho ).
But while the French did not feel encouraged to emigrate in large numbers, the 50,000 inhabitants of New France moved inland much more boldly than the Abbé Prevost might have made one expect.
It is not clear whether this reduced their disadvantages or simply made them more alarming to the British.
The Hudson's Bay Company went on trading at its posts on the shore of the Bay, and did rather well for its shareholders, but French fur traders moved out beyond the Great Lakes and by the 1740s La Verendrye had led them to places well west of the Bay.
The Hudson's Bay Company would have had to change the way it did business completely if it wanted to convert its coastal settlements to which Indians came to sell their furs into bases from which fur trading parties went into the interior.
For the French, who had to go inland to trade in furs at all, pushing on to the west was a matter of development by easy stages.
Their enterprising approach brought them profits; the Hudson's Bay Company got 10 beaverskins for a gun at its posts on the Bay, but to the Indians this was the final stage in a complicated pattern of inland trade, so that when the French travelled out to the central hunting areas they were able to save the Indians all the transport and trading costs and could get 30 beaverskins for a gun.
This competition made conflicts more likely and meant that in any conflict rival groups of Indians would be involved; those who traded with the French would support them, and their enemies would support the British, so that Indian skirmishing inland played a larger part in the fighting of the 1740s than in previous wars.
In the early eighteenth century the West Indian islands had established their position as the overseas area that meant most to Britain, and had become completely dependent on sugar and on slaves to grow the sugar.
On the North American mainland the transportation of convicts meant that there was some non-free white labour to do much of the hardest work in growing rice and tobacco.
In the islands almost all white men were part of a rigid structure that turned them into guards and gaolers.
The progress of the West Indian colonies was particularly important to Britain because they were so closely linked to her economic development.
By the eighteenth century growing sugar and carrying out the first stages of refining it were the main economic activities on the islands.
The tariff structure strongly discouraged completing the work of refining the sugar until it reached Britain, and there the increasing flow of sugar transformed people's diet, provided revenue, and launched new industries.
Sugar was one of the first imports to be reprocessed and used in new products made in Britain, such as jams or biscuits or sweetened drinks.
Honey had been the only sweetener; sugar had been as expensive as cinnamon or cloves and it could be taxed as a luxury in the firm belief that this would not make life harder for the working classes who were not thought to be consumers of sugar, though this was clearly changing in the eighteenth century.
By then sugar was fully established as the most important single item imported into Britain.
In the seventeenth century it had been an important re-export, which may have irritated planters who would have liked to export directly to the eventual destination.
In the eighteenth century British consumption, rising steadily at a bit over 2 per cent a year, was more buoyant than the re-export trade, which made the British preferential tariff more advantageous to the planters.
Another part of the economy was stimulated by the need to provide a labour force to grow this flourishing crop.
When the Royal Africa Company collapsed under the weight of its fixed costs, the need for permanent bases on the West African coast — essential if only because half-a-dozen other European countries were setting up forts there — led the government first to try to organize the slave-trading merchants into a loosely organized company which would be responsible for looking after the forts, and then to provide a subsidy to keep them going.
Previously the government had argued that the slave trade was so profitable that the traders could pay for their own forts, but by the mid-eighteenth century this attitude had changed to an acceptance of the fact that the trade was so necessary for the sugar islands (and the sugar islands so necessary for the British economy) that the trade would have to be supported if it could not afford to meet these overhead costs.
Certainly the slave trade was expanding in the early eighteenth century; more slaves were being bought in Africa than before, and the wars among Africans to provide captives to sell had more of a disturbing effect on the states of West Africa.
The planters might have been expected to see that slavery in the West Indies was wastefully debilitating, for the slaves died so fast that new ones had continuously to be brought in.
By degrees the British came to dominate this trade, partly because they were so committed to sugar that they were bound to make large purchases of slaves on their own account, partly because their increasingly dominant position at sea meant that they could take the place of the Dutch as general suppliers of slaves for planters in other European colonies who wanted to buy them.
By the middle of the eighteenth century about 70,000 slaves a year were being taken across the Atlantic, half of them in British ships.
About half of them went to British colonies, mainly to the sugar islands, and the rest were sold in other colonies in the Americas.
Later in the century the number  shipped may have risen to as many as 100,000 a year, and the British share of the total certainly became larger.
The sugar plantations and the slaves on them were the first British overseas investment of any size, at a time when investment of this sort was unusual, and in several eighteenth-century wars the British fought to defend this property, though it was not a central cause of any of the wars in which they were involved.
After the Treaty of Utrecht Britain remained at peace for a generation, declining to join in the only important continental war of the period, the War of the Polish Succession.
Openings for quarrels were bubbling up in several places in the 1730s.
Macaulay was attributing rather too much blame to Frederick II of Prussia when he wrote ‘in order that he might rob a neighbour whom he had promised to defend, black men fought on the coast of Coromandel, and red men scalped each other by the Great Lakes of North America.’
When Frederick attacked the Empress Maria Theresa in 1740 to snatch the province of Silesia from her, Britain and Spain were already at war, and there were two or three areas where France and Britain were likely to clash, though Macaulay was quite right to underline the world-wide dimensions of the struggle.
After its financial disaster in 1720 the South Sea Company had pulled itself together and had tried to trade with South America as though nothing had happened.
It was perfectly clear to everyone that the company could carry on enough trade to flourish only if it supplemented its income by bringing in more goods than its treaty permitted, and the smuggling trade became large enough to disturb the Spanish authorities.
Their coastguards used fairly brutal methods to discourage it: after intercepting one ship they cut off Captain Jenkin's ear — upon which, he later told a committee of the House of Commons, ‘he committed his soul to his God and his cause to his country.’
He had plenty of time to prepare this great phrase, for the outrage was said to have happened in 1731 and he was not asked about it until 1738, but the delay led to no awkward questions; by the late 1730s Parliament was growing increasingly annoyed with Spanish interference with British trade, and it was not willing to let Walpole go on with his peaceful policy.
War began with an unsuccessful attempt to return to the city-plundering strategy of the previous century, went on with a great commerce-raiding voyage round the world by Anson, and (not before it had at last ended the trading career of the South Sea Company) was swallowed up by the more far-flung clash of British and French.
That struggle was still concerned more with European than with colonial questions.
Frederick's aggression disturbed George II's position as Elector of Hanover and, because he tried to defend Maria Theresa's treaty rights and France joined in the attack upon her, Britain found itself at war with France.
This side of the war was not especially popular: opponents of the king and of his ministers played on the   fact that a good many MPs felt too much money was spent on German commitments.
George got financial support from Parliament for troops to defend his Electorate and they did well enough to maintain his position, but he could not establish in office the ministers he really wanted, who would have been committed to full-scale involvement in Germany, so that he had to put up with a government which was not completely devoted to fighting on the continent of Europe.
Outside Europe the struggle in the sugar islands was less destructive than it had been 50 or 60 years earlier.
It led to no permanent transfers of territory, though some islands were made neutral at the end of the war, and the half-dozen years after the war ended in 1749 were one of the peaks of eighteenth-century prosperity in the sugar trades.
On the American mainland French and British possessions were expanding and reaching the verge of collision.
The point of contact between British and French colonies was still on the seacoast, and here the British regular forces and the colonial militia co-operated effectively and captured the fortress of Louisbourg, which the French had fortified at immense cost to command the entrance to the St. Lawrence and hold back the British in Nova Scotia.
Nobody wanted to push the struggle any further; nobody in the 1740s imagined that a fight to the death was at hand.
From Commerce to Empire in India
The East India Company might have liked to have been able to take the same detached attitude as the Hudson's Bay Company.
Its employees were afraid that the death of the expansionist Moghul Emperor Aurangzeb in 1707 would lead to disorder and disintegration, and events in the next half-century showed they were right.
The Company felt very pleased when in 1717 it received an imperial decree giving it a good deal of the territorial autonomy for which its ambitious employees had hoped in the 1680s and, in return for an annual payment of 13,000 rupees, freed it from paying customs duties inside India, but there is no sign that the Company realized that developments of this sort showed the Moghul Empire was beginning to lose control of the country.
Power was slipping into the hands of important feudal vassals, and men like the rulers of Hyderabad in the south and of Bengal in the east were emerging with much more power than they had enjoyed in the previous half-century.
But they were still respectful to the Emperor; as fellow-Muslims they were part of the group that had dominated India for centuries, and it is unlikely that he was nearly as worried by their attitude as he was by the threat of Persian invasions like the one that led to Delhi being captured and plundered in 1739, or by the rebellious Marathas of western India, Hindu in religion and devoted to cavalry raids to plunder their neighbours.
European traders were really no problem; they usually negotiated with his direct vassals or with princes lower in the scale.
This did not satisfy the French.
After the collapse of Law's schemes his vast unified company was divided into its component parts again, but it still took some years for the French to recover in India.
By the 1730s they were able to be more active.
Though they were still doing less than half as much business as the British company, their rate of return on capital was higher.
They realized that the loss of power at the imperial centre would allow them to strengthen their position by negotiating with the imperial vassals.
In the 1740s the French in India would have been happy enough to ignore the war in Europe and remain neutral, as they had done during earlier European wars, mainly because previous emperors could maintain the peace.
The British Company might have agreed to this, but ships of the French and British navies had sailed to the Indian Ocean and could not remain neutral.
In 1746 the British squadron withdrew to Calcutta to refit; the French seized their opportunity and captured Madras, the main British settlement in southern India.
In the 1748 peace settlement it was returned in exchange for Louisbourg, but nobody in India had any doubt that the French had demonstrated their superiority.
The next year Dupleix, the most dynamic of the Frenchmen in India, made his bid for supremacy in southern India.
He made his candidate, Salabat Jang, Nizam of Hyderabad, and he also helped Chanda Sahib to become Nawab of the Carnatic, the region which lay inland from Madras.
None of this necessarily involved fighting between French and British, but it came at a time when the British Company was revising its policy of relying on the Moghul Emperor and on the successes of Englishmen outside India to protect its position.
It had always had a few troops in its settlements to defend property locally, but even when it had begun building up its own little army it had only about 3,000 men in 1749.
When the Company entered the dynastic politics of southern India by putting forward a candidate of its own in the Carnatic, the French were soon able to drive him back to Trichinopoly and beseige him there.
The best the Company could do was to send a 25-year old clerk and a force of 560 men off to Arcot, the capital of the Carnatic.
The clerk, Robert Clive, was able not only to take Arcot by a surprise attack but also to inspire his little force to hang on to it during a 50-day seige in which a series of onslaughts on the citadel was beaten off.
Next year the British candidate gained the throne of the Carnatic; the directors of the French Company decided that Dupleix had been wasting their shareholders' money, and in 1754 they recalled him, which must at the time have struck everybody as a prudent step to keep expenses down.
The British Company had shown that it could play an effective role in the rougher sort of Indian politics, but there was no reason to think it would go on doing so.
Clive had returned to England with his private profits from his trading and military activities, though he spent his money so fast (largely on an unsuccessful attempt to get into Parliament) that he was soon back in India, serving on   what was becoming recognizable as the military side of the Company's concerns.
Map 5 Eighteenth-Century India
One of the reasons for Dupleix's failure was simply that he was operating in a region of India where the profits from trade were not large enough to justify or even to support heavy military expenditure.
Bengal was the real source of wealth, and Calcutta the centre of its export trade.
When Alivardi, the Nawab of Bengal, died in 1756 and was succeeded by his grandson Siraj-ud-Daula, the Bengal scene appeared entirely peaceful.
But, within a couple of months of coming to the throne, Siraj-ud-Daula marched on Calcutta, seized and plundered it after a few days of frantic but ill-prepared resistance, and allowed the few British survivors of the seige to be locked up in the prison of the fortress for the night.
Because the cell was designed for only half-a-dozen prisoners, perhaps a hundred of the captives died in the night, and in later decades all Englishmen in India remembered the Black Hole of Calcutta as a dreadful atrocity.
At the time the Company showed no signs of being intolerably offended; it sent a force under Clive to recover Calcutta, but negotiated amiably enough with Siraj-ud-Daula.
He may have felt nervous about having plundered Calcutta or he may have thought he had done enough to show who was master in Bengal, but in any case he withdrew and paid the Company some compensation for its losses.
Clive's next concern was the French base at Chandernagore, a little to the north, and Siraj-ud-Daula allowed him to attack and neutralize it.
While the British were doing this, they learnt enough about the political situation in Bengal to realize that in a few months of confused and contradictory policy (of which his aggressive and then conciliatory treatment of the East India Company was only one example) Siraj-ud-Daula had lost the confidence of the Hindu merchants and bankers who ran the financial system and of some of the Muslims who ran the Bengal army.
Ten years earlier no Company official would have done much about this, and even in 1757 not many officials would have done the same as Clive: he joined the conspiracy against Siraj-ud-Daula, led his little army of 3,000 men against the Bengal army of 60,000, committed his troops beyond hope of withdrawal by crossing the Hughli (the lesser Ganges), and on 23 June 1757 held them steady at the battle of Plassey.
His fellow-conspirators took no part in the fighting, and Siraj-ud-Daula's army disintegrated in the face of the determination of the Company's army.
Siraj-ud-Daula could not have been defeated — if that is the word for the collapse of his army — and destroyed if he had not alienated his subjects by being unreliable and vacillating, without any signs of charm or kindness to make up for it, but the decisive fact was that the British had fought him, while his subjects had only deserted him and waited to see who would win.
Mir Jafar, who was made Nawab, had an adequate claim to the throne and might have been a good ruler under other circumstances, but it was quite  clear that he was on the throne simply because the Company had decided to put him there.
Anyone who became Nawab expected to be rich, and took it for granted that he should reward those who had helped him to the throne.
Mir Jafar's generosity completely transformed the process by which the Company's employees conducted a certain amount of private business to supplement the Company's meagre retaining fee and enjoy a satisfactory income.
The most ambitious of them could see that the largest gains were to be made in politics, and to politics they turned.
Clive's estimate was that the Company and various private individuals made £3m. out of the change of rulers.
He had been prosperous after the seige of Arcot; after Plassey the new Nawab gave him £234,000 in cash and the right to land rents of £27,000 a year, which made him as rich as a great territorial magnate like the Duke of Newcastle.
Sixteen years later Clive was asked by a House of Commons committee about the way this had happened.
He responded by explaining to the chairman of the committee, the fashionable playwright and military man John Burgoyne, how he had entered Murshidabad the capital of Bengal as a conqueror and how bankers and jewellers had rushed forward to thrust presents on him; and, he concluded, as he thought back to the moment of triumph, ‘By God, Mr. Chairman, I stand amazed at my own moderation.’
Clive returned to England almost immediately to go into Parliament and keep an eye on East India Company policy in London, but his followers — whose idea of moderation ran on much the same lavish lines — remained in control of Bengal.
If one man would pay generously to become Nawab, then so would another, and the  attraction of gifts paid out upon a change of ruler led to the deposition of three Nawabs in rapid succession, which reduced the position to one which was obviously that of a puppet of the Company.
The French in South India were eliminated as a political power in the 1760 and 1761 campaigns; the Moghul emperors were in no position to do anything about the rise of British power because, just a few months before the battle of Plassey, an Afghan army had marched south-east and plundered Delhi again.
So, partly because of Siraj-ud-Daula's incompetence and partly because of the eagerness of the Company employees to supplement their incomes by plunging into Indian politics, the British began to move inland.
The Triumph of William Pitt
For quite different reasons settlers were also beginning to move inland in America.
They were no longer so ready to see themselves as isolated settlements on the sea coast, unrelated to each other and uninterested in the interior.
At the beginning of the 1750s very few Englishmen in America had pushed even as far inland as the East India Company had done when it founded its port up the Hughli river at Calcutta.
George Washington, a Virginia gentleman whose home at Mount Vernon was quite close to the salt water of Chesapeake Bay, could ride off to the frontier with no difficulty  and acquire land to sell to future settlers.
The significant difference was that by the 1750s this speculation in land looked like making good sense.
Washington had first seen the attractions of open land when working as a surveyor along a line running north-west to the Ohio valley and Lake Erie, and he could reckon that his survey was not going to remain as a simple tribute to the government's desire for information.
If Englishmen in America were to push on to the west, it was fairly predictable that there would be clashes with the thinly scattered Indian population, and it was quite certain that if they went far enough either west or north they would meet the French.
In 1754 the Board of Trade ordered representatives of the mainland colonies to meet at Albany.
A philadelphia intellectual, Benjamin Franklin, back in his native land after a prolonged and enjoyable period in England, put down a statement of the need for political union which the conference accepted, but the colonial assemblies then rejected this plan for common defence, probably because it would have involved a good deal of extra spending.
The failure of the conference underlined the absence of any  institutions for co-ordinating policy on the western side of the Atlantic.
The governors wrote to the Secretary of State in London, but as he was also responsible for a wide range of Irish, domestic, and foreign concerns allotted to the Southern Department, they could not feel sure of prompt attention.
Other officials communicated with the Board of Trade whose President, Lord Halifax, managed during his dozen years in office after 1748 to make the department rather more effective than usual.
Franklin placed his own hopes on the idea that the Westminster Parliament would pass legislation to set up a union.
Despite this absence of co-ordination the British government was eager to move against the French and make sure they could not endanger the American colonies.
As part of the process of organizing Nova Scotia as a colony more seriously than before, the Acadians were pressed to take the oath of allegiance to George II in accordance with the Treaty of Utrecht, and those who refused were deported to the French settlement in Louisiana.
After the failure of the 1754 conference Braddock had been appointed to the newly-created post of commander-in-chief in America, and he rapidly put together a force which marched north-west through the area Washington had been surveying towards Fort Duquesne, just to the south of Lake Erie.
His force was ambushed a little short of its objective and he was killed by the French and their Indian allies.
Washington, who survived the defeat, must have noted the possibilities for irregular warfare.
Closer to Europe the British set up a blockade of Brest, a step which took them a long way towards war with France, and began looking for allies to protect Hanover against France in the event of a continental war.
First they arranged an alliance with Russia and then, at the beginning of 1756, an alliance with Prussia.
As  France made her preparations for war, it was relatively simple for her to make an alliance with Austria against Prussia and it also turned out to be surprisingly easy to draw Russia into this alliance.
By the middle of 1756 Britain's conflicts with France outside Europe had turned quite unexpectedly into a war in which the three major powers of Europe were allied against Frederick of Prussia and so were preparing to attack George's Electorate of Hanover.
The British felt very confident of their position at sea; to reinforce the strength of their blockage they laid down unilaterally the rule of 1756 that neutrals could not take advantage of wartime conditions to enter upon trade that would not have been allowed in peacetime.
But in fact they were so ill prepared that they lost their naval base of Minorca and seemed unable to organize any effective counter-measures.
The Duke of Newcastle, an amiable obliging man whose sense of duty and failure to perceive his own inadequacies had led him to become Prime Minister in the last months of peace and to preside over the move to war, was now very well aware that things were falling apart.
Pitt, who had led the attacks on a policy of commitment to Hanover during the war of the Austrian Succession, returned to the same line of denunciation.
Newcastle still enjoyed the King's approval and still had a majority in the Commons, but he resigned because he realized that nobody could provide an adequate answer to Pitt's attacks.
This was not a period in which the British suffered defeats gladly, however much their lack of preparation in peacetime might seem to invite them.
It was the great age of patriotic songs: ‘Rule Britannia’ was written in 1740 and ‘God Save the King’was first published in 1742 and gained in popularity during the Jacobite rebellion of 1745.
Lord Chesterfield, when discussing ‘useful prejudices…which I should be very sorry to see removed’ a little after the previous war, had declared that ‘that silly, sanguine notion, which is firmly entertained here, that one Englishman can beat three Frenchmen, encourages and has sometimes enabled one Englishman in reality to beat two.’
People were very angry when Admiral Byng failed to attack the French at Minorca, and the decision to execute him for cowardice was exactly what the public wanted.
Voltaire wrote satirically about the British arranging to shoot an admiral to encourage the others, but probably most Englishmen at the time would have taken the idea seriously.
So it was not surprising that George found that nobody would accept the dangerously exposed position of Prime Minister and that Pitt was indispensable even though he had no majority in the Commons.
His first ministry was brief, but when his government was defeated it was clear that nobody could take his place: for three months George II had to run the administration without any parliamentary ministers — an operation that was not as   impossible as it would have been seventy years later, though not nearly as normal as it would have been seventy years earlier.
During this period of political vacuum public opinion — or at the very least commercial opinion — made it clear that Pitt was indispensable.
So many cities enrolled him as a freeman, usually by giving him a scroll of membership in a gold box, that Horace Walpole summed up his popularity in the phrase ‘For some weeks it rained gold boxes’, and the more prosaic Duke of Newcastle recognized that no government could survive if Pitt opposed it.
A coalition was formed in June 1757 in which Pitt ran the war, and justified his claim ‘I know that I can save this country, and I know that no other man can’, while the Duke of Newcastle made sure that the majority in the House of Commons realized that their business was to vote money for Pitt's military operations without too much fuss.
Relatively little could be done for the first year or two; Pitt had a view of the war that stretched over the whole world, but it took some time to prepare the resources to give effect to this vision.
In America the distances to be covered were so large that they were the major obstacle to effective operations.
The colonies were encouraged to co-operate as actively as possible with British forces by promises of payments to cover the military costs, apart from clothing and pay, of any forces they could raise to support troops sent from Britain.
On this basis the colonies spent about £3m. of which about £1.25m. was later refunded.
In 1758 an expedition following a more northerly route than the one taken by Braddock was able to capture Fort Duquesne, which was renamed Pittsburgh by grateful Pennsylvanians who felt that at last a British politician had emerged who understood American needs.
Louisburg was captured again, and by the beginning of 1759 British forces could close in upon the centre of New France in the St. Lawrence valley.
Earlier expeditions, in the wars against Louis XIV, had twice failed to make any progress up the narrow estuary of the St. Lawrence; the new expedition under Wolfe sailed up the river and established itself outside Quebec, the capital of New France: British troops took up positions east of the city and also on the south side of the river, but there was no attempt at a seige and the routes north and west of the city remained open.
The British sailed up and down the river, trying to find an opening to land troops to the west of the city, and in September they were successful.
Wolfe led his troops up the cliffs on to the Plains of Abraham which commanded Quebec from the west, and so there emerged the unusual sight of infantry lined up in the formal European manner on North American soil.
Three sharp volleys and the French lines were broken.
Wolfe and his opponent Montcalm were mortally wounded in the small-scale encounter of a few thousand men which affected the history of North America as decisively as Plassey affected the history of India.
Fighting went on in New France for another twelve months, but after the fall of Quebec this was more a matter of moving forces over  long distances than of confronting threats that the French might retrieve their position.
Their prospects were hopeless because the British had developed a command of the sea that was much more effective than anything seen in earlier wars.
Between 1692 and 1747 the British had defeated the French at sea a number of times, but these battles could not eliminate the possibility that the French fleet would come out of port at a time of its own choosing and assist attacks on British colonies or an invasion of the British Isles.
There had been invasions by descendants of the deposed Stuarts in 1715 and in 1745 and, though neither had been successful, both of them had been rather alarming.
In 1759 the French were known to be preparing an invasion of Scotland in which French forces would sail and rouse any remaining Stuart rebels.
The British response was to blockade the main French fleet in Brest, and all through the summer the Channel Fleet under Hawke stayed at sea waiting for the French to come out.
In the end they did come out, were pursued to the south-east down the coast of Brittany, and eventually were overtaken in Quiberon Bay.
The action that followed was one of the most bizarre that sailing-ships ever fought, for it took place in a November gale that might well have put the whole of both fleets on to the rocks, but it was a complete defeat for the French who lost nine ships while the British lost only two.
However important this battle might be for future power at sea, the decisive point for the current war had been that the blockade made it impossible for the French to reinforce their West Indian or North American possessions.
They lost Guadeloupe, one of the most fertile of all the sugar islands, as well as seeing New France cut off hopelessly from the sea.
Pitt was almost the only British politician ever to think that acquiring colonial possessions was the main purpose of European war; by 1759 he had reached a position where he could carry out his objective almost at will.
The war in Germany still went on.
George II welcomed victories in India or America, but the safety of his family possessions in Hanover came first in his mind, and Pitt had to pay attention to this problem.
He had taken his first steps forward in English politics by denouncing the emphasis on German politics; he was able to shift to a position the King found acceptable by adopting the policy he later described by saying ‘America was conquered in Germany’, and this approach suited Britain's position very well.
As long as war went on in Europe the French would have to make it their main area of activity and could not concentrate on colonial or naval war.
So far as Pitt was concerned, America came first, but he was as delighted as anyone when the English force protecting Hanover won a distinct success against France at Minden, which might have been decisive if Lord George Sackville had not disobeyed an order to charge in a way that exposed him to conspicuous, though not permanent, disgrace.
The King of Prussia kept up a desperate defensive campaign against his other main enemies, Austria and Russia; Britain contributed to this struggle not only by keeping up the army for the defence of Hanover and western Germany but also by supplying money, first as loans and then about £3m. in grants, to keep the Prussian army going.
At a time when most German princes had small armies they would supply on a cash basis to the highest bidder who was not actually attacking them himself, the British subsidies to Frederick had a very direct effect in keeping the German campaign going and making sure that France was tied to the continent of Europe.
In 1759 Garrick had delighted London audiences by celebrating Quiberon Bay with his song ‘Heart of Oak’, and its lines ‘Tis to glory we steer, To add something new to this wonderful year’ fitted the mood of a steady succession of triumphs very well.
But in 1760 George II died, and his grandson George III had a dispute with his ministers about the King's Speech to Parliament which revealed a new attitude.
The King could say whatever he chose in the speech as long as he could find ministers to support it, and George wanted to say ‘this bloody and expensive war’.
His ministers persuaded him to say ‘this expensive but just and necessary war’, but even this was enough to show his feelings.
The war's momentum was too great for George to stop it quickly, but when he said in his speech ‘I glory in the name of Briton’ he was stressing the fact that, unlike George I and George II, he had been born and brought up in Britain, possessed an overseas empire to be proud of, and saw no need to pay particular attention to the problems of Hanover.
The kings of England continued to be rulers of Hanover for another seventy years, until the crowns were divided upon the accession of Queen Victoria because only men could rule in Hanover, but after 1760 the interests of Hanover were never of such importance in deciding British policy.
The new King brought a Scottish peer, Lord Bute, into the cabinet; he had a high opinion of Bute as a political thinker, and was willing to see Scottish opinion conciliated.
Considering the fears of Jacobite invasion there was something to be said for such a policy but it was not popular, especially in London, which had become the centre of support for Pitt and the war.
George and Bute set out to press for a policy of peace and lower taxes, which recognized the great strain the economy had been asked to bear.
Pitt thought of new campaigns; he knew Spain was thinking of entering the war on the French side, and he prepared an expedition against Cuba and another against the Philippines.
But cabinet pressure left him almost isolated and in 1761 he resigned.
The way was now open for peace negotiations with France, and these negotiations inevitably looked rather like the negotiations which had ended the wars against Louis XIV in 1713 — sensible enough at a time of high expenditure but not fair to allies nor likely to allow the British negotiators to gain the largest possible amount at the bargaining table.
Even so, the Peace of Paris of 1763 was bound to produce an immense number of acquisitions of territory for Britain.
There was some slight discussion  whether the British should keep Canada or should choose the large French sugar islands like Martinique and Guadeloupe; very few politicians close to the centre of power thought of giving Canada back to France, but the issue underlined the fact that Canada was unlikely to provide much revenue for the British treasury directly, and certainly would not provide the amount of revenue that sugar for re-export would give at a time when Britain used for consumption or for manufacture all that her West Indian islands could produce.
Canada was valued because it would bring peace and security to the American colonies and would allow them to continue to increase their imports of British goods in a much more tranquil continent.
The French had to give up New France, surrendering the St. Lawrence valley and the east side of the Mississippi (except for a small area around New Orleans) to the British, and transfer to the Spanish what was left, so the Spanish empire in North America took a long step forward to the north-east from its base in Texas and New Mexico.
But the Spanish paid a price in the peace settlement for entering the war on the French side.
They entered so late that Pitt had had plenty of time to prepare to attack them, and his expeditions captured Havana and Manila; as a result Britain took the Spanish colony of Florida, an area with a loosely defined western frontier lying somewhere a little east of New Orleans.
The British also took the small sugar islands of Tobago, Granada, Dominica, and St. Vincent in the Windward Islands at the southern end of the chain of the Lesser Antilles.
In a way this was a compromise between the people in Britain who wanted more sugar and the established planters in the West Indies who would find the additional competition of new sugar colonies entirely unwelcome.
The French, who kept the three fertile and relatively large islands of Martinique, Guadeloupe, and St. Domingue produced about as much sugar as the British did from their ten islands, where the soil was showing signs of becoming exhausted.
The Peace of Paris left France and Spain ready to look for revenge, and Britain's hasty departure from the war left Frederick feeling betrayed, so that Britain was quite likely to be involved in another war soon, and a war for which it would be hard to find allies.
But this was a problem for the future; a more immediate problem was likely to arise because Britain was acquiring a new type of colony.
Englishmen had been settling overseas for a century and a half but their colonies had been inhabited by people who, apart from the slaves who got no choice in the matter, had no particular difficulty in committing themselves to being loyal to King George: Englishmen, Scotsmen, Irishmen, or Germans would accept the King without question, and the Dutch of New York and the Acadians of Nova Scotia were almost the only people who had ever been asked to make a serious change of allegiance, which had been harder for the Acadians because of religious differences.
But Bengal and New France were territories in which large numbers of  people — in Bengal, perhaps 26 million people, or two to three times as many people as in all of George II's domain — were being asked to transfer their allegiance.
Obviously a transfer of allegiance in the feudal way was much less of a strain than the submergence of a national spirit, and there was a great difference between the national spirit of Englishmen and the allegiance to the King of France or to the Great Moghul felt by the inhabitants of New France and of Bengal; if the inhabitants of Bengal had felt that they were citizens of the nation of Bengal it would hardly have been possible for them to change to feeling they were Englishmen, but for them to feel that they used to owe allegiance to the Nawab of Bengal and now owed it to the British businessmen who had conquered the Nawab was not such a difficult transition.
The English had not been acquiring new subjects in the first century and a half of their overseas expansion; for the next century and a half they acquired new subjects at a rate which would have been quite inconceivable if they had been dealing with men and women who thought about their political rights and obligations in terms of nationalism.
But the process is not so hard to understand once it is remembered that nationalism is a political emotion that was not often felt before the old feudal leaders of countries outside Europe had been conquered and replaced by Europeans.
The Spanish in South America had of course embarked on this course long before the British; the changes of 1757–63 mark the point at which the British moved on an appreciable scale into the imperial activity of gaining new subjects in the process of expansion.
Gaining territory by right of conquest was an entirely acceptable way to expand an empire, but it remained to be seen if anyone had worked out any better methods than those of the Spanish for ruling the new subjects acquired in that way.