

CHORUS AND TANDEM READY FAULT-TOLERANT MICROKERNEL
Tandem Computers Inc and Chorus Systemes SA last week signed a deal that will put a fault-tolerant version of the SVR4-based Chorus microkernel co-developed by the two companies on Tandem's Unix boxes.
The partnership is a coup for Chorus, which will get back the fault-tolerant technology added to the microkernel as a standard ingredient in its Chorus Mix product.
Chorus' relationship with Unix System Laboratories Inc, its minority owner, was apparently a persuasive factor in Tandem's decision to cut the deal.
A die-hard SVR4 advocate, Tandem is interested in seeing its fault-tolerant enablers incorporated in the base operating system to save it from having to re-invent the wheel each time a revision is done and to allow it to focus on true value-added differentiators.
Tandem is hoping its alliance with Chorus will give it a lever with USL even though USL has yet to indicate officially how it will treat the microkernel.
Tandem declined to say whether the new operating system will come out on current or future Tandem Integrity machines, all based on MIPS chips.
No product is expected for at least a year.
Chorus itself has done no reference port to the MIPS architecture yet, though Inria, the French research institute, previously ported the microkernel to a MIPS-based Sony Microsystems Inc News workstation.
The Inria port will be used in the development work as will existing Integrity boxes.
Tandem's move reinforces current thinking which sees microkernel system software as very much an up and coming trend across the industry.
Tandem expects the technology to eliminate any remaining unplanned downtime users experience as well as any planned downtime needed for housekeeping chores like changing operating systems on the fly, a key facility in any mission-critical application from E-mail to fare collections.
Tandem may not be the first commercial box-shifter out with a Chorus-based system, though it may yet find itself in a race to be first to deliver in volume.
For the last two or three years, Chorus has been involved with Unisys Corp in a technology exchange that has so far failed to produce any significant deliveries.
Unisys is expected to make its move in the coming months.
These relationships have allowed Chorus to piggyback on the expertise of its partners netting Chorus an SVR4 base in the case of Unisys and now fault tolerance from Tandem.
A third alliance with a still unidentified company next month should give it a leg up on high-performance transaction processing and multi-processing.
Tandem and Chorus, which have not started the design work, will begin with the current Chorus Mix V.4 Release 1.2 and upgrade to the anticipated 2.0 in January when it's due.
A major upgrade is expected later next year.
Microkernel technology enables redundancy and dynamic configurability to be built into fault-tolerant systems.
TOP AS/400 HOUSE OFFERS CONVERTER TO UNIX
The AS/400 is by a long way IBM Corp's most successful current product line yet Chicago-based System Software Associates Inc, generally regarded as the largest player in the AS/400 applications market, seems to be less than confident about the future of the line.
It has begun shipping what it claims is the first software engineering tool designed to regenerate AS/400 applications to run on Unix-based workstations quickly and easily, and has been demonstrating the AS/SET WDK-U product in Anaheim, California at the semiannual conference of Common, the IBM mid-range users group.
Designed for AS/400 users considering Unix as an additional system, the generation tool transforms AS/SET-developed RPG applications for the AS/400 into C programs for the IBM RS/6000 — but the regenerated programs will also run on any workstation running Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix.
AS/SET WDK-U-generated AIX and Santa Cruz Unix applications will be consistent with the original AS/400 system, in both operation and appearance, the company says, obviating the need to retrain users or use separate development and maintenance staff for the Unix system — but the company does not say what database it uses on the Unix system.
The AS/SET Workstation Development Kernel for Unix is out now for single-workstation and multi-user environments.
Price per station is $15,000; the multi-user version is $50,000.
It needs AS/SET Application Development Kernel at $35,000 to $100,000, depending on AS/400.
FIVE SNAKES TO SHOW ON 12th
Having sifted through the net, it seems Hewlett-Packard Co's November 12th announcement will include three new low-end workstations, a mid-range box and a deskside configuration in the HP 9000 Series 700 line.
After some confusion over the numbering scheme, US sources say HP is preparing to debut a low-end with a box that will best the introductory price of Sun Microsystems Inc's new Sunergy Classic by $10.
Final pricing depends of course on how Sun eventually pitches its Tsunami offering, which is to be announced two days prior to HP's roll-out.
Sun was reported to have set an initial tag of $5,495 on the thing last week (UX No 407).
The new HP machines use the latest 7100 PA RISC in several guises.
A low-end Model 715/33 uses a 33MHz part — the chip is rated at 47 SPECmarks, 42 MIPS and around 9 MFLOPS — whilst a 50MHz version, the 715/50 is thought by insiders to perform at 70 SPECmarks, 61 MIPS and 13 MFLOPS.
Before the already previewed 100MHz, mid-range Model 735, which is reckoned to do 150 SPECmarks, 81 SPECint92 and 150 SPECfp92 (UX No 407), there is thought to be another 50MHz machine, possibly the 725/50, which could be reached from the existing Model 720 via a board swap.
A high-end deskside Model 755 sitting above the existing Model 750 is likely to come with the same 100MHz 7100 processor as the 735, but with expanded memory, disk and other peripheral options.
FLAMINGO AND SANDPIPER TO DEBUT AS DEC/3000s
Meanwhile, DEC's desktop-to-mainframe Alpha RISC roll-out, scheduled for November 10th, will include the the widely previewed Flamingo deskside, now re-christened the DEC/3000 Model 500/500S.
The uni-processor will deliver a reported 125 SPECmarks at 150MHz, come with 64Mb to 1Gb RAM, 3D graphics, six turbo channel slots and run OpenVMS — OSF/1 now appears to have been put back until July next year (UX No 407).
The desktop Sandpiper is to be known as the Model 400/400S and will do 110 SPECmarks at 133MHz, with a very warm 30 Watts power consumption.
It comes with with from 32Mb to 512Mb RAM, up to 105Gb disk, ISDN, three turbo channel slots, Ethernet, SCSI II, 2D graphics and optional FDDI it also runs OpenVMS in its initial guise, with a desktop OSF/1 implementation to follow (more Alpha news on page three).
According to sources, a user evaluating IBM's 100 SPECmark-rated RS/6000 Model 970 against similarly configured Hewlett-Packard Co PA-RISC 7100 and DEC Alpha systems found that in application performance comparisons the RS/6000 came out on top, followed by the HP and DEC boxes, though there was some variation according to job mix.
UNIPALM's WINDOWS-TO-UNIX E-MAIL
Snuffling around for untapped niche markets, Unipalm Ltd, based in Cambridge, has come up with Mail-it, a Microsoft Windows-to-Unix connectivity E-mail package.
Traditionally, network managers used gateways to integrate PC network E-mail into Unix E-mail, according to Unipalm.
These linked proprietary PC messaging protocols to Unix's open standards like Simple Mail Transfer Protocol(SMTP).
With PC E-mail standards being proprietary, users could only connect to other LAN users.
Unipalm's Peter Dawe claims gateways are difficult to administer and lose users' replies.’
One petro-chemical company spent $4m on gateways and still wasn't satisfied’, he says.
The reason no one had developed a product before was Windows 3 toolkits did not appear until six months ago, Dawe claims.
Mail-it reads, forwards, replies, prints and sends E-mail anywhere on a PC and Unix local area or wide area network.
It uses icons to notify the user of background mail activity.
Future developments include a multi-media extension called Mime.
Mail-it is already running at US and UK beta sites including a bank and unnamed Unix software company.
With sales of TCP/IP at 2000 a month, Unipalm hopes to ship 200 Mail-it copies.
Prices start at £450 for five users.
INFERONE: WHAT YOU THINK IS WHAT YOU GET
French artificial intelligence software house, InferOne SA, Paris, is now offering version 1.1 of intelliSphere, an environment for developing distributed knowledge-based systems using macro-connection techniques of the ‘neuro-symbolic’ approach to this kind of problem solving.
The company claims its stuff offers WYTIWYG functionality — what you think is what you get.
The idea of macro-connectionism is to shorten the distance between the expert's reasoning at the start of a project and the capture of his or her expertise at the finish.
InferOne claims intelliSphere can integrate previously disparate database, electronic document management, multimedia, numeric data processing, connectionist neural networks and expert systems.
The software runs on System V, BSD, AIX and SCO Unix variants.
InferOne: + 33 1 3075 0042.
LAWSON GOES INTERNATIONAL WITH RELEASE 6 OF ITS FINANCIAL, DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
Minneapolis-based Lawson Software Inc is to launch version 6.0 of its financial and distribution software in the first quarter of 1993, and with it a more international strategy.
Release 6.0 is a computer-aided software engineering tool, used to generate multi-lingual, multi-national, common source code.
The source code is to form the basis of an integrated set of financial and distribution management application modules for international usage.
Designed to meet all financial legal requirements in all countries, the systems can deal with any currency at the transaction level, while also providing translation, re-measurement and consolidation.
A flexible tax module is included, which handles such tax requirements as VAT and GST in different countries.
The product is intended to meet the demands of multinational companies as well as large national organisations, by providing common applications on a worldwide basis.
Lawson software runs on AS/400 hardware and in certain Unix environments: IBM Corp's RS/6000, Digital Equipment Corp's Ultrix, Hewlett Packard Co's HP9000, Unisys' U6000 and the Sequent Symmetry series.
Although character-based at the moment, graphical user interfaces are to be available by the end of 1993 for version 6.0.
Targeted particularly at medium to large-size businesses, where the $35m privately-owned company is eager to cash in on the trend towards down-sizing, the software is particularly popular among manufacturers, retailers and service companies in the US, and banks in the UK.
Its UK headquarters, although still fairly embryonic in nature, were set up in 1990 in Chertsey, Surrey, to serve the European marketplace.
DELL MOVES UP MARKET WITH NEW 66MHz 466SE/DSA SERVER
As Compaq Computer Corp comes down market with its new servers, Dell Computer Corp has shot upmarket with introducing the Dell 466SE/DSA, a server that incorporates a new Dell SCSI Array high capacity drive array, with Intel Corp's 80486DX2 microprocessor.
Pricing for a base system starts at $7,365, with 1.05Gb SCSI-2 hard disk drives priced at $1,900 and a selection of monitors starting at $200.
The company also introduced the External Media System 753, a new external storage system designed to address needs for both desktop and floor-standing servers.
NEWS ROUNDUP
In the US, ANSI has formed X3J19 Xbase, a new technical committee which will work on the advancement of the Xbase application development language originally derived from a mainframe-based package at the Jet Propulsion Labs in Pasadena, California.
Xbase is used in a range of popular products, including the dBASE series, FoxBase and Clipper.
Contact Marc Schnapp, the XBase Institute + 1 718 380 6175.
London-based DataFlex Services Ltd is now shipping a version of its FlexSQL report writer for SCO Unix-based Intel Corp platforms — prices start at £800: ICL DRS6000 and IBM RS/6000 ports are to follow.
UK Cobol house MicroFocus, Newbury, Berkshire, is teaming with US firm Creative Systems Interfaces Inc to develop a range of communications software: initially MicroFocus will market, under its own name, CSI's programme-to-programme connectivity packages which run over multiple hardware and software platforms including Windows, AS/400, MS-DOS (client), OS/2, AIX and MVS.
+44 635 32646.
IMI plc's Brook Street Computers Ltd, Guildford, Surrey, is now marketing Dataworks Corp's Uniworks Unix MRP II manufacturing package in the UK: Uniworks is based upon the Unidata relational database.
+44 483 504492.
EDS-Scicon (the integrated EDS UK and SD-Scicon UK) is now offering a versions of its ViewStar document management system which includes a database repository that supports Sybase running on IBM's RS/6000, DB2 on MVS mainframes as well as MS-DOS and OS/2.
+44 908 585858
Harris Corp's Computer Systems Division has introduced NightTrace, a graphical tool for analysing the behaviour of real-time multiprocessor applications, as part of its NightStar real-time software development environment: prices go from $1,000.
Control Data Systems and Structural Dynamics Research Corporation have formed a joint venture to design and market product data management software: Metaphase Technology Inc, currently without a president, will work out of Minnesota and should employ 100 people in its first year of operation.
Informix Software Inc has indicated that it plans to set up a wholly-owned Japanese subsidiary during 1993, according to ComputerWorld Japan.
Chuck House, senior vice-president of Informix, said exclusive distributor, Ascii Corp, had limitations in terms of strengthening Informix's relationships with Japanese firms, but that it does want to continue its relationship with Ascii.
SCO has appointed Software Mart Ltd and Tata Unisys Ltd as its distributors in India.
Digitalk Inc, Los Angeles is now shipping the 32-bit version of its object-oriented Smalltalk/V development environment for OS/2 2.0, enabling users to create Smalltalk/V applications that are up to 100% faster and 50% smaller than 16-bit OS/2 applications: it can call both 16-bit and 32-bit Dynamic Link Libraries, adds a debugger with enhanced single-stepping capability, improved support for bit maps, double-byte character set characters in Smalltalk/V code, and support for OS/2's common dialogue boxes; it costs a swinging $1,000.
CA-Unicenter for HP-UX has performed so well at four major beta sites says Islandia, New York-based Computer Associates International Inc, that the company is bringing the systems management product for mission-critical applications forward and it will now be generally available in the first quarter of 1993.
Silicon Graphics Inc has retained GE Capital Computer Leasing Co to write leases on its workstations: GE Capital also finances IBM Corp, Amdahl Corp, Digital Equipment Corp, Hitachi Data Systems Inc, and Apple Computer Inc computer leases.
CLEARPOINT OFFERS ADD-ON MEMORY FOR DEC's UNANNOUNCED ALPHA BOXES
Talk about jumping the gun — the machines aren't even announced for another three weeks, but Hopkinton, Massachusetts-based Clearpoint Research Corp reckons that there are potential users out there that already realise they ordered too little memory for the things and want to be prepared by having add-on memory ready and waiting on site.
The company has announced its first family of memory upgrades for Digital Equipment Corp's new Alpha APX-based (shouldn't that be Alpha AXP: when you're busting someone's embargo, it's as well to get the name right) DEC/3000 systems — now that is a name new to us, but is it right?
‘Aggressively priced and shipping immediately, the new DCME-A15 memory upgrades are available in 32Mb and 64Mb capacities,’ says the company, adding that they go straight into ‘the DEC/3000 Model 500/500S deskside Flamingo and Model 400/400S desktop Sandpiper systems,’and run under all available Alpha operating systems.
It says that future versions using 16M-bit chips rather than the present 4Ms will enable DEC/3000 Model 400/S and Model 500/S systems to address 512Mb and 1Gb main memory respectively; they are out now at $4,800 for 32Mb, $7,800 for 64Mb.
SUNPRO SIGNS FOR ROGUE WAVE'S C++ CLASS LIBRARIES
The brave new world of object-oriented programming must lead to the large-scale buying and selling of objects, and Sun Microsystems Inc's SunPro software development business has entered a technology development and licensing agreement with Rogue Wave Software Inc, Vancouver, British Columbia supplier of C++ class libraries.
The pact centres on Rogue Wave's Tools.h++ class library, a toolbox of nearly 100 re-usable C++ classes.
Under the agreement, enhancements to the libraries will be developed to address such areas as performance, ease-of-use, internationalisation and support for multi-threading.
SunPro says it intends to distribute the product at some stage as an add-on to its Sparc works Professional C++ development environment.
Tools.h++ has classes for handling time, date, string and character manipulation, linked lists, stacks, queues and vectors, and Smalltalk-like collection classes; it also has an error-handling facility.
OBJECTIVITY SUPPORTS SUN
Meanwhile, Menlo Park, California-based, Objectivity Inc is supporting Sun Microsystems Inc's Project Distributed Objects Everywhere (DOE) by delivering its object database with an interface to SunSoft Inc's Distributed Object Management Facility DOMF — Sun's implementation of the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA).
The new interface will give applications direct access to objects in Objectivity/DB via the CORBA protocol.
Objectivity and SunSoft have also agreed to develop and publish a specification for a standard interface between DOMF and object databases for use by other object vendors.
SES READIES OBJECTBENCH
Scientific and Engineering Software Inc, now calling itself simply SES, is expected to join the client/server object-oriented programming rush in January with a program called objectbench, a Unix-based object-oriented analysis toolset for C and C++ developers.
It features a graphical editor for the Shlaer-Mellor object-oriented analysis methodology and interestingly enough will offer on-screen animation for functional verification, dynamic functional verification and performance analysis.
SES previously wrote workbench, the hardware/software modelling and verification kit.
+1 512 328–5544
NOW HDS WINS A SHARE OF $2.5bn US DEFENSE SUPERMINI CONTRACT
King of Prussia, Pennsylvania-based, Human Designed Systems Inc is now two for two, having won both of the two largest X-terminals contracts ever awarded.
Last week the US Defense Department let its massive $2.5 billion AFCAC 300 Super-Mini-Computer contract to PRC Inc as prime contractor.
As a result, HDS, which PRC bid as part of its offering, could see orders potentially worth 43,000 units over the next five years, an estimated value of $75m.
All of them would be colour versions.
The AFCAC 300 win follows on the heels of the RCAS award to HDS last October, the largest single X-terminals contract in existence (UX No 355).
It has HDS supplying the US Army with close to 60,000 colour and monochrome units over 30 months.
HDS says it has delivered the first $5m.
The RCAS contract however is one of those rare governmental birds, an FFP or Firm Fixed Price contract, meaning that all of those 60,000 terminals are going to get ordered and delivered.
PRC and HDS are on less solid footing with AFCAC 300.
It's what they call in governmental circles, an IDIQ or Indefinite Delivery, Indefinite Quantity contract, described elsewhere as merely a ‘hunting licence.’
PRC officials believe they can move at least half of the potential totals.
HDS, which now has about ten sales staff, might be able to up the ante with a sales drive of its own.
PRC, a $700m Black & Decker subsidiary with 7,200 people and 200 offices, will have the greater impact provided it gets to keep the contract.
As is very much the fashion these days, the contract could be protested by the losers who in this case are believed to be Control Data Systems and its subcontractors.
The number of bidders on AFCAC 300 is thought to have been limited because of the amount of money needed to pursue it.
PRC reportedly spent $15m getting the contract with sources attributing the expense to hardware components and the integration work PRC did on the systems.
The contract is intended as a procurement vehicle for the US Army, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard and Defense Logistics Agency along with some civilian agencies.
The systems are to be used for office automation, DBMS and engineering applications.
Mostly it is a modernisation effort and the installations are likely to be large, making PRC more confident it will make its numbers.
PRC will be supplying Hewlett-Packard 700/800 boxes, apparently secured by SecureWare Inc; secure iAPX-86 SCO Xenix; Oracle Corp and Uniplex Ltd applications; and Everex Inc's personal computers.
HDS claims the award makes it the largest supplier of X-terminals for commercial applications in the business, a new area for the things.
Network Computing Devices Corp, the acknowledged industry leader with deliveries of 100,000 units, pooh-poohs the notion, retorting that HDS isn't even a contender and is only measured by market researchers as an ‘other’.
HDS declined to specify its installed X-terminal base, saying it had 200,000 units in the field, most of them serial terminals.
NCD's base is believed to be largely in the technical arena.
HP, ACER, DEC AND COMPAQ ‘TO USE SCALED DOWN INTEL P5’
InfoWorld says the P5, or Pentium as it will be known, has a little brother, P24T, a scaled-down P5 out of Intel Corp's OverDrive Division.
Supposedly the 32-bit, 238-pin do-hickey will operate at 33MHz externally and 66MHz internally.
The paper hypothesises that manufacturers won't have an easy time developing 66MHz/64-bit machines with the P5 chip and that P24T is something in the way of a stop-gap measure, speeds up the 486DX2 upgrade path.
It expects it to sell better than the P5 initially and claims Hewlett-Packard Co, Acer Corp, Compaq Computer Systems Corp and DEC will be using it.
It's expected shortly after the P5 comes out next quarter.
E&S WILL TAKE FREEDOM TO SPARC BUILDERS AND OTHER ARCHITECTURES
Evans & Sutherland Computer Corp says the Freedom 1000 and 3000 3D graphics accelerators that it is to sell on Sun Microsystems Inc platforms (UX No 407), have been designed as processor-independent units which could well end up on other CPU architectures in future, though none were mentioned specifically.
Initially it is likely to get the Sbus versions of Freedom out into the Sparc-compatible market, and says it has already been approached by several of those suppliers.
Mbus versions of the accelerators will follow, though there's no great rush because Sbus can meet all immediate performance requirements, the firm says.
Currently utilising up to 16 AMD 29050 RISC CPUs, E&S says Freedom could accommodate as many as 32 of the things.
The accelerators won't go on to Sun's price lists and there is no money changing hands in the relationship apart from some joint marketing and advertising of which Sun will bear the brunt.
E&S is hoping to sign up relevant Sun value-added resellers for the products.
Sun is looking to shoot down Silicon Graphics Inc with Freedom, admitting that its graphics specialist neighbour in Mountain View, California, has been ‘a major irritation to us over the last few years.’
Sun says its own graphics efforts, especially the GS and GT environments were ‘too little too late,’ though the 2D GX environment will continue as a low end offering.
GS, and GT at the high-end won't be getting too much more attention, though GT prices are to be cut to bring it into line with Freedom.
UK prices go from £20,800 for the 500,000 vectors per second Freedom 1050 unit plus display — or £34,400 with a Sparcstation 10/30 — to £62,750 for the 3,000,000 vectors per second Freedom 3300 with display — £81,600 including a Sparcstation 10/41.
E&S has no plans to develop another workstation of its own: its previous outing, the MIPS R3000-based ESV line, which has some 2,000 users worldwide, is no longer being actively promoted.
CAMBEX OFFERS FLEXIBLE RAID DISK ARRAY FOR RS/6000 CLUSTERS
IBM Corp add-on storage specialist Cambex Corp, Waltham, Massachusetts, is getting into the disk array business — for mainframes if its foray into arrays for the RS/6000 turns out all right.
The company has launched the Array/6000 as the latest member of its Certainty line, pitching it at RS/6000s operating in clustered multiprocessor environments.
It offers selectable levels of RAID fault-tolerance — 0, 1, 3 or 5 — for users of IBM's High Availability Cluster Multi-Processing mode.
Using 1.6Gb 3.5’ drives, a single Array/6000 subsystem can be expanded from 8Gb to 96Gb of storage, in six square feet of floor space, using a deskside or rack configuration.
Additional racks of similar size can boost capacity to 1Tb.
The controllers enable users to initiate multiple concurrent combinations of RAID data protection appropriate for each application.
All disks, power supplies, fans and array controllers are redundant and hot pluggable while running, and it is designed to eliminate all single points of failure so that dual power cords are provided to connect to dual power sources.
Cambes worked with CLaM Associates Inc, which helped IBM develop the clustering software, on the design of the thing, and it includes an Array Configurator Software utility that supports performance tuning and manages disk mapping.
The software, supported through the AIX SMIT interface, provides storage administration, disk array management, on-line subsystem expansion, and data protection control.
Software drivers to optimise the SCSI-II interface support up to 20Mbyte-per-second data transfer rates.
The subsystem also concentrates many drives onto a single SCSI address.
It supports up to 15 drives per controller pair, thus appearing to the host computers as several very large SCSI-2 devices.
The company claims it costs a third to a half less than non-fault-tolerant storage systems used in mainframe environments.
An 8Gb deskside system starts at $50,212, a fully configured 96Gb system is priced at $720,000.
It ships next month.
NEURON DATA TO SHOW NT VERSION OF GUI BUILDER AT COMDEX
Palo Alto, California-based Neuron Data Inc has finally got around to releasing version 2.0 of its Open Interface in the UK (UX No 386).
Currently available for building interfaces that are portable across Motif, Open Look, Apple Mac, Presentation Manager and Windows, a Windows NT version will be shown at Comdex later this month.
Runtime prices are £200 per seat for Unix and VMS, £100 for Macintosh and personal computer versions, but development licences start at a very hefty £12,000 for Unix — £9,000 for the Intel-based SCO and Interactive variants — and £7,000 for Mac and PCs.
Dropping hints that an initial public offering could be on the cards, the company pointed to figures showing that the majority of software start-ups make for an IPO at between $10m and $20m of venture funding: Neuron Data is capitalised at $16m.
Neuron Data UK: + 44 71 408 2333.
DIGIBOARD WINS APPLE, IBM, NEW NETWARE-TO-LON LINKS
Eden Prairie, Minnesota-based, Digiboard Inc says it will supply serial software links to Novell Inc's NetWare 3.11 network management system, for local outer networks (LONs).
The software, designed for the extended office sector where things like notebooks, laptops and modem systems reside on LONs, operates as a remote node on the network.
It offloads transactions from the server down to systems on the LON.
To do this, Digiboard has written a NetWare Loadable Module compatible with the Novell's NetWare Access Server and Application Server application programming interface.
The software allows users to access local and remote communication services on NetWare networks without being confined to a local area network.
Meanwhile, Apple Computer Inc says it will fit out its Quadra 700/900 AUX 3.0 servers with DigiBoard multi-port boards, whilst a new worldwide OEM deal will see IBM supply DigiBoard 128-port asynchronous cluster controllers for its RS/6000 series.
CRAY TO CUT ANOTHER 650 JOBS AND WILL TAKE $40m HIT THIS QUARTER
Cray Research Inc, which laid off 150 contract staff in September is having to make much bigger cuts this month in an effort to save $50m next year and, it hopes, substantially increase its competitive strength and profitability in the current global economic climate, and help counteract pressures from flat revenues and reduced profit margins.
The supercomputer manufacturer is laying off about 650 regular and contract employees, with about half from Wisconsin and the balance from Minnesota operations and field offices.
Cray is also introducing a company-wide wage freeze in 1993; executive officers will forego 1992 bonuses; it will defer or eliminate a number of its current activities; and will consolidate the Rice Lake, Wisconsin manufacturing operations with the Chippewa Falls base.
The workforce reduction and other actions will result in a one-time charge of $40m to be taken against the fourth quarter figures, but Cray expects to remain profitable for the year, and sees higher profitability as a result of the measures next year.
The company asserts that the cuts will not affect Y-MP entry level, mid-range and C90 products or development of follow-on parallel vector supercomputer systems nor the massively parallel effort or development of Sparc-based superserver products by Cray Research Superservers in Beaverton, Oregon.
NETWORX AND IBM TEAM ON NEW NETWORK MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE
Start-up Networx Inc a Boeing spin-off, expects to launch the industry's first second-generation network management application this week at InterOp.
Called Paradigm, the product is an off-the-shelf application that integrates trouble ticketing with inventory, providing the user with analysis, tracking and notification capabilities.
It is based on a cross-referential data model to support automation.
IBM has been working with Networx on the product's core technology.
Extensions will integrate it with IBM's Netview/6000.
Paradigm is also integrated with Hewlett-Packard's OpenView and SunConnect's SunNet Manager.
The Open Software Foundation's much-ballyhooed Distributed Management Environment technology is missing from Networx Inc's platform list because it is not yet productised.
No other platforms are considered significant.
Networx was founded at the end of last year by folks from the Boeing Network Management Systems and Services group.
The base Paradigm technology comes from software originally developed by Boeing for internal network management and as a strategic technology for the Computer Service Division's commercial network business.
The Bellevue, Washington-based firm purchased this software and is licensing it back to Boeing.
According to Networx president Christopher Slatt, the Boeing software was a non-commercial product written in C and 4GL.
Networx rewrote it completely in C++.
By design and architecture Paradigm is reportedly ready for the leap into object orientation.
The product's heritage, Slatt says, gives it a leg up over competitors.
Its original design was user-driven and tested at government and commercial sites.
Facilities include filtering network events, automatic notification, escalating unresolved problems, creating action plans, tracking vendor performance and multi-level security.
Networx is venture-backed with funding from Vanguard Venture Partners and Paragon Venture Partners with a business plan that says it can be a $35m to $50m company.
Paradigm is its first product with an asset management package likely to follow.
As it is, ready-to-use third-party network management programmes are few and far between, forcing users to roll their own, a pricey exercise that costs anywhere from $100,000 to $250,000 an application.
Paradigm, including one network management platform interface and one client, is priced at $10,000.
Each additional network manager client is $950.
End-user client tools are included.
Availability is December.
The company expects to sell via OEMs (one of which will obviously be IBM), VARs and integrators as well as direct.
+1 206 646–1850
SAG WORKS ON OMG-COMPLIANT BROKER
German software house, Darmstadt-based Software AG is to re-engineer the Open Service Broker element of its Entire software products to conform to the Object Management Group's Common Request Broker Architecture specifications.
Entire includes the Adabas database, Natural 4GL and networking technology.
The service broker did not conform to OMG specifications when it was launched earlier this year — version 2.0 will be out late next year.
The company says it is currently working to ensure compatibility between the two releases.
Software AG may be using the HD-DOMS technology of HyperDesk Corp as the vehicle to achieve OMG compatibility — the German company is expected to announce next month that it will provide interoperability between the Entire broker and the HD-DOMS object broker next month — though Westborough, Massachusetts-based, company would not comment.
OMG president, Chris Stone, said Software AG would certainly be able to bring a product to market much more quickly if it were to use the OMG-compliant HD-DOMS for the task.
The gateway between the two brokers will allow Software AG's mainframe applications access to CORBA-compliant objects in Windows or Unix applications through HD-DOMS.
…
TEAMS WITH SAP ON OBJECT TOOLS
Meanwhile, Software AG has teamed up with another German software house SAP AG, Walldorf, to develop a series of object-oriented tools called Alice, which will allow users of SAP and SAG software to import  personal computer-based word processors, spreadsheets, E-mail and fax services into Unix, MS-DOS, Windows 3.1, OS/2 and Apple Mac environments.
The two companies are also working to integrate Software AG's Entire communications technology with SAP's R/2 and R/3 databases.
The first Alice tools will be launched at CeBit next year.
SUNCONNECT HAS FASTER SOFTWARE FOR GLOBAL NETWORKS
SunConnect this week at InterOp is supposed to unveil three new high-speed connectivity products for the ‘international set.’
They include SunLink ISDN, SunLink Frame Relay and SunLink PPP and enable applications traditionally bound to LANs such as client/server databases, multimedia, X Window systems and NFS applications to run faster and more economically over global networks.
Used in conjunction with SunNet Manager, Frame Relay and SunLink PPP enable the management of high-speed wide-area connections.
The new products are part of a major SunConnect initiative to address the growing demand for tightly interconnected LANs and WANs.
Frame Relay and SunLink PPP, an alternative to dedicated routers, will be unbundled and made available for $1,150 each starting next month.
SunLink ISDN is for users working at home or at remote sites accessing corporate computing resources over ISDN phone networks and transmitting images and graphics at high speeds.
Beginning in the first half of 1993, SunLink ISDN, certified in France, Germany, the UK, Japan and the US, will be offered to all Sparcstation 10 users for free.
It will also be available to Sparc OEMs.
The new products have expanded SunConnect's Partners Program to include British Telecom and Telecom Finland, particularly interested in SunLink ISDN, as well as distributors like Access Graphics and developers like Oracle and Networx.
They expect to attract other PTTs and RBOCs.
SUN FIGURES DISAPPOINT SOME
Sun disappointed some people last Thursday by posting income of only five cents a share for the first quarter ended September 25.
Revenues stood at $855.9m, up 13%, netting income of $4.8m, down some 82% from $26.8m a year ago.
The company said it shipped 50,000 revenue systems, a first-quarter record up 16%, including 13,000 Sparcstation 2s, 15,000 IPXs and 12,000 assorted.
They said they built 11,000 Sparcstation 10s and sent 10,000 out the door.
Their relatively late arrival in the quarter coupled with their costs and the narrow margins on the surprise Model 20 impacted earnings.
They did not hit volume product on the Model 41s which is anticipated by the end of this quarter and are on plan for the 52s and 54s.
Deliveries were 52% US, 29% Europe and 19% Pacific Rim.
SunSoft distributed 81,000 Unix licences, an all-time high that included 7,000 for Intel machines.
Bookings were reportedly around a billion dollars and were said to be continuing strong.
US revenues were up 16%; European by 22%.
Revenues from other areas were lower because Sparc 10s weren't available.
Operating expenses were down and the company has $1.1 billion in cash.
Gross margins were 43%.
Margins are expected to improve in the second quarter when higher speed Viking chips are more available and more deliveries on higher end higher margin Sparc 10s are made.
SOFTEAM TAKES OBJECT WEST
French software house, Softeam SA, Montigny is putting its products on the American market: Objecteering is a CASE tool that automatically generates C++ applications from the company's Class Relation object-oriented model.
Reportedly Class Relation can encompass the entire software development life cycle from specification to coding.
Objecteering also produces program documentation.
The software runs on Sun Microsystems Inc, DEC and Hewlett-Packard Co platforms and support for IBM's RS/6000s will be added next year.
Together the two are priced at $10,000 for the first copy.
France Telecom, Thomson Consumer Electronics SA, Alcatel NV and Matra SA are said to be clients.
Softeam: +331 3043 8378
NEWS ROUNDUP
Tata Elxsi (India) Ltd, part of the country's largest conglomerate, will be reselling Netlabs network management pro ducts on several platforms on the subcontinent: Tata estimates the Indian networking market at $100m this year, predicting it will grow at 30% to 50% a year through ‘97.
Mountain View, California-based, Network Computing Devices, has set up a subsidiary in Munich to support German distributor sales: it has existing operations in England and France and a joint venture in Japan.
Sprint Inc, the American telecoms company, is currently deploying a real-time telephone fraud detection application, developed using Symbolics Inc's object-oriented programming environment: the two-part contract involved Sprint buying 50 turnkey Symbolics systems and will also now involve collaboration with Symbolics Consulting Group to integrate multiple mainframe and workstation-based systems in a WAN supporting TCP/IP, X.25 and SNA.
Intergraph Corp has landed a $422m share of the US Navy's $1.5bn CAD-2 programme and is to supply 4,200 workstations and 1,082 servers based on its Clipper RISC.
Oceanport, New Jersey, Concurrent Computer Corp and FD Consulting, New York, are to jointly develop enhanced versions of FD's market information system and real-time Ticker processing system for Concurrent's range of Unix-based real-time systems.
Softool Corp, Goleta, California, has released version 2.0 of its C/Manager change and configuration management tool for software development, which it will target at the Unix community: it is available initially on Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcsystems, and MS-DOS and other Unix versions will follow, the company says; prices start at $16,000.
Fremont, California-based Independence Technologies Inc has announced iView Fast Track, its Unix-based software for tracking hardware-software and administration problems: the software supports Open Look and the Open Software Foundation's Motif graphical user interfaces and runs Oracle, Informix or Sybase relational databases; available on Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparcstations it sells for $5,500.
Los Altos, California-based Full Source Software Inc has begun shipping UniShred, a $150 suite of media erasure applications that irrevocably delete files and securely obliterate data in files, making any kind of retrieval impossible: it's claimed to be the first Unix package to conform to the strictest government and commercial standards, directly replacing Unix's rm utility.
It works on all writeable media and across networks on SCO, Sun, HP and Addamax systems.
Data General Corp and Digital Analysis Corp have developed an integrated network, system and application package which can be used with TCP/IP and OSI protocols: OS/EYE*NODE uses SNMP and CMIP/CMIS for control, monitoring and analysis and can run on Sun's NetManager and Hewlett-Packard Co's OpenView without further coding operating over Ethernet, token ring, X.25 or FDDI networks — no prices given.
Fujitsu Ltd has a new version of MicroCadam running on its SuperSparc Fujitsu S family machines which it buys OEM from Sun Microsystems Inc.
Until now, MicroCadam was supplied by Fujitsu only on its FMR series personal computers.
Cadam Systems, the Japanese affiliate of Cadam Inc, converted MicroCadam for the Sparc, and expects to sell 2,000 systems over the next three years, priced at from $18,000.
New Sparc models, including the S-4/10 Models 30, 40, 50, the Server S-4/630 Models 40 and 50 and the S-4/670, and S-4/690 Models 40 and 50, were also announced.
Palo Alto, California-based Reasoning Systems has released Refine/C, a re-engineering tool for programs written in C: Refine/C reads C source code and produces structure charts, flow diagrams and coding standards violation charts — it runs under X-Windows and costs $3,500 now.
ViewLogic Systems Inc has introduced Powerview, a range of design tools for Unix based upon the proposed electronic design automation standards being developed by the CAD Framework Initiative: prices go from $26,500 to $70,000.
Irvine, California-based Caseware Inc has introduced Caseware/PT, an application problem tracking system: it costs $3,500.
Malvern, Pennsylvania-based Rabbit Software Corp says it will release a suite of IBM SNA communications products for the Univel Inc Unixware desktop operating system including IBM mainframe connectivity stuff, remote job entry, advanced programme to programme communication and 3270 terminal emulation.
Network Computing Devices Inc has added X-Windows X11R5, font server, Telnet session security and Open Look support to release 3 of its NCDware X-terminal software due in August.
Campbell, California-based Apogee Software is porting its super-fast C and Fortran compilers to Solaris 2.0 for distribution by Highland Digital: Apogee says they are optimized for Sparcstation 2s and 10s.
Xerox Imaging Systems has release the ScanWorkX application programming interface, a developers’ toolkit allowing programmers to integrate Xerox's intelligent character recognition technology into their applications: built using the open network computing standard it runs on Sun Sparcstations IBM RS/6000s and Intergraph Corp workstations.
Burlington, Massachusetts-based Leading Technology Inc has renamed TekBase, its technical data management system, Metrica: available on most Unix workstations, prices start at $5,000.
IMSL Inc, Houston, Texas, has introduced a C-based graphics library which includes an interactive interface-driven tool for manipulating generated results running on Sun, HP, IBM, DEC and Silicon Graphics workstations: IMSL claims Exponent Graphics for C reduces the amount of user-written C source code required to produce sophisticated graphical results by 75%-95%.
Englewood, Colorado-based Holistic Systems Inc has won Digital Equipment Corp's marketing support for its Holos Executive Information and Decision Support System in the US: Holistic Systems will do a version of Holos for the Alpha RISC, delivering OpenVMS and OSF/1 versions of the product in early 1993; Holos is currently available under VAX/VMS; the price for a typical Holos configuration begins at $50,000, based upon system size and configuration.
Pilot Software Inc, Boston, Massachusetts, has established a wholly-owned subsidiary in Singapore: Pilot Software PTE Ltd will support Pilot's Pacific Rim distributors.
Cleo Communications, Ann Arbor, Michigan, is offering a 32 user version of SCO's uniPath SNA-3270 mainframe connectivity package plus interface board for $1,300: however, in an attempt to persuade users to move to its own 3270 emulation package — 3270Linkix — the company is offering 32 user evaluation package, with board and documentation, for $700.
Existing SCO uniPath SNA-3270 users can upgrade to 3270Linkix — software and documentation — for $500 per site.
Cleo: +1 313 662 2002.
Frame Technology Corp's European operation has been shaken up, with sales now headed by Sacha Baker; Geraldine Kelly becomes managing director of Frame Technology Europe whilst Mark Duffel joins from Interleaf as UK sales manager.
Frame Europe, Dublin: 353 1 8429 566.
Spry Inc, Seattle, Washington, has introduced Sprysoft NetWare Client for Unix which enables Unix workstations to become NetWare-compatible clients for sharing file and print services from a NetWare server and to share data over NetWare LANs using Unix commands: prices start at $1,000 for SCO Unix and SunOS versions.
And Spry has a Microsoft Corp Windows-compatible terminal emulator (VT220, VT100 and ANSI) for Sun Microsystems Inc's PC-NFS: Air allows PC-NFS to run under Windows and is written to PC-NFS socket calls — prices start at $100.
Spry: +1 206 286 1412.
SYMBOLICS READIES ALPHA, P5 VERSIONS OF OBJECT SOFTWARE
Burlington, Massachusetts-based, Symbolics Inc says it is working with both DEC and Intel Corp to make its object-oriented development environment and database — respectively Genera and Statice — available on DEC Alpha RISC and Intel Corp P5 (or Pentium, see back page) platforms by the second quarter of 1993.
Symbolics will also re-work its NXP1000 application server — which currently runs a 40-bit Ivory chip — to use Alpha.
The company says Genera's compilers and device drivers will have to be re-engineered, in the effort, though it promises compatibility will be maintained across the different versions.
Symbolics plans to unbundle its various products and says support for other Unix platforms will follow.
The company specialises in developing systems for complex statistical analysis, and is eager to stem the flow of red ink it is trailing.
It hopes these measures will return it to profitability by the second quarter of 1993.
Vice president of development, Saiid Zarrabian, admits the company has spent the last three years ‘in perpetual transition, desperately trying to find out what it is good at…in doing this the company has lost time and money trying to make good the things it started.’
Symbolic has also established a new maintenance and consultation division.
DIALOGIC HAS NEW VOICE SOFTWARE
Parsippany, New Jersey-based, Dialogic Corp, the call processing components supplier, has come up with AppServer, a software environment that lets voice processing applications run on any computing platform.
It's a high-level application programming interface that sits on a Unix-based personal computer equipped with call processing hardware.
Tandem Computers Inc is its first user with its newly announced Voice Response Unit, designed for call centre automation, running on NonStop.
Dialogic +1 201 334 8450.
AUTODESK ACQUIRES MICRO ENGINEERING SOLUTIONS
Autodesk Inc, Sausolito, California has bought Novi, Michigan-based Micro Engineering Solutions Inc on undisclosed terms.
The privately-held company provides three-dimensional surface modelling and manufacturing technology to various industries, including the automotive sector, in North America, Germany and Asia.
About 50 employees of the five-year-old company will continue to work out of their Michigan offices.
It has been a Registered AutoCAD Developer since January 1992 and its Solution 3000 product line runs under MS-DOS and Unix.
ICL ADOPTS WINDOWS OPEN SERVICE, NT
ICL Plc and Microsoft Corp last week announced that they will work together long-term on systems integration.
ICL will adopt Microsoft's Windows Open Services Architecture and Application Programming Interface for its TeamWare portfolio of 500 software products.
The TeamWare products were acquired with Nokia Data in 1991.
They have an open client-server architecture and manage heterogeneous workstations, servers and host computers linked via a local area network.
Microsoft's MS Mail will be integrated with TeamOffice, ICL's office information system for personal computer-based local area networks.
ICL said it would use the as yet unannounced Windows NT and Windows for Workgroups, which will be available soon.
ICL said that Microsoft products would strengthen its network offering in the office automation market while Microsoft is keen to share ICL's system integration expertise and its customers in banking, retailing and government.
The two companies said they will also work on a long-term systems management project.
IBM FORMS WORLDWIDE IBM CONSULTING GROUP…
IBM Corp last week announced formation of the worldwide IBM Consulting Group to provide management and information technology-related consulting services.
It will rely on 1,500 consultants in 30 countries in groups that include Management Consulting for Business Transformation and Information Technology Strategy & Planning; Functional Consulting for Application Development; an Industrial Sector; and Technology Consulting, IBM noted.
It is being run by general manager Robert Howe, formerly of Booz-Allen & Hamilton where he ran the firm's worldwide financial services practice.
He reports to vice president Bernard Puckett, general manager of Applications Solutions.
It's got 1,500 consultants who have already completed 150 assignments.
…
LAUNCHES OPEN SYSTEMS CENTRE
IBM Corp has opened its US Open Systems Center, offering customers support and services to help them understand, design, implement and test open systems for their business.
Initial offerings will be standards-based, integrated hardware and software systems on multiple vendors' machines that will be prototyped in IBM labs at the site.
The labs include the Multivendor Networking Lab; the Application Assistance Lab; the Benchmark and Performance Lab; the Application Porting Lab, and a number of product-specific labs.
…
ADDS AFP FOR THE RS/6000
IBM's Pennant Systems last week announced the extension of its Advanced Function Printing into the AIX/6000 environment and WISIWYG viewing on PS/2 screens under Windows.
The idea is that a service representative talking to a customer on the phone will be able to view a document on the screen that looks the same as the printed document the customer has.
Advanced Function Printing software and hardware distributes, displays, and prints information through multiple systems on a wide variety of devices, including 3900 printers with output speeds up to 229 pages per minute.
It will be  available for the RS/6000 in second quarter 1993; no price.
In the meantime, the hot product that is cooking is a duplex version of the 3900, which will have two print engines and will be able to print on both sides of the paper as customers are demanding.
INFORMIX INSTALLS CONFIDENTIAL SNEAK-LINE TO COLLECT INTELLIGENCE ON PIRACY
Informix Software Ltd is setting up an investigation unit in the UK, providing a free, confidential phone line for resellers and users and including a licence manager with its software, in a new initiative to clamp down on software piracy in its reseller channel.
Around 80% of its business is generated through value-added resellers and dealers — of which there are 500 in the UK alone — making it particularly vulnerable to piracy.
The extent of the problem is almost impossible to estimate, but Informix reckons it is losing millions of pounds in unpaid licence fees at present, and could be losing tens of millions by 1995.
Over the past 18 months more than 10 cases have come to light, one of which is soon to be pursued in court.
Over the next two weeks, it will be mailing details about the initiative through to its customers, including the new 0800 number that has been set up for anyone wishing to give or receive information about piracy.
A team of two full-time staff is being employed to follow up leads.
Where agreement cannot be reached with offending dealers, legal action will be taken.
As a further deterrent, Informix is shipping the Highland licence manager, which assists managers to monitor user licensing, with its products.
It is also writing safeguards into its software to make it less easy to copy.
The funds it recovers as a result will be re-invested in reseller support, research and development and further anti-piracy measures.
It is likely that the anti-piracy scheme will be adopted throughout the Informix operations worldwide.
Through the Federation Against Software Theft, the company will also be pursuing collective measures with Uniplex Ltd, the Santa Cruz Operation Inc and Oracle Corp.
MINIGRAMS
The US Federal Trade Commission's investigation of Microsoft Corp has had an air of unreality about it, with few people imagining that it will come to anything very much or lead to any significant change in the market, but now that the thing may be coming to a climax, what are the possible outcomes?
If Microsoft is found to have a case to answer, the minimum possibility is that the company is forced to sign a consent decree under which it has to unbundle, and agree not to bundle in future — for instance it might have to dismantle Windows for Workgroups and sell the networking elements as a separate product (similar networking code will be an integral part of standard Windows NT); at worst, the company could be forced to split itself into two completely different companies, one for operating systems and languages, the other for applications.
Intel Corp is anxious to sprinkle as much luck on the P5 as it can.
That's why it'll be making them in Ireland at a fabrication plant in Leixlip reportedly running 6,000 8-inch wafers a week dedicated exclusively to P5 production.
NeXT Computer Inc is likely to go public next year, founder Steve Jobs said in Chicago last week, although he added that no steps have yet been taken to start the process: ‘Things (have been) going very well for us the last few quarters,’ Jobs said, and ‘this quarter looks quite good as well, so if things keep on their present course and the market is good, I think there's a real good possibility that we'll go public next year.’
Industry types evaluate Microsoft Corp's new Windows for Workgroups concept as a ‘Novell-killer.’
In the UK, Cambridge neighbours IXI Ltd and Uniplam Ltd are exchanging courses and distribution activities: Unipalm is to take over the running and management of IXI's 20 Motif training courses whilst IXI takes on Unipalm's Motif distribution business.
Saying Sun Microsystems Inc's service is not up to snuff, Sun reseller Marathon International Group, of Campbell, California, has gone into the business on-site and over-the-phone.
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG will debut its implementation of OSF's Distributed Computing Environment — to which it contributed the X.500 global directory service — as DCE Sinix V1.0 on its MX300i Unix systems, with other ports to follow in 1993.
With people watching how the X terminals business is going, Network Computing Devices last week reported record net revenues of $32.5m in the third quarter ended September 30, up 115%, giving a net income of $2.2m, up 386%.
Year-to-date results were $3.6m on $84.9m.
The company has cut US prices on three of its X terminals to attract dumb terminal users.
Reductions affect the entry-level NCD15b ($1,500 to $1,200) and NCD14c ($3,000 to $2,500) and the high-end NCD19c ($6,400 to $6,000).
There is no doubt that Marlborough, Massachusetts-based Sequoia Systems Inc has all its marbles in the right place when it comes to designing and building fault-tolerant Unix systems — it wouldn't be an important partner of Hewlett-Packard Co if that weren't the case, but it still needs to get its act together on the marketing and finance side.
In its latest fire-fighting measure, Gabriel Fusco has relinquished his positions as president and chief executive in order to devote his time to other aspects of the company.
An interim office of the chief executive will be established with two members, Richard Goldman, chief financial officer and Francis Hughes Jr, an outside director of the company.
Fusco will remain on the board as chairman.
Ed Taylor, president of Pencom Software Inc, Austin, Texas, has stepped aside to make way for Frank King, erstwhile head of software development at Lotus Development Corp and past vice president of development for IBM's personal computer division.
Taylor remains executive vice president of parent company Pencom Systems Inc focused on new business ventures.
King will report to Wade Saadi, Pencom chairman.
At the AIX Expo in California last week, IBM announced version 2 release 2 of its OSF/1 1.1-based AIX/ESA.
Early shipments have already gone out; general availability is set for the end of the year.
It supports stuff like 500Gb file systems, asynch I/O, disk striping and internationalisation.
Next year the next release will include systems management, B1 security, DCE and parallel FORTRAN.
Deborah Coleman was one of the highest-flying women in Silicon Valley with the title chief financial officer until she suddenly took a long sabbatical a couple of years ago: she did return to Apple Computer Inc and became vice-president for information systems, but quit again suddenly last week; she has now resurfaced at Tektronix Inc as vice-president for materials operations, which is a new post.
Whoops…we gave you the wrong phone number for Xalt Inc last week.
It may be based in Texas but the marketing arm is in California at +1 510 947–4814.
The Object Management Group has snagged Wim Roelandts, vice president and general manager of Hewlett-Packard Co's Computer Systems Organisation, as keynote speaker at Object World Boston, February 1–4 at the Hynes Convention Center.
Irvine, California-based, Corollary Inc's multi-processor C-bus II specification will support Intel Corp's future Advanced Interrupt Controller (APIC) with availability pegged for this calendar quarter.
Farnborough, Hampshire-based Knowledge Software Ltd says its Open Systems Portability Checker has been ported to DEC's Alpha AXP chipset running OSF/1: the checker will flag any 32-bit dependencies in applications being ported to the architecture.
DEC will target Japan as a growing market for networked computer systems and a source of strategic alliances, Reuter reports from Tokyo: ‘Japan is a critically important market to Digital Equipment,’ president and chief executive Robert Palmer said at an exposition of DEC products in the city; Kubota Corp has already said it will use DEC's Alpha chip in its workstations and rumours naming Japanese companies that are planning Alpha-based links with DEC have appeared in the Japanese business press.
Omri Serlin's’ FT Systems’newsletter estimates ‘the RS/6000 was responsible for 48% of all new accounts for IBM this year…‘
Emeryville, California-based, Scopus Technology Inc, one of the handful of start-ups vying to score big in the field of customer support software, has hired William Herman as president and chief operating officer.
He is a co-founder of Viewlogic Systems, active in electronic design automation, one of Scopus’ first customers.
Amdahl Corp's vice president of advanced systems, Dave Anderson has been replaced by Eric Miles.
Pentium is the name Intel Corp has chosen for what would otherwise have been the 80586 microprocessor, the company announced last week: reason is that it did not think it would be permitted to claim 586 as a trade mark.
Independence Technologies Inc picked up a $1.95m from Cincinnati Bell Information Systems Corp which is building large customer information, billing and network configuration applications with its iTran OLTP development tools, iView system management software and USL's Tuxedo transaction monitor.
Under the new contract, Independence will provide CBIS with iTran Toolkit and iView software, consulting and training.
Enfield, Middlesex-based Data Connection Ltd is supplying the X.400 technology that will be included in Microsoft Corp's messaging service that will be released with Windows NT.
IBM is licensing some Wollongong Group networking technology for use in future products.
The technology encompasses network/transport software, virtual terminal, terminal emulation, file transfer and high-level scripting language services in the IBM/DEC host environment for use on Unix workstations as well as DOS/Windows, Macintosh and OS/2 platforms.
Invited by Hawke Systems Ltd, Slough, Berkshire, to cast a glance over DEC's Alpha boxes last week, Unigram.X was turned away at the door when DEC UK officials turned white at the mention of press.
What was the fuss?
Other leaky sources at the company were quite prepared to give us a low-down, see front page.