

SUN RIPS UP PRICE BOOK WITH TSUNAMI CLASSIC…
Sun Microsystems Inc will be floating its brand new gunboats within sight of enemy flotillas this week ready to blow them out of the water with a savage attack on their price front.
Sun's Tsunami forces reportedly have orders from Sun chief Scott McNealy to be ‘animalistic,’ ripping up the old price book and standing the computer industry status quo on its head.
It is believed this order will translate into an entry-level Tsumani box that breaks not only the $5,000 barrier but the $4,000 barrier as well.
At press time Sun was still chipping away at the price of the Tsunami Classic, so named because Sun expects it to become the standard by which all others are judged.
It is unlikely to be more than $3,995 and could be slashed even more before Tuesday November 10 when the box is officially launched.
The 59 MIPS colour machine, available immediately, will come with a 50MHz Tsunami engine, the Sun/Texas Instruments Inc chip now renamed MicroSparc, 16Mb to 96Mb internal memory, 200Mb to 424Mb disk, two Sbus slots and 8-bit colour.
The entry-level will have a 15-inch screen, new to Sun, capable of 1024 x 768 or standard Sun resolution.
There will also be 16-inch and 19-inch models available.
Sun will tout the Classic as two-to-three times faster than a top-of-the-line Intel Corp 50MHz 80486DX machine and even faster than the anticipated 66MHz Pentium.
The Classic will reportedly do 4.6 MFLOPS, 26.6 SPECint and 21 SPECfp.
An up-scale model, dubbed the LX, is expected to cost between $8,000 and $9,000.
It will come equipped with 424Mb disk standard, expandable to 1Gb, a GX accelerator for graphics, CD-quality audio and ISDN standard.
Both will run only the new Solaris 2.1 (UX No 409).
To cut the fat out of the Classic's price tag, Sun will adopt a policy historically alien to the computer industry, the ‘no dicker sticker’ that American car makers like General Motors and Ford are experimenting with.
The Classic's street price, and only the Classic's, will not be discounted.
How Sun gets its resellers to toe this line remains to be seen.
Sun also expects to make money on the box by taking business away from high-end personal computers, particularly PC CAD accounts with the LX, and attracting a new set of customers lured by the promise that Tsunami, a better value, will outlive its depreciation schedule.
A Sun Microsystems Computer Corp vice president, before biting his tongue, claimed it would be a ‘piece of cake’ getting 100,000 units out the door in the next year, close to half the volume Sun currently does in a year.
…
LOOKS TOWARDS YEAR 2000 WITH SPARC CENTER MULTI-PROCESSORS
Accompanying the little Tsunamis on their maiden voyage will be the great Sun Dragon, now renamed the Sparc Center 2000, the biggest beast Sun has ever tried to field and a clear signal it's after the Fortune 1000's distributed data centre.
The number 2000 is meant to establish Dragon as the platform for database and corporate applications through the next ten years, a clear bid by Sun for the commercial sector and the rightsizing crowd.
Sun expects Dragon to  plough through the logjam holding back diffident customers from committing to Unix because pricey Unix servers can't handle the load.
Eventually specified to be a 20-way symmetric multiprocessor, Dragon will initially appear only in configurations of two, four, six and eight SuperSparc CPUs with volume deliveries beginning in April.
A hundred gamma Dragons will go to key customers and ISVs in the first quarter.
The Solaris operating system needs further tuning to handle a full-blown 20-way, 2,190 MIPS Dragon (UX No 409).
Sun is relatively unconcerned about the non-appearance of the big Dragon.
It estimates 90% of its users are looking for 8 CPUs and 1Gb memory anyway.
Dragon's internal memory will range from 64Mb to 5Gb.
Sun will claim it's the first machine capable of running an entire database out of main memory.
Disk space will start at 4.2GB, progressing to a half a terabyte and then to a full terabyte next year.
An entry-level two-CPU machine with 1Mb external cache for each CPU will be priced at $95,000.
Additional internal memory will run $67 a megabyte.
Sun will apply the little-used SpecRate performance measure to Dragon, a factor of how many ‘jobs’ a machine can process.
An 8-way 500-TPS Dragon reportedly has a SpecRate int92 of 8,047 and SpecRate fp92 of 10,600.
Dragon's handlers will claim it's the new world champion at this kind of thing, besting previous title holders Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG and Hewlett-Packard Co.
While not a fault tolerant machine or likely ever to be one, Dragon has automatic system recovery for fault resilience.
In addition, Sun struck up a development relationship with Xerox Corp's Palo Alto Research Centre to produce a brand new high-speed packet-switching Xdbus for Dragon doing 640Mb per-second peak and 500Mb per-second sustained.
Faced with a longer sales cycle for the Dragon, Sun expects to sell thousands of them in competition with Pyramid Technology Corp, Sequent Computer Systems Inc and Hewlett-Packard.
INTEL P5 NOW AT 40MHz —‘NEEDS A HEAT SINK AND FAN’
Our most up to date probing of Intel Corp's P5 or Pentium architecture — given that the company is sending different messages to different parts of the industry — has the processor running at only two thirds of its promised speed and needing both a heat sink and fan to dissipate the heat it is producing.
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG is understood to be most advanced at this stage in development of working parts.
It has so far only managed to produce a sample P5 running at 40MHz — just two thirds of the 66MHz speed Intel intended — and cannot get the thing to work at a faster rate.
We understand that even at 40MHz Pentium produces twice the heat called for in simulations and, embarrassingly for Intel, will require a heat sink and fan no matter what.
People who know say the physics involved will allow Pentium to be turned around, but that Intel may have to back off from a 66MHz specification to 50MHz if it is to meet its revised March 1993 delivery date.
Internally, Intel is thought to be finding it much harder and certainly more costly to produce new iterations of its iAPX-86 series than it expected.
Intel will be showing off a bunch of Pentium-based prototype systems at Comdex Fall later this month during invitation-only, ten minute theatre presentations.
Showing them is one thing, but will they be running — indeed what will they run — and will the audience be able to get close enough to count the number of pins on the things?
NEW OFFICE SYSTEMS FROM NEC
In Japan, new NEC Corp's office systems, OP-X Models R-30, R-40 and R-50, support a variant of Unix known as OP-X/V.
They include communications support for NEC's ACOS mainframe series, as well as previous models of the 3100 series.
Prices are from $30,000 for the R30 model and shipments start at the end of December.
Dataquest Japan forecasts that while the office computer market at $4,600m is currently double the size of the workstation market, the market will decline at 7% annually over the next few years to 1996, while Unix workstation shipments will grow at 29% a year over the period.
Dataquest forecasts that the Japanese market for Unix systems will grow on average at 23% by number to reach a value of $9,500m by 1996, against $3,375m in the year to last March.
NEC MOVES TO CUT COSTS IN ITS CHIP OPERATIONS WORLDWIDE
NEC Corp is responding to the recession by moving to halve costs in its semiconductor operations, the Nikkei Industrial Daily reports.
While increasing its yields in chip manufacturing, NEC plans to mount a cost-cutting campaign in its semiconductor plants, including overseas plants such as NEC Semiconductors UK in Scotland, from next March.
Research and development will also be reviewed.
With the depressed semiconductor market in Japan, NEC has reassigned 100 people in its plants to different jobs, but has not cut jobs as its overseas competitors have done.
AFTER BEING RELEGATED TO FOURTH, SONY TRIES HARDER IN WORKSTATIONS
With new mid-range models, NWS5000TF and the NEWS5000TG in its News workstation line, based on the R4000 RISC chip, Sony Corp is mounting a new offensive in the Japanese workstation market, where it has fallen to fourth place from third, deposed by NEC Corp as the number three player behind Sun Microsystems Inc and Hewlett-Packard Co.
It has formed a new division, the Computers & Personal Communication Sales Division, charged with expanding the number of Sony workstation dealers, and at the same time developing products wanted by large users.
The new models are to be shipped from the end of November, and will be priced around $30,000 for the TF model and $45,400 for the TG model.
INGRES WINS MAJOR CONTRACT AS CANON SALES MOVES TO UNIX
Ingres Japan has scored a coup with Canon Sales Ltd, with the decision by Canon Inc to move its sales management system from a mainframe to a Unix system running Ingres.
Canon Sales, which is the main dealer for Macintosh computers, also has a systems integration business with Digital Equipment Corp, NeXT Computer Inc and Hewlett-Packard Co equipment, as well as selling its own printers via a chain of retail shops called Canon Zero-One Shops.
With its mainframe-based system, the machines ground to a halt at the end of each month as sales reports from shops and sales locations around the country had to be collated on the head-office mainframe.
Unix workstations are now being installed between the mainframe and the personal computers, which formerly served as SNA terminals.
These will act as database and mainframe servers and will take around 30% of the load from the mainframe.
Ingres says it was chosen because of its advanced server architecture, its distributed database operation and management functions and its price-performance.
ZENITH REDUCES STAFFING BY 6%
Buffalo Grove, Illinois-based, Zenith Data Systems Inc has cut 180 US sales and marketing jobs — 6% of its workforce — in an effort to reduce costs across the company.
Reshuffling its North America operations is, ZDS officials say, ‘part of an effort to make the firm more responsive to the personal computer Unix-based market worldwide…the company had to start at the heart of the problem the bureaucracy in the company.’
Management suffered the brunt of the reorganisation, with ZDS stripping out a whole department of sales managers.
However, the firm says its international operations will not be affected by these measures and no further job losses are planned for the immediate future in the US.
Other cost cutting measures are expected to be incurred in ZDS manufacturing divisions.
Feeling the pinch after Compaq Computer Corp's recent price reductions, ZDS says it's also working to bring its pricing policies more in line with its competition.
SPAIN's TRANSTOOLS CLAIMS THIRD PLACE IN DATABASES; IS READY TO BE ACQUIRED
TransTools SA, a Spanish software company backed totally by private capital, is competing with Oracle Corp, Informix Corp and Sybase Inc.
Managing director Javier Ollero is quick to point out that TransTools is not a service company, but a product company that undertakes extensive research and development.
From the start, it has placed its faith in Unix.
TransTools' latest product is MultiBase, an applications development tool for relational databases that took four years to develop.
The product has a client-server architecture for use with both MS-DOS and Unix machines, and supports such graphical user interfaces as Windows, Motif, and Open Look.
Ollero asserts that TransTools has not involved itself in the price war.
However, while Oracle and Informix have raised their prices, TransTools prices have been reduced.
Nonetheless, prices are unlikely to drop further: TransTools made the mistake of launching its first database at too low a price, which lost it the prestige Ollero feels it deserves.
TransTools' main customer is the public administration, but Ollero admits private enterprise has shown little interest, preferring the offerings of the multinationals.
TransTools is open to the idea of being absorbed by a multinational, ideally a software and services company.
In general, Ollero believes that European countries have similar opportunities to the US for developing innovative software, and says that many important ideas have come from small companies.
Finally, he claims that TransTools holds second or third position in the Spanish market behind Oracle and Informix, with the impact of Sybase Corp and Ingres Corp being relatively muted.
TORCHRAVEN LAUNCHES VARPACK PORTFOLIO OF INTEROPERABLE OPEN SYSTEMS TOOLS
London, N1-based open systems integrator and developer Torchraven Ltd has announced its Torchraven VARpack portfolio of interoperable open systems tools and services for UK resellers.
The total value of items included in the pack is over £9,000, but Torchraven will be offering the entire suite to resellers for £2,500 — a package it hopes will increase its 48-strong dealer base.
The VARpack provides resellers with the means to develop guaranteed fully integrated open systems with provision for value added functions such as facsimile connections, integration with personal computers and built-in security, which are important for product differentiation.
The modules included in the pack are as follows: Hasler AG's automated facsimile hardware and software that enables end users to send and receive messages directly from their workstations; Advanced Graphical Environments Inc's X Server software that integrates Windows, MS-DOS and X Window applications on 80386 and 80486 personal computers; Planar Systems Inc's and Unicord Inc's Unix terminal integration software that enables MS-DOS and Windows 3-based personal computers to be integrated into Unix environments; Novell's LAN Workplace for MS-DOS that enables personal computer users to link to other local area network users or remote hosts; Locus Computing Corp's personal computer interface for resource sharing between MS-DOS, Windows, Mac and Unix users; Schasiepen GmbH's Netprint for shared access to a central printer on a network; a TCP/IP boot prom — enabling MS-DOS and standard TCP/IP network software to be booted from a network server — and Ethernet board for diskless, networked workstations; and Unicorn security software for controlling access, activity logging and reporting.
£1,000 worth of technical and sales training and technical notes, with an additional £1,200 of support is also included in the deal.
Torchraven is targeting the VARpack at resellers in vertical markets such as local government, finance and retail; those developing applications for specific products; and computer departments in large companies that act as resellers within their organisations.
The company has developed open systems for resellers and end users since its formation in 1986.
Past customers include the Automobile Association, Digital Equipment Corp, Easams Ltd, the European  Commission , GKN Plc, Hewlett-Packard Co, IBM Corp, the Ministry of Defence, Unisys Corp and Virgin Group Plc.
Its 10 staff are divided into an Applications Development Team which works on one-off technical developments, bespoke application development and product evaluation; a Products Department that supplies integrated open systems products; and a customer services unit offering consultancy, support and training.
It is currently working on a system for extending the security provided on Unix and local area network systems.
DEC ALPHA BOXES: $15,000 TO $600,000 — SIX-WAY, 900 SPECmark LASER TO FOLLOW
Sources say DEC decided on the following tags for the Alpha RISC machines it launches this Tuesday: $15,000 for the Sandpiper desktop and $18,000 for the server.
$39,000 for Flamingo; $70,000 to $200,000 for Cobra; $150,000 to $600,000 for Ruby.
Availability is supposedly 60 days.
DEC watcher Terry Shannon says Lasers will go from a maximum four CPUs to six in the near-term future for a projected 900 SPECmarks total performance, a six-fold increase over the top-of-the-line VAX 7000 Model 640.
He's also figuring DEC has an unannounced ‘modular computing’ initiative that will ultimately see the Laser top out at 12 CPUs or more.
DEC, he adds, has confirmed that more than 800 Alpha AXP seed systems are out with ISVs (we heard 500 elsewhere) and that 2,500 systems, including at least 100 Cobra platforms, will be in the field by the end of the year.
Leaks from inside DEC say OpenVMS runs a lot better on the Alpha platforms than OSF/1 does.
Other words from the inside has DEC trundling off to Comdex with a bunch of Alpha AXP Personal Computers for a technology demo of NT with third-party and DEC's own applications.
It claims to be ahead of schedule with NT-on-Alpha, a relatively meaningless phrase since we don't know what the real schedule is.
DEC says it's ‘considering’ making the machines available to ISVs.
Otherwise we hear the Alpha chips are in production as are certain of the Alpha machines.
Meanwhile, DEC's new boss, Bob Palmer, told stockholders last week he intends to break the company up into strategic business units with profit-and-loss responsibilities.
Managers will be named by the end of the calendar year.
…
OFFERS NEW NETWORKING
Digital Equipment Corp has announced that it will offer a new hub backplane, code-named One Hub, in early 1993, plugging the gap at the high end of the DEChub 90 range and for the first time offering Ethernet, Token Ring, and the Fibre Distributed Data Interface, FDDI, at first, and Asynchronous Transfer Mode high-speed networking technology, when it becomes available, in one product.
All modules for the DEChub 90 hub will fit the One Hub, which will be accompanied by the dual port router it has been developing with Cisco Systems Inc.
In the meantime, it added five new low cost modules — three with fibre optic capability — and network management software for its Ethernet-based DEChub 90.
SAMSUNG CHANGES TACK ON PRECISION RISC, WILL DO ONLY SUPERSCALAR
Seoul, South Korea-based Samsung Electronics Ltd has changed its plans for Hewlett-Packard Co's Precision Architecture RISC and now says it will be working solely on superscalar versions of the chip, Electronic Engineering Times claims.
It will be deriving proprietary low-voltage and highly integrated devices from the PA 7100 core design, rather than doing flow-cost versions of Hewlett-Packard's scalar architecture, as the pair originally said was intended.
Samsung's initial plans were derailed by Hewlett-Packard's difficulties in getting floating point processing units out of Texas Instruments Inc.
Samsung has been collaborating with Hewlett-Packard on some of the low-end PA 7100 machines, which are planned to appear next month.
Samsung will be a reseller of both the machines and the RISC microprocessor.
CONVEX ADDS ENTRY-LEVEL C3800
Convex Computer Corp is seeking to undercut its competition with a new entry-level, upgradeable minisupercomputer, the C3800-ES, the first machine, the company claims, to offer GaAs technology to the low end market.
The C3800-ES, pitched at the Cray Research Inc Y-MP2E and IBM Corp ES/9000 Vector Facility, is aimed at users unable to buy a full system at a stroke.
Prices start at £500,000 for a configuration of just one or two CPUs to which additional processors and crossbar networks can be connected, to build up to the full eight-processor C3800 series.
The machine comes with four to eight input-output processors; 128Mb to 1Gb memory; and runs under the Unix BSD 4.3-based Convex OS.
Additional memory, input-output bandwidth and peripherals are also available with the initial purchase.
Like other Convex models it offers features such as Auto Processor Recovery, Checkpoint Restart and Virtual Volume Manager; it is available immediately.
POWERPC TO REPLACE 88000 IN HARRIS NIGHT HAWKS…
IBM Corp has won 88000 RISC  aficionado , Harris Corp, for the PowerPC RISC IBM is developing with Motorola Inc and Apple Computer Inc as part of an alliance aimed at the US Federal market.
The agreement covers co-operative marketing of the Harris Night Hawk line of real-time Unix computers with the IBM RS/6000 to US government customers and involves Harris in helping IBM implement real-time capability for the RS/6000.
Harris will incorporate the PowerPC into the Night Hawk line.
IBM Federal Systems says that Night Hawk will enable it to offer customers ‘an extremely capable real-time computing system with the B-1 level security’ many of them require.
Harris sees the Night Hawk being combined with the RS/6000 to create a cost-effective secure client-server system.
Harris does appear to be ditching the Motorola 88000 RISC entirely in favour of the PowerPC: it sees the pact as ‘a natural extension of our alliance with Motorola…
PowerPC will offer a natural transition for our customers, a continuation of our Preplanned Product Improvement strategy.’
…
AS HARRIS LAUNCHES DATA CONTROL SYSTEM
Harris Corp's Fort Lauderdale, Florida-based Computer Systems Division has also introduced an integrated data acquisition and control system using its one- to eight-processor real-time Night Hawk with a range of VME-based input-output boards.
The system uses a graphical interface to enable users to collect and analyse data and control and configure the system by using icons.
The 70-plus boards now available on Night Hawk computers are the result of an OEM agreement with VME Microsystems International Corp of Huntsville, Alabama, coupled with Notebook/XE and LT/Control real-time data acquisition and control software from Laboratory Technologies Corp of Wilmington, Massachusetts.
The system is aimed at laboratory test, control stations, simulators, power plants and process control.
For applications requiring thousands of input-output points, an intelligent controller and separate VME chassis, connected to the Night Hawk via reflective memory, enables customers to configure very large systems without impacting the system CPU or VME backplanes with large numbers of programmed input-output transfers.
EO COMMUNICATORS COMBINE SERVICES
Mountain View, California-based Eo Inc looks like beating Apple Computer Inc to market with a personal communicator: the company has formally launched its first two products, the Eo Personal Communicator 440 and 880, handheld devices with facsimile, electronic mail, cellular phone and personal computing capabilities.
The 440 weighs 2.2 lbs, the 880 4 lbs; they are based on AT&T Co's Hobbit RISC and the 440 runs at 20MHz, delivering ‘two to three times the performance’ of a 20MHz 809386SL microprocessor.
The EO 880 runs at 30MHz, delivering performance ‘comparable to’ a 33MHz Intel 80486SX.
They come with built-in messaging capabilities for exchanging electronic mail and fax messages.
The PenPoint operating system and nine bundled applications are included in ROM.
EO will first release the Personal Communicators in an extensive beta test programme beginning at the end of the year.
All Eo users in the US will receive a free subscription to an AT&T EasyLink Services AT&T Mail electronic mailbox, accessible through an 800 number for sending and receiving electronic mail and faxes.
They run on batteries for up to four hours and an optional extended-life battery pack for the Eo 440 provides up to seven hours of continuous service.
Batteries can be recharged in 90 minutes.
The applications are for facsimile, electronic mail, note-taking, calculation, scheduling, and address book management.
Word processing, spreadsheet and database applications in development.
They have 4Mb or 8Mb, expandable to 12Mb, and an internal hard disk option is offered.
A high-speed serial port and cable offers exchange of data with MS-DOS machines, and a parallel port supports printers or an external 1.44Mb floppy drive.
There is a communications port for optional cellular and other wireless modules, and a type 2 PCMCIA slot (two in the EO 880) for future expansion.
The Eo 880 has a VGA and an SCSI II port for connecting external drives.
Volume is set for second quarter 1993.
The 440 with 4Mb is $2,000; with 4Mb and internal modem it's $2,500.
The 880 with 8Mb and modem is $3,300; the cellular phone option is $800.
The 440 will later take a 20Mb and the 880 a 64Mb disk, not yet priced.
Eo has also signed with Sun Microsystems Inc's Sitka Corp to bundle Sitka's mobile networking products in the machines.
HOPES AND FEARS FOR SOLARIS 2.1
by William Fellows
After promising to make its latest Solaris 2.1 operating system available for Sparc RISC-based systems within 30 days (UX No 409), SunSoft Inc's European general manager, Peter Watkins, says the Sun Microsystems Inc software unit will deliver Solaris 2.1 source code for Intel Corp iAPX-86 architectures to its OEM partners during December.
The partners, including AST Research Inc, CompuAdd Corp, Dell Computer Corp and Toshiba Corp, are expected to bring SunSoft's Unix-on-Intel to market from February next year, on 80486 machines with at least 12Mb main memory.
All are currently working with Solaris 2.0 code, binary compatible, says Watkins, with release 2.1, which includes support for symmetric multi-processing.
The Intel OEMs will productise the newer version and ‘in effect there will be no Solaris 2.0 for Intel, it'll be 2.1,’ says Watkins.
Solaris 2.0 was only supposed to be a developers' release in the first place.
Slight variations in the implementations will occur because of differences in hardware construction — there is no standard method for configuring multiple Intel processors in a system for example— and the need for a range of device drivers.
However, as long as manufacturers retain the standard Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL), that SunSoft supplies with Solaris 2.1, there will be few inconsistencies, says Watkins.
Although HAL contains just 1% of the total amount of code in Solaris, it incorporates important application programming interface specifications for maintaining consistent operation across computers from different makers.
Watkins aims to have a software development environment, including programming tools and a C compiler, available to the Intel OEMs at the same time as Solaris 2.1 Improved graphics facilities, similar to those enjoyed by the Sparc community, will be provided in due course, he says, along with greater high-availability features, security above the current C2 level, and a better implementation of HAL.
It is not just the OEMs that will bring Solaris 2.1 for Intel to market.
Although no names have been mentioned thus far, Watkins says SunSoft plans to sign a bunch of distributors for the product (UX No 409), but not traditional mass marketeers, rather those with Unix and networking experience.
MS-DOS, Windows emulation
Sun's personal computer integration arm, the Billerica, Massachusetts-based SunSelect, already offers a software emulator — with an optional Sbus hardware accelerator board — for running MS-DOS and Microsoft Corp Windows applications on Sparc systems under Solaris at Intel 80486 speed.
SunPC is based upon the SoftPC technology from UK firm Insignia Solutions Ltd, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, and SunSelect's own enhancements.
However, SunSelect recently acquired the assets of Praxsys Technologies Inc, the Norwood, Massachusetts-based company that was formed by the team that developed Phoenix Technologies Ltd's VPix MS-DOS-under-Unix emulation environment after Phoenix abandoned that business.
Praxsys' hottest property, Snoopy — which had already been adopted by Sun (UX No 385)— is designed to enable any Windows NT or Windows application to run on any RISC or iAPX-86 hardware (UX No 403).
Using this technology SunSelect intends to make Windows emulation available for Solaris 2.1 in the second quarter of next year and will eventually deliver the stuff on multiple platforms.
Watkins says SunSoft is happy to support what SunSelect offers in the way of MS-DOS emulation right now, but adds that if another firm comes up with better technology at a lower price ‘we'd be stupid not to do business with them.’
He says SunSoft is ‘not betting on any single technology,’ and will support other players, apart from SunSelect, too.
The same, he says, applies to Windows emulation, and there are at least four companies now working on that technology, including the Apple Mac-to-Unix house Quorum Software Systems Inc and Bristol Technology Inc in Ridgefield, Connecticut.
‘If someone beats them [SunSelect]then we could go with them.’
Although SunSoft — indeed Sun as a whole — has given little or no ground on the issue of direct support for the Open Software Foundation's Motif graphical user interface on its own Sparc systems, Watkins says the company is more than happy for third parties to supply it.
The customer, as he points out, pays for the bundled Sun environment, including the Open Look interface, in any case.
He says SunSoft would even welcome more third party Motif-based tools coming on board.
The bottom line with Motif, he argues, is that Sun doesn't want to support any more toolkits.
Indeed, SunSoft hopes the whole Open Look versus Motif issue will recede with the advent of object-oriented interfaces.
Sun's own effort will appear in 1994 or 1995 as a part of Project DOE (Distributed Objects Everywhere), the firm's object-based software technology development with Hewlett-Packard Co.
Between now and then, Open Look will get several more refinements.
SunSoft has recently recruited Bud Tribble, architect of Next Computer Inc's Next Step interface, as vice president of end user software, to orchestrate its efforts in that area.
Sparc and Intel versions of Solaris 2.1 include support for multi-threading, in which tasks — processes not dependent on the outcome of another — can be distributed across different CPUs for simultaneous processing.
The ability to break individual applications down into separate tasks — as long as the software is written in a suitably modular fashion — is known as application multi-threading, and will be supported in the next  release of Solaris 2. x, according to Watkins.
The Posix group is working on an industry standard for multi-threading architectures which should be completed by the end of the year (UX No 397)— SunSoft says it has implemented all specifications that have already been drafted.
SunSoft's representative on Posix's PThreads (or P1003.4a) committee ensures that the firm doesn't go off and implement anything non-standard that is likely to put SunSoft out on a limb.
Fear
Sun claims to have developed 80% of Unix System Labs Inc's Unix SVR4 operating system, and SunSoft is disappointed that its former technology partner had chosen to go into competition against Solaris.
USL has come up with its own desktop version of Unix for Intel and other architectures, SVR4.2, and via its partnership with Novell Inc in Univel Inc has recently brought to market the NetWare network-enabled version of SVR4.2 called UnixWare (UX No 406).
However, given the size of Sun's business empire SunSoft doesn't see Unix SVR4.2 and its derivative(s) as a real threat to its market position.
Out of its concern to maintain conformance to industry standards, SunSoft is more sensitive about the impact of USL's latest technologies in the plans of political organs such as Unix International (UI).
Unix SVR4 is currently specified by UI's RoadMap as the foundation for the future direction of the Unix operating system.
Like the majority of Unix manufacturers, SunSoft has already incorporated Unix SVR4 application programming interfaces (APIs), in its operating systems.
However, enhancements such as the ToolTalk communications package, Open Look toolkits and Open Windows 3.0 environment have been added to its SunOS and Solaris operating systems, and other additions, including the object-oriented Distributed Object Maintenance Framework will be incorporated by springtime next year.
SVR4.2 and UnixWare have their own extensions, and other Unix providers have added other functionality for particular CPU architectures and application areas.
Even though most now provide base conformance to Unix SVR4, to get the best out of an application, independent software vendors provide tailored versions of an application targeted for different operating systems environments.
The problem is that the additional functionality provided by Unix vendors — the bells and whistles which differentiate and position their products in the market — all require further APIs, rendering different Unix implementations incompatible in certain areas.
Watkins' fear is that if UI extends the Unix RoadMap to include conformance with SVR4.2 — technology which UI helped conceive and encouraged USL to develop — SunSoft would have to implement a bunch of APIs which are inconsistent with its own operating system releases to maintain RoadMap conformance.
‘If the world and UI goes to SVR4.2 as the basis of the RoadMap, then Sun will have to consider its position very carefully,’ says Watkins.
 Sensitive 
Hinting perhaps of bringing subtle pressures to bear, Watkins reminds us that SunSoft has at least 1,000 engineers working full-time on its Unix implementation, many more than USL has in its entire organisation.
Indeed, SunSoft believes UI will have to become more sensitive to future Unix issues because of the claimed lack of technological investment USL is making in Unix compared to SunSoft's endeavours.
Scepticism
Watkins is also sceptical of UI's stated aim of developing a micro-kernel-based version of Unix.
USL has already signed with French Unix house Chorus Systemes SA for its Chorus/Mix micro-kernel that will form the basis of this release.
Watkins says Bill Joy's Sun Labs team has been looking at micro-kernel technologies under the auspices of Spring, Sun's blue-sky, rolling research effort.
‘They haven't found some of the performance capabilities that are expected from micro-kernels,’ he says, adding that ‘Solaris has a very modular kernel, and we've made some of the micro-kernel mistakes already.’
CYPRESS MOVES ON TO 66.7MHz HYPERSPARC, JANUARY DELIVERY — 80MHz, 100MHz TO FOLLOW
Cypress Semiconductor Corp has scrapped the 55MHz version of its superscalar Sparc RISC, the HyperSparc, according to company official Bob Richards, speaking at a HyperSparc workstation conference in Zurich, Switzerland last week.
Instead, Cypress is pressing ahead with the 66.7MHz implementation of its chip-set, which will be generally available from January in Tape Automated Bonding (TAB) packaged modules.
HyperSparc's integer and floating point chips are said to be complete — the instruction cache unit will be finished within a week, the company says.
The promised 80Mhz HyperSparc is thought to be about four months behind the 66.7MHz part — Richards says there is a single completed 80MHz module in  existence right now.
The four month hitch has been caused by the need for a process change in cache memory, without which, Cypress won't get good yields for the part.
A 100MHz HyperSparc is now being talked up for the end of next year.
It will be introduced in a Multi-Die Packaging (MDP) format, which has been pioneered by San Jose, California-based nChip Inc.
Richards says it would be prohibitively expensive to package TAB versions of the 100MHz HyperSparc.
HyperSparc is Cypress' Mbus-compatible alternative to the Texas Instruments Inc superscalar SuperSparc chip (or Viking as it is often referred to), which Sun Microsystems Inc is using in its new generation of Sparcstation 10 systems.
Mbus is Sun's multi-processing bus architecture designed for symmetric multi-processing Sparc systems.
There have been well documented delays to SuperSparc and Sun has apparently built two crystals into its Mbus motherboards so that customers can upgrade their processor modules with higher clock-rate parts as they trickle on to the market, without having to dicker with clock timing and synchronisation.
Sun admits to having shipped thousands of Sparcstation 10 Model 30s with 36MHz SuperSparcs, a ‘number’ of Model 20s running 33MHz chip sets and ‘some’40MHz Model 41s: all are uni-processors.
Still awaited are systems with multiple SuperSparc modules, as Texas has yet to deliver the required dual-CPU modules and SunSoft Inc hasn't got its symmetric multi-processing operating system, Solaris 2.1 out of the door yet (UX No 409).
A dual-processor Sparcstation 10, the Model 52, was to have used 45MHz SuperSparcs, but will now start life as a 40MHz affair, though observers wonder if Texas can even hit that mark.
Sun is still clinging to its promised fourth quarter delivery date for the multi-processors (UX No 385), but admits that may slip to the beginning of next year.
Kicking Sun
Cypress hopes the dearth of SuperSparcs available on the market will allow it — in conjunction with Mbus board-makers such as Colombus, Ohio-based Pinnacle Data Systems Inc which is supporting Cypress — to leverage open the Sun-compatible market for HyperSparc.
On a board, the Cypress chip-set is plug-compatible with SuperSparc Mbus modules, though the two cannot be mixed and matched.
Cypress is worried however, that Sun may decide to turn off certain switches in Solaris that allow the operating system to run across systems configured with CPUs other than SuperSparc.
Cypress claims HyperSparc test systems fitted out with Campbell, California-based Apogee Software Inc C and Fortran compilers ‘kick Sun into oblivion.’
Cypress also believes Sun has established a hush-hush research unit to investigate HyperSparc.
Talks
In the US, Pinnacle, which peddles almost anything and everything you'd ever want for a Sparc system will have board and system-level HyperSparc and SuperSparc products when it gets deliveries from the chip-makers.
Its European outlet, Pinnacle Data Systems UK Ltd, is currently in talks with a European manufacturer to get its products made locally for the UK and continental markets.
From December 1st Pinnacle will be offering a RAID storage subsystem for Sun systems.
Pinnacle UK — partner, but not subsidiary of the US concern — says it has already sold about a hundred boards fitted with Cypress' standard 40MHz Sparc RISC set.
A French Pinnacle unit — standalone or subsidiary of the UK outfit — should be up and running soon with three staff.
Industrade AG, Wallisellen, is distributing Pinnacle hardware and IXI Ltd software in Switzerland.
ICL QUAD PROCESSOR DRS6000 ‘BY CHRISTMAS’
Meanwhile, the UK's ICL plc, a second-tier customer for SuperSparc, is possibly in the most fortunate position of the Sparc builders, because it is not shackled to the Solaris chain.
It has had a symmetric multi-processing version of Unix SVR4 available for its Sparc-based DRS6000 systems on the market for some eighteen months now.
Indeed, ICL promises a four processor DRS6000 Model 764, with two dual-33MHz SuperSparc modules, by Christmas.
It is taking orders for uni-processor 33MHz system now, and says it'll move up to 40MHz CPUs ‘once we are comfortable with it.’
It says it can ‘get the performance required for now with four 33MHz parts.’
…
HYPERSPARC FOR DRS9000s AND MASSIVELY PARALLEL SYSTEM?
Interestingly, ICL is also one of about a dozen alpha sites for Cypress' HyperSparc — there are two unnamed companies in Germany also playing with the thing — indeed it reportedly found seven bugs in the chip-set for Cypress.
Although it doesn't admit to doing anything more than ‘looking at the technology’ presently, indicators suggest ICL may develop a closer relationship with HyperSparc in future.
There's talk of a HyperSparc-based DRS6000 model, even a suggestion that ICL is evaluating use of the part for next-generation systems, possibly the DRS9000 line.
ICL itself admits to be investigating a parallel processor architecture that will use HyperSparc, sources say this is likely to grow out of a 256 CPU parallel system that the company is now building under the auspices of the European Community's Esprit project.
CISCO RALLIES 12 FIRMS TO JOIN ITS APPI FORUM
Cisco Systems Inc, Menlo Park, California, has managed to pull 12 other companies behind it in its attempt to develop its APPI, Advanced Program-to-Program Internetworking alternative to IBM Corp's Advanced Peer-to-Peer Networking.
The inaugural meeting of the APPI Forum took place at the InterOp show in San Francisco.
Apart from Cisco itself, the members are Alcatel NV, British Telecommunications Plc, Cabletron Systems Inc, Cascade Communications Inc, Digital Equipment Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co, Infonet Inc, McData Inc, Netrix Inc, Proteon Inc, Sun Microsystems Inc's SunConnect and Synoptics Communications Inc.
The Forum has also outlined its goal of submitting a full specification of the technology to the influential Internet Engineering Task Force, IETF, by the middle of next year.
The group reckons that official approval will follow around two years later.
But the group's urgency is underlined by its statement that a product demonstration is scheduled for next August's Interop.
Presumably these will be reference implementations of the proposed standards that the IETF will be examining.
Joining fees have yet to be set, but the Forum says that it is particularly looking for users to join its efforts.
IBM RENEWS STRATUS OEM PACT
Stratus Computer Inc is moving its fault-tolerant Unix and VOS machines to the Hewlett-Packard Co Precision Architecture RISC from the Intel Corp 80860, but IBM Corp has just renewed its OEM agreement with Stratus, which dates back to 1985.
IBM sells the Stratus machines as System/88, but the new contract includes a cross-licensing agreement giving IBM and Stratus some rights to each other 's patents, suggesting that IBM may have designs on developing its own fault-tolerant Unix for the RS/6000.
The original OEM agreement was intended to be a stopgap while IBM developed its own fault-tolerant machines.
CHASTENED COGNOS SETS TO WORK PUTTING THE WHEELS BACK ON ITS WAGON
by Katy Ring
What is up at Cognos Inc?
The Ottawa, Ontario company looks as if it is beginning to falter by reporting second quarter losses of $1.1m on turnover down by 2% at $30m.
Company chairman Michael Potter blamed the slip on European performance and the Desktop Products division.
Rob Engels, UK managing director, referred to the loss as ‘minor’ and said the blame could not be laid at the UK's door as this subsidiary has exceeded its targets; rather it is continental Europe that is down on its figures.
Engels attributes this to there being too many chiefs and not enough  indians in the European operation.
A restructuring is under way— John McIntyre, vice-president of European Operations has gone, and Europe is now being split into two: the UK, where Engels has recently been appointed managing director, and the continent, where Terry Hall is coming in from the Australian operation to take charge.
To date chief executive Papows has managed to stop Cognos going into a terminal decline, but has yet to prove that he can lead the company into a higher growth pattern.
Instrumental to that type of growth is the company's penetration of the AS/400 and Unix markets.
Blaze of publicity
The company launched PowerHouse for the AS/400 in a blaze of publicity a couple of years ago, but has encountered problems that will be familiar to many software companies attempting to break into this market.
Firstly, the AS/400 is a pig of a machine for C-based tools vendors to work with, even with IBM's help, and performance has been a problem with the product.
This is being redressed in version 5.87, which has a complete new expression engine inside and is scheduled for release next month.
Secondly, the IBM Agent market does not welcome untried and untested (new) products with open arms, and Cognos has been attempting to prove itself in this market.
Its tactics up to now have been to in direct sales and in bringing existing value-added resellers (typically Hewlett-Packard Co, Digital Equipment Corp and Data General Corp channels) into the AS/400 market.
The slog, however, is slow and the ghost of RPG is proving hard to lay to rest.
As Engels puts it, despite having had a product for nearly two years, Cognos is still at the ‘toe in the water’ stage with the AS/400 market.
As for Unix, here Cognos has been able to make use of third parties (it has no direct sales force for Unix products) but says the going has been tough because of the recession as a PowerHouse Unix sale tends to occur with the new purchase of a Unix box with applications.
To try and address these problems, the New Business sales team, which has hitherto been organised around operating system environments, is to refocus on the requirements of specific industry sectors.
One slight problem that Cognos has created for itself with Unix in Europe is its failure to recognise those lucrative government markets where the national champion is often the favourite — to date Cognos has declined to serve the ICL Plc, Compagnie des Machines Bull SA and Siemens AG environments.
Engels says that Cognos is now in the early stages of negotiation with ICL and Bull and the company is engineering a Unix System V.4-compliant product that will make it economically more reasonable to appear on a wider variety of Unix environments.
Meanwhile, the problem with the Desktop Division, according to Engels, is that its targets were unrealistic for products that have not yet achieved critical mass.
This is being solved by getting the third-party channels to sell PowerPlay and Impromptu on a straight distribution basis rather than on a value-added basis.
All in all, the company believes it is in good shape and is positioned for growth.
At least it seems aware of where its problems lie, and that is a good start.
SHAKE-UPS AT INGRES AND SYBASE
ASK/Ingres and Sybase Corp have reportedly undergone management shake-outs and implemented restructuring initiatives in a move to  respond to the changing nature of the software industry.
Ingres is now under the firm charge of ex-DEC European chief and now ASK Group president Pier Carlo Falotti, replacing Dennis McGinn who has taken over responsibility for developing strategic partners for the company.
Falotti also plans to divide the business into two separate divisions — a database unit and one for software tools — later in the year.
In a similar move, Sybase has set up a tools technology group and a database unit.
Sybase executive vice president, Bob Epstein, will head up the the tools unit and Mark Pine, former Sybase vice president of engineering, will take charge of the database division.
The company has also established a Pan-European management division to manage its European interests under the charge of Peter Albers.
ALTOS HAS NETWARE FOR SCO
Acer Group Inc's San Jose, California-based, Altos Computer Systems division has branched out into software and introduced two packages designed to integrate Novell Inc NetWare with systems running Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix.
According to the company, Altos NetWare for SCO Unix is the first shrink-wrapped NetWare implementation for SCO platforms to hit the market.
The software sits on top of SCO's LLI driver suites and allows SCO Unix-based systems to operate as NetWare servers using Novell's IPX/SPX protocol.
An Altos NetWare for SCO Unix licence is priced from $3,000.
Also new is the Altos Application Executive (APEX), a front-end add-on for Windows 3.1 into SCO Unix.
Using UK, Leeds-based VisionWare Ltd's PConnect software, Altos has extended the the stuff to include the IPX/SPX protocol.
APEX allows users to hot link between Windows and Unix applications, enabling data to be cut and pasted from either environment.
Data updated in one environment will automatically be updated on the other, Altos says.
APEX for Windows 3.1 is priced from $1,200 to $12,000 depending upon the number of clients.
WIND RIVER DELIVERS MICROWORKS
Alameda, California-based, Wind River Systems Inc has now introduced its software development environment for high-performance embedded systems, MicroWorks 1.0.
The software was developed using the company's real-time kernel technology, VxWorks, which offloads Unix applications from the host via TCP/IP, Ethernet or NFS, to a standalone VME-based system to be executed in real-time (UX No 318).
According to Wind River, MicroWorks enables users to transparently develop applications on the Unix host with a view into the target embedded system.
The software incorporates a remote debugging tool called VxGDB at the host and a target debugging agent, VxMon.
The debuggers allow users to download and debug source code in real-time.
MicroWorks will be  available for Sun Microsystems Inc Sparc, Intel Corp i960, MIPS Technologies Inc R3000/R4000 and Motorola Inc 88000 architectures — support for IBM hosts will be added by the end of the year.
Currently in beta test, MicroWorks is scheduled for release the first quarter of 1993 — it is priced at $12,500.
RDI LAUNCHES SPARCSTATION IPC-BASED COLOUR PORTABLE AT $10,000
RDI Computer Corp, San Diego integrator of Unix portables, is going after the — relatively — low-cost colour portables market with the BriteLite IPC, which combines Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparcstation IPC motherboard with an active matrix thin film transistor colour display and a new 450Mb hard drive for $10,000.
The disk is a slimline 3.5’ unit and the machine comes standard with the 15.7 MIPS 25MHz CPU with 8Mb of main memory expandable to 48Mb, 3.5’floppy and 103-key keyboard with all the functions of a Sun-4 desktop workstation keyboard.
SYBASE MAPS OUT THE FUTURE WITH SYSTEM 10
Sybase Inc, Emeryville, California, has started talking about extending the client/server architecture of its relational database, and last week revealed its Enterprise Client/Server Roadmap.
Under the name Sybase System 10, the company will release a series of modular, integrated products over the course of the next year.
At the heart of System 10 sits the Sybase SQL Server 10 product, basically the core database server which the company has been shipping since 1987, and now out at around 5,000 sites worldwide.
New features include ANSI SQL89 compatibility, increased control and security features, and consistency checking and backup.
Added next year will be the Sybase Navigation Server, OmniSQL Gateway, Replication Server, and a number of Control Server products.
The Navigation Server, developed with the help of NCR Corp, extends the SQL Server to make large scale and multiple databases appear as a single virtual database.
It will exploit the power of massively parallel processing architectures, such as NCR's 3600.
OmniSQL Gateway provides location, vendor and stored procedure transparency to applications, and allows for the integration of existing applications within a multi-vendor database environment.
Replication Server will use a store and forward protocol to ensure networked transactions are completed in the event of system failures.
It should avoid the bottlenecks associated with two-phase commit, claims Sybase.
The Control Server family of products includes an SQL Monitor for the remote monitoring and tuning of client/server applications, a Configurator for capacity planning and design monitoring of databases, and a Backup Server for large database backup and recovery.
Beta testing starts during the first quarter of 1993, with commercial availability expected by year-end.
Current Sybase users under maintenance contract will receive the SQL Server 10 release and Backup Server free, other pricing not yet set.
OBJECTIME's REAL-TIME OBJECT TOOLS
Ottawa, Canada-based, ObjecTime Ltd, a Canadian Bell Northern Research Inc subsidiary, claims it has developed the first Unix object-oriented CASE tool for real-time applications, ObjecTime.
The company, which opened its doors for business a month ago, was spun-out to market the two year old BNR technology developed for the telecommunications market.
Headed up by ObjecTime president, Jim McGee, the company is staffed by 14 BNR ex-employees.
According to ObjecTime, the software allows users to create executable object analysis and design models graphically, without being committed to programming languages — C++ or ParcPlace Software Inc's SmallTalk — early on in application development.
This makes application specifications more modularised, flexible and easier to modify, it says.
ObjecTime features include TCP/IP network communication and object identify functions, object behaviour calls, inheritance, containment and encapsulation capabilities.
Vying for a position against the likes of Cadre Technologies Inc, ObjecTime says its tool — unlike TeamWork from Cadre Technologies — was initially developed as a real-time object CASE tool and is not a traditional CASE kit with object extensions.
The software is targeted at the telecommunications and aerospace markets.
ObjecTime is available on Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparcstations — support for Hewlett-Packard Co's HP 700s and IBM RS/6000s will be available first quarter 1993.
A single user licence costs $20,000 inclusive of training and a year's maintenance.
+1 613 591 381
PERSPECTA DEBUTS PRESENTATION SOFTWARE
Start-up Perspecta Software Inc, Berkeley, California, has introduced Perspecta Presents, a $300 presentation management package for Unix.
Wedging itself against DEC's DECpresents and Island Graphics Inc's IslandPresents, which go for $795 and $1,000 respectively — Perspecta says its looking to steal as much as 20% of the market away from its competitors.
Running under X Windows it includes word processing, graphics, imaging, multiple background functions, view graphs, and on-line slide shows.
The software also comes with a tool command language kit and a graphical user interface.
Scheduled for release by the end of the year, Perspecta Presents is available on DEC Ultrix, Hewlett-Packard Co's HP-UX, IBM AIX and Sun Microsystems Inc's SunOs platforms.
+1 510 649 4900
UNIX INTERNATIONAL FORMS MICROKERNEL WORK GROUP
Swearing that the deck isn't stacked in favour of Chorus Systemes SA, Unix International has assembled a Kernel Architecture Work Group including Amdahl Corp, Bellcore Technologies, Fujitsu Ltd, Hal Computer Systems Ltd, Intel Corp, Locus Computing Corp, Motorola Inc, NCR Corp, NEC, OSSI, Oracle Corp, Sequent Computer Systems Inc, Tandem Computers Inc, Unisys Corp and of course Chorus.
The Open Software Foundation and its sponsors IBM Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co and DEC have also been invited to participate.
Academics from Carnegie Mellon, Cornell, New York University, Stanford, UCLA, Yale and the UK's University of Newcastle, active in microkernel research, will provide input and review the work.
UI president Peter Cunningham said that in plotting the architectural direction of Unix for the mid 1990s the group will consider a number of object-oriented and microkernel technologies including Amoeba and Mach.
It seems there might be a move afoot to align the internal interfaces of Mach and Chorus and bring some compatibility to the microkernels.
The work group needs to address issues of time-to-market, value add, parallelisation, distributed nodal architecture, fault tolerance, high availability, interoperability, performance, reliability, scalability and serviceability.
Its timetable calls for it to have its requirements back to UI by next July.
Sun's micro-kernel views, see page 7.
AT&T BRINGS HOME ISDN CHIP
AT&T Microelectronics has bought back worldwide marketing rights in the ISDN chip it developed for Sun Sparcstation 10s and has contracted with CoSystems Inc to sell and support the widget.
Properly called the T7259, the chip supports desktop video and video teleconferencing, multimedia communications, screen sharing and collaborative work with remote users, voice mail/e-mail integration, computer-assisted telephony and ISDN fax.
AT&T wants to insure its proliferation.
CoSystems will handle volumes of up to 500 units.
It is priced at $95 in quantities of a thousand or more.
+1 408 748–2190
METAPHOR DEVELOPS UNIX DATABASE LINKS
Metaphor Computer Systems Inc, the company IBM bought off of Dave Liddle when it was setting up Taligent with Apple Computer Inc, is expected to enter the Unix arena this week by hooking its decision support software to the Sybase Inc and Red Brick databases.
The company has added the RS/6000 Database Gateway for Sybase SQL Server to its Data Interpretation System.
This gateway provides direct DIS network-attached access to Sybase bases on the IBM machine as well as on a variety of other hardware platforms and operating environments, DIS access to Sybase can be local, LAN-attached or remote.
The implementation is Sybase Open Client/Open Server-compliant, opening the door to other products meeting this standard to be accessed including Red Brick Systems' Warehouse database system.
METRON OFFERS OBJECT SOFTWARE FOR MULTI-PROCESSOR DEVELOPMENT
San Francisco self-funded start-up Metron Technology has been working for a year and a half to develop some innovative, object-oriented, automated testing and performance debugging software for developing multi-processor and distributed Unix applications.
They're still six months away from product reckoned to run initially on Sun 3s and 4s, Sparcs, RS/6000s and DECstations.
Metron is playing its card very close to its chest and won't say much about the software other than it doesn't emphasise regressive testing and will run on multithreaded operating systems.
It eventually expects to embrace implementations of parallel architectures.
The people involved are apparently drawing technical inspiration from Carnegie Mellon University's PI project.
The toolset will provide a development environment that facilitates complete observation of the software under test and a suite of analysis tools.
Its architecture is platform, operating system and compiler-independent and adaptable to multiple languages.
It will support C first, then C++.
Users should be able to customise the product and build user-specific testing, validation and diagnostic tools.
+1 415 696–8030
SHORTS
UK firm IXI Ltd, Cambridge, will have CD-ROM versions of its Motif-on-Sun software out at the beginning of next year and is looking to add session management functionality to X.desktop when it can.
Microsoft Corp says it is now shipping LAN Manager 2.1a for Unix Systems to OEM customers: the new version adds a Windows Network Administration program that gives administrators a unified tool for managing multiple servers from a Windows-based desktop, the LAN Manager Print Station that enables an MS-DOS- or Windows-based micro to be designated as a print server, and support for OS/2 2.0 clients.
Unix System Laboratories Inc, Summit, New Jersey has retained Software Leasing Corp to give customers up to 60 months to finance the initial licence fees for its products.
The Microprocessor Report has heard the rumours about NeXT planning to introduce an 88110-based box, but says ‘the relatively compatible bus and early silicon of the [IBM PowerPC]601 might cause them to switch.’
Univel Inc and its Novell Inc parent are sharing the same order entry system.
Since Novell's fiscal year closed on October 31, Univel didn't want to do anything to louse things up for Novell.
So it refrained from inputting any of the orders it received since UnixWare's debut until Monday November 2.
Meanwhile, Univel will be launching in the UK, France, Holland and Germany the week of November 16.
Still no localised versions of UnixWare until the first quarter of next year.
That same week the stuff should appear at 20 to 25 Comdex booths in Las Vegas including 10 OEMs.
Unisys should be one of them.
Sun Microsystems Inc and Kalpana Inc have cut a joint technology pact to develop products addressing network congestion on Ethernet networks spanning large numbers of high-speed workstations.
The agreement promises to leverage Kalpana's strengths in Ethernet switching technology to boost Sparcserver network performance and availability.
The companies said Kalpana-designed EtherSwitch technology can multiply Sun's server-to-server and server-to-network capacity by providing multiple dedicated 10Mbps connections to each Sun server or workgroup.
Amy Wohl, doyenne of the consulting set, who calls a well-positioned product a thing of beauty and just as rare, is kicking off a series of Positioning Workshops.
Topics include identifying available product positions, brainstorming, understanding the competition, pricing, distribution, validation, feedback, advertising, industry experts and influencers.
Enrolment will be limited to 35 participants.
Interaction is required.
Price is $800 a head with some discounts available.
Venues are: Atlanta in December, Boston in January and Santa Clara in February.
+1 215 667–4842
Integris, Billerica, Massachusetts, has added graphical user interface support for IBM Unikix applications integrating Easel Corp and Wall Data Inc's GUIs — Easel and Rumba respectively — as front-ends.
+1 508 294 7963
On Tuesday, Hewlett-Packard Co will announce a new suite of multimedia tools for the PA RISC 700 series workstations.
The tool kit designed for collaborative workgroup applications includes text video functions, teleconferencing, still picture and graphics capabilities.
Bill Gates says Microsoft Corp is looking to have Windows NT on all ‘popular RISC platforms by 1995,’ including Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparc, Hewlett-Packard Co's PA RISC and IBM's RS/6000s.
Things don't look so rosy for DEC's Alpha.
As expected, troubled hardware vendor DEC, has announced price cuts of between five and 47% on a wide range of products including workstation memory, networking, printers, X Window terminals and disk drives.
The company has essentially eliminated annual volume discounts for ‘commodity’ hardware products in favour of low-end pricing policies for its sales channels and end-users.
It has also scaled down payouts for redundancies, so as not to exceed the $1.5bn restructuring charge it was hit with two months ago.
Hewlett-Packard Co is likely to steal DEC's thunder and whisk away its number two position as the second largest computer vendor in the US by 1994, Hembricht & Quist analyst Robert Herwick says.
It's a bitter pill for DEC to swallow, with predictions tallying HP surging ahead with hardware revenues of $17.9bn compared to DEC with $14.3bn for the end of the fiscal year 1993.
IBM says it plans to ‘blow Intel out of the water’ at Comdex later this month where it will demo a 100Mhz high speed clone version of Intel Corp's 80486 microprocessor, Computer Reseller News reports.
IBM says the chips will roll-out sometime next year.
US distributor, Ingram Micro Inc, has paid up its membership fees and joined Unix International: UI is hungry for new distributors and ISVs to follow suit.
Unix System Labs is rumoured to be sitting on top of a major geopolitical deal that will hand USL its next joint venture and put Destiny on the long march to widespread government-backed adoption.
Reportedly the powers-that-be have settled on a replacement for Ed Palmer to run the Uniforum association of Unix users: the name we've heard is Richard Jarros, formerly of Data General Corp.
Microsoft Corp's managed to squeeze NT on to 14 diskettes, a sight fewer than the 32 for OS/2.
There are HALs or Hardware Architecture Layers for Acer, ALR, AST, Compaq, NCR, Olivetti, ICL and Wyse 486 machines.
Sun was expecting to deliver hundreds of Tsunami boxes around the world the first weekend in November and to have thousands going out the door the beginning of December.
Tsunamis will be able to run PC programs complements of Insignia's SoftPC.
The software will be available direct from SMCC as well as from Sun Express and SunSelect, sending a clear message it wants to be a one-stop shop for corporate customers.
Apparently Sun IPX and IPC boxes will be upgradeable to Tsunami-strength with a motherboard swop.
Sun intends to set up a Sun Integration Service as part of its field organisation as a way to create demand and route business to the system integrators it's partnering with.
It's meant to help customers plotting their first move into client/server.
It's also a way to exploit the pre-sales and sales support talent they have inside.
Sun will be getting parallelising technology from KAI that will decompose code and run it on multiple processors.
Sun will claim Dragon's architecture makes it the most expandable Unix server in the business, capable of piling on memory, I/O, disk and CPUs and clearing up a lot of the bottleneck issues.
Each of Dragon's dual-CPU systems board have an I/O channel or ten I/O channels to a 20-way machine.
Since each is an Sbus, four cards can be added in each for a total of 40 I/O channels in a fully rigged machine.
The X Business Group, the market research house, is trying to stir up support among vendors for another X consortium besides The X Consortium.
It seems the original X Consortium, scheduled to get a new director in January and slowly dissociate itself from MIT over the next year, isn't evolving fast enough into a fleet-footed marketing vehicle or even churning out saleable technology quickly enough to suit everybody.
That's where the proposal to set up an X Industry Association comes in.
They're out looking for seed money and a board now with a deadline of December.