

LACHMAN ASSOCIATES RE-EMERGES THROUGH INTERACTIVE SYSTEMS BUY
A few days before Christmas, Eastman Kodak dumped Interactive Systems Corporation, the half that was left after SunSoft bought its piece a year ago, into the lap of the Ottawa-based integrator SHL Systemhouse Inc for an undisclosed amount of money.
Then on December 31, right before they started ringing in the new tax year, executive vice president Ron Lachman wrote out a cheque to Systemhouse buying back the piece of Interactive that had originally been the most famous part of the old Lachman Associates (UX No 220).
He intends renaming this spin-out, so to speak, Lachman Technology Inc.
Lachman, who can now claim the distinction of selling his company twice and buying it back once, quipped that he has personally established a new executive benchmark, transactions per year (TPY), having sold Interactive to SunSoft, Praxis to SunSelect, Interactive to Systemhouse and having bought back Lachman, all in the space of the last twelve months.
The piece of Interactive that Lachman bought is its 17-year-old 60-man network software products and consulting operation, a revenue stream currently producing around $9.8m a year.
He intends continuing its work on Unix networking and the Unix file system and adding new products in Unix network file sharing and storage.
He thinks he can grow the business into a significant piece of change, much of it coming perhaps from the Microsoft arena where, as much as Lachman is a self-admitted Unix bigot, he knows he has to enter.
The rest of Interactive, consisting of its $20m-a-year end user business, OEM consulting and old Unix porting operation, goes to Systemhouse to be collapsed into the rest of its US integration business.
Details, page 3.
INTEL'S TROUBLED PENTIUM ‘IN SHORT SUPPLY ALL THIS YEAR’
Pentium chips will be on severe allocation throughout 1993 with no one company getting more than 5,000 or 10,000 units total, according to what Intel is telling its customers.
These kinds of quantities will only go to Intel's best customers.
Others will have to make do with deliveries in the tens or hundreds depending on who they are.
The allocation policy is apparently the result of production difficulties.
Sources however think that what will be delivered after the chip is finally announced, probably at the tail end of this quarter, will be the promised 66MHz units.
Intel has had difficulty getting working parts over 40MHz and even at that reduced speed the silicon produced so much heat it required a heat sink and a fan (UX No 410).
According to the current timetable, if development of Pentium's P6 successor chip stays on course, it could step on Pentium's toes.
Intel is therefore reportedly telling its OEMs that the P6 will be purposely held back from the market, despite its state of readiness, to allow them to recoup their investment in Pentium.
Last quarter Intel was openly talking about introducing the P6 at the end of ‘93 (UX 405).
Thanks to Intel's vigilance, P6 specs are hard to come by.
We hear they may be trying for 2.5 volts to reduce heat on the part.
Interestingly, as we went to press, Intel stock had spiked 15 points in three days, some of it on the strength of a strong buy recommendation from Merrill Lynch, whose analysis underscored the strong demand for Pentiums.
NOVELL ‘NOT ALONE IN ITS BID FOR AT&T’
Novell wasn't AT&T's only chance to sell Unix off.
At least one other investment group was raring to go.
In fact they expected to meet with USL chairman Bob Kavner and lay their money on the table the week before Christmas, only to be caught off guard by the Novell announcement.
Reportedly they were ready to plunk down $426m, a figure Kavner pulled from the air at the end of a previous meeting when they offered $385m.
This group — and there were some sterling institutions reportedly among the participants — would have trimmed USL down to its core operating system, dumped the loss-making language sector, sold off the $5m-a-year Tuxedo line that some insiders consider a crown jewel and cut back on ES/MP which everybody wanted and no one is buying.
Along with the products would have gone a lot more of the people than USL cut loose right before it got bought.
It will be interesting to see if Novell comes to any of the same business decisions once it takes over.
Full analysis — pages 2, 4 and 5.
SEQUENT IN NT SUPERSERVER PARTNERSHIP
Sequent Computer Systems Inc and a still-unidentified partner are developing a five-member Pentium-based symmetric multiprocessor line that Sequent will reportedly offer as a software development, application server and database platform for Windows NT.
Sources who have gotten wind of the project claim it is important to Microsoft's efforts to push NT into the enterprise.
An announcement, perhaps blessed by Microsoft, is expected the last week in January.
Sequent determined some months ago that it should expand into the MP/PC superserver business based around NT (UX No 392).
It publicly demonstrated the first NT/SMP version running on a 16-processor Symmetry back in August to help Microsoft allay reports that NT's SMP capabilities are severely limited and would require heavy re-architecting.
The operating system however does require significant tailoring to run on SMP machines and Corollary is working to simplify the problem for a shrinkwrapped SMP NT (UX No 400).
Sequent's new hardware will not appear on the market until Microsoft releases NT.
It will be OEM'ing the three lower end boxes in the line from its partner under an arrangement that will give Sequent an exclusive in the NT space.
These boxes will apparently be EISA-based and extend to six processors.
Wyse and AST Research have been mentioned as possible candidates — Sequent's name has long been mentioned in conjunction with AST (UX No 371)— but most likely candidate appears to be Minneapolis, Minnesota-based Tricord Systems Inc.
Sequent is believed to be shooting for well-tailored packaging, expandability and competitive pricing.
The two larger machines are being developed by Sequent internally.
NT currently supports a maximum 16 processors, although Sequent has been working with Microsoft to extend it to 32 (UX No 400).
Sequent could start by offering Pentium upgrades to its current 486 machines and then move over to the new line.
Unix lines will continue.
UNIX WARS — NOVELL's NOORDA COULD BE THE MAN WHO FINALLY BRINGS IT ALL TOGETHER
For the first time ever Unix is teetering on the brink of real consolidation, with all its hopes focused on a humble billionaire businessman who wears $180 suits, plays golf with $90 clubs from a discount outlet and bought Unix in time for Christmas.
It's as though that's exactly the present the industry was hoping to find under the tree.
More than just buying an operating system and securing a future for Novell, Noorda — a man held in high regard by a wide cross section of industry executives — takes on the expectations of all those seeing him as a Moses figure capable of stitching up the highly personalised wounds inflicted during the Unix wars and the aborted peace attempts.
DEC perhaps captured the expectation best: ‘Do you think he could buy himself a plane ticket and go on a personal tour of all of us — IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Sun Microsystems Inc, DEC — and bring us together in kind of an Open Software Foundation II with all of the chief executives on the same  dais saying the past is behind us?’
The image is vivid, particularly so for end users who have begged the industry for years to consolidate, only to be ignored, then forced to retaliate by not buying.
And it's not just important to DEC who freely admits its whole strategy is dependent on a unified Unix and desperately needs last year's deal between OSF and USL on common Application Programming Interfaces to come to fruition.
Hewlett-Packard says the only thing that makes Unix questionable at all is that there is more than one version.
For the first time companies seem willing to bend a bit, maybe even give up a cherished shibboleth or two.
Even Sun, which prides itself on its ‘belligerent consistency’ or sometimes just on its belligerence, said it could see itself negotiating issues.
NCR is talking about seizing the opportunity to form an effective user group that includes systems companies and customers.
Novell has become famous for the way it manages its relationships and believes that relationships are the way to conduct business.
But on the other hand, as much as Novell might be just the right tug boat to guide Unix to safe harbour, much of the industry's optimism stems from the fact that Unix is no longer in AT&T's hands.
The hurts of the last years run so deep they just could not be solved with AT&T involved.
HP vice president Wim Roelandts said flatly that it was because of the bad feelings built up when Vittorio Cassoni was running Unix that Unix isn't the dominant operating system today.
As AT&T's Bob Kavner, soon to be USL's erstwhile chairman, says Novell's purchase takes the emotions out, leaving people to get on to the real issues.
Maureen O'Gara.
MERGER DETAILS MUST NOW BE AGREED
USL and Novell now have to work out a definitive merger agreement which includes defining exactly how free-standing and independent a subsidiary USL will be in the future.
Doubtless insiders are writing white papers and politicking their points of view and doubtless Mr Noorda, reputedly a pit bull in business, will have his prevailing view.
However, things are apparently still up in the air and OEMs are expected to gang up on the doorstep to get their two cents in.
Otherwise, the lawyers have to sort out things like what rights are retained by shareholders, access to new revisions, compensation plans, employment contracts, shared AT&T/USL patents, pension plans and whether USL employees still have a right to go back to work at AT&T, an enticement used to get them to go to USL in the first place.
One thing Novell needs to avoid is internal conflict over what it sells — otherwise it gets into DEC's position of having Unix on the books, but preferring to push its proprietary offerings.
TALKS ‘ON AND OFF FOR A YEAR’, SAYS KAVNER
USL chairman, AT&T executive Bob Kavner, says he talked with Ray Noorda on and off over the last year about acquiring USL.
Initially at least it wasn't what Kavner had in mind.
Sometimes they went for two months without talking.
Kavner isn't clear as crystal on what exactly changed his mind — though he claims it wasn't the money — and claims not to know what persuaded Noorda to push it in November when it all started to happen.
Kavner says he assumes Noorda and company had been evaluating their options all along and finally decided to spend their resources on USL.
Kavner figures that with the amount of money Noorda is spending he'll be pretty careful how he treats USL.
BULLISH MICROSOFT PLAYS THE NUMBERS GAME
Forty-eight hours after the Novell-buys-Unix announcement, Microsoft was out telling folks like The Wall Street Journal that it would sell more than a million copies of Windows NT the first year after it comes out.
Microsoft didn't fail to make the point that it expects to take market share away from Novell because NT includes networking while at the same time trouncing Unix.
It said it had sold 38,000 NT developers' kits to date.
It's also telling people it was expecting to have an installed Windows 3.1 base of more than 8m systems at the end of ‘92.
A Microsoft spokesman pointed to Novell's acquisition of DRDOS developers Digital Research, now almost completely subsumed within Novell, and predicted Unix would go the same way.
He also claimed that high-end multi-processor and security features would be delayed by Novell concentrating on the desktop.
SUN AND SCO EVALUATE THEIR POSITIONS
Sun Microsystems president Scott McNealy was warned off making any trouble over the USL/Novell merger the morning of the announcement by AT&T.
Perhaps that's why when Unigram.X spoke to him about it later that day he put a surprisingly good face on (UX No 417).
Still it's hard to believe the young warlord won't rattle around in his armoury for just the right mace.
Reportedly McNealy was the only one on the list of major USL customers contacted that day to squawk.
The industry seems to think that Novell is now as much of a threat to Sun as the Open Software Foundation was.
The Santa Cruz operation is another player potentially sidelined by the merger.
Its recent moves to begin a reconciliation with Unix System Labs (UX No 413) now look more urgent than ever.
INDUSTRY GIVES THUMBS UP TO THE MERGER
Other industry reaction was mostly positive.
Unisys Corp, ICL and DEC were all very happy to see Unix out of the hands of AT&T/NCR.
IBM would not comment, but aside from the position of OS/2, it wins on the deal through its existing collaboration with Novell announced early last year.
HP has also been getting close to Novell, and has been working on a NetWare implementation for its PA-RISC chip a move ahead of other players.
Unix International spokesman Dave Sandel said he took at face value assurances that USL would honour its commitments to customers.
The UI Roadmap, due to be revealed on February 11–12 at the UI members meeting in post — Mardi Gras New Orleans, remains unchanged — it details both OEM wants and USL development commitments for future Unix technology.
SEQUOIA SEEKS A BUYER AS HEWLETT-PACKARD WALKS AWAY
Another would-be user of the Precision Architecture RISC, Marlborough, Massachusetts-based Sequoia Systems Inc has retained Broadview Associates LP as its financial advisor for its pursuit of a sale of all or part of Sequoia.
Hewlett-Packard Co, which markets Sequoia's 68040-based fault-tolerant Unix machines as the HP 9000 Series 1200 line, has already backed off from investing new money to protect its investment in the company, where it holds an 8% stake.
Under terms of the agreement, Broadview will contact potential acquirers to ascertain their interest in investing in, or acquiring Sequoia, will participate in negotiations on behalf of Sequoia, and make recommendations for possible transactions with potential investors.
Financing for Sequoia is necessary because of reduced revenues and operating losses during the past two quarters, and its default under its bank credit arrangement and liquidity difficulties.
Samsung Electronics Co, Seoul, South Korea is Sequoia's other major business partner.
After the most recent lay-off, which saw staff fall to 175 from 250, Sequoia says its Precision Architecture project will be late, but only by six months.
HEWLETT-PACKARD ‘IN TALKS WITH NEXT’ SAYS NEW YORK TIMES
Hewlett-Packard Co has been holding talks with Steve Jobs' NeXT Inc about licensing the NeXTstep environment, according to a report last week in the New York Times.
The report, citing three unidentified executives familiar with the talks, says that discussions originally extended to the possibility of HP making an investment in NeXT, and NeXT adopting HP's PA-Architecture RISC chip.
These options were rejected by HP, however.
HP is also known to be weighing up Microsoft Corp's NT, and the Apple/IBM Taligent venture.
Most recently, however, it has been closest to Sun Microsystems on object-oriented technology, collaborating on the Distributed Objects Everywhere project.
HP appears to have pretty much given up on its own object-oriented New Wave environment for Unix.
NeXT, as ever, told Reuters that this is just one of a number of licensing deals it is discussing.
It also said that its proposed  flotation has been held back to late this year or early next.
SYSTEMHOUSE TAKES INTERACTIVE OFF EASTMAN KODAK'S HANDS
SHL Systemhouse, the new owner of the remains of Interactive Systems Corp — now minus the Lachman technology piece (see front page)— is targeting client/server computing and what it calls transformational outsourcing through its new buy, thinking competitor Anderson Consulting may be asleep at the switch.
The Ottowa-based company has made a dramatic comeback from the brink of financial disaster the last couple of years.
Now in the hands of a new management group and with Bell Canada a 25% shareholder, the 3,500-man company, while not yet solvent, claims 1992 revenues of $739m Canadian.
Losses for the year ended August 31 netted out to $9.5m Canadian versus $19.9m Canadian the year before.
Eastman Kodak put Interactive on the block at least six months ago because it did not fit its core business interests.
Interactive managers such as president Ben Salama and marketing vice president Ezra Goldman, both of which go with Systemhouse, were anxious to find a new owner because they could not depend on Kodak to provide the resources and critical mass needed to grow the business.
Interactive, headquartered in Naperville, Illinois and with lines into accounts such as Motorola, Swiss Bank and AT&T, will function as the hub of Systemhouse's midwest region.
Interactive's work with Kodak, recently helping to develop its new Photo CD product, will continue as far as several large imaging projects go.
DEC PLANS LOW-COST ALPHA FOR X-TERMINALS…
There's an Ultra Low Cost (ULC) Alpha chip in the works at Digital Equipment Corp targeted at X Windows terminals, palmtops and embedded applications, according to the ‘Terry Shannon on DEC’ newsletter that arrived on our desk on Christmas Eve.
Shannon figures it's a 3W AXP implementation intended to run at 58.8 MHz and produce 40 SpecMarks.
He also claims DEC and an unidentified partner are busy squeezing it into one of these new-fangled personal digital assistants or PDAs.
He calls the widget a mainframe-compatible palmtop and hand-warmer in one.
He thinks the ULC will also find a home inside the projected DECwindows Terminal III, DEC's first RISC-based X Windows terminal.
With the chip stripped of floating point processor, large caches and TurboChannel/EISA controller support, he says Terminal III could be the first AXP platform under $2,000.
multi-architecture VMS
Terry Shannon also suspects that R&D cutbacks at DEC are threatening its two-year-old effort to produce an architecture-independent version of OpenVMS.
He says the project appears to be on indefinite hold.
The sacrifice may be part and parcel of the wholesale downsizing of DEC's software empire now under consideration and another reason for software vice president Dave Stoneto have fled (UX No 411).
Such plans, which could put some software in maintenance mode and some in the morgue, don't appear to have affected DEC's flagship database Rdb which is reportedly being rewritten in C for OSF/1 and may also get ported to Windows NT.
…
AS DEC SETS MAJOR RESTRUCTURING
A floundering DEC, now with six consecutive losing quarters blotting its once-sterling record, divided itself into nine strategic business units, as promised by its new president, a few days before Christmas.
It is organising around five industry-oriented units and four products and services units.
The first include: Health Industries; Discrete Manufacturing & Defense Industries; Communications, Education & Entertainment Industries; Consumer & Process Manufacturing Industries; and Financial, Professional & Public Services Industries.
The four product units are PCs; Components & Peripherals; Storage; and Multivendor Customer Services.
Five of the unit chiefs were also named including: Lawrence Cabrinety, VP Components; Charles Christ, VP Storage; Frank McCabe, VP Discrete Manufacturing; John Rando, VP Multivendor; and Willow Shire, VP Health.
Restructuring of course has done nothing yet for DEC's oldest competitor and fellow sufferer IBM.
Responsibility for hardware and operating systems now belongs to vice president Bill Demmer.
DEC has collapsed once free-standing fiefdoms dedicated to Unix and NT, VMS, VAXs, microVAXs and workstations under him.
Demmer is now clearly responsible for the engineering of all these products.
However it is still unclear what DEC will do with the marketing arms attached to these units.
Demmer has shifted Steve Jenkins, who had run Alpha Unix, to head up all Unix engineering, replacing Glenn Johnson who will now handle Unix product management and strategy.
A DEC spokesman explained Jenkins' appointment by saying that, although the company will continue to support such non-standards as SCO Unix, it is striving for a single Unix thread built around OSF/1.
Jesse Lipcon, who managed the Entry Systems Business Group and fathered the microVAX, is now responsible for NT engineering reporting to Demmer.
Demmer in turn reports to VP Bill Strecker.
AT&T, NOVELL, AND THE SHRINK-WRAPPED SELL OUT
Harley Hahn and Rick Stout
The recent letter of intent signed by AT&T and Novell in which they revealed their plans for AT&T to sell Unix System Laboratories (the home of System V Unix) is of enormous importance.
No one doubts that the move will have significant lasting effects on the world of Unix and its relations.
The big question is, what is likely to happen?
In this analysis, we will look at this acquisition from both financial and technical viewpoints.
We will show you some startling figures and elucidate some of the hidden motivations behind the scenes.
In addition, we will discuss the trepidations in the technical community and offer our opinions as to whether these reservations are well founded.
To start, let's quickly recap the details.
In early 1990, AT&T consolidated its Unix operations into a division called Unix System Operation.
In April 1991, they spun off this division into a separate company named Unix System Laboratories.
At first, all the USL stock was owned by AT&T, but, later in the year, AT&T sold a minority interest to other carefully selected companies.
At this time, AT&T owns 77% of the outstanding stock, Novell owns 5%, and 11 other companies (including Sun Microsystems) own the other 18%.
Novell proposes to buy out all the USL stockholders in order to own USL outright.
But, rather than pay cash, Novell will issue about 1.1 million new shares of Novell stock and trade them for existing USL stock.
No real money will change hands (we will see why in a moment).
But when all is said and done, AT&T will be left sitting with stock valued at $100m more than its current USL holdings.
AT&T will own 3% of Novell's common stock but, according to Robert Kavner (AT&T Group Executive for Communications Products), they have ‘no plans to be involved in USL or Novell's operations or business decisions.’
What Novell promises
Novell promises not to change the fundamental orientation of USL.
The official Novell/AT&T press release says: ‘Novell recognizes and values the importance of UNIX as an open accessible technology to OEM partners and customers around the world.
As part of Novell, USL's commitment to fair and neutral access to UNIX technology will not change.’
On the other hand, in another part of the press release, Ray Noorda (the President and CEO of Novell) makes a conflicting observation: ‘This acquisition is being done at the urging of customers who have asked us to support the UNIX system directly and integrate it more fully within the Netware environment.’
(Is there anyone who actually believes that Novell decided to buy USL at the urging of Novell's customers?
If so, we have some IBM stock options that you might like to buy.)
The USL Numbers
AT&T is fond of saying that USL has annual revenues ‘in excess of $80 million dollars.’
In fact, the 1992 revenues were $91m.
But, revenues are not profit.
How much, if anything, does USL make from that $91m?
Is Unix is a profitable business?
USL is not a public company and they have chosen not to release their financial figures.
However, we were able to obtain the results for 1989 through 1991, and they do not paint a pretty picture.
The annual net revenues increased from $58m (1989), to $70m (1990) to $77m (1991).
However, during the same time, expenses increased dramatically.
Research and development went from $28m (1989), to $30m (1990), to $45m (1991), while sales and marketing expenses increased even more: $14m (1989), $17m (1990) and $26m (1991).
The most revealing numbers are the net income.
In 1989, USL made $4m on revenues of $58m.
In 1990, they made only $3m on revenues of $70m.
And in 1991, the last year for which we have data, USL sunk deeply into the red, losing $29m dollars on revenues of $77m.
The retained earnings (cumulative profit and loss) were $4.7m at the end of 1990 and -$24m at the end of 1991.
On Dec 31, 1991, USL had $100m in assets, of which $46m was cash.
Whatever is left of these assets will, of course, be taken over by Novell.
Although the 1992 results are not public, a highly-placed source at USL tells us that they did make a small profit last year (on revenues of $91m).
Moreover, they still have more than $40m in cash.
The Novell Numbers
By just about any standard, Novell is a strong company.
At the end of their 1992 fiscal year (Oct 31), they had total assets of $1097m, of which $260m was cash.
Moreover, their liabilities were low.
The total current liabilities were $149m, the minority interest was $8.9m, while the long-term debt was, remarkably, only $0.5m.
All this yields a shareholder's equity of $938m (about 86% of total assets) which gives a low debt to equity ratio of 17%.
Or, to put it in plain English, Novell is a wealthy company with negligible long-term debt and almost $260m cash.
Why is the deal structured as it is?
A company like Novell, with such tremendous assets, has several choices when it comes to an acquisition.
They can pay cash, out of their own reserves or by borrowing.
In fact, Novell has the leverage to do just about anything it wants.
Why then, did they choose to issue new stock to buy USL?
Our answer is that they bought it for no money down because there were able to.
Although they could afford to pay real money for USL, they were well aware that it was losing money and AT&T was highly motivated to make the sale.
You may remember that AT&T's original intention in setting up USL was to one day spin it off as a separate company.
It seems that USL could not stand on its own and AT&T's only alternative was to sell it.
Now, how many companies can afford to buy an ailing operating system concern?
Although Novell could have depleted its reserves to make the purchase, why should they?
By simply issuing new shares (which, in turn, diluted the equity of the current Novell shareholders), they could have their cake, eat it, and keep their wealth.
From AT&T's side the Novell offer is a godsend.
True, they do not get any cash, but they get a big chunk of valuable stock and, most important, they get to leave the Unix business and stop supporting the big white Unix elephant.
Do you think it bothers AT&T to jettison Unix?
Remember Kavner's remark: AT&T has ‘no plans to be involved in USL or Novell's operations or business decisions.’
In our minds, AT&T wanted out and Novell was the White Knight.
And when White Knights offer stock instead of cash, you don't quibble.
What's good for Netware…?
The technical community that uses Unix on a day to day basis has some valid concerns.
For example, much of the Unix community is used to flexible networking under the openness of the TCP/IP umbrella.
Although Novell does support TCP/IP in its UnixWare offering, the mainstay for its networking (and the bulk of its business) is provided by Netware's IPX/SPX protocols.
Moreover, NFS, widely used in the world of Unix for resource sharing, can be viewed as a competitor to Netware.
The main concern, however, is an overriding apprehension that what's good for Netware may not be good for Unix.
True, Novell seems to be promising that life will go on much as usual.
But there is no gainsaying the fact that Novell is a publicly-owned company whose primary responsibilities are to its shareholders.
Novell has no compelling reason (nor should it have) to keep on paying for the fuel that burns in the Unix flame.
In the long run, Novell must make a profit with USL and, if past performance is any indication, they will make a profit, no matter what it takes.
As Larry Lytle, the main spokesman for USL puts it: ‘USL understands that it is naive to believe that in any merger nothing changes.
The question is what will change and what will remain unchanged?
You can expect that Novell is going to run this as a business and is going to want USL to be profitable.
It is going to have a great deal of influence on the future of Unix because it is going to influence, for example, how we spend our money on research and development.’
Conflicts of interest
All of which create some interesting conflicts of interest.
For instance, what about all the companies that use Unix to build products that compete against Novell?
They will now have to license Unix from Novell in order to compete against them.
For example, the Vines operating system from Banyan, a direct competitor of Netware, is based on Unix.
Every time Banyan sells an operating system, some of the money will go to Novell.
There are many more companies that depend on their Unix licences just to build their products.
It would be unrealistic to not expect to pay higher royalties in the foreseeable future.
After all, USL has trouble making money, but USL under Novell will have to make money.
Moreover, we should assume that future decisions about Unix will have to take into account what is good for Novell.
Does this mean that System V-based companies should be concerned about their future?
Absolutely.
Maybe not today, or even six months from now, but somewhere down the road the interests of Novell will not coincide with the Unix world at large.
It is unrealistic to expect Novell to spend money to develop Unix for the good of everybody at the expense of their own company.
New opportunities
Much has been made of the threat that Microsoft and NT might pose to Unix.
The combination of Novell and Unix, the refrain goes, has a much better chance of countering this threat than USL by itself.
However, such observations ignore the fact that a small but significant share of the marketplace is best served by Unix no matter what Microsoft is up to.
The many Unix VAR's and resellers should probably be more concerned with the loss of a stable, independent source for Unix than with an imaginary NT monster.
What we see is a brand new opportunity for OSF which, after all, offers the only large-scale alternative for a vendor-independent Unix-like operating system.
It would be prudent for those Unix vendors who have not already made the switch to take a strong look at OSF.
There is also an important opportunity for the Mark Williams company, who sells their Unix-like operating system (Coherent) for $99.
Coherent can run System V binaries and may provide a viable, inexpensive basis for VAR's who sell vertical applications.
Winds of Change
Although we can't predict the future in detail, we can say that the winds of change are blowing ever more strongly.
Novell is so rich that the Unix acquisition is relatively small potatoes.
One way or the other, they can afford to do whatever they want.
The financial results for USL seems to indicate that supplying System V to the world is not a good way to make money.
If so, there is no reason to expect Novell to keep subsidizing Unix out of altruism.
The trouble is that we live in a part of the world in which many people depend on Unix — not to fight Microsoft and NT, but to earn their living — and there are too many unknowns.
As we see it, the onus falls squarely on the shoulders of Ray Noorda.
As Novell consummates the deal with AT&T, there should be guarantees made as to the future of Unix.
These guarantees should be in writing and should be made public.
Moreover, Noorda must finally set up a line of succession and give us some indication of how Novell (and Unix) will function when he bows out.
It's not that Novell has any moral or financial obligation to be the keeper of the Unix flame.
It's just that people have to make plans.
Vague, contradictory statements of intent are not enough.
It certainly  behoves companies dependent on System V to reevaluate their future.
Harley Hahn is an analyst and writer based in Santa Barbara, California.
He is the author of many books including ‘A Student's Guide to Unix’, published by McGraw-Hill College Division.
Rick Stout, CPA, is an analyst and writer based in San Diego, California.
With Hahn, he is the author of ‘Power Shortcuts, Quattro Pro from Windows’, published by MIS Press.
X/OPEN LOSES OKI — BUT HOPES TO GAIN NOVELL
While X/Open Co Ltd welcomed Novell Inc's letter of intent to buy Unix System Labs Inc, it was apparently not impressed enough to let them carry over USL's membership by default.
According to X/Open, it is looking forward to re-negotiating  membership terms with Novell — and more to the point membership fees.
X/Open said it very much hopes Novell will join its menagerie, but hinted it would have to pay a significant amount for the pleasure.
The actual terms of the membership have not been revealed, so it is unclear whether Novell will purchase two memberships or keep USL's membership with a re-negotiated fee.
Further details were unavailable at press time, as X/Open staff worldwide were taking part in a brainstorming session, somewhere in the wilds of Devon in the UK.
But the organisation may be in dire need of the fee following Oki Data Electric Industry Co decision to leave the X/Open consortium over Christmas.
The company said it could no longer afford the £320,000 membership fee and claimed open systems standards were widely enough accepted for it to leave.
Oki also announced that it is changing its membership within Unix International from an official member to a general member.
WAVETRACER SHUTS HARDWARE BUSINESS
Wavetracer Inc, the Acton, Massachusetts-based manufacturer of low-end massively parallel processing systems, has closed down its hardware business after investors pulled the plug and refused to invest further  capital .
Wavetracer launched its deskside single instruction multiple data (SIMD) data transport computer system a year ago (UX No 379), discontinuing its old custom one-bit systems at the same time.
But it suffered from aggressive marketing by established players such as Cray Research Inc and Convex Computer Corp, and has now laid off ‘a large percentage’ of its workforce, and shut down sales, marketing, manufacturing and support operations.
Support for the 35 Zephyr systems out in the field is likely to be sold off or sub-contracted out.
It now hopes for a future in the software design and systems integration market for massively parallel systems, but aside from an image processing library has no obvious product ready, and would not elucidate further.
It expects to present a new business plan to its board by the end of the month.
Whether the investors are prepared to support the migration to software remains uncertain.
AGE SHIPS FIRST 32-BIT X-SERVER FOR NT
Pre-empting the release of Microsoft Corp's NT later this year, San Diego, California-based based Age Logic Inc begins shipping its 32-bit X-Window server software for Windows 3.1 this week, claiming to be first on the market.
Based on MIT's X11R5 server code, Xoftware/32 for Windows 3.1 enables users to concurrently run and display Microsoft Windows and X Window applications on the same personal computer, and includes automated host login through an icon, a multi-process start-up system for opening multiple clients simultaneously, automatic font substitution and a graphics slide scale.
Age hopes its early move will gain it market support ahead of competitors such as Leeds, UK-based Visionware Ltd and Ontorio, Canada-based Hummingbird Communications Ltd, both of whom intend to release similar 32-bit products once NT emerges.
But a Visionware official said ‘there doesn't seem to be much point shipping a 32-bit designed piece of software to run in a 16-bit environment.
Users will find requests take much longer in normally very simple operations.’
The main problem lies in the amount of translation the software will have to do to read the 32 and 16-bit system calls both at the software and network level, Visionware said.
Xoftware/32 is available now, and is priced at $595.
PEREGRINE ADDS MANAGEMENT TOOLS
Peregrine Systems Inc has extended its PNMS mainframe management software with a new component — PNMS Client/Server — to tackle multi-vendor Unix machine management as well as IBM Corp MVS mainframes.
Andrew Walley, UK sales director of the California-based company, says PNMS was developed on a Unix machine in 1980 but commercialised for MVS because the Unix market was still immature.
He says the launch of PNMS Client/Server follows management problems experienced by IBM mainframe sites with their integrated Unix systems.
The product runs on IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Sun and Sequent Unix servers or on the mainframe, and Peregrine plans to support all Unix versions.
It incorporates PNMS features such as financial management and Help Desk facilities.
At the low end, PNMS Client/Server supports multiple workstations and personal computers running X Windows, Motif, OpenLook and MS Windows.
Walley claims a unifying tool in a mixed environment is needed because ‘it's too expensive to support individual parallel worlds’.
PNMS has 15 UK customers, 400 worldwide.
Peregrine is aiming to have 10 UK PNMS Client/Server customers by end 1993.
Pricing starts at 35,000.
AMDAHL'S HURON HELPS DOWNSIZERS
Amdahl Corp appears to be positioning its Huron application development environment as an escape route for downsizers moving from the mainframe.
The company says Huron does have a role as a migration tool for both UTS Unix and MVS mainframe applications moving down to mid-range Unix platforms, including its own multi-processing Unix machines currently under development.
Amdahl hopes to eventually supplement its dwindling mainframe income with revenue from these Sparc-based machines, expected to ship at the end of 1993.
These will replace Amdahl's moribund 7300 Unix machines, according to Ken Gorf, Amdahl's UK marketing manager.
However, Peter Bakalov, US vice president of Huron marketing, said downsizing was only one aspect of Huron's role.
He said the whole message of Huron was platform independence and the ability to develop applications in one environment, then port them to another.
Developed for MVS mainframes, Huron has already been ported to Intel 80486 machines, with an IBM RS/6000 version due in the first half of this year.
Despite the company's $24m third quarter loss, Bakalov said the company's core business remains with mainframes.
Amdahl favours a mix of technology, integrating mainframes with multi-processing Sparc systems rather than ditching mainframes altogether.
Bakalov said Huron version 1.18, expected in Q2 1993, will support Motif for the first time as well as the RS/6000, improved buffers support for larger numbers of terminals, Oracle server (Unix) and DB server(MVS).
IBM TO SHIP DCE PRODUCTS THIS MONTH
IBM's first Distributed Computing Environment-compliant products combined with its partner Transarc Corp's Encina transaction processing system are due to be shipped by the end of this month — but without IBM's Distributed File System component.
The software will initially run on both client and server IBM RS/6000 AIX-based systems, with other platforms to follow.
The software includes Base Services/6000, which supplies the basic DCE functions such as remote procedure call and threads for multi-processing, and also DCE cell directory server and security server software.
The Encina-based transaction processing modules sit on top IBM's DCE services as a server component, allowing users to develop their own transaction manager or integrate IBM's CICS/6000 TP manager.
Encina services include two-phase commit, a structured file server, a transaction monitor and client-to-host communications.
A key feature missing from the list is IBM's DFS Distributed File System which, it says, won't be available until June.
According to IBM, DFS — which enables an assortment of files on a network to look and act as if they were local — is up and running in the labs and is scheduled for beta test by the end of the first quarter.
IBM cites rescheduling problems as the reason for the delay.
The price of the base DCE license costs from between $150-$2,400 depending on the number of components chosen.
Encina modules are priced at between $400 to $1,800 for low end RS/6000 machines and reaching to $3,200 — $14,000 at the high end.
Both the DCE and Encina software have annual license fees as well.
AT&T NOVELL COOPERATE ON TELEPHONY
Aside from the USL/Novell merger, AT&T and Novell have also reached a separate agreement to co-market products that link their core businesses: computer networks and business phones.
Novell said its discussions with AT&T over USL led the two companies to consider this and several other areas of synergy, which they declined to innumerate.
The tie-up could send a chill through Bill Gates since it gives Novell an interesting point of entry to the enterprise.
The technology will take advantage of existing phones systems and computer networks and won't require wiring or new boards to connect the each phone and micro.
Telephony Services will be accessible from MS-DOS, Windows, OS/2, Macintosh and Unix.
First products are due this year.
McDONNELL DOUGLAS LETS INFORMATION SYSTEMS ARM GO IN A BUYOUT
McDonnell Douglas Corp has given up on its idea of floating its McDonnell Douglas Information Systems International Ltd Pick and Pick-under-Unix business on the London International Stock Exchange, and instead has agreed in principle to sell it to its management, who will retain effective day-to-day control, backed by a few blue-chip investors including Baring Capital Investors Ltd.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed, but observers say the deal must be worth over £200m.
Originally structured around the old Microdata Pick-compatible systems business, the Hemel  Hempstead company is now primarily a systems integrator, software and services company, buying up to 70% of its hardware from OEMs such as Encore Computer Corp.
It employs about 1,800, 1,300 in the UK, and also operates in continental Europe and the Pacific Rim.
It has been profitable on annual turnover of about £180m — $270m — over the past few years.
Flotation is still not out of the picture, with 1994 being forecast as the big year.
Three major new products, based on rapid application development environments, are on the cards, comprising a payroll and personnel system; an international banking system, and an object-oriented fourth generation language.
They are aimed at customers migrating from IBM Corp mainframes to client-server environments.
The software runs on IBM AS/400s and mainframes, DEC VAXes, and any version of Unix System V. No staff will be lost, and the company will still invest about 13% of its revenues on the research and development of applications software for its niche markets — which in the UK are the National Health Service, central and local government, the police force, plus libraries and banks.
IBM ‘TO CREATE TWO PARALLEL RS/6000 PRODUCT LINES’
Circumscribed by the injunction — voiced or not, that the machines built around it should not pose a threat to IBM Corp's proprietary product lines, the designers of the Power RISC created a chip that was heavily slewed towards scientific and technical applications — but the IBM world has changed out of all recognition since then and the RS/6000 is at least as widely used in commercial applications as in technical, while IBM is finding it increasingly hard to sell proprietary systems.
Accordingly, reports the January edition of our sister publication in the UK, IBM System User, the company is planning to come out with parallel lines of RS/6000s, with the present models and their derivatives assuming a T for Technical subscript, while a new line, based on versions of the PowerPC, will carry a C for Commercial tag.
The parallel lines will retain binary compatibility so that all applications written for either will run unchanged on the other, but the PowerPC is optimised for database and transaction applications.
The commercial line will include large multiprocessor servers.
INTEL SAYS JUPITER WAS A MISTAKE, SELLS IT ON
Intel Corp has decided that its 1989 acquisition of universal communications processor manufacturer Jupiter Technology Inc (UX No 240) was a mistake, and it is letting the company go in a management buyout backed by a private investment group.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
The Waltham, Massachusetts company had 50 employees when Intel bought it, but it is now down to 30.
The company will be renamed Jupiter Communications Inc.
The buyout is led by founder Kenneth Ingham, who left the company in 1989.
Intel had hoped to exploit synergy between Jupiter's multi-protocol communications CPU, which runs under a real-time Unix-like operating system, and its own Fastpath channel-to-channel communications system.
NEC IN TALKS TO MARKET CONVEX MINISUPERS IN JAPAN
In a surprise move, NEC Corp has approached Convex Computer Corp and proposed that it market the Convex C3 minisupercomputers in Japan to plug the gap below its own SX3 supercomputers.
Despite NEC's adherence to the MIPS Technologies Inc R-series RISC, which it fabricates, the move seems to move NEC inexorably towards the Hewlett-Packard Co Precision Architecture RISC camp, because Convex plans to use the part in forthcoming parallel machines, and NEC already markets the Stratus Computer Inc fault-tolerant machines in Japan — having chosen the ill-starred Intel Corp 80860 as the basis of its first generation of RISC machines, Stratus plans to use Precision Architecture RISCs in future iterations of its systems.
HITACHI SAYS IT'LL BECOME AN INVESTOR IN KALEIDA VENTURE
Meanwhile Hitachi Ltd says it is to join Kalieda Labs Inc, the joint venture between IBM Corp and Apple Computer Inc to exploit multimedia technology.
Hitachi was one of six Japanese companies invited to invest in Kaleida (CI No 1,931), and of the other five, only Toshiba Corp has so far stuck its head above the parapet with an agreement with Apple to license Kaleida technology and use it in jointly developed products; others invited to join were Matsushita Electric Industrial Co, Sharp Corp, Sony Corp and NEC Corp.
KUBOTA TO DESERT MIPS FOR DEC'S ALPHA
Kubota Corp, whose Kubota Computer Co unit builds its Titan graphics computers around the MIPS Technologies Inc R-series RISC, and also manufactures Tricord Systems Inc's 80486-based servers under licence, says that it will eventually stop using both processors in favour of Digital Equipment Corp's Alpha RISC.
Kubota was the very first to declare for the Alpha RISC, and the Japanese farm equipment manufacturer says it plans to market DEC computers in Japan and the US.
Kubota has significant shareholdings in both Tricord and Silicon Graphics Inc, parent of MIPS.
‘We see DEC's Alpha chip as the choice for the next generation of computers,’ Kubota said, suggesting that the expanded agreement with DEC will be completed later on this month.
VERSANT SHIPS OBJECT DATABASE FOR NEXT AND OS/2
Versant Object Technology, Menlo Park, California, has shipped its ODBMS system for NeXT boxes, developed in combination with NeXT customer WilTel.
It is the first commercially available ODBMS on NeXT.
Its selling for $2,000 until the end of the quarter.
Versant has also just shipped its stuff for OS/2.
…
AS ONTOS SHIPS DISTRIBUTED MULTI-MEDIA PLATFORM
Last month Ontos was expecting to ship its Distributed Multimedia Platform and toolkit, co-developed with IBM, targeting large-scale high-volume multimedia applications.
The package include a distributed ODBMS, low-end PC connectivity to 386-based boxes, a multimedia class library and extensions to support mainframe connectivity through IBM's Workstation LAN Files Services.
It supports configurations of OS/2 servers, running on a Novell network, serving OS/2 or DOS clients.
It is planning to charge under $5,000 without the Ontos DB.
MINIGRAMS
Open Systems Today asked Dennis Ritchie, one of the creators of Unix, what he thought of the Novell/USL deal.
For an answer he quoted them Genesis 25:31–34 and Hebrews 12:16–17.
That's the bit about Esau selling his birthright to Jacob for a mess of pottage.
Guess we kinda know now where he stands on the issue.
One of our tried and true sources claims Sun Microsystems Inc managed to move 2,000 of those nettlesome 40MHz Viking-based Sparcstation 10 Model 41s out of the door by the end of the year.
These were the ones giving them so much grief because of low chip yields (UX No 412, 413).
Even this better-than-expected showing, however, doesn't do that much for Sun's margins because it had to promise free MP upgrades.
Unix System Labs has reportedly been trying to sell off C++ for the last six months, but can't get Borland International to bite.
Now that IBM Corp is in long-term decline, evolving into just another big company like Xerox Corp or General Motors Corp that has seen much better days, market-makers are looking for another  bellwether to signal the direction of the entire market, the Wall Street Journal reports.
The general feeling is that no one company fits the bill, but the combined market capitalisation of Microsoft Corp and Intel Corp now exceeds that of IBM by 50%, and one well-supported suggestion is a triumvirate of Microsoft, Intel and Apple Computer Inc — in other words IBM's former strategic partner.
The company where it once held over 20% of the equity, and its current desktop partner — as analyst Hesh Wiener comments, in mythology, the gods eat their children, in computers it's the other way round.
John Kemeny, co-creator with Thomas Kurtz of the Basic computer language at Dartmouth College, has died of a heart attack in Lebanon, New Hampshire; he was 66.
A decade ago, NEC Corp surged past Motorola Inc and Texas Instruments Inc to become the world's largest chipmaker, and Japan has held the title ever since — until 1991, when according to Dataquest, Intel Corp grew 26% to win it back for the US.
Sequent Computer Systems Inc shares fell $1.75 to $19.125 late Monday last week after the company said Jay Richards resigned as chief operating officer and senior vice-president: he says he's off to pursue other interests.
Apple Computer Inc has lost Roger Heinen, head manager of the Macintosh Software Architecture Division, responsible for Macintosh System 7, to Microsoft Corp, where he will become VP Database and Development Tools.
When IBM stock hit bottom with a such resounding thud last month it cost its shareholders more than $6 billion, 17.5% of total capitalisation.
Class-action suits have already been filed.
Cyrix has a microprocessor code named Spike under design that it hopes to drive through the heart of Intel Corp's Pentium.
Expected in the last half of 1993, the company is intent on doubling Pentium's performance and moving three instructions through the 2.2m transistor chip every cycle.
Cyrix told The Dallas Morning News it thinks Spike will propel its sales to $300m in ‘94 from $75m in ‘92.
The company reportedly also has a version of Spike called M-1, short for No 1 microprocessor, that it's aiming against the Sun/Texas Instruments SuperSparc, Viking.
Alex Brown & Sons financial analyst Mark Stahlman, who coined the phrase network computing, has charged IBM with leaning on The Harvard Business Review hard enough to make it pull a 10,000-word article he wrote for the January issue on ‘Why IBM Failed.’
The developer of the new SunClassic workstation Todd Basche told SunWorld that, although Sun has barred Solaris 1.
x on it, ‘there is nothing intrinsically in the hardware that requires Solaris 2.1.’
Computer Users of Europe (CUE), a user group that's been around for some time on an informal basis, has gone official: it has drafted a constitution and has a steering committee working on making it formal.
No suppliers need apply, CUE accepts only users and its aim in life is to form a united front of users against the tyranny of the industry: call Rob Briggs +44 273 481859.
Hewlett-Packard Labs and AT&T Microelectronics have co-developed what they believe is the first technology to transmit data at 100 Mbits/s across existing voice-grade unshielded twisted-pair cable.
The IEEE's 802.3 networking standards committee will be asked to form a study group to examine the cost-containing solution.
Intel Corp is reportedly getting worried over the resources of its traditional vendors to weather market upheavals.
As a result it's supposedly eyeing the server contingent more seriously and is likely to strengthen its association with the Hewlett-Packard and Digital Equipment Corps of the world.
DEC is saying that 400 of the 900 software packages announced for Alpha OSF/1, OpenVMS and NT platforms will be shipping by March: a total of 2,000 programs have been committed to Alpha.
As expected, Tadpole Technology Ltd, Cambridge, will ship its latest Sparcbook 2 offering in February.
The 40MHz HyperSparc Cypress Semiconductor Corp-based notebook comes with 16Mb DRAM Snd 250–500Mb disk, SCSI 2 drives, DC-ROM and DATD drives, NFS support, X Windows 11 graphics and Open Look interface.
OpenWindows and Sunsoft Inc's Deskset tools are bundled.
It initially runs Sunsoft Inc Solaris 1.0.1 — Solaris 2.1 will be available as a no cost option within 90 days, Tadpole said.
The Sparcbook 2 is priced at £9,125.
Rogue Wave Software Inc has acquired the C++ class library interface to relational databases that Glockenspiel marketed in Europe as Commonbase and the Qualix Group distributed in the US as db++.
It has renamed the stuff DB.h++ and will continue reseller relationships with Computer.
Associates, now that it's bought Glockenspiel,
Qualix and ImageSoft.
Rogue distributes through Hypersoft Europe Ltd, Hassocks, West Sussex, in the UK and Ireland: +44 273 834596.
Apple Computer Inc, IBM Corp and DEC have cut their prices 40% in Japan, making things highly uncomfortable for microcomputer leader NEC.
The St Petersburg police department in Russia is going to use Empress Software's RDBMS and 4GL to develop a multimedia criminal identification system, the company says.
It will run on an AViiON 4300 file server and Unix-capable PCs.
It is being supplied by the Russian arm of Intelligent Resources International in  Retson , Virginia.
In a deal worth $700,000, Sun Microsystems Inc's SunPro unit has struck a deal with National Algorithms Group Ltd for the UK, Oxford-based outfit's Fortran 90 technology which SunPro will use to update its Fortran 77 compiler and developer environments.
NAG: +44 865 511245.
Objectivity Inc has lined up Micram Microelectronic GmbH to distribute its object database in Germany.
A fourth woman has joined the civil suit lodged against the Santa Cruz Operation and its former president Larry Michels charging sexual harassment and seeking monetary damages (UX No 415, 416).
The woman was a temporary secretary reportedly assigned to the executive pool.
Unlike the others, her charges stem from Michel's alleged behaviour off-site and after her employment at SCO was over.
The suit forced Michels to resign all his posts at SCO right before Christmas (UX No 417).
The company says he is now in the position of a passive investor, owning about 16% of the stock.
Microsoft owns another 16%; Larry's son Doug 20%; the employees 22% and other investors 26%.