

THOMSON's CETIA IS FIRST TO POWERPC BOARDS…
The Cetia SA subsidiary of Thomson-CSF SA, which specialises in VME workstations and processor boards for real-time applications, last week introduced the first computers based on the IBM Corp-Motorola Inc PowerPC 601 microprocessor.
The Power Engine family comprises two products: a VMTR2 high-performance VME single-board machine; and a VGPW2, which is a VME board optimised for real-time applications under Posix 1003.4 compliant operating systems.
Director of OEM and technology licensing for IBM's advanced workstations and systems division, Lucian Bifano said ‘Since the [PowerPC]agreement with Motorola and Apple 18 months ago, we speculated on who would be the first to market with a product; we certainly did not expect it to come four months after our October announcement of the first silicon’.
Bifano claimed that Cetia is playing a key role in validating PowerPC microprocessor designs still being developed at the Somerset Center in Austin, Texas.
Claude Bozzo, president of Cetia, said his company's agreement with Motorola for the 88000 microprocessor is still operational.
But the PowerPC-based VME engine is better suited for use in development environments because of its binary compatibility with the RS/6000.
He added ‘The problem with the 88000, although it's a fine component and runs perfectly, is that none of the main manufacturers of development machines (Hewlett-Packard, Sun, IBM) are using it.
Only Data General is using it.
So software developers will hesitate to write for it.
With IBM, Motorola and Apple, we have the two largest personal computer producers in the world and the second largest manufacturer of microprocessors.
You also have Ford Motor, Thomson and Bull backing the PowerPC, so you are already assured of sales of hundreds of millions.
The problem for Sun and Hewlett is that they will sell only in the tens of millions [of chips]’.
Cetia stated that the Power Engine product will have a phased entry, from September to December 1993 depending on the model, and its hardware, operating system, and extras.
Prices will be aligned with those for boards based on the Motorola 68040 to provide a four-to-five-fold increase in price-performance ratios.
Cetia expects to announce a PowerPC-based graphics board and a graphic single-board computer in the second quarter.
And Bozzo said that the company has already signed a contract with Aerospatiale for an undisclosed number of Power Engine units.
He could not hazard how much business Cetia will do from the Power Engine range because it will be go through three channels: Cetia, Thomson and IBM.
He added, however, that his firm would win at least the same revenues as 1992 — $40m.
At the same time, Cetia announced it had expanded its co-operative relationship with Lynx Real-time Systems Inc, Los Gatos, California to put up its Posix-compliant Unix on the new products.
…
POWERPC CONSORTIUM SET FOR APRIL
Meanwhile, it looks like we are to be blessed with a PowerPC consortium by April.
Logical members include Tadpole Technology plc, Harris Computer Systems Division, Groupe Bull SA and Thomson CSF: they're being asked to kick in $1m apiece in the first year, the fee will drop in the second.
Dell Computer Corp and Tandy Corp have been mentioned as possibles.
IBM is now making between a few hundred and a few thousand PowerPC 601s a month in Vermont.
Second-pass silicon will sample in the third quarter, with mass production coming by the end of the year.
Motorola Inc wants its 601 sampling late first quarter or early second quarter.
IBM is selling a license to use and modify AIX plus compilers with the PowerPC.
It is courting Asian manufacturers.
Two more European companies, one French and one Belgian, have signed for the PowerPC in the last two weeks, according to Hans Wildenberg, Motorola's director of marketing and applications for southern Europe.
One of the  unnamed companies is ‘a manufacturer of multiprocessor systems and the other a laser printer company,’ he said, adding that the printer company is planning to use the RISC processor for a range of high-definition laser printers.
Agfa-Gevaert NV of Leuven, Belgium seems to fit that bill, and Telmat Informatique SA, doing parallel machines is a possibility for the other.
IBM ‘TO ADD LOW-END RS/6000s, PARALLEL SERVERS’
IBM is expected to make its long anticipated move into massively parallel computing this Tuesday when it launches parallel processing machines running from eight up to 64 PowerParallel RISC/6000 processors.
Technical details of the machine, developed at IBM's Highly Parallel Supercomputing Systems Laboratories, were reported in detail last November following previews at Supercomputing ‘92 in Minneapolis (UX No 412).
IBM is going after the scientific/technical crowd as well as those into workstation clustering and computing.
No sign yet of the symmetrical multi-processors IBM has been working on with Groupe Bull SA.
There is also bound to be at least two low-end, low-cost single chip RS/6000 models, the M20 and M20A PowerStations, along with mid-range systems, upgrades to existing machines, and finally the results of IBM's development work with network server company Auspex System Inc, Santa Clara, California, first reported here one year ago (UX No 369).
SGI CHALLENGES CRAY WITH NEW HIGH-END MACHINES
Shooting, it says, to become a billion dollar company by the end of its fiscal year in June, Silicon Graphics Inc last week unveiled a raft of new hardware and software products which expand its current ranges upwards.
As expected (UX Nos 407, 420), the announcement included two lines of high-end, symmetric multiprocessing server systems — Challenge and Power Challenge — Onyx, a graphics subsystem, beefed-up Indigo Extreme and XZ workstations and a Unix System V.4-compliant version of its Irix operating system.
Silicon Graphics maintains it is still a technical, rather than a commercial Unix supplier and has its sights set firmly on the Cray Y-MP and Convex Computer Corp user community with its latest offerings.
Details below.
SCO GETS SERIOUS BOUT JAPANSESE MARKET
Santa Cruz Operation Inc last week announced its Japanese-language version of Open Desktop, running on 80386 and 80486 machines based on EISA, AT and Micro Channel Architecture buses.
Compatible computers include the new Japanese OADG standard machines.
Santa Cruz Open Desktop 2.0J has features such as an X Window terminal emulator; support for standard EUC codes, using a conversion between JIS and Shift-JIS codes; support of Japanese keyboards and printers; binary compatibility for Japanese-language applications both character-based and X Window-based, developed under Santa Cruz Open Desktop-J and compatible environments.
Japanese Open Desktop 2.0 will be supplied on a choice of CD-ROM, floppy disk and QIC tape, and is priced at $1,976 for a system for one to two users, $3,560 for a server system supporting an unlimited number of users, and $2,112 for a development system.
In its first real move into the Japanese market, Santa Cruz Japan has a well-planned series of seminars ready to be held over the next few months.
Prior to, and following, actual product release on March 1, seminars for both users, developers, and resellers will be held.
OEM customers include the Japanese representatives of Compaq Computer Inc, AST Research Inc, Acer Corp, Tricord Systems Inc and Dell Computer Corp.
Hitachi Ltd already includes Santa Cruz products in its list of packages supported on its Flora series of personal computers, and a number of systems integrators including Yamagiwa Data, Intelligent Wave, and Software Products Asia have been enlisted.
Santa Cruz has to date kept a very low profile in Japan, although it has had a product available on NEC 9800 series personal computers for some years.
However, it feels the real market is just now coming together with the impact of bilingual DOS/V machines and the growing challenge to the status being posed by Compaq and Dell.
ASTEC TO MARKET VISUAL EDGE UIM/X
Astec Ltd has launched the UIM/X graphical user interface builder from Visual Edge Software Inc of Quebec onto the Japanese market, and sales are to begin this week.
UIM/X automatically generates C source code based on Motif, conforming to standard specifications for C so that the code is extremely portable.
Astec claims an 80% world share for UIM/X of the market for Motif-based interface builders.
Other features include a built-in C interpreter, enabling changes in the user interface to be executed simultaneously with the application, WYSIWYG editor, and full use of all of the OSF/Motif toolkit.
The product is available on Sparcstations and on X-terminals supporting XMiNT.
OpenWare/Motif for Sparcstations, jointly developed with Ascii Corp, is the version of Motif being used, and it will be also sold by Astec.
Astec is well-known as a leading edge Unix house in Japan, and as the local distributor of Centerline Software's Saber products.
NEURON LAUNCHES OPEN INTERFACE
Neuron Data Japan has launched Neuron Data Open Interface Version 2.0.1 on the NEC Corp's 4800 series of R-series RISC workstations for delivery this month.
Neuron Data hopes to sell around 300 copies of the Japanese development version, priced at $23,200 in the first year.
Conversion for DOS/V machines and to Japanese Windows is currently under way back home at Neuron Data headquarters in Palo Alto.
JAPANESE LANGUAGE UNIXWARE IN MAY.
Novell Japan Ltd is now shipping UnixWare v1.0 in Japan, initially in its English version, but by May it will be available in a Japanese version being developed jointly with Unix System Laboratories Pacific.
Novell said it was likely that a version of UnixWare for the PC-9800 line from NEC Corp, which dominates the Japanese market, would be developed, although no date was committed.
Prices in Japan range from $4,435 for the application server to $524 for TCP/IP and Network File System add-on software.
Novell Japan already claims 500 registered outlets to which it plans to add some more dealers with Unix experience.
HUNGARY's DUNA ELEKTRONIKA TO ENTER UNIX MARKET WITH IBM's RS/6000
One of Hungary's largest distributors, Duna Elektronika, is preparing to enter the Unix market.
According to chief executive Peter Freed, the company is in negotiations with IBM Corp's Eastern European headquarters in Vienna to supply RS/6000s to the domestic market next year.
He said ‘The RS/6000 is not big now in Hungary, and it has only recently come off the Comecon list.
But then, in June 91 the PS/2 wasn't big, and this year the Unix market will be interesting.’
To date, Duna has only sold MS-DOS-based products.
Freed also said that it was he rather than Duna, who had taken a 90% stake in Hungary's largest circulation English-language newspaper, Budapest Week.
RUSSIAN EMIGRE GETS START-UP BUG
A Russian emigre who was for a while vice president of research and development at Prime/Computervision, has caught the start-up bug.
Vladimir Geisberg, graduate of the then University of Leningrad, has started a new company, appropriately named Software Emancipation Technology (SET), which last month introduced a family of software development products called ParaSet.
ParaSet is reportedly the first system to use the same model to forward engineer new software and reverse engineer existing software to modify, maintain and update it.
The company says this technological approach enables changes made anywhere in the process including development of documentation, design models and source code and at the lowest level of granularity, to be automatically reflected and maintained throughout the entire development process and all software deliverables.
ParaSet also reportedly provides the first ‘what if’ capability for engineers to assess the impact of potential changes to their software.
ParaSet defines a new product class based on parametric software development, which manages the complexity of design and maintenance.
Parameters may include statements, variables, functions and classes common throughout the source code or relationship, entities and subsystems in design models or blocks, paragraphs and words in documents.
Unlike traditional I-CASE or top-down design methodologies that allow changes only from high-level designs, ParaSet allows changes from any view of the model, both procedural and object-oriented programming.
The software includes a $7,500 core system: Para/Designer, Para/Programmer and ParaOnline with two options Para/Analyzer and ParaDebugger.
Because of its features, it should be  usable immediately without disrupting the way people work.
It currently supports C and C++, RCS and SCCS source control systems for configuration management.
Shipments begin in March.
SET is backed by VCs Advent International, Charles River Partners, Oak Investment Partners and Walsh and Greenwood, interesting company for a Russian.
+1 617 466 8600
HP BACKS ACT FOR CREDIT RISK SYSTEM
ACT Financial Systems Ltd and Hewlett-Packard Co are working on a Unix version of ACT's Digital Equipment Corp VMS-based credit risk analysis system, Limits.
The new Motif front-ended version, Open Limits, will be targeted at the banking community — in particular the major internationals.
Hewlett-Packard is contributing ‘significant’ funds towards development costs and providing software tools and consultancy to ACT, which is to re-engineer the new system on HP 9000 Series 700 and 800 business servers.
Limits is designed to integrate with corporate treasury systems and to help indicate the extent of potential risks from involvement with other parties such as members of the Maxwell empire or from fluctuating currencies.
It so helps users to monitor capital, to set and manage limits policy and ensure regulatory compliance — such as the 7.6% asset liquidity to be demanded of banks as from April 1.
The new version is expected to surface this summer and will be jointly marketed by London-based ACT — which remains the end supplier — and Hewlett-Packard, with its several hundred banking customers.
CAD/CAM SYSTEM MARKET GROWS 10.5%
The value of computer-aided design, computer-aided manufacturing, computer-aided engineering and geographic information systems shipped last year grew by 10.5 percent, according to Dataquest figures.
IBM: AKERS, KUEHLER SIDELINED, METZ OUT, RIZZO IN AT FINANCE: NEW CHIEF IN 90 DAYS
IBM Corp shares saluted the imminent departure of John Akers with a jump of $3.25 at $52.125 at the opening the day after the company accompanied news that it was cutting its quarterly dividend only 55% with the announcement that within 90 days it would have a new chief executive.
There are also sweeping management changes.
John Akers will retain the posts of chairman and chief executive during the search period and the company is not yet saying whether he will remain titular chairman thereafter.
The search for a new chief, to be led by Akers and managed by IBM's board nominating and executive compensation committee, which is chaired by James Burke, a former chairman of Johnson & Johnson, will be conducted both within and outside the company, and IBM has given itself 90 days to complete the process.
Chief financial officer Frank Metz, 59, is retiring and will be succeeded by returnee Paul Rizzo, who was elected a vice-chairman; Jack Kuehler, 60, gives up his post as president and becomes another vice-chairman.
‘It is the right time in IBM's business transformation to identify new leadership,’ Akers said.
‘The changes in the industry and in IBM's business continue to accelerate and new leadership will facilitate our ability to meet those challenges.’
The quarterly dividend for the fourth quarter was cut 55.4% to 54 cents a share from $1.21, and it could be cut further next quarter once the new man is in charge.
The assumption is that Rizzo's appointment to the finance post is a short-term measure and that his key function will be to work out a new pricing strategy, which means that anything we have heard on pricing on the new ES/9000s and AS/400s due next month will be overtaken by events.
Few are in any doubt that there is plenty more pain to come, and it may well be that the interim management is now expected to clear the decks, steel itself to announce another enormous net loss for the current quarter and let the new chief executive and team come in with a clean sheet.
…
BURKE TO WEIGH POSSIBLES AND PROBABLES
To misuse the cliche, the only game in town last week was speculating on who might succeed John Akers as chief executive of IBM Corp.
If it picks an insider or a retiree, then we will all be back to writing the company's obituary in three months' time so it has to be an outsider, and one name canvassed that should be crossed off the list at once is that of ‘Neutron’ Jack Welch, boss of General Electric Co — not because he doesn't have the capability but because he does not have a background in the computer industry.
John Sculley at Apple Computer Inc is another name that has been canvassed, and he is the exception that proves the rule that an outsider can't run a computer company, but he came in fascinated by the business and devoted all his efforts in the early days learning about it for himself rather than relying on his minions, something no-one taking over IBM now has time to do.
Sculley would be a bold choice, but perhaps a little too brave.
The same applies to Eckhard Pfeiffer, who has certainly turned Compaq Computer Corp around for the time being, but has not been in the job long enough to demonstrate proven staying power.
The best name we've seen so far is that of former Hewlett-Packard Co chief John Young but it is not likely that he would want the job.
Our choice would be a former IBMer who has carved out a successful career running another computer company — Comdisco Inc chief Ken Pontikes is already facing up to the same problems besetting IBM, and despite his protestations, there's always Ross Perot.
WANG's FACTORY JOBS IN JEOPARDY; MILLER OUT
Wang Laboratories Inc president, chairman and chief executive Richard Miller, retained to arrest the company's plunge towards the corporate graveyard, has resigned, firmly denying reports that the board believed the company could no longer afford to pay his $800,000 a year salary, or of any rift with the Wang family.
He is now to be succeeded by a triumvirate of three former executive vice-presidents — Michael Mee as chairman and chief financial officer; Donald Casey as co-president and chief development officer; and Joseph Tucci, co-president and chief executive.
The company is currently trading under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, and further big cutbacks were signalled as the company announced the change of leadership.
It is ending all manufacturing apart from the VS line, which means that most of the 1,000 remaining manufacturing jobs are at risk.
Plants in Taiwan, Ireland and Australia are likely to be hit, with the boom falling in the summer; Wang promises to continue to service the software and hardware it has already sold.
It will maintain a sales and support network in the 150 countries where it now has a presence, but there may be cuts in both Wang employee numbers and the type of facilities it will operate.
Miller said his resignation was because it was best for the re-emerging company.
The company's reorganisation plan is due on March 16, a date agreed upon by Wang and the creditors.
McNEALY ‘SEEKS NOORDA's SUPPORT TO £! % NT AND RETURN USL TO ITS ROOTS’
Sun Microsystems Inc president, Scott McNealy, has been talking to and having lunch with Ray Noorda lately, chewing over what's to become of Unix System Labs under Novell Inc.
McNealy has a menu of things he'd like Noorda to do once he takes over.
He says he told him: ‘fire everyone except one marketing guy, one order administrator and 200 engineers.
Stop all their silly marketing programmes.
Focus on producing better and better source code.
Cut source code prices to $5.
Stay out of the binary business.
Bundle NetWare into Unix.’
McNealy says this is also a ‘scenario to £! % NT.’
He says Noorda's reply is ‘I don't own it yet.’
Asked about Sun's continued support of USL, McNealy said, ‘Sun is the only company that can engineer its way out of any operating system royalty in a year or two.
HP can't.
NCR can't.
IBM can't.
Nobody can.
Ray understands that.’
The ideal time to make that kind of break would be as Sun shifts over to an object-oriented operating system, its next operating systems move, McNealy said.
He allows, however, that it'll take six to nine months after the acquisition is complete to see which way the wind is blowing.
‘If we're not getting what we pay for with our royalties,’ he said, ‘then we'll make the make/buy decision.’
McNealy's henchman, Ed Zander, president of SunSoft, the Sun unit most jeopardised by the Novell/USL takeover, was acting more of the good cop last week when Unigram spoke with him.
He uses words like ‘empathise’(because he did the Interactive deal), ‘supportive’ and ‘optimistic’when talking about Novell or the USL deal.
He says he has high hopes for unity finally and apparently thinks the industry might start coming together at the Unix International members meeting in New Orleans February 11–12 where some 100 companies and 200 people will assemble.
Zander seems to think it's going to close to an old-fashioned love-in.
SEQUENT OUT OF DOLDRUMS
Beaverton, Oregon-based Sequent Computer Systems Inc says the rise in its profits for the year to January 2 1993 is a result of company restructuring, and a re-focus on high-end business.
The firm's fourth quarter net profits were $6.3m — up from $1m last time — on turnover that rose to $88.7m from $61.5m last time around.
Net profits for the year were $14.5m, against losses of $48.7m last time, on turnover that rose 44.1% to $307.3m, the highest ever recorded by Sequent.
Net earnings per share were $0.23 in the quarter, $0.55 in the year.
Sequent's consultancy services for users contributed $15.6m to turnover.
Sequent claims an installed base of over 4,000 machines worldwide.
European turnover was $100m for the year, which accounted for nearly a third of Sequent's total sales.
UK turnover grew by 75% to £47.7m with the installed base topping the 600 mark — Sequent UK firm shipped 30 top-end Symmetry 2000/750 system in 1992.
Sequent's escape from the doldrums was also secured by alliances with software vendors such as Oracle Corp and Ingres Corp, according to Mark Miller, Sequent UK's marketing director.
The company recently raised $60m in capital via a share offering to fund its increased research and development efforts, including its Microsoft Corp Windows NT-based systems announced last week (UX No 420).
GRESHAM BANKS ON MOVE TO OPEN SYSTEMS
Gresham Telecomputing Plc, which last week released its first full year figures since the merger of the Gresham Group with Telecomputing Plc in 1991 is betting its future on the market's movement towards open systems, despite the fact that its revenues still come from traditional ICL mainframe customers.
Gresham chairman Sid Green professed himself ‘modestly satisfied’ with the company's pre-tax profit of £767,000 on sales of £7.25m — last year's sales were £6.29m but the two companies had been combined for only part of the accounting period.
The share prices rose to 57 pence on the news, giving Gresham a market capitalisation of some £17m.
DataServe, a remote procedure call client-server product to connect ICL mainframes running VME to other VME or Unix-based systems, is the company's most significant seller: VMS and Windows versions have been announced but are not yet shipping.
ISAM-XA, an X/Open-compliant resource manager for those wishing to access transaction processing monitors from data held in indexed sequential file systems — despite all the noise, relational still accounts for only 10% of data — is held to be the brightest hope for the future.
It's only competition comes from Informix Corp.
ICL has already agreed to take the product, while Olivetti, Bull, DEC, NCR and others are evaluating it.
And TP+, Gresham's transaction processing technology said to be complementary to teleprocessing managers such as Tuxedo, Top-End and Encina, has been integrated into Dun & Bradstreet financial accounting software which is now beginning to ship.
Gresham says it is working on similar deals and will also begin marketing the product itself to open systems transaction processing users.
Southampton-based Gresham employs 90 staff.
NT AND NOVELTIES
When last we talked to AT&T's Bob Kavner about the Novell Inc/Unix System Labs  acquisition , he really downplayed it as an anti-Microsoft Corp move, pointing out that AT&T does business with Microsoft on a lot of different levels.
Now we read in Computer Reseller News that Microsoft may sell NT developer kits to some 100,000 software developers at the US Defense Department through DOD contractor AT&T.
Novell says it expects to have its definitive agreement to acquire Unix System Labs, sewn up in early February, probably before Valentine's Day.
It then has to go through regulatory procedures like filing with the Securities & Exchange Commission and Hart-Scott-Rodino which could taken until late March, early April.
Then the stockholders vote on or in this case rubberstamp the deal.
PC Magazine thinks server versions of Microsoft NT will cost under $5,000.
It quotes Microsoft as saying NT add-ons like SQL Server and SNA Services will be delivered within 90 days of the environment.
A systems management product and an X.400 messaging service will ship in the second half of the year.
Microsoft says it has moved up the publication date of its Win32s application programming interface, a subset of the Win32 application programming interface in NT, to this quarter.
Reportedly it can't get performance from 16-bit Windows applications running on NT, and admits there's no real point in trying to do it.
The company claims NT is now up on 12 symmetric multiprocessing systems, 395 different personal computer models plus the DEC Alpha AXP and Mips RISC chips.
130 beta NT copies are now with UK corporates, a further 2,500 will be delivered this month: at least 10% of the 45,000 or so NT developer kits shipped worldwide have landed in the UK.
’ X/Open XPG compliance is the next step’for NT, Microsoft claims.
Meanwhile, Bill Gates seems to feel a lot of his Windows NT business will be upgrades.
We've heard tell of a $200 upgrade fee from Windows; apparently upgrading from Windows for Workgroups will be even cheaper.
Univel Inc, which last week closed its first full quarter booking orders, says it has 500 resellers signed and another 2,000 US, 1,000 PacRim and 1,000 European resellers going through the process.
Most are Novell Platinum and Gold resellers or part of the new Novell Unix Master programme.
Univel admits its continued independence is still an ‘unresolved issue’ that's being kicked around Novell and figures its eventual disposition won't be made public until after Novell's acquisition of Unix System Labs goes through, though the decision could actually be made in the next 30 days.
Novell has said it expected Univel to do over $5m worth of business during the quarter just closed.
It also expects it to build gradually over the next two quarters and then start doing something serious in the fall.
Early bird catches worm: there are two programs already shipping for the still-unavailable Microsoft Windows NT-run Alpha AXP, Digital Equipment Corp says.
One is SlickEdit, a programmer's editor from MicroEdge.
The other is Hamilton Seashell, a software tool from Hamilton Labs.
DEC is planning to have AXP PC platforms out with software developers before Microsoft puts NT into general release.
Figure the hardware for March or April.
Meanwhile, DEC is pulling together a central NT engineering-cum-marketing group under Jesse Lipcon and has picked Dennis Schneider, who rolled out DEC's Desktop Direct programme, as director of marketing.
Mimicking Novell, Microsoft is starting ‘Inside Track,’ a train the trainer programme for Windows NT February 16.
It's flying 500 value-added resellers to Seattle for a three-day course provided they promise to train 50 more.
Microsoft's simple arithmetic adds up to 25,000 people who know something about NT.
Reportedly it wants a shot at Novell Platinum dealers.
PC Week, which has taken a new interest in Unix since the Novell announcement and will reportedly even grace us with its presence at Uniforum, attacked Microsoft's NT last week in a pair of front-page stories headlined ‘NetWare Casts Shadow Over NT.’
The NetWare referred to is NetWare 4.0 which it reviews.
In a sidebar, the initial release of NT is trashed by beta testers as lacking the enterprise features such as a global directory, support for multiple protocols or server-based communications and server-to-server mirroring found in competitive products.
As a result, it says, many potential buyers are ruling out plans to use NT as a mission-critical server operating system.
This from a book recently accused by one of its own columnists as being too cosy with Microsoft.
Novell says it is planning to ship version 4.0 of NetWare for Unix by year's end.
SUPERCOMPUTER SYSTEMS CLOSES ITS DOORS
The world has changed radically over the past five years since Cray Research Inc refugee Steve Chen set up his Supercomputer Systems Inc in Eau Claire, Wisconsin.
Cray is finding it harder and harder to grow its monolithic supercomputers as the world edges towards parallel systems with the view that they will be able to take over many of the tasks presently handled by today's vector processors, and you can't enter an IBM lab these days without stumbling over some kind of parallel processing development project.
So it should have come as no surprise that IBM, which can no longer afford to squander money on things that only might come good, has decided to stop financing Supercomputing Systems.
Last week Chen's company bowed to the inevitable and closed its doors.
Chen says he is still looking for new sources of finance that would enable the company to re-hire the 320 people thrown out of work by the closure, but does not hold out much hope.
The company had tried to raise money by offering shares to the public but was unable to get the guarantees from its principal backer, IBM, that would-be underwriters to the issue were demanding.
Chen said in a message to employees that the Eau Claire, Wisconsin company had designed and tested a prototype of what would be the world's fastest supercomputer, and industry executives familiar with the project separately told Reuter that the prototype appeared to be a viable machine with a solid architecture.
Analysts calculate that Chen needs another $60m to get the machine into manufacturing and start marketing a four-processor configuration, which would sell for about $10m; the latest plan had the machine growing to 32 processors.
Despite its own financial woes, IBM is expected to provide 60 days' redundancy pay for each of the employees.
Analysts say IBM may have invested as much as $200m in Supercomputing Systems Ltd Partnership, the venture it formed in April 1988.
The long-awaited supercomputer had been promised for last year, but the target date was later pushed back to October 1993.
The SS-1 supercomputer is nearly finished, but some parts still must be completed, the company told the Milwaukee Sentinel: ‘In a very short period of time, we could be walking that machine out the door to a customer,’ a spokesman told the Sentinel —‘It's just a shame that IBM doesn't have the vision they ought to have.’
The company has several other industrial and government partners, including Boeing Co, Du Pont Co, Ford Motor Co and the National Security Agency, but IBM's $100m-plus represents about half the total raised by the company, and IBM has also supplied top managers to the company.
IBM had originally agreed to help finance the project through to the end of 1992, and has since been helping Supercomputing Systems to meet its payroll on a week-by-week basis.
COMPAQ THROUGH THE $4,000m BARRIER
Demonstrating what a simple change at the top can achieve, Compaq Computer Corp, which had sales of $3,200m last year and had been heading back towards the $2,000m mark under the previous regime, last week announced that it had made it through the $4,000m sales barrier for 1992, with profits up 34% in the most recent quarter.
The company, which has been beset by overwhelming demand for its budget lines, says that it expects to balance supply with demand for most of its products during the current quarter — although it shipped more than twice the number of machines in fourth quarter 1992 as it did in the 1991 period, the backlog has continued into the current quarter.
The company says that this year it plans to introduce an ‘impressive’ number of new products, including ‘entry-level to technologically advanced’desktop and notebook personal computers, printers and servers, and has development efforts under way to address emerging technologies such as Intel Corp's Pentium processor, ones with full motion video and stereo sound, pen-based machines and ‘other small form-factor devices,’the firm promised.
BULL LANDS £100m BRITISH ARMY PACT WITH LOGICA, NORTHERN TELECOM
Compagnie des Machines Bull SA last week picked up a plum UK contract when it was chosen to be the as the prime contractor for a contract worth up to £100m for an administrative computing infrastructure for British Army sites worldwide.
Logica Plc and Northern Telecom Ltd are the main subcontractors, with Logica getting business worth £4m and Northern Telecom £25m.
The project involves installation and integration of systems into about 550 British Army sites worldwide.
Work on trials will begin immediately and the system will become fully operational between 1995 and 1997 under the current plan.
The contract calls for systems and software integration, project management services, communications infrastructure and secure Unix systems.
Bull will also be providing services support for 10 years.
Logica will mainly be involved in the software integration.
RECORD REVENUES BUT PROFITS SLIP AT SUN
Sun Microsystems Inc turned up last week with record revenues of $1.05bn for its second quarter ended December 31, up 15.5% — however net profits were off 27.7% at $34.3m.
Mid-term net profit fell 47.3% to $39.1m on sales up 14.7% at $1,906.7m.
Net per share fell 30% to $0.33 in the quarter, 49% to $0.38 in the half.
The erosion was anticipated because of Sparcstation 10 Model 41 shortages and the cost of ramping up new product production.
The company ended the guessing game on Wall Street about how many units it has delivered.
Sun said in the first half it shipped 28,000 Sparcstation 10s including 1,500 Model 41s.
It has also delivered 3,000 MicroSparc units.
En toto for the quarter Sun shipped a record 59,000 revenue systems and 74,000 Sparc systems and upgrades.
SunSoft distributed 176,000 Solaris and Unix licenses, 131,000 of them Solaris 2. x, double anything its done before.
The US accounted for 50% of the turnover; Europe 28% and the rest of the world 22%.
Japan declined as a percentage of the rest of the world.
The company said to expect Sparcstation 10 Model 52s and 54s in the late spring, early summer.
Analysts, meanwhile, were not impressed at all, and were downgrading their opinions on the company right, left and centre last week, causing the shares to slip.
…
FOLLOWS HEWLETT-PACKARD WITH PREDATORY TRADE-IN PROGRAMME
Sun Microsystems Computer Corp has responded to Hewlett-Packard Co's big trade-in programme with up to 40% trade-in credit for people moving to the new Sparcstation 10/Model 30, where Hewlett is offering a maximum 30% (UX No 420).
Hewlett, IBM, DEC and Silicon Graphics kit is targeted.
…
VXM EASES SOLARIS MIGRATION EFFORTS
Sun's SunSoft Inc satellite is anxious to move its installed base off of Solaris 1.
x Unix operating systems and on to Solaris 2. x and naturally doesn't want to share all the goodies it has in 2. x with 1.
x users.
That sets up a situation of two naming services and not providing NIS+ clients for SunOS.
To the rescue comes VXM Technologies Inc, Brookline, Massachusetts, with its SunSoft-sanctioned NIS Migration Kit which consists of a set of NIS+ client binaries for Solaris 1.
x and should help users more easily integrate new Solaris 2. x-only boxes like the Sparc Classic and LX.
End-user pricing starts at $3,750 for 50 nodes.
NIS+ servers are also available and cost $250 and includes the first to replicate once.
+1 617 730–8490
…
SOLARIS-ON-INTEL DUE MARCH 29
The week before last, SunSoft Inc sent out copies to Solaris-on-Intel, which will be officially christened Solaris x86, to a limited number of OEMs.
SunSoft plans on making the official announcement on March 29 at the beginning of the  hoop-la surrounding the Second Annual Solaris Developers Conference in California.
Its promising new partners (’ big stuff’) but it's still unclear when x86 will go into general release.
IBM SIGNS CA FOR AIX SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT
IBM Corp has turned to Islandia, New York-based Computer Associates International Inc for enterprise-wide systems management for the RS/6000 Unix family.
The two have an agreement under which Computer Associates will provide RS/6000 users with CA-Unicenter for Unix, becoming, so it claims, the only systems software vendor to provide enterprise-wide systems management connecting MVS, VM and VSE-based mainframes with OS/2, AIX and other Unix systems, enabling data to be managed from any workstation on the network.
CA-Unicenter is designed to provide security, scheduling, tape protection, disk back-up, archive management, help desk and console automation.
CA-Unicenter is also being developed for Sun Microsystems Inc, Sequent Computer Systems Inc and Tandem Computers Inc machines, and for Novell Inc's NetWare, the company noted.
NEXTWORLD EXPO FOR MAY
Next Computer Inc is going try to stage a NeXTWorld Expo without leaning on Uniforum by holding it at the same time like it did last year.
This year it's scheduled for the Moscone Center in San Francisco May 25–27 and NeXT claims it's going to draw 10,000 people.
There's only one little tiny problem with the booking — it's smack in the middle of Comdex/Spring, Windows World and the NT roll-out.
Its going to be  trumpeting NeXTStep as the alternative to the Microsoft monopoly as though the NeXT hardware didn't exist.
Steve Jobs is obviously a glutton for punishment.
TENSIONS RISE AS OSF MEMBERS AWAIT DISTRIBUTED MANAGEMENT ENVIRONMENT
The Open Software Foundation denies a scathing front-page story in last week's Communications Week that practically writes off its Distributed Management Environment (DME), charging it with being late, possibly too late to matter much to the marketplace, and with causing in-fighting between OSF's technology suppliers.
The story goes so far as to suggest that Hewlett-Packard threatened to resign from OSF over the pace of development but changed its mind.
OSF on the other hand contends that the complex software is on schedule for the next phase, its Distributed Services Release due in September.
Most of the technology going into this third snapshot will be wrapped up in the second quarter, according to business area manager Jon Gossels.
Gossels says the development and engineering plans along with a set of milestones and documentation were published along with the second snapshot towards the end of last year and sent to 50 early access members, arguing that the schedule and adherence to it is known and  calculable , The next part, the Management Framework, is set for release by the end of the year.
Although Gossels says, ‘it looks good today,’ he also acknowledges that the framework is at a different stage, is difficult to assess and that substantial work remains to be done.
OSF is doing the final integration and testing of DME reportedly because it couldn't get any of its members to take the job after the  tussle IBM had integrating DCE.
However it appears that five of DME's technology providers including Tivoli Systems Inc, HP, Gradient Technologies Inc, IBM and System Center are modifying their  components and making changes on OSF's behalf so they will fit.
Gossels admits tensions rise because people resist change, especially to their own work.
He dismisses the notion that these reactions were either ‘bad’ or a ‘surprise.’
Although there are 45 OSFers and 105 outsiders working on the project, Gossel said at least one of these, Hewlett-Packard, is working without a contract but that it is a perfectly normal situation at OSF.
DCE integration contracts weren't signed until after the code was released.
There are of course difficulties merging technologies as  variant as HP's and Tivoli's which is object-oriented.
However, Gossels maintains OSF and its partners foresaw the hurdles and prepared against them well in advance.
Bottom line, it is too premature to talk about DME losing market, ‘What alternative do they have,’ Gossels said.
NOVELL PLANS DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING SUPPORT
Novell Inc is working with Carnegie Mellon University to develop Open Software Foundation Distributed Computing Environment (DCE) support for NetWare.
It will offer DCE support as add-ons in a series of phased releases.
The first offering, not expected until the end of the year, is a NetWare Loadable Module.
This will enable users to access DCE file systems transparently.
The user logs on, is identified by the system and will be able to access both DCE file systems and NetwWare simultaneously.
Product Number will undertake core functionality like remote procedure calls, security and DCE threads within the NetWare server.
If DCE is accepted as a de facto standard, Novell says it may embed the modules NetWare, although it says this is unlikely to happen unless OSF reviews its DCE licensing fees currently running at some $2,500.
NEXT LEANING TOWARDS SOFTWARE
Suggesting that that Next Computer Inc may indeed err on the software of its business — if it can find enough takers for NextStep-on-Intel (UX 414)— the company says it is re-organising its corporate operations to ‘accomodate a much larger software role’.
The company said end of year financial results — which recorded its first profitable quarter, thought to be around $1m on revenues of $45m — will give it the opportunity to concentrate on software.
For the year, revenues were $140m, up 10%, more than double the rate of growth of the workstation market as a whole; profit and loss details were not given.
US sales rose 36% to $98m, foreign sales slumped 24% to $42m.
Next plans further international subsidiaries and is to expand its software engineering division.
Next refused to comment on reports that it might abandon its hardware business altogether.
The company says a 40MHz 68040 upgrade board for the NextStation, nicknamed Nitro, will only be released if it increases performance 30–40%.
Nitro's evaluation period finishes this week.
OILMEN's SOFTWARE PLATFORM DUE IN APRIL
The 69 members of the Petrotechnical Open Software Corporation are in the final stages of deciding what standards and technologies, from those submitted, are to be included in its Software Integration Platform (SIP).
At a user group meeting in Aberdeen, Tim Haynes, POSC's European technical director, said he hoped the integration platform would establish guidelines for suppliers working to develop interoperable applications for the oil industry and allow the oil companies themselves to harmonise their internal IT efforts.
SIP guidelines will be made public in April.
SIP is a combination of open systems strategies, de facto industry standards plus some established products adopted under previous technology requests, such as Hewlett-Packard Co's object-oriented OpenODB database and UniSQL Inc's relational-to-object database linking technology (UX No 401).
POSC member companies — the oil industry's open systems user organisation — and the group's permanent staff have been evaluating potential SIP components since last December.
POSC is positioning the Base Computing Standard in SIP as a building block for portability, scalability and interoperability and electronic data interchange using established and emerging technologies.
This encompasses Posix, XPG3 (XPG4), TCP/IP, OSI, and Fortran and C languages.
Graphics standards supported are GKS, Phigs, X-Windows, PEX, Motif and probably Open Look.
POSC says it'll call for the development of a set of industry-specific widgets next year when a more complete range of interface recommendations will be presented.
Emerging standards such as C++ and the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing and Management Environment will also feature in SIP.
Windows NT has yet to be endorsed in SIP because Microsoft Corp refuses to back open systems standards for the oil industry, Haynes says.
Branding scheme
POSC has established common data and access (SQL-based) models for developers and suppliers to incorporate in their solutions derived from its members' data processing requirements POSC says the models will allow different departments within an organisation to share applications and data.
Using solutions which deploy these models, production and operations divisions should, for example, be able to share well and drilling information with their geology and geophysics counterparts.
With X/Open Co Ltd's help, the organisation will try and get a branding scheme going for POSC-compliant products using the SIP.
According to Haynes, the problem establishing any branding effort — and one that POSC has encountered — is the reluctance of vendors to re-engineer existing products to meet the requirements of one section of the user community.
To help its cause, POSC has set up interoperability labs in Houston, Texas and London which preview the various model and technologies in use.
POSC began life in November 1990 as a three year effort backed by $15m funding plus membership fees of up to $100,000 which depend on the organisation's size.
Funding beyond November this year depends upon the success of SIP and how POSC's 1994–1998 business plan, expected next quarter 1993, is received by majors sponsors such as Mobil, Chevron, Elf, Texaco and British Petroleum.
Haynes stoically suggests that POSC's future is not indefinite.
Its aim, he says, is not to become a commercial body but to point users towards products and technologies that support their interests.
TANDEM's CLIENT/SERVER OLTP TOOLKIT
Tandem Computers Inc has introduced a software tool kit that it claims extends transaction processing on its proprietary Guardian 90-based NonStop machines to desktop systems in client-server environments.
The products in the Client/Server OLTP Toolkit are claimed to simplify interoperability by minimising programming complexity between client and server systems in a transaction processing application.
The Toolkit includes the Pathway Open Environment Toolkit and Tandem Dynamic Data Exchange Gateway, both of which are designed to accelerate transaction processing applications development with Microsoft Corp Windows-based clients.
The Toolkit also includes Remote Server Call, which now supports clients running under the Hewlett-Packard HP-UX operating system, Sun Microsystems SunOS, the Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix and the Apple Computer Inc Macintosh System: the application programming interface already supports IBM Corp's OS/2 with Presentation Manager, and MS-DOS and Windows.
ADOBE LAUNCHES ACROBAT WITH DISTRIBUTED FILE FORMAT
Postscript language and application developer Adobe Systems Inc, Mountain View, California last week launched, Adobe Acrobat, a range of products based on its Carousel Postscript document interchange technology (UX No 407).
Adobe claims the Acrobat line will enable users to distribute documents between MS-DOS, Windows, Unix SVR4 and Macintosh System 7 environments as readable files on screen, regardless of the application, hardware or operating system used for document creation.
The company pitches Acrobat as an alternative to the ubiquitous ASCII — American Standard Code for Information Interchange — file exchange protocol used by most computer operators.
In an ASCII format, documents are displayed in their lowest form on screen and can't easily be read.
Adobe claims to have solved this problem with a Postscript-based file format called the Portable  Document Format (PDF).
PDF files can describe documents containing any combination of text, graphics and images in a device-and resolution-independent format.
This means users can view and alter documents anywhere on a Postscript-based network without modification.
Acrobat has three components.
Acrobat Viewer receives incoming PDF files and enables users to view, manipulate and print the information on any platform running MS-DOS, Unix, Windows or Macintosh.
The application used to create the PDF files are not required to view the information, Adobe says.
Acrobat Distiller translates Unix and MS-DOS Postscript language files into PDF formats, where print drivers don't normally exist.
It is also used to create PDF files from applications that bypass the system level printing  facilities .
PDF Writer, geared for Macintosh and personal computers running Windows, will convert a file to PDF using the same procedure as used to print a document.
A user will be presented with the option of saving as a PDF file rather than sending the document to the printer.
Adobe will release additional Acrobat tools to include editing, video, sound and SGML software for the publishing market by the end of this year.
Adobe Acrobat version 1.0 is available on Apple Macintosh System 7, Windows 3.1, Sunsoft Inc Solaris 2.1 and MS-DOS.
No prices were available.
ATRIUM TO DEBUT DCE SOFTWARE
Atrium Technologies Inc, Austin, Texas, the new start-up by Tivoli Systems founder Bob Fabbio (UX No 419, is going to preview its never-before-seen software packages this week at ComNet, some of the first stuff built for the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment, DCE.
The surprise is a thing called Distributed Access Control Manager (DACM), a generic DCE ACL security manager meant to relieve users of having construct a  defence of their own out of what DCE presents them with.
Atrium says the DCE technologies are too primitive and low-level for users to work with.
The second program is the expected Dazel which will deliver information to faxes, printers, E-mail, voice and pagers within the context of the network.
Dazel reportedly supports Postscript, SGML, SPDL, PCL, ASCII and MIF with other protocols to come.
Atrium will run on Sun boxes and Transarc's DCE with HP and IBM hardware to follow.
Dazel will sell for $5,000 for a server, $700 for a client and DACM for $2,000 for a server and $200 for a client.
Deliveries are reportedly on schedule for June.
Dazel is expected to have some big-name customer wins.
FIFTH GENERATION UNIX BACKUP FOR PCs
Baton Rouge, Louisiana-based Fifth Generation Systems, a little spitfire in the MS-DOS world, has moved on to the Unix scene with its first Unix product, Fastback Plus Unix, a $345 backup and restore utility for Intel Corp 80386 and 80486 machines running UnixWare, Interactive, SCO Unix, System V.3/V.4 and Consensys V.4.2.
It claims to be the fastest PC Unix backup program on the market clocking up to 17.5Mb a minute.
The company went out-of-house for the base technology, hooking up with Unisource Systems Inc, experts in big-time disaster recovery.
It has added its own full-featured easy-to-use character-based interface.
(We've seen, it is.)
Fifth Generation is an interesting notch in Unix' belt.
It is one of the 20 largest software companies in the US, its MS-DOS Fastback package is the industry standard and it knows a thing or two about distribution and support.
It is also not the kind of company that throws its money around so it must be confident making some on Unix.
Fastback Plus Unix product marketing manager Neil Norton figures they'll start moving 1,000 units a month direct to some large customers and through their channels.
Right now it is shy of OEM deals.
The company claims its two million DOS Fastback customers have never reported a case of data loss due to product malfunction. +1 504 291–7221
SILICON GRAPHICS USES MIPS R4400 AND TFP TO CHALLENGE CRAY
William Fellows
Shooting, it says, to become a billion dollar company by the end of its fiscal year in June, Silicon Graphics Inc last week unveiled a raft of new hardware and software products which expand its current ranges upwards.
As expected (UX Nos 407, 420), the announcement included two lines of high-end, symmetric multiprocessing server systems, a graphics subsystem, beefed-up Indigo workstations and a Unix System V.4-compliant version of its Irix operating system.
Still positioned as a technical, rather than a commercial Unix supplier — and with its sights set firmly on the Cray Y-MP and Convex Computer Corp user community — the Mountain View, California company has introduced Challenge and Power Challenge server systems, claiming Cray-equivalent performance at a tenth of the price.
The Power Challenge series uses the high-end TFP variant of Mips Technologies Inc's R4000 RISC — MIPS began development of the part in conjunction with Silicon Graphics before it was acquired by the latter — which is optimised for floating point performance.
Silicon Graphics claims the superpipelined, superscalar 64-bit TFP can execute six instructions per cycle and delivers 300 MFLOPS.
It comes as two-chip CPU board plus cache and connects to a 1.2Gbps system bus.
The deskside Power Challenge L comes with up to six TFPs and is rated at up to 1.8 GFLOPS, while the rack-mounted Power Challenge XL delivers 5.4 GFLOPS with up to 18 CPUs.
Each comes with from 64Mb to 2Gb RAM (16Gb by year-end), from 1.2Gb to one Terabyte disk, up to four Terabytes of RAID, Ethernet, four serial, one parallel, two SCSI 2, one VME and two HIO (mezzanine) slots.
Deskside systems start at £114,000, rackmounts go from £160,000: a top-end configuration will come in at around £1,000,000, the company says.
Second Challenge series
A second Challenge series of systems — what the firm calls its network resource server line — is expected to compete with more traditional Unix suppliers like Sun Microsystems Inc and Hewlett-Packard Co.
The machines use Mips latest 150MHz R4400 part — a four-CPU chip set plus cache.
The Challenge L, a deskside machine with up to 12 CPUs, is rated at 1,500 MIPS.
It comes with from 64Mb RAM and up to 6Gb disk, two SCSI II channels, Ethernet, five VME slots, one parallel and six serial ports.
It starts at £68,300 as a two-CPU box with 64Mb RAM and 1.2Gb disk.
The Challenge XL, a rack-mounted system, is configured with up to 36 R4400 processors, delivers up to 4,000 MIPS, comes with from 128Mb to 2Gb RAM (16Gb from year-end), up to one Tb of disk, 4Tb of RAID, and includes the same connectivity options as the deskside systems.
With two CPUs, 128Mb RAM and 1.2Gb disk it is priced at from £127,900.
Onyx graphics
The R4400 Challenge systems can also be configured with a new graphics engine, Onyx, which comprises up to three RealityEngine2 or VTX graphics subsystems.
Like Challenge, these are built around the Mips R4400 and come with up to 12 and six of the parts respectively.
RealityEngine2 is an enhanced version of Silicon Graphics' existing RealityEngine subsystem — VTX is aimed at users that need supercomputing performance but less graphics power.
A two-processor Onyx subsystem costs from $114,900 — with two RealityEngine2s it is priced from $643,900.
For systems administration purposes, all new servers are supplied with a visualisation console, which comes with with the firm's workstation graphics environment and the Legato Systems Inc and Veritas Software Corp file management software that it offers.
Indigos
Not content with expanding its server offerings, Silicon Graphics also expanded its Indigo product lines with new mid-range and high-end workstations.
A top-end Indigo2 Extreme uses a 100MHz R4000, comes with from 32Mb RAM, 1.2Gb disk, a 19″ colour screen, Indigo Magic — a set of software development tools for audio, visual and three-dimensional modelling — and supports the EISA bus.
It costs from $35,000, and a 150MHz R4400 upgrade board will be available from the third quarter priced at $6,000.
The mid-range Indigo XZ uses a 100MHz R4000 and replaces the Indigo XS24Z.
With from 16Mb RAM, 432Mb disk and 19″ colour screen it is priced at from $23,000.
The company hinted that a sub-£5,0000 workstation package will be its next offering.
64-bit Irix next year
All of the new systems are available this quarter and run Irix 5.0, Silicon Graphics's implementation of Unix System V.4.
Irix uses the firm's own file system, supports symmetric multiprocessing and multi-threading now, but will not support full 64-bit addressing until the beginning of next year.
Although Irix 5.0 conforms to the Mips ABI, Mips computer users running Risc/OS 5.0 or lower will have to recompile applications for the new release.
Although it eschews a commercial position, optimised database packages and a transaction processing monitor are promised for the new servers in future and new relationships with Silicon Graphics' existing suppliers are under negotiation.
EVEREX TO SELL ITS ESIX UNIX UNIT TO JAMES RIVER
As expected, Everex Systems Inc, based in Fremont, California, is to sell off its Esix Systems Unix operating systems arm — and the buyer is Minneapolis, Minnesota-based James River Group Inc.
The deal was being completed as we went to press, subject to approval by the bankruptcy courts.
Everex filed for Chapter 11 protection on January 4 after a projected loss of between $80m to $100m for 1992.
James River plans to integrate technology from its ICE 10+ and ICE TCP personal computer-to-Unix communications applications with the Esix shrink-wrapped version of Unix System V.4.
Ian Cummings, James River's European sales director, says the company will aim the resulting operating system package at small businesses.
The Esix product and company will continue to operate under the Esix name.
The enhanced Esix product will be sold through new channels as well as existing Esix and James River distributors.
Cummings described Esix's worldwide distribution strategy as ‘haphazard’, and said that James River intends to increase its worldwide distribution, especially in Europe.
James River: +44 474 709200
NOBLENET READIES EZ-RPC FOR SUN PC-NFS — LAN MANAGER, NETWARE VERSIONS TO FOLLOW
Noblenet Inc, the Natick, Massachusetts-based developer of EZ-RPC  transport-independent remote procedure call software, is trying to make it big and and is looking for OEMs to sell its distributed computing technology.
It has already signed UK distributor Personal Workstations Ltd, London, and wants outlets in Germany and France.
Noblenet's problem is that its major competitor, Boulder, Colorado-based Netwise Inc has already mopped up most of the potential outlets with its RPC-Toolkit offering.
Noblenet is currently negotiating with Sun Microsystems Inc and Hewlett-Packard Co and believes their interest in EZ-RPC lies in the product's ability to rejuvenate the ageing network topologies the two still have, respectively the Open Networking Computing and Network Computing System environments.
Noblenet will release an EZ-RPC version of Sun's PC-NFS protocol later this year.
Like EZ-RPC, the PC-NFS version will sit on top of Network File System libraries generating PC-NFS-based remote procedure calls (RPCs) or transport indpendent RPC's as required.
EZ-RPC PC-NFS will enable developers to distribute specific sub-routines of an application across multi-vendor networks to which ever host is best suited to the processing task.
Microsoft Corp LAN Manager and Novell Inc NetWare versions of EZ-RPC will follow.
PARITY TO RESELL AXIL SPARCS
RISC-based peripherals reseller Parity Systems Inc, Sunnyvale, California, will be distributing Sparc-a-likes from both Axil Workstations Inc, the San Jose, California-based Hyundai Electronics Co offshoot, and from the parent's Workstation Division.
The first are aimed at the commercial market; the latter at the technical.
The initial product, debuted last week at the Client/Server expo in California, is a Hyundai Sparcstation 10 clone paired with a 43.2GB Parity PS5900 Tower Subsystem to make the Parity PerformancePlus File Server.
Parity says it will have its PerformancePlus models fitted with 33MHz, 36MHz and 40MHz Viking chips.
While the first two models should be available in the next few weeks, delivery on the biggest one won't be until after the end of the quarter due to the relative scarcity of 40MHz chips.
Parity has only priced the entry-level.
It's going for $22,775 with 32MB, 640MB disk, 14″ SVGA colour monitor and 7GB storage.
Parity expects to sell to end users and have the boxes rebranded by an integrator who sells into the petrochemical industry.
MINIGRAMS
XVT Software Inc, Boulder, Colorado, will ship version 2 of XVT-Design, its graphical user interface (GUI) design tool in April, which supports seven different front-ends and includes a range of enhanced integration features.
It is priced at $1,200 on Intel Corp 80486 boxes — $2,900 on workstations.
XVT US: +1 303 443 4223.
XVT Europe + 49 6103 37940.
Qualix Group Inc, San Francisco, California, has formed Qualix Direct, a new division to expedite large-volume Unix/client-server software purchases.
The move institutionalises the company's eight-month-old Cheap Seats programme.
The unit is targeted at customers needing little or no integration services or consultation.
It is focused on pricing and delivering saying Unix software has outgrown the long sales cycle.
This year's annual Hewlett-Packard Co user association meet, Interex 1993, runs from April 4–7th at the Washington State Convention Center: registration details +1 408 738 4848.
We gather we should regard the coming Digital Equipment Corp Triumph Alpha RISC PC as a Sun Microsystems Inc Classic knockoff.
What else can you call it if it's priced from $3,500 and $4,000 and meant to be a network client.
Sunnyvale, California-based MasPar Computer Corp wants us to know it shipped 13 MP-2 massively parallel machines in 1992, calling it a ‘faster-than-projected start-up’ for a box introduced in October 1992.
Motorola Inc is into volume production on its long overdue superscalar highly pipelined 88110 RISC multiprocessing unit, promising it will not be the last of the line.
Its brought in Phil Pompa from Advanced Micro Devices Inc 29000 line to handle marketing.
The 88000 line and the PowerPC will be handled by the same sales team though Motorola is thinking of dividing the world into vertical segments.
Could it have it both ways?
Could the Santa Cruz Operation Inc go public and get acquired?
Think about it.
Meanwhile, some quarters are wondering why Sun Microsystems Inc hasn't been around to kick SCO's tyres.
Arnet Corp, Nashville, Tennessee, has signed Tech Data Inc to distribute its fax and I/O boards in the US: it has a new X-Windows facsimile viewer programme for Intel iAPX-86 Unix systems: prices start at $1,300.
Meanwhile, it has appointed Janet Shelton OEM sales manager and has a new director of marketing, Fred Berry, who joins from Emulex Corp.
Arnet has also signed up the Polish Clico Hi-Tech Software Promotion Centre Ltd to distribute its wares in Poland.
+1 615 834 8
Digital Equipment Corp has reportedly decided to delay putting its sales force on commission until July.
It was to be this month.
A shadow programme to give people an idea what they'd earn on commission is in effect meantime.
Acer America Corp says it is shipping AcerFrame 500, an entry-level, diskless Intel Corp 80486-based, EISA server for up to to 40 users: with 4Mb RAM, eight slots, SCSI II channel and floppy drive, it runs SCO Unix, OS/2, NetWare, MS-DOS and NT (when it arrives) and starts at $2,300.
Rosemount, Illinois-based Covia Technologies is putting its Communications Integrator message-based distributed computing software up under Sunsoft Inc's Solaris.
Bill Coleman, vice president of systems software at SunSoft Inc, is taking a delayed leave of absence and is replaced by his right-hand woman, Helen Bradley.
Coleman should be gone three to six months and his boss SunSoft president Ed Zander says he'll be back probably with added powers.
Toronto, Canada-based Empress Software Inc has put its software on LynxOS, the first port of a commercial database and 4GL to the Lynx Real Time Systems Inc operating system.
What with the Santa Cruz Operation's new president Lars Turndal being the new kid on the block and a stranger to most of the people who'll have to deal with him, we thought we'd give a little of his background.
He's 56, Swedish and married with two kids.
He's held senior international management positions with Sperry Univac, DEC and Burroughs.
He joined SCO from MSI Data, the portable data collection equipment people.
Previously he'd been president of Memorex' international group.
Doug Michels, now SCO's official chief technology officer, reportedly had more control over the future of the company than he used to but is likewise more accountable, measured by what he delivers, they say.
The Microprocessor Report finds DEC has reduced prices on its Alpha 21064 CPUs from $1,559 to $1,096 in quantities of a thousand and $800 in quantities of 50,000.
Boy, that's a relief.
The market researcher Summit Strategies Inc points out that Unix was developed before Bill Gates was even in high school.
The research group also figures Novell Inc will try to boost Unix System Labs' $150,000 revenue per employee near term to at least $210,000 — the minimum Novell believes is required to get a 10% net margin.
However, it also claims ‘Novell will gladly sacrifice a portion of the possible Unix market to expand the market for NetWare.
It has a plan to do just that.’
Naperville, Illinois-based Unir Corp has signed a distribution agreement with AT&T to sell and support AT&T's eight-year old object programming language and development environment C3.
C3 includes a graphical development environment, a graphical browser, a compiler and interactive debugger.
It also provides interfaces to C, C++, ParcPlace Systems Inc's Smalltalk and LISP.
The initial version is available for Sun Sparcstations — NT and Apple A/UX editions are underway.
Prices start at $800 per workstation.
Those canny souls that know how often these things fall at the last hurdle can stop holding their breath and relax over Tadpole Technology Plc's deal to do a Power RISC-based notebook for IBM Corp: IBM has paid £325,000 for 500,000 new Tadpole shares at what is now the bargain issue price of 65p, which at last week's price of 224 pence gives it an instant paper profit of £795,000; it also gets warrants for 2.22m more shares at the same price to take it to 12.9%.
Digital Equipment Corp says it intends delivering Open Software Foundation Distributed Computing Environment on its OpenVMS AXP platform later this year.
Last week it put out a DCE Developers' Kit for OpenVMS on VAX platforms.
Meanwhile, its name Adriana Stadecker, who's been managing the company's redesign and restructuring, vice president, executive operations reporting to president Bob Palmer.
She will be responsible for overseeing strategic and operational plans.
Norcross, Georgia-based Dickens Data Corp, IBM's top US RS/6000 remarketer, is the first reseller named to handle Bull's DPX/20 systems, the new RISC product line based on IBM's Power architecture.
It's signed a $2m contract.
Electronic Engineering Times pegs the Pentium at $1,200 initially.
IXI Ltd has ported the OSF/Motif graphical user interface and its X.desktop manager to SunSoft Inc's Solaris 2.1 operating system.
The UK, Cambridge-based firm says demand has been generated by volume sales of the low-end SparcClassic workstation, which does not run earlier versions of Sun's operating system: it ships this month priced at £140 — £200 for a development pack.
ASK Ingres has appointed Jean-Paul Minar senior vice president of worldwide marketing: he was previously managing director of Ingres France.
Thirteen Japanese companies have banded together as the Tuxedo Promotion Group in support of Unix System Labs' on-line transaction processing monitor, Tuxedo.
They include Fujitsu Ltd, Oki Data & Electric Co, Nihon Unisys, Olivetti of Japan, Tandem Japan, ASCII, AT&T Software Japan Ltd and Nihon Oracle.
Toshiba, a Sparc RISC win which did some fabricating of Mips chips, is considering developing a 32-bit R3000 variant for use as a portable terminal CPU.
According to the Japanese press, the move would be designed to counter Apple Computer Inc ARM chip for Newton and AT&T Hobbit.
Toshiba would launch a design/development project within the year and commercialise a ship-chip CPU early in 1994.
Mips lives!
The old Apache Group, now restyled the Mips ABI Group, has added a few members (current count is 16) and is going to stage a rally later this month to wheel out the promised ABI.
Cheerleaders, mostly in the form of software companies, will be there to say they have or will comply.