

IXI AGREES TO SELL OUT TO SANTA CRUZ OPERATION
After the Cambridge, UK company had been pursued by a couple of unwanted suitors, Santa Cruz Operation Inc last week stepped in and took high-flying IXI Ltd out of the loop.
No cash changed hands and the friendly acquisition was completed via a stock swap arrangement between the two privately held firms under US accounting rules.
Marriage between Unix-on-Intel house Santa Cruz and the British graphical front-end specialist was supported by all shareholders on both sides — including SCO board member Microsoft Corp — and blessed by IX OEMs which include Compagnie des Machines Bull SA, Digital Equipment Corp, IBM Corp, ICL Plc, NCR Corp, NEC Corp and Unisys Corp.
Observers see the acquisition as a logical match, and — following Novell Inc's planned acquisition of Unix System Labs — evidence of further consolidation in the Unix industry, this time around the desktop.
IXI will remain intact as an SCO subsidiary, and is to take over some responsibility for the development of Open Desktop — SCO's graphical operating system bundle which has yet to deliver in the manner promised.
IXI is expected to use other SCO technologies for new groupware and tools that will roll into its pervasive Motif-based X.desktop manager, of which 250,000 users are claimed.
Sources close to the deal say SCO is now expected to do versions of its iAPX-86 software for RISC architectures so it can compete on corporate accounts which demand Unix for RISC systems and Microsoft Corp software on Intel Corp boxes.
IXI's international offices in San Ramon, California; Minneapolis, Minnesota; and Tokyo, will remain in place, though the upstate San Ramon unit may be collapsed into SCO's San Francisco sales operation.
Full details of the transaction were not disclosed, but IXI shareholders, which include a number of employees, plus investors like Tomen Electronics Co in Japan and Hermann Hauser, have exchanged their holdings for newly-issued Santa Cruz common stock.
 Flotation 
IXI founder and chairman, Ray Anderson, who owns just less than half of all IXI shares coverts his holding to a ‘significant’ stake in SCO and takes a vice president post at the company, reporting directly to recently appointed SCO boss, Lars Turndal.
Anderson  remains managing director of IXI and gets a position on SCO's new management committee, whilst Turndal and other SCO executives take seats on the IXI board.
‘IXI will add more to the value of SCO than the dilution of the shares involved,’ according to Anderson.
And, in a clear reference to SCO's well-publicised drive towards a  flotation in the US, he said the acquisition will provide ‘a faster route to liquidity for IXI shareholders.’
Five-year-old IXI, with 50 employees, turned over £3.5m ($6m) last year and has a healthy £2m in the bank.
SCO reported $160m of business in the year-end to September 30th and has 1,110 staff.
IXI said it had been courted by a couple of other Unix suppliers, but decided some months ago to offer itself up to its OEM partner.
The deal was finally kicked into life by Turndal, who on his appointment said SCO would be looking to acquire additional system software technologies and utilities from outside (UX No 420).
Insiders say the issue of new SCO stock will not dilute existing shareholdings significantly: former president Larry Michels has 16%, his son and current chief technology officer Doug, holds 20%, Microsoft has 16%, employees own 22% and other investors have 26%.
UNIX SUPPLIERS TEAM ON COMMON DESKTOP FEATURES
The spectre of the ubiquity of the Microsoft Windows interface is pushing a lot of big names like IBM Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co, Digital Equipment Corp, Santa Cruz Operation Inc, SunSoft Inc, Novell Inc and Unix System Labs toward standardising on some common look-and-feel features for Unix.
Their joint efforts will be known collectively as CDE, the Common Desktop Environment.
As reported briefly (UX No 423), initial agreement is expected to establish a standard for installing Unix software from within graphical user interfaces.
The X/Open Co Ltd-compliant specification, known as the Distributed Format for Desktop Architecture, DFDA, and contributed by IXI Ltd, will provide a standard set of techniques for independent software vendors to write to, allowing users to get Unix applications up and running from an install icon within a variety of graphical environments without resort to shell commands.
With the support of IBM and HP now apparently secure — despite their other endeavours, see below — an announcement is expected at the Uniforum show in a couple of weeks time.
IBM AND HP ‘WORK ON COMMON INTERFACE’— HP ‘OFFERED 20% OF TALIGENT’
Latest gossip has IBM Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co working on a separate agenda for desktop Unix using IBM's Common User Access specification and dubbed COSI, or common operating system interface (UX No 424).
Other Unix suppliers are said to be treating the IBM/HP effort very cautiously — some are worried that it may turn out to be a trojan horse for proprietary technologies (UX No 423).
The suggestion is that COSI will pick up on the work of Taligent Inc, the object-oriented operating software joint venture between IBM and Apple Computer Inc.
However, sources say IBM has been making Taligent's life a misery lately, by insisting that Taligent use its Distributed System Object Model — a general purpose mechanism for communicating between objects based upon the OS/2 2.0 workplace shell, also up on AIX (UX No 423).
The technology is regarded as regressive by Taligent staff, and IBM's insistence reportedly convinced several key employees to quit.
However, as recently as last week, IBM is said to have realised that its shell technology does not comply with the Object Management Group CORBA specifications and has been urging HP to throw its OMG-compliant Distributed Object Management Facility into the pot.
DOMF is HP's object technology which grew out of its joint software development project with Sun Microsystems Inc, and which seems to have gone very cool of late (UX No 423).
More interestingly, sources say that HP is currently weighing a 20% stake in Taligent to cement the new relationship, while IBM brass have been meeting with HP officials at various locations around the US over the last few days firefighting for their support.
WELCOME TO THE NEW WORLD ORDER AS THE PRETENDERS LINE UP TO FIGHT FOR IBM's CROWN
Tim Palmer
With Hewlett-Packard Co heading for $18,800m turnover this year and Fujitsu Ltd at around the $26,000m mark, while Digital Equipment Corp looks hopefully to Alpha to rocket it off its $14,000m-a-year launchpad, the contenders to take over leadership of the mainstream computer industry from IBM Corp are lining up — and a major new round of mergers and acquisitions could be on the way.
Until the last couple of years, Fujitsu looked the most likely company to catch IBM up in terms of size and reach, but the company is now beset by all the problems that assail IBM, led by an over-dependence on mainframes.
In the mid-range, its key products are derivative, coming from its ICL Plc affiliate and Sun Microsystems Inc, while in personal computers it is an also-ran in Japan, not visible in the US, and only a significant player in Europe by proxy via ICL.
Its strongest American card is its 44% stake in Amdahl Corp, and while IBM appears to be playing into Amdahl's hands in the short term, Amdahl knows it has to build a big new business almost from scratch out of Unix and its Huron applications development and delivery environment if it is to grow much beyond its present $2,500m or so annual business.
Nor is Fujitsu in any position to improve its position with another acquisition — its balance sheet is too stretched and it can't use its shares — too few US investors would want to hold them.
Loser
Hewlett-Packard currently looks by far the best placed of the biggest manufacturers to come out as the winner in the 1990s — but then three or four years ago, that was being said about DEC.
At present, everything that Hewlett-Packard is doing looks right: it has won itself a reputation of taking better care of its customers, an example being the way it is not forcing its MPE users to move to Unix, instead letting them migrate at their own pace.
In Unix, it has succeeded in creating the impression that it has far more of the management, security and support capabilities in place than any of its competitors, and while this may not be entirely valid, time and again in the computer industry, winning the perception is nine tenths of the battle: in the 1970s, it was universally acknowledged among the cognoscenti that Burroughs Corp had by far the best mainframe architecture and operating software, but that did nothing to prevent the vast majority of its users migrating to IBM over time.
IBM was perceived as the winner, just as today, even the things it does right are in trouble because IBM is perceived as the industry's most emphatic loser, and more and more people are talking seriously about the company being in danger of going the same way as Prime Computer Inc, Wang Laboratories Inc and Control Data Corp.
And Hewlett-Packard, with its laser printers, has demonstrated that it still has the ability to build a major business from scratch, and its OEM disk drive business, although not very visible, is treated with respect by its competitors.
Because all of DEC's business is computer-related, it remains slightly bigger than Hewlett-Packard in computers — Hewlett has its medical electronics and instruments businesses as well, but computers are becoming more and more dominant with every year.
The case of DEC is tantalising: either the Alpha will do for the company what the VAX 8600 — quickly supplanted by the VAX 8650 — did for it in the 1980s, and the vast installed base of VAX machines will be replaced by Alpha AXPs, giving the company three years of fantastic growth that propel it to $25,000m, or the desperately late Alpha and the new OpenVMS will turn out to have too many bugs and glitches to be trusted, in which case, DEC will be trotting off after IBM.
There is an assumption behind all this that size does matter, which seems to be belied by the fact that IBM's enormous $60,000m a year bulk has been unable to save the company — but IBM's problems all arise from the fact that the company's business is so hopelessly slewed to one sector of the market, with products that fewer and fewer people are going to be happy to own.
IBM's personal computers business may be enormous, but it has never made very much money, and it is now more like a millstone than an asset.
The company has only two attractive businesses now, the AS/400 at $14,000m or so a year, and the RS/6000, at barely $2,000m — which means that in the rankings above, the truly viable computer businesses of IBM lie between Hewlett-Packard and DEC.
Economies of scale mean that size does still matter: to succeed, companies have to grow while constantly guarding against building the sclerotic bureaucracy that bolsters a sense of infallibility that was IBM's ultimate downfall.
And  Hewlett-Packard has shown itself willing to make regular infilling acquisitions as it has grown — the company was heavily castigated for the price it paid for Apollo Computer Inc, but without Apollo, it would not be in anything like such a strong position today.
The two other big diversified computer companies are Unisys Corp at $8,400m or so, and NCR Corp at $7,100m — only the same size as Apple Computer Inc, a pure personal computer play with few designs on the data centre — and if AT&T Co is really serious about making it big in the computer industry, it will soon have to start thinking of buying NCR a present — and Unisys begins to look tempting now that James Unruh has finally got the company onto an even keel and Unisys' own mainframe millstones under control.
NCR and Unisys are both following the same Intel Corp with everything Unix strategy, and Unisys' strong position in banking and reservations would provide new outlets for NCR's strengths in special purpose terminals.
Shareholders in Unisys have been through so much misery, the fear that the IBM mainframe blight will soon infect the company is so great that no reasonable offer for the company is likely to be refused — and while the Unisys debt burden is now manageable, it is still onerous for a company of Unisys' size, but AT&T's credit remains almost as good as gold.
The main fact that would make AT&T look twice is that it would not likely play well with its own shareholders in the short term.
Crazy
Compagnie des Machines Bull SA is in such a bad way that only the determination of the French state keeps it alive, and Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA is not much healthier.
One company that could still make an impact on the world computer market is Siemens-Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG — but only if Siemens is serious about remaining — outside Germany — a force in the computer industry.
Siemens Nixdorf is in as bad a way as IBM, and only a couple of years behind Bull, and that simply because the German public sector still hasn't realised it's crazy to pay $50,000 or more per MIPS for computing power.
The depth of the recession facing Germany means that the boom must fall soon, and then about the only way for Siemens to save the company will be to make a major acquisition that finally puts it onto the world stage.
Companies like Sequent Computer Systems Corp and Pyramid Technology Corp are technologically compatible — but painfully small to make much difference, which suggests that a bold move for another technologically compatible company — with a nice sideline fit in telecommunications — Tandem Computers Inc, is the smallest acquisition that would make a real difference — but it's hard to see cautious Siemens being that bold.
Welcome to the New World Order.
NETWISE CLOSES EUROPEAN SALES OFFICES
Remote procedure call technology firm, Netwise Inc is retreating to its home base in Boulder, Colorado.
It closed its European sales offices last week because, according to sources, ‘of lack of interest from end-users and few takers for the [RPC Toolkit]early adoption programme’.
Netwise's RPC Toolkit is OEMed by the likes of Sun Microsystems Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co and Unix System Labs.
Netwise's latest crisis comes just a year after its then UK subsidiary, Netwise International Ltd, went into liquidation owing substantial amounts to both the parent organisation and other creditors.
It re-appeared a few weeks later as Netwise UK Ltd, in what some creditors argued at the time was ‘an apparent breach of Section 312 of the UK Insolvency Act of 1986,’(UX No 375).
The new Netwise UK Ltd subsequently formed other direct sales operations around Europe, including Netwise Europe BV in Naarden, Netherlands, and offices in France and Germany.
Netwise's European general manager, Rob Rietveld, said last week ‘this was an error of judgement by the company.
Netwise thought direct sales would increase by expanding into potential geographical markets.
We also over estimated the interest in our early adopters programme.’
Netwise Inc financed the European subsidiaries with $8.5m raised via a third round of venture  capital funding last August.
Reportedly, Netwise could not afford to continue financing the European effort once the cash had dried up.
The twelve staff employed in European offices have been made redundant.
Netwise says its US operations remain open and describes its financial health as ‘fairly stable.’
Netwise is now setting up indirect channels across Europe, using a chain of  independent software developers and VARs.
The firm will support existing European customers from Boulder.
DEC WILL PHASE OUT MANUFACTURING IN GALWAY AT COST OF 780 JOBS
As always seemed likely, despite the frenzied last ditch efforts of the Irish lobby, Digital Equipment Corp has decided that it is the Galway plant that must close, with the loss of 780 jobs.
The company is softening the blow a little by retaining the Galway research and development operation, which employs 350 people.
DEC also employs 350 sales and service personnel in Ireland.
Irish Employment Minister Ruairi Quinn flew to Boston last weekend for talks with DEC president Robert Palmer in a bid to save the Galway jobs, and Tony O'Reilly, Irish-born chairman of H J Heinz Co, was also rallied to lobby DEC, but to no avail.
Manufacturing operations — the plant makes VAX 9000s and VAX 6000s — will be gradually phased out over the next 12 months, with completion expected by February next year.
IBM, HEWLETT-PACKARD RALLY SUN TO THEIR FIBRE CHANNEL INITIATIVE
IBM Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co promised back in December that they would formally unveil their Fibre Channel Systems Initiative ‘in six to eight weeks’ and that all the major workstation companies had signed up (UX Nos 414, 424).
They duly unveiled the initiative last week, but the only name they were able to add to their own was that of Sun Microsystems Computer Corp.
The aim of the initiative is to agree a standard for 1Gbps communication over fibre optic cable between workstation and workstation, workstation and peripherals, workstation and outside services and peripheral to peripheral, starting out by working on high-speed communication between applications running on multiple workstations from more than one vendor.
The aim of this is to use the Fibre Channel to share the processing of complex applications, such as stock market analyses among clustered computers — effectively providing a physical layer to underlie the Distributed Computing Environment.
Another application mentioned is the instant transmission by doctors of large data files containing diagnostic images to other offices.
IBM and Hewlett-Packard aim in the medium term to hand over work from the Initiative to an FC/Open consortium.
The Initiative will propose selected sets of Fibre Channel options called profiles to be made available to the industry as a basis for building products.
The profiles in turn will be based on the proposed Fibre Channel Interconnect standard in public review under the guidelines of the American National Standards Institute.
HYPERSCALAR RIOS 2 SET FOR SUMMER
IBM Corp is ready with a new generation of its Rios RISC, the RIOS 2 for June or July launch, which will be able to execute as many as six instructions per clock cycle, US reports say.
It doubles up branch and conditional registers and integer and floating point units and a version of the PowerPC, derived from the design, is expected to execute up to four instructions per cycle, although whether those kinds of superscalar performances can often be achieved in practice will depend on how well the compilers are optimised for the new internal architecture.
One version of Rios 2 apparently combines nine separate chips on a substrate 4’ square.
The technology used in the RIOS 2 three-chip chipset — which IBM will use in upcoming Power Parallel machines (UX No 422)— should re-establish IBM as the performance leader, says The Microprocessor Report, which estimates the thing will fetch around 100 SPECint92.
Floating point performance could reach 250 SPECfp92, exceeding even Silicon Graphics Inc forthcoming TFP part, it notes.
First system shipments are due around the third quarter.
…
AS IBM GOES PUBLIC ON PLANS TO BUILD FUTURE AS/400s AROUND POWERPC
IBM Corp has been muttering about migrating to RISC technology for the AS/400 processor for a year or so now, and the company is now talking openly about it, saying that the AS/400 will move to a RISC, but not until several criteria are met.
That comes from Keith Slack, director of systems development hardware and technology for IBM's Application Business Systems division, speaking at the Paris launch of the new RS/6000s.
Shipping a RISC-based AS/400 will require a 64-bit architecture — the AS/400 CPU is a 48-bit device, appropriate commercial extensions to that architecture, reliable, high-performance multiprocessors, and changes to the AS/400 operating system to migrate to RISC transparently to the user, Slack said.
IBM should soon have its own 64-bit RISC architecture with the 620 PowerPC chip, Slack added.
Said John Thompson, IBM vice-president and Application Business Systems general manager, ‘We will implement RISC [on the AS/400], but not until it catches up with the AS/400 architecture, which we think is more advanced…and until we can do it in a way that won't disrupt the customer's applications.’
The new AS/400s of course already use Intel Corp's 80960 RISC processor in their input-output subsystems, Slack noted.
HP's NEXT RISC INCLUDES FULL MOTION VIDEO
The low-cost 7100LC version of the Precision Architecture RISC that Hewlett-Packard Co is developing is generating growing excitement, and could give the company a significant edge in winning space on the desktop of the future.
According to Computer Reseller News it will incorporate parts of both the Motion Picture and the Joint Photographic Experts Groups algorithms, rendering it capable of running video at 30 frames a second without additional hardware.
It will also handle both little and big endian byte ordering so as to be able to run personal computer operating systems such as Windows NT as well as Unix, although the company denied that it had any plans to support NT on it — the capability is simply there if anyone wants it in the future, the company said.
The part, due to start appearing in products next year, will be clocked at 60MHz and will include on-chip cache controller and new graphics instructions.
INTEL's NI1000 CHIP HOLDS PROSPECT OF COMMERCIAL NEURAL NETWORKS
If neural networks are ever to become more than a lab curiosity with the odd exotic application in the real world, Intel Corp's new Ni1000 chip, developed with Providence, Rhode Island-based Nestor Inc should provide the breakthrough.
In contrast to Intel's first neural network chip, the 80170NX, which had an analogue design, the Ni1000 is all digital, and integrates 1,024 neurons with a large block of Flash memory for storing learned patterns on-chip and a 16-bit microcontroller to handle the learning application.
It has a standard microprocessor bus interface, and is claimed to execute 20G-operations per second, so that it can recognise thousands of text characters a second compared with 10 to 100 per second for a personal computer running character recognition software.
The Ni1000 can be combined with a personal computer for fast character recognition, Intel says.
It was developed with grants of $1.2m from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, $400,000 from the US Office of Naval Research.
It is sampling now; no prices.
THREAT OF NT ‘NOT ENOUGH’ FOR UNITY
One of the companies involved in what can only be described as the latest round of unity talks that Unix International seems to be sponsoring (UX No 423, 424) says that for all the fear, uncertainty and doubt unleashed by Microsoft Corp, the project still lacks the compulsion that galvanized the industry to form the Open Software Foundation five years ago.
It needs that extra-special final bit of stimulation.
The company says one of the points at issue in the unity talks is support of Unix SVR4 ES/MP.
What it believes is needed is the leadership of SunSoft Inc throwing its weight behind ES/MP.
OSF OPENS LABS FOR INTEROPERABILITY TESTING
Now pursuing a wider marketing brief to boost its coffers, the Open Software Foundation has opened up labs at its Cambridge, Massachusetts-based headquarters as an interoperability testing site.
Initially focused on Distributed Computing Environment interoperability testing — apparently much needed (UX No)— OSF says the Interoperability Lab replicates end-user environments and provides for real-world testing and verification.
The Lab has eleven machines from six vendors available for use, including HP-UX on PA-RISC, DEC OSF/1 on Alpha AXP, Sinix and Unix SVR4 on Siemens Nixdorf Intel boxes, Solaris and SunOS on Sun Sparc systems, IBM RS/6000s running AIX3.2 and Mips-based DECstations with OSF/1 plus Transarc Corp on-line transaction processing and Gradient Technologies network licencing software.
+1 617 621 7300
…
APPOINTS NEW TECHNOLOGY CHIEFS
The Open Software Foundation's recent wrestling with its internal structure (UX No 423), reportedly a product of its continuing financial angst, has created a reorganisation that separates OSF/1, the operating system that brought it into existence, from the other technologies it has put its name to.
OSF/1 is now off on its own under vice president, engineering Roger Gourd who has added the title of vice president/corporate planning to his chevrons.
As such, he reports to president David Tory.
The organisation's other technologies — the Distributed Computing and Management Environments and Motif — are now parts of a unit under a newly created vice president, interoperability Jeanette Horan who had been director of Motif and OSF/1 engineering.
Both engineering and marketing functions, the latter known around the non-profit OSF as business area management, have been brought together under the new structure.
Reportedly OSF is motivated in setting things up like this to see the technologies can stand on their own.
The OSF Research Company, which does advanced development like the microkernel, is apparently unscathed because it operates on a different funding model.
The consortium is breaking out education, customer support, computer facilities, corporate communications and sales.
These functions will support all the others.
The office of chief operating officer that OSF created a few months ago has been abolished.
The incumbent is now off in hot pursuit of government funding for the much-enlarged interoperability lab, see above.
NOVELL TAKES GRADIENT LICENSING SOFTWARE
Novell and Gradient Technologies have cut a strategic deal that will put Gradient's standard-setting software licensing technology on NetWare.
Beside an Electronic Software Licensing (ESL) NetWare Loadable Module (NLM), the partners will deliver tools providing access to ESL services that licence-enabled NetWare applications can be built on.
They expect to co-develop a significantly enhanced version of Gradient's NetLS license server technology, part of its iFor/LS suite, in a NLM optimised for NetWare 3. x and 4. x.
It will be transport-independent to support emerging comms protocols.
Availability is expected in this year.
NetLS software developer kit are due in the third quarter.
Pricing has not been set.
VISUAL EDGE HAS NEW UIM/X RELEASE
Montreal, Canada-based Visual Edge Software Ltd will introduce version 2.5 of its UIM/X Motif graphical user interface (GUI) builder in May, priced at from $5,000.
Enhancements to the new release include the ability to build GUI object classes which comply with the Object Management Group's CORBA C application programming interface specification.
The tool which now supports Motif 2.1 will also generate C++ GUI objects.
UIM/X OEMs include Control Data, DEC, IBM, Silicon Graphics, Data General, HP and Motorola — distributors are Astec in Japan; It Connexions, Australia; Patzschke and Rasp, Germany; Uniras, Europe; Metavision, France; Protek, Europe; Choreo Systems, Canada; Bluestone Consulting and Black & White Software, US. +1 514 332 6430.
SUN FRANCE FORMS CLUB OF USERS INTERESTED IN DOWNSIZING
To study the benefits of downsizing a corporate information system, Sun Microsystems France has set up a ‘club de reflexion’ of approximately 40 French directors of information technology, says Eric Saillard, manager of rightsizing marketing at Sun's French subsidiary.
The club is an outgrowth of a downsizing market study undertaken for Sun France last November by Paris-based market research specialist Whatever.
The study of 90 French enterprises, of which 70% were not Sun clients, determined that the majority, 79%, of the respondents see a major evolution in their computing architecture.
Of those that responded ‘oui’, the top three evolutive choices were, in order of preference: establishing a new client-server architecture; converting applications for dedicated servers; and interconnecting networks.
Collaboration
‘The idea is to bring these management information systems directors together and have them discuss how they judge the profitability of a new computing architecture and to talk about the results they may have had from rightsizing changes,’ Saillard says.
‘We want to try to model the economies that can be realised from downsizing by studying particular cases.’
Only between 10% and 20% of the club's participants are Sun clients, Saillard says.
It is scheduled to meet on April 15, after which it will continue to meet either as a whole group or in subcommittees, ‘according to the desires of the group,’ he said.
Saillard says the results of the group's study would be used first by the participants and then by Sun.
‘It's a collaboration between Sun and the directors,’ he said.
Of the study, Saillard says the most important results were those that showed users' preferences for client-server architecture, dedicated application servers and interconnected networks.
‘It aligns exactly to our strategy.
We are the defender of client-server architecture, and installing dedicated servers under Unix is our way of attacking the mainframe,’ he said.
Sun France did not choose the survey subjects, he added.
‘We wanted a realistic study.
To have polled Sun clients would not have been realistic,’ Saillard commented —‘We gave Whatever a list of 500 names and they chose from that.’
McNEALY SUNBEAMS
Sun Microsystems Inc chief executive officer, Scott McNealy, says he's sick and tired of the press Intel Corp's getting about chips it can't deliver.
Sun too has chips in development — seven of them in fact.
So McNealy says he's going to put his people on a road show to compare ‘vapourchips to  vapourchips .’
Among the ones they're likely to tout are the MicroSparc 2, 3 and 4 they're working on.
The current Tsunami run meanwhile is reportedly exceeding expectations in speed and yield.
SunSoft Inc has been secretly working on writing a Microsoft Corp Windows application programming interface in a clean room so Solaris will be able to run a copy of Excel, let's say, that's bought from a high street software shop.
Being a man of a few select words, Scott McNealy claims it ‘works good and runs fast.’
Logically, it's called WAPI.
Scott McNealy told Wall Street analysts last week that Sun has more 40MHz Vikings than it knows what to do with and that Texas Instruments Inc ‘could bury’ Sun in the chips if it would let it.
Actual quantities, which exceed internal expectations of only a month ago, boil down to between 100,000 and 200,000 units a quarter which in turn means that by the end of the current quarter Sun expects to be able to fill all the back orders it has for Model 41 Sparcstation 10s plus the orders they get in the intervening weeks.
McNealy also said the hard-won 45MHz and 50MHz versions of the Viking, aka SuperSparc, would be abundant by the end of the second quarter thanks to a third iteration of the masks.
Silicon availability has McNealy bragging that Sun will have more multiprocessing servers out by the end of this year than all the rest of the world combined in the history of the world.
McNealy-on-NT: the Sun chief told Wall Street last week that he reckoned ‘it'll be a long time before information managers start drinking that Kool-Aid.’
UNIFY EMPLOYS GALAXY FOR ACCELL OBJECT
Unify Corp, Sacramento, California, is using Galaxy, Visix Software Inc's new object-oriented application programming environment, to build its next generation of software products including Accell/OO, an object version of its 4GL development system.
Accell/OO — or whatever it is known as by the time it comes to market — will have full graphical and object-oriented functions, Unify says.
 Retson , Virginia-based Visix's Galaxy software, introduced last year (UX No 399), enables developers to develop applications across multi-vendor platforms irrespective of operating system or graphical user interface.
Galaxy is written in C and C++, provides an application programming interface (API) plus an open software backplane for third party tools to plug in to.
According to Unify, Galaxy will ‘pretty up’ Accell's look and feel and allow it to hook into other graphical and non-Unix environments.
Galaxy currently supports Motif, Open Look, IBM CUA, X-Windows, the Object Management Group's CORBA specification, Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment, Sun Microsystems Inc's Open Network Computing environment, Microsoft Corp's Object Linking and Embedding specification and the Apple Computer Inc Mac.
Unify, which unveiled a bunch of Accell enhancements last year — including Accell/SQL, a gateway that provides Unix-to-IBM DB/2 access, and Accell/TP, its Tuxedo-based transaction processing 4GL — will begin releasing its object stuff by the end of the year.
Unify: 1 916 928 6400.
Visix: +1 703 758 8230
APPLE GOES TO THIRD PARTIES FOR POWERPC MACS IN NICHE MARKETS
Apple Computer Inc is apparently negotiating with third party manufacturers — including Radius Inc and DayStar Digital Inc — to develop PowerPC versions of the Macintosh for specific markets, according to Computer Reseller News.
It says third parties will use the Macintosh  Compatibility Module, which allows lets shrink-wrapped Mac applications to run on the Apple/IBM/Motorola PowerOpen/PowerPC system under development.
Radius, the paper says, will likely do a multiprocessing PowerPC Mac, whilst DayStar might develop an image processing system.
ONTOS PLANS OBJECT ENHANCEMENTS
Object-oriented software developer, Ontos Inc, Burlington, Massachusetts will introduce integration enhancements for Ontos DB, its object-oriented database and application development environment in September.
These include two object-linking Storage Managers — for the Sybase relational database and IBM's IMS mainframe database — a set of front-end application programming interfaces (APIs) and a family of object class libraries developed for the financial trading room market.
The Sybase Storage Manager, which uses a C++ API, enables Ontos DB users to hook up with Sybase as a back-end database server (UX No 405).
This allows messages sent from the object database to access information stored in the Sybase system.
Data requested from the Sybase is encapsulated and fed back to the object environment and can be manipulated, analysed or updated without re-engineering, the firm claims.
The Sybase Storage Manager can also be used as a migration tool for re-engineering Sybase applications, or even parts of applications, into object forms, Ontos says.
The IMS Storage Manager is configured in the same manner but conforms to IMS protocols and specifications.
Both the Storage Managers will be available from September.
Pricing details have not been set.
Ontos also plans to provide a set of dynamic link library APIs for third party graphical user interfaces.
This will enable developers to hook up their preferred choice of front-end tool to Ontos DB, by converting the command syntax of the software into readable object forms.
Ontos has developed a set of object class libraries for financial trading rooms in a co-development with the University of West England,(formerly Bristol Polytechnic).
The libraries have been designed on the basis of research carried out at the University under the auspices of a Department of Trade & Industry programme, and include temporal functions to monitor the start and stopping time of shares, financial risk calculation and probability functions.
Other goals for Ontos this year include, introducing Microsoft Corp Windows 3.0 client support for Ontos DB in June and porting the software to Windows NT.
Ontos UK: +44 753 831 890
200MHz ALPHA RISC SAMPLING NOW…
Digital Equipment Corp last week made samples of its 200MHz Alpha chips available priced at $3,500.
Volume ships will start in July at $1,231 apiece for quantities over 10,000.
DEC also cut prices on its 150MHz Alpha from $1,355 a unit to $853 in 10,000+ quantities effective in July.
Samples will be cut from $3,375 to $1,900 next month.
The 150MHz has been shipping since September.
DEC said the 200MHz benchmarked at 200 SPECfp92 and 106 SPECint92 and an aggregate 184 SPECmark89.
DEC claimed that at $7 an aggregate SPECmark, the chips beat out all comers on the price/performance curve.
It also made a point of saying the chips would let personal computer applications reach their full potential under Microsoft Corp Windows NT.
…
AS DEC AIMS NEW ALPHA AT PERSONAL COMPUTER, NT MARKET
As well as the 150MHz Alpha AXP machines designed to run Microsoft Corp's Windows NT, Digital Equipment Corp has begun developing a new line of Alpha microprocessors addressed specifically at the personal computer market, according to US PC Week.
The chip family will include a low-cost part that will offer an interface to Intel Corp's high-speed Peripheral Component Interconnect local bus specification.
The first EISA-based Alpha AXP personal computers, which include a minitower and a desktop, are expected to offer better price/performance than systems based on Intel's Pentium processor — the superscalar Alpha executes 300 MIPS at 150MHz where Pentium is rated at over 100 MIPS.
The paper reckons that a DEC AXP machine with 21064 CPU, a 512Kb secondary cache, six EISA slots, five drive bays and 16Mb to 128Mb memory will be $7,000 to $10,000.
Entry-level Pentium machines, which could be used as servers, are expected to be under $6,000.
NETWARE FOR DEC ALPHA, IBM RS/6000?
Hewlett-Packard Co is already using the hardware-independent version of Novell Inc's NetWare to develop native NetWare for its PA-RISC architecture.
Sun Microsystems Inc is following a similar course, though Novell is doing the port (UX No 423).
Now US reports suggest Digital Equipment Corp and IBM Corp will, over the next few months, announce plans to put native NetWare up on their RS/6000 and Alpha CPUs.
Meanwhile, the Novell network operating system port to Sun platforms — NetWare for Sparc — will have all the features expected in the upcoming NetWare 4.0, including a global directory.
NetWare for Sparc, due next year, will allow MS-DOS, Windows, Macintosh and other vanilla NetWare clients to access Sparc-based servers.
They will be able to access resources like printers and databases over NetWare and NetWare for Sparc servers.
For Sparc server users, the software will replace the need for Novell's NetWare for Unix, which has been criticised for being to slow.
However, SparcStation clients won't — at least not initially — be able to access servers running NetWare for Sparc.
They'll have to buy NetWare for NFS, which costs $5,000 for 100 users.
Once the initial product is out, the firms say they will add more connectivity options for Sun workstation users.
To offset criticism, Novell is promising to deliver a new NetWare NFS gateway this month, which it says will make it easier for NetWare clients to access Network File System services on remote Unix systems.
TAIWANESE LAB HAS FOUR-CHIP MICROSPARC CLONE
It looks like Taiwan's government-backed Computer and Communication Research Laboratories (CCL) has a four-chip set design aimed long-term at Texas Instruments Inc's MicroSparc, according to a story in last week's Electronic Engineering Times.
United Microelectronics Corporation will apparently produce the first commercial version of the thing using a 0.6-micron CMOS process trying for a 50MHz, 39 MIPS part in the second half of the year.
It will reportedly execute most single-word instructions in a single clock cycle through a four-stage instruction pipeline.
The next step is 80MHz with further integration to follow.
CCL is catering to chip demands from local Sparc cloners such as Tatung, Datatech, Twinhead, Sampo and Chicony.
CURRENCY PROBLEMS HIT SALES OF COMPUTERS IN RUSSIA
our Moscow correspondent
Given the dire state of the rouble, computer sales in Russia now tend to be mostly to those pockets of the economy still generating hard currency.
Russia's main source of dollars is sales of oil and other raw materials from Siberia.
Yet despite the amount of money generated in the region, it has remained largely impervious to the attempts of local companies to establish computer retail operations.
As evidence that money is to be made in Russia's ‘Wild East’, last month Hewlett-Packard Co and Swedish software firm CMA AB sealed a $3m contract with ASUNEFT in Nizhniy Vartosk, North West Siberia to supply a Unix system to automate oil field data acquisition in the region.
Much of the computer business in Siberia is still done direct with Moscow.
Though the money is being spent, local vendors are having a tough time coping with the increasingly erratic nature of demand and worsening financial instability.
This paradox is nowhere more evident that in Novosibirsk — Russia's third largest city, in Western Siberia.
The city's economy is heavily weighted towards large manufacturing enterprises, most of which were established to supply the Soviet military.
All are now severely hamstrung by the economic chaos in Russia.
Under conditions of hyper-inflation no factory manager has either capital or financial stability to invest in any kind of serious modernisation.
As a result, little real automation is taking place.
In most cases when computers are purchased by enterprises, it is to run administrative systems like bookkeeping.
Anatoly Guljaev, managing director of Novosibirsk-based Utilex CT, says the economic vitality of the Novosibirsk region has noticeably declined in the last three years.
Many of the large military enterprises which formed the backbone of the city's economy have suffered serious reductions in income.
Given the sluggish progress of economic restructuring in the region the size of the hardware market is relatively constant.
Most hard currency comes from state grants, from exporting raw materials or manufactured goods.
Since no mines, oil wells nor factories have invested in significant modernisation few are making appreciably more convertible currency than they were two years ago.
The structure of demand, however, is far from constant.
Vendors say organisations will usually buy immediately they have state credits to avoid losing out on the plunging value of the rouble.
Twice-weekly
The rouble-dollar rate is calculated in twice-weekly exchange sessions in Moscow.
During November 1992 and January 1993, its value some times slumped by over 10% in a week.
There have also been several periods of panic buying triggered by rumours of taxation or currency reforms.
Mainly for reasons of security, firms cannot afford to keep stock in warehouses so that confronted with sudden large requests, most cannot compete with their better-connected rivals in the Russian capital.
The key to success (or survival) as a reseller in the region is firstly a question of capital.
With the Russian currency so weak, the developing fragile tier of rouble resellers — sourcing and reselling for roubles — has all but disappeared.
The number of firms selling computers in the region has dropped markedly since January 1992.
Customers still buy for local currency but vendors cannot operate without their own reserves of US dollars or Deutschmarks.
To compete with Moscow they must also be able to deal direct with foreign suppliers.
For local vendors, finding good suppliers is crucial.
Machines made from US components, tend to be relatively expensive.
The larger market is undoubtedly for cheap Far Eastern clone machines.
Due to an anachronism inherited from the days of the Soviet Union, Taiwan is classified as ‘Third World’ for customs purposes.
Tariffs on Taiwanese goods are all lower than those on Western European or US imports, giving the so-called ‘white personal computer’ an in-built premium over ‘yellow’machines.
In December 1992 the tax on Taiwanese imports was 7.5% compared with 15% for the US and Europe.
Since only a handful of Russian organisations can raise letters of credit, most have to pay foreign vendors 100% payment in advance.
With the value of the rouble falling weekly, arranging credit is almost impossible.
In Novosibirsk, commercial banks offer around 1,000%.
Given the margins on most computer deals and the time it takes to organise shipment, this will bankrupt most companies.
Large orders come from huge enterprises (often with over 10,000 employees) small orders come from medium-sized organisations — research institutes or small factories.
Principal customers are often banks, which are now virtually the only organisations generating funds big enough for significant investment.
At the close of 1992 there was a significant growth in demand.
This can be interpreted in a number of ways but the most likely reason is that customers were cashing in on relatively good prices as software vendors failed to keep pace with the rouble's sudden plunge.
IBM's PARALLEL SUPERCOMPUTERS
Lynn Stratton
You could be forgiven for thinking the only ‘grand challenge’ IBM Corp faces is turning its profit and loss account around.
But the company is now moving into the esoteric world of technical and scientific supercomputing — the Intel Corp-Meiko Scientific-Kendall Square Research Inc-Fujitsu Corp domain — with its 9076 SP1 Scalar PowerParallel machine.
It is the first of a promised family of RS/6000 RISC-based serial and parallel systems and part of the ‘parallel revolution’ that IBM believes is destined to transform both technical and commercial computing markets alike.
Who knows?
A parallel AS/400 might even surface one day, the company suggests.
The ‘modestly’ parallel SP1 is intended as a step up from clusters of RS/6000s — connecting any more than five is cumbersome according to IBM — and a step towards massively parallel TeraFLOPS machines.
It comprises between eight and 64 62.5MHz Rios RISC processors delivering 125 MFLOPS peak performance and 64Mb to 256Mb memory on each node, and running under full AIX/6000 Version 3.2.
System management is provided by a single RS/6000 control workstation running AIX/6000 and with AIX Windows access from other workstations.
It runs IBM's new 9076 system support programs for hardware monitoring and control and also has a 7208 model 001 tape drive for software installation.
System performance and scalability, IBM says, is boosted by the SP1's specially designed multi-stage packet switch, which provides ‘any to any’ connection between the processor nodes and ensures a constant 40Mbps peak bi-directional bandwidth and  500ns latency.
The switch has been designed to support increasing numbers of nodes and will be used in future IBM supercomputers, the company says.
This will enable users to transfer applications developed on one machine to another without fear of mismatches in timing — so removing a major headache for developers.
Ease of programming and availability of software are key concerns for supercomputer vendors as IBM rightly recognises.
For instance it is offering a number of parallel application development packages — Linda, Express and PVM — alongside the AIX Parallel Environment Software that the company has developed itself for the SP1.
Forge 90 will also be available to run High Performance Fortran parallel programs on the SP1 and to help parallelise existing serial Fortran programs.
And it has wasted no time in garnering the support of academic and commercial developers with over 20 firms writing software for it.
Conveniently, AIX/6000 applications will run on the SP1 — and future SP1 software packages will be also backwards compatible with clusters of RS/6000s.
IBM intends to support other Unix workstations and clusters in the future.
Loadleveler is compatible with Network Queuing System, Network File System, and the Andrew File System protocols — with Distributed File System extensions planned for the future.
Data access is provided by a file server — either an RS/6000 or other Unix machine, which has to be provided by the user.
The Fibre Channel Standard and FDDI interfaces are supported and an SP1 Block Multiplexor will provide a direct connection to IBM 390 systems.
Prices start at £240,000 — ships begin from the third quarter.
KODE OUTLINES ITS PLANS
With the merger of DCM Services Ltd and Kode International Plc's Kode Computers Ltd now complete, the company has broadened its range of consultancy services, and is looking for acquisitions in the UK.
Managing director Joel Jervis is already negotiating with several companies operating in niche areas such as network support.
The company won't lean towards Kode Computers' traditional markets — local and central government — preferring to focus on the more lucrative commercial sector.
DCM's activities have been reorganised into four sectors including an open systems planning unit developed out of Kode Computers' government expertise.
It provides consultancy and installation services for all flavours of Unix.
Its speciality is AIX, chosen for its captive RS/6000 market — the box is the most popular Unix environment among DCM's customers.
The firm generates most of its business on the back of existing large accounts — worth, on average, between £70,000 and £80,000 a month — and by word of mouth.
Open systems-related projects will net it £2m in revenues this year.
BANYAN, ARTISOFT AND NCR COME TOP IN BUTLER BLOOR NETWORKING REPORT
Milton Keynes, UK-based research firm Butler Bloor Ltd's latest tome on the IT industry looks at networking: peer-to-peer networking, server-based networking on personal computer and Unix platforms and network management systems.
In it, Artisoft Inc's LANtastic gets top marks in the the peer-to-peer category, followed closely by Sun Microsystems Inc's 10Net.
Banyan Systems Inc Vines and Vines for Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix are rated best products in the server categories.
NCR Corp's StarGroup comes second to Vines for SCO Unix and is regarded as the ‘premier implementation of of LAN Manager,’ by Butler Bloor.
The report acknowledges Digital Equipment Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co users are still more likely to opt for Pathworks and Lan Manager/X networking solutions from their respective suppliers.
In network management software, it positions NCR's StarSentry as a ‘clear leader’ over HP OpenView, though it praises OpenView for its superior security features, and SunNet Manager for its ‘excellent foundation which third parties have built on.’
As far as personal computer networking is concerned, ‘there is little to choose from between Microsoft Corp LAN Manager and Novell Inc NetWare, though NetWare has the edge in performance,’ the report concludes.
It sees the combination of AT&T software and NCR hardware being particularly successful, whilst in the battle between Microsoft Corp and Novell Inc it expects ‘Microsoft to dominate the desktop and possibly provide Novell with competition on the server.’
Trends
The Butler Bloor missive identifies a number of key trends that will, in its opinion, result in a dramatic increase in networking activity across the board.
Although data and voice transmission lines are moving gradually towards the 144Kbits per second Integrated Services Digital Networks specification, the report believes ISDN has not been as successful as many pundits believed it would be.
In fact ‘it has been short of traffic.’
Meanwhile, it says, the emergence of ATM, asynchronous transfer mode local area network (LAN) technology, has laid to rest any doubt about whether networks will be able to handle the kinds of traffic throughput expected in the future.
ATM is a derivative of fast packet switching technology, offering speeds of up to the gigabits per second range, supports voice, data, image and video, and can therefore implement ISDN.
This is networking technology ‘running at CPU bus speeds,’ the report  suggests .
It quotes Gartner Group estimates that reckons investment in ATM technology will top $50bn within the next six years.
Saturated
Other ‘roads’ for the electronic traffic of the future include radio technology.
Demand here is likely to be high, the report says, because the service will be able to satisfy the demands of portable computing.
‘The problem is that the airwaves could become quickly saturated.’
Satellite communications provide a way round this, and now Iridium Inc — a company founded recently by a consortium of companies including Motorola Inc — is to place a constellation of 66 satellites around the earth, costing $3bn, for a commercial service that is expected to span the globe by 1998.
Reality
However, even with the tens of millions of personal computers and workstations in use around the world, networking and network usage still hasn't taken off in a big way, the report says, because two things are needed: multi-tasking operating systems and the means to develop client/server applications.
Soon, it argues, nearly every desktop system will be sold with a multi-tasking operating system — OS/2, Windows NT or Unix — on 32-bit hardware or better.
Client/server applications are becoming a reality with performance problems being addressed by faster computers, faster LAN speeds and improving software.
The arrival of desktop operating systems and client/server computing has coincided with the emergence of graphical interfaces, and computers now more often handle bit-mapped, rather than character-based environments.
With the advent of multimedia, the — for the most part— disparate information sectors, such as television, film, telephones, books, newspapers and records, will become increasingly integrated industries.
Global networks will be used by computer users first, the report concludes, whilst the owners of the highways — both public telephone companies and independent carries — which charge for traffic, ‘cannot fail to profit.’
The 300 page report —‘Networking: Options & Comparisons’ evaluated 20 products and costs £420. +44 908 373311
UNIX SEEN STARRING IN MAJOR TELEPHONE STANDARDS EFFORT
Major international telecommunications service providers are teaming under the auspices of the Network Management Forum to agree purchasing specifications for an open, standardised computing environment to support their network, service and business management needs — and with annual spending of $20,000m a year on computer systems, the parties involved have the muscle to impose any standard they set.
The service providers — including AT&T Co, British Telecommunications Plc, France Telecom, Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp, Stet SpA, Telefonica de Espana SA and European Telecommunications Informatics Services, have formed a team within the Forum called Spirit — for Service Provider Integrated Requirements for Information Technology — to manage the effort.
Computing and equipment suppliers that have joined include Alcatel NV, Compagnie des Machines Bull SA, Hewlett-Packard Co, Digital Equipment Corp, GEC Plessey Telecommunications Ltd and IBM Corp.
The objective will be a realistic specification that can be met by a wide variety of suppliers, but the final say in the specs will be left with the service suppliers, making it highly likely that Unix System V.4 will be at the core of the specification.
The work of Spirit will be an input to the OmniPoint programme, an agreed collection of specifications and technology needed to achieve integrated service management, including open management systems, reflecting combined efforts of user groups, standards bodies and consortia such as X/Open Co Ltd, Open Software Foundation and Object Management Group.
BRS DEBUTS LATEST TEXT RETRIEVAL SYSTEM
The London-based UK arm of document retrieval specialist, BRS Software Products — a division of InfoPro Technologies Inc, McLean, Virginia — has introduced BRS/Search 6.1, an enhanced version of its document retrieval system for client/server Unix environments.
The software, first introduced twelve years ago for mainframe environments, enables multiple users to search and retrieve specific documents, on the basis of their content, rather than on indexed component labels.
BRS/Search can handle large volumes of unstructured textual information by recording the position of every word.
In comparison, traditional document management systems developed upon relational database management systems rely on a pre-defined indexing system, which sub-divides a document by title and paragraph, not on content as such.
This restricts text retrieval, BRS says.
The client/server version of BRS/Search can store text, images, graphics, audio and video documents.
It comes with BRS/Word, a WordPerfect filter which imports and exports WordPerfect 5.1 documents to and from BRS/Search.
It includes Tally, a document analysis module that details statistics on word  occurrences .
BRS/Thesaurus is a library of  hierarchical word lists.
The system also includes BRS/Demon, a data entry editor; BRS/Native Mode, a graphical toolkit for command level user interfaces; and BRS/Views, a character-based interface toolkit.
BRS/Search also includes BRS/Vision, a Windows-style interface.
It provides object-linking and graphical displays of heirarchial structures like the  thesaurus and tool boxes.
BRS is currently developing Win32 application programming interface (APIs) extensions for Windows NT which will be available by the end of the year.
BRS users are predominately found in the legal, government, security and publishing sectors.
The system can search up to 16 databases simultaneously and works with a variety of relational database systems including Oracle, Informix, Ingres and Sybase.
Available now, the system is priced from £2,000, depending on the number of users and platform.
The company, which has four US and four European offices, has set up an Asian-Pacific operation in Singapore.
POSLOGIC HAS INTEGRATED POS SYSTEM UNDER UNIX
In Florida, Miami's POSLogic Corporation is soon to announce its first product, the POSLogic 5000 Point of Sale System, reportedly the first Unix-based POS system to incorporate both hardware and software as a fully integrated product.
The company says every POSLogic terminal comes with full-featured POS and inventory control software designed to operate under the popular species of Unix.
Cash sale, credit, refund, exchange, partial payment, store account and other transactions are supported.
Options include laser, CCD, LED and projection scanners, weighing scales, coin changers, touch screens and membrane keyboards.
Prices will start at $3,200.
The product will go through distributors.
+1 305 433 5310.
MINIGRAMS
The SCO/IXI combine will be looking at ways of re-negotiating, where possible, some of IXI's earliest deals, which saw it licence X.desktop away for very small amounts in some cases: ironically SCO was one of the earliest beneficiaries of that licensing policy.
Electronic Engineering Times reports that Systems and Processes Engineering Corporation down in Texas has got first silicon in its NASA-backed effort to make a 200MHz gallium arsenide Sparc module for use in space applications.
Vitesse Semiconductor Corp is the foundry.
Scotts Valley, California-based Microport Inc's System V.4 now supports Corollary Inc's multiprocessor and XM multiprocessor hardware designs, making it the first independent software vendor to provide a shrinkwrapped multiprocessing version of Unix SVR4.
Sun Microsystems Inc worshipper Integrix Inc has come up with a keyboard called the S5+ that incorporates the functionality of Sun's new Type 5 but can also be used with all Suns, Sun compatibles and PCs.
It is targeted at mixed computer environments and X terminals and requires no special device drivers.
+1 805 375–1055
Users of the ‘Pentium-ready’ personal computer systems which have been on sale since the middle of last year — Intel Corp 80486-based boxes with a Pentium upgrade socket — won't get their OverDrive Pentiums, code-named the P24T, which plugs into the socket, until next year (UX No 424).
Although Next Computer Inc has stumbled, Data General Corp, which last year signed to resell Next boxes, will maintain a relationship with Steve Jobs' firm — it says it was always more interested in the NextStep software anyway, and will market the environment on its OEMed 80486 personal computers once it becomes available.
It was supposed to be a big secret when we heard it but Open Systems Today must have announced internally by now that it's killing off its stepchild SCO Magazine.
AT&T and Unix System Labs want to be sure no one who contributed significantly to the advance of Unix these last 24 years is overlooked at the big bash they're throwing at Uniforum (UX No 423).
If you have any suggestions you're asked to call Larry Lytle at +1 908 522 5186.
The Microprocessor Report notes that the Motorola Inc 88110 is now in production but isn't reaching its original 50MHz target.
IBM is using it in its new X terminals but says it will probably migrate to PowerPC 601s when it's got volumes.
A 40MHz 88110 is roughly the performance equivalent of a 33MHz SuperSparc.
The search for a new chief executive for IBM Corp has moved into top gear and could be complete by the end of next month, the Wall Street Journal reports.
It notes that by hiring two firms, IBM gave itself maximum scope — and also upset the search industry because search firms are barred from approaching a company they have worked for two years after a placement, and barred for life from approaching an individual they once placed, so each of IBM's two can pass on such names to the other.
Names mentioned as possibly on the short-list are Paul Stern, lately of Northern Telecom Ltd and seen as having enemies among IBM's present top brass; Perot Systems Corp chairman Morton Meyerson, Motorola Inc chief executive George Fisher and Louis Gerstner, chairman of RJR Nabisco Inc.
With Digital Equipment Corp closing its proprietary VAX manufacturing plant in Galway — see page three — Unix supplier Sun Microsystems Inc's SunSoft satellite will this week bring a little good news to the Republic of Ireland, when it announces on Tuesday the establishment of a software development centre outside Dublin.
The centre will look after  internationalisation of software for the European market, though not manufacturing, and will be staffed by up to 100 employees over time.
The Open Software Foundation has been quoted in the US press as saying it shipped 85,000 binary versions of OSF/1 to developers and users last year.
Sequent Computer Systems Inc investor relations manager John Eldridge says Wall Street estimates for the company's 1993 earnings per share to run from $0.95 to $1.10 and that the company is comfortable with what range.
Sequent expects to continue to win orders from the traditional mainframe market and says it expanded its sales force to 160 from 125 at the end of 1991 although total employment fell to 1,550 from a peak of 1,800.
It sold more $500,000-plus machines in fourth quarter 1992 than the three previous quarters combined and looks forward to being able to use Pentium in its machines, because it says the new Intel Corp chip will reduce the gap between its machines and RISC in batch processing work.
DEC has packaged a cost-optimised 100-MIPS/10-watt Alpha chip, some DECelx and OSF/1 real-time software and services to attract OEMs in the embedded market.
Hardware samples this summer.
These chips will also be used in single-board computers.
DEC watcher Terry Shannon has heard reports DEC is working on a microkernel-based OpenVMS implementation.
We have a sneaking suspicion IBM Corp will be looking for outside investors for many of its new business units, maybe the new Power Parallel and Power RISC Systems ventures.
SunSoft Inc's director of Intel Corp iAPX-86 product marketing, Allan Snell, has left to go and live in the house he's been building in Boulder, Colorado.
Novell NetWare 4.0 will debut on Wednesday March 10 in Washington, DC.
Unix Systems Laboratories president Roel Pieper and his boss-in-waiting Novell chief were in Japan last week explaining to USL's Japanese shareholders the ins and outs of the deal that's been cut.
Reportedly some companies, perhaps ICL and Olivetti for instance, were interested in somehow retaining their shares in USL.
USL says it will release a beta version of the Architecture Neutral Distribution Format (ANDF) for ISVs by summer.
Because of falling hardware margins, Fujitsu Business Systems Ltd in Japan has reorganised to pursue software development and sales bringing together its 700-person K Series office software development group with its 50-man Unix software development group to create a System Headquarters Group.
The consortium du jour is the brand new SGML Open, a group of electronic distribution, authoring and database software companies which have banded together to push SGML (Standard Generalised Markup Language) as an international and commercial standard for document and data interchange.
Members include Fulcrum, Interleaf Inc, Oracle Corp, SoftQuad, XSoft Inc and Avalanche.
SGML is supposed to be able to do for document-based information what SQL did for proprietary databases.
Announcement is due in April.
San Rafael, California-based Island Graphics Inc will no longer sell directly to resellers.
This week, as a transition, it will set in train a reseller programme called Palm Partner to offer distributor-level resources, lead passing, technical support and discounts to US and Canadian resellers who buy Island's software through its actual distributors Access Graphics Inc, Ingram Micro Inc and Merisel Inc.
The Open Software Foundation will debut the next version of its Distributed Computing Environment, DCE 1.2, at Uniforum.
OSF also confirmed version 1.2 of OSF/1, released last month, is X/Open Co Ltd XPG4-compliant and says it plans to introduce a full-featured Mach microkernel version of OSF/1 in the first quarter of 1994.