

COSE IS ‘PART ONE’ OF THREE-STAGE ‘UNIFIED UNIX’VISION
From the outset we've known COSE, the Common Open Software Environment, to be more than just a unified desktop interface, and this week, two more pieces of the COSE puzzle appear to be dropping into place.
COSE II for networking, interoperability and distributed computing, COSE III for system management — see below — and there's more we don't know.
COSE, it has emerged, is part of a much wider recipe that was originally cooked up by Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM Corp, prime movers in the effort to meet the threat of Microsoft Corp Windows NT, and probably two of the firms with potentially the most to lose.
The objective of their ‘Unified Unix’ vision (UX No 429), is to put together a cost structure for open operating environments that can match NT on the desktop.
The two appear to be working through a shopping list of NT's ingredients, ticking off those features and functions which can already be found in their own, or equivalent open systems products on, or coming to market.
The simplest way of getting the outstanding items on board as cheaply as possible, is through technology exchange and cross-licensing and COSE was seen as forum for this.
The other COSE firms were approached to support an effort that became bigger than HP and IBM could handle alone.
IBM and HP decided — or were persuaded by independent software vendors — that a common kernel wasn't needed to take on NT, which is why COSE does not address the issue, even though some observers still believe the perceived lack of a common Unix kernel will hand Bill Gates a propaganda advantage.
In HP's view, ‘users don't give a damn about the kernel anyway, they need application programming interfaces,’ says European computer systems marketing manager Bernard Guidon.
He says the COSE process is just a way of breaking ‘Unified Unix’ down into attainable goals.
Although inspired by the threat of NT, Guidon claims COSE also grew out of pressure on HP and IBM from large end users and ISVs demanding Unix standardisation.
Novell Inc's acquisition of Unix System Labs made the COSE desktop effort easier, he says, and — with the exception of NT supporter Digital Equipment Corp — agreement with the other Unix suppliers was relatively painless.
COSE II and III
Guidon, who describes COSE (I) as the ‘tactical execution’ of an agreed set of desktop strategies, says COSE II and COSE III will follow because ‘it doesn't make sense to unify the desktop if you don't do the rest.’
Just how COSE II and COSE III will turn out remains unclear, although a systems management working group COSE firms have initiated will likely be a vehicle for these developments.
According to Guidon, COSE II will include everything related to networking, distributed computing and interoperability.
An alpha specification — described as OSF Distributed Computing Environment plus a ‘broader set of distributed computing services’— with an application development environment, is now doing the rounds.
This part of the vision is agreed, Guidon says, an implementation strategy is outstanding.
The more shadowy COSE III should result in a standard distributed systems management environment specification, that may include the Tivoli Systems Inc object API.
Guidon says meetings are going more or less constantly — an X/Open-hosted COSE get together in Menlo Park this Tuesday will likely be used to take stock.
Digital Equipment Corp, left out of the COSE initiative, has been invited and says its will send its X/Open representative as observer.
…
AS HP AND IBM WORK ON CLOSER RELATIONSHIP
Hewlett-Packard Co and IBM Corp's ‘Unified Unix’ effort is thought to be part of a much broader set of strategic discussions the two firms are having on how best they can collaborate on a wide range of technologies.
COSE — and IBM's attempt to woo HP to its object-oriented Taligent operating system effort with Apple Computer Inc (UX No 425)— are thought to be manifestations of these talks.
HP's Bernard Guidon says the strategic goal is to have joint agreements in place by the end of this year.
He denied rumours that HP might give up its PA RISC architecture for the IBM/Motorola Inc PowerPC, but said the two firms are ‘technically close’, and that HP is ‘flexible.’
88OPEN FUNDING WITHDRAWN, FUTURE OF 88000 ‘QUESTIONED’
Things  took a sudden twist at 88open last week when 19 of the consortium's 23 full-time staffers reportedly had their contracts terminated.
Sources said they have been given six weeks to finish their assignments and another four weeks severance.
The dismissals, believed traceable to members backing out of their combined $3.5m pledge to continue funding the operation, leave president Tom Mace, technical vice president Andy Silverman, operations manager Claudia Marshall and a secretary in place.
It is said 88open will try to continue its activities with no staff and to hive off a separate company to peddle its conformance testing technology as it recently planned (UX No 429 and see page two).
Mace declined to comment other than to say that ‘we are in the process of trying to figure out how to set up a separate company.’
Motorola Inc is reportedly concerned the move will fuel suggestions that the 88000 RISC chip is dead even though it may be at least partially responsible for the short-fall in 88open's funding.
Motorola did not return calls by press time.
SOLARIS UP ON POWERPC
Earlier this month SunSoft Inc president, Ed Zander, told us to expect a version of its Unix operating system to feature on the PowerPC RISC (UX No 426).
Last week Sun Microsystems Inc's software unit made good the promise and announced it would be working with Motorola Inc's Semiconductor Products Sector to get Solaris 2.1 up and running on the IBM Corp/Motorola-developed RISC.
PowerPC is the second port of Sun Unix outside the company's Sparc CPU base.
Solaris made its official debut on Intel Corp iAPX-86 last week — see page 4.
The way is now open for SunSoft to join PowerOpen, a group vendors supporting PowerPC, which includes Apple, Bull, Harris, Tadpole Technology and Thomson-CFS.
IBM AIX Unix and Apple Macintosh operating systems are already destined for the architecture.
SunSoft presumably believes it can win PowerPC customers for more standard Unix SVR4-compatible system software: Tadpole already integrates Solaris on its Sparc-based laptops and will likely do the same for a PowerPC line.
Sun chief executive officer Scott McNealy claimed the move would deliver to Solaris the three volume chips likely to survive: PowerPC, Sparc and Intel.
As SunSoft resources are moved off the new Intel port, he said, they would be dedicated to the PowerPC.
McNealy said the port would be ready in late 1993.
SunSoft president Ed Zander immediately contradicted him, saying the date would more likely be early next year.
Few details were available.
It remains to be seen who would use it and how it will be sold.
88OPEN: LIFE BEYOND THE 88000?
William Fellows
88open's world shrinks painfully with every defection from the Motorola Inc 88000 RISC camp, or the adoption of a dual-architecture strategy by a formerly loyal vendor.
Members of the not-for-profit support organisation, other hardware developers and independent software vendors that have passed through its binary testing and certification schemes are nevertheless full of praise for the work 88open has done.
Now reduced to a shell with news that members are believed to have backed out of providing their $3.5m dues — see front page — the organisation must now offer its testing services on other chip architectures if it is to survive in any form (UX Nos 424, 429).
Last year, on the back of industry acclaim for its work, 88open took some first steps beyond the 88000 horizon by offering its binary testing suites to other vendors and organisations.
It netted only Hewlett-Packard Co and the Precision Architecture RISC Organisation (PRO) as a customer.
Potential users apparently wanted 88open to undertake the difficult job of porting and administering the test suites on their architectures too, something not possible under 88open's current charter.
The 88open offshoot will come into being in or around May, providing it doesn't get itself bought outright before that happens.
It'll bring with it some very focused ideas about binary compatibility and porting issues that face the industry, derived from its experience with the 88000.
Common
The problem with source code for example— even standardised and tested source code — is that it always ends up going through a variety of different compilation systems.
This process means, inevitably, that the code will get different calls when running under different operating systems.
So one of the first issues to be resolved, as Steve Heath, director of 88open operations in Europe sees it, is to define the ways in which different compilers interpret source code and how, in turn, operating systems utilise different compilers and compilation techniques.
At this level, the number of bits used, alignment and requirement for there being no reserved bits in the mechanisms becomes important.
This is processor-independent stuff, according to Heath, who says most Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC) architectures already share common notions in these areas and most are now able to deal with software that is written to either Big Endian or Little Endian byte ordering styles.
Killer
Once terms of reference for the way code, compilers and operating systems work together are established, things that prevent software being ported across different platforms need to be addressed.
There are a collection of these miscreants — Heath identifies file formats, disk formats and install scripts as notable examples.
Next, Heath argues, CPU-specific issues like register stacks and context switching need to be standardised.
Although this stuff is low-level, if instructions are correctly coded and subtitled, there's no reason why software can't be ported across standardised, low-level mechanisms.
After all this is done ‘then you have a standard,’ says Heath.
‘That's easy.
But how do you test for it?’
X/Open Co Ltd has some two or three thousand tests for conformance to its XPG portability guide.
Static testing to check, for example, that all system calls are correct is fine, says Heath.
‘But for real compatibility, software needs to be tested dynamically,’ as it is being executed.
‘You need a test harness for testing stuff dynamically.
That's the killer.’
Burnt
Lack of dynamic testing can mean that for some independent software vendors less than 20% of their application code is relevant, which can lead to any number of  unforeseen problems when the application is run under different environments.
Heath's example is a hypothetical software firm's development team, which claims to have developed the latest all singing, all dancing application, which of course is portable.
The marketing team goes out and finds 20 odd platforms to sell on to.
However, only 20% of the code gets tested and when the software is recompiled and run under these other environments, it often doesn't work properly.
The company gets burnt by the cost of extra development time and resources needed to correct or re-write the application for each architecture.
Thereafter the firm might carefully choose one or two platforms and do a thorough porting job, probably thinking at the same time ‘there must be another way.’
Moreover, as revenue derived from upgrades and add-on sales becomes increasingly important to the software industry's business model, binary compatibility across different platforms and between old and new versions of application software becomes ever more critical.
A company needs extremely good porting and testing tools for these jobs — of just the kind that are available for the 88000, argues Heath — even more so given that some end-user customers are even demanding certification as part of their acquisition/procurement process, 88open says.
Bigger than the 88000
88open uses 5,000 tests for compliance with the 88000 application binary interface and has both static and dynamic test harnesses.
Its verification programme demands a minimum 80% of binary code is tested dynamically — 100% statically — before certification is awarded.
X/Open's XPG suites test source code.
That's fine, argues Heath, for what X/Open has set out to do.
The problem is that XPG is like defining an English language.
The English will get interpreted one way in the UK, differently in the US, and in other ways elsewhere.
The point is, argues Heath, that the industry is developing more binary-to-binary compatibility and emulation techniques.
As these  technologies mature, underlying architectures matter less.
Software costs a lot and it should be re-usable across different platforms.
The key to 88open's future, as he sees it, is being able to test and certify binary compatibility across platforms that do not include an 88000 processor or application.
The more architectures on which 88open is able to offer its testing and certification technologies, the more hardware and software suppliers will come knocking on it door.
XEROX's XSOFT LOOKS FOR BIG BUCKS IN EUROPEAN MARKET
Xerox Corp's XSoft document management software division says it is opening new sales and services centres in London, Zurich, Dusseldorf and Paris.
The move reflects the importance of the European market, which is expected to generate 40% of the Palo Alto company's 1993 revenues.
The UK office is to service Northern Europe — Norway, Denmark and Finland.
Central Europe — Germany, Switzerland and Austria — will be jointly handled from Zurich and Dusseldorf.
The French office will cover Belgium, Spain, Italy, Greece and Portugal.
Rank Xerox Ltd will remain a major XSoft distributor, to which a network of systems integrators, value-added resellers and dealers are to be added.
Accompanying the news was the launch of Inconcert, a new workflow manager for client-server systems.
InConcert works by modelling business processes and tracking documents like spreadsheets, forms and graphics through each stage.
It has a graphical user interface, provides SQL database support and can be easily customised for a variety of applications such as publishing, insurance, legal, retail distribution, health care, aerospace and government.
It is available in client and server implementations for Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations and IBM Corp RS/6000s along with 80386 and 80486 personal computers.
European pricing is expected to come in around that of the US at $22,000 per server licence.
XSoft added that its GlobalView for X document management system will now run on IBM Corp's RS/6000s and Sun Sparcstations running SunOS 4.1, Open Windows 2.0 or the Motif Window Manager.
User licences are £1,500.
Also promised soon is Version 1.5 of its personal computer package Rooms for Windows, to be followed by Rooms for X Window.
EXCALIBUR HAS PIXTEX UP ON UNIX
Excalibur Technologies Corp, which moves about a bit and is now headquartered in San Diego, has begun shipping its PixTex/EFS 3.0 document imaging software to a much broadened list of machines, including Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations, Hewlett-Packard Co HP 9000 Series 700s, IBM Corp RS/6000, and Digital Equipment Corp Ultrix, VAX/VMS and Alpha AXP/Open VMS servers with Windows, X Window and Macintosh clients.
The new version of the software automatically indexes, stores and retrieves digital information.
The company's fuzzy searching technology enables searches with free-form queries on full-text contents, document names and file labels, and users can find information even if documents are misfiled or queries are misspelled.
The technology also overcomes common optical character recognition processing errors, eliminating the need for cleaning up OCR-processed documents.
The software provides links to external databases including Oracle, Informix, Rdb, Sybase and Ingres and Excalibur also provides local area network support through TCP/IP to Windows and Macintosh clients in Unix environments, and DECnet to Windows and Macintosh clients in DEC/VMS environments.
No prices were given.
GERSTNER TAKES IBM HELM SAYING HE SEES ‘NO QUICK FIX’
Recklessly deciding that the appointment was to become effective on All Fools' Day, April 1, IBM Corp duly named Louis Gerstner to the posts of both chairman and chief executive.
Gerstner said at the announcement that he sees ‘no quick fix’ to turning the company around —‘I have no idea how long it will take,’he said, adding that his first priority is to listen and learn from the IBM management team.
Over the next few months he and IBM's board will look at IBM with ‘a no-holds barred’ approach.
‘I have the authority necessary from the board to build this company over,’ he said, adding that he was not sure that breaking the company up would be the right approach.
‘This is going to take time,’ he said, adding that he does not yet have plans for IBM — he has to first learn the company by meeting executives, managers and employees.
He is starting with a teleconference with 100 IBM managers around the world.
The selection board said that Gerstner was the first person they had spoken to when they began their quest for a new chief in January.
IBM's shares rose slightly after the appointment was announced, rising 75 cents to $51.25.
Traders said the fact John Akers will be leaving soon was likely a contributing positive to the stock.
Gerstner is a colleague of Akers on the board of The New York Times Co, and he is also said to know former IBM chief executive Thomas Watson Jr, who lives in the same Greenwich, Connecticut suburb as Gerstner.
A pay and benefits package for Gerstner is valued at over $7m.
He will receive an annual salary of $2m, a one-time transition payment of $5m and a string of other incentives including a performance incentive potentially worth $1.5m a year, though the goals themselves were not detailed.
The big bucks are tied up in the options on 500,000 shares of IBM stock he gets to exercise.
He'd make $500,000 for every dollar the stock rises or $46m if the stock ever gets back to the $145 range.
If the stock declines, the options are worthless.
On the news the stock fell $1.625 to $50.125.
The package is far more than predecessor John Akers got.
KUBOTA HAS DENALI FOR ALPHA AXP
As expected (UX No 424), Kubota Pacific Inc, Santa Clara, California, yesterday announced the availability of Titan 2.0 — now renamed Denali — a line of three-dimensional graphical and imaging subsystems for Digital Equipment Corp's Alpha AXP workstations running the OSF/1 operating system and built upon the firm's own custom chip technology.
Denali is configured at three levels: low-end E series models 15, 25 and 35 offer mid-range graphics performance; P series models 310, 410 and 510 deliver high-performance 3D graphics imaging; whilst V series model 520 and 620, offer high-end texture mapping and imaging functionality.
The eight models will be housed in ‘pizza box’ desktops which plug into TurboChannel slots on DEC AXP 3000/400 and 500 workstations.
Kubota claims performance ratings of between 200,000 and 1.2m shaded triangles per second and 350,000 to 2m 3D vectors per second.
The subsystems include texture mapping support, double buffer colour animation and hardware image processing.
Two- and three-dimensional graphics and image processing is provided through a set of Transform Engine Modules (TEMs) and Frame Buffer Modules (FBMs).
TEM software handles functions such as light reflection calculations and geometry, while FBM provides off- and on-screen memory, Z-buffer comparisons, alpha blending and compositing functions.
Kubota says Denali is binary compatible with all applications ported to DEC's Alpha-OSF/1 systems and is upgradeable from its existing Titan 1.0 series.
Graphics standards supported include PEX, PEXlib, DEC PHIGS+ and NPGL.
UK prices start at from £11,300 to £40,700.
The name Denali derives from the Innuit (Eskimo) name for Mount McKinley, Alaska's highest peak.
PS'SOFT ADDS THREE
Paris-based Axial Consulting Group's PS'Soft division has added three new modules to its Qualiparc Multi Platforms system management software which can be used in conjunction with a variety of Unix and non-Unix databases, running under Motif, Windows or Presentation Manager.
Qualiparc Hotline is a new fault management package, Connectic maps networking and communications connections — Query reports on system status.
Qualiparc is built upon the Uniface software development environment and costs from £5,000 up.
Hotline is priced at from £3,500 for 200 users.
The French RATP train service has Qualiparc up on its 7,000 workstations.
The eighteen-person PS'Soft unit sells only in France at present, but expects a UK outlet to be established soon.
+331 4692 3512.
DEC TO OFFER ALPHA, PENTIUM PERSONAL COMPUTERS AT SAME PRICE
With both the Intel Corp Pentium processor and its own Alpha RISC chip ready to enter the personal computer market this year, Digital Equipment Corp is expected to get around the problem by offering parallel lines of nearly identical systems based on the two chips, US PC Week reports.
But, the paper reckons, DEC will artfully slant the two lines to give the Alpha machines the price-performance edge.
DEC will invite users to choose between Pentium- or Alpha-based systems with the same configuration and prices, but the Alpha machines will offer higher performance — DEC will offer an Alpha machine with a 150MHz CPU at the same price point as a 60MHz Pentium system.
The 60MHz Pentium has been rated at 58.3 in the SPECint92 integer performance rating and 52.2 in the SPECfp92 floating-point rating.
The 150MHz Alpha chip rated 74.3 and 125.1 respectively on the same benchmarks.
The chips are expected to cost about the same when in volume production.
USL SEEKS REVERSAL OF BSDI DECISION
In the matter of its lawsuit against Berkeley Software Design Inc for copyright infringement and misappropriation of trade secrets, Unix System Labs has decided to file a petition for reconsideration with Judge Dickinson Debevoise before it goes over his head to the Circuit Court of Appeals (UX No 427).
USL is asking him to reconsider his recent denial of a USL bid for a preliminary injunction halting distribution of any BSDI code.
USL claims the judge came to an incorrect conclusion of law based on an incorrect understanding of the facts over whether 32V Unix should have carried a copyright notice or not.
USL says it shouldn't — and didn't — have one because it was a limited publication, subject to a different set of rules than stuff that's generally circulated.
USL will take it to a higher court if the judge doesn't overturn himself.
The BSDI contingents hopeful that Novell Inc will quash the suit once it takes USL over may be barking up the wrong tree.
USL says Novell has been kept abreast of its strategy and efforts and has indicated its support.
CRAY RESEARCH REPLACES ENTRY-LEVEL Y-MP EL WITH TWO-  TWO-PROCESSOR EL98
Cray Research Inc has completed the renewal of its supercomputer line with launch of the Cray EL98, its new entry-level machine, which offers times the memory of Cray's original Y-MP EL.
Pricing for the two-processor EL98 begins at $340,000, the same price as the single processor Y-MP EL, and can be expanded to eight processors; existing Y-MP ELs can be upgraded to the new version; Cray says that it has taken five orders for the new machines, and expects to introduce the next generation of its super computer family by the second half of 1994.
…
AS CRAY COMPUTER RUSHES OUT SMALL CRAY-3s TO EARN VITAL CASH
Meanwhile, Cray Computer Corp, Colorado Springs, says it will start shipping its first scaled-down versions of the much-delayed Cray-3 in a bid to raise cash.
Prices start at $2.95m for a uniprocessor version of the 16-processor machine.
The company has predicted that it may run out of money as early as July without new customers or an infusion of cash from the outside.
Cray-3 systems with one, two and four processors will be available for shipment in mid-1993.
Eight-processor versions will follow at year-end with 16-processor machines shipping in 1994.
The company also said it is working out details of a tentative $5m settlement of a shareholder suit filed after it lost its only Cray-3 customer.
EURO SOFTWARE GROUP TAKES SHAPE
A group of 15 European firms in a range of businesses have come together to create the European Software Institute to improve skills in developing computer software.
The Institute, to be based in Bilbao, Spain, will work with customers on software processes and methodology, according to Compagnie des Machines Bull SA vice-president Georges Grunberg, who is the acting chairman.
The other founders are Bilbao Bizkaia Kutxa SA, GMD SA, Eritel SA, Finsiel SA and Iberdrola SA from Spain, British Aerospace Plc, the Electricity Supply Board, Lloyd's Register and Logica Plc, Sema Group Plc, Cap Gemini Sogeti SA, Telecom Ireland, Siemens-Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG and Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA.
Each of the founders will pay $118,000 a year for three to five years to fund the Institute, which will have a staff of about 50.
It hopes to build its membership up to between 100 and 300 companies in the medium term.
SOLARIS x86, MOTIF AND LIVE!
AT SUNSOFT DEVELOPER CONFERENCE
Maureen O'Gara
SunSoft Inc rolled out its feature-for-feature, bug-for-bug port of Solaris 2.0 to Intel Corp iAPX-86 architectures at its 1,700-strong Software Developers Conference in California last week, pitching it as a platform for enterprise-wide client/server computing.
Deliveries on a CD-ROM won't start for another 60 days (UX No 428).
The software requires a minimum 33MHz 80386DX machine with an 80387 co-processor, 12Mb RAM — though 16Mb is recommended — and a 200Mb disk, though 300Mb is better.
It supports the ISA, EISA and MCA buses, IDE and SCSI interfaces and any Adobe Postscript-compatible printer.
Three hundred native applications are reportedly in the process of moving to Solaris x86.
Users can also access the 1,800 applications currently porting from Solaris-on-Sparc 1.
x to 2. x by downloading them from a Sparc server to an Intel client.
Many of the 2,000 Interactive applications will run on Solaris x86.
Admitting the channel has to be ‘reinvented,’ SunSoft still intends selling Solaris x86 wholly indirectly.
Its newly established corporate sales force is meant only to drum up demand among the Fortune 1000.
Sun Microsystems Inc, the company's hardware arm, will put the operating system in its end-user price book and AST Research, CompuAdd, Dell, Toshiba and Zenith Data Systems, all of them companies committed to Solaris x86 since the middle of last year will OEM it.
SunSoft has also lined up several large American distributors namely Ingram Micro, Merisel, Tech Data, Access Graphics and Gates F/A to peddle it and says it has authorised over 2,000 US resellers to handle the product.
SunExpress, the company's catalogue operation, will start moving it in July.
In Australia Solaris x86 will be distributed by Tech Pacific.
In Europe it will move through Bacher, Bytek GmbH, DSD SA, ComTrad International, Merisel Europe, Scribona Sverige AB, Morse Computers Ltd and Technology plc.
ComTrad will also open South America.
Sun CEO Scott McNealy indicated aggressive volumes are expected from the software but would not discuss actual numbers.
SunSoft pooh-poohs any conflict between Sun and the resellers.
Support will be initially provided by Sun's worldwide support organisation under a non-exclusive arrangement.
SunSoft expects to authorise other service partners later this year.
It stuck to its guns on pricing, listing the client-side Solaris Desktop at $795 in single quantities.
It reckons its targeted accounts will pay the premium for high-performance software and that the channels need a decent margin.
The Solaris Workgroup Server for small to mid-range departments is $1,995 in single quantity.
The Solaris Enterprise Server is $5,995 in single quantity.
The Software Developer's Kit is $495 and the Solaris Driver Developer's Kit for hardware vendors for building drivers is $195, both quantity one.
SunSoft claims it is offering better value for money than its nearest competitor Univel Inc which just dropped the price of its UnixWare client to $250 anticipating predatory pricing by Microsoft on Windows NT (UX No 428).
SunSoft says it would actually cost $843 to get from Univel what the Solaris Desktop offers at $795 since it includes symmetric multi-processing, 3D graphics, ToolTalk and Solaris Live!, new hardware-independent network multimedia facilities.
Similarly it would cost $1,295 with the SCO, $995 with Next, $1,350 with IBM and $1,195 with HP.
SunSoft has enhanced Solaris 2.0 to 2.2 (though it's not officially calling it that) boosting symmetric multiprocessing performance 60% over the previous version as measured on an 8-way.
Perhaps most importantly it's the platform for Sun to add the Motif toolkit compliments of IXI Ltd.
It provides a set of user-accessible threads to accelerate I/O and concurrency particularly for database applications.
Networking is reportedly 10%-15% better on transferring data and there's on-demand access to CD-ROM and floppy disks as well as remote file systems.
System administration and the desktop are improved with the latter adding an Image Tool to create, load, view, rotate, zoom and crop images for documents among other enhancements.
Solaris 2.2 also has XIL, the industry's first bundled imaging and video library, as part of Solaris Live!.
Sun  Microsystems Inc should have the stuff on its entire product line in May.
Availability is in 60 days — Motif prices are due in 30 days.
SunSoft has several configurations of Solaris x86 available.
Solaris Desktop, the $800 client piece, includes SunOS 5, ONC+ networking, multiprocessing, system and network administration, installation, DeskSet and run-time support for OpenWindows, ToolTalk and the XGL graphics toolkit.
The $2,000 Solaris Workgroup Server gives users access to print service, file service and networking service and multiuser access to applications.
It includes all of the Solaris Desktop features and additional technologies such as server networking, naming services and remote administration.
The $6,000 Solaris Enterprise Server allows for compute-intensive tasks, data transaction processing and  high-performance multiprocessing.
It incorporates all of the Solaris Workgroup technologies plus advanced system administration, commercial-grade I/O and enterprise-wide installation.
SunSoft says Solaris x86 will run on Intel Corp-based Acer, ALR, Grid, Olivetti, Apricot, Compaq Computer Corp, Gateway, IBM, NCR and NEC machines even though they don't have OEMs deals with these companies.
Targets for the second half include multiprocessors from the likes of Acer, ALR, AST Research Inc and Compaq.
It currently supports graphics cards from ATI, Compaq, CompuAdd, Diamond, Genoa, IBM, Orchid, Paradise and STB; SCSI and disk controllers from Adaptec, DPT and IBM; network cards from SMC, 3Com and IBM; tape subsystems from Archive, Sun, Tandberg and Wangtek; I/O devices from Logitech and Microsoft; and CD-ROMs from LMS, NEC, Sony, Sun, Texel and Toshiba.
Since this is mass market time and peripheral connections are very important, SunSoft's wish list for the second half is stuffed full.
Bundles multimedia tools
SunSoft last week introduced Solaris Live!, a collection of multimedia technologies including productivity tools and application programming interfaces (APIs) supporting distributed real-time workgroup collaboration, video conferencing, audio and image integration into electronic documents.
The package includes XIL, XGL, PEX and XLib, audio device-independent interfaces, a message set called Media Exchange and multimedia desktop tools like Multimedia MailTool, AudioTool and ImageTool.
SunSoft also cut multimedia partnerships with Matsushita Electric Industrial, Toshiba and Centigram to create value-added extensions to Solaris Live!.
Respectively they include device-independent device control protocols to enable heterogeneous VCRs, laser disks and CD players to be integrated, a Japanese text-to-speech synthesiser necessary to phone-based data retrieval and TruVoice, a text-to-speech converter and API interface that transforms any text passage into spoken English or Spanish.
SunSoft promises that Solaris Live! 's future includes integration with phone systems and object-oriented extensions.
Elements of Solaris Live! were included in prior Solaris releases but were never bundled together.
Second phase of DOE complete
SunSoft says it's reached the second milestone in its Project DOE (Distributed Objects Everywhere) programme and completed a distributed object system consisting of the DOMF (Distributed Object Management Facility), SunSoft's implementation of the Object Management Group's CORBA specification, and a set of system objects.
It demonstrated the system running around a network at its Software Developers' Conference.
It has been turned over to SunSoft's Distributed Object Council, a group of unidentified object developers and major end users who meet frequently with the company to discuss product specifications and plans, for feedback.
SunSoft is supposed to make the distributed object system available to key software developers and end users in 90 days.
SunSoft borrowed the laid-back format of the Tonight Show and Johnny Carson — down to the band, the couch and the jokes — to make its announcements last week.
It'd be a shame if those well-crafted anti-Microsoft anti-NT ads they ran as ersatz commercials during the breaks don't get a wider airing, if for nothing more than their amusement value.
SunSelect chief Carl Ledbetter says they don't know yet what Windows and MS-DOS applications won't run on WABI, the Windows-on-Unix software it bought when it bought Praxsys Inc.
WABI hasn't been productised yet but something's expected shortly and it should be bundled into Solaris this year.
Meanwhile, Quorum will put Equal, its Macintosh application adapter on Solaris-on-Sparc, and ship it this quarter.
That'll give Sun access to Mac versions of Word and Excel.
Near as we can make out the SunSoft deal with Motorola Inc for the PowerPC (see front page) is very fresh.
It was probably completed over the weekend of March 27.
Weekends are getting popular for closing deals: COSE wasn't a deal until the evening of Sunday March 14.
SunSoft announced a VAR program designed to educate resellers on selling 32-bit computing.
It includes training and education, sales and lead generation; marketing and merchandising support.
SunSoft Inc claims Solaris-on-Intel is being evaluated by Amoco (10,000 units), AT&T Universal Card, DuPont Pixel Inc (20,000 units), Foxboro, Philip Morris, Superior National Insurance and 3M.
INMOS READY TO SHIP T9000 TRANSPUTER
Inmos Ltd has finally launched the long-delayed T9000 Transputer and hinted at the next generation ‘Chameleon’ technology.
Inmos admits that the year's delay lost the company several customers.
The T9000 is rated at 200 MIPS and 25 MFLOPS and packs a 32-bit superscaler integer processor, 64-bit floating point unit, virtual channel processor and 16Kb memory on one chip.
Its internal communications links operate at 100Mbps unidirectionally, 200Mbps bi-directionally — 10 times faster than previous Transputers.
The device is easily scalable — no interface or buffer logic is required to link T9000s — with communication between up to 32 indirectly connected devices possible courtesy of Inmos's C014 Packet Routing Switch.
The Chameleon programme aims to produce a number of interconnectable modules that can be used individually, or in combination in single devices.
The modules will include 64-bit processors and cache, programmable communications processors, high speed communications interfaces, link routers, floating point co-processor, re-configurable co-processors and dedicated Asynchronous Transfer Mode communication and graphics and video processors.
The modular architecture will integrate 10m transistors.
The T9000 comes in a 208-pin CLCC and draws 3W in single chip applications; samples are $700.
Details on page six.
OSF GRENOBLE GETS DARPA BACKING
The Open Software Foundation's Research Institute has gotten a three-year multi-million dollar research contract from the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and the Air Force Material Command to develop a distributed operating system for high-performance computing.
It will produce a series of prototype versions of the Mach microkernel it has been working on with experimental extensions for real-time and high-trust portable across a range of hardware architectures, especially non-shared memory supercomputers.
PICK LAYING OFF STAFF AND CLOSING OFFICES
Plus ca change…
Pick Systems Inc, which two months ago was hiring back some of its old lieutenants (UX No 420), has up and laid off all its vice presidents and managers except its engineering chief reportedly without notice or severance and will close down all but its Russian and headquarters operations.
The move, a cost-cutting measure Pick has employed several times in the past, halves the company to thirtysomething, leaving Pick with its development core and about five sales people.
ICL ADDS MANCHESTER TESTING CENTRE
ICL Plc's Openframework Division — which aids migration to open systems — last week opened its second UK Verification Centre in Manchester.
The centre will test for interoperability between ICL and non-ICL hardware, software and operating systems at the bequest of customers and ICL says it'll have 12 similar worldwide centres set up by the end of the year — 50 by the end of 1994.
It also introduced Systemswise, a CD-ROM package that lists 5,000 hardware and software configurations based on the results of interoperability tests.
It is updated quarterly and annual subscriptions are priced at £1,000.
The firm also launched a series of books entitled ‘The Openframemwork Architecture,’ which explain systems integration and open systems.
The books are published by Prentice Hall and cost between £20 and £25.
SPSS UNVEILS CLIENT/SERVER PACKAGE
SPSS Inc, Chicago, Illinois , has introduced SPSS 5.0, a client/server version of its statistical data  analysis software.
Enhancements include support for the Open Software Foundation's Motif interface, increased data access, statistical analysis and six add-on software modules.
Data access improvements include a data editor in spread-sheet format, support for Ingres, Oracle, Informix and Sybase databases and new transport and file formats.
Additional statistical analysis functionality includes modularised statistical procedures, such as time-dependent co-variates and probability functions; high resolution labelled charts and chart manager; hot keys between charts and related numerical data; object-oriented chart editing and a choice of 30 different chart types including boxplot, pie and bar charts and scatterplot matrix.
Optional add-on modules include SPSS professional statistics, SPSS advanced statistics, SPSS tables, SPSS categories and trends.
SPSS 5.0 is available now on IBM RS/6000s and support for Hewlett-Packard Co HP 700s, Sun Microsystems Inc Sparctstation 10s and DEC's Alpha workstations running the OSF/1 operating system will follow in the third quarter.
Support for DEC's Alpha Windows NT will be available in the first quarter of 1994.
SPSS 5.0 is priced at $700.
The company will sell SPSS 5.0 direct and through existing distribution channels.
+1 312 329 2400, +44 923 566262.
CINCOM SOFTWARE UP ON HP, DEC UNIX
As promised last March Cincom Systems Inc has launched the Unix version of its integrated manufacturing software, Control:Manufacturing.
The most obvious change is that the product sports a clutch of graphical tools, all running under Microsoft Corp Windows.
The user gets access to everything through the control desk applications application, programmers get a swish Windows-based Developers Workstation and executives get a new Decision Support/Executive Information System.
The Cincinnati, Ohio company originally said it would convert its software to run on HP 9000 Series 8000 machines under HP-UX Unix and that Hewlett-Packard Co had signed a joint development and marketing agreement.
A similar deal has now been struck with Digital Equipment Corp, and the manufacturing software is available immediately for the Ultrix version of Unix with support for DEC's OSF/1 following in the second half of the year.
The portfolio will be further expanded in the future as extra Unix variants are supported; no names yet, except to say that the company is not rushing to implement under IBM Corp's AIX: most customers who are interested in a Unix version are looking for prime open system vendors, says UK marketing manager David Miller, adding that AIX is not usually towards the top of the list.
Other new features include international support, not only handling languages, but also country's financial and accounting vagaries and European value-added tax (Intrastat) reporting.
Finally, the company was proudly showing of its multi-site support; the software's ability to handle communications between remote plants ordering and producing parts.
While this feature is already implemented in the most recent version of Control:Manufacturing for the DEC VMS and IBM versions, its presence in the Unix version means that the new decision support software can collect, summarise and present manufacturing data from across the enterprise.
The support software, together with the graphical front ends will appear on the older systems within the next six months, the company says.
TATUNG TRIGGERS PRICE WAR
Tatung Science & Technology Inc, San Jose is trying to extend the personal computer price war to colour workstations, and it is offering discounts of up to $2,800 on its new SuperSparc-based Super Compstation 7/30 Series.
A Super Compstation 7/30 with a 36MHz CPU, 520Mb disk, 32Mb memory, on-board GX graphics accelerator and a 19″ colour monitor will cost $13,490 in the plan.
The Taiwanese company reckons that a similar system from Sun Microsystems Computer Corp is currently list-priced at $20,500.
WANG SELLS TAIWAN UNITS TO PRESIDENT
The President Group of Taipei, Taiwan has effectively paid about $150m for the Wang Laboratories Inc operations in Taiwan.
President has increased its stake in Wang Laboratories Taiwan to 100% from 30% and bought a 51% stake in Wang Industrial, which manufactures personal computers.
President, which includes President Enterprises, Taiwan's biggest processed food company, made the purchases through its affiliate, Rong Chen Investment.
Rong Chen will pay Wang less than $300,000 cash, but will cancel obligations of about $150m the US parent owed one of the Taiwanese units.
Wang Laboratories Taiwan has the right to use Wang's trademark in Taiwan and will make personal computers for Wang.
MUST SHIPS NOMAD 4GL FOR UNIX
Must Software International has announced the first versions of its 4GL Nomad software for Unix starting with IBM Corp platforms.
Later this year it will add Sun Microsystems and next year Hewlett-Packard.
Shipping now, Nomad offers an environment for client/server application development and reporting.
It provides a windowed user interface, non-procedural 4GL language, procedural language, reporting and data management facilities, a developer's workbench and a syntax-free reporting front end.
It comes with a Sybase SQL Server interface allowing full read/write client/server access to Sybase from AIX, OpenVMS, DOS and OS/2 clients.
The company plans to add Motif support in the first half of ‘94 and comms support via TCP/IP by the second-half of 1994.
Single-user price is $2,500.
Multi-user pricing ranges from $10,500 to $120,000 depending on machine class and number of users.
ABEL TAKES HELM AT X CONSORTIUM
A replacement for X-Windows pioneer Bob Scheifler as head of the X Consortium has been found in Lou Abel who must now raise funds as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology withdraws support and figure out the consortium's true charter especially now that the industry has established a trade association, the X Industry Association (UX No 429).
Abel, who's apparently got a CAD/CAM background, worked for himself as Procon Systems Inc.
He's been with Data General, Via Systems, Applicon and DEC.
THE NEW INMOS TRANSPUTER
The arrival of the T9000 Transputer last week was hailed as the next step in Inmos Ltd's technological evolution, filling the gap between the former T2, 4 and 8 families and the proposed modular ‘Chameleon’ product line.
Inmos Transputers are unique because they combine a processor, communications links and memory on a single chip.
The power and complexity of this latest offering makes it the world's fastest single-chip computer, according to its maker.
The T9000 has 3.3m transistors.
Each of its four communications links can convey the equivalent of 20 bibles; and its internal communications crossbar can throughput the equivalent of 200 bibles per second.
Inmos sees the device as the blueprint for all future chip design.
Conventional microprocessors, the company reckons, will reach ‘burn out’ by about 1996 or 1997.
By then, performance enhancement will centre more on multiple capabilities than, say, clock speeds, which likely will have reached a plateau.
Multi-purpose chips are likely to be popular with manufacturers, because they offer the advantages of reduced chip count and board space, and faster time to market.
Indeed, Inmos has already shipped 1m Transputers and is expecting to double this number over the next year.
It will be targeting the T9000 at traditional markets such as office automation, PABX switching systems, industrial robotics high-performance computing and military and space systems, alongside existing Transputer family members.
It says it has no plans to phase these former Transputer lines out.
The T9000 replaces the T805 as Inmos's high-end offering.
It uses Tungsten Plug technology, which helps integrate the various elements in the chip in as small a package as possible.
The Pentium, explained Ian Pearson, director of Inmos's Transputer Business Unit, is 30% bigger though it has the same number of transistors.
The device's CPU combines a 32-bit integer processor producing up to eight instructions per cycle and 64-bit floating point unit and has 200 MIPS, 25 MFLOPS performance.
The memory system has 16Kb on-chip memory, configurable as cache and/or RAM; 800Mbps, four access-per-cycle workspace cache; and Programmable Memory Interface.
The so-called Virtual Channel Processor connects with four four-wire 100Mbps links, with up to 64,000 channels per link and 80M-bytes total link bandwidth.
This is all bundled into a 208-pin CLCC package which, in single chip applications will run on 3W; 5W is needed to drive large external memory systems.
Inmos says the T9000 is easily scalable with no interface or buffer logic required to link multiple devices.
Communication between up to 32 indirectly connected T9000s is possible with Inmos's C014 Packet Routing Switch.
There is also a C100 System Protocol Converter that links T9000s to previous generation Transputers and C101 Link Adapter for interfacing with standard buses in a variety of other devices.
These will be available during 1993.
Software development and programming for multiple T9000s is as easy as for single devices, according to Inmos.
ANSI C, C++ and Occam compilers are available for development on personal computers and Sun Microsystems Inc workstations.
Hardware development has also been simplified with the  availability of a range of Transputer Modules, or TRAMs, high performance modules and motherboards.
Fabrication will initially be based in Newport, South Wales but, from 1994, this will be extended to parent SGS Thomson Microelectronics NV's Crolles facility.
This will enable Inmos to take advantage of Thomson's 0.5 and 0.35 micron fabrication techniques to produce faster, 3V T9000s.
Inevitably the news of the T9000's arrival, approximately a year overdue, was accompanied by a host of announcements from other vendors, to dust off their T9000-based products.
Among them were Parsytec Computer GmbH and Parsys Ltd with their T9000-based supercomputers and Ektron Applied Imaging Inc with its Boss-9000 parallel processor.
Work on the successors to the T9000 has been under way since 1991 under Inmos's Chameleon programme.
The aim is to produce a new chip architecture comprising a number of interconnectable modules, that can be used individually, or in combination, in single chips.
The modules will include 64-bit processors and cache, programmable communications processors, high speed communications interfaces, link routers, floating point co-processors, re-configurable co-processors and dedicated Asynchronous Transfer Mode communication and graphics and video processors.
This modular architecture will integrate around 10m transistors and two special interfaces: an interconnect protocol for supporting scalable shared memory access, communication and control; and the so-called virtual binary for supporting sequential, parallel and distributed programming.
The virtual binary will support standard operating systems like unix and Windows NT, and compilers and programming languages like C, C++, Fortran and Occam.
Chameleon chips will be aimed at the Transputer's traditional telecommunications markets, along with more mainstream computer markets, multimedia workstations and portables, database and computing servers.
Chameleon products are due in 1996.
PARSYS ANNOUNCES SN9000 PARALLEL SERIES
Parsys Ltd has at last been able to follow up the statements of intent it issued over a year ago with the formal announcement of its T9000-based SN9000 series parallel computers.
The new range, which is targeted at the traditional scientific and technical parallel computing markets, will comprise five model types, covering a performance range from 800 MIPS to over 400,000 MIPS.
All will use Inmos's 32-way C104 switch chip.
The machines consist of modules with either 8Mb, 32Mb or full 64-bit memory addressing in size 2 High Performance Transputer Module format; or 16Mb and 64Mb in size 4 format.
Peripheral access is via SCSI-II modules.
All can be hosted by a personal computer or Sun workstation.
Parsys will also provide a single T9000 module with ethernet, SCSI II, RS232 port and minimum 16Mb of RAM.
The SN9300, targeted at engineering and educational users comes in two types of enclosure: full VME with T9000 VME master card for supporting flexible addressing over the VME bus; or passive rack, which uses the backplane for power sourcing only.
The system uses up to four processors per card, and is expandable to 40  processors .
Each card has 128Mb RAM, 100 MFLOPS and 800 MIPS.
The SN9400, designed for single users, comprises a series of small enclosures, each with their own power and cooling systems that can be linked together in a stack.
Users can choose between a single or multiple processor host, with a maximum of four switched or four unswitched processors per unit.
The system is expandable to 16 processors, with a maximum of 512Mb RAM.
Each unit of four processors offers 100 MFLOPs and 800 MIPS.
The SN9500, also for single users, is a fully switched network of sixteen High Performance Transputer Modules.
It is designed to fit under a standard workstation processor unit and to be hosted by it.
It has 512Mb RAM and delivers 400 MFLOPS and 3,200 MIPS peak per unit.
The higher capacity SN9700, is designed as a network server for up to four simultaneous users.
It contains up to four motherboards, each with sixteen fully switched High Performance Transputer Modules.
The motherboards are arranged in four clusters that communicate through a single backplane.
Further disk and tape systems can be accommodated, along with up to 64 Transputers.
It offers 2,048Mb maximum RAM and has 1,600 MFLOPS and 12,800 MIPS.
At the top end of the range is the SN9800, for multi-user, networked systems.
It is fully switchable, scalable to over 2000 processors and capable of supporting a range of topologies from simple clustered networks to reconfigurable complex networks.
SCSI and ethernet devices are closely integrated into the system enabling any processor within the system to be attached to a SCSI or ethernet controller.
It offers 8,192Mb RAM per unit, with a system maximum of 65,536Mb.
Each unit delivers 6,400 MFLOPS and 51,200 MIPS.
The SN9000 systems will initially use the Inmos toolsets for C and Occam, with Fortran available in 1994.
The Idris operating system can also be run on as many Transputers as necessary while allowing part of the system to remain as a native T9000 network.
The smaller systems will be rolled out first, probably around the third quarter this year.
Prices will begin at $10,000, larger systems follow by year-end.
…
AS PARSYTEC DEBUTS XPLORER
Meanwhile, Aachen-based Parsytec GmbH now has what it claims to be the world's first high performance parallel desktop system, Xplorer, based on the Inmos T9000.
It comprises between eight to sixteen transputers, with a choice of between eight to 32Mb memory on each node.
Extra input-output interfaces, mass storage subsystems and image processing modules can be added to boost performance, with users offered the choice of Inmos's High Performance Transputer Modules or Parsytec's own Transputer Image Processing modules.
Up to four Xplorer systems, totalling 64 processors, also can be connected.
Xplorer supports both the Inmos software toolset and Parsytec's Parix system.
Parsytec reckons the system offers better performance than traditional high end workstations and is anticipating that it will be used mainly for graphics, design and animation; technical and economic modelling; manufacturing and office automation systems.
An eight processor version will cost around £17,000 and a 16 processor machine £27,000.
Pre-final spec T9000-based versions will ship in June/July followed by final spec versions in the fourth quarter.
Xplorer offers users a migration path to the firm's GigaCube massively parallel supercomputers which are also to use T9000s.
The company is uncertain whether it will phase out its current T805-based GigaCubes just yet.
Availability will be as for the Xplorer, with prices starting at £34,000 for an eight node machine and ranging up to £4m for a 1,000 processor model.
Meantime, to help users assess the T9000, Parsytec is offering interested parties the chance to bench test applications using a special evaluation kit.
This includes a module with T9000, 8Mb Dynamic RAM and T805 processor connected to a Sparc workstation.
The T9000 memory is laid out as a dual ported memory and is therefore accessible for measurements by the T805.
Special software running on the workstation parallelises C-based programs using Parix, ACE compilers and the Inmos C Toolset compiler — it claims a tenfold performance increase over the T805.
By Lynn Stratton.
SYBASE TO DEBUT SYSTEM 10
Ahead of its international user meeting and training conference in San Jose, California, on the 27th of this month, when the majority of System 10 components will be debuted, Sybase Inc this Wednesday unveils the first module in the latest release of its relational database management system products.
As reported (UX No 410), OmniSQL Gateway provides location, vendor and stored procedure transparency to applications, and allows for the integration of existing applications within distributed, multi-vendor database environments.
Other modules and integrated products will roll-out on the 27th and over the course of the year.
At the heart of System 10 will be a new version of the Sybase SQL Server, the core database server which the company has been shipping since 1987, and now out at around some 6,500 sites worldwide.
New features will include ANSI SQL89 compatibility, increased control and security features, and consistency checking and backup.
Perhaps more interesting are surrounding interoperability features due in the release, which will allow object technologies like a request broker and C++ application programming interfaces to be integrated into the environment.
Moreover, Sybase's relationship with object player Tivoli Systems Inc should result in a bunch of distributed, operational control tools coming on stream for System 10 next year, as well as the provision of hooks into the database for Tivoli's forthcoming object products.
The Emeryville, California-based company also plans new ease-of-use functionality layers in System 10 — advanced features of the Sybase system have in the past proven difficult to learn and use in comparison to rival database products.
Sybase expects System 10 products to kick into its revenue stream immediately — its current business is evenly split between sales to new customers and upgrades at existing sites.
SQL Server for Windows NT
Sybase is currently working on new CASE and repository front-end systems using object-oriented and multi-media technologies derived from its Gain Technology acquisition, which, according to Sybase vice president of marketing, Stewart Schuster, is now focusing Microsoft Corp-based development on Windows NT rather than Windows or MS-DOS.
Microsoft has stopped short of bundling the Sybase SQL Server it offers with Windows NT, but the two firms are working on a System 10-derived add-on package, with new tools for the third quarter, that'll scale to personal computers, minicomputers and mainframes.
The performance monitor, event logger and control services will be fully integrated within the operating system.
It'll be backwards compatible with the Win32 application programming interface and interoperable with Sybase SQL Sever 4.2 for OS/2 and offer multiprocessing support plus and SNA server gateway.
However, Microsoft is expected to offer a single-user version of SQL Server for NT that'll appear at the same time as the operating system which, according to reports, may cost less than $1,500, and will be targeted at value-added resellers, integrators and corporate developers.
It would provide a low-cost point of entry into the client/server world.
Microsoft may have decided not to bundle SQL Server directly in order maintain good relations with other database suppliers, ‘but why not do it the other way around?’ asks Schuster.
There's a version of SQL Server that comes bundled with OS/2, ‘why not with NT?’
Schuster says relational database performance under NT on Intel Corp boxes won't differ much from results under Unix, but doesn't know about RISC.
In the short term he sees NT very much as a client system, with take-up by the server community a couple of years out.
He's more sceptical of NT's role at the high-end.
Unix has managed to win space in mission critical, distributed application areas by offering its inherent diversification, customisable features and scope for optimisation as distinctive advantages for developers.
Despite these kinds of market issues, Microsoft is unlikely to allow developers to add-value for them by tinkering with NT operating system code ‘but it may have to change this model to win the high-end,’ warns Schuster.
INTERGRAPH's LATEST CLIPPERS
Intergraph Corp has released new InterPro Series 2700 and 6700 workstations based upon its C400 Clipper RISC chip which run Unix but can also be configured for Microsoft Corp Windows NT.
A 2700 desktop with 32Mb RAM, 426Mb disk and 19″ screen costs £15,000 — with 1Gb disk and two 19″ monitors, the price rises to £21,000. 21″ and 27″ screens are also available.
The 6700 deskside, with more expansion features, is priced at from £18,000 to £53,100 configured with twin 27″ monitors and Edge 2+ graphics.
COMMON OPEN SOFTWARE ENVIRONMENT
Tough talk?
Officially, Microsoft Corp is greeting all this COSE business with a shrug of the shoulders.
According to an unimpressed NT product manager, Richard Greenberg, COSE will have no impact whatsoever on anything Microsoft is doing.
Apparently Microsoft was concerned that the Unix camp might rally round the kernel which it says would have been a ‘much more powerful statement…a substantive agreement.’
However, the way it reads COSE the Unix people are ‘not saying they are going to unify’ and dismisses it as ‘just a bunch of hype.’
Microsoft also maintains that it is focusing on interoperability and if something concrete eventually does come out of COSE, well, that consolidation will just make it easier for Microsoft to interoperate with Unix.
Besides which, Greenberg claims, anything COSE delivers ‘is not going to make Microsoft less attractive.’
Greenberg also warns the Unix contingent not to try to hoist NT on same petard Microsoft is using against Unix.
NT will not be fractured into a bunch of different versions simply because it's run on different MPUs.
The company is moving literally to a single-code structure for Intel, Alpha and Mips and licensees are restricted from changing the code.
Since COSE doesn't want to be referred to as a consortium, group, organisation or initiative, maybe we should start calling it ‘La Cozy Nostra.’
Apparently the International Multimedia Association (IMA), a party to COSE, is having discussions with Intel about how to handle Intel's own multimedia standard.
Perhaps it too will become part of the COSE spec.
Unix System Labs still harbours the belief that COSE will eventually result in agreement on the kernel, namely SVR4 or its descendent.
The COSE specification will include IBM Corp's Common User Access ‘93 interface standard, which isn't out yet.
Other things that could be addressed by COSE include a data interchange format — product naming conventions would be useful too, some say.
ENTROPIC SPEECH RECOGNITION TOOLS
Washington, District of Columbia-based Entropic Research Laboratory says it has HTK, the Hidden Markov Model (HMM) Toolkit, providing the software tools needed to build HMM pattern classification and continuous speech recognition systems.
The company claims the product, originally developed by the Cambridge University Engineering Department Spaach Group and available through an exclusive alliance with Cambridge University Technology Transfer Company, marks the first time these capabilities have been available in a single commercial product.
Users reportedly do not need to write computer programs.
It currently runs on Sun, HP, DEC and SGI boxes.
+1 202 547–1420
WALKER SEES UNIX AND MAINFRAME FUTURE
The rest of the world may be doom-mongering about the mainframe and its impending extinction, but not Walker International, the Aylesbury-based subsidiary of San Francisco-based IBM mainframe accounting software company Walker Interactive Systems Inc.
Walker International saw its turnover rise 40% to £7.4m during 1992 and its pre-tax profits double to £2.6m.
Confidence is such that Walker is looking to expand its operations from the US, Canada and UK to the South East and Western Europe — with announcements to this effect expected in the summer.
Like most, however, it sees the potential of the open systems market and will offer RS/6000 with Oracle and HP 9000 with Sybase versions of its mainframe software by the end of this year, with Informix and Windows NT versions to follow in 1994.
ARTISOFT OFFERS UNIX SUPPORT
Low-end network operating system developer Artisoft Inc has announced a new kit enabling its LANtastic local area peer-to-peer operating system to interconnect with other operating environments, as well as providing a Network Driver Interface to the LANtastic NetBIOS.
The Tucson, Arizona company claims that Network Driver Interface Support for LANtastic Kit will enable users to load or stack multiple protocols, providing support for transparent access across systems, including Unix (via Network File System), NetWare (using a separate IPX NDIS driver), and the IBM Corp mainframe.
The company claims that these protocols can be loaded and accessed simultaneously without interrupting the LANtastic network connection.
Available from the end of last month, the kit will have a list price of £150, the company says.
MINIGRAMS
Apparently Bristol Technology Inc's Xprinter software library, its common graphics programming interface for both X Windows displays and Postscript and PCL laser printers, is going to turn up in Unix SVR4.2 soon.
Hitachi Ltd has put a tiger team from its Network Products Group in Silicon Valley on developing LAN-based multiplatform e-mail products hoping to have them all gussied up in time for a third-quarter rollout.
Hitachi figures it's on to a good thing: IDC predicts the worldwide market will be 77 million users in 1996.
Hitachi is expected to make a point of integration, management and directory synchronisation.
It'll probably be based on the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol.
New York-based Linkon Corporation will be developing an SBus multimedia comms card called Link Engine FS3000 for SunSoft Inc's Solaris operating system to give desktops interactive voice response with speech recognition and fax capabilities.
The first SBus solution supporting distributed voice processing applications, it will be generally available by June following a May beta.
There will be one-to-four port configurations for the desktop and T-1 configuration for large client/server installations.
Europe will be supported by an E-1 interface.
Hewlett-Packard Co and Colorado-based Ellery Systems Inc are collaborating on a development environment for OSF's Distributed Computing Environment.
The first fruits of their labours is the Earth Data System, a solution for collecting and analysing critical geographically distributed environmental-impact data put together with NASA and several universities.
Its communications interface to DCE was reportedly created in three weeks using Ellery's Open System software, a development and run-time  environment that requires no remote procedure call programming or source code modification.
Scott McNealy on IBM Corp's new chief executive officer Louis Gerstner: ‘Who cares who's captain after the wings have fallen off.’
Supposedly the first legal Apple Computer Inc Mac-compatible from the tiny NuTek USA Corporation uses Motif instead of the Mac interface to sidestep legal hassles.
NuTek reportedly developed its own Mac-compatible ROM in a clean room using public documents.
The company is offering a $900 logic board and a $3,000 box called Duet, a hybrid 68030/480DX Mac/PC compatible.
It is to run Unix besides Windows, DOS and OS/2.
+1 408 973–8799
Uh-oh.
We called Aries Research Inc, makers of what looks to be the first HyperSparc-based systems (UX No 426) Marixx.ds and Marixx.dt, Aries Technology.
More understandably, perhaps, was our spelling the new software start-up Kapre Software Inc Capri.
It never told us it went to school with Dan Quayle.
A sceptic has pointed out that ‘the use of one graphical user interface rather than another has never added one point to an organisation's earnings per share ratio.’
The same source, it must be said, also believes that ‘the API wars will replace the GUI wars.’
Unix System Laboratories Pacific Ltd has begun marketing of Veritas Inc software in the Asia Pacific region: the Veritas products include the Veritas volume manager, Veritas File System, Veritas Visual Administrator and the Veritas Journalling File System; technical support will be provided by Unix Labs.
Toshiba Corp has formed a long-term multimedia technology partnership with the SunSoft Inc: the first step will be the development of a text-to-speech capability for workstations.
Unisys Corp now has Posix 2 compliance for its CTOS operating system, based on the Mortice Kern Systems Inc InterOpen/Posix Shell and Utilities product; it's priced between $663 and $10,425, depending on server size.
Microsoft Corp is spraying statistics in all directions to try and convince the industry of NT's success: 60,000 software development kits have been sent out, it says, 25,000 dealers and the like should be trained before the launch, and it has commitments from developers that over 500 applications will be ready by the autumn — however it absolutely refuses to comment on how many copies it expects to sell.
Sun Microsystems Inc CEO Scott McNealy arrived at the SunSoft Developers' Conference last week all spiffed up in a dinner jacket, wing collar, jeans and sneakers.
SunSoft Inc president Ed Zander, a man with a tailor to kill for and the wardrobe to prove it, was quick to notice that McNealy was wearing a shirt with his initials on the cuff for the first time in his life.
McNealy shot back that the ‘SM’ stood for ‘Stop Microsoft.’
Corollary Inc intends porting Solaris x86 to its Extended C-bus and C-bus II multiprocessor architectures by the end of this year.
Party manners.
Hewlett-Packard Co hosted all the COSE meetings and picked up the pizza tab.
Sun Microsystems Inc then threw a celebratory dinner for the COSE teams on March 16, the night before the announcement.
Now it's IBM's turn.
Unisys Corp has signed up to use Univel Inc's UnixWare as the operating system on those Intel-based Unix-run U 6000 workstations and entry-level servers it's expected to introduce later this spring (UX No 420).
The agreement is said to mark the beginning of a close strategic alliance between the two companies.
Apparently the Internet could run out of available addresses by 1995 and the Internet Engineering Task Force is now looking at ways of overcoming address limitations in the current IP version 4 standard.
Three proposals have been submitted.
SIP, Simple Internet Protocol is compatible with different technologies on different computers and backwards compatible with existing IP technology.
PIP, P Internet Protocol is a new address structure which would supplant the current IP structure.
And TUBA, TCP and UDP over Big Addresses, is a means to combine TCP/IP and ISO standards to accommodate larger OSI-based addresses that will support both TCP/IP and ISO-based applications.
Electronic News says Intel Corp's deal with Digital Equipment Corp to resell its i860-based massively parallel processors and follow-on Paragon machines has died, apparently out of lack of interest.
DEC's MPP activities have been moved from corporate research to its mainstream computer operations and clustering, as in its recent deal with Encore, is the current watchword.
Intel is reportedly looking for replacements.
Unix System Labs and the Santa Cruz Operation have both licensed Sun Microsystems Inc's ONC+.
It will become part of UnixWare as part of the commitment to COSE.
Steve Jobs last week denied to Unigram reports printed in a European trade magazine that Novell Inc was planning a takeover of NeXT Computer Inc, intending to use NeXTstep as the object-oriented front-end to a new version of NetWare.
Andrew Seybold, a respected US analyst, recently wrote an open letter to Jobs and Novell CEO Ray Noorda suggesting such an alliance.
Hitachi Ltd's open systems division is rumoured to be working on a deal with Sun Microsystems Inc to use Sparc RISC boards running Solaris that'll be used as a front-end, handing off network data to its OSF/1-based mainframes.
Presumably Hitachi is a member of Sparc International too.
The firm is supposed to be doing a RISC-based Unix mainframe and is already a licensee of HP's PA chip which it uses in its 3050 line of Unix workstations.
Could that 8-way SunBox we're looking for (UX No 429) have been code named Scorpion?