

UNIX SYSTEM LABS CLAIMS ONE PORT OF AN APPLICATION TO DESTINY WILL SERVE FIVE ARCHITECTURES
In one of the most tantalising promises yet made in the computer industry, Unix System Laboratories Inc is claiming that independent software vendors who port their applications to its Destiny desktop implementation of Unix SVR4 will only have to do so once to have it run on the disparate architectures of Intel Corp, Sun Microsystems Inc Sparc RISC, MIPS Computer Systems Inc RISC, Hewlett-Packard Co PA RISC and IBM Corp's RS/6000 RISC.
The claim, if proved, would of course, create tremendous market share and persuade many ISVs still hanging back from Unix to make the great leap forward.
USL president Roel Pieper says the technology that would make such a move possible is not yet formalised, indicating that it will be either the Open Software Foundation's Architecture Neutral Distribution Format or a binary conversion.
A decision will have to be made in short order if a technology is to be in place by November or December when the Sparc and MIPS/Advanced RISC Computing implementations of the Destiny desktop operating system are due, a timetable suggested by Pieper.
Speaking at an analysts' breakfast in Chicago last week where Comdex Spring took place, Pieper alluded to such a breakthrough as ‘removing the firewalls’ between the various microprocessors.
ICL and Fujitsu Ltd are USL's porting partners for the Sparc version of Destiny; Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA for MIPS.
USL, which is known to be interested in porting the desktop Unix to as many volume architectures as possible (UX No 377), says it is progressing its talks with HP and IBM to gain their cooperation in moving Destiny to their architectures.
USL meanwhile, is anticipating expanding its Destiny  distribution channels in Europe beyond Univel Inc and classic OEM arrangements, with the formation of as many as ten new joint ventures this year alone.
Pieper, who declined to identify his potential partners, indicated he would be dealing with Europe on a country-by-country basis.
Pieper is quite frank about buying customer base, the result he anticipates from these other joint ventures.
SPARC INTERNATIONAL TO REVEAL SUN LABS' 64-BIT SPARC SPECS
Within the next few weeks, Sparc International Inc is going to release the next iteration of its interface definition for the Sparc RISC architecture.
Version 9 will include all the specifications that must be adhered to for those designing and implementing 64-bit Sparc technology.
Version 9 is based upon work being done by a team headed by Dave Ditzel down at the Sun Labs Inc research and development outfit.
Although Sun has re-iterated that it won't be doing a 64-bit Sparc implementation itself for at least the next three years —‘there is no need for it yet’(UX No 376)— the company is seeking to define the space in which some are already working — Hal Computer Systems Inc for one.
Anil Gadre, Sun Microsystems Computer Corp's vice president of systems product marketing, told Unigram last week that it has a 64-bit part that it is playing with, but there is no operating system or applications up and running on it, yet.
Sparc International, which is currently at version 8 of the Sparc interface definition, said the 64-bit stuff in version 9 will be just ‘the tip of the iceberg,’ and that it would be putting out the new specifications ‘relatively soon:’it still has to go and dig up the stuff from down at Sun Labs.
MIPS GIVES MORE DETAILS OF FUTURE R-SERIES RISCs
MIPS Computer Systems Inc and its system and semiconductor partners have outlined the technology road map for its RISC architecture, previewed here last month (UX No 377).
It appears that the high-end part we called the R10000 is code-named T5.
It continues along the evolution path of the R series RISCs — 2000, 3000, 4000 and 5000 — and the single-chip superscalar part is slated to deliver around 500 MIPS performance by the end of next year.
The R4000 will move up in clock rate to 75MHz by year-end from the present 50MHz, and to 100MHz in 1993.
By mid-1993, the R4000 will be followed by an enhanced performance R5000, offering larger on-chip caches and more than 150 SPECmarks of balanced performance for commercial desktops and workstations.
There are two parallel efforts that sit above and below the vanilla R series line.
The first will result in a very high-performance processor code-named TFP, designed for technical computing.
The CMOS TFP is designed to deliver Cray Research Inc Y-MP-class performance for floating-point scientific and multiprocessing applications and is being designed by MIPS' fiance Silicon Graphics Inc along with Toshiba Corp.
It is to be commercially available in 1993.
The second is a low-power, low-cost processor codenamed VRX, targeted at notebook and battery-powered computers.
It's essentially a low-power version of the R4000 being developed by NEC Corp which will operate at less than 2W at 80MHz, but deliver up to 10 times the performance of competing low-cost personal computers and notebook-sized systems, the firm claims.
VRX will be available in the second half of 1993, and will also be multiple-sourced, MIPS said.
SUN MICROSYSTEMS BOWS TO PRESSURE: SPARCMAKERS TO GET SUPPORT CHIPS
Sun Microsystems Inc has been under withering fire for the past year or so from companies seduced into trying to build machines compatible with Sun's own — and then finding that the company artfully withholds all the best bits for itself.
Now the hardware side, Sun Microsystems Computer Corp has responded to the waves of criticism by saying that it will make its silicon designs available to some semiconductor fabricators so that they can make, sell and support chips based on those designs worldwide.
The designs include Sparc CPU and logic chips found in the Sparcstation 1 and 2, ASICs and other system support chips.
The company states openly that the aim is to earn greater returns on its silicon design investments by making the designs available early to the broadest possible customer base.
Licensed semiconductor partners will be able to involve their customers at the beginning of the design process and Sun says its current intention is to facilitate early design adoption and volume sales as soon as silicon is production ready, independent of its own system products becoming available.
It will receive royalties from its semiconductor partners, who will use their existing distribution channels to market the chips.
The first example of the new programme is an audio chip intended for future Sparcstations.
Analog Devices Inc and Crystal Semiconductor Corp this week said that they have begun selling multimedia coder-decoder chips claimed to offer highly integrated single-chip advanced audio system functionality, designed in conjunction with Sun.
Sun notes that it has ‘occasionally’ licensed its designs in the past, such as those used in the Sparcstation 2.
Sun — which admits its latest strategy is similar to the route trodden by MIPS Computer Systems Inc that now has half a dozen  semiconductor  companies selling its R series RISC designs — says it is just awaiting clearance to announce the names of several firms that have agreed to take on the Sparc.
ICL SHOWS UP CONTINENTAL SIBLINGS WITH £39m FOR 1991; LIKE-FOR-LIKE SALES UP 2%
ICL Plc has pushed back the timeframe for its stock market flotation, saying that it will most likely be towards the back end of the two to five year target it set when Fujitsu Ltd took its 80% stake.
ICL, suffering under the recession like everyone else, last week reported a 30% drop in trading profits to £78m in 1991, after a 5 percentage points reduction in gross margins — attributed to higher sales of low-margin personal computers and Unix systems — and a £10m rationalisation charge above that of 1990.
Sales of mainframe systems are still thought to be earning the biggest profit.
Nokia Data, acquired last year and included in the 1991 figures from October 1, ‘made a small contribution to profits’.
Chairman Peter Bonfield pointed out that most of ICL's competitors are currently trading at a loss.
Net earnings were down 40% at £39m.
Revenues grew 16% to £1,870m, though 14% of this was related to acquisitions, most notably Nokia Data.
Finance director Keith Todd announced that ICL has gained one point of market share in the UK, in a declining overall market — stealing back a little of the market share that IBM UK has won from ICL over the past 20 years.
The results, he said, do not reflect any benefit from the £250m Corporate Headquarters Office Technology System UK Ministry of Defence contract, nor from the £200m British Gas Plc coup, both of which will be delivered over the next six years.
ICL reiterates that its relationship with majority owner Fujitsu remains strictly at arm's length, and that the recent transactions between the two companies, such as ICL's acquisition of Fujitsu Systems Business-Europe were purely commercial.
ICL has also swapped its retail systems business in Australia for Fujitsu's in North America.
ICL's continental revenues rose by 71%, organic growth being particularly strong in Spain at 200%, Portugal at 47% and Italy at 37%.
Software and services revenues grew 18%, to account for 50% of ICL's total turnover — an area in which further acquisitions are likely.
OfficePower sales grew 65%, with over 50,000 licences sold in the year, bringing the total installed base to 300,000.
On the hardware side of the business, personal computer revenues rose 92% — though only 15% of this growth was organic; Unix system revenues grew 28% organically.
ICL hopes to ship 200,000 personal computers this year.
Retail hardware shipments were down.
ICL's rationalisation plan includes an annual 3% headcount reduction, which in 1991 involved between 600 and 700 redundancies — most of these took advantage of the company's early retirement programme.
The current headcount, after acquisitions, stands at 26,000.
CLD SETS UP OPEN SYSTEMS CENTRE WITH CONSORTIUM'S HELP
In an attempt to convince users that vendors can work together, Pyramid Technology Ltd, Oracle UK, Sun Microsystems and Ingres UK have formed an interoperability consortium, resulting in the setting up of a client-server configuration at the newly opened Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte Open Systems Centre, London.
Pyramid has supplied a MIServer 2S running Data Centre OSx, Pyramid's version of Unix SVR4, along with Oracle and Ingres database software.
CLD is also installing Oracle CASE, Oracle financials and Ingres' Windows 4GL at the front end.
Client platforms are PCs and Sun SPARCstation IPX's.
CLD has integrated the new hardware and software with its IBM mainframe using its existing DecNET network.
Set up at a cost of half a million pounds contributed by CLD and the consortium, this is seen as a long-term project to introduce CLD staff, clients and other interested parties to open systems.
Pyramid said that it will  continue to concentrate on high-end systems, claiming that the low-end market was now saturated by Siemens Nixdorf and Olivetti.
HARRIS PREVIEWS 88110-BASED NIGHT HAWK REAL-TIME UNIX BOX
Harris Corp's Fort Lauderdale, Florida-based Computer Systems Division has moved up to the second generation 88110 version of Motorola Inc's RISC family with the Night Hawk 5000 series — which can't be called Night Hawk in the UK.
The company says that the machines are the first real-time multiprocessing computers to use the 88110 and represent a unique 88110 implementation with large caches, local memory, and high input-output throughput supporting multiple input-output buses making it a balanced system for real-time computing.
Pitched at simulators, signal and radar processing and energy systems, the one- to eight-processor machines are available as field upgrades from other Night Hawks.
Harris says the 88110 Symmetric Superscalar microprocessors are up to five times faster than the 88100/200 combinations in the Night Hawk 4000 and with secondary cache are expected to achieve 70 SPECmarks per microprocessor.
A ‘unique’ multi-level memory architecture incorporates local and global memory, a 16Kb cache inside each 88110, and secondary 256Kb cache dedicated to each 88110, attached by a 400M-bytes-per-second bus.
Cache sizes will expand to 1Mb per processor with the next generation of memory chips.
The local memory is attached via the 200Mbps processor bus.
Each processor board can have up to 32Mb of local memory, to expand to 128Mb with next generation memory chips.
Up to eight 16Mb or 32Mb modules can be used for global memory at $12,000 for 16Mb, $16,000 for 32Mb.
The primary input-output bus of the Night Hawk 5000 is the 40Mbps Harris VME-64 bus, which offers enhanced performance over standard VME.
Adding a second VME-64 bus provides up to 40Mbps additional input-output capacity.
The first model is the Night Hawk 5800, set for the fourth quarter, upgradable from the 4800.
Night Hawk 5800 single processor board is $15,000 more than the comparable 4800 processor board, the dual-processor 5800 board $20,000 more.
The line does 20 to 800 MIPS and supports a real-time and multi-level secure Unix to Posix, System V Interface Definition and 88open standards.
GAIN TECHNOLOGY SNARES IBM IN PORT PACT
Remember back a few issues (UX No 363) when Gain Technology, the multimedia start-up that used to call itself Cayenne Systems, was talking about giving the IBM/Apple joint venture a run for its money and persuading IBM to adopt its technology?
Well, Gain has reportedly just snared a porting pact with IBM to move its software to the RS/6000 and once it's ready IBM will apparently co-market the stuff worldwide especially to users with mission critical distributed applications.
Meanwhile, Gain has cut an anticipated pact with Sun Microsystems Inc under which Sun will license Gain's object oriented hypermedia training technology and develop and distribute interactive mulitmedia training software combining text, graphics, sound and animation.
The new software, developed by SMCC's Worldwide Customer Support Organisation, will give Sun users on-line information on how to use Sun hardware and software.
First product is due this summer.
FRENCH UNIX GROUP CALLS FOR GUI USER ORGANISATION TO SOLVE STANDARDISATION PROBLEMS
In France, a working group at AFUU — L'Association Francaise des Utilisateurs d'Unix et des Systemes Ouverts — has been beavering away doing some research on how it might be possible to get a single graphical user interface (GUI) standard going.
It thinks that a sensible way would be to standardise on windows, icons, menus, and command box style via agreement on specific languages — such as C, C++ — for all interfaces, with reusable source code modules, rather than on specific product-oriented solutions.
Looking at the way the international bodies like IEEE and X/Open Co Ltd have failed to define even a basic set of standards due to the competitive nature of the marketplace, AFUU believes an international body of GUI users is what is needed to get some momentum going, a global organisation that can represent user requirements to the GUI providers.
SUN VIKINGS TO SAIL ON MAY 19th?
According to Anil Gadre, Sun Microsystems Computer Corp's vice president of systems product marketing, the new licensing strategy — see front page — should, for example, enable the Sparc compatible community to get its hands on the company's next-generation Viking, or SuperSparc technology — being co-developed with Texas Instruments Inc — much more quickly than the best part of a year that elapsed between the launch of the Sparcstation 2 (UX No 308), and the day Sun gave the green light for the LSI Logic Inc made 40MHz Sparc chip sets to be sold on to Sun wannabe's (UX No 356).
Gadre claims there will be ‘zero difference in time’ this time around.
However Sun has been playing with the long overdue part for many months now, working closely with Texas Instruments Inc to get the thing up to scratch.
Sparc builders will only get their first glimpse of the stuff when Sun finally rolls out its Sparcstation 3 Viking boxes.
It's thought to have picked Tuesday May 19th to do that.
Sun won't say if that is the case, or whether the Viking has actually hit the 50MHz mark yet.
SUN DROPS HINTS ON 80486 ACCELERATOR BOARD FOR MS-DOS APPLICATIONS
Gadre was also dropping heavy hints that Sun will soon likely move to offer a hardware-based solution for users wishing to run MS-DOS applications on its Sparc systems.
Sun currently offers Insignia Solutions Inc's SoftPC emulator, but says it has ‘had demand for accelerated versions of that.’
It's thought to be preparing to market an Intel Corp 80486 (or alike) -based accelerator board that runs in an Sbus slot which would greatly improve the performance of personal computer applications.
Component cost has foreclosed that route until now, but with with Intel being forced by competition to drive down the cost of its 80486 technology, the prospect of such an offering is becoming more realistically cost effective by the day.
The watershed mark is thought to be the point at which a user could get hold of such a board at a couple of hundred dollars or more less than the cost of buying a complete PC solution.
SPARC INTERNATIONAL SETS SPARCBUILDERS PROGRAMME
Sparc International last week set in place a SparcBuilders programme which will include the licensing of a portfolio of designs, hardware and software interfaces, tools and implementations for designing and building Sparc systems and applications.
Included in the programme are the SBus and MBus, and the Sparc architecture, to be offered through the $99 Sparc licence from Sparc International, which gives licensees the right to design, make and distribute CPUs conforming to Sparc architecture.
MOTOROLA 68060 ‘COULD IMPACT PowerPC’
The latest Microprocessor Report says the cancelled Motorola Inc 68050, a minor upgrade of the 68040, fell prey to a resource battle with two next-generation implementations that were to follow the 68050: the LP040, a low-cost, low-power re-implementation of the 68040 in 0.5 micron technology due to sample in late 1993, and ‘Q’, a fully static modular, superscalar, superpipelined part that borrows from the 88110 and will probably come out as the 68060.
The newsletter speculates that if ‘Q’ is good, ‘it could significantly delay the migration of Apple's customers to the PowerPC since the early PowerPC chips won't have spectacular performance.’
QUARTERDECK SHIPS DESQVIEW/X X-WINDOWS FOR MS-DOS
Santa Monica, California-based Quarterdeck Office Systems Inc says it is now shipping its long-awaited MS-DOS version of the X-Window System.
Desqview/X turns MS-DOS text-based programs into X-Window clients; the MS-DOS program can run locally or as a remote process with the actual application residing on a remote workstation.
And an MS-DOS machine running Desqview/X can display X-Window applications.
The program was originally supposed to ship in the autumn of 1990, Microbytes Daily notes; Myers told a BYTEweek reporter last August that Quarterdeck would ship Desqview/X in October 1991.
Quarterdeck now says the delays were the result of adding new features requested by developers.
Last August, it said it planned to incorporate scalable font technology from Adobe Systems Inc and support for shared MS-DOS extenders through an agreement with Rational Systems Inc.
Getting Microsoft Windows to run remotely on a Sun Microsystems Inc workstation was seen as the last step in the development effort.
INTEL ‘TO PREVIEW THREE VERSIONS OF 80586 AT PC EXPO IN JUNE’
Intel Corp will reportedly use PC Expo in New York in June to preview the so-called 80586 or P5 microprocessor in a technology demo perhaps showing off three versions.
One is tipped to run at 33MHz, another at 50MHz and a third at 33MHz external, 66MHz internal, according to InfoWorld, with the on-chip cache size ranging from 32Kb to 54Kb.
The 50MHz version is said to be capable of 100 MIPS.
The formal announcement is believed to be scheduled for September, with modest volumes to be deliverable around November time.
APPLE ‘TO DO COLOUR MACS, ARM600 ASSISTANT, FIRST DEDICATED SERVER’
Apple Computer Inc is to strip out the bits that won't be needed in its Quadra machines to create its first-ever dedicated server, MacWeek reports.
The 68040-based machine is being designed for Apple's A/UX version of Unix and will inherit much of the Quadra 900's architecture, the paper says, and is expected to be announced in October for shipping as early as January 1993.
It will be the first machine to emerge from Apple's Enterprise Systems Division, formed last year to develop high-end business systems.
It will support client Macs running Systems 6 and 7.
Bits to be eliminated from the Quadra are likely to include the on-board 24-bit-colour graphics.
Apple also plans to introduce two low-cost colour Macs early next year, the paper says.
One will have a built-in 8-bit, 10″ colour display, 16MHz 68030 processor, 4Mb memory and 40Mb disk for under $1,300.
A more powerful colour Macintosh, using a 25MHz 68030 and aimed at the multimedia market with at least 4Mb memory, a 40Mb disk and 14″ colour Trinitron display with 640 by 480 pixel resolution, is expected to cost under $1,900.
And Apple could introduce its first Personal Digital Assistant at the Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago next month, MacWeek says.
The device uses an infra-red link to connect to a desktop computer or to other Personal Digital Assistants, and it will use a low-power RISC processor — Cambridge, UK-based Advanced RISC Machines Ltd's ARM600 presumably, a 3″ by 5″ supertwist but not backlit screen and will have no other input devices except a pen.
It is said that it will be able to recognise cursive handwriting and gestures entered with the pen.
It should cost less than $700.
SPARC SPOTS
Replying to reports that it has published misleading SPECmark performance claims for its boxes by using unavailable compiler and pre-compiler technology in its testing (UX No 378), Anil Gadre, Sun Microsystems Computer Corp's vice president of systems product marketing, says the company will use shipped compilers for future SPECfp and SPECint performance benchmarking.
On the thorny question of support for the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment on its kit (UX Nos 375, 379), Sun will now say only that if there is demand for it from customers, then ‘fine, why not?
We won't stop shipping Open Network Computing (its own distributed solution), ONC is recommended, and we don't have an answer on whether DCE will be a third party or Sun offering.’
Sun has appointed Dr Peter Deutsch to its research outfit Sun Labs Inc, naming him as a Sun Fellow, an honour bestowed only on two others: Ivan Sutherland (of Evans & Sutherland Computers) and Bob Sproulls.
Deutsch worked at Xerox Palo Alto Research Centre's on the famous Alto system, a model which spawned many of today's workstation designs, and was most recently chief scientist at Smalltalk house, ParcPlace Systems.
In India, the Bombay Stock Exchange is to use 50 Sun servers to support some 3,000 personal computers running  alongside an ICL mainframe to automate its trading floor — the deal is worth a total of some $30m over the next 12 months: Sun's contribution is being handled by its distributor Wipro Infotech.
Sun Microsystems Inc says that henceforward it will ship a microphone with every Sparcstation desktop workstation: the machine already includes built-in speaker and bundled software for easily playing, recording and receiving audio; existing users can have it for $30.
RDI Inc, San Diego, California, is offering a Helios-made Group III fax/modem option for its BriteLite Sparc laptop featuring V.32 for data connections up to 14.4 Kbps: it costs $850 for the modem only; $1,850 for the fax/modem.
Fujitsu Ltd sources say that the machine being developed by Hal Computer Systems Inc in the US will be significantly more powerful than the 300 MIPS that has been reported — but 300 MIPS was for one of its Sparc chips.
Arrow Electronics, already US-wide distributors of Sun workstations and servers, has picked up its SparcEngine 2 and SparcEngine IPX boards, marking their entrance into the reseller channel.
Santa Clara, California-based Nimbus Technology says it has a DMA controller chip for Sparc Sbus input/output devices, which at $35, costs 30% less than LSI Logic's comparable part, it claims.
Californian start-up, Integrix Inc, has a metal enclosure for Sparc cloners similar in footprint and design to the standard Sun Sparcstation 2 chassis with three externally accessible SBus slots and accessories like an LED, speaker, cabling and drive mounting hardware.
Its 100-watt power supply is larger than Sun's.
The Ingen, Netherlands arm of MapInfo Corp, New York, says its desktop mapping software now runs under Open Look on Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations — out now, prices start at £1,360.
ANA Tech, the Intergraph division, has ported its Eagle scanners to Sparc and Open Look.
Targeted largely to VARs, systems integrators and OEMs for engineering environments and building image management systems for technical documents, ANA Tech's new flagship, the large-format Eagle 3640 features 400DPI and interpolated 800 DPI resolution in a production-volume pinch roller scanner priced cost effectively at $25,000.
Sun will co-market.
Thinking Machines Corp, the Cambridge, Massachusetts manufacturer traditionally of custom chip-based SIMD supercomputers, but more recently of the Sparc-based SIMD/MIMD CM-5 ‘TeraFLOPS’ machine, says it has opened a French office near Paris, to support business development and technical marketing activities; Thinking Machines also has offices in Guildford in Surrey, Munich in Germany, Camerano in Italy, and Driebergen in the Netherlands, from where the European offices are run.
MIPS WORLD
MIPS duly rolled out its Magnum and Millenium systems last week: in the UK, journalists from across Europe trundled in two-by-two as the company treated the press corps to a glimpse of the inside of Ake Larson's London Ark building in Hammersmith, which isn't due to be opened until next month.
We got two presentations of most of the stuff too.
UK prices go from £11,320 for an R4000PC Magnum workstation to £16,390 for the SC version.
The Millenium server is £15,570 configured with the PC part — £32,800 for the SC version.
MIPS expects a number of its OEMs to pick up the new ARCsystems including CDC, Tandem and government integrator AT&T Federal Systems Advanced Technologies which will put its System V/Multi-Level Secure Unix on the boxes.
One of ACE's claims is that members will be able to develop systems based upon the same building blocks which are sufficiently differentiated to enable them to go after separate market niches.
At Comdex Spring in Chicago last week Microsoft Corp gave a clean bill of health to the Hardware Abstraction Layer, HAL, which resides in the MIPS' ARC specification, and is designed to facilitate this differentiation, saying that running NT on the R4000, HAL does indeed meet its claimed potential.
San Diego-based TeleSoft Inc says its TeleAda-Exec Ada-oriented real-time executive, is now available for MIPS Computer Systems Inc R3000 target systems: up to now, it has been available only for Motorola 68000 and Intel 80386 targets, but it now works in conjunction with the TeleGen2 Ada VAX-host/R3000-target Cross Development System.
The University of Delft in the Netherlands has a VME-3000 adaptor card, with a transputer link, which allows users to interface a MIPS Computer Systems Inc R3000 chip to their VME system for, it claims, around a quarter of the cost of an R3000 VME card.
Sunnyvale-based MIPS Computer Systems Inc says that Control Data Corp and Tandem Computers Inc will be adding its new ARCSystems to their product lines, and that AT&T Co's AT&T Federal Systems Advanced Technologies has announced it will offer ARCSystems with System V/Multi-Level Secure Unix in its role as a large-scale integrator for the US Federal government.
Microsoft Corp says that more than 400 software developers are now armed with the NT development kit containing binary code for both ACE's Intel and MIPS R4000 platforms.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION SETS EPHOS GUIDELINES FOR GOVERNMENT OPEN SYSTEMS PROCUREMENT
The European Commission has launched a new Open Systems Interconnection product purchasing guide called EPHOS, European Procurement Handbook for Open Systems, which urges  government procurement officers to buy OSI-compatible networking solutions based upon X.400, File Transfer Access and Management (FTAM) and X.25 standards.
The European programme is, like the US Government Open Systems Interconnection Profile (GOSIP) effort, mandatory, and its is expected that most government buyers will follow the guidelines because they will have to give and explain reasons for non-standard purchases.
However, EPHOS is not expected to impinge upon the UK's own GOSIP profile, ‘EPHOS is at a higher level,’ according to the UK's Central Computing and Telecommunications Agency, although it admits that ‘they may merge in the future, but we're talking about four or five years.’
SPAG LAUNCHES PROCESS TO SUPPORT INTEROPERABILITY FOR INTERWORKING
The European standards promotion group SPAG took another crack at open systems interoperability last week with the launch of Process to Support Interoperability.
The group is trying to avoid the cry of ‘not another one’ by pointing out that the scheme has one or two extras that we have not seen before.
For example, the Process targets inter-working, rather than conformance testing, unlike the lacklustre Corporation for Open Systems COS Mark.
More innovatively, companies signing up for the programme will be legally committed to going through a conciliation process to sort out unforeseen interoperability problems.
SPAG's membership is currently working on getting 1984 X400 implementations certified, and on the horizon is work on X500 and network management.
IXI TRAWLS FOR DEC USER SUPPORT — READIES NEW DESKWORKS TOOLSET
Angling for the deal that it has sought for some time now, UK firm IXI Ltd, Cambridge, is starting to cast groundbait all over the water in an attempt to land its catch.
It's offering all organisations using DECstations a free single-user copy of its X.desktop manager (which runs on all DEC operating system platforms).
However, it looks like IXI may have to get down into the water to try and tickle this baby out of the flow, as DEC has its own problems to iron out.
IXI sales and marketing director, Anil Malhotra rather cryptically observes that DEC is having difficulty ‘finding its centre of gravity.’
IXI, meanwhile, is to release the next iteration of its graphical user interface manager, X.desktop 3.5, in June.
More interestingly, the company is also to begin casting its nets in other waters when it introduces a new range of productivity tools under the name of Deskworks, in June, something it has talked about for ages.
CASSONI LEAVES OLIVETTI FOR XEROX
Vittorio Cassoni, erstwhile head of AT&T's computer shop, and as such, the single individual most credited with giving the Open Software Foundation a reason to exist and dividing the Unix community into two opposing camps, has left Olivetti, who lent him to AT&T in the first place, to join Xerox Corp as executive vice president.
He will be part of Xerox's newly constituted six-person corporate office charged with running the joint.
Interestingly, Cassoni was recruited because Bill Lowe, who headed up development of the original IBM personal computer, left to join Gulfstream.
Cassoni was recently shunted to one side by Olivetti.
At Xerox he will be directly responsible for the company's Office Document Service and US Sales & Service.
They are apparently interested in his network experience.
SEQUENT BEATS ICL TO NUCLEAR ELECTRIC
In the UK, Sequent Computer Systems Ltd, Weybridge, Surrey, has won a £1.2m contract from Nuclear Electric — the UK's state owned nuclear power generator — to supply 15 Symmetry 2000/200 systems, which replace the existing ICL mainframes.
After trials with Sequent and ICL kit, Nuclear Electric said ICL's DRS6000 Unix based systems failed to meet the requirements it had set, including an open-ended, upgradable system, high application performance and a complete integration plan.
Nuclear Electric's IT service manager, Mike Wall said ‘ICL didn't convince us they could provide the necessary integration requirements.’
The Symmetrys will be installed in 13 powerstations and seven administration sites around the UK, running Peterborough Software Ltd's, OpenDoor human resources management software.
With one system up and running, Sequent says the rest will be installed by the end of April.
HP, INTEL TO DESIGN 80960 X CHIP SET
Hewlett-Packard Co last week announced an agreement with Intel Corp under which the two will develop a chip set designed specifically for the HP 700/RX family of Intel 80960 RISC processor-based X-Window System stations.
The resulting devices will be used with Intel's 80960 Cx series of superscalar microprocessors to provide a complete building block chip set to reduce chip count by integrating most of the logic functions surrounding the CPU, which should lead to increased reliability and performance, and reduced board space requirements and cost.
The HP 700/RX stations are claimed to deliver performance of up to 90,000 Xstones, and to be the most powerful X-stations available.
The companies gave no indication of when the sets will be ready, but Hewlett claims that the 700/RXs used with its HP 9000 Series 700s already offer  unrivalled price-performance.
SAIC PLANS MORE PLATFORMS FOR HP VUE, TASK BROKER SOFTWARE
Sun users in the UK that would like to take advantage of Hewlett-Packard's highly thought-of VUE Visual User Environment graphical user interface, can now get a copy from Loughborough, Leicestershire-based Tectonic Ltd, which is selling a Sun port of the software for £375, or bundled in with its £6,000 SDT 400 Sparc workstations from Trigem.
VUE, which incorporates OSF/Motif, has been ported to the Sparc by San Diego-based Science Applications International Corp, which also has an IBM RS/6000 version out on beta test, and has plans for a DEC version.
Compaq has shown great interest in VUE, a preference that put just one of the many spanners in the works of the ACE initiative.
SAIC has also completed a port of HP's Task Broker network load balancer, and has just got the go-ahead for seven further ports, thought to include DEC, Silicon Graphics and IBM.
NETWORKING TOOL FROM NORWAY MERGES UNIX AND WINDOWS
Winix America, a Beaverton, Oregon start-up, is ready to ship Winix Network 1.2, modular networking software it says is not only compatible with both Windows 3.
X and Unix, but blends the two environments into a single user-friendly operating system.
The product, now Americanised, but originally developed in Norway for government use, was launched last week at Comdex in Chicago, not from the exhibit floor but out of an invitation-only suite.
The company, which claims to have the product up and running smoothly in Norway at the Ministry of Defence and in Sweden in the educational administration, is dreaming of becoming the industry's new standard of connectivity.
Winix described its breakthrough as making Unix services such as parallel processing, standardised e-mail and Unix news plus its own workgroup tools available simultaneously under the Windows interface.
The software includes a terminal emulator that integrates Unix applications with Windows by supporting MS Windows Dynamic Data Exchange to transfer data from a Unix session directly to a running Windows application.
It supports cut-and-paste between Unix and Windows applications using Windows Clipboard.
PC users do not have to be connected by Ethernet to the server.
Standard serial communication over telephone lines is sufficient for remote capabilities.
Winix has already captured support from several computer firms and systems integrators including Tandem, Motorola, MicroAge and Science Applications International Corp (SAIC), and says it is negotiating with several OEMs.
The network, which reportedly cost $3.5m in R&D, will retail for $5,000 for ten workstations, with discounts on bulk orders.
FOR COMDEX READ MICROSOFT
Comdex/Spring in Chicago last week was for all intents and purposes a Microsoft Corp event, all the energy and sparkle belonging to the Windows World side of the house, OS/2 being a footsore also-ran and Unix not even showing up for the race.
NT had its own pavilion manned by a group of independent software vendors showing their wares.
It might take them longer to get to market than they anticipated.
Gossip has it that NT has slipped from summer to winter 1992 and now again to sometime in the first half of 1993.
Among whatever problems it may be having, count memory management as one.
PARSYS ADDS VECTOR CAPABILITY USING 80860s ON NEW SN8000
Still waiting for the ever-imminent T9000 Transputer, London-based Parsys Ltd has announced details of a new interim range of parallel supercomputers, the SN8000 series, based on the latest 30MHz T805 Transputer and, for the first time, the Intel Corp 80860 RISC; the new vector-boosted machines follow the proposed architecture of the SN9000, which in turn reflects the design of the GP MIMD Esprit consortium's Concerto machine.
They use the 80860 as a vector processor for complementary co-operative processing, explains Parsys's commercial director Ian Coburn, who goes on to stress that the company has no plans to use the Intel processor as a replacement for the delayed T9000.
All newly-built Parsys machines are now shipping with the new 30MHz version of the T805 Transputer, which is rated at 4.3 MFLOPS and 30 MIPS peak — a 20% performance improvement over the previous Transputer.
This is being passed on to customers at no extra cost.
Meanwhile, existing Parsys SN1000 customers can upgrade their non-vector machines to the SN8000 — by adding in 80860 modules mounted on a Parsys TRAM board.
Parsys provides software tools with the SN8000 range for 80860 integration and communication with the transputers.
Multi-user access is enabled via Idris, Parsys's Unix-like parallel operating system, and optimising compilers are available for the 80860, as well as ANSI standard C and Fortran 77 compilers.
Application development can be carried out on MS-DOS personal computers, the IBM RS/6000, and DEC, Hewlett-Packard and Sun Microsystems workstations.
A new SN8000 is £45,420, delivering 240 MFLOPS peak, with three 80860 processors — each with 16Mb shared memory — 766Mb disk, 2.5Gb tape back-up, Ethernet connection and Idris.
The incremental cost of adding three 80860s is £18,000.
A big configuration with 24 Intel RISCs would be around £190,000.
Parsys doesn't expect to have the SN9000 ready until ‘late 1992’— it will take three months or so to bed the new chip in when it does arrive.
The SN9000 is likely to cost a lot more than the SN8000, so the latter is not necessarily just a transitional product.
HEWLETT-PACKARD READIES MAINFRAME-LEVEL SERVER
The third week in May has been earmarked by Hewlett-Packard for the launch of a new addition to its top-end HP 9000 RISC server line that should boost its performance range up to the mainframe level.
The multi-processor machine, dubbed Corporate Computing Server, is expected to support up to 3,000 users, and represents a performance boost of up to 7% on HP's top of the line 9000 Series 800 servers.
HP's current implementation of symmetrical multi-processing HP/UX supports up to four CPUs, but this will be extended to support the new machines.
The company claims that IBM is now the only competitor it comes up against on every deal.
MINIGRAMS
X-terminal house Network Computing Devices has picked Arrow Electronics as its first national distributor in the US.
Fujitsu Ltd is to begin selling its VP 2000 Unix-based vector processors in the US, and is to target the commercial sector: the 10 models in the VP 2000 range run Fujitsu's UXP/M Unix SVR4 implementation, with around 100 applications available.
DEC specialist, $100m-a-year Micro Technology Inc, has acquired five-year-old SF2 Corporation, the Sunnyvale, California-based firm that pioneered and commercially shipped the first fault tolerant disk array storage device known as RAID 5/6.
Lacking specific benchmark data, The Microprocessor Report extrapolates from DEC's 200MHz SPECmark claim and figures a 150MHz Alpha chip should perform at over 110 SPECmarks.
It has also heard rumours that National Semiconductor, the major American semi house without a RISC design (aside from Swordfish), is in discussions to fabricate the silicon.
After purging its European and UK management teams last year (UX No 342), Sybase Inc has appointed Robert Albers as vice president of European operations.
He replaces Dominic Gattuso who has held the post temporarily and returns to the database company's Emeryville, California-based headquarters as vice president of worldwide business operations.
Albers, who will operate out of Holland, previously headed Stratus Computer Inc's international operations.
Unix System Laboratories Europe has appointed Irwan Owen as account manager for the UK and Ireland — for the past year he has been USL's account manager for Italy.
US airline operator, Northwest Airlines Inc, is moving to open systems and has issued a request for information on products that it can use to build an integrated distributed computing system.
Sequent Computer Systems Inc is to appoint former ICL boss, Rob Wilmot, to its board, replacing outgoing president, Scott Gibson: Sequent's six-strong board now has five outside directors.
Oracle Corp says it is already working on VMS and OSF/1 ports of its relational database management system technology for DEC's Alpha RISC and says it'll be showing them off at DECWorld in Boston at the end of this month.
A survey of the Japanese computer market in Nikkei group magazine Nikkei Computer estimates the Japanese domestic computer market at $92,000m: a growth rate of 6% is expected over the new financial year that started on April 1; by sector the market grew last fiscal by 18% for Unix systems, compared with 8% for the data services market, 5% for mainframe computers and 3% for small business computers, while personal computers saw negative growth; Unix machines are expected to grow by 20% this year and personal computers to put on 7%; mainframes are again expected to be affected by the depressed economic conditions but will still manage 2% growth.
Marlborough, Massachusetts-based Sequoia Systems Inc has gone to Micro Focus Plc, Newbury, Berkshire for a Cobol compiler for its Series 400 fault-tolerant Unix multi-processor: it has opted for the Micro Focus Cobol/2 optimised for the hardware architecture to produce high performance native code; no value was given for the agreement.
Menlo Park, California-based Informix Software Inc says it will do versions of its family of database information management software to Alpha, Digital Equipment Corp's new 64-bit computer architecture.
Mountain View, California-based Network Computing Devices Inc has been chosen to supply the X terminals for the US Department of Defence's Joint Computer-Aided Acquisition and Logistic Support system as part of the contract awarded in December to Computer Sciences Corp: it will supply 13,000 colour and monochrome X-stations worth $30m.
Salomon Brothers has initiated coverage of 11 computer stocks, six of which analyst John Jones is recommending for purchase: the six are Amdahl Corp, Cray Research Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co, Sequoia Systems Inc, Stratus Computer Inc and Tandem Computers Inc, Dow Jones says.
The Unix Forum ‘92 expo and conference is being held May 26–27 at the Internationales Congress Centrum Berlin in what is now a united Germany.
Software AG last week announced Unix versions of core products Natural, Adabas and Network for Ultrix, HP-US, AIX, SunOS, Sinix, and Wang's AIX.
The company is beta testing implementations for the NCR 3000 series, Bull DPX and SCO Unix 5.32 which are due this quarter.
People are starting to whisper that sales over at Sun have slowed, crediting IBM and HP with some of the impact: this has got the Wall Street crowd fretting about Sun's performance in the last quarter.
Results are due in a couple of weeks but there are those who claim Sun's run rate can't possibly add up to a quarter of a million units a year.
It seems the boys from Sun Microsystems Inc, Santa Cruz Operation Inc and Unix System Laboratories Inc have had their heads together with Intel Corp for some months and must be getting close to agreeing an Application Binary Interface for Unix with the semiconductor house.
Univel Inc, the USL/Novell joint venture, should have its Destiny Unix desktop implementation ready for beta testing by August, with introduction scheduled for September.
Unix System Labs’ published timetable suggests it will have a Unix SVR4 version of DCE (UX No 379), on the market by the fourth quarter.
The latest companies to join the Display Industry Association, the consortium backing AlphaWindows display terminals (UX No 365) are NCR, Specialix, Bull and Siemens Nixdorf.
Tata Consultancy Services, the Indian company, says it has done a lot of work for Unix System Labs on Unix device drivers and hopes to get more work now that it has bought into the firm (UX No 378).
Start-up Carrera Computers Inc, out of Laguna Hills, California, has licensed an ARCsystem design, the ARCsystem 100 Manufacturing Kit, from MIPS Computer Systems Inc to produce PC motherboards, expecting to be first out with a RISC-based PC motherboard later this year.
AT&T Federal Systems has signed a systems integration teaming agreement with MIPS which includes Bell Labs porting a MIPS SVR4 ABI-compatible version of B1-rated System V/Multi-Level Secure Unix to MIPS' new R4000 workstations and servers.
AT&T intends selling the MIPS boxes into the federal government.
Comdex organisers had an independent survey done at the last mammoth fall show and discovered that 35% of the attendees were interested in Unix.
However, the promised Unix showcase at Comdex/Spring last week never came to fruition.
Interface, by the way, reckons the Comdex/Fall audience divides roughly into 50% Fortune 1000-type volume buyers and 50% resellers.
DEC was demonstrating a derivation of its C++ for Ultrix on NT in Chicago last week.
The long-sought ‘killer application’— aka the next Lotus — may have been born last week: Silicon Valley start-up Arbor Software was at the NT Pavilion at Comdex in Chicago showing off its multi-dimensional spreadsheet.
But it needs some encouragement to port to Unix and substitute it for the server, rather than OS/2.
Gossips down in Houston insist that Compaq Computer Corp will announce its withdrawal from the Advanced Computing Environment initiative within a couple of weeks because its business is making very high volume personal computers, and it can't see the MIPS Computer Systems Inc RISC-based machines ever reaching those kinds of volumes; no-one was available to comment at Compaq but its strategy has been shifting over the past year — the investment in Silicon Graphics Inc has been sold, and founder and president Rod Canion was ousted from the company after differences over strategy.
Is it a good idea for DEC to boast that its VAX 6310s were the ‘workhorses’ of the British Broadcasting Corporation's electoral analysis machine when the BBC's predictions of the UK election result last week — along with just about the entire market research industry — turned out to be so wide of the mark?