

COMPAQ, DEC, INTEL AND SANTA CRUZ JEOPARDIZE MIPS COMPUTER SYSTEMS ACE EFFORT
Despite the continuing efforts of its best soothsayers, the Advanced Computing Environment initiative seems to be gathering unstoppable and irreversible entropic momentum.
Two of ACE's founding fathers, Compaq Computer Corp and Santa Cruz Operation Inc are now being widely tipped to stymie their respective MIPS-based ACE development work; not just because MIPS is about to lose its independence to Silicon Graphics Inc, but also because the Intel Corp 80586 (P5) bandwagon is now gathering a full head of steam, whilst DEC is also doing its damnedest to undermine the whole MIPS effort with its Alpha RISC (see below).
If SCO lets its MIPS development ride, one reason is certainly Intel's efforts to pump up the performance — now reported at over 100 MIPS — and accelerate delivery schedules for the P5.
Another is simply the lack of interest in Open Desktop on MIPS.
Compaq, meanwhile, has been talking down its ACE role ever since Rod Canion left the bridge.
None of this is good news for MIPS, whose chief executive, Bob Miller, recently told Unigram that his job ‘is to maintain a two-to-one [better]price performance advantage over Intel’(UX No 377).
If SCO downgrades its commitment to MIPS, and if, as seems likely, Compaq shelves its MIPS/ACE plans, it throws the chipmaker's long term future further into doubt.
Many are already sceptical of MIPS' independence, following its proposed acquisition by Silicon Graphics, and now it's drawing fire from all quarters, not least from shareholder DEC.
MIPS' poor first quarter figures — see page three — will only add fuel to these fires.
SCO's MIPS strategy — see page seven.
DEC-MICROSOFT ALPHA-NT PACT SEEN AS UNIX KILLER
DEC and Microsoft, neither of whom could ever be accused of being the least bit friendly to Unix, look for all the world like they're ganging up to try and kill it off once and for all, using NT-on-Alpha as the blunt instrument.
The long-awaited announcement of the port was finally made last Friday, right before DECWorld ‘92 opens this week in Boston.
The software is expected to be deliverable by the end of 1992 or the beginning of 1993.
The announcement managed to elevate the NT import to the level of a strategic operating system for DEC, which is embracing it as a ‘corporate solution’, language rarely heard from DEC's mouth unless it's talking about VAX/VMS.
It has also pledged the pair to establishing NT-on-Alpha as ‘a premier RISC-based systems platform’ and has them promising machines ‘that could fundamentally change the face of computing’as we know it.
Both companies contend that their relationship is different from all the other strategic alliances and partnerships that are the rage in the industry, being distinguished by, among other things, a shared perspective and a growth path into the next century.
Ace in a hole
The limelight cast on NT-on-Alpha and the number of adjectives spent on it this week is expected to have a negative, if not fatal impact on the rickety ACE Initiative, whose founders, including Compaq and SCO, are perceived to be abandoning it for greener pastures, despite claims to the contrary.
DEC, which continues to maintain an official fidelity to ACE, at least in the short term when MIPS RISC boxes are all it can deliver, last week also cast Alpha as an ‘evolution to ACE.’
It says it is in discussions with its ACE partners about Alpha, but continues to hesitate to formally offer it as still another hardware platform for ACE to absorb.
DEC and Microsoft said that they expect NT-on-Alpha, which they are jointly engineering, to be a high-volume, multi-sourced platform for users, software developers, systems designers and chip manufacturers — exactly the same thing ACE was supposed to be.
OLIVETTI POPS ACE BOX
Inc C Olivetti & Co SpA last week rolled-out its first contribution to the ACE initiative, in the form of the Olivetti M700 Series, built around MIPS Computer's R4000 RISC.
The first model in the series, the M700–10, is compliant with ACE's Advanced RISC Computing specification.
Like other firms that have announced ACE boxes, there is no ACE operating system yet available for the box, though an early version of Microsoft's NT will be available in June — the complete offering from December — with Unix System Labs' SVR4 due at the beginning of 1993.
Olivetti, a prominent member of the Apache splinter group of ACE companies that insisted on going the Unix SVR4 route, says it won't offer Santa Cruz Operation Inc's ACE Open Desktop implementation, except as an option if customers require it.
Olivetti chief operating officer, Elserino Piol, said ‘we're betting on USL's SVR4 — SCO ODT is not for us.’
The EISA bus M700–10 uses a 50MHz R4000PC and is rated at 40 SPECmarks.
It is the production version of the PWS 4000 porting platform which has been shown at all the major computer exhibitions since Comdex/Fall last October (UX No 357).
Prices for the M700–10 start at $14,231.
Olivetti says it doesn't expect its newest machine, MIPS' ARCsystems or the rest of the ACE consortium's MIPS offerings to have any real impact on the market for the next two or three years, leaving Intel Corp's dynasty intact for some time to come.
The next batch of M700 machines are due next spring.
THUMBS DOWN FOR UNIX, NT IN FROM NOWHERE IN COMDEX POLL
People that go to Comdex don't rate Unix, the twice-yearly technology poll conducted by Byte magazine among attendees seems to suggest — and IBM Corp still has an uphill fight to win over the hearts and minds that are presently in the Microsoft Corp camp.
The table shows the percentage of respondents that predicted dominance in five years' time for each of seven operating systems listed in the table.
The results — reported in Microbytes Daily — demonstrate a growing interest in 32-bit operating systems: OS/2 more than doubled its vote, to 15% from 7% last autumn — but Windows NT, which wasn't even in the poll last autumn, won 16% of the votes despite the fact that most of the respondents have likely scarcely seen it.
Unix slumped to 10% from 13%, the lowest it has ever scored in the Byte poll.
Top choice was still MS-DOS with Windows, with 44%; the 18 percentage points it has lost in the past six months have all gone to Windows NT and OS/2.
Some 9% still think that no single operating system will dominate.
The poll also asked which of six technologies would have the greatest practical impact on the respondent's company in the next five years.
Here multimedia got 38% of the votes, up four points from October, while portable systems held even at 20%.
Object-oriented programming received 16%, up from 14% in the autumn, but wireless communications fell two points to 12%.
The gathering perception that pen input has been over-hyped was reflected in the fact that it slipped two points to 8%, and speech technology doesn't have many friends either, dropping one point to just 7%.
PLEXUS HAS NEW IMAGE-BASED WORKFLOW INFORMATION PRODUCTS
Plexus Software Inc, the image processing software specialist based in Swindon, Wiltshire in the UK, has announced two new workflow automation products ImageFlow and Case Management Application — CMA.
According to European manager Rick Mellinger, ImageFlow isn't tightly-coupled to an application: instead, the client-server-based software links up to any application via an Application Programming Interface, enabling workflow processing to be separated from application processing.
It's based on Windows 3.0 and the first implementation supports the Informix relational database running on Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcsystems, NCR Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co HP 9000, IBM Corp RS/6000 and Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix servers.
Case Management Application, has been developed using ImageFlow in combination with Plexus' flagship XDP image processing software and is claimed to offer 70% of the core functionality needed to develop most vertical market imaging applications.
Both products are due to ship at the beginning of June.
ImageFlow is $7,500 for five users; $250,000 for 500 users, plus $2,800 for the development tools.
CMA will cost in the region of $115,000.
In the UK, Plexus sells its products via Andersen Consulting, Hoskyns and British Telecom, through smaller organisations such as Altos distributor CST, and via hardware partners including Hewlett-Packard, NCR and DEC.
ImageFlow is expected to support Oracle sometime next year.
Plexus, which went bankrupt in 1989 following an unstable transition from hardware to software production, was subsequently rescued by Dallas, Texas-based Recognition Equipment Inc.
DEC's POLYCENTER EMBRACES UNIX…
Digital Equipment Corp says it has added 20 new or enhanced products, services and partnerships to its Polycenter schema for enterprise computing management.
There is a new version of the DECmcc family, version 1.2, which adds 12 management modules including autoconfiguration of TCP/IP, DECnet and FDDI nodes, full featured event notification and on-line documentation.
DECmcc Unix Distributed Management software integrates system and network management on DEC's Ultrix and other Unix systems, and extends Network Application Support to Unix.
The company has picked up Technically Elite Concepts Inc's Net/Pod, which enables DECmcc operators to determine local area network usage patterns and detect network problems before they lead to failures; the combination monitors local and remote segments simultaneously.
There are new DECinspect network security management products for security analysis and reporting on a network of VMS, Ultrix and SunOS systems.
The 2.2 release of DECinspect Compliance Manager is enhanced for VMS and adds Ultrix and SunOS support.
There is a new DECinspect Intrusion Detector for VMS, release 1.0, which is designed to challenge hackers by detecting, tracking and invoking countermeasures against suspicious and hostile activities in real time.
Additions to Polycenter include UIS-Archive Connection from UIS Inc, which archives data generated on Unix workstations onto VMS servers and UIS-PACS Connection for tracking and charging for use of system resources by Unix workstations on the VMS server.
DEC says it plans a new DataCentre Monitor for Ultrix, a watchdog for SunOS, HP-UX and AIX Unix.
It also plans a Unix-based distributed management application for performance, file system and user account management, designed to handle from five to 100 Unix systems.
…
DISBANDS UNIT BORN IN FEBRUARY
Taking a bizarre leaf out of the Grand Old Duke of York manual of management, Digital Equipment Corp has disbanded the engineering group it created only in February, giving rise to perceptions that the company is in a deeper crisis than observers had previously realised.
The company is also now expected to embark on a new round of lay-offs in addition to those already planned for, with the need for further provisions against its fourth quarter figures — despite still having $694m of the $1,100m reserves already taken that is not yet allocated.
It is now down to 126,000 employees and is thought to want to get that down to 100,000 by December.
The functions of the group created under chief engineer William Strecker will be distributed to the marketing groups for the separate product lines; the move also affects the heads of personal computers and peripherals operations, and of DEC's Unix business.
The stated aim is to bring product engineering closer to customers; the Wall Street Journal quotes a senior DEC manager saying president Ken Olsen feels DEC is not getting an adequate return on its $1,600m annual investment in product engineering.
ENCORE HAS CONCEPT/32, 88000 BOX — RSX 90 SYSTEM
Fort Lauderdale, Florida-based Encore Computer Corp has introduced a new machine that combines a Concept/32 processor with its 88000 RISC-based machine.
The result is to create the RSX 90 System, which runs both real-time Unix and MPX-32.
The RSX 90 System features a development and execution environment based on Encore's UMAX V Unix and MPX-32 operating systems.
A windowing terminal interface is available and this uses Macintosh-like commands and functions in an icon-based screen.
RSX 90 users get access to software engineering tools with graphical user interfaces, VME-based input-output options, along with incremental compute and graphics processing power for use in real-time applications.
The RSX 90 also features Network File System, GOSIP, Fibre Distributed Data Interface and X25 interfaces.
IEEE 754 floating point for data sharing with other RISC systems is available and, you will all be relieved to hear that UMAX V is fully Posix certified, or so the company says.
The RSX 90 co-processors are interconnected via Encore's patented Reflective Memory System.
Multiple RSX 90 systems can be connected via this Reflective Memory System to form a cluster.
Multiple clusters, each one spanning distances of up to a mile, can be configured using Encore's Fibre Optic Reflective Memory Systems.
Clusters also can include other members of the Encore 90 Family as well as Concept/32 systems which can be configured together to form scalable systems for complex application requirements.
Entry-level prices for the RSX 90 system start at $159,900.
SOLBOURNE FOUNDER QUITS AFTER POOR RESULTS
Solbourne Computer Inc founder Doug MacGregor has been bounced as president and chief executive officer of the Sparc-compatible company he created, and is replaced by his vice president of international operations, Carl Herrmann.
MacGregor turned in his ‘mutually agreed’ resignation at a closed board meeting on April 17.
The surprise move is believed to have been precipitated by the privately held company's unprofitable year-end results tallied as of March 31.
A spokesman said the Longmont, Colorado-based firm ran in the black in the first two quarters but the colour turned blood red in the last half, particularly the third quarter.
Souces indicated Matshushita Electric Industrial Co, Solbourne's major stakeholder with investments in the firm  totalling more than $50m, has been attempting to exert tighter controls of late.
Herrmann, a Wharton MBA who has been with Solbourne for the better part of a year, has a components background, having previously run Amphenol in Hong Kong.
MacGregor, who was taking his dismissal philosophically, admitted to loss of confidence in his leadership.
He remains on the board, representing employee shareholders, and intends to take a thirty-day breather before looking for what to do next.
MIPS BUSINESS DRIES UP IN FIRST QUARTER…
Cataclysmic first quarter figures from MIPS Computer Systems Inc — a loss of $12.7m on sales that plunged 46% to $23.7m underline how much the company needs rescuing by Silicon Graphics Inc.
Turnover was down 50% from the $47.3m reported for the fourth quarter to December 31, with product revenue down 24% from a year ago at $27.8m, and technology revenue dwindled to just $2.5m from $16.2m a year ago.
The company says that while it expected somewhat lower revenue in the first quarter because of seasonal factors and a product transition to R4000-based systems, the revenue decline was principally down to deferrals in customer orders and licensing activity as a result of the announcement of the proposed merger deal.
…
BUT SUN's 3RD QUARTER SHOWS ONLY MODEST SLOWING OF GROWTH
Sun Microsystems Inc reported third quarter net profits up 4.6% at $61.4m on turnover that rose 12.2% at $952.1m last week.
Net profit for the nine months rose 9.4% at $135.6m on turnover that rose 14.8% at $2,616m.
Net earnings per share rose 7% to $0.60 in the quarter and 11% to $1.34 in the nine months.
The figures show a modest slowing of growth — 12% in the quarter, 15% in the nine months, but the deceleration does not yet look serious, although the figures must include a contribution from the Interactive Systems Corp businesses bought by Sun that is not in the previous year's figures.
The company says it shipped a record 52,000 units, including desktop computers and servers (exclusive of upgrades) during the quarter, and that SunSoft Inc distributed a record number of Unix licences, more than 70,000, to users of Sparc-based and iAPX-86-based kit, to manufacturers of Sparc-based machines and to other licensees.
Sun notes that business in Japan and other Pacific Rim countries was robust, while the US and Europe turned in more modest growth rates The company has a record cash and near-cash treasury of some $928m.
THOMSON-CSF TO MAKE VERSIONS OF POWERPC FOR MILITARY WORK — CETIA TO BUILD REAL-TIME WORKSTATIONS
Thomson-CSF SA, which has already adopted the Motorola Inc 88000 RISC for embedded applications, announced agreement in principle with IBM Corp to use the PowerPC RISC in real-time applications for space, defence and professional electronics products in Europe.
Under the terms of the initial agreement, Thomson-CSF will be able to use the PowerPC architecture to develop digital processing functions for its equipment and will be licensed to manufacture some microprocessors from the PowerPC family and customise them for defence and aerospace applications.
Thomson's Cetia SA subsidiary is to build real-time workstations using the chip VMEbus, Futurebus+ and OSF/1.
IBM would have marketing rights to any workstations it developed.
IBM UNLEASHES MARKET-LEADING RS/6000 MODEL 970
IBM Corp last week duly introduced the rack-mounted RS/6000 Powerserver 970 and the 970E model, which is what the thing is called when it is upgraded from a 930, 950 or 950E, killing off the 930 in the process.
It comes with a new 0.5 micron four-level metallisation CMOS CPU clocked at 50MHz which has a 32Kb on-chip cache, four times the size of the existing one.
The speed of the Micro Channel is doubled to 80M-bytes per second and the box has integrated SCSI port and supports an option of an additional eight full slots for a total of 16 Micro Channel slots.
Base disk capacity is 2.7Gb using two 1.37Gb drives and maximum disk storage capacity increased to 132Gb with attachment of up to four 7202 Model 900 Expansion Racks.
The 930, 950 and 950E can be field-upgraded with the new processor board and all the fixed disks and most other media devices can be carried across.
A maximum of eight 64-Port Asynchronous Controllers are supported on each  input-output board and up to eight four-port Multiprotocol Communications Controllers.
Up to four sets of Fibre Distributed Data Interface Adaptors can be configured per system.
The Powerserver 970E requires a minimum of 64Mb memory, so people upgrading may need to order more.
Maximum is 512Mb.
IBM reckons the 970 achieves a SPECmark rating of 100.3, making IBM the first to produce a RISC system which scores a century on the benchmark, and that it also does 100.9 transactions per second on the Transaction Processing Performance Council's TPC-A benchmark.
The 970 costs $94,500 and $833 a month maintenance from June 26.
Upgrades are $51,500 from a 930 and $34,500 from a 950 or 950E.
IBM also has new 1Gb and 1.37Gb disk drives for the RS/6000, $4,800 and $5,480 respectively, as well as an M-Video Capture Adaptor at $2,250, a new Ethernet transceiver converter for connection to twisted-pair cable networks at $280.
The 9333 disk subsystem is now available on the 340 and 350E.
The machine is being pitched at banks and telephone companies; it also said it plans to make available ruggedised versions of the 340 and 350 systems and servers; and that it cut prices 17% on the Powerserver 950, and 14% on the 400Mb disk drive for the RS/6000.
There is also a new release of AIX, 3.2.1, which consists of enhancements that are separately and optionally installed.
The enhancements include support for new hardware, new printers and functional enhancements, which can be added without reinstalling 3.2.0.
IBM also no longer intends to support NeXT Computer Inc's NeXTstep Release 2 on AIX/6000 or AIX PS/2 machines.
APPLE's NEWTON DIGITAL ASSISTANT PREVIEWS IN MAY
Apple Computer Inc's personal digital assistant — now said to be code-named Newton — is being described as ‘one of the most exciting electronics products in years’ according to sources that spoke to the Associated Press.
Now expected late next month, the pen-driven handheld computer is said to be able to organise data such as an appointments diary and can communicate with other machines by dialling phone numbers and sending facsimile messages.
Although the machine, which is designed to read hand print but not cursive writing, is expected to be at the Spring Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago, it is not expected to be available until early next year.
Apple confirms that the machine will be built by Sharp Corp and will cost under $1,000.
The company has said that it will license the technology to others.
Newton is said to be powered by a RISC microprocessor, presumably Acorn Computers Plc's ARM device, which is now owned by Advanced RISC Machines Ltd, the Cambridge, UK-based design company in which Apple, Acorn and VLSI Technology Inc are all investors.
Sanyo Electric Co licensed the RISC for embedded applications.
DEC-MICROSOFT PACT
Microsoft, DEC will collaborate on software
To forward their shared aims — see front page — Microsoft Corp will move its own Windows applications, starting with Excel, to NT-on-Alpha, and the twosome will ensure that applications written for NT will recompile for Alpha as well as Intel and MIPS platforms.
Microsoft, meanwhile, will provide a full set of Alpha development tools in the NT Software Developers kit starting in the fall.
As expected, Microsoft is going to the DEC multi-vendor networking well: NT will be a strategic part of DEC's Network Application Support (NAS).
The companies are writing common application programming interfaces (APIs) for both NAS and the Windows Open Systems Architecture, Microsoft's recently articulated blueprint for a single Windows API across heterogeneous networks in global enterprises.
DEC will port its DECtp Desktop for the ACMS transaction processing client environment, a key NAS element, to all NT platforms so programs can interact, and both companies will market the product.
Microsoft will put DEC's NAS-based eXcursion X-server on NT to enable interaction with X applications on Unix, VMS and other environments.
DEC will also extend its Pathworks PC integration, another NAS service, to include support for NT clients and servers.
Low-end Alpha projects
DEC apparently has a number of low-end Alpha PC projects going on: add the code name Jenson, prospectively a $5,000 box, to the $3,500 50 SPECmark Triumph we've already heard about (UX No 376).
Meanwhile, DEC is supposed to have Alpha boxes running on the floor at DECWorld ‘92 in Boston this week: expectations are that they may have a deskside Flamingo, and one to four processor Laser there.
The Sandpiper desktop is of course another possibility, but DECwatchers wonder if that model will be delayed to get its $12,000-$15,000 price tag down to between $6,000 and $12,000.
Meanwhile, there are rumours that the single or dual-processor Cobra, currently pegged at under $100,000 rather than the previously estimated $200,000 (UX No 374), may not ever make it out the door because of overlap problems.
It was thought to be pitched at the VAX 4000 market.
Microsoft and DEC have been porting NT to Alpha for the last year: conveniently DEC has a facility just a mile away from the Microsoft campus in Belleview, Washington.
DEC says it delayed any announcement until now so there would be meat on the bones, not just promises.
The shared Windows Open Systems Architecture/Network Application Support APIs DEC and Microsoft are working on include standardising on SAG, the SQL Access Group Standard for database access.
The mail API for Windows, Messaging Applications Programming Interface (MAPI) will be integrated with NAS X.4000.
It will ship mid-1993.
Both companies will adhere to the Remote Procedure Call API of OSF's DCE and DEC will support the WINsockets API providing transparent access to multiple transports such as DECnet/OSI and TCP/IP.
UBS Securities vice president Marc Schulman correctly forecast the massive NT-on-Alpha tie-up and the intimacy between DEC and Microsoft thirteen months ago (UX No 328), more on the basis of logic than sources.
DEC and Microsoft are jointly developing an SQL Server GateWay for Rdb/VMS so Windows users can access information residing in Rdb/VMS databases.
Rdb will then be able to connect with the 125-odd existing applications designed for Microsoft's SQL Server.
They expect to have the stuff ready in July.
DEC says its 21064 Alpha chip is capable of delivering 400 peak MIPS via dual instruction issue and claims Alpha architecture will eventually allow up to ten simultaneous instructions.
Not to say DEC is going whole hog for Microsoft, but it has cut a master license agreement to give Microsoft University courses and sell video products at its 145 training centres around the world.
Maybe DEC president Ken Olsen has finally found his ultimate successor in Bill Gates, and maybe one of these days Billy will just whip out his personal checkbook and buy DEC outright.
FRENCH IT INDUSTRY SCOURS SILICON VALLEY FOR FRIENDS
Touting France as the foremost software preserve in Europe, a bunch of French companies and research and development institutes under the aegis of the French Scientific Mission will be in Silicon Valley June 23–24 trolling for partnership opportunities including joint research and development agreements, joint patent development, licensing and strategic alliance.
The Mission has  corralled such personages as Sun Microsystems Inc's John Gage, Chorus Systemes SA's Hubert Zimmerman and ex-Apple Computer Inc honcho Jean Louis  Gassees to speak.
CASE, expert  systems , neural networks, object-oriented databases, man/machine interfaces and information retrieval systems.
It'll be at the Hotel Sofitel in Redwood City.
Contact (415) 397–4440.
OSF LAUNCHES MOTIF 1.2, CLAIMS COMPATIBILITY WITH 1.1
The Open Software Foundation says version 1.2 of its Motif graphical user interface is now generally available.
It's based upon X-Windows 11 release 5, and is binary compatible with Motif 1.1 applications, according to OSF.
It has enhanced internationalisation features and the ability to work with a mixture of different fonts and character sets.
OSF says it has increased consistency with Microsoft Corp Windows, Hewlett-Packard Co's Presentation Manager and IBM's Common User Access.
The Foundation says there are now 1,500 applications available for Motif, and with over 1,000 licensees, it runs on some 145 hardware platforms and 47 different operating systems.
A full re-distribution licence for version 1.2 costs $15,000, source code with limited distribution rights is $2,000.
SUMITOMO TO SELL OPUS SPARC PRODUCTS IN JAPAN
Opus Systems Inc has got itself an exclusive Japanese distributor, Sumitomo Corporation, the giant international trading concern.
Sumitomo, which quietly started getting JLE-compatible Opus products four or five months ago to seed its large accounts, will be handling both the Opus Sparc workstations and add-in Sparc cards.
It expects the bulk of its business to be in workstations.
It forecasts moving volumes in the low thousands in three years and wants to represent 10% of Opus’ business.
Currently the company says about 45% of its business is offshore, including selling 25MHz add-in cards to the Chinese petroleum industry via Singapore.
VERSANT HAS INTERACTIVE GRAPHICAL C++ TOOL SET
Menlo Park, California-based Versant Object Technology Inc has come out with the Versant Interactive C++ Tool Set, the first C++ software system for developing graphical end-user business applications in object-oriented environments.
The Interactive C++ Tool Set is also designed to add interactive graphical interfaces to existing C++ applications and to support multimedia, workgroup and second-generation client-server applications.
The company claims that it is the first graphical tool set specifically designed to make C++ code re-use a practical reality.
The Tool Set is tightly integrated with the Versant object database, providing a delivery environment and enabling developers to take full advantage of the client-server features in the database, including check-out and check-in to personal and group databases and versioning.
It works with standard OSF/Motif and third party C++ class libraries.
It includes an interpreted C++ subset that excludes the more complex features of C++ for initially defining classes.
It consists of Versant Screen, a tool that enables users to create highly interactive applications; the Interactive Object SQL uses SQL-like statements to access and manipulate objects within the Versant database and Versant Report interactive report generator.
Screen and Interactive Object SQL are currently available; Report will be out next quarter.
No prices or details of the hardware environments that are supported were given by Versant.
TADPOLE DEBUTS SPARCBOOK 1 IN EUROPE — SPARCBOOK 2 TO FOLLOW
William Fellows
As expected, Tadpole Technology plc, the UK company that took itself off to Austin, Texas, and came up with the first notebook computer based on Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparc RISC chip and Unix, has decided the time is right to bring its Sparcbook 1 back to Europe (UX No 371).
Unable to wait, many European hopefuls have already tried to get the thing direct from the US.
All 13 models of the notebook, from the monochrome S1–85G-8 with 8Mb RAM, 85Mb disk and floppy drive, to the colour S1–240C-32 with dual 120Mb disks and 32Mb RAM are available in the UK and France from this week through Tadpole's Cambridge- and Paris-based offices.
Prices go from £3,640 to £11,545.
The modem included in US models isn't approved by the British telecoms authorities — apparently its components are too close together and don't meet the required specification — so Tadpole is recommending another for use in its place.
Distributors for Benelux and Scandinavian markets are currently being finalised — they'll be announced in May, when a telemarketing campaign for Germany countries also begins.
Italy will get its own  distribution outlet in September and resellers for the Japanese and Asian markets will be announced in June.
Tadpole is also lining up a couple of UK value-added resellers who will sell the Sparcbook into specific application markets, though the company says it definitely won't be putting a complete third distribution channel in place.
The Sparcbook will — like it is in the US — be available for rent.
Meanwhile, Tadpole has picked up a second firm, Isometrics, to peddle the Sparcbook to the US government, and says a second strategy to make it easier for US government bodies to buy its technology will be revealed in a couple of weeks (UX No 381).
Also in the US, two unnamed systems integrators have agreed to take the notebook on-board — they'll also be announced in a few weeks' time.
US sales
US deliveries of the Sparcbook 1 began at the end of January, and according to Tadpole chairman, Robert Gilkes, there are already some 160 corporate customers, one of which has taken 40 of them.
Gilkes says he will be happy if the firm can sell between 2,500 and 4,000 of the notebooks in the US by the end of this year, with European business expected to generate between a quarter and a third of the US total.
Its main market area in all regions is the Sun user community — early users will be independent software developers, oil companies and others for on-site work, telecoms  companies for remote diagnostics, and the financial services industry.
12 month lead
Gilkes says his firm hasn't run into the Sparc laptop builders like RDI Computer Corp and Toshiba Corp too often on its travels — for starters the Sparcbook has no Sbus or peripherals.
Although it believes it has a technological lead of around a year in the RISC notebook market, Gilkes doesn't expect Tadpole to have the ground all to itself for much longer.
Fujitsu Ltd and Toshiba are tipped as likely candidates for RISC/Unix notebook announcements, one possibly coming as soon as next month.
Sharp Corp is also thought to be working on a similar tack, though not for this year.
40MHz Sparcbook 2 this year
Gilkes says a Sparcbook 2 will be on the market later this year that'll be based upon Sun's 40MHz Sparcststion 2 technology — though it won't replace the Sparcbook 1, which will live on.
There may even be a 70 SPECmark, multi-processing Sparcbook on the horizon — Gilkes says Tadpole is committed to ‘closely tracking the performance of Sun's desktops,’ starting with the Sparcstation 2, then whatever follows.
Gilkes confirms he's happy to stick with Sun's Solaris Unix implementation, and although the firm took out much of the networking stuff obviously surplus to Sparcbook requirements, he's not much interested in the various cut-down Unix desktop implementations.
‘Unix Lite would have been okay four years ago, but with the performance and memory capacity of today's machines — and their future potential — we don't need cut-down Unix.
It's cheaper to keep the whole lot and remain compatible — in the corporate environment you need all the bits and pieces on top of the kernel in any case.’
Despite Sparcbook, Tadpole's bread and butter business remains its VME and Multibus board solutions for the present.
Following what Gilkes admits has been a very poor year in the VME marketplace, that part of its enterprise will contribute a declining proportion of the company's revenue as sales of the Sparcbook rise.
The cross-over point at which sales of the notebook outstrip revenues from its other products is still some way off, however, and it certainly won't be reached this year.
Tadpole currently spends a larger proportion of hardware research and development money on board design, not on the Sparcbook, although most of its software development efforts go into the notebook version of Unix.
‘Looking at other RISCs’
Gilkes is content enough with the Sparc market that his firm has to itself at the present, though he admits that the company is looking at other, unspecified RISC architectures, and it really is only just little more than co-incidence that Tadpole's US office is just down the street from where IBM/Motorola Inc's PowerPC RISC efforts are concentrated.
There are, says Gilkes, several other CPU technologies that could benefit from Tadpole's notebook treatment, but they're not public yet, though they will be by year-end, he advises.
ANOTHER R4000 DERIVATIVE IS SPOTTED
Michael Slater, in the latest issue of Microprocessor Report, chides us all for being mean to MIPS Computer Systems Inc and the ACE Initiative.
In his analysis, Hewlett-Packard Co, Sun Microsystems Inc and Intel Corp were out for blood, DEC and Compaq Computer Corp started eating their own children and ‘the press, in a striking example of pack journalism, turned vicious,’ playing up all the bad stuff — most notably MIPS' financial distress — never mentioning the $50m it has in the bank — though see page three for MIPS' disastrous results.
Slater, however, who figures MIPS for one of the strongest long-term challenges to Intel's iAPX-86 dominance in the personal computer market, allows that MIPS has nevertheless created some of its own headaches — like delays in the R4000 RISC stemming from its decision to produce a chip that pleased everybody, yet pleased nobody.
It wasn't performance-intensive enough for Silicon Grahpics Inc, but included stuff like multi-processor support that was completely unimportant in a mainstream Intel competitor, but yet it remained hard to design and debug.
It needed a two-tier design approach, but now that it's got one — compliments of the VRX implementation (UX No 379)— the window of opportunity isn't as wide open.
The Microprocessor Report has gotten wind of at least one other low-cost, low-power R4000 derivative in the works beside the NEC/MIPS VRX.
It seems there's a MIPS spin-off called QED under contract to Integrated Device Technology, which is producing a 50MHz, 2W, 60 SPECmark piece of silicon with cache memory size significantly larger than the original, but on a die less than half the R4000's.
Sampling is expected in the second half of next year with volume following in early 1994.
Toshiba Corp and Siemens-Nixdorf, IDT partners, are supposed to supply the chip, with Toshiba reportedly being especially hot to trot.
EUROPEAN ROUNDUP
ICL is introducing Openframework Version, its guide to implementing open systems solutions: ICL says the guide will include advice on standards conformance and software compatibility issues, functionality, performance and a comparison of different approaches to implementing open systems.
According to Tektronix UK Ltd, Marlow, Buckinghamshire, commercially available X-Windows applications are increasing at a rate of 40% a year: under the company's validation programme, over 60 new applications have been approved after testing on Tektronix TekXpress X terminals.
$16m-a-year French software house Prologue SA has clinched a joint sales and marketing deal with IBM France for the RS/6000 version of its multi-user application development language Abal: Prolog says installation and after-sales support will be provided by its Symbiose Informatique subsidiary.
London-based Chernikeeff Networks Ltd is now offering Japan Computer Corp's range of MIPS R3000 RISC-based colour X-terminals in the UK as the SuperXR series: prices go from £4,500 for a 17″ model to £6,000 for the 20″ version.
Phoenix Computers Ltd, Northampton, UK, is offering Dataram's DR-6000S memory boards for IBM's RS/6000 series, which increases main memory on the Model 320 from 8Mb to 128Mb, and to 512Mb across the rest of the range: the boards come in 16Mb and 64Mb configurations and are claimed to cost 30% less than IBM options.
Dickens Data Systems' Max-Terminal — an asynchronous X-terminal for the IBM RS/6000 — is now available in the UK from Oxford-based Nextage Systems Ltd.
Xerox Imaging Systems, Peabody, Massachusetts, has begun shipping Scanworx, its document input system to France, Germany, Italy and Spain: running on Sun Microsystems Inc's SunSparcstations under SunView or USL's Open Look.
Scanworx is distributed by Compact Computer Systems in Austria, Rank Xerox in France, Nuvoe Tecnologie Grafiche in Italy and in the UK by Xerox Imaging Systems Ltd.
The Kewill Group's Trifid Software Ltd, Congleton, Cheshire, has released a Unix version of its IBS integrated business system for manufacturing industries.
In the UK, Cambridge-based CadCentre's GNC Plus is to support Hewlett-Packard's 9000 series 700 workstations: GNC Plus, its Unix Cam package it allows CAD-generated component designs to be turned directly into machining programs for NC/CNC tools.
Amsterdam-based, Associated Computer Experts BV and Parsytec, Aachen, Germany have signed an OEM agreement for ACE Expert T800/T9000 transputer compilers.
Parsytec has integrated ACE's Expert compilers with Parix its run-time development  environment for its parallel supercomputers, GC-series.
ACE Expert compilers features C, ANSI-C and Fortran-77 front ends and a language independent back-end for the T800.
Parsytec will deliver the ACE compilers with every GC-system.
UK Unix connectivity house Unipalm Ltd, Cambridge, is to distribute Macclesfield, Cheshire-based JSB Computer Systems' MultiView, Windows-to-Unix integration software through its European channels.
VMark Software Inc is setting up UK and European subsidiaries in Frensham, Surrey, and Paris, France: VMark UK Ltd is headed-up by Ed Aston, whilst Freddies Rodriguez continues to serve as manager of operations, now at VMark Europe Inc.
The firm has appointed Steve Machnik vice president of marketing in the US.
In Europe, DEC has appointed Dr Juan Rada as director of strategy and new initiatives — he hails from the International Institute of Management Development in Lausanne, where he was director general.
London-based Personal Workstations Ltd is now offering the XI extension to XVT's graphical user interface toolkit for £275: developed by Orca Software, Colorado, XI allows portable database applications to be created that take advantage of the environments XVT supports.
Technology Ventures Ltd, Luton, UK is distributing the TGRAF-X 4200 graphics emulation tool from Grafpoint Inc in the UK.
Emulating a Tektronix terminal under X-Windows, the TGRAF-X 4200 can be installed on most hardware platforms including HP 9000 and IBM RS/6000.
The tool allows the user to run any applications supporting Textronix terminals on X-Terminals or workstations even if the application does not support X.
The Unix Forum ‘92 expo and conference is being held May 26–27 at the Internationales Congress Centrum Berlin in what is now a united Germany.
Rair Computer GmbH will be selling Addamax's secure operating system and networking products including its Compartmented Mode Workstation (CMW) in Germany to both commercial and government accounts under an exclusive reseller licence: the two will collaborate on localisation.
Meanwhile, Addamax has picked European OSI vendor the Marben Group to provide OSI networking technology for the Addamax CMW.
In the UK, Misys subsidiary, TIS Software Ltd, Slough, Berkshire, says it has ported its Strategix financial and distribution system to Sequent Computer's Symmetry series — Sequent reseller, Cambridge Online Applications Ltd becomes a Strategix VAR.
Following its bid for Dataid SA in France, AT&T Co's AT&T Istel subsidiary has moved on to Germany and won agreement for the acquisition of CAB Computeranwendungs-Beratungs GmbH, a software house specialising in applications that run mainly under Unix.
It is one of Hewlett-Packard Co's most successful German resellers and has 100 employees; 1991 turnover was about $12m.
AT&T Istel plans to combine the company with its 1991 acquisition, Infoplan in Cologne.
The first European Design Automation Conference is scheduled for 7–10 Spetember at Hamburg's Congress Center and is expected to attract 5,000 visitors: among those exhibiting are DEC, Harris, Sun, Cadence, Fujitsu and i-Logix.
In the UK, Uniface and Information Dimensions have developed an interface driver which integrates Information Dimensions’ Basicplus and the Uniface 4GL across mainframe, minicomputer and Unix platforms: Basicplus is a relational database designed for document processing and multimedia.
In the UK, Luton-based Optim Computers Ltd has released Help3000, a help desk system for MS-DOS and Unix platforms: it features tracking capabilities, an electronic data interchange interface, call tracking and logging.
Shipping now, prices start at £8,000.
Lynwood Scientific Developments, Crowthorne, Berkshire, has signed an OEM agreement with Tandberg Data AS for its X-Windows terminal technology: in return, Tandberg is to take Lynwood's security tools.
Instrumatic UK Ltd, Marlow, Buckinghamshire, has launched TSSI's X-Windows-based Wavemaker graphical test generator for Sun  Microsystems Inc and Hewlett-Packard Co platforms.
UK, Oxford-based Network Designers Ltd, is to supply Scottish Airports Ltd — a subsidiary of British Airports Authority — with its Tango+ connectivity system for linking ICL DRS Unix servers with VME mainframes at Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Glasgow airports.
Computer Systems for Business Ltd, Burnham, Buckinghamshire, has launched a manufacturing, accounting and distribution package for Unix systems dubbed TIMS: the firm has recently opened a branch in Warsaw.
Netherlands-based, Westmount Technology BV has announced ISEE/Accell, a CASE tool that generates applications for relational databases: ISEE/Accell supports Oracle, Sybase, Unify 2000, Informix and Ingres and runs under Microsoft Windows, Open Look and Motif.
Available now, a full licence for one user costs $10,000.
In the UK, Oxford-based Hytec Computer Systems Ltd, has been bought out in a £1.8m management buy-out the ICL reseller of its Unix mid range computer systems will be headed up by Suat Yilmaz who will take over as managing director.
SCO KEEPS WEATHER-EYE ON INTEL P5 AS ITS INTEREST IN MIPS WANES
Last week, SCO's European business development manager, Steve Spill, was able to say only that his company's Open Desktop port to MIPS/ACE is ‘continuing as of today, but we'll be looking closely when the Intel P5 [80586]is launched.’
According to Spill, there are a number of checkpoints that SCO must negotiate over the coming months if it is to maintain its MIPS effort — each requiring a commitment of political will, as well as cash.
With the ACE ODT developers' kit for DEC's R3000-based machines under its belt (UX No 366), SCO has to decide whether to continue work on HAL, ACE's hardware abstraction layer, a version of which is required for each port of ODT to an ACE member's MIPS platform.
Then it has to decide if it actually wants to shrink-wrap the stuff, and finally whether to go ahead and put together a marketing and distribution effort for the completed product.
SCO's schedule — now effectively subject to change without prior notification — would have an R4000 developers' kit out in the third quarter, with a completed offering early next year.
‘We're not at a checkpoint at the moment,’ says Spill, ‘but the P5 will be there before we reach the next one…and many people are waiting for the P5 before deciding whether to go to the R4000.
There are many less ACE machines around than we thought there would be by this time,’ he added.
Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA's European corporate marketing director for personal computers, Fabrizio Gimona, revealed that SCO even offered to develop a custom version of ODT for Olivetti's latest box — see front page — an offer the Italian company eventually declined.
‘We were very hungry for a shrinkwrapped operating system for our ACE machines but we had to say no to SCO,’ he said.
Gimona claims SCO had already told Olivetti it would be refocusing on Intel some time ago.
Spill says SCO will make an announcement regarding its Intel plans around mid-year, its new-found enthusiasm is a turnaround from last year when it was bullish about its MIPS Open Desktop effort, but seemed ready to leave the Intel ACE version to tread water, saying it wouldn't be around until 1993 (UX No 364).
SONY SHOWS TWO MORE NEWS WORKSTATIONS
Sony Corp has two new models of its NEWS workstation family, both based on the 64-bit R4000 RISC chip and with speeds of 100 MIPS: the NWS-5000 is a desktop model and the MWS-5900 is a server and both use the R4000SC chip clocked at 66.7MHz They run the NEWS-OS4.2 version of Berkeley Unix, and feature support of the AppleTalk protocol, facilitating connection with Macintosh computers.
The 5000 desktop model has a memory checking function for picking up memory errors, while the 5900 server can make use of a large-capacity disk array with up to eight disk drives.
ENCORE HAS CONCEPT/32, 88000 BOX — RSX 90 SYSTEM
Fort Lauderdale, Florida-based Encore Computer Corp has introduced a new machine that combines a Concept/32 processor with its 88000 RISC-based machine.
The result is to create the RSX 90 System, which runs both real-time Unix and MPX-32.
The RSX 90 System features a development and execution environment based on Encore's UMAX V Unix and MPX-32, the operating system of the old Gould line.
A windowing terminal interface is available and this uses Macintosh-like commands and functions in an icon-based screen.
RSX 90 users get access to software engineering tools with graphical user interfaces, VME-based input-output options, along with incremental compute and graphics processing power for use in real-time applications.
The RSX 90 also features Network File System, GOSIP, Fibre Distributed Data Interface and X25 interfaces.
IEEE 754 floating point for data sharing with other RISC systems is available, and, you will all be relieved to hear that UMAX V is fully Posix certified, or so the company says.
The RSX 90 co-processors are interconnected via Encore's patented Reflective Memory System.
Multiple RSX 90 systems can be connected via this Reflective Memory System to form a cluster.
Multiple clusters, each one spanning distances of up to a mile, can be configured using Encore's Fibre Optic Reflective Memory Systems.
Clusters also can include other members of the Encore 90 Family as well as Concept/32 systems which can be configured together to form scalable systems for complex application requirements.
Entry-level prices for the RSX 90 system start at $159,900.
USL TO OPEN UP IN FRANCE, ITALY AND GERMANY…
Unix System Labs Inc is to extend its European operations and is planning to open a French office by the end of the month.
It's part of USL's strategy to manoeuvre itself back into the commercial sector — the company says the operation will be concerned with systems integration and promoting Unix awareness in the government and corporate markets.
Other offices are planned for Italy and Germany in the next few months.
…
ADDS DESQVIEW TO DESTINY
At the Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA launch last week, see front page, Unix System Labs Inc president Roel Pieper confirmed, as reported (UX No 370), that it is to adopt Veritas Software Corp's file management system for its Destiny desktop environment.
Pieper says it will also feature Quarterdeck Office Systems Inc's MS-DOS implementation of the X-Window system, Desqview/X — which has finally appeared after lengthy delays (UX No 380)— if its can get the thing up and running on it.
The port as ‘not running too smoothly,’ at present, he said.
GOLDMINE UK TAKES OPEN INC'S ASPECT
Newly formed Goldmine Technologies Ltd, based in Berkhamsted, Herts, says that it will be distributing Aspect, the graphical user interface development system from Open Inc, Colorado Springs (UX No 315, 358), for Apple Macintosh and IBM's Presentation Manager in June and October respectively — versions for OSF/Motif, Open Look and Microsoft Windows are available immediately.
As well as distributing the new version 1.2 of Aspect, due out at the end second quarter, Goldmine claims that it has other distribution deals in the pipeline to be announced over the next few weeks.
The company sees its future as mainly GUI-shaped and admits that Aspect takes advantage of the lack of GUI standards: ‘standards will not happen’, commented Malcolm Neill, the company's director, who formed Goldmine with fellow-ex Sybase UK employee John Rodford and technical director Brian Clarke, one of the originals at Pyramid UK.
It was set up in conjunction with Swiss  entrepreneur Niels Rasmussen, owner of Nercom Informatik, who has also set up Goldmine Technologies AG in Zug, Switzerland (UX No 374).
In the US, Open Inc has 50 customers for Aspect, including NASA and AT&T Bell Laboratories, and already has one in the UK which Goldmine coyly refused to reveal.
Entry-level price for a single-user copy of Aspect is £1,500.
IMAGINE HAS MULTI-AUTHOR APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT ENVIRONMENT
Imagine Multimedia, the Ann Arbor, Michigan-based spinoff of the University of Michigan and creators of MediaStation, has developed InterActive Author, a hypermedia software for authoring interactive applications.
Imagine says it has taken the complexity out of authoring by creating a program that constructs sophisticated hypermedia apps without recourse to a scripting language.
It can be combined with MediaStation for media acquisition, editing and management.
Together they support multiple authors working on different aspects of an application simultaneously over a network.
InterActive Author, whose price is still unfixed, will be available on NeXT computers in the third quarter, with an X-Windows version coming by the end of the year.
An X-Windows version of MediaStation will be shipping on DECStation 5000s this summer.
KNOWLEDGEWARE SEEN AS A TAKEOVER TARGET OF SOFTLAB GmbH
It seems KnowledgeWare Inc may be an acquisition candidate for hungry Munich software house Softlab GmbH which, on behalf of its 75% owner Bayerische MotorenWerke AG, is known to be assessing various complementary software businesses as potential buys, particularly in the US.
According to Computerworld, Softlab recently offered $350m for the company — which has been experiencing a rough time of late, reporting mid-term losses of $3.5m back in January.
A spokeswoman for Softlab, however, told the US paper's German sister publication, Computerwoche, that the figure had been plucked out of the air and, while confirming that the two companies are in discussion, said that negotiations are no further advanced than those it is currently having with at least four other US firms.
Beyond that, Softlab isn't giving anything away: US rules say it may not discuss talks until agreement is won.
MINIGRAMS
Altus Finance, a subsidiary of Credit Lyonnais in France, has followed Unix System Labs Inc's example and invested $1m in Paris-based micro-kernel Unix house Chorus Systemes SA (UX No 359).
Cypress Semiconductor Corp is disappointed with its Sparc business, which is falling and impacted its earnings in at least the last quarter: but now it reckons its Pinnacle Sparc shot (UX No 381) will save the day in the second half.
Sparc laptop house RDI Computer Corp, San Diego, California has had a change of guard: start-up specialist, Roy Wright, has been brought in as president to run day-to-day operations, while co-founder, Rick Schrameck, remains chairman and CEO responsible for the company's direction, strategic alliances and new product development.
Informed sources say that Texas Instruments Inc had Sun Microsystems Inc's SunOS Unix running on the superscalar Viking Sparc a long time ago, but when schedules for the long overdue part began to slip, it clammed up, leaving the grapevine to hum with negative vibes.
The sources, who have seen Viking in action, say that the thing works, and may even perform ahead of expectations when it eventually sees the light of day.
Claiming to have ‘seen it all,’ they say Fujitsu is doing some interesting things with Sparc, but the Cypress Semiconductor Corp/Ross Pinnacle effort is ‘still a long way off.’
NCube Inc, Foster City, California says that it expects to win agreement within three months for one of Japan's Big Three mainframe manufacturers to start marketing its massively parallel machines, and suggests that Siemens AG may also adopt them for marketing in Europe.
Santa Cruz Operation Inc and Inglewood, California-based Locus Computing Corp say that Locus's Merge MS-DOS-under-Unix is now available as SCO Merge for all Santa Cruz Unix System V/386 systems; it runs MS-DOS applications as Unix processes on iAPX-86 machines.
AT&T Federal Systems has signed a systems integration teaming agreement with MIPS Computer Systems Inc, which includes Bell Laboratories implementing a MIPS System V.4 applications binary interface-compatible version of B1-rated System V/Multi-Level Secure Unix for MIPS' new R4000 workstations and servers; AT&T intends to sell the MIPS machines to the US federal government.
Dutch water, gas and electricity distributor, Energie Delfland NV, Delft, has signed for UK, Cambridge-based Smallworld Systems Ltd's geographical information system which it is to use for its Atlas project management and distribution system running on Sun Microsystems Inc workstations.
Data General Corp, the British Computer Society, the Scottish Office Industry Department and the Department of Trade and Industry are co-sponsoring the first Scottish Open Systems conference, which takes place at the Ibrox Stadium — home to Glasgow Rangers football club — on May 14th.
Correction: Hewlett-Packard Co says that its new HP 9000 RISC server line should boost performance by up to 70% at the top end of its line, not 7% as reported (UX No 380).
Unisys Corp is slowly settling on Staffware as its workflow automation software, Unisys Information Systems having pledged to make it their only workflow offering, renamed their Staffware-derived OFIS Procedures product back to the generic  labelling Staffware and a co-marketing agreement with the Staffware company: Staffware has also nosed out the Dublin-created Workhorse workflow software at Imix, Arix's imaging arm, in Imix' Supervision integrated imaging and workflow system.
Imis is supplying both Wang and Cincinatti Bell with their Unix imaging products.
Delaware-based Security vendor, Raptor Systems (UX No 377), is offering to install one of its new Eagle network security systems free-of-charge for 30 days on any network using TCP/IP.
They'll also bring in an independent security auditor to  estimate its effectiveness: Eagle will be installed on the user's Sparc or RS/6000.
Sunwatchers: if you were expecting Texas Instruments to formally announce the Viking chip before Sun trots out its Viking boxes May 19, take heart.
TI will bear its soul officially on Viking performance, price and availability May 7.
Uniforum Asia ‘92 conference will run concurrently with the first Asia Pacific Networking, Open Systems & Workstations (NOW) exhibit August 25–27 at the Marina Mandarin Hotel in Singapore.
A hundred companies are expected to participate.
DEC will be porting its strategic Rdb/VMS relational database to Alpha VMS and OSF/1 platforms.
Hewlett-Packard's KGB claims DEC/Europe is under orders not to sell Unix and move Vax 4000s and 6000s instead even though Europe is hot for Unix: It's the margins, you see.
HP's Larry Lytle, loaned to the Open Software Foundation back at its inception to handle recruiting, has made a 180 degree turn after a stint at Netwise as strategic relations director where he had philosophical differences with OSf: He's now gone to Unix System Labs as director of corporate communications.
Vivid Publishing in Los Altos, California, makers of the TypeView font utility for Next, has come up with an environmentally aware software packaging scheme it's calling EarthPack and challenging other software vendors to do the same: it's making the specifications available to any who inquire and will license the EarthPack name free of charge.
InterCon is now up to version 1.2 of Planet X. its X Window client software for the Mac, promising 20% faster performance in colour mode and improved session security.
It says Telnet users won't bump into each other anymore.
Planet X will also run on Apple Quadras now and support Apple monochrome displays.
Seymour Cray has been left holding the baby at his struggling Colorado Springs-based Cray Computer Corp: Neil Davenport has resigned as president and chief executive, saying that Cray Computer had reached the point where it has appropriate resources to complete the Cray-3 so he is free to seek other opportunities — but the company is still seeking its first firm customer for the supercomputer.
The firm said chairman Seymour Cray would be assuming the two additional posts for now.
The rumoured deal between NeXT and either Compaq or Dell that first broke last January (UX No 368) has so far failed to materialise: observers claim it's because Steve Jobs is demanding a big down payment from both firms even though he intends to shrinkwrap NeXTstep-on-Intel.
Meanwhile, observers, who claim there are still chats going on between HP and NeXT (UX No 372), say NeXTStep won't run on just any 486: it takes SuperVGA just to get mono and a JAWS card to get colour.
Talus, the little Texas company with the order for 2,500 NeXT workstations from Russian president Boris Yeltsin (UX No 381), says the way the order's written it doesn't have to provide NeXT machines, merely computers running NeXTStep: it estimates the value of the order at $25m, but not in cold cash.
It's prepared to barter for Russian oil and lumber.
Sun is set to cut prices across-the-board this week on its desktop line as part of its transition to Viking starting May 19th: just how deep they'll go remains to be seen.
According to their latest results they were eating up backlog last quarter.
San Jose, California-based 3C, now trafficking as Super Workstation with ex-Sony VP Mike Hilgenberg in as president, claims it is making the LSI/Sbus-based CPU and frame buffer boards for Goldstar's Sparcettes in the US and shipping them to Korea for final assembly: it also says it's planning a Viking-based add-in card and is designing its own Sbus/Mbus 24-bit and 32-bit graphics accelerators.
Novell Inc reckons it has four paths into the Unix market: NetWare, NetWare for Unix, NetWare NFS and Univel Inc.
Sequent Computer Systems Inc has privately placed some $20m — £11.3m — worth of convertible debentures to repay bank debt and provide working capital.
Our sister publication, Computergram International, the daily hi-tech newsletter, is now available as Computergram Newsline in the UK only.
Updated daily, the service is split into four sections — front page, finance, IBM and Unix.
Call 0839 300 300 for the latest news on the Unix industry.
Calls charged at 36p a minute cheap rate, 48p at all other times.