

SUN ROLLS OUT VIKING BOXES AS SPARCSTATION 10s…
This is the week that Sun Microsystems Inc debuts the first of its much-heralded, if tardy, Viking boxes.
Despite hopes that Sun would think up something warm and friendly to call them, the things have been dubbed Sparcstation 10s — small improvement over the Sparcstation 3s they might have been — in recognition of Sun's tenth birthday, which it celebrated earlier this year.
The new family includes two desktop workstations, the Model 30 and 41, each available in August in either single or dual processor configurations.
Both models, sans monitor and keyboard, also come as servers.
Performance will be quoted at two to three times the existing Sparcstation 2.
Sun has wisely isolated its competitor as Hewlett-Packard Co, currently the performance leader, and is going to go head-on with claims that its boxes beat comparable HP Snakes on a sheer performance basis, let alone the price/performance ratios.
As of last week, Sun was still tinkering with the Viking's clock speeds.
It is not using the 33MHz and 40MHz silicon Texas Instruments just announced (UX No 384), but will come in higher than both those rates.
Sun will also be offering Viking versions of the Galaxy 630MP, 670MP and 690MP multi-processors it introduced this winter, configured with one to four processors.
The Sparcstation 10 comes with 32Mb RAM standard, expandable to 512Mb using 64Mb SIMMs or 128Mb with 16Mb SIMMs.
There is either one 424Mb or 1Gb 3.5-inch drive standard, up to two 3.5-inch SCSI hard disks and up to 26Gb external disk capacity.
There are four SBus and two MBus slots.
A single-slot GX accelerator is standard with GXplus, GS and GT  configurations , available for 2D and 3D graphics.
Monitor options include a 19-inch grey-scale or 16- or 19-inch colour screens.
Solaris 1.1 will be pre-installed.
As Sun suggested it would do, it has built in ISDN and multimedia features such as a bundled speaker box and microphone, CD-quality audio and multimedia mail in an OpenWindows 3.0 environment.
The Model 30 servers are uniprocessor only, the 41s can expand to two.
Both will connect directly with 34 terminals.
Sparcstation 1, 1+ and 2 users — even in some respects IPX customers — will be able to upgrade to either the Model 30 or 41 via a chassis and motherboard swap out.
Old Sun-3 and Sun386i users can exchange their CPU boards for an entry-level Model 30.
No further word on pricing was available at press time except that the 10s will start between $20,000 and $30,000.
Keeping its eye on what HP was up to with its latest Snake, see page three, Sun was still dickering with its pricing schedule at the eleventh hour last week.
…
AS CYPRESS DELIVERS HYPERSPARC — BUT NO CUSTOMERS YET
Cypress Semiconductor Corp and its Ross Technology Inc subsidiary last week delivered their repost to Texas Instruments Inc's superscalar Viking Sparc in the form of HyperSparc, a 64-bit microprocessor which they hope will compete with Texas' part for the next generation of Sparc RISC system business.
Developed and designed by Austin, Texas-based Ross, under the watchful eyes of Sun Microsystems Inc engineers, the superscalar, superpipelined HyperSparc begins life as a 66.7MHz unit delivering 70 SPECmarks (55 SPECint, 64 SPECfp), 133 MIPS and 32 MFLOPS, compared to the 50 SPECmarks of Texas' initial 40MHz Viking CPU.
Executing 0.9 instructions per cycle, HyperSparc uses 0.65 micron, two-layer metal CMOS technology, has 1.2m transistors, is taped-out now and is due to sample next month.
Prices start at $3,500 in quantities of 100, which ship from the fourth quarter.
HyperSparc will evolve into three-layer, 0.5 CMOS, 80MHz and 100MHz iterations next year.
An 80MHz part will deliver 85 SPECmarks (65 SPECint and 75 SPECfp), 166 MIPS and 37 MFLOPS.
The 100MHz offering is rated at 101 SPECmarks (77 SPECint and 89 SPECfp), 200 MIPS and 44 MFLOPS.
HyperSparc is being offered in uni- and dual-processor modules with 128Kb or 256Kb of cache memory per processor.
A symmetric multi-processing HyperSparc configuration with two, dual-66.7MHz CPU modules has a SPECthruput rating of 200.
HyperSparc is pin-compatible with Cypress' first-generation Sparc RISCs, which Sun uses in its workstations and server systems, and uses the 40MHz Mbus.
To handle the throughput that future HyperSparcs will be capable of delivering in multi-processor configurations, Cypress says it is investigating a higher clock speed Mbus, and other bus technologies.
Although existing Sparc applications can take advantage of the superscalar and superpipelined features of HyperSparc as they stand, Cypress says that with re-compilation, software can garner a further 10–15% boost in performance.
Sun's SunPro unit is expected to come out with new compiler technology to allow applications to take advantage of HyperSparc — and Viking — features, indeed Sun's whole SunWorks compiler set is now being readied for an overhaul.
Viking fits Sparc international's current edition of the Sparc Compliance Definition — Cypress says it'll also meet the requirements of SCD 9.0, now expected in the third or fourth quarter, which will outline a set of parameters for 64-bit Sparc systems (UX No 380).
More details, page four.
UNIX ON THE DESKTOPS, WITH A LITTLE HELP FROM FRIENDS
There are a handful of noticeably small start-ups wrestling with the key interoperability issues facing Unix as it elbows its way on to the desktop.
SunSoft Inc's solution to the problem of running Microsoft Corp Windows applications on its Solaris 2.0-on-Intel Unix SVR4 operating system will reportedly be addressed by Praxsys Technologies Inc, Norwood, Massachusetts.
The technology is code-named ‘Snoopy,’ and the firm claims its software will take all current and future off-the-shelf shrinkwrapped Windows applications, whether written for Windows 3.0, 3.1 or NT and run them unmodified on any RISC or Intel Corp Unix platform in native mode, see page five.
Snoopy doesn't have the field to itself, however, as Bristol Technology Inc, Ridgefield, Connecticut, is also readying a solution to the task of running Windows applications on Unix.
Its Win/U answer to the problem is expected to debut as a commercial product by the end of the year and is claimed to be a step ahead of rival technologies because it requires no Windows source code, see page four.
Meanwhile, start-up Echo Logic, the Bell Labs Inc spin-off being funded by AT&T Ventures Corporation, the phone company's venture arm, has announced a pact with Apple Computer Inc that it's apparently had in its back pocket for over a year.
The pair will reportedly use Echo's multi-pass binary compiler technology, FlashPort, to have existing shrinkwrapped Mac applications running on Apple's anticipated PowerPC RISC Unix boxes when they reach market, see page five.
Not such good news from one of the original players in this arena though, Mac-on-RISC house Quorum Software Systems Inc, Menlo Park, California, has filed suit against Apple seeking to counter allegations of patent and copyright infringement made by Apple.
The suit is meant to head off a legal attack against it by Apple which Quorum believes is in the works, see page four.
X/OPEN STILL TRYING TO CUT A DEAL WITH OSF
The X/Open Group Co Ltd has missed its proposed May timeframe for rolling out XPG4, the next version of its portability guide, which are a set of specifications designed to make it easier to develop open systems products, or to port proprietary offerings to open systems platforms.
The delay is due to the complex documentation required, X/Open claims, saying that it wants to make a big splash for XPG4, now scheduled for the Autumn.
Now that Unix System Labs has finally cut a deal for OSF's Distributed Computing Environment, albeit through Siemens-Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG (UX No 384), hopes are that X/Open may find light at the end of that particular tunnel too.
X/Open, which has been in negotiations with OSF for over a year now, was supposed to have incorporated DCE into its Common Applications Environment some time ago: that announcement is also on ice until the two can work something out.
SUNSOFT TO ACKNOWLEDGE OSF's DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING ENVIRONMENT
Sun Microsystems Inc has been sending out some rather confusing messages of late with regard to its position over the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment — DCE — initiative, which is more or less completely opposite to its own Open Network Computing, ONC environment.
Although the industry seems to be rallying to DCE, which is being touted as the future de facto, if not de jure , standard for creating and implementing distributed client/server applications, as Sun points out, no-one is using DCE — except a few early developers — whilst it already has some three million odd ONC licencees.
Nevertheless, Sun has come in for no small amount of criticism in pursuing what is often strictly an ‘invented here’ approach to technology solutions, at the expense of making some pragmatic marketing decisions.
Most marked has been Sun's reluctance to concede any ground to OSF's Motif interface, even though many Sun users clearly prefer that graphical environment over Sun's Open Look GUI.
On May 26th, Sun will, via its SunSoft Inc software operation, outline a more conciliatory position over DCE, alongside the first major shake-up in its networking strategy for some time.
Although its plans stop short of adopting DCE outright, or even endorsing a third-party offering based upon the stuff, SunSoft will define a networking strategy for its Solaris Unix SVR4 operating system, which will include the ability to ‘plug-in’ DCE components, according to Ed Zander, president of the software unit.
As well as introducing ONC Plus, an enhanced version of its existing networking technology, featuring new naming services, file system services and security enhancements, SunSoft will describe Solaris Federated Services, a set of utilities that'll allow users to develop with ONC Plus, or to plug-in alternative technologies such as DCE, even whole networking products, like Novell Inc's NetWare.
SunSoft's Unix-on-Intel play, Solaris 2.0, will be shown at the forthcoming PC Expo in New York — along with its emulation stuff, see page five — and is still scheduled to become available 90 days after the Sparc version ships.
By next year there will be no time delay between releases of software for the different architectures, promises Zander.
Meanwhile, the SparcWorks compilers that are used to re-compile for both platforms are soon to get a re-working, including a name change, says Zander, but there will be no cross-compiler.
Solaris and Destiny — incompatible
Given all the hard work being invested in the various Unix desktop efforts, it seems a shame that Solaris for Sparc and Intel won't be binary-compatible with Unix System Labs' Sparc and Intel implementations of the Destiny desktop Unix.
Their respective Application Binary Interfaces are different.
That might cause headaches at the likes of ICL, which says it'll run Destiny on its DRS3000 boxes (UX No 384), whilst maintaining a Sun-compatible operating system on its DRS6000 Sparc range.
However, USL has recently claimed that it will configure Destiny to run applications of all persuasions — including Solaris —(UX No 380), Zander says ‘if they can do that they're better than anyone in the world.’
DOE: Distributed Objects Everywhere
According to Zander there are 12 different products that will eventually fall under the DOE umbrella that it is sharing with Hewlett-Packard Co.
The first of that breed will appear next year, including technology that will incorporate Tivoli Systems Inc's WizDom object-oriented distributed management framework.
DOE will also embrace Sun's ToolTalk communications and messaging service.
SunSoft holds quarterly DOE non-disclosure updates for 75 or more independent  software vendors under the  auspices of a Distributed Object Council, and has up to 100 engineers working on object stuff.
European offices
As well as its North European operation (covering Ireland, Norway, Finland, Denmark, Sweden, Iceland, Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Israel), which is run by Interactive Systems' former European boss, Doug Miller, out of Interactive's old UK offices in High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, SunSoft has now opened offices in (Grasbrunn) Munich and Velizy-Villacoublay (Paris), though both are located within the parent's premises.
The French office handles Southern Europe — France, Spain, Italy, Portugal, Greece, Turkey, Jugoslavia and Albania, plus Africa and the Middle East, and is run by Bernard Moitel, poached from Santa Cruz Operation Inc.
Dr Michael Beier has responsibility for Germany, Austria and Switzerland — and any points that it can find east.
SUNSOFT's INTERACTIVE INITIATIVE
Eyeing the expected Microsoft Corp NT assault on the 32-bit systems software market, SunSoft is also fortifying its channel strategy hoping to press the advantage first for its Interactive product, then for Solaris-on-Intel when it becomes available.
SunSoft has been publicly quiet on Interactive Unix since acquiring the division at the new year despite the fact that its sales accounted for a significant portion of the record number of licenses it sold.
Now it is starting to rev its engines with a new Spectrum programme designed to increase Interactive channel sales, preparing the way for Solaris-on-Intel.
It has been interviewing its distributors and sampling its 3,000 resellers to access geographical coverage and shortcomings.
SunSoft is spending in the neighbourhood of $5m on training and education, lead generation and promotion and user-oriented advertising.
Its 10 US and 30 European distributors have been briefed: its 12 PacRim houses remain.
Sun, which reckons its US distribution is thin, is expected to strike first at SCO which is deemed over-distributed and stagnant.
SCO's forces are apparently  disgruntled since Sun has been invited to make its case to SCO's Distributor Council later this month in Florida.
SunSoft is also kicking off a 200,000-piece direct mail campaign targeting new users and collateral telemarketing activity.
It says it is currently turning over some 6,000 leads a month to its distributors.
HEWLETT-PACKARD HP-UX AND OSF/1: ‘THE PROBLEM IS THAT IT ISN'T CALLED UNIX’
Although Hewlett-Packard Co says it still plans to incorporate OSF/1 into its HP-UX Unix implementation, the timeframe for accomplishing that task is gradually being pushed back, and who knows what will happen before such a transition is complete.
The company's next Unix release — HP-UX 9.0 — will comply with release 2 of OSF's Application Environment Specification, ‘OSF/1 without Mach,’ says HP UK's workstation manager Richard Owen, with a full OSF/1 kernel expected in HP-UX 10.0, which will be backwards compatible with the other HP-UX releases.
HP is not in a hurry to rush to OSF/1, Owen says, because the applications aren't there, but ‘the big problem is that it [OSF/1]isn't called Unix.
And users want Unix.’
HP will take-up OSF's other technologies — like the Distributed Computing and Management Environments — the problem though, ‘a hairy one,’ according to Owen, is how to fit them together, or how to develop the interfaces that allow them to interoperate with each other.
Owen says HP is ‘doing better with DCE than DME.’
HP's Apollo Network Computing System development team ‘regards DCE as an NCS product,’ and currently has its work cut out trying to integrate all the DCE components — new technology to HP — back into NCS.
On the other hand, from HP's corner, DME is essentially the development of an existing application, not a new technology, and in any case ‘we've got more of our stuff in there,’ says Owen.
Owen, who describes DCE as ‘more ambitious code,’ says the other problem with it is that, by implication, DCE has to be tested on multi-vendor machines.
‘People want DCE becasue they want the Andrew File System — which accepts wide area networking — and the security.’
The problem with Network File System (part of Sun Microsystems Inc's rival Open Network Computing technology) Owen says, is that its security is built upon Unix, and it is not scalable above 20 systems.
On the demise of the Open Software Foundation's Architecture Neutral Distribution Format effort, Hewlett-Packard Co says ‘there should be an ANDF technology out there, but says it will be happy to work with whoever can provide that solution, ‘we're not  religious about that,’ says HP UK's workstation marketing manager, Richard Owen.
Although an adversary of the Advanced Computing Environment initiative, Owen concedes ‘ACE stirred people into an application portability train of thought.’
HP will pick up any software technology ‘that makes it easier to sell hardware,’ Owen says, ‘if users demand Microsoft NT, then we'll pick that up too.’
HP ADDS COLOUR 705 WORKSTATION
Turning up the heat on Sun Microsystems Inc and IBM, Hewlett-Packard Co is starting worldwide deliveries of another Snake RISC workstation in June, adding a colour model of the PA-RISC HP 9000/705 to its pit.
Geared towards computer-aided design and technical markets, the colour desktop uses the company's HP-UX Unix operating system, runs at 35 MIPS and is rated at 34 SPECmarks.
With 16Mb RAM, the 16-inch and 19-inch diskless units cost £7,100 ($9,000) and £8,000 ($10,000) respectively.
Pitched at £400 less than the IBM RS/6000 model 220, the colour 705 can be upgraded to use the 50MHz 710 PA-RISC board, upgradability, which HP claims, is offered neither by Sun nor IBM.
To stir up the competition even further, HP has reduced the price of the current Model 710 by £1,125 ($1,500) to £9,350 ($12,500).
Tilting further at Sun, HP says it has eight RISC Unix announcements to make before Sun wraps up its May 19th Viking launch (we're still waiting).
APPLE LAUNCHES UNIX DESKSIDE IN UK
Apple Computer UK Ltd, Uxbridge, Middlesex, begins deliveries of its Quadra 950 deskside Macintosh in the UK this week.
Running Apple's A/UX Unix implementation, the machine is based upon Motorola Inc's 33MHz 68040 chip, delivers 25 MIPS performance and includes 1152 x 870 resolution graphics, five NuBus slots and CD-ROM.
The 950, different from the desktop Quadra 900 (CI No 1,784), comes with a variety of monitor size options — 12-inch to 21-inch.
Prices start at £4,900 for the 4Mb, diskless version — £5,700 buys a system with 230Mb disk.
US prices have yet to be announced.
CRAY LAUNCHES MASSIVE MEMORY Y-MP M90s, CUTS LOW-END TAGS
Eagan, Minnesota-based Cray Research Inc has introduced a new Y-MP M90 series of supercomputers, claiming that they offer the largest main memories ever, in the hope that they make it possible to solve important scientific and engineering problems that are too large for the memory of any existing computer system to handle efficiently.
It is looking for customers in the petroleum, automotive, aerospace and chemical industries and in large-scale environmental and long-range weather modelling.
There are three models — M92 with two CPUs, M94 with four and M98 with up to eight, the last coming with up to 4G-words of 64 bits, 32Gb, using 16M-bit memory chips with up to 17.1G-bytes-per-second memory bandwidth and 11.7G-bytes-per-second input-output throughput.
No word on who is supplying the memory chips.
AT&T Co's Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey has ordered a Y-MP M92 for installation in late 1992 for integrated circuit design, physics, chemistry, numerical methods and speech processing.
Pricing for the Y-MP M98 starts under $10m where three years ago, eight-processor Cray supercomputers started at over $23m.
It has also cut prices on its existing Y-MP 2E, 4E, 8I and 8E by 5% to 30%.
CRAY COMPUTER WANTS CRAY-3 TO FRONT-END PARALLELs
Meanwhile, Colorado Springs, Colorado-based Cray Computer Corp has had to have another rethink on its strategy for its delayed and now down-sized Cray-3 supercomputer.
Seymour Cray now says that it will be marketed as a front-end to enhance massively parallel processors, in the hope that the combination will appeal to scientists whose problems are too complex for a massively parallel computer alone to solve.
Under the new marketing strategy, Cray Computer will offer the Cray-3 in two-, four- and eight-processor configurations.
Cray Computer says that at least one prototype has been running for about three weeks and hopes to have one ready to demonstrate by the end of this summer.
The machines will cost $5m to $30m and the company says that it has already opened talks with some makers of massively parallel computers — observers suggest that Intel Corp and Thinking Machines Corp may be high on the list — according to the New York Times, several major US laboratories have experimented with Cray machines (Cray-2s presumably) linked to Thinking Machines kit.
SQL GROUP HALTS WORK ON ACCESS SPECIFICATIONS, RUNNING OUT OF CASH
The SQL Access Group (SAG) is shelving its design and development plans for the SQL Access specification, leaving IBM's Distributed Relational Data Architecture (DRDA), to monopolise the field of database enquiry.
SAG was set up in 1989 to develop an architecture for relational database connectivity, its aim, to create complete multi-vendor database interoperability.
SQL, the standard query language for interrogating relational databases is now established — the battle is over how SQL enquiries are structured — the IBM or SAG way.
SAG, seen by many as the only independent standards body opposing IBM's hegemonic database infrastructure, has DEC, Informix Software, Oracle Corp, Microsoft Corp, Locus Computing Corp, and X/Open amongst it members.
However, SAG has been forced to wind down work on its two major development projects, the persistent SQL function, which involves an SQL statement being compiled and stored using a high performance compiler, and datatypes strategy for two-phase commit.
At a recent SAG board meeting a decision was taken to cut all development projects in an attempt to consolidate resources.
SAG admits that it didn't anticipate the difficulty it would face convincing vendors to pick up its technology.
SAG chairman of the board, John Robertson said ‘we weren't expecting to have to work so hard at promoting the technical specifications…and the price is having to back off on these projects.’
Products complying to the SQL Access specification are still expected to start shipping by the end of the year, including Retix Inc's OSI  communication stack, its application builder and Microsoft Corp's SQL Access interface implementation in Windows 3.0 (UX No 382).
These few, SAG claims, are not enough to keep it running.
Financially, SAG's bank balance looks a little unstable — Westport, Connecticut-based Meta Group predicts that its revenue stream of around $300,000 a year will run dry by the summer.
The problem, Meta claims, lies in the fact that commitment of SAG's 40 members runs only skin deep.
Most have plumbed for a ‘token’ associate membership, contributing a couple of thousand dollars rather than coughing up around $10,000 and two engineers for full membership.
Meta says its problems have been compounded by the rise of IBM's DRDA, which is seeing a tidy flow of SAG members defect to its ranks, including Oracle and Informix, who say they simply cannot afford not to pick up DRDA because of IBM's huge installation base.
UNIX INTERNATIONAL SEEKS COMMENTS ON DWARF DEBUGGING AID
Parsippany, New Jersey-based Unix International Inc says it has completed a specification that will enable software developers to create debugging tools that can analyse any Unix application.
The specification, called Dwarf, is designed to enable debugging of any application generated by a compiler that also supports the Dwarf format, regardless of the application's vendor.
It supports the storing of complex debugging information within a compiled application.
The design of the debugging information format is open-ended, so that new information and support for new languages or debugger capabilities can be added, and can be used outside the Unix world.
The Dwarf specification currently supports debugging of C, C++ and Fortran 77, and will be available free for industry comment until June 15.
After receiving input from the industry, Unix International will revise the format as indicated by the review process and issue a revision.
Dwarf comes from a Special Interest Group representing users, proprietary and open systems vendors worldwide, including Data General Corp, Fujitsu Ltd, IBM Corp, ICL Plc, NCR Corp, NEC Corp, the Open Software Foundation, Oracle Corp, Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG, Sun Microsystems Inc, Unix System Laboratories Inc and Unisys Corp.
NOW UNIX LABS FORMS VENTURE ON TUXEDO WITH STERIA
Unix System Laboratories Inc has formed another joint venture to complement its Univel Inc effort with Novell Inc, this time in France.
Its partner in the new Unix System Technologies SA is software and services house Steria SA, and the company will concentrate on the Tuxedo transaction processing monitor for Unix.
The new company will also offer engineering services and training programmes for the full gamut of vendors, and for large end users.
Velizy-based Steria was chosen for its systems integration skills.
The new company, headquartered in Paris, expects to be employing 100 people within three years.
No financial details were given, but Unix Labs will get a 51% stake, Steria 49%.
QUORUM ‘TO FIGHT APPLE LAW SUIT’…
Mac-on-RISC house Quorum Software Systems Inc, Menlo Park, California, last week filed a suit against Apple Computer Inc seeking to counter allegations of patent and copyright infringement made by Apple.
The suit is meant to head off a legal attack against it by Apple which Quorum believes is in the works.
The action stems from a letter Apple sent Quorum lawyers on March 17 accusing it of infringing its intellectual property rights.
On May 1 Apple also revoked Quorum's privileges as an Apple certified developer, calling it an error and returning its $600 sign-up fee.
The March 17 letter was signed by Apple vice president and Macintosh software architecture general manager Roger Heinen.
Four days earlier Apple had signed a confidential agreement allowing it to review the object code of Quorum's Latitude and Equal products, a negotiated response to an earlier Apple demand that Quorum send its Latitude object and source code to Apple's outside litigation attorneys.
The Heinen letter claims ‘Latitude appears to specifically infringe Apple's patents and copyrights.
This is evident from a cursory review of the object code…
For example, the Latitude product running on a Sun workstation violates Apple's patents on pull-down menus and Colour QuickDraw.’
Quorum maintains that it relied solely on Motif or Open Look for the pull-down menus and uses Adobe Display Postscript or SunSoft Inc News for screen rendering and therefore could hardly have infringed Apple's patent or copyrights.
Heinen's letter also says that ‘We believe Latitude incorporates copyrighted material of Apple.
For example, Latitude was developed by violating, or inducing others to violate, a number of licensing and confidentiality agreements by making use of information provided to developers only on a restricted basis and subject to a number of conditions.’
Quorum counters that Apple cannot assert any ownership of application source code created by ISVs.
Quorum is asking the federal courts in California to rule that it has not infringed on Apple's turf, and declare Latitude marketable with no infringement liability and enjoin Apple from making any further assertions.
…
APPLE QUESTIONS QUORUM TACTICS…
As part of the fall-out from the Quorum/Apple controversy, Apple says it believes that Equal, the end user-oriented software Quorum has in development, ‘will not be Macintosh compatible’ unless Quorum infringes Apple's intellectual property further.
It also claims to be concerned about Quorum's marketing tactics.
It dismisses Quorum's claims of providing compatibility with the Macintosh.
‘Nothing close to full compatibility is achieved by either product,’ Heinen's letter says.
Further, ‘Apple is also disturbed by the implications in press coverage that Quorum has a relationship to Apple; this is also not true.’
…
QUARK RALLIES TO QUORUM DEFENCE
Quark Inc chairman, Tim Gill, has come to Quorum's defence, dismissing Apple's position as incorrect and ill-considered: in a letter he wrote to Quorum he adds that Quorum made a port to Unix feasible for him.
‘Compare the estimate of less than one man-year effort to port using your toolkit to the 30 man-year effort to port to Windows.
I believe that a port to Unix using the toolkit will take less time and resources than our conversion to support Apple's system 7.
If that isn't ‘compatibility,’ I don't know what is.’
CYPRESS WOOS MEIKO
Although Cypress has made great efforts to get the HyperSparc to the launch platform so quickly (when compared to Viking, see front page)— the design process spanned just 18 months — Cypress has one major problem: it has no customers signed-up for the thing yet.
Sun Microsystems Inc, which takes 70% of  Cypress' current generation of Sparc 2 products for its existing workstations and servers, was at the roll-out to endorse HyperSparc, but says it has no plans, as yet, to use the 64-bit technology.
Its apples, for now, are in the Texas camp, after expending considerable resources on the Viking project.
Cypress says it can only speculate that Sun will become a customer for HyperSparc, though Cypress chief, TJ Rogers, has been sending messages via the press to the effect that if Sun doesn't buy HyperSparc, then he's going to turn around and do the Alpha RISC for DEC (UX No 384).
Nevertheless, Cypress is sending out semaphores about ICL being interested in HyperSparc, but more interestingly it seems Meiko Scientific Ltd, the UK, Bristol-based manufacturer of Intel Corp 80860, Inmos Transputer and Sparc-based multiple instruction multiple data (MIMD) parallel systems will likely move to incorporate HyperSparc in the summer.
It currently uses Sparc 2 parts in its Computing Surface platform, which comes in  scientific and commercial flavours, running SunOS.
Meiko also had a hand in developing Sun's low-end Tsunami Sparc, which it says it'll also be using when the thing arrives.
BRISTOL's WIN/U WILL SUPPORT WINDOWS APPLICATIONS UNDER UNIX: NO MICROSOFT CODE REQUIRED
Bristol Technology Inc, a tiny, privately-held, six-person shop in Ridgefield, Connecticut, is currently bearing down on the problem of how to move Microsoft Corp Windows applications to Unix.
Its solution, a program called Win/U, goes into beta test next month, which it hopes to debut as a commercial product by the end of the year.
Its success could affect the outcome of the Unix-on-the-desktop movement on which the fortunes of so many more prominent firms in the industry now hang.
Bristol claims its approach to the issue is more viable and ultimately more independent of Microsoft than other solutions from firms which are believed to be working on the same problem.
Those companies, reportedly including Insignia Software Inc and the newly constituted SunSelect (UX No 381), are thought to require Windows source code.
Bristol does not.
Win/U reportedly needs only the Windows application's source code, which is then recompiled and emerges running native on any brand of Unix under Motif.
The recompile is said to link the application function-by-function to Bristol's own library rather than to Microsoft's Software Development Kit.
Motif is slower than Windows but Bristol's marketing vice president, Jean Blackwell, says there is no  degradation and the software experiences a performance gain because it is now running on a Unix box.
Blackwell indicates Win/U has attracted the passive interest of hardware vendors such as HP, IBM and Sun who are apparently adopting a ‘wait-and-see’ attitude.
They are unlikely to be Win/U's market.
Software houses will be the target and major players like Lotus Development and Borland are reportedly starting to kick Bristol's tyres.
Potential competitors such as the hot-shot Mac-to-Unix people at Quorum Software, who might eventually find their market niche too narrow, are also said to be watching.
During beta testing, Bristol will be working with small independent software vendors willing to hand their source code over to Bristol so that it can properly babysit the whole operation.
When Win/U is debugged, fleshed out and licensable — at a projected fee of around $100,000 — ISVs will simply use it in-house without parting with their precious source code.
Bristol plans to issue revisions to maintain pace with the changes made in Windows and Unix.
Bristol, which hopes to grow to 10 or 12 people by year's end and is looking for qualified X-Windows and Motif programmers, says it now has a positive cash flow.
It kicked off in October of 1990 and got $200,000 in venture money from a local government agency called Connecticut Innovations.
Since Win/U is modular, it has been selling its Postscript-based XPrinter and hypertext-style HyperHelp modules separately, the latter for $19,500 as a source code site license, $2,500 for run-time.
Motif lacks on-line help, and HyperHelp reportedly runs on any X-Windows system including VMS.
It has recently been licensed for resale by Dublin-based Glockenspiel as part of its C++ Application Framework for Motif under the name CommonHelp.
Win/U also includes a Graphical Development Interface (GDI) mapped to Motif, Windows Management and Systems Services.
Co-founder and chief technical officer, Ken Blackwell, reportedly structured development serially and did the hardest bits first to insure the design could be accomplished.
SUNSOFT LOOKS TO SNOOPY FOR WINDOWS COMPATIBILITY UNDER SOLARIS
SunSoft Inc's all-important solution for running Microsoft Corp Windows applications on its watershed Solaris 2.0-on-Intel operating system is reportedly being developed outside by a little-known 10-person firm called Praxsys Technologies Inc in Norwood, Massachusetts.
Praxsys is one of a handful of noticeably small start-ups wrestling with the key interoperability issue facing Unix as it elbows its way on to the desktop.
‘Snoopy,’ the code name given the unchristened Praxsys software, promises to take all current and future off-the-shelf shrinkwrapped Windows applications, whether written for Windows 3.0, 3.1 or NT, and run them unmodified on any RISC or Intel Corp Unix platform in native mode.
Praxsys has remapped the Windows 3.0 application programming interface to XLib and Motif interfaces, expanding Windows to X-Windows stations, devices Microsoft itself can't run on yet.
As such, it has been designed to straddle client/server architectures.
Major Windows packages such as Excel, Coral and Word have reportedly been tested.
Keyboard, mouse and screen all run native.
The performance of graphical Windows programs should be enhanced by the Unix hardware.
Compute-bound packages that require the Unix engine to emulate Intel's floating point will not run as well as on an Intel/MS-DOS platform.
Depending on intensity of use, Snoopy may be bundled with a copy of Windows.
Praxsys intends making the operating system-independent software generally available, with hopes of hopping on such vehicles as Destiny from Unix System Labs Inc and Univel Inc.
It could conceivably capture 10% to 25% of Unix users if its $500 list price is right.
SunSoft, however, thanks to a license it inherited when it bought the Systems Products Division of Interactive Systems Corp, has a time-to-market advantage whose exact terms are still unclear.
With Solaris-on-Intel still unannounced and SunSoft starting to push Interactive Unix (see opposite), Snoopy could appear there or on Solaris 1.0 or 2.0-on-Sparc first.
It could also be an aftermarket product for Interactive's 3.2.
SunSoft, likely to be billed as a co-developer, is believed to be readying its Solaris-on-Intel announcement for late next month at PC Expo in New York.
Sun's acquisition of Interactive reportedly delayed Snoopy, originally set to bow at Uniforum in January.
Currently, it is reported to be in pre-alpha quality assurance, with alpha starting in June and beta later in the quarter.
Praxsys could deliver in the fourth quarter: early 1993 is more likely.
Detective work
Praxsys reportedly used Microsoft manuals in reconstructing the Windows API and played detective to find its undocumented systems calls.
Sources say most things work but hundreds of fine points have to be checked.
The effort involved remaking every window, arrow and icon in the Motif look-and-feel.
Initially a Windows 3.0 vehicle, Praxsys has reportedly overcome the major 3.1 hurdles: dynamic data exchange, OLE and scalable fonts.
It cannot support TruType until the X-Windows server does.
Since Snoopy re-implements Windows calls, it could be used as a porting tool, currently a more vapoury purpose than its initial harder-to-realize charter.
Praxsys founders include engineering vice president, Bob Van Dette, who brought a hand-picked development team over with him from Phoenix Technologies when it bombed out of the emulation business two years ago.
That team had co-developed VPix, probably the most popular of the MS-DOS emulators, with Interactive.
Besides Snoopy, Praxis has done MS-DOS emulation work for Sparc cloners Mars, Tatung and Hyundai.
Praxsys is said to be ‘leagues ahead’ of Quorum Software, the Mac-on-RISC house that captured the limelight back at Uniforum — see opposite.
ECHO BINARIES WILL RUN APPLE MAC SOFTWARE ON POWERPC
Start-up Echo Logic, the Bell Labs Inc spin-off being funded by AT&T Ventures Corporation, the phone company's venture arm, last week announced a pact with Apple Computer Inc that it's apparently had in its back pocket for over a year.
The pair will reportedly use Echo's multi-pass binary compiler technology, FlashPort, to have existing shrinkwrapped Mac applications running on Apple's anticipated PowerPC boxes when they reach market.
Echo president, Brad Burnham, claims Apple has expressed an unpursued interest in taking an equity position in Echo.
The product itself won't be generally available before the second quarter 1993, though limited numbers of alpha editions will hit software developers, its key market, later this year.
Burnham mysteriously alluded to the architecture before the PowerPC version comes to market.
He was not specific and appeared to have no other projects in hand.
He denied having any solid relationship with Unix System Laboratories Inc, a fellow AT&T company, despite the fact that USL is reported to be working on any ANDF-style solution for its Destiny project as well as being determined to evaluate the Open Software Foundation's own ANDF selection (UX No 384).
It is believed the internal ‘ANDF-style’ technology USL has claimed to have may in fact be Echo Logic's which it may be evaluating.
As a Destiny product, FlashPort's state of readiness may be more important than to Apple.
Burnham said that as FlashPort needed ‘a lot of improvement’ tightening up integration, size, the speed of generated code, degree of automation and documentation.
It is, however, considered out of the research phase.
Tough-nut
The Apple deal reportedly came about because Echo used the Mac, theoretically the toughest nut to crack, as its proof of concept and showed the system to Apple last year, translating Macintosh programs to several unidentified RISC platforms.
Burnham described FlashPort as a beefy, sophisticated and complex piece of software suitable for use by a senior engineer.
However, Echo is promising to cut ports to a matter of days, or at worst weeks, lopping off what could be years of development time in moving from one architecture to another.
The time saved could be spent adding features like voice recognition that are only possible on a more advanced platform such as PowerPC.
Echo  claims to circumvent the problem of trespassing on Apple's jealously guarded ToolBox by not needing it anywhere but on the target machine, which in this case Apple will provide.
Meanwhile, Echo says it has Apple's permission to use the ToolBox for demonstration purposes.
Echo still needs the  connivance of an Apple to guarantee that it stays in synch with all system call releases.
Echo says FlashPort, which translates executable object code, will generate an application for a PowerPC intervention regardless of language, even assembly.
The results should be competitive with hand-ported code in performance and size.
Echo has been working on the technology for three years with a variety of minicomputer architectures.
It developed three algorithms that automatically analyse the program's machine code, create an intermediate architecture neutral representation of the program and shift executable code to the new environment.
A user interface reportedly allows a developer to intervene at any stage in the translation.
Burnham, at a Macintosh Developers Conference last week, declined to say what FlashPoint's license fees would be, indicating they could vary depending on the developer's particular circumstances and desperation.
Developers could use the tool in-house, at the expense of buying a target machine, currently an RS/6000, or have Echo do it as a service.
Royalties are an issue Echo has apparently not resolved.
Echo was unclear whether the programs shifted over were System 7 or System 3 based.
UKCMG ATTENDEES NERVOUS OF UNIX, BUT CAN'T IGNORE IT
John Abbott
Habitual attendees of Unix events would have enjoyed last week's UK Computer Measurement Group conference and exhibition, held at the Brighton Metropole.
Instead of the usual  exercise in preaching to the converted, UKCMG members — real users rather than computer industry staff — brought with them a wealth of scepticism and experience to Thursday's open systems stream that was both refreshing and alarming.
One speaker was introduced with the sobriquet that his ambition ‘was never to become involved in Unix’, a more general view being that it could no longer be ignored, even if little good might come of it!
CAPACITY PLANNING FOR UNIX BEGINS TO EMERGE FROM BLACK ART STATUS
Aside from the old chestnut that no single Unix implementation is the same as any other, the main concern voiced was the lack of tools available for DP staff to plan and manage their systems using the type of facilities available on proprietary systems.
‘Unix is not open, only ajar’, Harold Mead of Metron Data told delegates during a talk on capacity planning, going on to describe in detail how, despite the fact that while data for performance measurement and capacity planning is available from Unix through utilities such as sar, ps, mpstat (on some multi-processors), acctcom and last, data was often presented with different formats and content that could easily make a nonsense of the figures.
In one case — IBM's AIX versions 3.1 and 3.2 — sar enquires of cache performance data brings up only a screenful of headings with no data — a problem IBM is said to be ‘aware of’.
Information on transaction-level data, readily available from IBM's CICS (MVS) and ICL's TPS Audit (VME) facilities, is nowhere to be found in Unix, the only hope of getting it is through RDBMS tools, and in the future from transaction processing monitors such as Tuxedo.
Capacity planning, of course, is vital if customers are to avoid buying equipment they don't need, or buying it too soon, and at the same time avoid hitting a performance crisis due to inadequate hardware resources.
And if Unix advocates counter the criticisms with the promise of the Universal Measurement Architecture, proposed by Unix International and the Open Software Foundation, he points out that there are so many options in the specification that we will only be marginally better off: ‘at least we'll know the format of the data that isn't there’, he said.
Metron itself took the opportunity to launch Athene/Open, an integrated capacity management environment for Unix, also available on MVS, VMS, and VME.
It runs on a PC, taking data from a data collection monitor running on the target machine, which in the Unix version include AIX, Bull, HP, ICL, Phillips and Pyramid systems.
Cost is from £10,000 to £50,000.
FORCE YOUR OWN BENCHMARKS ON MANUFACTURERS, ADVISES ANALYST
Citing the experience of the Northumbria Police Force, analyst Andrew Hubbard of the X/Team, based in Twickenham, West London, said that delegates should tell manufacturers ‘to stop mailing benchmarks and performance figures from outside organisations’.
Users should provide their own benchmarks, preferably an emulation of the sort of application they intend to run with comparable workload.
‘It is important that you own the process, not AIM or whoever’.
At Northumbria, 45 Oracle users were emulated using keystrokes from users entering sample data and carrying out enquiries using SQL batch programs.
Shortlisted companies such as ICL, Unisys, Bull, Tandem and McDonnell Douglas were asked to run the simulation and report on performance.
The final choice, yet to be made, centred as much around how the suppliers coped with these demands as much as the actual performance figures.
‘We learned so much about the suppliers and how they could help us or not that the results weren't so important’, said Hubbard, who claimed that the process was beneficial to both supplier and customer, taking some of the guesswork out of sizing and selecting the final systems.
Initially the lowest-priced system was offered at £300,000, the next most expensive £600,000 and the most expensive priced at £1 million, with little relationship to performance, claimed Hubbard.
While no decision has been made as yet, ICL appears to be the front runner, although more than one supplier might be chosen.
SECOND ‘PREFERRED PARTNER’ FOR UNIPLEX IS DATA GENERAL
Uniplex Ltd is set to reveal Data General as the second of its ‘preferred’ architectures for Medley — its new generation client/server office automation software project.
Back in March (UX No 375), Uniplex said it would use IBM's RS/6000 as a primary development machine along with one other platform, giving those chosen a significant lead time in bringing product to market.
Despite the later announcement, Uniplex managing director Patrick Register claimed that negotiations with Data General on the deal were ‘more advanced than with IBM, with specific projects planned’.
DG is funding some of the development work on Medley, something which IBM is also expected to do.
The new products will still be available on other platforms — HP and DEC, for instance, are working with the company in other areas — but IBM UK and DG will be the first to offer commercial ports of Medley some time next year.
DG CUTS LOW-END SERVER PRICES — HAPPY WITH 88000 CHIPS
Data General, hosts to a lively Scottish Open Systems Conference at Ibrox Stadium in Glasgow last week, marked the occasions with price cuts of around 25% on its low-end servers.
In the UK, that means a 25MHz AV 4300 server with 1Mb RAM and 332Mb has been reduced from £12,500 to £9,000, the same price as the AV 4100 entry-level system, still available but in effect now obsolete.
A system with 1.4Gb disk now costs £16,000, down from £18,800.
And prices for the 33MHz AV 4600 line have also been cut.
AV 4300s can be upgraded with a second CPU for £5,400, doubling the power from 29 to 58 MIPS for less than half the cost of the original machine, according to DG.
The company also improved packaging options on its AV 4300 and 4600s, with ECC memory, DAT tapes and improved connectivity.
According to Peter Gyenes, VP and General Manager International, Aviion revenues are now around equal with the proprietary Eclipse range, which dropped off ‘faster than expected’ over the last quarter.
Gyenes again confirmed that DG was happy with its choice of the Motorola 88000 chip, especially since Motorola has accelerated the pace of its 88120 developments.
88110 machines are said to be ‘on the way’, but no dates appear to have been set.
Observers are expecting multi-processors beyond the current 4-processor models, but whether these will be 88100 or 88110 machines is currently unclear.
SEEKING STRENGTH IN NUMBERS AGAINST US ONSLAUGHT, NEC AND SONY MAKE MIPS BOXES COMPATIBLE
Japanese companies continue to find the going extremely tough in the workstation business, where American companies led by Sun Microsystems Inc and Hewlett-Packard Co continue to make all the running, so defensive alliances are becoming essential, and Sony Corp and NEC Corp shared a platform last week to say that they are joining forces in the Japanese workstation market to enable Japanese language applications written for either of their MIPS Computer Systems Inc RISC-based workstation families — NEC's EWS4800 and Sony's NEWS — to run on the other.
The two have jointly developed an Open Computing environment for MIPS Platform, OCMP, specification based on an expansion of the MIPS applications binary interface developed by Unix System Laboratories Inc and announced by the M-SIG special interest group at this year's UniForum.
Sony's SuperMicro Division forecast that the combined Sony-NEC share of the workstation market would be over 50% by 1993–94.
INTEL LOST NT-ON-i860 BECAUSE OF COMPLEXITY
Intel Corp has been less than enthusiastic about the future of its i860 — getting the 80586 into battle readiness in such a short space of time has taken up much of the company's research and development resources in any case.
But part of Intel's de-emphasis is due to the fact that it believed the i860 would gather its own momentum as Microsoft Corp brought its New Technology operating system over to the chip.
Microsoft had i860s in its labs, but its engineers, whilst reportedly ‘not un-impressed’ with the part, ‘didn't want to spend the next six years writing  assembler code,’for the very complex processor, and shelved the port.
The M15 follow-on to the current i860 XP hasn't been cancelled, but Intel isn't being very specific about what is going to happen to it.
IN A CORNER, PORTLAND GROUP LOOKS BEYOND i860
Presently treading water as a three-year-old compiler house, Portland Group Inc, Wilsonville, Oregon, is  expected to grab the bull by the horns over the next couple of months and put in place strategies which it claims will lead the company into more profitable software markets.
The company develops and markets compilers for the Intel Corp 80860 RISC — but must be saturated by now— and  competes with the likes of Green Hills Software and Metaware.
Portland Group claims it has got the US market ‘pretty well stitched up,’ and will re-focus efforts on cracking the European market and the low-end of the i860 vendor spectrum.
The top-end of the market, where the likes of Intel Scientific Computer and Parsytec live, is already well populated with compiler technology, but Portland reckons there is a great deal of ground to be gained amongst the host of niche players banging out i860 boards for graphics and CPU acceleration.
Portland, which does C and Fortran compilers — including the C compiler for Unix SVR4 on the i860 — is looking at C++ as well as other processor architectures.
The company said it was ‘disturbed that Oki has gone,’ from the i860 fray (UX No 384)— it had sold its compiler technology to the firm.
However, Samsung is beginning to ramp up its i860 effort, there are thought to be 12 of its MagicStation workstations with ISVs in Germany, six in the UK.
And in the US, Palo Alto, California-based Torque is still banging out Linda, its distributed processing protocol technology, which originated at Yale University.
Linda enables users to build applications for i860-based distributed servers, which can be networked to heterogeneous systems, replacing the need for i860-based accelerator boards in each client.
THE ABC OF ABC
Turning up under the new name of ABC Workstation Solutions Ltd, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, the checkered past of this UK start-up has taken some interesting turns.
The trail begins with the now  defunct Whitechapel Workstations Ltd back in 1987, which ran out of money in April 1988 only to be bailed out by a European consortium funded by Barron International Holdings of Gibraltar.
The consortium founded a company, Mistral Computer Systems Ltd, picking up Whitechapel's MIPS R2000-based Hi-Tech 10 workstation along the way, which it prettied-up and renamed Mistral-20 (a MIPS R3000 20MHz, 8Mb system).
It came a cropper in 1990 and had to be cut up and sold off, with the remains ending up at Amstral Workstation Solutions Ltd, a value added reseller operation.
Amstral has recently been through a combination of management buyouts and takeovers, including the acquisition of Crab Advanced Technologies' sales and marketing division, and now goes by the name of ABC Workstation Solutions Ltd.
Content with being a VAR, ABC sells Hewlett-Packard Co 9000/700/800 systems as Macintosh file servers, and says, it will be carrying Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparcstations by the end of this week.
MINIGRAMS
Upgrading its Unix-to-IBM mainframe connectivity products, Rabbit Software Corp, Pennsylvania, has released Open Advantage Version 5.0 for 3270-SNA, RJE-SNA and APPC applications, for both SDLC and Token Ring.
It's available for SCO Version 3.2, SCO Open Desktop, Interactive System Version 3.2 and 4.0, Intel Unix System V and IBM's RS/6000 System next quarter.
Uniface Corp and Ingres in a joint venture, are releasing an Uniface built interface driver to access the latest release of Ingres's 6.4 relational database management system.
The Uniface database interface drivers cost $750 to $40,000: the Uniface device interface for Ingres 6.4 will ship in the third quarter, no price given.
In the UK, Star Computer Plc, Watford, Hertfordshire, has launched Unix/DOS integration tool kit MSWindows: which allows Unix applications to run within MSWindows on a personal computer or Unix machine, or alongside other Windows applications such as Lotus 1–2-3, without applications having to be rewritten.
Running on Unisys Corp's Unix 6000 systems System V.4 Unix.
Entry level costs £200 rising to £20,000 depending on the scale of integration.
Taiwan's Macronix International has licensed MIPS Computer Systems Inc's R3000 RISC on the heels of its fellow countryman Acer Corp taking the R4000.
It will use it as an embedded controller in office automation products such as X-terminals after it shrinks it and optimizes its speed.
It will start with 0.8-micron CMOS technology going to 0.6 micron.
Commercial versions are not expected for 18 months.
The R3000 came out in 1.3 microns.
UK software house, James Anthony Consultants, Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, is beta testing an application development tool, jBASE, for translating Pick applications to Unix.
It uses an intermediate language — jBC — which outputs C object code from Pick-Basic, alongside what the firm calls a jedi library, which provides an interface between an application and a database, disk subsystem or network.
JAC claims jedi will soon be able to communicate with object-oriented databases via the generation of C++ code.
Versions for MS-DOS and other proprietary environments are also underway, the firm says.
jBASE ships in the summer, no prices given.
Philips Semiconductor has new input/output processors which it claims, can boost the performance of Motorola Inc 680X0 and Intel Corp iAPX-86 microprocessors by up to ten times for peripheral handling in parallel networks — it's due next month.
Artisoft Inc, the Tucson Arizona-based developer of the Lantastic low-end network operating system, has signed a letter of intent agreement to acquire San Antonio, Texas-based Performance Technology Inc for 300,000 new shares, valuing Performance at about $7.725m at the current Artisoft share price: privately-held Performance Technology, develops the Powerfusion package that links MS-DOS micros to Unix systems, the Powersave archival system for networks, and the PowerLan personal computer networking system, which is compliant with X/Open Co Ltd and Open Software Foundation Distributed Computing Environment recommendations.
Informix Software Inc says version 4.1 of its OnLine/Secure  database is now available for AT&T's System V/MLS B1 secure operating system.
Dataproducts Corp has released XP-1, a print server designed to be an intelligent noder for Unix or DEC Ethernet networks: allowing multiple hosts to queue print jobs transparently across the network.
The server supports TCP/IP, local area transport and runs BSD Unix and DEC VAX/VMS.
XP-1 costs $1,295.
Control Data Corp's Computer Products Group has appointed Clive Hay-Smith as regional manager, responsible for Western Europe, Africa and the Middle East following CDC's decision to separate its business into three divisions Information Services, Government Systems and Computer Products.
Trying to put its ACE nightmare behind it, Santa Cruz Operation Inc will this week try to start making amends with the launch of Open Desktop version 2.0.
Sequent has cut a strategic relationship with Computer Associates that will put CA's mainframe software on Symmetry 2000s.
Sequent figures to be the first vendor to offer a large-scale symmetric multi-processing implementation of CA's products for Unix.
The partnership provides for joint development and marketing of CA's Unicentre, CA-DB, CA-DB:Generator and Classic/Open.
It also provides for CA and Sequent to co-develop an enhanced version of CA-DB for Sequent's Dynix/ptx symmetric multi-processing environment.
Besides Sun, we guess the unidentified members of the Sparc International Executive Committee getting access to the Viking chip are the five in the systems business: Hal, Hyundai, Amdahl, ICL and Matsushita.
Solbourne patron Matsushita announced its very own colour lCD Sparc portable in Japan; The unit, no battery and rather hefty, is bound to show up on Solbourne's plate later this year.
Matsushita by the way is talking about using Sparcs in high-definition TV.
Fancy that.
Leasametric has now jumped on the Tadpole bandwagon and will be an Sparcbook authorised rental company.
Xerox Imaging Systems has named John Seeley Brown, head of Xerox PARC, to its board of directors.
AIX Expo and the Power Solutions Conference, the exclusively IBM shindig, has been scheduled for October 20–23 at the San Jose Convention Centre in California: they expect to change the world.
According to the latest tittle-tattle, Sparc licensees Fujitsu and LSI Logic (who is into MIPS as well) have been talking to DEC about Alpha.
Hewlett-Packard Co and Intel Corp are to jointly develop a chip set for the HP 700/RX family of i960 RISC-based X stations; the circuit devices will use Intel's i960 Cx series of superscalar microprocessors to provide chip-set solutions for X station applications.
Larkspur, California-based Bristol Group has released a new version of IsoFax, its software-based fax package including Direct Inward Dialling phone service for Unix-based workstations: it runs under Open Look and Motif on Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations.
ParcPlace Systems has got itself a new president and CEO; Bill Lyons, former Ashton-Tate chairman and CEO who left when Borland took over.
ParcPlace founder Adele Goldberg shifts to chairman.
IXI Ltd says Groupe Bull has standardized on its X.desktop as the de-rigeur Motif desktop manager across all its boxes including the Power RISC stuff it's doing with IBM.
Meanwhile, in the UK, IXI has got an agreement with the Combined Higher Education Software Team — CHEST — to provide X.desktop to all universities and colleges across the UK, including Motif kits for Sun workstations.
The world has another Sparc cloner: Santa Clara, California-based Silla Corporation started by ex-TriGem groupie Michael Pak.
Apparently it's OEMing somebody's Mbus machine and are talking about a portable that's not a laptop.
They're hoping to substitute their own designs down the road.
HP says its 705 Snake and particularly its 710 sales have exceeded projections.
San Jose, California-based Cypress Semiconductor Corp, which is betting the company on its new HyperSparc microprocessor, for which it has no customers, is to cut costs by moving its US assembly operations offshore at the cost of about 200 American jobs this year — 100 have gone immediately; it hasn't said where assembly will be done.
What makes Ross Perot think that he can get a handle on the US budget deficit that has defeated the last two administrations?
Well he is still legendary in Dallas for his lightning five-year spell with IBM Corp, when he met his annual sales target…in the middle of January.
Qualix, the software distributor, has fashioned a new ‘Cheap Seats’ program to bring the price of networked licensed Unix software below PC and Mac software.
Companies can purchase multiple copies of popular packages at greatly reduced prices.
The discounts vary with the publisher but a Lotus 1–2-3 25-user set is going for $10,000 and Avalon, the page layout program, usually $49,000 for  simultaneous users, is now $10,000.
Sunsoft and HP are endorsing the concept.
InfoWorld's hit-or-miss gossip column claims Next is considering designing its expected twin-processor workstation with a PowerPC instead of 88110 out of concern Motorola won't be able to keep as many balls in the air as it's got.
Hewlett-Packard is going to try to steal some of Sun's thunder this week by getting their top honchos to roll out a high-end multi-processor, reportedly code named Emerald, that will come to use the recently announced 7100 PA-RISC chip.
DEC was trying to gain visibility last week for the 661 companies it says are porting programs over Alpha.
Quorum says that it has some Echo Logic-type technology in development that it calls Autoport and might be interested in a cross-licensing deal — see page four.
Wyse Technology found itself a technology playmate in Siemens Nixdorf, having forged a pact some months ago that they're just getting around to telling us about: Wyse is selling SNI its Intel Corp-based symmetric multi-processing designs and subsystems which the Germans are using in the MX500 superserver line released in Europe and the Far East late last year.
SNI expects to release the boxes, which run the SNI version of SVR4 Sinix, in the states in the second half the year.
It's Wyse's second OEM deal after Datapoint.
Epoch Systems Inc, has released EpochBackup, software backup systems for Unix-based network environments: designed to automatically back up and restore files it also incorporates disaster recovery, library management and hierarchical storage management.
Set to ship in May prices starts at $5,000.
Redwood Shores, California-based Oracle Corp has joined the Greek chorus to say that it plans to convert its complete family of products to run on Alpha architecture under both OpenVMS and DEC OSF/1; the conversion effort on the VMS products is under way and should be out by the time DEC starts ships.
Digital Equipment Corp says it will lay off up to 60 employees at its Asian headquarters in Hong Kong as part of a regional restructuring unconnected with its first quarter loss.
The company employs about 6,000 people in 11 Asian countries, and there may be further lay-offs in the Taiwan, Hong Kong, China, Singapore and India subsidiaries.
IBM has lost its head of worldwide database design and strategy, and the man responsible for DB2, Jnan Dash, to Oracle Corp, to be vice-president, Database Technologies.