

UK FIRM HAS ARCHITECTURE NEUTRAL DISTRIBUTION INSTALLER FOR SUN MICROSYSTEMS SPARC
Despite the Open Software Foundation's apparent downgrading of its Architecure Neutral Distribution Format technology effort (UX No 384), the ground-breaking project is likely to gain an imminent reprieve from a variety of quarters, not least as part of any eventual joint working relationship between OSF and Unix System Labs — see below.
In a development that is expected to have at least some impact on the current jockeying for positions between the Unix factions, a 200-person UK software engineering firm, Praxis Systems plc, Bath, has now completed an evaluation ANDF installer for the Sun Microsystems Inc Sparc, which it says, ‘exceeded the original performance targets.’
It's been doing that work on behalf of OSF, which could presumably use the stuff as some kind of a bargaining chip in the latest round of talks with Unix System Labs (UX Nos 387, 388).
Praxis says it is well down the development road of getting an ANDF installer up on another RISC, possibly the Inmos Transputer, whilst there are known to be several other key players keen to get installers up and running on their kit too (UX No 385).
Praxis believes once the independent software vendor community starts nibbling at its bait then the momentum behind ANDF will gather irreversible pace.
Whatever happens this Tuesday, it is thought ANDF will return to centre stage soon after.
DESTINY GUESTS STILL CHOOSING THEIR PARTY FROCKS
Rumours were racing through the industry last week that Hewlett-Packard Co and DEC — and perhaps even IBM, apparently the most laggard of the trio — might indeed muster some support for Unix System Labs Inc's Destiny launch on Tuesday, June 16.
One of DEC's official spokesmen allowed that they would probably send along representatives ready to support Unix SVR4 with its Network Application Support environment.
Others, however, suggested factions inside DEC, previously thought to be the most difficult of the troika, are rushing to ensure Destiny gets on their platforms and will go further than might be imagined on Tuesday.
HP, a more consensus-run establishment, might be a bit more tepid this week in its enthusiasms but is believed to be sending observers with at least a statement of goodwill.
IBM is said to be late off the mark and may not get the chance to inject itself officially.
However, it too is thought to be moving to catch up with the market.
Since Tuesday is not exactly Unity II, but only its stepchild, much of the factionalism inside the industry is still lively.
The Open Software Foundation is caught in the middle and is reportedly being pulled in both directions, with some of the OSF staff, not to say members, said to be questioning the wisdom of OSF chief David Tory's appearance at the launch.
An OSF spokeswoman said Tory was preparing his own remarks and that she had no idea what he would finally say.
She read a draft OSF position paper which focused on the importance of portability, the adoption of OSF technologies — the Distributed Computing Environment, Distributed Management Environment and Motif — by USL and the expansion of their camaraderie beyond a common API.
Notably it made no mention of any collaboration, specifically on ANDF, though some kind of working relationship on that technology is expected to be forged, according to one insider.
OSF also suggested there would be further endorsement of OSF/1 from some unidentified quarter this week.
Tory of course will have to fend off inquiries about the continued viability of the operating system and the re-prioritisation going on inside OSF.
Intel Corp, which last week purred over Univel Inc and Destiny, will doubtless make an appearance at the launch along with three score or more companies including end users, Wall Street firms and uncommitted OEMs, all suddenly interested in what's going on.
DEC CHANGES ITS MIND, AS WORK ON OSF/1 FOR MIPS BEGINS AGAIN
DEC has had to think again about its decision to scrap its OSF/1 operating system development on the MIPS platform, due to demand from customers already working on OSF/1 projects.
DEC's announcement that it would concentrate on OSF/1 only for the Alpha range made enough customers angry for DEC to go back to its business plan and think again.
‘It's a financial decision — revenues will be significant’, said DEC spokesman Chris Sarfas.
The prevarication has set back the effort six months, said Sarfas, and OSF/1 for the Alphas will now emerge first, early next year.
DEC already has the incomplete version 1 of the OSF operating system out on its MIPS line, and it's this that customers are using for their own early development work.
Dropping version 2 of OSF/1 would have left those on-going developments undeployable.
DEC also said it would provide R4000-based daughter cards to upgrade existing R3000 DECstations and DECsystems, but would give no indication as to whether it would proceed with MIPS beyond the R4000, or concentrate on Alpha.
In the US, DEC's abrupt volte-face involved it in a furious row with press and analysts — see page two.
SANYO ENDORSES NEC's POLE POSITION IN WORKSTATIONS
NEC Corp is now such a star in workstations in the Japanese market that Sanyo Electric Corp, which had developed its own Icon workstations around the MIPS Computer Systems Inc R-series RISC, has decided instead to work with NEC on MIPS-based workstations and buy the resulting products in OEM, the Nikkei Industrial Daily reports.
NEC beat Sony Corp to third place in the Japanese workstation market last year — Sun Microsystems Inc and Hewlett-Packard Co remain one and two.
Sanyo has tried to be active in the personal computer market as a member of the Japanese-language AT-compatible AX PC group, but has an almost negligible share within Japan, with most sales coming in OEM from Europe and the US.
Meantime NEC has come out with two new models in its SuperServer UP4800 series and three new models in the EWS4800 workstation series.
The new UP4800/630 and 620 servers use 60MHz and 50MHz 64-bit R4000 processors respectively, delivering a claimed 110 MIPS and 95 MIPS.
The new workstations are Model EWS4800/130LT which has a 1,280 by 1,024 pixel colour Thin Film Transistor screen and performance claimed at 30 MIPS; the EWS4800/350 with a 50MHz CPU and performance of 95 MIPS; and Model EWS4800/215, a desktop entry-level model with a VMEbus expansion slot.
NEC plans to use the 75MHz R4000 microprocessor which will be ready soon, in an upgrade board to be released this year.
Both servers and workstations use versions of Unix SVR4, which will incorporate the Common Japanese Language Application Binary Interface called OCMP announced last week by Sony and NEC.
The new products are priced from at the equivalent of $17,800 to $128,000, including software, and shipments are phased from late this month to early September.
NEC is hoping to shift 30,000 workstations over two years.
DEC READIES OPEN VMS VAX RANGE
The ‘heap’ of important VAX announcements that Digital Equipment Corp said it would make before it reveals more Alpha RISC licencees (UX 386), will take place on July 7th.
On that day DEC plans to lift the veil on its OpenVMS VAX systems — new transitional VAX models that will be upgradable with Alpha RISC processors when the chips are out in volume.
DEC says the announcement will feature ‘more systems than the company has ever announced in a single day.’
DEC ‘PINS OSF/1 CONFUSION ON PRESS CORPS’
DEC last week reversed a decision of a few weeks standing not to put OSF/1 on future MIPS machines (UX No 386) and reverted to an earlier strategy that will — see front page.
The flip-flop, outlined in the first of a series of three press conferences last Wednesday (with more to come today, Monday), turned far messier than it needed to be due largely to DEC's inability to admit that it had flip-flopped to begin with.
Instead, DEC's Unix-based Software and Systems Marketing and Planning Group manager Matt Kochen and Laurie Buller from the product management group staff attempted to pin responsibility for what they termed the ‘confusion’ in the marketplace over DEC's actual position on misguided press reports — an allegation stoutly and unanimously resisted by senior members of the US press corps and analysts who have been close to the story.
Effectively they called DEC a liar.
DEC for its part disassociated itself from statements made by DEC VP of software engineering David Stone as well as its own PR people that DEC had decided not to pursue the OSF/1 path for MIPS.
It labelled them as personal opinion and suggested that in future the press question everything said at any time by DEC staff, no matter how high ranking, to assure themselves they are getting the company line.
Customers vote for MIPS
Despite his contention that DEC's strategy had never changed, Kochen also said DEC's Product Strategy Committee, chaired by founder Ken Olsen, had decided last week to stick with the MIPS-OSF/1 policy.
Kochen cited DEC's need, under current financial conditions, to look at all significant investments as the reason for the review.
Kochen maintained that DEC had been taking a worldwide census of ‘hundreds of customers’ recently to ascertain whether OSF/1-on-MIPS was a viable policy.
Overwhelmingly they voted in favour, he said, though he could not quantify the demand.
It is believed the technique DEC used, though Kochen did not say, was largely an Internet opinion poll and that DEC's sales force, on hearing the no-OSF/1 decision, had begged their customers to complain.
It is also believed that the no-OSF/1 decision, made in the midst of the recent flurry of reorganisations that have left DEC somewhat muddled, was made — perhaps unilaterally — by Stone whose heart apparently belongs to Alpha and that its reversal is something of an internally staged palace revolt.
However, forums such as ComputerWorld have seen a small firestorm of user complaints in their pages over the proposed return to an Ultrix migration path.
Reporters suggested that a ‘trial balloon’ had backfired on DEC, leaving customers feeling ‘whipsawed’and ‘cynical.’
Kochen himself mentioned that orders had frozen and users themselves calculated that DEC had lost millions of dollars along with credibility and goodwill.
Hostilities
With the industry hours away from its first formal truce since the Unix wars began (UX No 388), DEC returned to the rhetoric that marked the outbreak of hostilities.
Kochen and crew maintained that DEC customers were ‘excited about OSF/1’ because of its superior technology and key features, the prospect of DCE and DME and the ‘more open process’by which the Open Software Foundation found its technology.
They again rejected any possibility of DEC ever going to SVR4 (’ no requests for it,’they said), maintaining that OSF's future compliance with SVR4 would suffice and calling OSF/1 the long-awaited Unix rewrite.
One observer, however, suggested that the users perhaps felt anything would be better than Ultrix, which DEC will continue to support on R4000s.
BEEB SWAPS ICL MAINFRAME FOR SUN
The BBC's magazine distribution arm, BBC Frontline, based in Peterborough, Cambridgeshire, has ditched its ICL Series 39 mainframe in favour of a 670 MP Unix machine from Sun Microsystems Inc, Mountain View, California.
The news comes a week after ICL closed a deal with the BBC to outsource its IBM mainframes through its Facilities Management arm, CFM, as well as providing the BBC with an Open Hire agreement for Unix systems.
Jointly owned by the BBC, EMAP and Haymarket, BBC Frontline installed its first Sun machine last year as its initial step away from VME to a more open, Unix oriented approach.
The company commented that it had benchmarked machines like ICL's DRS6000 and a Sequent server in December 1990 but they were not considered fast enough.
It already has two Sun Sparcstations acting as clients and one Sparcserver 670 running an Ingres database.
HP IS TOP OF THE CLASS IN NEW OPEN SYSTEMS REPORT
Digital Equipment Corp will be trailing far behind IBM and Hewlett-Packard Co by the time it gets its Alpha-based hardware out, according to Butler Bloor Ltd's Open Systems report, published this week.
The research company assessed 16 companies for architecture, hardware range, top end performance, Unix implementation, development software and support.
At the top of the class is Hewlett-Packard in terms of its attitude towards Unix.
The report claims the company is ‘clearly the vendor that the others respect most’.
It was the only company to provide perfect scores for its architecture and its hardware range according to Butler Bloor's assessment.
Also favoured was IBM which Butler Bloor predicts will attempt to reconcile its mainframe and AS/400 lines with Unix.
This will be achieved, it speculates, through OS/2 running on the RS6000: ‘we rate the RS/6000 architecture highly and expect IBM eventually to assume its natural position as market leader’.
Despite ICL's Unix expertise, its choice of Sun's Sparc architecture is brought into question.
Pyramid and Sequent score well, along with Siemens Nixdorf, in the top end performance ratings for mainframe Unix.
Although Sun's architecture is termed ‘excellent’, Butler Bloor claims that its hardware range is not comprehensive enough and that the company still has the feel of a workstation vendor.
Still reeling from its ACE nightmare, MIPS's market presence is seen to only be significant through its OEMs, according to the report.
ENLISTS HELPS IBM WITH RS/6000 CLUSTERING
Pursuing its goal of creating very high-speed clustered configurations of the RS/6000 Unix workstations and servers, IBM Corp has turned for help — on the fast optical links it will need — to Ancor Communications Inc in Minnetonka, Minnesota.
IBM sees the clustered configurations being used to process and share text, video and image data used in large, complex applications such as astrophysics, climatology and medical imaging.
The two plan to work together on development of hardware and software components that support Fibre Channel Standard optical-link technology, not only for the RS/6000 but ultimately for connection to mainframes and other mid-range systems such as IBM's AS/400, personal computers and peripherals.
The two also hope to accelerate standards by contributing to the definition of an open architecture that can be used by others in the industry to develop software applications, hardware technologies and other products and components for Fibre Channel Standard-based networks.
Fibre Channel Standard is sanctioned by the American National Standards Institute and transfers data at up to 1Gbps compared with 100Mbps for Fibre Distributed Data Interchange.
Computing devices linked by the channel can be physically up to six miles apart.
Ancor says it has extensive expertise in the research and design of components that meet the Fibre Channel Standard specification, and the initial activities will involve use of high-speed switching chips and software technologies from Ancor and related technologies from IBM.
The products will be designed to support existing network protocols and interoperate with existing technologies such as FDDI, Ethernet and Token Ring.
Testing of prototype products with university, national laboratory and commercial customers is expected to begin by the end of the year.
ADOBE PUTS DISPLAY POSTSCRIPT ON SPARC
Shrugging off the distressing four-day kidnapping ordeal of its president, Adobe Systems Inc, Mountain View, California has come out with a whole string of announcements, headlined by the news that it is to make the Display PostScript system available to users of Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations.
The system will include the Adobe Showpage PostScript language file viewer and will be offered through distributors, which will receive the Display PostScript Server Integration Kit for Sparcstations this month.
The kits enables the distributor to modify an X-Window System 11.5 server running on a Sparc processor to use the Display PostScript extension.
Distributors can sell an X server with integrated Display PostScript software as a stand-alone product, or bundle it with Adobe's TranScript software for PostScript language printing in Unix environments, an Adobe Software Development Kit, or additional fonts.
Sparcstations with Display PostScript will ship with 13 scalable Type 1 fonts and further type sets will be available — a font installer programme will give access to the full 1,500 type faces in the Adobe Type Library plus 13,000 Type 1 fonts from other vendors.
Adobe Illustrator, Motif version, already out for other Unix systems, will be offered by the same distributors later this year.
UI READIES DME-COMPLIANT, OBJECT MODEL
Unix International said last week that it has finalised its systems and network management requirements, focused on a single object-based model, making them compatible and interoperable with the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Management Environment (DME).
Working through Unix System Labs, it will also be giving its members early access to the Tivoli-based object-oriented framework starting in the third quarter.
The framework is due to be out with major OEMs and key users in early 1993.
Framework APIs are to be put in the public domain.
CRAY READY TO SHIP S-MP SPARC-BASED SUPER-SERVERS
Eagan, Minnesota-based Cray Research Inc said it will shortly start shipping the Cray S-MP system, the first in a planned series of Sparc-based servers from Cray Research Superservers Inc, the subsidiary it formed around the Floating Point Systems Inc assets it acquired late last year.
It says it has so far received nine orders for the multiprocessor S-MP superservers, which start at $500,000 and are designed to support Sparc-based workstations.
ACE's APPLICATION PROGRAMMING INTERFACE FOR UNIX SVR4, OSF/1 ‘READY THIS MONTH’
Whilst a final version of the Advanced Computing Environment's hardware specification is now being printed, more interesting, hears Electronic News, is that the common application programming interface for Unix SVR4 and OSF/1 operating systems should be completed this month.
Although a binary interface for various Unix SVR4 implementations is also being put together, plans for an OSF/1 binary interface have been dropped, apparently due to technical difficulties.
However, following Santa Cruz Operation Inc's departure from ACE, OSF/1 has been degraded to the status of an unofficial ACE operating system.
OSF/1 was ACE's primary Unix focus when the initiative was launched amidst much fanfare last year, but over the following months it became clear that DEC was the only major ACE member committed to using the operating system.
DEC's recent Windows-on-Alpha agreement with Microsoft Corp only drove the nail further into ACE's OSF coffin.
…
AS MIPS TAKES OVER SILICON GRAPHICS R4000 TFP EFFORT
Although the MIPS Technologies subsidiary of Silicon Graphics Inc will retain research and development  responsibility for the R series RISC processors, a Silicon Graphics vice-president is to head-up the multi-processing effort under MIPS chief executive Bob Miller.
Silicon Graphics' endeavour to produce a floating-point intensive R4000 part by next year in conjunction with Toshiba Corp, called TFP (UX No 380), is being re-integrated into the MIPS unit, taking some 40 Silicon Graphics engineers along with it.
The reason being given is that in retaining the project for itself, Silicon Graphics' goal of portraying the MIPS architecture as vendor-neutral would be compromised.
PRIME FILES TO GO PUBLIC AGAIN
Prime Computer Inc has now filed for its expected return as a public company — under which it will change its name to Computervision Corp, and intends to offer 15.8m shares at a target price of $18 to $20, concurrent with an offer of $125m of senior notes due 1999.
All the proceeds will go to repay existing senior debt and some of the senior subordinated notes held by Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.
The remaining junk paper that was left with Shearson after the junk bond music stopped, will be converted into common stock at the price at which the company goes public.
As expected, the Computer Systems Business Unit will be sold to its management.
ORACLE EUROPE RESTRUCTURES
In the run-up to the single European market next year (if the Maastricht treaty ever gets ratified) Oracle Corp has restructured its European operations into four divisions.
Its Austrian (including Yugoslavia), Swiss and German outfits get grouped together under Franz Niedermaier, currently managing director of Oracle Germany.
Oracle Italy is being formed as joint venture with its distributor of ten years, Datamat; Michael Rocher, managing director of Oracle France takes on responsibility for that unit too.
The database company's subsidiaries in Spain, Portugal, Greece and Central Europe join  Scandinavia and Benelux under the charge of Loek van den Boog, previously vice president of Northern Europe.
Mike Harrison remains in control of Oracle UK and the European development and financial organisations remain unchanged.
ICL PUTS OFFICEPOWER UP ON SCO, SUN, IBM PLATFORMS
ICL has been dallying with the prospect of putting its OfficePower office automation suite up on alien platforms for at least two years.
Now it has finally taken to the field and just about touched first base, announcing that OfficePower is from today, generally available worldwide on Santa Cruz Operation's SCO Unix implementation.
As expected (UX No 384), the two other Unix platforms it will market OfficePower on are Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations running SunOs 4.1.2, which is scheduled to ship at the end of June and IBM Corp's RS/6000 AIX systems, which ICL says will hit the streets at the end of September.
It's a ‘cultural move’, according to Graham Taylor, ICL's UK software business manager, to break into the client/server open systems market.
Apparently IBM, which offers the AP/6000 office package on the RS/6000, is not at all perturbed about ICL muscling on to its territory with OfficePower.
Aiming at corporate accounts, ICL claims these versions of OfficePower, along with implementations on other Unix platforms expected to be announced in the coming months, will account for over 70% of new licences for the software by the end of 1993, by its reckoning some 140,000 out of 200,000 new seats it expects to win between now and then.
The company claims 10,000 of its Unix sites are already running OfficePower, which has some 300,000 users worldwide, 120,000 of them in the UK.
Despite its good intentions, however, ICL is only able to deliver, at present, a rather lacklustre SCO implementation running under Powerwindows — a Microsoft Corp Windows based graphical user interface.
X.400 mail, Novell Inc NetWare local area networking, Powersearch version 3, Powerlink, all server software as well as an application programming interface (API) toolkit called Powerkit are all included.
However, the new versions do not support the de facto OSF/Motif graphical user interface standard — though the Sun version does support OpenLook — and Motif support may not even feature by the time the RS/6000 version is delivered, though ICL says it is working on it.
The API toolkit, developed for Unix-based applications, will allow existing software to be front-ended with a traditional OfficePower look and feel.
OfficePower for Unix currently only supports ICL's long time relational database partner, Ingres, though there are plans to bring the Oracle Corp offering into play, and the company confirms that it is talking to other companies too.
Sales will be direct and via existing third-party distributors, though ICL plans to sign up specialist Unix and office software VARs in all regions.
Prices will be user-banded, irrespective of platform, starting at £150 and rising to around £400 per seat.
…
SUPPORTS SCO MPX ON PCs…
Whilst ICL has duly announced that it is to support Santa Cruz Operation's SCO Unix MPX for multi-processing, Open Desktop environment and the SCO communications suite on its Intel Corp 80486-based personal computers, the OfficePower-on-SCO validation work — see above — was actually carried out on an Apricot Computers Ltd box.
Completing the Santa Cruz story, ICL is also offering SCO Unix versions of TeamOffice, its local area network management software.
…
TEAMS WITH HUGHES FOR SECURE NETWORKING…
Meanwhile, via its federal systems division in  Retson , Virginia, ICL and Hughes Aircraft's Hughes STX systems integration subsidiary plan to jointly develop secure networking systems and software for the commercial open systems market.
To kick off with, ICL is making all of its existing secure systems technology available to Hughes STX, starting with Access Manager, the secure network password software, running on DRS6000 Sparc workstations.
ICL will also supply technology developed under the auspices of its work for the UK Ministry of Defence's Corporate Headquarters Office Technology — or CHOTS — to the effort, and use Hughes STX as a gateway to lucrative US government and defence contracts.
Products developed under the agreement will be marketed by both companies.
…
DELIVERS VIKING ORDERS TO TEXAS
Being one of those select few companies that have been able to secure access to initial deliveries of Texas Instruments Inc's SuperSparc RISC processor (UX No 384), it is understood that ICL last week totted up numbers required by its various departments and placed its order with TI for the part, which will feature in the DRS6000 workstation range from the fourth quarter.
READY SYSTEMS HAS FIRST PORTABLE REAL-TIME OPERATING ENVIRONMENT…
Sunnyvale, California-based real-time tools developer Ready Systems Corp will unleash a scalable, modular operating system towards the end of this year.
Prior to this it is ensuring its distribution and support is beefed up in the UK and Germany by signing a sole distribution deal with Marlow, Buckinghamshire-based Instrumatic UK Ltd.
Ready Systems is known for its VRTX operating system for real-time embedded applications.
VRTX has had 4,500 design wins and can be found in Ricoh cameras, Apple printers, Motorola cellular phones, submarines, bomber planes and pacemakers to name but a few applications.
Famous for its marketing campaign that guaranteed bug-free software — if you found a bug you could claim a VW Beetle from the company — Ready Systems embarked on an ambitious project two and a half years ago to build a completely new tool suite.
Ambitious because the company was attempting to write a scalable operating system.
Bruce Gregory, Ready System's president and chief executive, explains that the requirement for a real-time operating system is diverse, ranging from very lightweight applications such as intelligent suspension systems through to the complexity of NASA space station command and control systems.
Currently, real-time operating systems tend to be optimised for either low end, mid-range or high end applications, and customers either buy VRTX, go somewhere else or build their own system.
Now those companies that have built their own operating system (and around 60% or more do in the real-time area) can retain their investment and buy into the new operating system as the company reckons it can emulate any existing operating system.
The beauty with a scalable operating system, believes Gregory, is that Ready can take a single technology and adopt it to suit any requirements.
The new operating system has a layered architecture — the lowest layer is a very small kernel that runs very fast and is suitable for lightweight applications.
On top of this Ready Systems can add different layers for different implementations, the most powerful of which is a real-time Unix offering.
The lowest layer is patented as the ‘nanokernel’ and acts as a substrate for the other layers.
It has been up and running for 18 months and was beta tested last summer by Japanese engineers from NEC Corp that built an I-Tron interface to it.
So far it has been implemented for the 68000, 88000, R-Series and Sparc processors.
The first product, to ship this September, is VRTXsa, which is a 100% emulation of VRTX built on the nanokernel to provide upward compatibility, and the new toolkit.
Gregory believes the new toolkit, which is also scalable, is a technical breakthrough because it can assume the available processing power and memory resource on the target.
With this Virtual Target Capability application code can be developed without a target, as the code can be run on the host processor or switched to run on an emulation of the target node.
This enables the design phase to gather pace before the hardware is ready for implementation.
The tool interface is open and can be accessed by any third-party tool written to it and the company is looking to integrate it with engineering frameworks like Atherton, SoftBench and so on.
The nanokernel acts like a bus and can move between operating systems to run different systems simultaneously on different processors.
Gregory claims that he has already licensed this technology to a well-known player interested in multimedia applications.
The secret licensing deal is believed to be with one of the following three: Sun Microsystems Inc, Microsoft Corp or Kaleida Inc.
You see, the very exciting thing about multimedia from Ready Systems' point of view is that it requires real-time software.
…
ACCOMPANIED BY TOOLSET
Accompanying VRTXsa is a development toolset, Velocity 3.0.
It operates in an host/target interconnect arrangement and the tools will support embedded microprocessors and microcontrollers, but can also scale up to support VME and system-level clients if required.
Ready anticipates it will quadruple its sales revenues with the release of Velocity 3.0.
Velocity 3.0 is targeted at the Motorola Inc 680X0 and MIPS Computer Systems Inc R4000 CPUs initially.
Scheduled to ship in September Velocity 3.0 will cost £17,000 for an entry level development seat with add-on seats costing £2,000.
UNISYS ADDS CLIENT/SERVER FEATURES TO ON-LINE TRANSACTION PROCESSING SYSTEM
Unisys Corp has come out with an enhanced version of its one-year-old Open/OLTP on-line transaction processing environment, which uses Unix System Labs Inc's Tuxedo TP monitor.
Open/OLTP TM2 includes transactional desktop, terminal concentrator and conversational transaction support features, which, the company says, increases the options for integrating personal computers and Unix systems into distributed client/server networks.
Open/OLTP runs on Unisys' U 6000 series of Intel Corp 80486-based servers, and includes the Ally CASE/4GL environment.
The transactional desktop element allows networked personal computers running MS-DOS or Windows to run the client portions of Open/OLTP downloaded from the server.
Users can perform local tasks on their PCs, with their existing tools and can initiate transactions, including two-phase commit operations.
Offloading tasks from the server also frees-up CPU time, allowing it to get on with other things and reduces the flow of network traffic.
The terminal concentrator allows other Unisys Unix systems to serve as client controllers for asynchronous terminals, off-loading client management functions from the Open/OLTP server.
Conversational transaction support allows clients to establish peer-to-peer relationships with the application server, which Unisys claims, enables large blocks of data or queries to be processed continually.
There are two security enhancements: application password control and client  authentication .
Open/OLTP comes in five modules.
The transaction manager itself, and four components which each support a different type of client.
The manager costs from $1,900 to $17,500 depending on the U 6000 being used.
Transaction desktop and terminal concentrator costs $500 per seat.
The network access port — software which enables transactional desktop and terminal concentrator to communicate with the Unix server costs $150 for each concurrently active client.
Networked Open/OLTP TM2 nodes can interoperate with those running Open/OLTP TM1: TM1 to TM2 upgrade kits cost 50% of the price of the TM2 transaction manager for the appropriate U 6000 server.
Unisys quotes Hyannis, Massachusetts-based market research firm the Standish Group, which estimates the market for OLTP on Unix platforms will grow at a compound annual rate of 119%, from $900m in 1991 to $20,800m in 1995.
ELLIPSE DEBUTS TP SOLUTION IN EUROPE…
San Jose, California-based Cooperative Solutions Inc has launched itself into Europe with Ellipse/DE, its combined development and run-time system for building transaction processing into LAN-based workstations and servers.
Its UK base will be in Stockley Park, London.
Available since September last year under Windows 3.0 and OS/2, Cooperative plans to port Ellipse to Unix by the third quarter of this year.
It will generate stored procedures for Unix machines using the Sybase Inc database together with 8m lines of code called the Production System, guaranteeing the partition of applications so they can be distributed around the network.
The Production System also acts as an application manager so that workstations have correct versions of software.
Cooperative claims Production System provides a higher level of security by giving every user a different profile.
FORTE AND TESSERACT NOT FAR BEHIND
However, hot on Cooperative's trail are two other companies, both based in San Francisco.
Forte Software is hoping to have a similar tool, yet to be named, up under Unix by 1993, once it has finished beta testing.
The company describes its stuff as an advanced open application development tool for distributed computing with database roots.
Meanwhile, Tesseract Corp has Primrose, launched in the US at the end of April.
According to director of software marketing, Dan Esterlin, Primrose arranges things using a peer-to-peer system and does not just partition the application once, but every time the application is run.
Tesseract will port Primrose to Unix by year end using Sequent Computer Systems Inc and Pyramid Technology Corp multi-processors.
COROLLARY RE-SIGHTS ON INTEL P5 FOR MULTI-PROCESSING WORK AFTER ACE CRASH
Irvine, California-based Corollary Inc's search for a volume multi-processing market, derailed by the Advanced Computing Environment fiasco, has led it to switch gears to pursue the P5 and NT in league with Intel Corp and Microsoft Corp.
The twin moves by a company that previously described itself as an out-and-out, dyed-in-the-wool Unix bigot with great hopes for the MIPS RISC chip must leave the rest of the Unix community at least edgy despite the fact that Corollary says the bulk of its energies are still directed toward Unix.
The shift will delay the productisation of  Corollary's third-generation C-bus II architecture, originally intended for 50MHz 80486 systems and now hell-bent to substitute for Intel's anticipated 80586 or P5 instead, by two or three quarters.
The redirection will probably make Corollary the only company to produce a generic P5 multiprocessor board and chipset targeted at OEMs.
Corollary expects to cash in on the appeal of the BiCMOS P5 which will doubtless far outshine the 80486 whose market will likely be truncated.
It is working with Intel on the project but has to wait for silicon before it attempts to actualise the product and turn it over to LSI Logic for manufacture.
A sample is promised for sometime before Comdex.
However, the company's spec calls for it to support six to eight P5s which it says should be capable of 250 transactions a second.
Corollary is also working with Microsoft to port NT to its fully Symmetric Multiprocessor Integrated Logic (SIMPL) chipset and C-bus II architecture which also supports SCO MPX, which it developed, and SVR4.0.
It expects the standard server version of NT, sold at retail, to support its technology.
A key feature of NT is its MP capability and Corollary says the NT Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL) for C-bus II systems contains more than 3,000 lines of code and was complete last month.
The SIMPL chipset includes one cache bus controller chip and two data path exchange chips creating a 64-bit path.
With them, a P5 multiprocessor can be implemented on half a card.
Corollary is assuming a 66MHz P5.
Anything above that would be hard to keep up with, it said.
UNIFACE REVEALS GUI-INDEPENDENT DATABASE APPLICATION BUILDER
Alameda, California-based Uniface Corp will this week be staging a four-city telecast, rolling out its new Universal Presentation Interface and promising that developers will be able to build database applications that automatically deploy on computers running Motif, Open Look, Windows, Presentation Manager or even character mode without writing a single line of additional code.
UPI, except for PM, is available immediately as part of Uniface 5.2.
The development, important to the company's portability strategy and to developers interested in maintaining only a single application, addresses the multiplication of platforms and graphical user interfaces in the marketplace.
Uniface says each of the GUIs are supported by a specific driver that provides applications with all the features of the particular environment.
Uniface figures UPI can help developers leverage the millions of character-based displays in the workplace.
Otherwise, the new 4GL release is said to improve Kanji support.
Uniface pricing ranges between $5,000 and $250,000.
GUI drivers cost $350 to $32,000 depending on platform and configuration.
SUN INTRODUCES SUNSELECT AND SUNCONNECT INTO EUROPE
Sun Microsystems Inc last week launched its SunSelect and SunConnect satellites in Europe, using existing offices in the UK and France as base.
Billerica, Massachusetts-based SunSelect, which concentrates on PC and Unix integration, will run its European operations from Bagshot, Surrey in the UK by David Ballantine.
It's product focus is the SunPC product line, combining PC emulation technology from Insignia software with i486 SX and DX S-bus accelerator cards to give acceptable Windows performance on a Sparcstation, and the recently unveiled version 4.0 of PC-NFS, which Sun claims now holds a larger slice of the PC networking market than Banyon.
A third strand to the business is NetWare SunLink, Sun's implementation of Portable NetWare for the Sparc.
SunSelect's UK distributor is Unipalm, Cambridge.
SunConnect, which will be run from both Bagshot and Paris, with a presence in Germany by year-end, concentrates on OSI services, network management with SunNet Manager version 2.0 and other LAN/WAN tools and services.
New European network management partners include Archie Communications and Grapheal (France), Dornier (Germany), and MicroMuse in the UK.
SILICON GRAPHICS RALLIES EIGHT MIPS BACKERS TO BUY 1.5m SHARES
In the hope that it will lock them in to the MIPS Computer Systems Inc RISC family, Silicon Graphics Inc has persuaded eight of the major MIPS chip users and fabricators — Control Data Systems Inc, Integrated Device Technology Inc, NEC Corp, Sumishomo Electronics Co Ltd, Sumitomo Corp, Tandem Computers Inc, Tata Enterprises Overseas Pte Ltd and Toshiba America Electronic Components Inc to participate in a modest way in the share offering it is making to raise cash to bolster the balance sheet of its MIPS Computer Systems acquisition.
The eight will share only 1.5m shares between them, representing just 2.4% of the shares the company will have outstanding after the 5.1m share issue.
Such cross-shareholdings are commonplace in Japan and in continental Europe, but tend not to work so well in the US — Control Data had 20% of Silicon Graphics and sold it; Compaq Computer Corp sold the stake it bought to cement the Advanced Computing Environment Initiative in less than a year.
Now Silicon Graphics is to take a 10% stake in Control Data Systems.
TIVOLI FOUNDER SURFACES AT ATRIUM WITH NEW NETWORK SOFTWARE
Start-up maven, Bob Fabbio, fresh from the unparalleled success of Tivoli Systems Inc, whose software has become the distributed systems management framework for the Open Software Foundation, Unix International and Sun Microsystems Inc, is back at it again.
Having left Tivoli in capable hands, he's kicked off another new Austin, Texas-based start-up, Atrium Technologies Inc.
This one's doing a product called Dazel, due out the second quarter of 1993.
Dazel is partially funded by some Fortune 500 companies, so development is in progress, but Fabbio is currently out looking for more money.
Fabbio did his homework among the downsizing-bent corporates which gave him the idea for Dazel: exploit the need for managing information in the network environment and give them instantaneous links to fax, printers, voice and E-mail.
Dazel, based on a distributed client/server architecture, is targeted at MS-DOS and Unix platforms, starting with Sun Sparcstations.
ECHO HONES MAC-TO-POWERPC COMPILER SOFTWARE FOR EASE OF USE
Mac-to-PowerPC software start-up, Echo Logic (UX No 385), fresh from its triumphant debut, figures it has proved the feasibility of its concept and is now starting afresh to try and make the binary compiler technology, FlashPort, easy to use.
President Brad Burnham says the amount of information FlashPort generates about a programme as it attempts to translate it from one platform to another has presented him with pricing and packaging issues.
Some people have notions of using the technology as an ambitious static analysis machine but in most cases it simply presents more data than anybody needs and will have to be restrained.
Echo Logic isn't rushing towards the Intel iAPX-86 market, estimating it would take nine months and four or five dedicated folks working on it.
IXI HIRES SAATCHI AND SAATCHI FOR SUN CAMPAIGN, PLANS NT VERSION OF X.DESKTOP
IXI Ltd, Cambridge, claims that over 50% of the estimated 400,000 or so existing Motif users are running its X.desktop manager on top of their Open Software Foundation-based windowing environments.
The rest are using a combination of the Visual User Environment window manager from Hewlett-Packard Co — 25% — Visix Software Inc's Looking Glass — 20% — with the remaining 5% accounted for by the likes of Paris-based Non Standard Logics SA's Wish and Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG's management systems.
Having mopped up the majority of Motif users, IXI is now gunning for Sun Microsystems Inc's Open Look user base — both installed and new accounts — as its next outlet (UX No 388), and has hired the advertising guns of Saatchi and Saatchi to try and tease Sun users to X.desktop with its largest advertising campaign to date.
IXI doesn't think those users will need to be tempted by special offers promotions though, believing they'll come flocking of their own accord.
Indeed, IXI claims one of Sun's European offices has already brought in a Motif-based solution to use in-house.
IXI says it'll put its X.desktop technology up on Microsoft Corp's NT when that arrives too.
DATA GENERAL DEFENDS ITS GROUND — NEW AViiONs IN THE WORKS
John Abbott, William Fellows and Sue Norris
Ron Skates, president and chief executive officer of Data General Corp and senior vice president, Tom West, were in the UK last week to bolster the company's bid for a share of the UK Home Office's Unix System Environment — House 2 — contract for open systems hardware, which is worth up to £100m split between three suppliers.
House 2 is a project to computerise the UK's criminal justice system.
Skates is confident that, whatever its prospects seem to outsiders, the fast-shrinking Westborough, Massachusetts-based hardware manufacturer will weather the economic storm, while competitors that haven't been as prudent will suffer greatly.
The General, half the beast it used to be and back in the red at the mid-point of 1992, will be lucky to break even this year, despite vast attempts over the last three years to clear the decks and keep a tight ship.
But, although eyebrows were raised in April at the unexpected announcement that DG would be axing a further 1,000 jobs, reducing the total headcount to just over 7,000, from 17,700 a few years ago, Skates maintains that these cuts — 600 to 700 of which have already been effected — would have been implemented regardless of the company's financial performance.
It turns out that the recent redundancies were enabled by the installation of an AViiON-based Unix client/server administration system at the company's headquarters.
Skates, his ruthless beancounting skills surfacing, makes no bones about suggesting that if any more job cuts can be made, they will be.
He explains that although DG is currently incurring losses, the company's balance sheet remains healthy in comparison to those of its rivals.
He notes that the General is selling more computers than ‘ever before in our lives’.
But, although margins are good, system prices are much reduced, so that a very low cost base is needed before profits begin to show.
DG has over the last three to four years put a good deal of energy into reducing that cost base, but now, even with a quarterly breakeven level reduced to $270m from $350m, the company is struggling to make ends meet.
The problem lies with the proprietary MV Eclipse line, which last year still accounted for some 65% of revenues.
Skates says MV customers are in the main small businesses which aren't making replacement purchases while the recession's on.
So, although AViiON sales are increasing quarter by quarter, they aren't bringing in enough to compensate for the sudden drop-off in MV business.
Skates forecasts that it won't be until early 1993 that sales of the Unix-based AViiON workstation and server line cross the proprietary MV line.
(Research and development split between the two lines — currently 50–50 — will soon tip the balance in favour of AViiON, since three years' worth of products are expected to be squeezed out of the last round of investment in the proprietary line.)
While Skates concedes that the current year is going to be a difficult one, he feels that his company is now better prepared than most.
In November, he warned that if the likes of IBM and DEC didn't implement drastic measures they'd go through ‘Holy Heck’— DG has been through that and if the company is confident about one thing, it is that the worst is over.
Alliances beyond the product-swap level are seemingly still off the agenda, and Data General is not for sale.
Designer label
The General currently offers 29 AViiON systems — seven workstations models, the rest server configurations — built around Motorola Inc's initial 88100 RISC part.
Its top-end quad-processor was launched more than a year ago and there have been no major additions to the range since then.
The company will move to the next-generation 88110 CPU — which it'll use to re-vamp the entire AViiON line — though an eight-processor system using the existing 88100 will emerge before that, Skates says.
Despite 88110 announcements from other Motorola RISC vendors — notably Dolphin Server Technology and Harris Corp — DG is not worried about rushing to follow suit.
Skates doesn't believe that anyone is actually shipping 88110 products yet in any case.
Skates said that DEC approached DG — as it did with most other manufacturers — about using its Alpha RISC processor.
Skates describes Alpha as ‘wonderful technology,’ but says the 88000 is better.
Despite being Motorola's only volume outlet for 88000-based CPU systems, the company wouldn't dream, he says, of taking over fabrication of the part from its owner, in the same way that Silicon Graphics Inc is swallowing its chip supplier.
Apart from the fact that it divested its foundry business some four years ago — and has no intention of getting back into that game — Motorola can supply 88000 parts at a $850 apiece.
That's a price DG could never hope to match, indeed Motorola could probably fulfill DG's entire CPU requirements for the part in just a straight two week run on its fab line.
In any case, ‘a fabrication plant costs $1.3m a week to run before you even turn the lights on,’ says Skates.
Tom West, head of Data General's Advanced Systems Development Group claims that DG's lonely advocacy of the 88000 RISC ‘is not a problem — two or three years ago I was more worried about the decision than I am now’.
The  challenge to make the 88000-based systems a binary-compatible standard across a wide range of high-volume, multi-vendor platforms has largely failed, despite the 88open binary compatibility standard, to which DG heavily contributed, serving as a model for how it should be done.
‘The chip just has the wrong designer label’, says West.
But, he said, most shrink-wrapped software would not be applicable to DG's demanding commercial customers anyway.
Aside from the 88open work, West says that Motorola established an early working definition of the 88000 that won't change with future upgrades.
It's also the best of the bunch for multi-processing, he says.
Although DG plans eight-processor models — see above — the optimum for the AViiON's tightly-coupled architecture is ‘somewhere above eight and below 16″, according to West.
Ironically, when DG started out with AViioN, the fashion was to get away from proprietary silicon onto merchant microprocessors.
Now Hewlett Packard, IBM, and DEC are all back on the other side of the fence.
INTERLEAF HAS SGML-COMPLIANT DTP SYSTEM
Waltham, Massachusetts-based Interleaf Inc, the desktop publishing house, has incorporated the standard generalised markup language, SGML, into release 5 of its electronic document software.
The SGML data format allows documents to be shared between different publishing systems or applications, tagging each piece of data with a name or  identifier .
It was adopted as an ISO standard back in 1986, and has led something of a ghostly existence in the commercial market ever since, hovering on the boundaries of document interoperability solutions for the last five years.
Interleaf says it will provide a migration path for its 130,000 existing non-SGML users to move to the standard incorporated into version 5 of its package.
It will also allow alien SGML documents and applications to be imported into the environment with, so it claims, no recoding.
There are also plans, says Interleaf, to make its other products ‘speak’ SGML.
Interleaf 5 incorporates a relational document manager, which retrieves and manages information from any SGML source, and Worldview, its electronic distribution system.
Interleaf is working on getting an object-oriented version out, and says the software already includes SGML object interchange functionality.
Interleaf 5 is scheduled to ship in August on DEC Ultrix, Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations, Hewlett-Packard Co PA RISC Unix systems and Data General AViiON computers — no prices were given.
IBM PICKS UP UNITREE FILE, STORAGE MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE FOR RS/6000
IBM Corp has gone to the Distributed Computing Solutions arm of General Atomics Inc, San Diego for its UniTree file and storage management software ‘for use and distribution on the entire line of IBM computers,’ although it seems likely that it will be confined to running under Unix for now.
UniTree, used primarily in the scientific world — Convex Computer Corp has an implementation and Floating Point Systems Inc picked it up before it turned up its toes — is an implementation of the IEEE Mass Storage Reference Model and automatically migrates files among disk and tape libraries.
UniTree is a distributed client/server program that provides automatic and transparent file and storage management for networked, heterogeneous computing environments.
In its simplest form, it provides a single central file server, automated transfer of data between storage subsystems and user access via Network File System and File Transfer Protocol.
XHIBITION ‘92 PREVIEW
Samsung Electronics America will be showing off its two new AMD 29000-based X terminals this week at Xhibition.
The SGS-CA1 and SGS-CA2, intended for CAD/CAM, scientific desktop publishing applications, are reportedly user-installable in minutes.
They come with 4Mb RAM standard, and X11 Release 4.
The SGS-CA1 includes a non-interlaced colour display supporting 1024 x 768 pixels; the SGS-CA2 uses a 19-inch 1280 x 1024 screen along with 2Mb video RAM.
Shipments start this month.
Pricing was not available.
This is the week for Bristol Technology Inc, Ridgefield, Connecticut, to formally unwrap its new-fangled Windows-to-Unix software Wind/U at the show.
The potentially breakthrough technology promises to allow Windows applications to run native as Unix/Motif applications via recompile (UX No 385), and springboard Windows developers into the Unix marketplace.
Bristol will be demonstrating its test case, a Windows CASE analysis and design tool called ObjectMaker from MS-DOS house Mark V Systems that has ported to Unix with Wind/U.
The Unix version of ObjectMaker goes into beta this month.
Mark V president Herman Fisher says he has a common set of source code running on Windows 3.1, NT (beta) and Unix while maintaining all the Windows functionality, Bristol is also intending to enter a joint development with Montreal, Canada-based Visual Edge Technologies Inc, suppliers of the UIM/X GUI development tool.
Wind/U, a complete set of Windows APIs operating under Motif that Bristol wrote, is currently in beta and will ship in  in the fourth quarter priced at $50,000 per product license.
Milpitas, California-based, LSI Logic Corp is catapulting itself into the X terminal market introducing the RISC-based Racer X Board, which allows OEMs to build monochrome or colour X-terminals based on the MIPS Computer Systems Inc R3000 RISC.
The Racer X Board is also, says LSI, destined for the personal computer and Apple Computers Inc Macintosh markets.
The board is based upon LSI's embedded version of the R3000, called the LR33020 Graph X Controller, supports 25/33 and 40MHz operations.
Other competitors also gunning for the R3000 X-terminal market are Integrated Device Technology Inc and Performance Semiconductor Corp.
At the same time, Intel Corp and Motorola Inc are also in the offing with their versions of chips for X-terminals.
The Racer X Board comes in two versions, an 8-bit colour or monochrome unit.
Both versions include 4Mb of RAM expandable to 8Mb.
The 25MHz colour board sells for $4,000, and the  monochrome version costs $3,000.
Ontario, Canada-based, ATI Technologies Inc has struck up a deal with Metro Link Inc to run ATI's Ultra graphics accelerator board and Metro's Metro-X X11.5 server together to give Intel Corp 80386 and 80486 systems X-Windows functionality.
An X-Windows system running in an Unix environment, Metro-X 2.0 will run under Santa Cruz Operation SCO Unix, USL's System V.4 or Interactive Systems Corp's Unix flavour.
ATI's graphics Ultra boards come in 512K and 1Mb configurations with extended drawing capabilities reaching maximum rates of 10-pixel vectors per second, which plug into ISA or Micro Channel systems.
Metro-X, supports X colour management system, PEX 3D library, X and Motif shared libraries.
Metro Link's Metro-X server is priced at $300 and ATI graphics Ultra boards cost $600 for the 512K and $700 for the 1Mb board.
San Jose, California, Megatek Corp will preview the newest member of its graphics family X-Cellerator, Esprix.
The Megatek Esprix board accelerates X11RS, Open software Foundation's graphical user interface Motif, SunView applications and window managers.
A one slot Sbus, Esprix features a graphics rendering processor, an 8 bit-colour frame buffer, and says, it is binary compatible with X-Window and Open Windows software.
Prices start at $2,500.
Felton, California-based, Crosswind Technologies Inc, says Synchronise 1.2, its time management tool, is to support Santa Cruz Operation's Open Desktop 2.0.
Synchronise 1.2 is an X-based time management tool, using a  multiple time zone support allowing schedules, tasks and resources to be transparently managed across wide area networks.
Rhode Island-based Sunrise Software International, is releasing the latest version of ezX 3.2, its flagship graphical user interface prototype productivity tool for Motif.
As a  prototype tool, ezX 3.2 allows users to revise the GUI without recompiling the application as well as generating C, Ada or UIL data structures.
EzX 3.2 is also compatible with C++, Fortran and C languages.
As a graphical design tool, ezX 3.2 features colour image editor, WYSIWYG functions, integrated resource editor — which controls the attributes of Motif widgets — as well as replacing widget or re-parenting widgets capabilities in a drag and drop format.
EzX is available on Sun Microsystems Inc's SparcStations, DEC's VAX, IBM RS/6000 and Silicon Graphics Inc's Iris workstations.
The Sun version sells for $3,500 per seat.
SL Corp, Corle Madera, California-based object oriented graphics software company, will be launching SL-GMS — its graphical model ling system for Motif, Open Look and DECwindows interfaces.
Used to develop embedded dynamic graphical screens into application software, SL-GMS features include a drawing toolset, input objects functions — using graphical interactive screen management objects (GISMOs)— Model instance compression and double buffering maximise application performance.
Metafiles can be saved in an ASCII format allowing applications and files to be exported and imported in and out of Unix and Vax environments.
Intended for the aerospace, corporate and manufacturing sectors SL-GMS is available now.
No prices given.
San Jose, California, Microfield Graphics Inc will roll out the X8 colour graphics controller, its graphics processing controller for the technical and manufacturing markets, for X-Windows and Microsoft Windows systems.
A single slot graphics controller, X8 boosts ISA/ESA-bus compatible personal computers into workstations, and has a screen resolution of 1280 x 1024.
The X8 features 5Mb ISA bus image transfer between host and display, 2Mb of VRAM, and bi-directional input/output block logic transfer.
Running on Santa Cruz Operation SCO Unix, USL's System V.4, Sunsoft's Solaris and Microsoft Windows.
X8 costs $3,000.
Mount Laurel, New Jersey, Bluestone Consulting Inc will be show ing off its new Motif graphical user interface builder, UIM/X Professional 2.0.
Using Professional, Motif developers can select widgets in UIM/X to design widget layout, callback, test/revision and code generation functions.
UIM/X Professional 2.0 will start to ship in August.
No prices given.
Leeds, UK-based VisionWare Ltd is supposed to announce its fourth product at Xhibition this week, but since it has taken a vow of silence everyone will have to wait until Thursday to find out what's going on.
According to the firm, the announcement has nothing to do with X-Windows whatsoever, which is why it is keeping stumm.
However, Visionware is also priming itself for the opening of its US office in California on July 1.
Heading up the operation is UK managing director, Chris Holmes.
WINSOCK API FIRMS UP TCP/IP OVER WINDOWS NT APPLICATION EFFORTS
A new applications programming interface specification for TCP/IP applications running under Microsoft Windows has been agreed and announced by 20 vendors, including FTP Software, JSB, Microsoft Corp and SunSelect.
The WinSock API (for Windows Sockets) allows an application written to the interface to run unchanged over TCP/IP implementations from multiple vendors under Windows and Windows NT.
Included are Microsoft Windows-specific extensions for applications writers to integrate the networking portions of their applications into the message-driven Windows programming model.
‘A single market for TCP/IP applications under MS-Windows will expand the market’, said Martin Hall of JSB.
It is available via Internet from FTP Software Inc, Wakefield, Massachusetts, from Microsoft's Online Software Library, the CompuServe bulletin board, or in forthcoming Microsoft developers kits, such as the preliminary Win32 SDK for Windows NT.
Microsoft is working with Spider Systems, Edinburgh, Scotland, to provide a validation suite.
Other endorsements come from 3Com, Beame and Whiteside, Novell, Wollongong and Ungermann-Bass.
MINIGRAMS
Word has it that Unix System Labs has structured its pricing schedule so that its OEMs could bring Destiny out for $350.
A source who ought to know says that Unix System Laboratories has changed Destiny's original Mac-like interface and made it look more like Windows: Sounds like a dumb move to us.
Ironically, SunSoft, whose now got Mac/Next designer Bud Tribble working for it (UX No 388) will probably turn up with a more sensible Applesque front-end on Solaris.
SunSoft Inc has picked Tuesday June 23, the start of PC Expo in New York, as the day to announce that Solaris 2.0-for-Sparc will be delivered to OEMs within the week.
It looks like its got a few tricks up its sleeve about Solaris-on-Intel as well: expect announcements of some OEMs.
Meanwhile, the Solaris-for-Sparc promised to OEMs reportedly includes SVR4, ONC+, OpenWindows 3.0 with Tool Talk, the desktop metaphor and Open Look interface and multi-processor support that the OEMs will have to fine-tune to their machines.
Meanwhile, the latest issue of RISC Management claims that ‘the multi-threaded SMP capabilities that are the core of Solaris 2.0 will not appear until the fourth calendar quarter — in time for the first multi-processor Sparcstation shipments, but a year behind schedule.’
As with any PC product, hardware endorsements are as important as software, so at its UnixWare early access announcement last week (UX No 388) Univel sewed up a bunch of supporters like WangTek and WangDat, UltraStor, SMC, Microfield, Maynard, Future Domain, DPT, Digiboard, Comtrol, Computone, Ciprico, BusTek, Arnet, Always Technology, Adaptec and 3Com.
Voice Processing Corp backed up the operating system with its VPro-4 speech recognition board; PostSaver Systems with its barcoding software and Pittsburgh Powercomputing with its X Server products.
The Banco Popolare di Bergamo, one of Italy's oldest banks, will be replacing all of the character-based OA software used in its 240 branches with Applix's Aster*x on Sparcstations and link to Oracle's RDMS: the $18m deal is reportedly worth $1m-plus to Applix which has to convert the software to Italian.
Insignia Solutions Ltd, a sturdy member of the tiny band of small UK computer and software companies making their mark across the Atlantic, reports from its Mountain View, California Insignia Solutions Inc base that it has raised $4.75m in ‘mezzanine’ financing from Technology Venture Investors of Menlo Park, California, which gets one seat on the board of the High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire company's board; the investment is its first in a foreign company.
Insignia has shown consistent profitability for the last five quarters and in calendar 1991 had sales of $14.5m — £8m, an 80% increase over the previous year.
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG is tracking the move towards distributed, networked systems by US corporations with the creation of a new Systems Integration Group at Burlington, Massachusetts, which will target telecommunications, government, retail and manufacturing markets.
Electronic News hears that Stratus Computer Inc is readying new Intel Corp i860-based fault tolerant systems for introduction later in the year: Stratus currently offers two uniprocessor machines, and will likely bring out its first multi-processor, based on the faster i860XP part.
Santa Cruz Operation Inc says that Zenith Data Systems will ship its Open Desktop Release 2.0 as an optional feature of its new Z-Station and Z-Server computers, pre-installed, pre-configured, tested, and supported with a choice of third-party communications options on the Z-Station tower, or bundled with some Z-Station desktop machines.
IBM says we got it all wrong last week about the delivery date of the first of its RS/6000 multi-processors being in July.
They say it's too soon considering that they just started work with Bull on them, as we ourselves noted.
They also say maybe our sources got it confused with the fact that the so-called High Availability 6000, which strapped together two of them for special orders, will become a regular product this week.
Veritas has arranged to support Destiny with a cut-down version of its file system dubbed the Journaling File System and aimed at the desktop: the full product will come along later as a server upgrade.
Compaq has come out with a new version of its SystemPro server and cut prices on its existing SystemPros by up to 21%: the new 33MHz 80486-based SystemPro is claimed to deliver up to 70% better server performance at up to $5,000 less than current SystemPro models — the new models are from $12,800 to $23,000.
The company also signed to resell Novell Inc's NetWare Version 3.11 network operating system on the servers.
San Jose, California, Motorola Inc's Commercial Systems Division has won a $5m deal from Plano, Texas-based Paging Network Inc, the paging services specialist, to install its Unix-based Motorola 68040 systems in 40 of its offices nationwide.
Each of the Mototrola dual-processor systems will support 40 to 60 X terminals, and will handle billing and office automation applications previously run on a Datapoint host system.
The initial version of Destiny will reportedly not support multi-processing.
Groupe Bull SA will this week reveal details of UniKix, a software solution enabling existing IBM CICS/Cobol/Vsam applications to run on Unix platforms within its Distributed Computing Model.
The Polish Telecommunications Co, previously the Polish Post, Telegraph and Telecommunications Company until it was separated from the Post last January, looks like being one of the first to run IBM's mainframe version of AIX on its E9000 Series mainframe.
Proud of the speed with which it can run Windows 3.1 applications on Sparc systems using its SunPC hardware and software combination, SunSelect vice president and general manager Carl Ledbetter could still not resist speculating that future technology for running PC applications from Sun would ‘go way beyond the current generation, without the need for a card’.
Others suggested that such functionality would be integrated at the motherboard level, and that Sun was working on the technology independently to its current emulation partner, the UK's Insignia Software of High Wycombe.
The International Association of Hewlett-Packard Computer Users' annual conference takes place in New Orleans, Louisiana, between August 23–27.
In the UK, Lotus Development UK Ltd will begin shipping version 1.2 of its 1–2-3 spreadsheet for IBM's RS/6000, DEC RISC/Ultrix and HP workstations from next month.
BusinessWeek's June 1 cover story on Intel, which puts its rushing out the P5 in a highly positive light, makes passing mention of an 80586 machine it's designed under the code name Panther that OEMs can license describing it as ‘a PC with workstation power.’
We wonder whether this has anything to do with an ‘upgradeable’ machine DEC seems to be using where you could yank out the 80486 and substitute a P5.
The same article claims Intel could reach its turn-of-the-century 100m-transistor chip a year or two early.
Hot off the rumour mill: Cypress Semiconductor Corp is now seriously talking about Alpha.
DEC needs someone to produce the chips, and most of the semiconductor manufacturers are already tied, but Cypress may be in a position to straddle camps and/or dump Sparc.
DEC/Fujitsu discussions are now rumoured as ‘over’— Fujitsu is not dumping Sparc, but would have loved to go to Alpha instead — two to three years ago.
Sun will come out with the Tsunami machine (Sparcstation 2+), a low-end colour machine for $5,000, running 20–30% faster than the SS2.
There has been speculation that Sun will not build another generation of desktop workstations, but will instead design and license.
Designs such as the SS2+ and the SS10 can be more cheaply produced by the cloners who have volume access to the colour monitor market — such as Tatung, CompuAdd etc.
Any such move would be accompanied by an OEM/rebadge deal.