

NOW STRATUS DESERTS THE 80860 — FOR HEWLETT-PACKARD's RISC
Fault-tolerant systems manufacturer Stratus Computer Inc will join the exodus out of the Intel Corp 80860 RISC camp after one more iteration and has decided to switch to the Hewlett-Packard Co Precision Architecture RISC.
The Marlborough, Massachusetts-based company will use Precision Architecture in future high-end machines which it plans to roll out in 1994 or 1995.
The news comes just days before Stratus is due to take the lid off a nest of new symmetric multi-processing systems built around the Intel 80860XP RISC (UX No 389).
As many as eight new models are expected on July 13, which according to insiders, will go well beyond dual-processor arrangements.
Stratus currently uses Intel's 80860XR RISC in its XA/R line — the XR part has no cache-coherency and doesn't support symmetrical multi-processing — and Motorola Inc's 68030 in its eight-way XA2000 multi-processors.
The company scrapped an original plan to use Motorola's 88000 RISC part back in 1989 in favour of the 80860, a decision that Stratus may now be regretting.
Its beating a path to Hewlett-Packard Co's door seems to indicate the final demise of Intel's 80860 as a mainstream system-level CPU.
Alliant Computer Inc, which used the 80860 in high-end parallel systems recently filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings.
Defending its latest manoeuvre, Stratus says ‘the move from complex instruction set to RISC was difficult, RISC to RISC is straightforward by comparison.’
Hewlett-Packard is currently designing own fault-tolerant systems around the Precision Architecture RISC using the technology of Stratus' deadly rival, Sequoia Systems Inc — Hewlett currently re-badges the Sequoia boxes as its HP 9000 Series 1200s — though it says its agreement with Stratus ‘will not affect the relationship with Sequoia,’ where it is a shareholder.
Stratus will continue to build 80860- and 68000-based systems up until the 1994–95 time frame — possibly beyond — and plans at least one more iteration of the XA/R line before that.
Additional input-output, memory and disk enhancements are also planned.
Stratus fault-tolerant systems, which are re-badged by a host of companies, including IBM Corp as the System/88, and Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA as CPS, expects the various OEM arrangements it has to carry on through into its HP era.
Although Stratus faces growing competition from HP in its own markets, it says the latter has ‘guaranteed equal access to the Precision chip — a level playing field.’
Stratus' endorsement further bolsters the credibility of Precision Architecture and its 7100 iteration, which Stratus will probably be using.
The new machines will run both its proprietary VOS and its FTX System V.4-based fault-tolerant Unix and it will look at Microsoft Corp's Windows NT: applications will be compatible across all the three hardware environments.
Meanwhile, Intel's plans for the 80860 CPU family remain clouded.
Its 80860 development team moved across to the firm's 80586 P5 effort, where Intel has now focused most of its resources.
A high-end 80860 effort, called N12 was cancelled, and a planned N15 part targeted at the graphics marketplace now appears to have been scrapped.
Some sources indicate that a high-end effort may be re-kindled after the P5 is out of the door, but sceptics say all future 80860 development has been canned.
SUN ENDORSES X-TERMINALS FROM DOWN UNDER
Under the guise of meeting some of its obligations due to the Australian government under its ‘partnership for development programme’— where foreign multi-nationals must reinvest some of their profits back into Australian industry — Sun Microsystems Inc has all but embraced its two technology pariahs, X-terminals and the Motif interface.
Sun Australia, Sydney, has signed with Labtam Australia Pty Ltd, Melbourne, to port its Open Windows 3.0 environment to a new generation of Labtam X-terminals, called Open Terminals.
Sun is paying an undisclosed amount towards the cost of the project, thereby fulfilling some of its operating obligations down under.
Although Sun will not sell the Open Terminals directly, it will cooperate with Labtam, as its preferred partner, on contracts that stipulate the supply of X-terminals to be used in conjunction with Sun equipment, and has sanctioned Labtam to use its worldwide distribution network as an outlet for the things.
The Open Terminals will use Intel Corp's i960CA RISC and perform at 100,000 Xstones in colour configurations — 130,000 in monochrome.
As well as Open Windows 3's Open Look graphical window manager, they'll be able to run OSF's Motif interface, and will also be configured with ISDN software to take advantage of Sun's moves in that direction (UX No 386).
Labtam says 100% of Sun software will run on its boxes, which will be around in beta versions by September — with volume ships 90 days thereafter.
Users of Labtam's existing i960-based 300 series can upgrade to Open Terminals.
Wales, Cardiff-based Metaglyphix Systems Ltd resells Labtam kit in the UK.
UI ACTS AS PEACEMAKER BETWEEN SUN AND USL OVER SVR4 INCOMPATIBILITIES
Unix International is trying to head off further fragmentation in the industry by acting as peacemaker between the new desktop rivals SunSoft Inc and Unix System Laboratories Inc, anticipating some compatibility issues before the mud-slinging turns nasty.
UI has drawn up a ‘statement of SVR4 commonality’ that it says it is trying to get both Sun and USL to agree on.
It includes mutual conformance to a proposed new Application Binary Interface (ABI) that UI members are working on and should be ready in the next three months.
UI is rightly concerned that constantly harping on the about the incompatibilities between Destiny and Solaris will only demoralise software houses and lose applications for Unix.
SunSoft is apparently reluctant to align itself to closely with the Unix International Roadmap, seen as too closely aligned with USL.
USL and SunSoft are pledged to continue talking to ensure ‘interface compatibility in new areas of the system software technology above the operating system.’
Details, page 2, and see below.
UI ‘TO LOOK BEYOND USL FOR FUTURE TECHNOLOGIES’
Unix International is also preparing to look beyond Unix System Laboratories in its quest for technologies on top of and around the core Unix System V Release 4 (SVR4) operating system, say sources close to the organisation.
Believing that its original charter — the establishment of SVR4 as the main focus for future Unix development — has largely been achieved, UI is now looking to build on that success, and, said the source ‘we've now worked out how’.
UI spokesman Dave Sandell dismissed the claims as ‘old news,’ pointing to the establishment of UI's Atlas framework last year (UX No 331).
But Sandell admitted that up until now, all the technology was being sourced through USL, which had the integration expertise.
This is perhaps less of an issue now that Unix SVR4.2 has been modularised, and it is expected that UI will in future work more directly with the rest of the industry on interfaces and reference technologies around SVR4 — see page 2.
‘There is still a perception of UI as a USL club’, said Sandell.
No announcements from UI are anticipated, at least until Unix Expo in September.
SUNSOFT SETS $800 TAG ON SOLARIS FOR SPARC — NCR, OLIVETTI, EVEREX OPT FOR INTEL VERSION
With the news that NCR Corp has joined the ranks of those opting for its Unix implementation for the iAPX-86 processor family, Sun Microsystems Inc's SunSoft subsidiary finally took the wrapping off its long-awaited Unix SVR4-based operating system environment last week.
The first implementation of Solaris 2.0 is now available in OEM quantities for Sun's Sparc RISC architecture at $800.
The second, Intel version, was demonstrated at PC Expo in New York, but will remain under the covers — at least as far as users are concerned — until the end of the the year at the very earliest.
The two are source, but not binary compatible, and Sparc applications will have to be re-compiled to run on the Intel version, indeed to take advantage of Unix SVR4 features, existing SunOS operating system users will have to migrate their applications to Solaris 2.0 via the Transition pack announced recently by SunPro (UX No 390).
As well as NCR Corp, which appears to have favoured Solaris over Destiny, the desktop Unix environment now on offer from parent AT&T's Unix System Laboratories Inc — effectively a rival product — ICL plc, Zenith Data Systems, Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA and Everex Systems Inc join those personal computer manufacturers who have already committed to Sun's Unix offering, including Dell Computer Inc, Toshiba Corp, AST Research Inc, CompuAdd Corp and NetFrame Systems Inc.
Included in the $800 price-tag for a single desktop version of Solaris 2.0-on-Sparc is SunOS 5.0 — SunSoft's Unix SVR4 — plus the Open Network Computing, ONC, environment, NFS network file system, NIS+ naming service, a transport-independent remote procedure call, Solaris Federated Services — which allow third party networks, such as Novell Inc NetWare, Open Software Foundation Distributed Computing Environment and OSI to plug into Solaris 2.0 — multi-threading, symmetric multi-processing, Kerebos security, disk mirroring and striping, real-time support and internationalisation.
Development features include Open Windows version 3 (with the Open Look graphical user interface), the object-oriented ToolTalk mechanism for networked data sharing and DeskSet, a bundle of 15 desktop utilities that run under Open Look.
Solaris ships in compact disc format, though SunSoft has no doubt that OEMs will offer taped-out versions for both Sparc and Intel platforms.
SunSoft is also shipping a multi-processing OEM kit for Solaris 2.0, which it says will allow system manufacturers to take advantage of the symmetric multi-processing features of the kernel, such as multi-threading, and tune and verify it for their specific hardware implementations.
That'll come into play when Sun's own symmetric multi-processors arrive — the Sparcstation 10, Sparcserver 10 and Sparcserver 600MP follow later in the year.
Confident
Solaris-on-Intel, work on which only began last January, will be available to developers from the third quarter, and will require a minimum configuration of a 33MHz 80386 with 80387 co-processor, or 25MHz, 33MHz, or 50MHz 80486DX, 80486DX2 or 80486SX with an 80487SX co-processor.
It supports ISA, EISA and MCA busses and requires 8Mb RAM and 200Mb disk.
Microsoft Corp MS-DOS and Windows emulation will figure on it (UX No 385), and although pricing for Solaris 2.0-on-Intel has yet to be fixed, it is expected to be significantly below the Sparc version.
$800 for Solaris 2.0-on-Sparc sounds expensive compared to USL's $350 for Unix SVR4.2 (Destiny), but SunSoft claims such a price would buy little more than a kernel from USL, and is virtually useless in such form.
Even so, Microsoft Corp is sure to pitch its Windows/NT Unix-killer well below both the Destiny and Solaris 2.0 products, though SunSoft is confident that once networking, graphics, E-mail, a desktop environment and multi-media capabilities are added to NT, it won't be as cheap as many commentators believe.
Given the proliferation of multi-user operating systems just coming to market, SunSoft declined to talk percentages about how much of the Unix-on-Intel market it is aiming for with Solaris 2.0, though a bullish Doug Miller, managing director of SunSoft UK, said sales of one million copies a year within two years wouldn't be an unreasonable goal.
SunSoft currently does 30% of its business outside of the Sun group of companies and Miller admits that the Interactive Systems Corp Unix variant it markets ‘is still our bread and butter business.’
The Interactive product, picked up when Sun acquired that part of Eastman-Kodak Co's Unix subsidiary, is now being pushed at the lower end of the Intel marketplace and further iterations will appear, though not a Unix SVR4 version.
Miller fully expects Solaris 2.0 to appear on other CPU architectures in future, courtesy of third parties.
SUN AND USL — UI SEEKS TO MINIMISE THE DAMAGE OF NIGGLING INCOMPATIBILITIES BETWEEN SOLARIS AND DESTINY DESKTOPS
Unix International is working to head off further arguments in the Unix world over incompatibilities, this time within the System V.4 camp itself (see front page).
SunSoft already has a burr under its saddle about the recent BusinessWeek article on USL, based on interviews with USL president Roel Pieper, that suggested that all Unix applications run on Destiny — not to mention the unfounded BusinessWeek claim that Sun would support Destiny.
That's simply more fat on the fire.
Into this simmering fracas strides UI waving a ‘statement of SVR4 commonality’.
SunSoft officials like Jim Billmaier were surprised that the eight-points included in the statement were committed to paper, believing them only discussion items for an independent software vendor rally held at PC Expo in New York City last week.
Billmaier indicated SunSoft had little difficulty with six of the eight points, non-controversial items such as support of open systems, industry standards interoperability and maintaining ABI compatibility between Solaris and Destiny.
SunSoft, however, draws the line at promising to evolve Solaris according to the UI Roadmap and had those words excised.
The Roadmap is too identified with USL which is now Sun's competitor, Billmaier said.
The proposed ABI, designed to ensure binary compatibility of applications within an architecture and offer a common denominator porting environment that all can work with, embraces media formats, TCP/IP, X11R5, perhaps multi-media and extensions to the graphical user interface.
This last point is a touchy issue with Sun, which wants nothing to do with USL's Moolit toolkit.
However, UI member companies, who variously use both Motif and Open Look, want libraries for both included in the ABI.
Unix International is also hopeful that the ABI, when finalised, will include some kind of desktop commonality.
Again another highly touchy point for SunSoft, but even Billmaier allows some concessions could be made here — but only if pieces of Sun's more advanced technology, which is moving for instance to objects, is adopted — a point UI at least seems to understand.
Watered, down, politically correct
UI president Peter Cunningham believes the new ABI could mean up to 75% commonality between the systems for the software programmer, initially on the client side and then moving to the server.
However, it does depend somewhat on the application involved: character-based being the easiest, graphical applications harder and the new generation of graphical programs the most particular.
SunSoft, which foresees new multiple binaries in Unix's future, is anxious to stress all the current and mostly anticipated differences in its system that independent software vendors have to take account of, claiming developers want their programs running at maximum performance rather than in some watered down but politically correct fashion.
Writing to the distinguishing features of the ever feisty Sun, mindful of Microsoft Corp, UI seeks to avoid alienating the developers.
It's happy with the amount of convergence they have managed to get, saying that it's a lot easier now to agree than it used to be, pointing to the significance of the networking and X-Windows commonality the new ABI implies.
RETIX HAS OSI, DATABASE TRANSACTION PROCESSING SOFTWARE
Santa Monica, California-based Retix Inc has announced the availablity of source code for OSI transaction processing and Remote Access, RDA.
The TP-920 and RD-930 software will, the company says, allow OEMs and developers to build interoperability into their existing transaction processing and database products.
Supporting X/Open's distributed transaction processing model, TP-920 provides interoperability between transaction processing monitors and OLTP systems whilst RD-930 — compatible with OSI and TCP/IP — provides interoperability between database servers and applications.
HEWLETT-PACKARD TO BUY TEXAS INSTRUMENTS' UNIX ARM
Texas Instruments Inc finally threw in the towel on the wasting asset of its computer business, and signed a letter of intent to sell it to Hewlett-Packard Co on undisclosed terms.
The part to go is the Business Systems line of Motorola Inc 68000- and Intel Corp iAPX-86-based Unix machines that are the direct successors to Texas's old TI 980 and TI 990 minicomputer business that goes back to the early 1970s.
The business is estimated to be doing about $200m a year, and a key attraction for the Cupertino company is that Texas sells almost exclusively through resellers, and Hewlett-Packard sees big potential in mobilising that army to take on board its own computer products as well.
The acquisition will result in an as yet undetermined number of lay-offs because Hewlett-Packard is planning to offer jobs to about 450 of the 1,600 employees in the worldwide Computer Systems & Services business, primarily employees currently in field and customer services functions.
Some remaining Texas Instruments employees will be involved in transition efforts that could continue for up to several years, while others will be offered positions elsewhere inside Texas Instruments.
Underlining the fact that the business was going nowhere, the transaction is not expected to have a material financial impact on either company.
Hewlett-Packard gets a base of some 125,000 multi-user computers, and will continue to offer the existing line until users are ready to migrate to Precision Architecture.
Texas will continue to manufacture the series and plans one more iteration.
It's interesting to note too that Texas is a Unix SVR4 shop and HP will now pick that up by default.
The sale does not include any other Texas computer businesses — notebook computers, printers, the software engineering and distributed computing tools, telecommunications systems, or the process automation systems.
USL DEAL FOR MAC INTERFACE ‘IS CLOSE’
Seems we should not be surprised: Unix System Labs says it's close to a deal with Apple Computer Inc for the Macintosh interface (UX No 390).
Others tell us Apple's Enterprise people have been shopping the thing around for a while apparently to further insinuate the Mac into the corporate environment.
Notice, however, that it isn't the Apple/Taligent effort or even Apple advanced systems that is spearheading the effort.
Critics claim the technology is 1980s passe and not for Unix and that it would take a tremendous amount of engineering to make it suitable for modern enterprise-wide client/server applications that demand object-oriented solutions.
ICL TO CONCENTRATE ON SVR4.2, DESPITE SOLARIS ENDORSEMENT
On the face of it, ICL's Unix strategy is beginning to look somewhat confused.
ICL, one of the key supporters of Unix V. Release 4.2, and with $750m worth of SVR4 sales under its belt in 1991, lent a statement of support to Sun for its Solaris operating system last week, although the statement was admittedly somewhat vague.
On top of that, ICL still supports SCO Unix on its PC range.
‘There's still a large installed base of SCO out there’, explained ICL's Peter Stuart, vice president of business development, mid-range systems, although the Open Desktop package failed to make any impact, he said.
Stuart said ICL would be concentrating on SVR4.2 on Intel platforms, anticipating that its greatest impact would be for companies looking to implement true client/server installations, with SVR4.2 at both the client and server ends.
‘If it's just productivity applications or Windows that you want, you should stay where you are’, said Stuart, who said that ICL would certainly be looking at NT when it emerges.
For PC LAN users looking to upgrade, ICL will also offer the Univel Unixware package.
On the Sparc-based mid-range DRS6000s, SVR4.2, without multi-processing support, would be a retrograde step at the moment, said Stuart.
But ICL, along with its parent Fujitsu, is currently working on the Sparc reference port of SVR4.2, and will offer it to on the DRS6000s in 1993, once extended security and multi-processing support is in place.
ICL also OEMs Sun workstations, mostly to scientific and engineering customers, and on these will continue to support Sun's Solaris operating system.
The case for Solaris on Intel, however, does not appear a strong one for Stuart at present, ‘although I could be proven wrong’, he said.
WITH HELP FROM FRIENDS, SPARC INTERNATIONAL SETS VERSION 9 SPEC
Sparc International has announced the completion of the Sparc Architecture version 9 specification (UX No 390), which extends the Sparc RISC address space to a full 64-bits while promising upwards binary compatibility with current versions — the first major change to the Sparc architecture since 1987.
In the process it's picked up HaL Computer Systems Inc, the most famous of the no-product-yet companies, to stand up and say it was doing its own Version 9 implementation, claiming to be ‘well under way.’
HaL will be using an SCD 2.0-compliant version of SVR4.
Meanwhile, SI is developing a V9 application binary interface, enabling both V8 and V9 binaries to run on a V9-compliant machine.
Version 9 is the work of twelve executive members, including HaL, who apparently manned the vanguard.
Amdahl, Fujitsu, Hyundai, ICL, LSI, Matsushita, Philips, Ross Technology, Sun Microsystems Labs and Texas Instruments are said to have collaborated on it since March of last year as a team reportedly independent of their affiliations.
Initially, the group toyed with the idea of developing a new unconstrained, non-compatible architecture but then abandoned that notion claiming the trade-off suffered was relatively minor.
Some of the technology the group is using such as speculative loads has never been used before and as a result the designers believe the specification will stand unmodified for the next twenty years with only a few extensions.
Sun's director of advanced development, Dave Ditzel, says he for one is glad the specification wasn't disclosed before DEC/Alpha and MIPS wheeled out their 64-bit architectures, which he dismisses as pretty traditional technology.
He's positive they would have tried to copy the Sparc design.
Other groundbreaking work was reportedly done in the areas of fault tolerance support and compiler optimisation.
V9 is now available to all SI members.
In the design, all Version 8 integer registers have been extended to 64-bits and all register commands work on the full 64-bit register, with full hardware support for 64-bit arithmetic, including multiplication and division.
It provides dual integer condition codes to allow 32-bit and 64-bit code to co-exist.
Several new instructions have been added specifically for superscalar Sparc implementations.
New conditional move instructions minimise branches and increase performance in both superscalar and super  pipelines boxes which will also be able to use any valid order of execution.
The floating point changes should allow for increased parallelism.
New atomic memory access instructions and a more flexible memory model are meant to make synchronisation in large-scale multi-processors more efficient.
V9 is supposed to simplify development of fast modular client/server or microkernel Unix implementations.
The operating system interface has been completely redesigned to support lightweight threads, fast context switching and object-oriented software.
The design supports the use of leading-edge wait-free multi-processing algorithms.
HaL plans to offer conversion tools to help in moving from 32-bits to 64-bits.
It will also provide SI with a V9 simulator that will run on V8 and V7 systems and test suites to validate V9 implementations later this year.
UNIVEL's EUROPEAN ROLL-OUT
Following Unix System Labs Inc's SVR.4.2 US bonanza last week (UX No 390), the European launch was a more subdued affair — just a smattering of USL and Novell Inc officials graced a podium at the Networks ‘92 show for a briefing by Univel Inc on its UnixWare derivation.
Out in September, UnixWare will include Novell's MHS E-mail gateway and transparent access to NetWare 2.
X and 3.
X implementations.
Univel will announce distributors on July 14th — OEM agreements are still under wraps.
A European distribution strategy is still being put together according to Univel's international marketing director, Greg Fallan, though existing Novell distributors and resellers will get first refusal.
Maintenance and support services is to be handled by Novell's existing support centres.
RISCs: 88000 HOT, ALPHA NOT, SPARC FLYING, 80860 DYING — CHIP GURU MICHAEL SLATER
By Sue Norris
80860: ‘poorly thought-out’
Michael Slater, industry guru and editor and publisher of the US journal, Microprocessor Report, in London last week to give his views on the RISC marketplace, had some disparaging comments to make about Intel Corp's and Digital Equipment Corp's RISC processor offerings.
The Intel 80860 he  described as a good implementation of a poorly thought-out microprocessor architecture.
As a supposedly general-purpose chip, he said, the 80860 falls down on programmability, no thought seemingly having been given to the compiler and operating environment.
Slater echoed industry doubts about Intel's commitment to the unsuccessful device, which Olivetti was going to use to build a workstation until the last minute when it scrapped the whole project in favour of DEC's Alpha (UX No 390).
The 80860 also formed the basis of Oki Electric's server line until it folded last month.
Apart from use in supercomputers and embedded applications, the 80860 is struggling to garner support.
Intel was the last to join the RISC bandwagon, Slater notes — repeating a comment made some time ago by Intels' Dave House, that RISC was ‘the last hope of the have-nots’— now it seems Intel is the have-not of the RISC marketplace.
Indeed, as Slater was only too quick to point out, Intel is shifting people from the 80860 development project onto the iAPX-86 line, on which Intel is concentrating most of its resources now.
Alpha: ‘three years late’
DEC's Alpha, meanwhile, was given a hard time for being late into the market.
Three years ago, Slater said, ‘I predicted that there would be no more major RISC  announcements , and then came Alpha — I could still have been right.’
He is cautious about all the hype that has surrounded Alpha from the time of announcement and warns that too much is being promised by a chip that was designed in the first instance to provide a Unix migration path for VAX users.
He said DEC has pulled out all the stops to achieve the fastest possible clock speed — 200MHz in a CMOS silicon implementation — and a pure 64-bit architecture.
In striving for this goal, however, DEC has sacrificed cache memory capacity — a third of the chip is actually taken up by clock buffers which dissipate half of Alpha's notably high level — 30 Watts — of heat emission.
Although Alpha is packaged to the same die as the Viking SuperSparc, Alpha manages only 16K cache while Viking has 36K.
Nothing, according to Slater, will make up for the fact that Alpha is three years late to market.
He pointed to a couple of other technical inferiorities, and went on to note that DEC still hasn't managed to convince any of the semiconductor manufacturers to take on the production of Alpha — it looks as though DEC will have to make it itself.
According to Slater, the semiconductor suppliers just aren't confident that a market exists for Alpha.
Whether or not Slater was aware of Olivetti's endorsement of the Alpha chip, he commented that, since no major workstation vendor had latched onto Alpha, other than DEC itself, there is no-one to really drive the market.
88000: ‘best, but lacks customers’
Slater pointed to the Motorola 88110 — not yet formally announced due to some lingering problems — as ‘perhaps the best of the current crop of microprocessors’, adding that it is a shame that it won't make an impact because it doesn't have the customers.
The 88000 Slater described as the most highly integrated of early RISC implementations with a very clean architecture and no major warts, except perhaps the combined integer-floating point register file.
Its failure to take the market, in Slater's view, was due to strategic and not technical reasons.
Adding that no-one seems to know what really happened, Slater went on to say that it was an apparent lack of early commitment by Motorola's management which led to the loss of Sun and others as takers for the 88000.
The processor also suffered slow product development and, as a result, potential customers lost patience.
This, coupled with internal conflicts at Motorola over the 680x0 program, led to a weak positioning of both product lines.
With something of a domino effect, this lack of success in the Unix market, according to Slater, caused Apple to switch to the PowerPC.
As strengths, Slater pointed to the 88000's high level of integration, good single-precision performance, multi-processor support and Motorola's advantage of single-vendor control, while as weaknesses, he listed the expense of building a large cache on the 88100/200 implementations and the slow speed of the floating point in double precision mode.
PA-RISC: ‘fast, but lacks support’
Hewlett-Packard's PA-RISC, Slater held up as being among the fastest workstations shipping today, as having a rich architecture and as having a large primary cache in current implementations.
On the downside, despite licences there are no useful chips on the open market and no other workstation vendors to support it.
Also, current implementations are costly, the system design for high clock rate primary cache is weak, and there is a lack of strong US partners.
Sparc: ‘no significant weaknesses’
For Sparc, the weaknesses listed were not significant, except to say that Sparc is unlikely to support Windows NT.
Its strengths, meanwhile, include its application software base, Sun's substantial investment, and the availability of second source suppliers.
R-Series: ‘Sparc means MIPS won't be number one’
MIPS Computer Systems, on the other hand, has the first RISC which will support Windows NT.
The R-Series is also supported by a wide range of applications, and the MIPS market is a level playing field, not dominated by a Sun Microsystems.
Sun's very presence in the workstation market, however, means that MIPS is unlikely ever to be number one.
The disbanding of ACE, of course too, has done little to boost MIPS' credibility, and there exists no major vendor that's committed to MIPS as a desktop processor.
RS/6000-PowerPC: ‘proprietary, but well supported’
The RS/6000 and PowerPC lines are credited with the commitment of three large industry players, and a high-performance floating point.
On the downside, high performance can today only be achieved with a proprietary multi-chip implementation, early PowerPC implementations will not be performance leaders and IBM is caught up in internal conflicts over the AS/400 and its mainframes.
Hobbit versus ARM
Finally, at the low end, Acorn spin-off, Advanced RISC Machines, seems set to battle it out with AT&T's Hobbit RISC in the handheld computer market — ARM has been taken up for Apple's Newton range, while Hobbit is expected to be the RISC target for Go Corp's PenPoint operating system.
OSF DEBUTS MODULARISED RELEASE 1.1
The Open Software Foundation last week announced the general availability of Release 1.1 of its OSF/1 operating system and trundled out the first snapshot of the Distributed Management Environment, for members.
OSF also rolled out some future development plans in its Open Road plan.
Compiled versions of OSF/1 release 1.1K — integrated kernel — are out on three reference platforms, Intel Corp's 80386-based 302, Digital's MIPS Computer Systems Inc RISC-based DECstation 3100 and Encore Computer's National Semiconductor-based Multimax.
Other releases will follow for Intel Paragon, DEC Alpha, Apple A/UX 4.0, Convex MPP, Intergraph, IBM ESA, Hitachi MJ, ACE and HP systems.
OSF/1.1 is essentially a modularised effort, in a similar vein to Unix System Labs's Destiny product.
It can run on 4Mb RAM and has a range of modules which can be loaded and unloaded as required including NFS, TCP/IP, or a System V file system.
Most important, for compatibility's sake, OSF/1.1 includes conformance to USL's System V Interface Definition version 3, which means any application written to the SVID3 base and kernel extensions — the backbone of Unix SVR4 — will run on OSF/1.1 with a strict re-compile, OSF says.
OSF/1.1 has in creased foreign language support and costs $85,000 with full distribution rights.
Upgrades from OSF/1.0 are $25,000, binary royalties are $65 per copy.
Microkernel, DME
Snapshots of OSF's Mach-based micro-kernel are out now, and an advanced technical release is slated for the third quarter.
The micro-kernel won't do away with AT&T code entirely, as a server version of the existing OSF/1 operating system will be required to drive the stuff.
OSF's Distributed Management Environment, DME, meanwhile, will roll out in a five-step process.
The first is the snapshot.
A Distributed Services Release is targeted for mid-1993, providing key distributed management services to the DCE technology.
In the second half of 1993, OSF will provide the integrated DME framework, management user interface, management object and a developer's toolkit.
However, it failed to mention in its release that it has dispensed with the services of IBM's data engine in DME — apparently the object-oriented software is to complicated to integrate with the other technologies.
IBM's data engine was to be used alongside Tivoli Systems Inc's Object Management Group-compliant Object Dispatcher technology in the DME server compartment, which maintains objects that contain information about resources on a network as well as routines for managing them.
OSF will expand Tivoli's stuff to fill the role.
Open Road
In its Open Road schedule, OSF expects to get OSF/1.2 out of the door for the second half of next year, with improved commercial functionality, real-time and pre-emptive scheduling features.
DCE, the Distributed Computing Environment was left pretty much untouched — OSF says it will include object-oriented capabilities by 1995, and there are now some 75-odd source licensees for the stuff.
OSF mapped out Motif's future: it plans to start work on the Next Generation User Interface by 1993, which will evolve into a fully object-oriented use interface by 1995.
OSF also said there would be significant moves towards converging its style — look and feel — with Windows and IBM's Common User Access user interfaces.
MASPAR MP-2 WITH THREEFOLD POWER ‘OUT THIS YEAR’
MasPar Computer Corp, Jeff Kalb's Sunnyvale, California-based single instruction-multiple data massively parallel supercomputer company from which Digital Equipment Corp gets one of its supercomputer offerings, is expected to launch the MP-2, its second generation mid-range machine before the year's out.
Electronic News hears that the new MasPar machine will offer three times the performance of the company's two-year-old MP-1 system, but at the same price.
That would give a peak throughput of 3.6 GFLOPS on a maximum 16,384-CPU configuration costing $1.2m.
The new system will again be based on a custom CMOS microprocessor, 32 of which will be integrated onto one chip.
The new processor is expected to operate in 8-bit mode rather than the 4-bit approach used in the MP-1 (processors sourced from Sierra Semiconductor Corp); theoretically, the MasPar architecture could be expanded to 64 bits.
In the meantime, the trade weekly reports, Kalb is attempting to get DEC to clarify its supercomputer strategy in the wake of its announcement that it will also sell Intel Corp's iPSC machines.
DEC accounts for half MasPar's sales (Kalb would prefer it if that fell to 33%), and the firm is concerned that if DEC fails to position the ostensibly competing parallel lines clearly, potential customers will be confused.
INTERACTIVE LOOKS FOR A BUYER FOR NORTON UNIX UTILITIES
One of the products that seemed to slip through the cracks when Eastman Kodak Co's Interactive Systems Corp, Naperville, Illinois, sold its packaged Unix division off to Sunsoft Inc was Norton Utilities for Unix.
Interactive shared development of the product with Segue Software Inc, Santa Monica, and launched the product back in 1990 (UX No 281,285) for Intel-based machines, with Peter Norton Computing taking royalties (Norton has since been acquired by Symantec Corp, Cupertino, California).
Now Interactive is looking for a buyer for the technology, which does not fit with its new brief as a networking technology specialist.
Interactive says there is a lot of interest, and that ports of the technology for Sun Sparc and IBM RS/6000 systems are being proposed.
One of the interested parties, and one of the only sources that can currently supply the Norton toolset for SCO and Sunsoft's (Interactive) Unix, is Transparent Technology Inc of Los Angeles, California, which specialises in PC/ Unix software.
Company spokesman Chris Hipsher said there is a huge demand for the product, but that perhaps the most often requested port, for SCO Xenix, is still not available.
Hipsher says another glaring omission is an equivalent of the Norton for DOS disk fragmentation utility, but that the Crocodile utility from Australian multiport board manufacturer Stallion fills the gap.
The Norton product is in short supply, but Transparent hopes to begin manufacturing software itself in the near future.
A solid deal, and possibly a relaunch of the product, will happen by year-end, says Interactive.
PEDDLE's THSTYME TO DO ITS DEVELOPMENT IN RUSSIA
THStyme Inc, the technology company formed by Commodore Pet developer and Victor Technologies Inc founder Chuck Peddle, has announced a deal with Nauchny Tsentr, Russia's former aeronautic electronics conglomerate.
The joint venture, to be known as Unified Technologies, is aimed at transforming this Russian answer to Silicon Valley, in the Moscow suburb of Zelenograd, into a world class producer of semiconductors, peripherals and other computer products.
THStyme will act as the exclusive distributor for these Russian-manufactured goods to the world market.
Unified Technologies meanwhile will market THStyme products in Russia.
The project will be officially launched in Moscow next month, with the first shipments of computer products to the West due in late 1992.
Some 20,000 researchers at the base are already working on a top secret new THStyme product set for launch next spring, which Peddle promises ‘will change the way that people use computers’.
HP FOLLOWS SUN ROUTE WITH ISDN FOR WORKSTATIONS
Mirroring Sun Microsystems Inc's efforts in this area (UX No 386) Hewlett-Packard Co has rolled out a new range of ISDN connectivity enabling standalone workstations to communicate over public or private ISDN networks.
Included are the HP ISDN Link/S700 add-on card for its 720, 730 and 750 workstations — with transfer speeds of up to 128Kb per second — HP ISDN server and HP ISDN Link/MS-DOS, which allow PCs to take advantage of ISDN circuit switching services.
All ship July 1 — the HP ISDN server costs $18,400, an HP ISDN Link/S700 add-on card is $2,800 and the HP ISDN Link/MS-DOS card starts at $2,600.
PRIME's PRIMESERVICE UNIT OFFERS
Prime Computer Inc's Framingham, Massachusetts-based PrimeService Inc — soon, as we understand it, to be part of a new quoted company called Computervision Corp — has launched Connection NetWare for Sparc, which it describes as an open architecture version of Novell Inc's NetWare operating system running under Sun Microsystems Inc's SunOS version of Unix.
The company says that it enables MS-DOS, OS/2 and Apple Computer Inc Macintosh users to share data, print services and applications on Sparc systems while retaining the existing operating environments; certified by Novell Inc, the product will be sold directly and through manufacturers and resellers.
It costs $5,800 for an unlimited user licence.
RABBIT BREEDS IN EUROPE — AGAIN
Rabbit Software Corp, based in Malvern, Pennsylvania, is about to try and cut it in Europe — for the second time.
The 10-year-old public company, 75% owned by venture capitalist Safeguard Scientifics Inc, specialises in Unix, MS-DOS and Windows-based connectivity products for standalone or networked personal computers and workstations.
While some of Rabbit's business is done on an OEM basis, with procurers over the years having included IBM, NEC, Siemens, Motorola, Intel and McDonnell Douglas, the firm has also, until recently, been selling its products direct to end users.
This new push into Europe, however, will be based totally on indirect sales.
Rabbit first set up this side of the Atlantic with a direct sales office in Paris in June 1987.
This was closed three years ago — Peter Craine, Rabbit's vice president for marketing and sales, explains that the firm then didn't have any national language support for its MS-DOS products; also, Unix — Rabbit's favoured environment — hadn't taken off in quite the way the firm had expected.
The closure of the Paris office was initiated by a management team that had been installed at Rabbit Software by Safeguard.
According to Craine, the investor's choice of directors left much to be desired; indeed, Charles Robins, one of Rabbit's technical founders, left the firm in frustration over the new management team that had been drafted in.
Robins is now back in the warren, however, following the appointment of a fresh management team in June 1991.
Now the company has an aggressive mission, to promote the Rabbit name (which Chuck Robins selected in desperation after a Volkswagen Rabbit came into his line of vision while he was trying to think of something to call the company) and to achieve 50% of revenues in Europe within the next three years.
Rabbit has been trading at a loss — last year, net losses amounted to $2.6m, down from $3.3m losses in the previous year, on revenues down 20% at just under $7m; for the first quarter of this year, losses were reduced to $248,000, from $800,000, on sales down 13% at $1.6m.
According to Craine, however, losses have now been reduced from once being $1m a quarter to being now ‘around breakeven level’, and Rabbit should be profitable ‘shortly’.
Playing a crucial role in achieving that goal will be the firm's new policy of making sales to end users entirely via a network of third party distributors, which Rabbit promises to support with unfailing commitment.
The picture for Europe — where currently only 5% of revenues are generated — is expected to be similar.
In the UK, Rabbit's distributor is a company called Accent Computer Ltd, based in Burgess Hill, West Sussex.
Rabbit admits that its support of Accent has in the past been minimal — now the firm will put all its strength behind its partner, and has appointed a Mr Helmut Weissenbach in Munich to co-ordinate the various European distribution outlets.
Backed happily by Safeguard, Rabbit can afford to expand on the back of acquisitions, which the firm points to as being part of its growth policy, whether such acquisitions be based on product or on sales/marketing synergies, in the US and in Europe.
Craine says Rabbit has been in talks with various companies, but declined to comment any further.
What he did say was that Rabbit has no intention of setting up wholly-owned subsidiaries in any country, because of its commitment now to its previously neglected distribution partners.
On the MS-DOS side of the connectivity business, Rabbit sees itself up against the big names — IBM, Novell and DCA.
On the Unix side, however, Craine names only small market participants, such as Nynex's SSI division and Ann Arbour, Michigan-based Cleo Communications Inc, as having anything near what Rabbit can offer.
Today the firm offers connectivity products supporting Santa Cruz Operation Unix, Unix 5.1, and IBM's AIX — Craine says Sun Microsystems, Hewlett-Packard and DEC flavours of Unix might be on the agenda sometime in the future, though nothing is imminent.
Rabbit recently announced a range of IBM SNA communications products for the Univel UnixWare operating system, initial shipments of which are scheduled to coincide with the launch of UnixWare in the third quarter this year.
Rabbit Open Advantage for UnixWare is to include a range of IBM mainframe connectivity options, including 3270 terminal emulation, remote job entry, and APPC.
The products are claimed to be cabable of operating as a client to Novell's NetWare SAA communications server across Novell and TCP/IP networks.
Charles Robins believes UnixWare will facilitate the growth of Unix in commercial accounts because of its ease of use and integration with NetWare.
Craine reckons Rabbit will do well out of its relationship with Univel, since it has 10 years' experience of Unix.
The firm aims to extend UnixWare integration into IBM networks, enabling access to host applications and development of distributed applications.
Meanwhile, Rabbit Software has recently been the source of a minor confusion in the US, following speculation as to which species of animal Ross Perot would choose for his Ross for Boss presidential campaign.
The rabbit is proposed The New  Republic as a favourite, following an alleged investment by Perot in Rabbit Software — in actual fact, Perot Group investors did once invest in of Charles Robins' business enterprises, but it wasn't Rabbit.
FORMER DUN & BRADSTREET STAFFERS FORM AGILITY TO ENCOURAGE DOWNSIZING TO UNIX
An allegedly truly open, second generation Unix product range has been announced by new Unix applications software distributor, Agility Business Software Ltd.
The Bristol-based company enjoys a value-added reseller kind of relationship with Baan International NV of Ade in the Netherlands.
Baan has 400 employees, offices in 15 countries and a turnover of $60m.
Clients include Sony Corp and food manufacturer, Van Melle Nederland BV.
Agility is offering integrated financial, manufacturing and contract servicing application software as well as a fourth generation toolset for in-house application development.
Consisting of modular packages, the product range is claimed to be completely open to any specific version of Unix and any hardware or database running on open systems.
This is apparently achieved via the Baan-shell and toolset at the heart of the system.
The B-shell contains in-built drivers that trigger the chip technology and run the relational database.
The drivers also act as an interface between hardware and software.
Agility maintains that customers need only specify their hardware and the right drivers will be provided.
Any Windows technology and graphical user interface of the customer's choice can be built into the system.
Agility also claims the ability to implement its software for any box within five days.
Its products are aimed at companies wanting to move from a mainframe environment to mid-range open systems networks.
Although the co-founders, Phil Edwards and Dave Jordan, both come from Dun & Bradstreet Corp, they will be focusing on attracting a new customer base rather than wooing an old one.
Operating solely in the UK and Ireland, Agility was set up in April, 1992.
It has six current employees, but is hoping to increase this number to 16 by June 1993.
All of its products are available now and an average contract value is estimated at £150,000.
APPLE BRINGS TOSHIBA INTO THE KALEIDA MULTIMEDIA PARTY WITH IBM
Toshiba Corp has now been drawn into the IBM-Apple Computer Inc alliance following the announcement that it and Apple have an agreement to develop multimedia technology, combining Apple software skills with Toshiba's expertise in semiconductors and consumer electronics.
The two will jointly license, develop and produce Personal Digital Assistants with the first from the alliance, set for mid-1993, will use CD-ROMs storing text, audio and graphics.
Sharp Corp has already signed to make and market the first Apple Personal Digital Assistant, Newton, and Sony Corp makes Apple's smallest PowerBook.
Toshiba and Apple will license software from Kaleida Inc, the IBM-Apple multimedia firm, which yesterday named Nathaniel Goldhaber as chief executive: he is a principal in Cole Gilburne Goldhaber & Ariyoshi Management Inc, a high tech venture capital firm.
PowerPC UPDATE
It turns out that the numbers put to the four PowerPC implementations the 601, 603, 604 and 620, detailed last week (UX No 390), refer to chipsets and not systems as was implied.
The 601, to sample later this year is destined to be used in the first Power PC Macs and other low cost desktops.
This chip implementation, to be available on the open market, is a derivative of an IBM Corp Rios design, which explains why it will be out so soon.
The 620 chip implementation, for high-end workstations and servers, will be available in 1994.
This will be a full 64-bit implementation, superscalar so that it probably issues two to three instructions per cycle.
The 603, for use in portable computers and the 604 for mainstream desktop applications, will be available in limited quantities in the second half of 1993.
The Rios RISC has been cleaned up to create the PowerPC, focusing on just what's important for the desktop market.
It will be binary-compatible with the RS/6000 Power RISC, since no operating code has been changed.
The RS/6000 has basically been revised ‘with single-chip implementations in mind’.
Compatibility with the RS/6000 is ensured through trapping of unimplemented instructions.
And 64-bit extensions have been added.
The first Apple Computer Inc PowerPC systems are expected to sell for under $2,000 — these will be true Macintosh systems running Macintosh applications.
Included in the System 7 operating system for the PowerPC will be a full emulation for Apple 68000 binaries — this will be faster than MC68040-based Macs that cost about four times as much.
Slater reckons ‘Apple is the one company that will make PowerPC happen’.
He notes that IBM and Apple are collaborating on the PowerPC CPU, and not on systems: Apple boxes will run System 7, not Pink or any new operating system.
88OPEN ROUNDUP
The 88open Consortium Ltd has released a compatibilty test suite for applications — in binary and object forms — running under Unix SVR4 on the Motorola Inc 88000 RISC.
Software developers — independent or corporate — can have access to the tests and certify their SVR4 applications on the 88000 at no charge, the group says.
The Posix and XPG3-compliant ACT/88 for SVR4 adds tests for new Unix V.4 features such as dynamic linking, ELF and streams.
Tom Mace, president and chief executive officer of 88open, believes the proposed Architecture Neutral Distribution Format-type software portability technologies now doing the rounds should be pursued as  vigorously as possible, but argues that provision for support and verification must be developed, if the stuff is to become accepted by a still sceptical independent software vendor community.
Because the techniques involved imply a separate implementation of the portability software on each different platform — they also mean that what users purchase and what they see on their screen are two different things — there are obvious questions of support and testing that need to addressed.
Further out, Mace believes these portability issues will become redundant as chip technology evolves to the point where multiple architectures can be implemented and supported on a single microprocessor.
Although there are some formidable technological hurdles to overcome, the concept is already being put into practice in several projects, most prominently from where Mace stands, in the IBM Corp/Apple Computer Inc/Motorola Inc effort to bring some of the functionality found in Motorola's 680x0 and 88000 processor families onto the PowerPC RISC architecture the three are developing, as well as maintaining binary compatibility with IBM's RS/6000 Power RISC.
There will be less people and less distribution issues involved in these efforts than in the ANDF-like solutions, argues Mace, who reckons real on-chip solutions are some four to five years away from commercial realisation.
Although IBM, Apple and Motorola have a forged an agreement for the duration of their project, there remain obvious legal implications for a vendor who might want to stick say Sun Sparc and MIPS RISC instruction sets on to a single piece of silicon.
Mace believes those copyright and interface issues are now being worked through in the current round of legal skirmishes between Intel Corp and its iAPX-86 impersonators such as Advanced Micro Devices.
The upshot, Mace hopes, is that interface copyrights will be broken and will therefore pass into the public domain.
Subsequently, who ever can produce the cheapest, fastest part with the most capabilities to  mimic other architectures will win out, and ‘once one does it, the others will be forced to follow.’
On the PowerPC effort, Mace says the initial part will come in with around 30% less power than the 88000, though he expects performance to converge over time.
PowerPC, which Mace describes as ‘not elegant, but a good start,’ incorporates around 15% of the 88110's architecure, re-engineered of course.
Meanwhile, the 88110 itself is still only available in developer and very limited edition quantities, despite announcements from the likes of Dolphin Server Technology AS and Harris Corp.
Motorola, Mace says, is still cleaning up the part and doesn't want to announce pricing or general availability until later in the year.
Mace claims that some $1bn of business has now been conducted on 88000-based system products, and claims, as the group often does, that there will be more converts to the cause — this time around there are five or six Intel Corp i860 manufacturers on its hitlist. 88open will open a European office this summer, either in the UK or Germany, which will use space rented in one of its members' offices.
The office will coordinate 88open's pan-European marketing, information, exhibition and conference efforts.
The group's clutch of porting and testing centres remain intact.
Mace was also able to cast some interesting light on the heritage of Unix System Labs Inc's Destiny desktop — or Unix V.4.2 (UX No 390).
He reckons that up to 70% of Destiny originally featured in the modularised Unix System V.3 implementation that was developed by Convergent Technology for the ill-fated Unix PC which it manufactured under an OEM agreement for AT&T.
The stand-alone desktop machine which appeared back in October 1984 (UX No 1), was a Motorola Inc 68000-based machine that came with 512Kb RAM — expandable to 4Mb — 20Mb (Winchester) drive, 5.25″ floppy drive and 12″ mono display with a telephone and modem built-in.
The thing retailed at between $5,000-$6,000.
Although at that time the Unix PC was the most successful Unix product ever, by May 1986 (UX No 79), AT&T was struggling to market thousands of the things held in stock — it had wanted to sell a million of them — and had co-opted Convergent on to the job too.
The problem then, as now, argues Mace, is that ‘Unix systems are developed by Unix engineers who like the complexity of Unix.
If you develop something complicated, then you need complicated people.’
The problem with Destiny is that even at $350 — which will only buy kernel-level stuff — it is still much more expensive than MS-DOS/Windows, and Microsoft Corp is sure to pitch NT at some attractive price point well below USL's.
Mace believes that whilst USL may be able to claim the value-add in Unix ‘is worth it,’ the problem is ‘who wins by saying things like that?
Only Apple perhaps.’
EUROPEAN PROJECT TO INTEGRATE CHORUS MICROKERNEL WITH SVR4
A new European initiative to push the future direction of operating systems is set to be announced today, with the announcement of ‘Ouverture’— a 14 million ECU (around $17.5m) project supported by the Commission for the European Communities' Esprit programme.
Involved in the project are systems vendors Alacatel Alsthom, Olivetti, SGS-Thomson (owners of the Inmos Transputer) and Siemens Nixdorf, along with technology providers Chorus Systemes.
Unix System Laboratories (which has a stake in Chorus) and Unix International are also supporting the effort, which aims to integrate the Chorus/Mix microkernel technology into Unix System V.4.
The work is expected to be applicable to the mainstream Unix market as well as real-time embedded systems and high performance parallel processing systems.
Object-oriented interfaces will also be added to the Chorus kernel.
The project is linked to existing European efforts such as the Open Microprocessor Systems Initiative (OMI) and High Performance Computing (HPC) projects.
COGNOS' UNIX PUSH
Ottawa, Canada-based 4GL software supplier Cognos Inc is about to  consummate the moves into Unix and distributed computing it's been flagging for a year, with the planned Six By Six launch of six products on six Unix platforms in August.
A new version of the company's flagship product, PowerHouse, is main dog in a pack of tools to ship on SunOS, HP-UX, IBM AIX RS/6000, DEC Ultrix, Data General's DG-UX, and Santa Cruz Operation Xenix.
This latter is perhaps the most noteworthy from Cognos' viewpoint, since early indications were that this is a port brought forward from 1993.
The products are version 7.0 of PowerHouse, the end-user SQL query tool Impromptu, the Powerplay executive decision tool, the non-graphic end-user and reporting tool InQuisitive and the application and maintenance tool Architect.
Cognos' core development work is all done on Sun workstations at its Ottawa R&D centre, and as early as last June a version of PowerHouse 7.0 for SunOs was finished and ready to ship, simply awaiting the executive green light.
According to Cognos' ebullient senor vice president of R&D Ron Zambonini, porting from one Unix platform to another is a commercial decision only, since it's not a technologically difficult move: ‘I want to be on every Unix in the world.’
As part of the same announcement, Cognos, which derives the vast majority of its business from the proprietary mini world — 20,000 of its 35,000 PowerHouse licences worldwide are on its traditional platforms like Hewlett-Packard MPE or Data General MV — is positioning Cognos as a client/server tool, with the Unix platforms as servers and Microsoft Windows 3. x as clients.
Cognos will also offer Motif client support sometime soon — but as co-founders of anti-software industry hype body The Software Business Practices Council, Cognos is cautious about announcing anything not shippable within 90 days.
The shift is as much based on a desire to snag Unix software sales as by caution about competition from fellow 4GL tool suppliers Uniface and Progress.
The company is still chuckling about recruiting Steve Debler, former Progress' VP marketing and number 7 recruit in Progress, as new head of product, corporate and channels marketing.
Dutch outfit Uniface ‘has a good message — it's the same as ours,’ says Zambonini, part prompting the smartening up of Cognos' GUI capabilities and user-friendliness in version 7.
Cognos has just about sorted out one of the big problems software companies with a proprietary platform background face when getting into Unix: pricing.
‘We've modelled 500 of our customers, and within 12 months all pricing will be by per-user, as the Unix products already are,’ adds Zambonini.
Much of this direction was outlined at the company's first international user group meeting, Cognition ‘91, in Los Angeles last June, which explains the low-key reaction of journalists and analysts to the roadshow.
That shouldn't take away the value of the announcement: Cognos, a company well regarded as technically sound and with much work on exploiting object-orientation quietly under its belt, is offering users a firm bridge into distributed and client/server computing while preserving their existing applications.
MINIGRAMS
IBM Corp has now shipped 700,000 copies of OS/2 2.0 since it announced the product on March 31 and claims it has exceeded its initial unit sales projection —‘We're well on track to surpass many industry expectations,’ it said, but Reuter notes that IBM has previously said its expects to sell ‘millions’of copies of OS/2 this year but has never provided a specific forecast.
SunSoft Inc president Ed Zander acknowledges the Solaris ‘endorsements’ he got last week from the hardware community are kind of lukewarm and skimpy — see page two — but he still claims, mostly for Destiny's benefit, that he's got the only tested and proven big-time distribution channel, namely Sun Microsystems Inc.
The Hannover Fair's CeBit ‘93 has picked its dates: March 24–31 of next year.
Apologies: last week's story on the Sparc Architecture Version 9  specification was incorrect, and based upon incomplete information.
The spec was not  solely Sun's work, as the piece implied, nor ‘rubberstamped’ by the twelve companies that wrote it.
Sparc International was responsible for a press release.
Full story on page3.
Spreading its wings to Europe, Young Minds Inc has set up deals with three leading distribution houses to market its range of CD-ROM publishing software.
European Marketing, Chevenoz, France, will market YMI's stuff on the continent, UK, Oxford-based Phase IV Systems will head up support services for Europe and sell to VARs — Open Minds AB of Lund, Sweden, will market YMI's educational software.
Sun Microsystems Inc has a new desktop SBus Expansion Subsystem that provides three more SBus slots for several of the its workstations and servers, and enables use of single and double width boards; it also accommodates up to two 424Mb disk drives and will be available from Sun Microsystems Computer Corp and SunExpress at $2,500 in July.
Suppose, just suppose now, that Sunsoft's upcoming battle with Microsoft is just a smokescreen.
Suppose what Sun is really after with Solaris-on-Intel are all those juicy Intel sites where Sun's aim is really to dislodge Intel with a lever like low-cost Tsunami.
Sun Microsystems Inc is to invest a further £12m in its European manufacturing site at Linlithglow, Scotland: its Sparcstation 10 workstation is to be built at a new 70,000 square foot building, including, for the first time, the printed circuit boards; up to 100 new jobs are expected to be created at the 350-strong operation.
It has been confirmed that Francis Lorentz, chairman and chief executive of state-owned Groupe Bull SA, will this week retire after 10 years in office: his successor will be Bernard Pache, a mining engineer who is currently managing director of Charbonnages de France.
Unix distributor, Irvine, California-based UniDirect Inc, has reportedly cut a deal that will have Dell Computer Corp passing on all calls for application software certified on its machines to UniDirect as leads or orders.
Dell will also be bundling a catalogue of all the programs that work on its boxes — along with UniDirect's 800 number — with systems.
UniDirect hopes to duplicate the formula with other hardware vendors.
The distributor is still negotiating with Dell to resell Dell's version of SVR4 which Dell unbundled some time back.
Sun Microsystems Computer Corp has established Sun Mexico as its 19th subsidiary worldwide, and its second subsidiary in Latin America.
Armchair strategists are currently wondering whether Novell Inc will wait to see if Univel Inc pans out (UX No 388) or makes its move to acquire more of Unix System Labs before the end of the year instead.
Reading stories on USL such as the one BusinessWeek just ran, they estimate USL has its mind more on going public or selling out than might be realised.
If it's being run for the short-term, they reckon, that could account for a lot of its recent pragmatism.
Vittorio Cassoni, one of three executive vice-presidents at Xerox Corp, died in Milan of a brain tumour at the age of 49.
He was at the centre of the controversy that led to the Unix Wars and the creation of the Open Software Foundation while on secondment to AT&T Co from Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA.
Shortly after the formation of the Foundation he returned to Olivetti as managing director, from where he joined Xerox just seven weeks ago.