

ROW OVER AT&T-FREE UNIX CODE — UNIX SYSTEM LABS FILES SUIT AGAINST BERKELEY SOFTWARE DESIGN INC
A legal row is brewing around the University of California at Berkeley ‘AT&T code-free’ BSD4.3 and 4.4 operating system releases, resulting in Unix System Laboratories filing a complaint with the New Jersey Federal Court against Berkeley Software Design Inc (BSDI), an independent company in Falls Church, Virginia that uses the BSD software as the basis for commercial products.
The complaint alleges false advertising in violation of Section 43(a) of the Langham Act and unfair competition in violation of state laws.
The crux of the complaint is BSDI's statement that no license from AT&T is required for the company's BSD/386 product (UX No 370), or for any product derived from the BSD4.3 Networking Release 2 code from the University of California.
BSDI has filed a motion to dismiss the claim, saying that USL has failed to provide any basis for its allegations.
It has not, says BSDI, claimed the violation of any proprietary rights, such as patent rights, trade secrets or copyrights, saying that that's because it has no proprietary rights to violate with respect to the Networking Release 2 code.
USL, however, is talking very much in those terms, saying that it does believe there is AT&T code within the BSDI product, and that it will protect its proprietary rights in all cases.
USL said it was currently evaluating its position over the University of California at Berkeley, but had as yet made no public announcements.
Details, page three.
SPARC 10 CLONER TO LAUNCH ‘WITHIN WEEKS’ OF SUN
After playing catch-me-if-you-can for so long, it looks as though Sun Microsystems Inc is only going to get a month's headstart over the pack of Sparc-compatible builders which will be gunning for its superscalar Sparcstation 10 market — if US firm Pinnacle Data Systems Inc, Columbus, Ohio, has its way.
The mid-West systems integrator, which specialises in servicing and supporting Sun workstations, looks set to inject some new life into the lacklustre compatible market, promising not only a ‘true clone’ of Sun's Sparcstation 10 workstation — within a month of Sun's first superscalar deliveries — but also an intermediate Sparcstation 10 IPX system, an offering Sun is also thought to be mulling, and Sparcservers too.
What's more, Pinnacle says it will deliver its S-10 clone at around 65% of Sun's list price, which would peg an entry-level machine with a 36MHz CPU doing 86 MIPS, 44 SPECint92 and 53 SPECfp92 at around $12,000 — £9,600.
Pinnacle says it will use an LSI Logic Corp superscalar board-set, incorporating the Texas Instruments Inc Viking part, and is shooting for initial deliveries to begin just weeks after Sun's first shipments, which it expects in September.
Pinnacle says copyright reasons forbid it from selling clones until Sun can get the real thing out of the door.
Where it can, Pinnacle's as yet unnamed box will match Sun's workstation component for component, including memory, disk and screen.
It has also signed deals with SunSoft Inc in the US and Europe for the Solaris 2.0 operating system and will become a Solaris support centre for the Sun subsidiary.
Pinnacle, which currently offers a Sparc 2 CPU board, will leverage its experience in the Sun spares, repair and trade-in hardware business — combined with the SunSoft deal — to launch itself in to the compatible market proper, backed by a hefty advertisement campaign.
Potentially more interesting is a machine Pinnacle is also readying which it says will fill the gap between Sun's current Sparcstation 2 offering and the top-end Sparcstation 10.
It'll be a kind of Sparcstation 10 IPX offering — everything an S-2 has, in the same footprint, but with a Viking CPU.
Existing S-2 users will be able to upgrade their systems via a board-swapout.
Final configuration and pricing has yet to be finalised, the firm says, and it is still casting around for a name, although Series 200 has been mooted.
Pinnacle also has plans for clones of Sun's superscalar server range when that comes on stream towards the end of this year and the beginning of next.
Just now Pinnacle is putting the finishing touches to deskside and rack-mount cabinet designs for that effort, it says.
Again, the server systems will be out around a month after Sun's own efforts — Pinnacle even believes Sun may stretch to an eight-way offering there.
Pinnacle, a $40m outfit with 30 engineers, will sell direct in the US and via a sales agency it is employing.
Pinnacle's UK arm, Unix Solutions Ltd, a five-person start-up in Dunstable, Bedfordshire, is currently lining up distribution outlets in Germany, France and Switzerland.
It will hold stock and spares and says it could get first machines as early as September from its US parent.
Unix Solutions eyes Germany as potentially the biggest European market for initial sales of its clones.
The firm says Sun is restricting the number of Sparcstation 10s that will be available over there to just 400 this year.
Pinnacle also has a 5Gb RAID system ready to ship for Sparc 2 systems — it will cost from £15,000.
BERKELEY'S HISTORIC CSRG GROUP TO CLOSE AFTER BSD 4.4 RELEASE
Meanwhile, Berkeley's Computer Science Research Group has announced that it is to end its work on BSD 4.4 following the final releases this year.
The move, announced at a birds of a feather session at the recent Usenix conference in San Antonio, Texas, marks the end of one of the most influential strands in the development of Unix technology over the years.
The reasons why CSRG cannot continue in its present form include lack of funding, changes in the marketplace and a decline in support from the University of California itself.
With the departure of key team member Mike Karels last year, that left a team of only four, headed by Keith Bostic and Kirk McKusick, to architect and maintain an increasingly large and complex system.
BSD Unix releases formed the basis of Sun Microsystems' SunOs operating system, along with large portions of the Open Software Foundation's developments.
Unix extensions from Berkeley quickly found their way into mainstream Unix.
Dr Douglas Greer, ex Berkeley and now at the European Computer Research Centre in Munich, said that in the early days of Unix CSRG did a lot to make the system more modern and usable.
‘The Bourne shell was a good start, but Berkeley added the C shell and Berkeley extensions, such as vi, refining the ideas coming out of Bell Labs.
Later the Berkeley file system and some of the networking socket interface work became important’.
Meanwhile, the next release of 4.4 goes into Alpha release this month.
It will be available in a full version, requiring a Unix license, and in ‘Unix lite’ form with just the freely distributable code included.
This will be ‘more complete than earlier free releases, but will still need some work on the kernel.’
The final version will be out in the Autumn, the final release date depending on when current funding runs out, after which CSRG will close down.
OSF's NEXT-GENERATION INTERFACE: RFT NEXT YEAR?
According to the Open Software Foundation's Open Road plan (UX No 391), it's supposed to have started work on developing an object-oriented Next Generation User Environment, UEC II.
OSF says it will be a ‘highly evolved’ version of the Motif GUI.
However, describing it is as far as the organisation has got for the moment, though OSF says members are screaming for a bridge that spans all GUI environments.
The likelihood is that OSF will issue a Request For Technology in the area some time next year — none are planned for 1992 — and the stuff isn't expected to be complete until 1995.
OSF Motif technical manager, Bruce Huie, says OSF ‘doesn't know how exactly its going to do it yet,’ but to gauge interest, OSF is holding workshops for members and non-members over the summer, covering application interoperability and interface graphics.
It hopes these will mark out some boundaries for UEC II.
AMDAHL ENHANCES UTS UNIX WITH MICRO FOCUS COBOL, TUXEDO
Amdahl Corp has bolstered its mainframe Unix offerings with the launch of a new Cobol from Micro Focus Plc, a new release of the UTS operating system, and of the Tuxedo transaction processing monitor.
Amdahl Cobol Release 1.2 is designed to facilitate the migration of Cobol applications from minis, micros and proprietary mainframes and is based on Micro Focus Cobol/2.
For those wanting to plunder moribund proprietary bases for applications, as well as conformance to the 1974 and 1985 ANSI definitions, Federal Information Processing Standard 21–2 and X/Open Portability Guide 3, it supports RM/Cobol, Data General Interactive Cobol, IBM OS/VS Cobol and VS/Cobol II, and Microsoft Cobol.
UTS on the Amdahl mainframe can also be used for developing applications for other environments — the new Cobol generates an intermediate code that is portable to 250 different hardware and software environments.
The new release of UTS is called UTS 2.1 Service Level 4, and is based on Unix System Laboratories Inc's Unix System V.3.1.
It adds protection facilities for improved security; supports Amdahl's new 6390 disk subsystem; undertakes diagnostic testing of peripherals more efficiently; has enhanced tape management for conventional and silo tape subsystems; complies with X400 electronic mail standards; and supports Tuxedo and the Amdahl Unitree Release 1.0 hierarchical file management system from General Atomics Corp.
Amdahl Tuxedo Transaction Manager 4.2, based on the Unix System Laboratories Inc product, offers support for migrating some transaction processing applications to UTS from IBM Corp MVS systems while maintaining links to corporate databases in the MVS/CICS environment.
No prices given for anything.
BOSTON BUSINESS SIGNS UK's ESSENTIAL COMPUTING — SEEKS ICL BLESSING
Boston Business Computing Ltd, the Andover, Massachusetts-based company that brings VMS emulation features to Unix, has signed DEC software house, Essential Computing, Clevedon, Avon, as its master distributor in the UK.
Essential will serve and support the existing half a dozen or so dealers, VARs and system integrators that already offer BBC's software in the UK.
BBC is using the UK as a test case, and says if all goes well, similar deals will be struck on the continent.
Three years ago, 90% of BBC's business was on MS-DOS platforms, 10% on Unix: that's all changed now and the company says MS-DOS now accounts for just 20% of its revenues.
BBC welcomes DEC's latest OpenVMS initiative for its proprietary operating system, because ‘it keeps VMS alive,’(and therefore BBC in business).
However, it's not only VMS-on-Unix software BBC offers: the VMS editor, mail system and backup utilities are also available on proprietary Data General Corp, IBM Corp and PrimOS environments.
SunSoft Inc Solaris and Microsoft Corp Winows/NT will follow too.
As yet it has nothing to offer ICL users who want to retain their VMS look and feels, but BBC president, David Pikcilingis, and director of marketing, Edward Gaudet were in the UK last week to try and convince ICL there is a market for VMS emulation software on the company's Unix-based hardware — and to lend BBC some DRS machines to port to.
Founded in 1983, privately-held BBC has 15 employees, claims some 20,000 users of its solutions worldwide and expects to do around $2.5m this year.
Essential Computing is a two-year-old nest of refugees from Zeta Systems and turned over £500,000 in its first year.
Essential's David Stokes expects the seven employee company to double that effort this year.
DEC REORGANISES IN EUROPE
Digital Equipment Corp has announced the final stage of its 18-month European reorganisation programme.
UK chairman Geoff Shingles explains that the latest measures, to be effective from now, will invert the management triangle, reorganising the European operation by industry, rather than geography —‘one Europe, one company stance’.
CRAY ADOPTS MODCOMP's REAL/IX REAL-TIME UNIX FOR THE Y-MP EL
Meanwhile, Cray Research and AEG AG subsidiary, Modular Computer Systems Inc, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, have signed an agreement under which ModComp will license its Real/IX real-time Unix operating system technology to Cray.
The pact also calls for the firms to collaborate in developing the operating system for use in running real-time applications on the Cray Y-MP EL entry-level supercomputer.
CRAY ENVISAGES UP TO 1,024 ALPHA RISCs IN PARALLEL SYSTEM NEXT YEAR
Cray Research Inc is expected to ship its first massively parallel processor, due in the second half of 1993, in configurations with up to 1,024 Alpha processing nodes, hears Electronic News: indeed ‘several thousand’ processors could be supported at a customer's request.
While the new line is being based on DEC's Alpha RISC, Cray is reportedly developing 22 bipolar gate arrays — to be made by Motorola Inc — using technology from its Y-MP C90 vector supercomputer range for handling interprocessor communications and synchronisation.
Nelson concedes that 1993 ships will be limited to ‘very few large machines’, with volume not expected until 1994.
The Eagan, Minnesota firm still isn't saying whether it will use the Alpha in its second-generation massively parallel system planned for 1995.
PRECISION VISUALS DEBUTS PV-WAVE 4.0
Boulder, Colorado-based Precision Visuals Inc, has introduced version 4.0 of its graphics application, PV-Wave.
Developed for the low-end of the workstation market, PV-Wave is aimed at aerospace, geo-science, medical and financial markets.
Version 4.0 operates as a command language for application developers wishing to integrate or migrate their own sub-routines into the environment, but there is a point and click module available for non-technical users.
The company will also provide Montreal, Canada-based Visual Edge Technology Inc's UIM/X Motif front-end and a beefed-up hypertext-on-line help system.
Tabletools, a new suite of tools accompany PV-Wave, allowing users to hot link into relational database environments and draw off subset tables using SQL-like syntax.
In addition, desktop publishing drivers have been added to PV-Wave to paste graphics into DTP documents.
PV-Wave will also include more complex statistical and mathematical analysis modules, stemming from its joint development project with the UK, Oxford-based Numerical Algorithms Group Ltd.
Like its high-end counterpart, Advanced Visual Systems Inc's  Advanced Visualisation System, PV runs on all major Unix-based workstations — Sun Sparcstation 10 and DEC Alpha ports are expected.
With the graphics visualisation market apparently booming at present, PV says it expects the company to report an increase in profits this year of $19.3m, up $2.5m from the previous year's $16.8m.
Describing the market as ‘unquenchable’, UK managing director of Precision Visuals, Nick Lewis, says the European market is growing proportionately faster than that in the US.
On general release from this month, PV-Wave 4.0 costs £4,000, with the PV-Wave:NAG module starting at £700.
LOCUS TARGETS EUROPE WITH NEW DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING IMAGE
Inglewood, California-based Locus Computing Corp is attempting to raise its European profile, and is re-positioning itself as a specialist distributed computing consultancy, design, development and services outfit.
It is emphasising these offerings rather than the connectivity software products for which it is traditionally known — what it now calls a secondary stream.
According to Carl Chilley, principal business services consultant, the problem with distributed computing has been that it has encouraged the development of technology for technology's sake, without real thought as to how to implement it effectively in a business environment.
This is, of course, where Locus comes in.
It intends to offer customers strategic business planning as well as interoperability strategies for the future.
It reckons it is well placed given its behind-the-scenes work in helping to develop some important interoperability features for Unix: it also developed the Transparent Computing Facility for IBM's AIX and a remote procedure call test and validation suite for the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment.
Locus believes the future of distributed computing lies in transaction processing, saying TP will drive the distributed systems market in the same way that databases drove the client-server market.
Locus has four offices in the US, which have generated most of its income.
The European headquarters are in Hemel Hempstead, Herts, and there is another office in Leeds, but Locus is aiming to broaden its European base by means of acquisitions on the continent: the first is expected by the end of this year.
UNIX LABS PROTECTING ITS SOURCE CODE RIGHTS IN BSDI SUIT
According to Berkeley Systems Design International's Peter Collinson, based at the company's Canterbury, Kent subsidiary in the UK, BSDI ‘are relying on the Berkeley statement’ that there is no AT&T code within BSD Networking Release 2, the basis of its BSD/386 product (UX No 370), and as such they feel they are on solid ground (see front page).
But a USL spokesman said that in order to develop a source free implementation of Unix ‘you would have to find people with no intimate knowledge of the source code.
If people develop a kernel independently, that's fine’.
USL, he said, is increasingly concentrating on ABIs and specifications, he said, but would protect its proprietary rights in all cases’.
Arguments over intellectual property rights and re-writing code have been doing the rounds of the court system for years.
But what really seems to be worrying USL is the commercial use of the code by third parties such as BSDI, which, says USL, may go beyond the channels approved in AT&T contracts with all Universities that Unix source can be used for internal administration and  educational purposes — not commercial use.
‘What's changed’, says Berkeley CSRG's Keith Bostic.
‘We want our software to be widely available to anyone that wants it — a lot of people pick and choose the bits they want’.
Unix vendors, he said ‘have always shipped BSD code — Sun, DEC and the Open Software Foundation have all used Berkeley work’.
But these companies have always taken out a separate source licence with Unix System Labs, something that BSDI does not appear to have done.
USL is worried that if it doesn't act now, such a practice may become more widespread.
It remains to be seen what effect the moves will have on the Open Software Foundation' plans for AT&T-free versions of its Microkernel-based OSF/2 operating system, using a mixture of Berkeley and Carnegie Mellon code.
MEIKO SEEKS US CASH FOR TERAFLOPPER
Meiko World Inc, the holding company of Meiko Scientific in Waltham, Massachusetts, is ‘in serious dialogue’ about making a private share placing in the US, according to chief executive Miles Chesney.
Chesney, also managing director of Meiko Ltd's UK research and development operation in Bristol, says the placing aims to raise a ‘significant’ amount of funds to help finance the project to build a TeraFLOPS-peak massively parallel machine due for shipment next year, for a cost of around $50m.
No further details were given, although as an active participant in the Esprit GP MIMD general purpose supercomputing project, Meiko is known to be closely reflecting the GP MIMD architecture in its own product line.
GOLDMINE RESTRUCTURES — NEW BACKER SOUGHT
The future of newly-formed UK firm, Goldmine Technologies Ltd, Berkhamstead, Hertfordshire, was hanging in the balance last week, as its Swiss parent, Goldmine Technologies AG, Zug, Switzerland, tried to stump up new sources of venture funding for the group (UX No 382).
Sources close to the company say Goldmine backer, Swiss entrepreneur Niels Rasmussen — owner of Nercom Informatik — has pulled the plug on any further investment in the firm.
Goldmine AG boss, Kurt Halm, admitted the company was being  re-structured but expected new sources of venture funding to come forward as we went to press.
Although the re-structuring shouldn't affect the 10-strong Swiss operation, ‘jobs may have to go’ at the UK arm, Halm warned.
He said he didn't know what the UK operation would look like after the restructuring but said most resources would be concentrated in Switzerland: ‘support and marketing is here, so there's not much point in having it in the UK too.’
Goldmine UK, a six person outfit, was set up in April by former Sybase colleagues Malcolm Neill and John Rodford together with Brian Clarke, one of the originals at Pyramid UK.
Goldmine distributes Aspect, the graphical user interface development system from Open Inc, Colorado Springs (UX Nos 315, 358).
Halm said the company had very few paid-up customers for Aspect in Europe, but claimed many organisations have the environment on trial, awaiting a new release, due in September, which will include bit-mapping, enhanced icon support and code generation facilities.
Halm said the company is currently negotiating for European distribution rights to two or three other Unix software products.
DEC TO TAKE UP TO 9.9% OF OLIVETTI
Despite all his dissembling about any new industry alliances over the past few months, Carlo de Benedetti told Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA's annual meeting that he had been negotiating with Digital Equipment Corp, and revealed details of the alliance.
DEC, which has already snapped up Mannesmann Kienzle and Philips Data Systems in Europe, will immediately buy a 4.03% stake in Olivetti from de Benedetti's holding Campagnie Industriali Riunite for about $150m — a whacking 160% premium over the market price.
Over the next 12 months, it will buy another 1.89% in the open market, and gets an option on a further 4% for another $150m from Olivetti's shareholders' syndicate by June 1994; that adds up to 9.92%, which if it paid current prices for the shares it buys in the market would represent a total investment of about $330m.
Terms of the commercial alliance between the two are imprecise, although, as had been expected, Olivetti will use the Alpha RISC in future products.
DEC already buys Olivetti desktop personal computers OEM for resale in Europe, and notebook computers for sale worldwide.
Olivetti also does joint research with DEC and de Benedetti says it is interested in DEC's networking technology.
Olivetti's commercial relationship with the Maynard minimaker stretches back to the 1970s, when the Ivrea company used to buy in DEC PDP-11 minis OEM for use as branch controllers for sale with its banking terminals.
De Benedetti disclosed that Hewlett-Packard Co had also approached Olivetti for a possible alliance, but declined to elaborate.
SGI CLOSES MIPS' MANUFACTURING SITES
Silicon Graphics Inc completed its acquisition of MIPS Computer Systems Inc, paying 0.52 shares for each of MIPS' 26m shares outstanding.
At the $17.125 issue price that Silicon Graphics sold 3.6m new shares shortly before completion, that values MIPS at some $231.5m.
However, SGI expects to make a loss in its second quarter results absorbing a $90m-$110m charge from its acquisition.
MIPS' operations meanwhile, are slowly being dismantled by SGI: US reports suggest that 450 of the 685 jobs at MIPS are to go, although there are plans to redeploy at least 250 of those lost at other SGI sites.
All MIPS product manufacturing operations were reportedly halted at the end of June and are currently being transferred to SGI's own facilities.
All MIPS buildings, except for one in Korea where SGI doesn't have an office, are scheduled to be closed down by August.
…
AS ACE BOARD WINDS DOWN
R.I.P.
It looks like that $50,000-a-seat ACE Executive Advisory Board organised back in January (UX No 370), is headed for the dumpster.
MIPS' ACE liaison officer and vice president of software technology, Larry Weber, said the sixteen companies on the board won't be sent their third-quarter bills until after all the MIPS-SGI merger details are cleaned up and the need for these funds is reassessed.
He suspects the bills may never get sent and that the board will simply become ‘inactive,’ with the members content to let the newly constituted MIPS Technologies plot strategy and direction.
Weber, by the way, isn't making the jump to the newly merged company.
INTEL NEEDS ANOTHER NAME FOR THE ‘80586’
Having failed to asset copyright on the 80386 name and 386 tag, Intel Corp is in a real bind over the P5, and according to Computer Reseller News has decided not to call it the 80586.
It wants vendors to use the P5 code name until the chip is formally announced, and has invited employees to come up with a new name that stresses 80386 and 80486 compatibility — so the RISC 86 suggestion did not get a warm welcome.
TECHNOLOGY HOLDINGS SOLD TO ICL
The news that ICL Plc is to acquire Warrington, Cheshire-based Technology Holdings Plc for a maximum of £40m seems to set the seal on the success of the management buyout team at what used to be the distribution arm of MBS Plc — a business that MBS top management felt was such a drain on its corporate resources that it couldn't wait to let the company go.
Its Open Systems division is a reseller for Digital Equipment Corp, Sun Microsystems Inc and latterly IBM Corp, and added its new parent, ICL, in January, and also has an arrangement with Hewlett-Packard UK Ltd.
Under the agreement, ICL is paying £30m upfront for the company.
ICL will hand its own third party distribution operations over to Technology, which will continue to be run by Derek Lewis and his team.
Adding ICL's business immediately swells annual turnover to somewhere around £250m, putting the company into the number one spot in the UK, ahead of P&P Plc.
UNIX IN EUROPE: SPAIN AND GERMANY FASTEST GROWING MARKETS, SAYS IDC…
IDC's European Unix Expertise Centre, Copenhagen, Denmark, has released figures which show Spain and Germany were the fastest growing markets for Unix systems sales in 1991.
Even recession-hit UK managed two points more than the 15% average European revenue growth rate last year.
Spain managed 35%, Germany 24%, Belgium 19%, UK 17%, Italy 11%, Netherlands 7% and France 6% with Sweden flat at 0%.
The recession, not only affecting the UK of course, has hit hardware sales generally, but it hasn't had a significant impact on the Unix market, because, IDC believes, that in times of a depressed economy and slow investments, information technology purchases tend to move to less expensive, low-end systems, which ‘might mean Unix systems.’
Small scale multi-user systems running Unix was the UK's major growth area last year — ICL and IBM significantly increased their market shares.
Spain's 35% growth has been fuelled by its catching up from a low base, government investment policies, especially in the workstation arena.
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG's share of the German market fell, with Sun, IBM and Unisys Corp all riding a wave.
Belgium's above average growth rate is explained by heavy investment from EEC bodies says IDC.
As a result, one of its primary suppliers, Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA shipped a large number of multi-user systems there.
1991 saw total Unix systems revenue in Europe climb to $6.9bn from $6bn in 1990. 1991's growth of 15% is two points up on 1990's 13% — IDC predicts a mean compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 14% for the next six years, by which time it believes the European market will be worth some $16.3bn.
It expects 1992's growth to decline one point on 1991, forecasts 20% for 1993–95, with 10% for the two years after that.
Contrary to Unix-on-the-desktop sceptics, the fastest growing sector will be the Unix PC marketplace with a revenue CAGR of 28% over the period.
IDC's figure suggest a compound unit growth of 36% for that sector, with the average cost of Unix PC systems dropping from $6,000 in 1991 to $3,800 by 1997.
The Unix workstation market is expected to slow — CAGR 18% in value, CAGR 26% in units.
Average cost of a box will drop from an average of $18,500 last year to $10,500 in 1997.
Sales and unit growth of the small scale multi-user systems market is forecast at 6% over the period, with average cost falling from $38,000 to $36,400 in 1997.
Value of medium scale multi-user systems will reach 10% CAGR — 7% in units — with average cost rising from $216,300 to $268,000.
Unix growth in Germany and Spain will remain above average throughout the period, with Netherlands, Sweden, Norway and Finland below the mark.
INGRES HAS LIONS' SHARE OF WORKSTATION DATABASE MARKET
IDC also reports that ASK's Ingres relational database last year held the largest — 40.8% — share of the European market for databases on Unix workstations.
Oracle weighs in with 24.9%, Sybase 11%, Informix 7.2%, Unify 6.3%, Progress 5.4%, Borland Interbase 3.6% and others amounting to 8%.
Ingres, which contributed 62% to ASK's third quarter revenues, is expected to account for some $243m of ASK's turnover of $430m anticipated for its year to June 30.
Germany has been the jewel of Ingres' crown, with 700 new licences expected to push revenues there up to DM35m from DM27.6m last time around.
Oracle remains the largest database player in the overall European Unix marketplace, according to Gartner Group.
’ ONLY 8% OF UK FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS HAVE OPEN SYSTEMS’SAYS KPMG STUDY
KPMG Peat Marwick's London-based management consultancy operation polled 50 domestic and international banks and building societies in the UK.
Just 8% of  respondents claimed to have already implemented open systems.
15% have plans underway, 10% said they were at the pilot stage and 11% are ‘seriously considering’ it — the other 56% have no open systems plans whatsoever.
 Respondents' hardware ranged from IBM S/x or AS/400, 25.5%; DEC VAX, 15.5%; IBM mainframe, 13.6%; Tandem, 11.8%; Unisys, 10.9%; NCR, 5.5%; Sun, 3.6%; HP, Bull, Olivetti, ICL, Stratus and Wang, 1.8% and others, 2.7%.
Lack of available products, skilled staff and standards appear to be the major obstacles to adopting open systems strategies.
A quarter of  respondents have ‘significant investments’ in more than five different type of hardware, though only 16% see reduced purchasing costs as a benefit of open systems.
Just 17% said they were seriously considering restructuring their IT operations from mainframes to open systems.
IBM GOES TO ULTRA FOR FAST CLUSTER, RS/6000-ES/9000 LINKS
IBM Corp has made no secret that it believes super-fast communications will be essential to the medium-term success of machines like the RS/6000, and the company has turned to one of the pioneers, San Jose, California-based Ultra Network Technologies Inc.
It is to resell Ultra's high speed network connections for both mainframes and the RS/6000.
Ultra also added two new products for the IBM market, the UltraNet RS/6000np network processor, which provides off-board generation of the TCP/IP protocols; and striping of standard Block Multiplexer Channels for enhanced network performance on IBM mainframes.
IBM will resell the two products as part of its Cluster Service Offering, which prepackages RS/6000 workstations, hardware and software from IBM and third-party companies with IBM support services.
The UltraNet RS/6000 Network Processor is claimed to deliver effective application performance in excess of four times that of a standard block multiplexer mainframe channel, and an order of magnitude faster than other RS/6000 network connections such as Ethernet, Token Ring and FDDI — in other words it runs at 1Gbps or over 100Mbytes per second, coming close to matching network bandwidth with computer bandwidth.
Ultra sees the link being used to connect RS/6000s to ES/9000 mainframes for applications so that the workstation can analyse large mainframe-resident data sets, and for clustering RS/6000s.
It also sees it being used to connect RS/6000s to supercomputers and massively parallel processors for pre- or post-processing in seismic analysis, computational fluid dynamics and molecular modelling.
The RS/6000np occupies a single RS/6000 slot and provides full-duplex 250Mbps fibre optic or coaxial cable serial connection to an UltraNet networking hub.
Ships start next month; a single adaptor is $6,500; package pricing for a workgroup of four, including adaptor hardware, software and networking hub, is under $10,000 per workstation.
The other product, Channel Striping or inverse multiplexing, is a software feature now available with Ultra's standard Block Multiplexer Channel network adaptors, which enables users to access and transfer mainframe data over multiple input-output channels in parallel to a TCP/IP network.
The company says that striping and off-host processing of network protocols results in sustained network data rates in excess of 100Mbps, without significant mainframe CPU loading.
The Channel Striping option for the BMCnp is available immediately at $28,800 for one to four channels, and $31,200 for five to eight channels.
HEWLETT-PACKARD PRICES NEW X-TERMINAL TO TWEAK SUN
Hewlett-Packard Co added a low-end Model 19Ga to its HP 700/RX RISC X Window System terminal family for use with its HP Apollo 9000 Series 700 workstations, and added versions of its X server software for Santa Cruz Operation Inc's Open Desktop for iAPX-86-based systems and for IBM Corp's RS/6000 AIX workstations, and cut prices by up to $500 on existing 700/RX stations.
The 19Ga is out now at $4,000 and comes with 4Mb memory and a 19″ 1,280 by 1,024 monitor that displays 256 shades of grey.
It is rated at 86,000 Xstones and is claimed to be $500 cheaper than comparable stations from Network Computing Devices Inc.
Aimed at electronic publishing, software engineering and document imaging applications, it is pitched as a cheaper alternative to Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparcstation IPX — Hewlett says that at $18,480, an HP 9000 Model 705 with two of the new stations gives a three-user configuration that is 20% more powerful at 37% less cost than three IPXs — Sun doesn't go much on X-stations.
The Open Desktop X server software is available now and the RS/6000 software is set for September, at $700 apiece; only one copy is needed per customer site.
INTERACTIVE INFORMATION BECOMES AVALON — TARGETS CLIENT/SERVER
Interactive Information Systems Inc, Tucson, Arizona has upped and changed its name to Avalon Software Inc.
The name change, Avalon says, represents the company's decision to reposition itself in the client/server market.
It also announced CIIM 8.5, the latest version of its flagship client/server manufacturing software for Oracle's Version 7 relational database management system.
Running on all major Unix platforms as well as DEC VAXes, it will begin to ship on August 15 on Oracle version 6.0.
Oracle version 7 will follow.
Prices range from $25,000 up.
NT AVAILABILITY SLIPS TO 1993
Microsoft Corp has now confirmed that general availability of NT has slipped into 1993 — January or February, it says.
But those dates in turn depend on manufacturing starting in December, which is still only a ‘target.’
The NT betas going to software developers starting this week will lack full implementation of the system's networking features plus support for Unix, MS-DOS and Windows applications.
Corporate customers are supposed to get betas in October.
We trust Univel Inc and SunSoft Inc will play the hand dealt.
ADVANCED VISUAL ATTEMPTING TO SHRUG OFF THE PAST WITH AVS 4.0
Advanced Visual Sytems Inc, the Waltham, Massachusetts-based spin-out from now defunct Stardent Computer Systems Inc, is attempting to put the past behind it and do its own thing with former parent's flagship graphics software environment, the Application Visualisation System.
Stardent established AVS Inc in 1991 to muster some extra cash for its crumbling empire — the software, an environment for viewing complex graphics data has always faired reasonably well in the scientific and technical community.
Now a separate concern, privately-held AVS survived the eventual crash of its parent and is determined to make its mark as a standalone software house.
The Stardent factor, however, is never far behind it.
For a start, 80% of its staff come from the former graphics system builder, which was itself born of a marriage made in hell between bitter rivals Ardent Computer Inc and Stellar Computer Corp back in 1989.
Rights to Stardent's Intel Corp 80860 RISC-based Vistra desktop were snapped up by Oki Electric Industry Co for its own use — an effort which subsequently bit the dust (UX No 384).
Meanwhile Kubota Corp — majority shareholder in Stardent and now a 30% stakeholder in AVS Inc — is left with Stardent's MIPS R3000-based Titan series of high-end graphics workstations.
AVS supports the remaining Stardent/AVS installations, but admits it isn't making much money there.
With some 2,000 licencees worldwide it reckons Stardent/AVS installations account for no more than 10% of its base — too few to make it worthwhile porting future versions of AVS onto old Stardent kit.
‘If not now, then by next week, we won't be selling a single Stardent licence,’ says AVS' vice president of marketing, Ian Reid, who wants to migrate AVS to as many non-Stardent platforms platforms as possible.
The latest — version 4.0 — of AVS is now available, and upgrades for existing Hewlett-Packard Co, IBM RS/6000, Sun Microsystems Inc and Silicon Graphics Inc users are currently being completed.
The company has an existing OEM agreement with DEC, which offers AVS on its Ultrix systems — AVS is confident of pinning down an Alpha RISC port for its solution too.
It also claims to have secured a spot for AVS on Sun's superscalar Sparcstation 10 workstations.
Version 4.0 includes a generator module, which functions as an application definition framework and allows developers to integrate their own Fortran or C sub-routines into the package.
There's also a new data interface, data input facility and dataviewer, along with a real-time animator module.
AVS version 4.0 is priced at $7,500 for a single user licence — version 5, promised to have more multi-user facilities, follows next spring.
AVS is courting independent software vendors and resellers across Europe for a push through third party  channels .
AVS's European operation, based in Staines, Middlesex, is fronted by Peter Collins.
The company claims an estimated 150 of its 2,000 installations are in the UK.
KUBOTA DELAYS GRAPHICS SUBSYSTEM
Santa Clara, California-based Kubota Pacific Inc, the US subsidiary of Japan's Kubota Computer Corp, has delayed the release of its plug-in graphics subsystem for the MIPS Computer Systems Inc R3000 RISC-based Titan 1.0 it sells, and the DEC Alpha-based Titan 2.0 machine which it is readying.
Due to have been launched at this month's Siggraph show in San Francisco, Kubota attributes the delay to the ‘over-optimistic attitude of management,’ and a too-tight timescale.
However, Kubota promises to demonstrate what it has of the subsystem at a series of private viewings during the show.
Vice president of marketing and sales, Greg Hopwood, says ‘we'll be showing whatever the engineers have ready.
Whether it's circuit boards or diagnostic imaging, there will be something on show.’
The graphics subsystem is built around custom chips and plugs into the TurboChannel of the host processor: it's intended for the Alpha-based Titan 2.0 — a multi-processor graphics workstation — but it will also run on the MIPS-based Titan 1.0.
Kubota has at least half a dozen Alpha chips in the labs, but says it still has a long way to go before there is sufficient software support to bring out the Titan 2.0.
The delayed Subsystem is now scheduled to be generally available in the first quarter of 1993.
MICROSOFT PAYS IBM IN DIVORCE SETTLEMENT
Microsoft Corp is expected to pay IBM Corp between $10m and $35m in settlement of the disagreement over operating system software royalties.
The two companies also reached terms on the royalties IBM must pay Microsoft for OS/2, but refused to disclose details.
The settlement unravels the contract signed between the two in 1990 on joint development of OS/2.
Under the agreement, Microsoft will continue to provide IBM source code for versions of Windows released before September 1993, and source code in development at that date.
IBM will give Microsoft source code for versions of OS/2 up to that date.
Both companies are licensed to use this source code in their products for as long as they choose.
Agreed royalties will be paid for the use of each others' code for an agreed period of time.
After September 1993, IBM and Microsoft will not exchange any newly-developed source code.
Microsoft will license the Windows NT product to IBM under standard hardware manufacturer terms, at IBM's option, for use on IBM systems.
Microsoft claims that it will be ‘very, very difficult for IBM to maintain compatibility with Windows after September 1993’ under the agreement, but IBM disputes that inference.
Microsoft will continue to get royalties from IBM on Windows code for five years after September 1993.
Microsoft reckons it has sold 14m copies of the two releases of Windows 3; IBM claims over 700,000 copies of OS/2 2.0.
Meanwhile, analysts are wondering how IBM Corp hopes to make money out of OS/2.
The royalty it must pay Microsoft is generally put at $15 to $20 per copy, and all the blank disks needed to make each copy of the thing, plus printing and packaging cost about $26, which does not leave much for distribution from the $49 it charges Windows users, $99 for MS-DOS users and $139 for those having neither.
HYPERDESK UNLEASHES OBJECT SYSTEM
Westborough, Massachusetts-based Hyperdesk Corp, has now begun shipping its object-oriented Distributed Object Management System — DOMS — which is compliant with the Object Management Group's Object Request Broker.
Hyperdesk says DOMS will allow developers to build, integrate and migrate applications across Unix, Windows and NT environments.
Its first European distributor is UK, Maidenhead-based Protek Ltd — others will be named in the following weeks.
DOMS is bundled with a choice of either Object Design Inc's ObjectStore object database, or the Informix relational database.
Prices start at £1,600 for the Informix option or £2,400 with ObjectStore.
C++ ROUNDUP
Centreline Software Inc's Object Center C++ has topped a new IDC survey: it holds a 57% share of the C++ market according to the research group, ahead of SmallTalk and Eiffel.
IDC says 8% of the corporate sector is now using C++ in some form, a further 20% plan to purchase it whilst 33% are in the evaluation stages.
IDC estimates 57% of professional software developers are already using C++, 14% plan to purchase and 22% plan to evaluate.
Mountain View, California-based ParcPlace Systems Inc has started to ship its interface development tools for C++ applications on Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparcstations under Motif and Open Look: ObjectKit/C++ is priced at $1,000 and its ObjectBuilder/C++ interface builder costs $3,000.
Santa Clara, California-based, Quest Windows Corp has debuted the latest version 3.0.1 of Quest ObjectViews, its object-oriented C++ user interface development tool for X-Windows, supporting OSF/Motif and Open Look: ships begin in the third quarter, prices start at $2,500 per seat.
Instrumatic UK Ltd, Marlow, Buckinghamshire, has introduced TauMetric Inc's C++ compiler and debugger in the UK: TauMetric acquired the the stuff following its acquisition of Oregon Software last November — prices go from £1,200 on Sun Sparcstations.
Lexington, Massachusetts-based Oasys Inc says its Cross 680x0 tool kit will now support Silicon Graphics Inc's RISC-based IRIS workstations: the tool kit includes the Green Hills C++, C, Fortran and Pascal compilers and Oasys's 680x0 cross assembler/linker.
Framingham, Massachusetts-based Liant Software Corp has released version 2.0 of its object-oriented C++/Views class library for Microsoft Windows, OS/2 Presentation Manager and OSF/Motif environments: it features independent compilers compatible with all C++-based compilers.
The Motif version is scheduled for release in July and costs $1,500, the OS/2-Presentation Manager edition is priced at $1,000 whilst a Windows copy comes in at $500.
SEQUENT GEARS UP FOR PC SUPERSERVER PUSH WITH NT
Sequent Computer Corp confirmed last week reports that it is to move into the multi-processor PC ‘superserver’ business, basing its software strategy around Microsoft Corp's forthcoming NT operating system (UX No 390).
The Beaverton, Oregon-based company has been working over the last few months to staff up a new business unit to concentrate on low-end multi-processors, an area it feels offers great potential.
Sequent has already dipped its toe into the PC LAN database and application server space with its parallel implementation of Novell Inc's Portable NetWare (UX No 356, 378), something it says is ‘very complimentary’ to the new effort.
Sequent won't currently go into details over products, but says it will be ‘leveraging its technology and knowhow’ gained from its line of high-end Intel-based multi-processor Symmetry systems, aimed at corporate users looking to downsize their mainframes.
NT supports symmetric multi-processing, and uses the same parallel streams communication architecture model as Sequent.
Corollary Inc, Irvine, California, is another Unix stalwart recently attracted by the lure of volume shipments through NT (No 389).
MINIGRAMS
Hewlett-Packard Co is not a company to rush into something just because it is the fashion, but with ICL Plc firmly in the Sparc camp, Groupe Bull SA committed to IBM Corp's Power RISC and Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA's allegiance to the Alpha RISC bought dearly by Digital Equipment Corp — with Hewlett an unsuccessful contender in both the last two cases, the company may well be beginning to think that persuading Siemens-Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG of the virtues of the Precision Architecture RISC is a high priority if it is to be seen to have equal standing with its three closest rivals in Europe.
Following the painful and not yet complete absorption of Nixdorf, Siemens' product line is a mishmash of iAPX-86, 68000 family and MIPS Computer Systems Inc R-series processors, and Siemens fabricates the R-series, but the company also had a long-standing OEM relationship with Apollo Computer Inc that continued after that company was acquired by Hewlett-Packard.
Siemens is keen to add more logic devices to its semiconductor line, and Hewlett has few licensees fabricating Precision Architecture — and several US chipmakers fabricate more than one RISC family.
Having just mopped up the minority in Siemens-Nixdorf, would Siemens be ready to admit a new investor into the company?
Well the money would be very welcome at a company that is again finding that computers are a gurgling cash drain, and a single outside investor is very different matter to a host of fractious small shareholders and institutional investors.
Before doing any deal, Hewlett-Packard would have to weigh whether it would gain more from what would effectively be privileged access to Siemens' customers than it would lose in self-impact on its already strong position in western Germany.
Larry Dooling, former president of Unix System Labs Inc, managed to withstand retirement for only six months: he's just become chief operating officer at the five-year-old $10m-a-year voice systems company Verbex in Edison, New Jersey.
Naturally it has some of its stuff running on Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcs and Unix SVR4 systems and will be doing more.
Retix Inc is hosting an OSI Forum in conjunction with the CCTA at The Royal Aeronautical Society, London on July 8th: the agenda includes messaging, GOSIP guidelines, transaction processing, migration strategies and OSI installation.
Sequoia Systems Inc fault-tolerant users have banded together and formed SUG/GEST the Sequioa User Group/Group Exchange of Sequoia Topics: it'll focus on sharing third-party technologies as well as vetting Sequoia products and future technologies.
Next Computer Inc, which has been through a tidy sum already, has gotten further financing: this time a $55m credit line from Canon Inc and another $10m from Steve Jobs himself — both are former investors already.
If and when the company goes public, any money borrowed under these credit lines will convert to equity at the IPO valuation without any premium or discount.
The company says it is now fully funded.
And Next, which claims to have captured 20% of the commercial workstation market, about half its estimate of Sun's share, has named Bernard Woebker its vice president of Europe, stationed in Munich.
Woebker, most recently Pyramid's senior vice president for Europe, the Middle East and Africa: Pyramid UK's Martin Lambert is to fill Woebker's shoes.
X/Open Co Ltd has commissioned market research firm Dataquest to undertake an Open Systems survey on its behalf, as part of its Xtra user requirements programme.
The study will focus on the supply side of the industry to identify the progress being made towards delivering products that meet users' needs and will investigate how vendors intend to respond to users aspirations in interoperability, data management, on-line transaction processing and network and system management.
Xtra meets will be held in Dusseldorf, Germany,(24–26 November) and in Washington, DC, USA (30 November-2 December).
The latest recruit to X/Open's now 44-strong User Council is the UK's National Health Service Information Management Centre.
The government-backed Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI), in Taiwan is reportedly thinking about taking a second crack at a locally designed Sparc processor: it supposedly came up with 25MHz three-chip silicon in the spring, but was shooting for 50MHz.
Electronic Engineering Times also says ITRI is working on a separate multi-chip module that would probably contain a 24MHz CPU, memory management unit, floating-point unit and cache.
The voltage on the power panel which the Object Management Group has planned for its Object World expo later this month just went up a few notches: Lotus' John Landry couldn't make it so they got Sun's Bill Joy as a  substitute .
OMG will bring him together with rivals Steve Jobs of Next, Joe Guglielmi of Taligent, Jim Allchin of Microsoft and Philippe Kahn of Borland.
OSF's security provider, SecureWare Inc, is bankrolling a start-up and sharing its president with it: Advanced Software Engineering Technologies or ASET Inc is doing a user interface management system dubbed Agora.
If Unisys Corp's iAPX-86-with-everything Unix strategy succeeds in building a substantial customer base, particularly among the company's long-standing mainframe customers, the strategists at AT&T Co, whose NCR Corp is galloping down the same track and has a more extensive Intel Corp-based product line, will have to start weighing up whether a bid for Unisys could be made to make sense: AT&T would likely want a recommended offer, coupled with arrangements for a management buyout of at least one of the conflicting mainframe lines.
Sun Sparc-based machines have 57% of the European RISC-based workstation market according to IDC: MIPS R-series is in second place with 19%, IBM Corp's Power is third with 10% and HP's PA fourth with 8% — its low showing reflecting the fact that most of its installed base of workstations are still based on the 68000 line.
Visix Software Inc has a new cross-platform application development environment, Galaxy, up its sleeve.
Fearful of the competition listening-in, a tight-lipped Visix wasn't giving much away, but we understand Galaxy toolkits will allow users to build applications that will be portable across Unix, NT, OS/2, Windows, Macintosh and MS-DOS.
The Zenith Data Systems personal computer subsidiary of Groupe Bull SA has officially announced what everybody that cared already knew: it's out of ACE.
Although stateside gossip recently had it that Hitachi Ltd would soon be ready with Unix on its mainframes (UX No 384), latest rumours suggest that BASF's Comparex Informationssysteme GmbH — a European OEM for Hitachi Data Systems' IBM-compatible mainframes — is tired of waiting, and may be close to signing a deal with IBM for its already proven AIX/ESA 2.1 mainframe version of Unix, which is an implementation of OSF/1.
SunSoft UK has poached Janet Davies from Madge Networks to replace Tony Westray: Davies was formerly with Informix and AT&T's Unix operation.
There is a vogue in the UK for all things Magritte at the moment — the Belgian's work is currently the subject of an exhibition at London's Hayward gallery — this is all we have to say: ceci | n'est pas une pipe.