

DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP WORKING ON 1GHz ALPHA CHIP
DEC's ten-year-old Palo Alto, California-based Western Research Lab is trying to design a single BiCMOS chip that will run at 1000MHz, 1GHz, according to the latest Microprocessor Report.
The project, dubbed BIPS-1, will implement the Alpha RISC architecture and is expected to produce testable silicon before the end of next year.
The part is meant to integrate an integer unit, a floating point unit and two levels of cache — the first, 8Kb, the second 32Kb — on a hefty 6m transistor die, the first reported attempt at putting two cache levels on a single chip.
The part is specified to dissipate a hot 175 watts at 4.5 volts so Western Research Labs engineers are rigging a little water cooling system sealed inside a low-pressure cylinder.
The Microprocessor Report notes that ‘the coffee-warming 30 Watts of the current 21064 Alpha chip pales in comparison to the bacon-sizzling BIPS-1.’
DEC has never used a Western Research Labs-designed computer architecture, although the unit was originally set up to find ways of building the fastest possible computers.
SILICON GRAPHICS LAUNCHES DESKTOP DEVELOPMENT BOX
Silicon Graphics Inc, Mountain View, California, will this week unveil the Iris Indigo DevStation, calling it the industry's first desktop especially configured for software developers.
An entry-level MIPS R4000-based Indigo — see page three — will be fitted out with the Iris Development Option, a package of libraries and tools such as an ANSI C compiler, the Motif tool kit, GL, Display Postscript and X-Windows libraries and Unix debugging and profiling tools, and CASEVision/Workshop, a development environment.
Available in September and priced from $12,000, the DevStation will come with 16Mb main memory, 16-inch colour monitor, 432Mb drive, Irix 4.0.1, Iris ShowCase 2.0 presentation package and the WorkSpace GUI.
SGI will also announce CodeVision, a fully integrated visual software development environment.
Reportedly built from the ground up, it includes a static analyser, debugger and performance analyser based on an object-oriented architecture.
It is designed to facilitate development of multiprocessing and Iris GL applications.
It becomes available in three months priced with media and manuals at $1,500 and with right-to-use licences at $1,400.
Volume pricing is also available.
SGI also has a new version of its object-oriented ImageVision Library 2.0 API for image creation, processing and display which supports parallel processing techniques and features multi-threading mechanisms for increased performance and reduced latency.
It becomes available in the fourth quarter at $500 a licence.
The company is also adding ClearCase and Track to its CASEVision family of software products.
ClearCase is a $3,000-per-licence large-scale or long-term software configuration management and version control system based on Atria Software's product and Tracker is a process tracking system under Motif.
Both are available immediately and can be purchased together for $3,750.
New R4000-based Indigoes, see page three.
INFORMIX FOUNDER LAUNCHES PROACTIVE SOFTWARE
Roger Sippl's latest venture is now official: ProActive Software Inc has been created to develop and market what it calls a new generation of enterprise-wide customer information resource management systems.
The venture, originally styled Information Workbench and based in Mountain View, California, is being funded by Sippl, who provided the seed capital, and venture capitalist Mohr Davidow Ventures, which has kicked in $1.5m.
ProActive's products were developed in collaboration with Mohr general partner, William Davidow.
Sippl, who founded and still chairs Informix Software, will serve on the ProActive board.
Sippl henchman Steven Goldsworthy, former corporate vice president of product development at Informix, is president and chief executive officer, responsible for product strategy.
The company is shy of discussing its product in any detail before its formal unveiling in the next few weeks.
Aimed at firms that need to support technical products, the system is meant to manage all the data generated by a corporation across multiple departments about customers, products and how and why those products are used.
The application modules, geared for technical support, sales and marketing, quality assurance and engineering, are targeted to replace simple call and bug tracking systems.
The system, thought to be called Support Advantage, was developed in C++, uses a client/server architecture and CASE-based analysis.
Reportedly it will run initially on Hewlett-Packard Co and Sun Microsystems Inc hardware and on Microsoft Corp Windows or X-Windows or Motif clients and uses Informix, Sybase and Oracle as databases.
The company is said to be ready to deliver now.
INDUSTRY LINES UP FOR COVIA COMMUNICATIONS INTEGRATOR
The Open Software Foundation is reportedly courting transaction processing and network developer Covia Technologies Inc, based in Rosemont, Illinois.
OSF is thought to want Covia's pioneering transport independent, networked transaction processing software, called the Communications Integrator (CI), which runs across disparate hardware platforms and network architectures.
OSF would like to include CI in its DCE and DME environments.
Covia says it is hesitant about joining OSF, although ‘favourable’ negotiations are continuing.
Reports from the US suggest that Covia's software will also be snapped up by Sun Microsystems Inc, which could OEM CI as an add-on to its Open Networking Computing environment.
Covia, owned by a consortium of airlines including major shareholders United Airlines and British Airways, pioneered the technology to port transaction processing airline reservation applications across different platforms and networks.
Covia has existing agreements with IBM, Tandem Computers Inc, DEC, NCR Corp and Unisys Corp for CI — those ports are currently in beta test, with NCR's likely to be first out of the gate.
Sun was expected to line up alongside the rest of the takers, but didn't complete negotiations in time.
The attraction of CI is its power to talk across networking environments and incompatible platforms, without recompiling applications or protocols.
CI lies under the application itself, but above the network protocol.
It isolates the application at an API level and masks it from routing information, the operating system and network protocols.
CI interfaces the two layers, communicates to the underlying network protocols and drops the application into the network, Covia claims.
CI is priced at $750,000, with additional maintenance costs of $100,000 per platform.
KEN OLSEN, JOHN YOUNG TO RETIRE
After 35 years as president of the company he founded back in 1957, Ken Olsen will give up the reins at Digital Equipment Corp this October, aged 66.
DEC's number two in command, vice president of manufacturing and logistics, Robert Palmer is to take over.
And Lew Platt, 51, is to be the next president and chief executive officer of Hewlett-Packard Co following John Young's retirement on October 31.
He will be the third person to hold the job at the 53-year-old company, reportedly selected after a two-year process.
HP's chief operating officer, executive vice president Dean Morton, will be retiring at the same time.
Young, who turned 60 earlier this year, is leaving under the company's Officer Early Retirement Programme after 14 years as HP's chief executive.
Platt, a 26-year HP veteran, is currently executive vice president and head of the the firm's Computer Systems Organisation.
Most of his current responsibilities will fall to HP vice president Wim Roelandts, general manager of the Networked Systems Group.
OBJECT WORLD ‘92 AND OBJECT EXPO EUROPE
Sophie Goodchild
Object World ‘92 kicks off this week at the Moscone Centre in San Francisco, California — some used last week's London show Object Expo Europe, as a dress rehearsal for the event.
At Object World, NeXT Computer Inc is expected to announce its membership of the Object Management Group.
IBM, already a member, is to announce its support of OMG's Common Object Request Broker Architecture, CORBA.
It intends to do this by modifying the object interface definition language in its System Object Model (SOM) for OS/2 2.0 to support CORBA's interface definition language.
SOM will also support OMG's object model, the idea being that over time both OS/2 and AIX environments will comply with OMG standards.
DEC's commercial push
Meanwhile, Digital Equipment Corp is shifting its object-oriented software development into the commercial sphere by announcing object-oriented enhancements to its Cohesion software strategy.
A new version 2.0 of DECdesign, the graphic and analysis design tool will now run on its Ultrix systems and includes support for the Ptech object-oriented methodology and C++ code generator from Associative Design Technology Inc.
Version 2 now also supports the Coad/Yourdon methodology and the enhanced data modelling Yourdon, Gane and Sarson, and Merise techniques.
Version 2.0 will be available late summer on VAX OpenVMS and RISC/Ultrix platforms.
The Objectivity/DB database from Objectivity Inc, Menlo Park, California, which DEC has offered for a year, will be marketed as DEC Object/DB from September, also under Open VMS and RISC/Ultrix.
It comes with three support options: for application developers, end-users and system administrators.
DEC will announce a further release of DEC C++ in October which adds support for DEC OSF/1 as well as Open VMS and RISC/Ultrix: an Alpha port is a possibility, the company says.
It will include C++ exception handling, a name ‘demangler’ and support for shared libraries on DEC OSF/1.
DEC is also expanding its Rdb Solutions VendorProgram (RSVP) to include object-oriented tools, applications and services.
RSVP currently provides applications and services for DEC's Rdb/Open VMS database and related tools.
DEC has also set up the Object Database Assessment Team to provide consultancy to customers deciding between an object database or a traditional approach for an application.
On the standards side, DEC has announced that it is working with International Software Systems Inc (ISSI), Austin, Texas on an architectural definition and implementation plan for the European Computer Manufacturers  Association (ECMA) Portable Common Tool Environment (PCTE) standard.
PCTE was developed by the Commission of the European Communities in 1983, has been implemented across Europe and is now filtering through to the US.
DEC says its aim is to implement ECMA with its own products as well as merging US and European standards.
Semaphore, based in Andover, Massachusetts, is previewing a CASE tool from Atriom Inc, Waltham, Massachusetts called Atriom Build.
It allows users to generate graphic models composed of object oriented parts and use these to generate C++ code.
Atriom Browse analyses existing C++ code and extracts object-oriented features which can be loaded into a repository, which is used to build extra features into the data model as defined by the code.
Atriom Build will be available on Sun Sparc platforms in the fourth quarter, no prices given.
La Mesa, California-based Suite Software Inc has added a library of object classes to its distributed object management environment, SuiteDome.
The library provides operating system services for all SuiteDome supported platforms including Nextstep, Sun Sparc, IBM RS/6000, HP 9000 and DEC VAX/VMS.
Suite Software says its product insulates the developer from disparities in hardware, operating systems and networks through its SuiteDome Architecture Encapsulation Layer.
This includes object classes providing basic non-specific operating system services.
Ships begin at the end of August, prices start at $375 for desktop systems.
ILOG SA, Cedex, France, has a a C++ version of its constraint-based programming tool Pecos.
The company claims it has the same functionality as Pecos version 1.1, written in its version of Lisp.
Constraint-based programming is an artificial intelligence technique which finds the optimum way to allocate means and resources.
Due by year-end, Pecos C++ costs £7,000 on Unix workstations.
Expersoft Corporation, San Diego, California, is to launch XShell, a portfolio of module building toolkits and an object-oriented, distributed computing integration framework.
The product includes a range of toolkits: XRule, XGenetic and XFuzzy.
These support problem solving techniques such as rule-based systems, genetic optimisation and fuzzy logic.
Developers can build complex distributed software systems that will migrate to new technologies without re-engineering, according to the company.
Xshell supports most Unix platforms and X-Windows under Motif.
No prices given.
Lexington, Massachusetts-based Oasys Inc will be showing-off its Native Sparc Tools.
Integrated with Sun's native assembler/linker, the software development kit for Sparc includes version 1.8.6 of the Green Hills Compilers (C, C++, Pascal and Fortran) and the multi-language, X Windows-based multi-debugger.
The initiative was prompted by Sun's recent decision to unbundle its own compiler, the company claims.
The product currently supports Solaris 1.0 with 2.0 support under development.
The tools will ship in September 1992, no prices given.
Itasca Systems Inc, Minneapolis, Minnesota, is releasing version 2.1 of its Itasca distributed Object Database Management System.
It includes a graphical user interface called the Itasca Active Data Editor (ADE), which, the company claims, makes it easy for users to create, edit and browse data.
Itasca ADE is Motif compliant and can access data stored by C, C++ or Lisp programmes.
The company has added support for DEC and Silicon Graphics workstations along with Sun Sparc and IBM's RS/6000 — it's due in August.
Getting geared up for Microsoft's Windows NT, Inmark Development Mountain View, California, has announced an NT version of its zApp C++ Application Framework.
This consists of a library of C++ classes providing an object-oriented environment to create applications.
The company claims zApp for Windows NT simplifies the creation of applications by encapsulating the Windows NT application programming interface into C++ objects.
zApp is compatible with the Microsoft C/C++ compiler provided with the Windows NT software development kit.
zApp for Unix and X-Windows under Motif will be released later this year.
Support for other compilers will be added as they become available.
Source versions of zApp for Windows NT is priced at $400.
New York-based Popkin Software and Systems Inc says its System Architect CASE tool will be available for Sun, HP, IBM and DEC Unix platforms in December.
The product is focused on system modelling and design.
It consists of a set of diagraming tools and an integrated project encyclopedia facility.
The product is distributed in the UK by Real Techniques and methods, based in Royal Lemington Spa, Warwickshire.
No prices given.
Persistence Software Inc, based in San Mateo, California, will be releasing its Persistence 1.0 C++ application development tools in beta in September with commercial ships due for October.
Aimed at Oracle and Sybase users moving to C++, the Unix-based product adds object oriented extensions to the two databases.
It consists of a Database Interface Generator (DIG), and a Runtime Object Management System (ROMS).
ROMS uses object caching to speed up performance while the DIG automates the development of data access methods, enabling a developer to generate code in a day, the company claims.
An initial version will support Sun platforms and the Oracle and Sybase databases — other platforms and databases will follow later this year.
Object-oriented pioneer Symbolics Inc is moving its Genera development on to standard Unix platforms with the introduction of NXP1000.
The new product consists of the software environment and a hardware peripheral that fits into networked Unix environments and is designed to run on almost any Unix workstation or X-terminal, the company claims.
Available in September for $18,500, the NXP1000 includes the Symbolic 40-bit tagged Ivory architecture, 20Mb ECC memory, 500Mb disk and Genera 8.2 or later.
A floating point accelerator, larger disk and memory expansion are options.
STRATUS EXTENDS XA/R 80860 LINE UP, DOWN WITH NINE NEW MODELS
Stratus Computer Inc has duly expanded its XA/R line of Intel Corp 80860 RISC-based Continuous Processing Systems with nine new models, claiming about 2.5 times the performance of comparably-priced members of the 68000 family-based XA2000 Series (UX No 391).
The new XA/R line includes the entry-point XA/R Series Models 5 and 10, mid-range Models 25, 35, and 45, and high-end Models 305, 310, 320 and 330.
The Models 310, 320, and 330 provide symmetric multi-processing with two, four, and six logical central processing units respectively.
The XA/R Series Model 300, introduced last October, and the Model 305 can be field upgraded from fault-tolerant uniprocessors to symmetric multi-processors in the same cabinet.
For the telecommunications market, Stratus introduced telephone exchange packaging for all models of the XA/R Series, engineered for the ‘rigorous processing environments of telephone company central offices’.
Applications from the XA2000 only need to be recompiled to run on the new XA/R models, which run both FTX fault-tolerant Unix and the proprietary VOS.
Stratus claims to be the first fault-tolerant system vendor to ship the Unix System V.4 multiprocessing operating system.
Models 5 and 25 are shipping now in volume.
The 305, 310 and 320 will ship this quarter and the 10, 35, 45 and 330 in the fourth quarter.
Prices go from $124,000 — £106,000 for an entry Model 5 to $1.039m — £1,011,000m — for the symmetric 330.
Stratus expects its OEM deal with IBM to continue to generate around 15% of its  reveunes , but wants to grow ICL plc sales of its machines into the commercial sector.
Stratus currently offers Unix System Labs Inc's Tuxedo transaction processing monitor, but says its preferred solution is Transarc Corp's Encina, which will be offered as an alternative — Encina is in beta-testing now.
Having plumped for Hewlett-Packard Co's PA RISC over the Intel i860 —‘because of price/performance’— for its next generation of systems, Stratus plans no further computers using the i860 at this time, but says that depends to some extent on whether Intel manages another iteration of its RISC.
MICROSOFT, APPLE BACK EACH OTHER 's TECHNOLOGIES
The promised agreement between Apple Computer Inc and Microsoft Corp calls for the two to work together on future technologies to help ensure a smooth and long-term evolution for customers of Microsoft applications for the Apple Macintosh — Microsoft has committed to doing versions of its Macintosh applications for the PowerPC RISC.
Apple will support Microsoft's Open Database Connectivity applications programming interface implementation of the SQL Access Group call-level interface specification as a standard facility of the Macintosh Data Access Manager, giving compliant applications access to server databases through one set of calls.
Microsoft and Apple have also endorsed the combination of Open Database and Apple Data Access Language, via Apple's Data Access Manager: Apple intends to build, distribute and support a Macintosh ODBC/DAL client that will translate Open Database calls and information into Data Access Language functions and requests and enable Open Database applications to access DAL servers, and will develop an ODBC/DAL client for Windows, which Microsoft is to distribute and support.
Microsoft will support QuickDraw GX in future versions of its Mac applications and will offer Foxbase+ for the Macintosh.
There are also new releases of Microsoft Works, 3.0; Project 3.0; and Mail 3.1.
SILICON GRAPHICS LAUNCHES R4000-BASED INDIGOES — NO MENTION OF ACE…
Mountain View-based Silicon Graphics Inc has fulfilled its promise to bring out a new family of Iris Indigo RISC personal computers based on the 50MHz R4000SC RISC from its MIPS Technology subsidiary.
The R4000, claimed to run at 70 SPECmarks, 85 MIPS and 16 MFLOPS, includes tightly integrated support for 1Mb secondary cache, a key element in the performance of the machine.
Silicon Graphics claims a near 300% increase in performance over the original R3000A-based family of Iris Indigoes.
The firm points to the Khornerstone benchmark which measures system balance by testing disk input-output, floating point and processor-intensive tasks.
According to the Workstation Labs independent test shop, the Iris Indigo R3000A system has the highest Khornerstone per dollar rating of any competing system and the Indigo R4000 is expected to improve upon this.
The super-pipelined 64-bit R4000 enables up to two instructions to be issued per clock.
The first five models are the R4000 Iris Indigo Entry at $12,500 — £10,340, the XS24 at $20,000 — £16,540; the Indigo Server at $11,400 — £9,240; the Indigo XS at $16,500 — £13,650 and the Indigo Elan at $32,000 — £26,470.
Prices include 16Mb memory, colour monitor, keyboard, mouse, 16-bit audio subsystem and bundled tools currently on the Iris Indigo — Showcase, Explorer, media mosaic tools and the Irix implementation of Unix.
All Iris Indigo R4000 configurations will ship in volume in September and the R4000 CPU is available as an upgrade to existing Iris Indigo customers for $9,000.
The R3000s have also been reduced, with the R3000 Indigo Entry with 16Mb cut to $8,000 and the Indigo XS cut with 16Mb cut to $11,500 — wait to buy until August 1 to get the new prices.
There is a new 10Mbyte-per-second 1Gb disk drive to give a maximum internal storage of 3Gb.
Fast SCSI II is now standard in all Iris Indigo systems and memory prices have been reduced by up to 36% too.
There was no mention of ACE at the launch, the machines are ACE-compatible but without EISA bus and other bells and whistles are not ACE-compliant.
‘ACE?
Don't mention the war,’ was SGI's reply when the subject was broached.
…
RE-ORGANISES AFTER SWALLOWING MIPS…
And now SGI's acquisition of MIPS is complete, the company is re-organising internally to accommodate the changes.
The former personal systems and advanced systems divisions have been replaced by seven others, including a volume products division headed up by Tom Furlong, who hails from MIPS, a visual computing division, being run by Mike Ramsey of SGI, a client/server group and an OEM and business systems division.
The latter will be handling all the MIPS' systems business plus things like Microsoft NT.
SGI says its Irix V.4 operating system, and the MIPS Risc/OS flavour of Unix SVR4 will be merged over the next six to eight months: it expects to have R4000MP multi-processing boxes with up to eight processors out of the door by the end of the year.
…
TAKES 15% OF TATA ELXSI IN INDIA
Although former minisupercomputer maker Elxsi Corp disappeared from radar screens a year or three back, its Tata Elxsi Ltd former joint venture with the giant Indian conglomerate J R Tata Sons & Co Pte Ltd of Bombay is still in  existence , and has just announced a joint venture with Mountain View, California-based Silicon Graphics Inc to expand their collaboration for the Indian market.
Silicon Graphics will buy a 15% equity stake in Tata Elxsi on undisclosed terms and will license it to manufacture more of its RISC-based servers and graphics workstations in India.
Tata Elxsi, based in the electronics boom town of Bangalore, Karnataka, is already manufacturing compute servers using technology from Silicon Graphics.
IXI RUNS DEC TO GROUND, SETS UP EUROPEAN UNIT…
After months of pursuing its quarry, it looks like IXI Ltd has finally nailed down the OEM agreement with DEC for its X.desktop manager that has been long in the making.
Terms haven't been finalised, but an an announcement is due in a couple of weeks which will likely see DEC bundle IXI's X.desktop with its systems — the interface manager already runs across DEC's entire range of platforms in any case.
Meanwhile, IXI is also in the process of setting up a European operation, which is being headed by Steven Sampson as general manager.
The unit will remain at IXI's UK, Cambridge-based headquarters for the  foreseeable future.
Sampson joins IXI from Cray Europe, though in a previous incarnation he was one of Scott McNealy's original recruits when Sun Microsystems Inc set up its European hub back in 1984.
Before that Sampson was involved in DEC's early Unix efforts.
Drawing on his experience, Sampson will also spearhead IXI's assault on Sun's user base with the Motif-based Deskworks toolset (UX No 387).
…
SAYS OSF MOTIF SHOULD BECOME AN END-USER PRODUCT…
Meanwhile, the future of the Open Software Foundation's Motif graphical user interface is a subject that's concerning IXI, as well as some other corners of the independent software vendor community who's businesses are focused on the emerging de facto industry standard, OSF's major success to date.
Although there are moves to define the requirements for a next generation user environment, UEC II (UX No 391), which will be a ‘highly evolved’ version of Motif, that won't be around until 1995, and there are some more immediate issues that need to be addressed, according to IXI.
Its main concern is that Motif should evolve from what is now essentially a developers' tool to become an end user product.
That's no trivial task given that even the latest, X-Windows X11R5-based release of Motif, 1.2, comes with nine patch releases (as of June).
Indeed, reviewing its experiences with Motif in our sister publication, Unix News, UK software quality assurance house, Programming Research Ltd, Esher, Surrey, concluded that ‘improvements are likely to occur only in the event of a complete re-think and re-write.’
After prompting from its bigger corporate customers, Programming Research decided to make a commitment to use Motif around 18 months ago.
However, after exhaustive efforts to produce interfaces using Motif — which it dubs a ‘deranged widget set’— the company has decided to ‘stop throwing good money after bad and cease using it until it either improves or disappears.’
As well as cleaning up the whole environment, the main task, as far as IXI is concerned, is to make Motif portable across platforms.
This is not a task for the faint-hearted, and even coping with different releases, as IXI admits, is problematic.
Motif also requires more functionality, more hooks, more object-oriented functions, the firm argues, to allow other software to be plugged in, and to encourage the ISV community to write applications for Motif.
Ideally IXI would like to see OSF put together an extended application programming interface that would allow other technologies and applications to be brought in.
It's been talking to OSF about just these kinds of things, and would (of course), like to do more than simply participate in such an effort if it could, though the smoke signals from OSF read simply ‘message received,’ for the present.
…
AS DEC TRIES ITS HAND AT BOLSTERING OSF's MARKETING MUSCLE
IXI might try its luck on Richard Straub, of DEC's OSF & X/Open consortia Open Systems European marketing group, who is trying to put together a re-vamped marketing package for OSF.
He, and other OSF plaudits, are concerned that Unix System Labs Inc is doing too good a job of attracting the limelight.
It's not that OSF technology isn't good, they argue, its simply that OSF, and its members, haven't done a good marketing job.
Now DEC has re-affirmed its commitment to OSF/1, it's as keen as mustard to spread the gospel, and Straub for one is busy readying proposals he can take to OSF hierarchy.
According to Straub, OSF recognises there is a lot more it could do, marketing-wise, but most of its limited resources go on research and development.
He wants OSF to move to the position most companies adopt when bringing new products to market: at the same moment they back their latest technology releases with endorsements and supportive product announcements from across the industry.
INFORMIX OFFERS TOOLS TO MIGRATE TO GRAPHICAL INTERFACES
Informix Software Inc has launched a tools initiative designed to provide ‘painless migration from character-based to graphical user interface-based applications for end-users and developers’.
Senior product manager Tony Lacy-Thompson explained that although graphical interfaces offer benefits in terms of consistency, easy-to-remember icons and mice for user-driven interaction, these benefits are of little use to those that only use one application, those only interested in data entry and those whose productivity will not be improved.
This poses a problem for the software developer who will probably need to write applications for both graphical and character-based environments.
On top of this, there is the added dilemma of deciding which graphical user interface to write for — Windows, Motif, Open Look, Apple Mac, Presentation Manager and so on.
Informix is coming to the rescue of Informix developers by providing Informix 4GL/GX.
The Informix 4GL generates pseudo code which currently runs on Informix RDS Rapid Development System for run-time character applications.
The GX product provides the same function as RDS only for graphical applications and the developer doesn't have to take source code and recompile.
However, as GX is not a full object-oriented graphical language (something that Informix is still developing) it will not give applications pull-down menus or 100% mouse control in every field.
It does, however, provide a graphical look and feel for applications.
It is available today for Motif and will support Windows in October.
Entry price for the product is between £2,000 and £3,000.
Informix also launched what it is describing as graphical framework services that is its OpenCase/Toolbus product based on Softbench technology licensed from Hewlett-Packard Co, an encapsulator for Toolbus so that third-party vendors can encapsulate their tools to run with this software backplane and the Informix 4GL for Toolbus.
Toolbus costs £2,000 per developer seat and the Informix 4GL for Toolbus costs £1,500.
Informix has not forgotten the end user, and is working on what it terms the Storm project, which is a graphical query and reporting tool that will feature Super Views and a Schema Builder.
SuperViews enables the data processing department to provide end users with views of the database table that are already joined and adds information for the end user.
Storm has its own data dictionary and leaves control over user access to the database with the DP manager.
The Schema Builder will enable all parts of the database schema to be created or modified in a graphical environment.
BSDI SLAMS UNIX LABS LAWSUIT
The issue of whether the US federal courts will sustain Berkeley Software Design Inc's motion to dismiss Unix System Laboratories' suit against it (UX No 392) comes up this week.
The judge has reportedly decided not to hear oral arguments, cancelled the hearing set for July 20 and will base his decision, due in 30 days, on the documents at hand.
USL is suing BSDI for unfair competition and for falsely advertising that its BSD/386 operating system, a derivative of the Network Release 2 work done by the University of California, Berkeley, is AT&T-free and needs no licence from USL.
BSDI lawyers went on the offensive last week circulating court documents among the press along with a press release slamming the USL suit as ‘harassing and frivolous’ and harbouring ‘chilling overtones for the computer software industry.’
They claim ‘AT&T's real motivation is to harass and to attempt to intimidate a potential competitor’ and ‘to maintain a monopoly of the Unix System market by suing anyone who refuses to tithe to them.’
BSDI bases its claims of no-licence-required on representations made to it in writing by the University's Computer Systems Research Group.
Casting itself as a tiny company imperilled by a giant shark, BSDI makes much of the fact that USL has not sued the University nor has it stopped the University from distributing the software.
However, they say, ‘we expect that USL (or its parent, AT&T [sic]) will threaten to review or withdraw research grants made to any university or research institution using or distributing software based on NET2, even though no violation has yet been proven.’
USL says it is in contact with the University in an attempt to resolve their difficulties ‘informally’ and without recourse to litigation.
It declined to discuss who specifically it was talking to or the substance of the discussions.
BSDI's motion to dismiss, which makes significant use of the Xerox/Apple precedent, claims USL's failure to sue them for any patent, trade secret or copyright infringement, or even allege such a violation, taints their case.
Infringement, BSDI argues, is a necessary first step to proving false advertising or unfair competition.
It dismisses the fact that USL has reserved the right to bring such a claim later on, apparently after discovery, suggesting that this means ‘it does not have a good faith basis for such a claim at this time.’
USL's suit asks for unspecified compensatory, treble and punitive damages as well as‘an accounting and disgorgement of BSDI's profits derived as a result of its wrongful acts…
’ BSDI is meanwhile bound by a court order not to use its toll-free ‘800-ITS-UNIX’number.
INDUSTRY SAYS PINNACLE IS ‘TOO OPTIMISTIC’
Our source on the Pinnacle Data Systems story a fortnight ago (UX No 392) was stretching things a bit when he described the five-year-old Columbus, Ohio firm as a $40m outfit: a Dun & Bradstreet report on them projects their sales at $5m.
Industry folks are also sceptical Pinnacle can pull off an LSI Logic Corp-based Sparc 10 clone as quickly as claimed.
They say LSI is still negotiating ‘starter kit’ rights with Sun Microsystems Inc which is reportedly asking LSI for $250,000.
Even if that's ironed out, the manufacturing kit is incomplete and needs some re-engineering.
Then after that it'll be back to Sun for its proprietary (and pricey?)
SRams and equally proprietary power supply.
Some cloners think Sun regrets making previous Sparcstations too easy to knock off so it's putting some obstacles in the way.
They also think Sparc 10 cloning may be a big boys' game.
The cost of admission is figured at $150,000 just to get to the point of manufacturing.
DATA GENERAL ADDS EIGHT PROCESSOR AViiON MONSTER
As expected (UX No 393), Data General Corp last week rolled out eight-way, high-end versions of its Motorola Inc 88000 RISC-based symmetric multi-processing AViiON servers, plus two models at the low end.
The Westborough, Massachusetts-based company that says these will be the last to incorporate Motorola's current 88100 RISC — it expects to move up to Motorola's next-generation 88110 processor by the end of the year (UX No 389).
With eight 88100s configured in pairs across four boards, a two-level cache system and dual memory bus architecture, the  rack-mounted AV6280 unit is rated by the company at 235 MIPS and comes with 128Mb memory.
It supplants the existing quad-processor server at the top of the AViiON range.
The AV8000–8 is a pack aged version of the AV6280, incorporating the processor board plus a RAID disk subsystem.
Both configurations are scheduled for release in the fourth quarter, and prices start at $200,000 — £190,000.
Also announced was a low-end, uniprocessor model, the AV4605 — and a dual-processor system — the AV4625 — which replace the current AV4600 series servers.
With 32Mb memory, 520Mb disk and 525Mb tape, the AV4605 is priced at from $20,000 — £19,000.
All the new servers run DG/UX V.4/SMP, the firm's symmetric multiprocessing Unix System V.4 MP implementation.
Data General's first use of the 88110 will be in a workstation, followed by 200 to 400 MIPS-rated mid-range AViiON systems in spring 1993 and an 800 MIPS-rated rack-mount machine by the end of next year.
The top-end will run to eight and 16 CPU configurations — which is as high as Data General says it wants to go.
SPECS ON INTEL's P5 CHIP LEAVE DESIGNERS DAUNTED
Developers that have yet to see Intel Corp's P5 microprocessor are in for a shock, because judging by intelligence gleaned by Computer Reseller News in Asia, the new part bears little resemblance to the commodity microprocessors that power tens of millions of personal computers.
Intel has already said that the P5 includes two RISC-like pipelined integer execution units and an advanced floating point unit, plus an 80386 execution unit.
But the part also has a 64-bit data bus and 36-bit address bus.
The bus is clocked at 66MHz and is heavily pipelined — it can continue operating while up to two cycles remain uncompleted.
The CPU is said to have some support for out-of-order execution of instructions, which requires very tricky circuitry to reassemble the stream in the right order and avoid dependency conflicts.
The part has an enlarged on-chip primary write-back cache rather than the write-through cache of the 80486, which means that the CPU does not have to wait for the cache controller to copy stored data back to main memory.
Up to three external caches are expected to be supported.
The write-back cache may also be added on a new version of the 80486.
But the feature that really marks the P5 out from its predecessors is the integrated floating point processor that is claimed to offer three to five times the performance of the one in the 80486, giving the P5 its reputation as a RISC-killer.
The part is thought overall to outperform the 50MHz 80486 2.5 times on optimised code.
Intel is expected to come out with its own building block chip sets that will work with both the P5 and the 50MHz 80486: one will support the EISA bus for servers, the other, for workstations, will use Intel's new PCI bus which has a 32-bit multiplexed burst-mode architecture to provide high bandwidth for graphics, networking and compression chips.
Many of the Asian designers the US trade weekly talked to were worried about the 66MHz clock frequency, because at that speed, stray radiations become a serious problem and it is unlikely that garage operations are going to be able to knock up boards using the chip that will work.
Apricot Computers Ltd, which always likes to be first with Intel's latest chip, will reportedly announce a P5-based machine in September, but with the enormous leap in complexity in the microprocessor, the other major worry has to be that it will take early users of the chip at least 18 months to find all the bugs in it and for Intel to correct them.
PARALLEL PROCESSING: NCUBE 2E ENTRY AT $30,000
NCube Inc, one of the small band of sturdy massively parallel processing pioneers, reckons that it may need to crash the entry price of its machines to popularise the concept, and last week announced the nCube 2E series, starting with just eight and going to 128 of the company's proprietary processors, with an entry price of $30,000.
In full configuration, it is claimed to offer ‘five times the performance of mainframe systems’— but that depends on users writing applications that can keep all the processors popping, and that is the hard part.
The nCube 2E series is designed to operate as a stand-alone system or as a networked extension of existing computing resources, integrating into environments of supercomputers, mainframes, minicomputers and workstations from multiple vendors.
Using the nCube Parallel Software Environment, applications developed for an eight-processor nCube 2E system will run unchanged on an nCube 2S computer with as many as 8,192 processors, so serious potential users can make an affordable investment in the thing to decide whether they really like it before making a real commitment.
A fully configured nCube 2E will deliver up to 1,280 MIPS and 422 MFLOPS, the company says.
The nCube 2E comes with from 32Mb to 4Gb memory and up to 24Gb of disk.
It has up to 64 input-output channels, supports TCP/IP and Ethernet, has C++, C, and Fortran libraries with VAX extensions, supports Oracle in a client-server environment and fits in a deskside cabinet 29″ by 18″ by 30″.
RETIX ENABLES OSI-TCP/IP CO-EXISTENCE
Retix Inc, Santa Monica, California has a new version of its OpenServer 400 Unix software which enables coexistence between OSI (Open Systems Interconnect) and TCP/IP (Transport Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) based networks.
OpenServer 400 1.4 uses the RFC 1006 Internet standard that specifies the transport of OSI applications over TCP/IP networks.
Retix claims version 1.4 allows users to implement enterprise wide messaging without the need to change existing software and systems.
The OpenServer 400 message server links different PC LAN messaging systems to each other, to mainframe and minicomputer-based systems, and to public mail networks that support X.400.
Version 1.4 has been designed to take advantage of the multi-tasking facilities available under Unix.
It also allows simultaneous use of OSI and TCP/IP stacks on the same LAN adapter, which means users with existing TCP/IP networks can employ OSI-based X.400 messaging without eliminating their existing networks or incurring large implementation costs.
OpenServer 400 1.4 for Santa Cruz Operation Inc Interactive Unix costs from $6,000.
INTERGRAPH JOINS THE CONTROL DATA
— VOLKSWAGEN ICEM SYSTEMS GmbH PARTY
Volkswagen AG and Control Data Corp formed ICEM Systems GmbH as a joint venture to develop manufacturing software based on CDC's ICEM Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering & Manufacturing package in November 1990.
Now Control Data Systems Inc and the Wolfsburg automaker have signed a letter with Intergraph Corp, Huntsville, Alabama for a joint marketing and technology agreement to develop simultaneous engineering software for the automotive, aerospace, and discrete manufacturing markets using ICEM and Intergraph's I/EMS software products.
Volkswagen will be the first customer to implement resulting technology.
Intergraph will form a European Centre of Competence for the Automotive Industry, co-located in Hannover with ICEM Systems GmbH.
UNIFY READIES TP, OBJECT VERSIONS OF ITS 4GL
Unify Corp, Sacramento, California, has previewed a new version of its fourth generation language database and independent toolset for on-line transaction processing applications.
Speaking at ICL's Software Open Show in Birmingham in the UK last week, Unify said it expects to launch Accell/TP and Accell/Object next month.
The two developments have been backed by cash from ICL, which will take the software as part of its existing OEM agreement.
Unify claims Accell/TP is a database-independent toolset for implementing on-line transaction processing applications, supporting its own Unify 2000 database offering, as well as Oracle, Informix, Ingres and Sybase — it runs under Motif, Windows 3.0 or Open Look.
Unify says the software offers data dependent routing, fault tolerance and integrity, along with debugging and administration functions.
Accell/TP also allows applications built using Accell/SQL — its current product — to run under Unix System Labs' Tuxedo transaction monitor, without recompilation, it claims.
Eager to hound down deals with users of the major databases, the company is laying low with Accell/TP on its Unify 2000 database for the time being.
With an announcement planned for August, Accell/TP should be generally available in the Autumn — no prices have been set.
Development kits are available in limited quantities.
An object-oriented version of Accell/TP — Accell/Object — is planned for the first quarter of 1993.
COMSHARE DEBUTS NEW EIS SYSTEM
Comshare Inc, Ann Arbour, Michigan, this week releases version 3.0 of its executive information management system, New Commander, for Mac System 7, OS/2, Windows 3.1 and Unix.
An EIS package designed for the client/server environment, New Commander will allow users to access data from SQL or non-SQL-based database systems irrespective of the platforms they reside on, as well as operating from its own proprietary database, Commander modeller.
Comshare uses Scripts, a technique it has developed to port commands from the application to the database.
New Commander includes status and exception reporting, ad hoc investigation, an executive reminder system, and Redi-mail — its electronic mailing system.
Comshare says it supports Hewlett-Packard, Sun, DEC, IBM and ICL Unix platforms, along with MS-DOS and IBM mainframes.
Available as a desktop package or as a builder kit, it's scheduled for release this month — prices start at £20,000 for the desktop and builder software combined or £2,000 for the builder kit alone.
BARCLAYS HAS ‘JUST NINE RS/6000s’
The latest update to last week's Barclays Bank story (UX No 393), is that five of DEC's Alpha-ready VAX 7000/610 machines are replacing 20 VAX 8000 and 6000 boxes at three Barclay's datacentres.
According to Barclays Computer Operations, Barclay's services arm which manages the data centres, the old kit was installed over a period of one to four years.
The reason for the upgrade, claims BCO, is to manage the data centres better.
They are accessed by 3,000 UK users and 6,000 international users including Barclays Network Services.
The new machines will run E-mail, time management and office software.
As for its Alpha plans, BCO hinted that the new kit could be upgraded to Alpha technology in a year's time but it will not commit to any definite Alpha policy.
As for its liaison with IBM, Barclays claims it only has nine RS/6000s, which have been used for evaluation as part of its open systems strategy.
AMDAHL ADDS HURON VERSIONS FOR UTS, UNIX ON 80486
Amdahl Corp believes that its Huron applications development and production system is a winner, and rather than leave it stranded on the mainframe under MVS, it is taking it along in the direction the market is moving with two new versions, one that runs under its UTS implementation of Unix System V on its mainframes, the other for Unix workstations, the first version of the latter being for 80486-based machines under Unix.
Both are initially aimed at customers that already have, or commit to taking, the MVS version.
Amdahl plans to follow up with versions for IBM Corp's RS/6000 in the second quarter of next year, and versions for other Unix machines led by Sun Microsystems Inc's Sparcsystems, and also for IBM's OS/2, will follow.
Huron is designed as a completely integrated system that enables users to develop applications, run them in production and adapt them to changing business requirements.
The new versions of Huron for Intel Corp workstations and for UTS are available immediately to customers that also license Huron to write applications under MVS.
The Sunnyvale, California company says that the initial licence fee for the workstation version of Huron is $10,000.
Fees for mainframe versions, for use with either MVS or UTS, or a combination of the two running in different partitions on the same host, are from $525,000 to $1.4m, depending on processor size.
NOW DEC TURNS TO AUSPEX
Although unconfirmed at the time, rumours that DEC had struck up a deal with Auspex Systems Inc, the Santa Clara, California network server company that already counts IBM among its customers, have turned out to be correct (UX No 384).
DEC is to purchase $8m of Auspex systems over the next 12 months to support its networked Unix workstations.
Auspex says it has already shipped 12 systems, worth $4.5m, to DEC customers around the world.
Auspex's NS 5500 and NS 3000 NetServers support up to eight Ethernet networks and up to 200 workstations per server.
DEC will sell, install and service the Auspex servers.
COMPAQ, SUN, DEC SET TO FOLLOW IBM OUT OF ICL's TECHNOLOGY — BUT WHY WORRY?
With IBM UK Ltd taking away its RS/6000s and PS/2s and Digital Equipment UK Ltd ready to end its agreement with ICL Plc's Technology Plc personal computer and workstation distribution acquisition, there has been much frenzied speculation that Sun Microsystems Inc and Compaq Computer Corp are ready to withdraw their products too, and that ICL has dropped a very big brick on its foot in buying the company.
Getting ICL to comment on or explain anything much is a fruitless task, but counter-arguments are easily marshalled to the chorus of derision that has greeted the aftermath of the acquisition.
The first is that ICL paid only £30m upfront for a business that carried a buyout tag of £29m three years ago, and had substantially increased volume in the interim.
The other £10m in the price depends on performance, and if that is rotten, ICL will need to pay no more.
That £30m bought some £130m of distribution business, and knocking that amount out of the UK market would leave a big hole if all the third party suppliers do take their toys away.
But all that business is not simply going to vanish: ICL will be refilling the channels with its own personal computers and DRS 6000 and DSR 3000 Unix machines before they even empty of third party machines — and by using a captive distribution network, ICL should be able to improve overall profitability.
There may be a significant fall in volume in the first year or so, but while the third party suppliers to Technology may feel that they have no alternative but to withdraw their products, they look like being the net losers as a result, while ICL sheds crocodile tears all the way to the bank.
SUN SHADOWS HP TRADE-IN PROGRAMME
Sun Microsystems Inc is taking out after Hewlett-Packard Co with worldwide trade-in program aimed at moving Apollo/Domain users to Sun's RISC-based boxes: Sun will accept any Apollo or HP workstation in working order.
They must be turned in within 30 days after taking delivery of a Sun IPX or SparcStation 2.
Sun claims its trade-in values range from $3,300 to $6,800 compared to $1,000 to $4,500 under HP's own Open Migration trade-in program.
The Sun boxes on offer come standard with a 19-inch Trinitron colour monitor, 424Mb pre-installed disk, 32Mb internal (16Mb for the IPX), GX accelerated graphics, audio and Solaris.
Sun is claiming more expandability and a superior upgrade path to anything HP is offering.
Trade-in customers can upgrade to Sparc 10 when available, saving 25% off a Sparc 10 Model 41, it said.
An HP spokesman claimed the Sun program had ‘a million holes’ and was based on ‘half truths,’pointing out that Sun was offering no migration tools or interoperability whereas HP is giving Apollo users the same look and feel and middleware when they shift to HP boxes.
He figures Sun only has price in its corner and claimed Apollo users, the last of the die-hard zealots opposed to Sun on religious grounds, won't be budged simply on price.
HITACHI ADDS NETWORK COMPUTING DEVICES X-TERMINAL
Hitachi Ltd has entered the X Window System terminal market with launch of the HT-3451-G11, based on a 20MHz Motorola Inc 88100 RISC, claiming performance for it of 70,000 Xstones.
The new terminal is built around OEM parts procured from Network Computing Devices Inc of Mountain View, California, and engineered for production by Hitachi.
It is designed for use with the company's 3050 Creative Workstation business workstation series, as well as the small desktop engineering workstation series the 2050G/FS, the latter for computer-aided design and other engineering applications.
Hitachi's Unix workstations are built around the Motorola 68000 family.
The new X-terminal offers a large user memory of 30Mb, and fits in with Forefront, Hitachi's heterogeneous systems integration schema announced in February.
SCO MOVES ON UK ACCOUNTING MARKET
The Santa Cruz Operation Inc has signed up six UK software vendors to provide packaged, multi-user accountancy solutions running on SCO Unix, including installation, training and maintenance, in addition to hardware and software through Basingstoke, Hampshire-based outlet Frontline Distribution Ltd.
The six are Pegasus Group plc, Multisoft Financial Solutions Ltd, Sage Group plc, Systems Union Ltd, Tetra Ltd and Misys plc's TIS Software Ltd.
First out of the gate is Pegasus which is offering its Unifacts accounting software on a four-user SCO Unix-based Intel platform — with Lotus 1–2-3 and Wordperfect — for £10,000.
Initiatives with the other five firms will follow later in the year.
SCO claims 31% of multi-user accounting systems costing under £50,000 installed in the UK run on its flavour of Unix, whilst London-based market research firm, Ovum Ltd — which says accounting is by far the largest application software sector in the UK — forecasts an annual growth rate of around 23% for the Unix-based accounting software market to 1995.
SCO and Pegasus are hoping to take advantage of an increased demand for computer-based accounting solutions expected when new accountancy regulations come into force in the UK next year, which will make it very difficult, the two claim, for companies to perform accounting tasks, like payroll, without a computer.
Presently, only some 2,500 of Pegasus' 80,000-odd users are running their accounts on Unix of any kind.
MINIGRAMS
The Hungarian Unix Users Group, HUUG, and the John von Neumann Computer Society, NJSZT, are organising HUNIX ‘92, an international Unix conference and exhibition in Godolla (15 miles west of Budapest) between September 28th-30th.
There are some 30 seminars scheduled for the three days, including Unix communications, TCP/IP administration and the Hungarian experience of implementing client/server architectures.
The one-year-old HUUG claims more than fifty members, half of which are user organisations.
Meanwhile, Budapest-based Graphisoft, the privately-held Hungarian software outfit which claims to have sold more CAD packages on Apple Computer Inc Macintosh platforms than any other firm during 1991, is thought to be readying Apple A/UX 3.0 and Microsoft Corp Windows versions of its ArchiCAD software for release in around six months time.
At Siggraph ‘92 in Chicago (July 26–30), Hewlett-Packard Co will unveil new three-dimensional client/server graphics programming tools based on the PEX 5.1 and PEXlib graphics extensions to X-Windows for use on its workstations.
Active Memory Technology Ltd, the ICL Plc Distributed Array Processor parallel systems spin-out, which went into receivership last month (UX No 393), was sold by the receivers to a Cambridge, Massachusetts investment company, Cambridge Group Inc controlled by Norton Garfunkel.
The Reading company will be renamed Cambridge Active Memory Technology Ltd.
Unacknowledged, it's been that way for several years, as we have regularly tried to point out here as others wrongly gave the crown to Digital Equipment Corp, but both the Wall Street Journal and Datamation magazine have at last come round to agreeing that Fujitsu Ltd is the world's second-largest computer company — with NEC Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co both now challenging DEC for the third place.
Oracle Corp is reportedly readying a glass shattering plunge into the Microsoft Corp Windows 3 world with Oracle Business Manager, a set of client/server front-end tools for integrating Oracle applications with other Windows applications such as Lotus Development Corp's 1–2-3 for Windows and the Microsoft Word processor, and to run queries on the data locally and do graphs.
A source claiming good authority says to tack another year on the Apple/IBM ‘Pink’ project over at Taligent: that would stretch things out to somewhere around 1996 we imagine.
Kubota Pacific Computer Inc, Santa Clara, California, has teamed with Codar Technology Inc, Longmont, Colorado, to develop a ruggedised, high-performance, three-dimensional graphics system based upon DEC's Alpha RISC.
First products are expected early next year and will be marketed by both companies, reports say.
Taiwan's Computer and Communications Research Laboratories is reportedly actively pursuing an Alpha licence.
The few people left that Intel Corp hasn't non-disclosed about the P5 will be able to  glean some details at next months Hot Chips Conference in California: the P5 will be previewed and presentations made on Alpha, a 200-MFLOPS PA-RISC, HyperSparc, the ARM 600, something that looks like Sun's Tsunami and LSI's single-chip 33020 X terminal controller.
It'll be at Stanford University August 10 and 11.
ComputerWorld's gossip column thinks Microsoft Corp is working on a project that would let applications written to the Win32 API run on Apple Macs: it says the programme will run on System 7 and let users recompile Win32 apps to get an instant Mac program.
The project is code named Alar, the name of an apple pesticide.
Japan's quixotic Fifth Generation Computer Systems project is being replaced this fall by a $800m Real World Computing project that will explore massively parallel processing, optical and neural computing and soft logic in an attempt to create a concept or architecture that distributes data as it is in the brain.
New York-based Congruent Corp has ported programs in the GNU Unix tool library to Microsoft Corp NT in both its MIPS Technologies Inc and Intel Corp flavours as a $200 ToolBuster kit including RCS, a source code control system, and GNU Emacs text editor.
Taiwan's recently established Open Systems Software Inc (OSSI), a joint venture between Hewlett-Packard Co and the island's Institute for Information Industry (3I) and Pacific Wire and Cable Co, will distribute Independence Technologies Inc's OLTP and system management software locally.
OSSI is meant to develop OLTP applications and provide software integration services as well as distribute third-party packages.
SunSoft Inc has gone to Highland Software for its Flexible License Manager for Solaris 2.0.
Dataquest Corp, which has been without a president for some months, has recruited Judith Hamilton for the job: she was formerly a senior vice president and general manager at Locus Computing Corp.
The C++ in Action conference and exhibition is set for September 21–25 in Santa Clara, California.
The Larkspur, California-based Bristol Group has come up with what it calls an affordable database and project planner for Sparcs: Power Base is priced at $400 for a single license; $1,000 for a server license and six packs for $1,500.
The thing will make phone calls, fax, send E-mail, post or express mail, address envelops and post reminders.
It works with either Open Look or Motif.
Unix Expo has nailed IBM vice president, Jim Cannavino, general manager of Personal Systems, as its keynote speaker.
Larry Ellison's having quite a month: not only did Oracle finally get version 7 out, his house got a to-die-for spread in Architectural Digest.
Very Japanese.
For months we said Microsoft Corp NT was gonna be big and fat and Microsoft said ‘Perish the thought!’
Guess what?
It's gonna take 12Mb to 16Mb to run that sucker.
Stick that on your average desktop.
Rumour has it Sun Microsystems Inc may can the ISDN feature on its Sparc 10s.
Silicon Graphics says it's giving a lot more headroom to software these days and is organising around it.
The same is true of NT in the wake of the recent NT developers' conference.
It also wants to get into the high-end Apple space and migrate those users over to ‘real machines’ that let them realise some of their hopes and dreams.
It can't imagine going below the $5,000 mark, however.
Next Computer Inc's NextStep 80486 environment failed to make its target beta date the end of last month as well as the June ship date for NextStep 3.0 on its own hardware, now due next month.
Beta for the 486 version has stretched to September with OEM delivery rescheduled for the fourth quarter and the  likelihood of shrink-wrap pushed into 1993.
Next is still cash flow negative, hence the need to get that other $55m in the form of a credit line from its investors (UX No 392).
SunSoft Inc's Solaris 2.0-on-Intel has also slipped three months: originally due in September, SunSoft is now saying it'll get to its OEM customers by the end of the year blaming the delays in acquiring Interactive for botching the schedule.
X/Open Group Co Ltd last week selected IXI Ltd, Cambridge, as its UK software supplier of the year (UX No 393).
Cypress Semiconductor Corp has announced its Mbus-based SparcSet chip set, designed by Nimbus Technologies (UX No 383), for cloners.
It'll be able to take the Cypress HyperSparc chip when that's ready; until then modules like the 33MHz 6001.
It's priced the chip at $250 in quantities of 100.
A complete design kit depends on quantity but start at around $50k.
Hewlett-Packard Co will release a new set of TPC-A benchmark performance results this week: top of the pile is 578 transactions per second achieved on a top-of-the-range, four processor HP 9000 Model 890 Emerald server running Oracle Version 7.0, that's $11,901 per transaction.
Unigram can be contacted at ‘unigram! george@uunet.UU.NET’