

NOVELL NEGOTIATES FOR A BIGGER STAKE IN UNIX SYSTEM LABS
Novell Inc and Unix System Laboratories Inc are negotiating for Novell to acquire additional shares in USL, sources say, seeming to confirm reports previously heard by Unigram.X (UX No 388, 391).
Novell, one of thirteen companies to take a minority position in USL last year, is currently its largest single shareholder outside of majority owner AT&T, and currently owns about 4.6%.
It remains to be seen whether or not Novell would acquire all of AT&T's remaining stock and at what price.
Apparently the $325m valuation put on USL last year for purposes of the private placement is being reappraised.
USL's other stockholders, Sun, ICL, Amdahl, Fujitsu, Motorola, NEC, Oki, Toshiba, Olivetti, Tata and 3i, may not have a say in what eventually happens or whether Novell takes it all.
The negotiations — and with them USL's desire to conserve cash and pretty up its balance sheet as much as possible — might explain why it has so far put little muscle into marketing Destiny since its announcement in June (UX No 390).
USL is believed to be interested in aligning itself more closely with Novell to strengthen its forces for the war against Microsoft Corp's NT, a herculean effort AT&T may not be as willing to put its back into.
Previously AT&T has talked about decreasing its ownership by going public, an event that was unlikely to take place for at least another year.
That avenue is now regarded in some quarters as not nearly as strategic as cuddling up with Novell, despite the disappointment USL employees might feel in not being able to cash in their stock and options that way.
Novell believes systems software is one of the least assailable markets to be in during the coming decade.
It would have bought up all of USL last year if it could have got it, Novell executive vice president Kanwal Rikki previously told Unigram.
As a historical footnote, it's also interesting to observe that Novell went after Santa Cruz Operation Inc back in 1990.
USL figures — see page three.
SCO ‘READY TO STRIKE A DEAL WITH USL FOR SYSTEM V.4’
According to sources at the highest level, the Santa Cruz Operation Inc has ‘bitten the ideological bullet,’ and is prepared to step out on the Unix SVR4 road — if it can cut the deal it wants with Unix owner USL.
SCO, which got its Unix System V.3.2 licence relatively cheaply, is apparently trying to win concessions from Unix System Labs Inc in return for its endorsement of SVR4, having behind it the leverage of its Unix-on-Intel base that would give USL a commanding share of the overall market.
However, sources say SCO finds doing business with USL is ‘like running into a brick wall.’
USL is apparently unwilling to budge on standard pricing, knowing full well that SCO is trying to pull together an agreement for SVR4 by the time of its showpiece SCO Forum in Santa Cruz this week.
Other sources say that even if SCO does manage to cut a deal for SVR4 — leaving OSF/1, the other possible route, by the wayside — its future intent is to move to a micro-kernel architecture, and which flavour of that it might go for still hasn't been decided.
If SVR4 is adopted, it's unclear whether SCO would start with its existing V.3.2.4 implementation and add SVR4.2 features, or start with SVR4.2 and add backwards compatibility with its SCO Unix and Xenix offerings.
Whether or not a deal would be forged before the start of SCO Forum was unclear as we went to press, but whatever happens, SCO says there will be an SCO V.3.2.5 product released before any SVR4 offering is made available.
DEC'S FULLSAIL MAY WIN THE RACE FOR FIRST DME MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE
DEC this week will bring out DEC FullSail, the first comprehensive application put on the market for managing distributed Unix systems.
It is intended to become an actual OSF Distributed Management Environment (DME) product, probably one of the first, as that technology becomes available, according to Unix systems management director Roy Shiderly.
At initial delivery in September FullSail will run on Ultrix 4.2 or later platforms, moving to DEC OSF/1 and then Sun platforms six months later.
Others will follow.
Motif-based, the three module programme is meant to simplify day-to-day systems management of user accounts, file systems and systems performance.
The software, developed over the last two years at DEC West in Washington, should free systems managers to be proactive in identifying and preventing potential systems problems while reducing the cost of systems management.
An administrator should be able to oversee 50 to 100 systems, accessing FullSail from any workstation or X terminal on the network.
The application maintains a database of management and configuration information that is used for batch process management requests, preventing configuration errors and adding new systems.
A fully customisable front-end groups the systems in a network into management sets according to criteria and policies, however arbitrary, determined by the administrator.
It will produce the hard data needed to analyse resource utilisation and will trigger an alarm mechanism allowing managers to control access.
FullSail incorporates a client/server architecture and uses standard protocols including TCP/IP and RPC mechanisms including Apollo's and Sun's.
Pricing is $300 per client licence and $6,000 per server for the database licence; $2,000 per server for the application modules licence.
Computer Associates is believed to be working along the same lines for the HP platform.
X/OPEN CAE TO EMBRACE FOUNDATION's DCE
After months of dallying, X/Open Co Ltd has finally endorsed the Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment as its standard for distributed computing architectures.
Even though X/Open no longer has any formal relationship with the Foundation, following the Cambridge, Massachusetts-based group's withdrawal from its board at the end of last year, the open systems standards body has nailed down an agreement with OSF which will see all DCE specifications integrated into its Common Applications Environment, CAE, interfaces over the next 12 to 18 months.
First specifications to come across will be the DCE Remote Procedure Call, which is based upon Hewlett-Packard Co/Apollo's Network Computing System technology.
That flavour of Remote Procedure Call is however very different from one that is already widely implemented by users of Sun Microsystems Inc's Open Network Computing system.
X/Open, which has already endorsed the Network File System component of ONC seems unlikely to recognise Sun's version of RPC at the moment — although the DCE agreement does not preclude it — but says it will ensure ‘co-existence and interoperability’ between the two, though it hasn't figured out how it will do this yet.
‘It's a problem we still have to solve,’ said a spokesman: it may want to look up the latest crop of hopefuls such as Covia Technologies Inc, Locus Computing Corp, and NobleNet Inc which have recently begun to offer just such solutions.
X/Open is pushing the DCE specifications through a fast track procedure for adoption, which means they go straight to a vote by its members rather than through a prolonged period of technical evaluation, work already done exhaustively by OSF in any case.
Any comments will go back to OSF which has final say on whether any proposed changes are acceptable or not.
The agreement stipulates there will be no fundamental alterations to DCE and any changes are likely to be in areas like internationalisation.
X/Open vice president and chief technical officer, Mike Lambert, expects the process to be ‘relatively painless’— more an exercise of integrating DCE into existing CAE specifications.
The interfaces to DCE will ultimately appear as an XPG Distributed Computing Profile with 5 groups containing a total of 12 specifications.
Over the coming year or so X/Open will introduce a range of XPG profiles — the XPG portability guide is a subset of CAE — to cope with the volume of technology areas it now embraces (there are 37 XPG specifications in total).
A standard XPG base brand will not require DCE compliance.
X/Open says it is taking DCE on the same terms as it has taken object specifications from OMG.
X/Open signs with UN — see page three.
ADDS RUNS TO INTEL RISC FOR NEW X-STATIONS
Applied Digital Data Systems, NCR's terminals subsidiary, will be trading in its allegiance to Motorola Inc 68000 chips and switching to RISC with the Intel Corp 80960 for a new line of X stations it plans to introduce September 1 and then show off later in the month at Unix Expo.
ADDS is hoping the new 3533 XLRs, a nine-model family including monochrome, grey scale and colour versions developed under the code name Viper, will offer some of the fastest machines on the block.
Reportedly they're getting 107,000-Xstone performance on monochromes right out of the box with no tweaking and 92,000 Xstones on colour.
…
AS NCD LAUNCHES NEW MIPS X-TERM
Network Computing Devices Inc's UK operation in Maidenhead, Berkshire, has debuted the Mountain View, California company's latest X-terminal which uses MIPS Technologies Inc's 33MHz R3000 RISC.
The 15″ monochrome NCD15r has a resolution of 1,024 x 800, comes with from 4Mb to 20Mb RAM, NCD's X11 server software and costs £1,470.
European sales accounted for 25% of NCD's revenues last year — the company expects that figure to rise to 40% this year as Europe begins to catch up with the US in its adoption of X-Windows-based technologies.
NCD claims to have shipped 25.9% of the 96,610 X-terminals thought to have been installed worldwide during the first six months of this year.
With offices in London serving central Europe, Paris serving the south, NCD is getting up a German office in Munich to serve the North, to be headed-up by former Wyse Technology Inc staffer Achim Herber.
…
AS HDS TAKES ON RIVALS WITH NEW DISTRIBUTION STRATEGY
King of Prussia, Pennsylvania-based Human Designed Systems Inc wants to steal a march on its competitors in the X-Windows terminal market with a new distribution strategy that it says will offer significantly lower end-user prices than competitive products, quick delivery, nationwide on-site service, and a money-back guarantee.
Up to now, distribution has been via system integrators to the Federal and commercial markets, but it is now lowering retail prices for all its ViewStation FX Series of X terminals by 30% to 50% when it sells them direct.
Under the new pricing, the 80960-based ViewStations start at $1,000 for an FX15 15″ mono terminal putting up 1,024 by 864 pixels; a 19″ colour FX19CT with 1,280 by 1,024 pixels now costs $3,200.
Shipments for any standard product will be within three weeks of order, installation assistance and free telephone technical support are included, as is a one-year warranty that includes free software upgrades.
ISLAND ADDS MULTIMEDIA GRAPHICS
Island Graphics says it has added multimedia features to IslandPresents, the graphics packages it introduced back at Uniforum, and has started delivering it for Sparc-based systems fitted with Open Look and Open Windows 3.0.
Versions for Solaris 2.0, Sparcs running Motif and HP 9000s are expected this autumn.
The software can now display full-screen presentations and drive large screen displays.
On-screen presentations can include transitions such as fades and wipes and can be annotated with music or voice segments recorded with SunSoft Inc's Audio Tool.
A single-user license will go for $1,000.
INTEGRATED MICRO PRODUCTS SIGNS CIC IN JAPAN AS NEW DISTRIBUTOR
Integrated Micro Products Ltd, of Consett, England has signed the CIC reseller and systems integration subsidiary of Chiyoda Joho Kiki to market its XMP921 68040-based fault-tolerant Unix computers in Japan.
CIC is budgeting to sell 100 machines over the next three years.
Chiyoda Joho Kiki was the Japanese distributor of ICL Plc's DRS series of Unix machines until ICL was acquired by Fujitsu Ltd.
Integrated Micro Products also has a distribution agreement for its kit with CJK Corp of Tokyo.
RAYTHEON SIGNS FOR ALPHA
Patriot anti-missile system maker, Raytheon Corp, has licensed DEC's Alpha chip intending to build a line of military-specification compatibles around it.
It may even make the chip in the future.
Raytheon already makes military versions of DEC's mid-range VAX 6000s and the Alpha license expands on that deal.
The mil-spec machines are reportedly due less than 12 months after DEC brings out its first commercial Alphas later this year.
Raytheon is said to have first orders in hand.
LOCUS HAS TRANSPORT-INDEPENDENT NETWORK APPLICATION ENVIRONMENT
Inglewood, California-based Locus Computing Corp, has introduced Transparent Network Computing environment, TNC, the  latest incarnation of its transport-independent distributed systems architecture (UX No 271), which will be competing for space with similar technologies from NobleNet Inc and Covia Technologies Inc (UX No 395).
TNC, a layered configuration, sits above distributed networking environments such as Sun Microsystems Inc's Open Network Computing environment, the OSI stack and the OSF's Distributed Computing Environment, interfacing between the application and the remote procedure call (RPC) mechanism.
Its existing technology — the Transparent Network  Facility that it developed for IBM's now defunct RT 6150-T25 machines (UX No 312)— interfaces to the network at a lower level.
Operating in clustered environments, TNC will give the impression that an application, distributed around the cluster, is functioning as a single entity and will assign request calls to the most suitable processor without the user being aware of the destination.
Locus claims DCE and ONC solutions still demand applications to be modified for their respective application programming interfaces in order to function.
To get around this, Locus has written extra kernel-level facilities, including a remote execution function call which will communicate with different RPCs, and has made modifications to the file system — allowing current applications to migrate across to DCE and ONC without re-coding.
TNC still needs to be tailored by OEMs for specific Unix flavours, although the company says it plans to bring out a shrink-wrapped version in the future.
SPECIALIX WINS IBM AGREEMENT
Input/output board manufacturer, Specialix Ltd, Byfleet, Surrey, says it has secured an agreement with IBM for its Transputer-based RIO multi-port I/O controller which IBM will use in the RS/6000.
Noting the slow take up of the high-end RIO, Specialix says RIO was ‘over engineered’ and brought to the market before its time, saying it will have to wait until multi-processing technology takes off before it sees any real installations.
Specialix is also courting an OEM agreement with Ing Olivetti & Co SpA for RIO — Specialix claims to have 80% of the Italian I/O board market.
The company plans to add SNMP and PPP network protocol extensions to its XIO and SI range of I/O controllers, plus enhancements to all of its other boards.
Specialix is planning to debut a new board at SCO Forum this week.
DEC WINS MOLECULAR SIMULATIONS FOR ALPHA RISC MACHINES
DEC has been ahead of the field in cultivating computer-aided drug design and other molecular modelling companies, and its latest is Waltham, Massachusetts-based Molecular Simulations Inc.
The two will work together to provide three-dimensional molecular modelling applications under OSF/1 Unix for DEC's Alpha workstations and servers, including forthcoming Alpha-based massively parallel machines.
Molecular Simulations claims the largest installed base of three-dimensional modelling software for computational chemistry applications.
DEC's interest is fuelled by the fact that the Aberdeen Group in Boston projects that the market for computational chemistry products will grow to over $2,000m in 1996 from about $500m in 1990.
DEC has an existing relationship with Molecular Simulations and a similar one with Molecular Design Ltd, which offers chemistry database products for the VAX.
SILICON FORMS OEM GROUP FOR MIPS BUSINESS
Now that MIPS Technologies Inc is in its back pocket, Silicon Graphics Inc has gone ahead and acted on its promise to service MIPS' OEM business which accounted for the bulk of its revenues.
SGI has set up a new OEM Operations organisation under the supervision of Todd Johnson, formerly director of SGI's business development group, who reports to SGI vice president, John Kohler, general manager of the company's newly created Business Systems Division.
The unit is responsible for maintaining relations with existing MIPS OEMs — Control Data, Daikin Industries, Digital Kienzle, Siemens Nixdorf and Tandem — and finding new business.
It is to manage to the transition from MIPS RISC/os to SGI's IRIX operating system.
UNIX SYSTEM LABS WAIVES $7m SOURCE FEES FOR UNIVEL — REVENUES UP BUT ACCOUNTS SHOW A LOSS FOR THE YEAR
Unix System Labs' annual report arrived on our desk last week, and makes for some very interesting summer reading.
For instance, the 176,000 shares (21.7%) USL sold in its private offering in March 1991 went for $57.2m.
USL repaid approximately $13m to AT&T from the proceeds and the remainder allows it to fund its cash flow requirements.
Net revenues for the year ended December 31 totalled $76.6m, up 10% over 1990 and 21% over 1989.
However, the company ran at a net loss of $28.7m as opposed to the $2.7m in profit it got in 1990 or the $4.2m it tallied in 1989.
Operating system revenues were up $1.8m to $61.7m, though revenue growth has not increased at the same rate as unit volumes shipped because of volume discount schedules.
Foreign revenues grew 16% or $4.4m to $32.3m.
Revenues from non-System V products such as Transaction Processing and Networking were up $5.2m or 54%, most of it attributable to Services.
Costs increased 262% to $43m due largely to a $26.8m write-off of capitalised software development costs in excess of estimated net realisable value.
But even excluding the write-off, cost of revenues increased $4.3m or 36% while gross margins continued to decline to $33.5m versus $57.7m the year before.
Development costs are its largest outlay totalling $11.7m in 1991, down from $22.4m in 1989.
However, USL finds the royalties it pays third parties for using their technology, particularly those sent to Microsoft Corp for its Xenix functionality and Sun Microsystems Inc for its BSD functionality, on the increase and likely to rise further.
They hit $3.9m in 1991, up $1.4m.
Total marketing and sales expenses increased as it turns itself into a market-driven company to $24.3m, up 45%.
Working capital was $37.3m at the end of last year.
USL's November investment of $1m in Chorus Systemes, an investment that was subsequently increased, gave it a 7% position.
In December it put another million into the Univel Inc joint venture with Novell Inc, where it has a 45% ownership interest, and committed itself to providing another $4m to fund on-going operations.
USL says it is waiving source code fees due from Univel worth up to $7m during the 30-month period after Univel commences operations.
It is unclear from the annual report whether the clock has already started ticking.
USL's total assets amount to $99.87m including $46.5m in cash.
…
AS UNIVEL ANNOUNCES 23 DISTRIBUTORS
Meanwhile, Univel Inc, the Unix System Labs/Novell Inc joint venture, will start unwrapping its distribution channels this week when it announces that it has signed an initial sixteen distributors in the US and seven overseas.
They are all Novell distributors.
The American companies lined up to resell Univel's shrinkwrapped UnixWare include BDS, Costa Distributing, FoxTech, Gates/FA Distributing, GBC Technologies, InaCom, Ingram Micro, JWP Information Services, Merisel, MicroAge Computer Centers, Microware Distributors, MultiMicro, PC Distributing, Tech Data, Vitek Systems Distribution and Vitronix.
International distributors, which Univel believes will eventually outnumber US sites, include InterQuad, Softservice and TopLog in France, Akam Data in Holland, Diode in Spain, Jardine Network Systems in Hong Kong and ComTech in Australia.
Univel will also unveil a Univel Education programme whose syllabus includes a self-study video Univel Reseller's Kit; a two-day hands-on desktop course UnixWare Personal Edition Installation and Configuration; a two-day hands-on server course UnixWare Application Server Installation and Configuration; and the five-day Univel Instructor Certification Session.
The Personal Edition and Server courses are offered through Novell.
X/OPEN TEAMS WITH UNITED NATIONS
Having a busy summer, X/Open Co Ltd has also cut a prestigious five year deal with the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to promote the use of ‘modern information systems’ in ‘developing and recovering’countries.
Under the programme, Unitar and X/Open will organise a series of three-day symposiums with hands-on technology training tailored for local and regional needs.
Unitar will invite the delegates from the government agencies and commercial entities in each country.
The idea is to get Western hi-tech companies to sponsor the events, and X/Open is about to begin on a 90 day roadshow to drum up industry support.
It says the symposiums will provide firms with badly needed frontiers into the territories where the gathering are to be held.
How many of the forums are eventually scheduled depends on the level of sponsorship, but the first is already planned for ‘recovering’ East European countries which takes place in Budapest in the second quarter of 1993.
Other confirmed venues are Santiago (for South American countries in the third quarter) and Cairo (for North Africa and the Middle East in the fourth quarter).
According to the agreement there are to be four events a year, each with a minimum 150 participants.
The United Nations has already passed resolutions calling for the acceleration of technology transfer to developing countries and X/Open's Chief Operating Officer, George Shaffner says UN country ambassadors are now jockeying for rights to host a symposium.
X/Open is in separate discussions with the UN over the organisation's internal use of open systems, and there is speculation that X/Open's involvement with the UN might eventually see X/Open president Geoff Morris being elected to the UN's advisory board.
Before this could happen X/Open would have to establish a formal relationship with the UN after meeting initial requirements, such as proving — to the UN's satisfaction — its status as as a non-governmental, not-for-profit organisation.
After being measured against a second string of acceptability criteria — and assuming the UN takes to Morris and that a seat on the board becomes available — there would be a ballot, though no movement on this front is expected until next year.
ARCHIPEL CLAIMS FIRST TRANSPUTER BASED DISTRIBUTED UNIX SYSTEM
Archipel SA of Paris claims that it has the first Inmos International Ltd Transputer-based distributed Unix system, built using Chorus Systemes SA's Unix System V-compatible microkernel technology on Archipel's Volvox-TS line of multiple instruction-multiple data parallel processors.
Volvox-TS uses the T805 Transputer and will move up to the T9000 in due course.
It comes with up to 64 processors, and the T9000 version will take as many as 2,048 processors; the machines come be configured as hypercubes, rings, or binary trees, and come with standard SCS and Ethernet interfaces.
The Volvox will be the reference machine for the Chorus microkernel on the Transputer and is due next month.
BULL READIES GCOS EMULATOR FOR MULTI-PROCESSING RS/6000s
Groupe Bull SA Bull will not develop Posix compliance for its proprietary GCOS operating system, according to Ian Fowler, Bull UK's product marketing manager.
Instead its Boston, Massachusetts-based unit is developing an emulation product called HVX which will enable GCOS 6 applications to run under AIX on the forthcoming multi-processor RS/6000s that it is developing in conjunction with IBM.
HVX will be out in the fourth quarter of next year, by which time the long-expected multi-processing RS/6000 boxes should be on the street.
HVX is currently in alpha test on uni-processor RS/6000s, but it will only be delivered for multi-processors, Fowler says, because GCOS 6 applications need the power multi-processors can offer.
Bull evaluated translation tools from UK firms Sterling Business Systems, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, and from Liverpool-based Fraser Williams, but decided it needed an emulator to enable GCOS applications to fully function.
Bull's rebadged RS/6000s are claimed to be 5% cheaper than IBM's — it will add more peripherals to leverage the mid-range market, it said.
WYSE ADDS TO MP LINES
Wyse Technology Inc, San Jose, California, will this week add new models to its mid-range and high-end Intel Corp-based, symmetric multi-processing Unix systems.
The Series 7000i Model 740MP with up to three 80486DX-33 processors is rated at 80 MIPS, supports from 64 to 175 users and starts at $19,100.
The high-end Series 9000i Model 960MP comes with from one to eight 80486DX2–50 CPUs is rated at 320 MIPS, comes with from 16Mb to 384Mb RAM, supports from 250 to 400 users and costs from $40,000.
Both run Unix V.3.2 or SVR4.0MP with SVR4.2 Destiny to follow.
An entry-level Series 6000i Model 645 with one 80486DX-33 processor supporting 16 to 64 users costs $8,400.
All ship this month.
CRAY LAUNCHES C++ COMPILER
Having adopted Silicon Graphics Inc's Iris Explorer object-oriented application building environment last month, Cray Research Inc now has a C++ compiler to go with it.
The Cray C++ Compiling System is an enhanced supercomputer version of Unix Systems Laboratories Inc's C++ Language System 3.0.1, and operates in conjunction with the existing Cray Standard C Compiler.
The C++ Language System runs on the full line and has been licensed to two undisclosed customers.
ENCORE ADDS A DISTRIBUTED REAL-TIME EXECUTIVE UNIX
Encore Computer Corp, Fort Lauderdale, Florida has joined the real-time Unix fray with the launch of its Distributed Real-Time Executive for development and control.
DRTX runs on the company's new RSX 90 systems, and users of the company's proprietary Concept/32 real-time minicomputers are offered a cost-effective upgrade option.
As a development environment, the new DRTX targets both the 88000 RISC-based RSX and Concept-based 90 Family and Encore offers a complete software engineering environment and a Macintosh-like graphical user interface.
No word on pricing for it.
MODCOMP WINS X/OPEN CERTIFICATION FOR REAL/IX
AEG AG's Fort Lauderdale, Florida-based Modular Computer Systems Inc reports that X/Open Co Ltd has completed the certification of its Real/IX real-time Unix operating system, and claims that it is the first real-time Unix to be registered with X/Open under its test and verification programme for open systems.
DOWNTIME ‘COSTS US BUSINESS $4,000m A YEAR’— STRATUS REPORT
A survey of leading US businesses sponsored by Stratus Computer Inc of Marlborough, Massachusetts, which has an interest in spreading alarm and despondency about these things, suggests that computer downtime cost the country at least $4,000m in lost productivity and revenue last year; and with 75% of respondents indicating that their businesses are becoming increasingly reliant on computing systems this figure looks set to grow.
The sample comprised 450 information system executives from major corporations in the telecommunications, travel and transport, insurance, manufacturing, banking, securities, and retail industries who were questioned about the costs and other impacts of online computer system failures.
The results showed that businesses lost $3,400m in annual revenue due to computer failure.
An average hourly revenue loss of $78,191 was identified though some individual companies put losses at $500,000 plus.
Further significant costs resulted from lost productivity with 37.3m lost hours (translatable into more than $400m if you take the average hourly wage as $10.53); 60% of companies included overtime costs, and 7.6% added fines to their expenses.
It was found that customer dissatisfaction and lost productivity due to computer downtime were considered to have a greater impact than the quantifiable loss of revenue due to downtime.
Lost customers, dissatisfied corporate management, and lost data also were deemed significant.
The findings indicated that, on average, computer systems crash nine times per year, per company, and that those systems stay down for an average of four hours.
MICROKERNEL UNIX SVR4 STILL IN THE AIR AS UNIX LABS WEIGHS OBJECT TECHNOLOGIES
Speaking at a Unix Labs Pacific System Software Technology Seminar held recently in Tokyo, Michael Miracle, the director of the Unix System Development Department at Unix System Laboratories Inc in New Jersey and the person responsible for the development and testing of the System V.4 ES/MP release, said that Unix Labs was currently involved in internal debate and discussion with customers about the release of a microkernel-based version of System V.4.
He was not currently ready to commit that the release after System V.4 ES/MP would be a microkernel-based one.
The decision to go ahead or not would be based on a business assessment of the development costs against potential revenue, and the decision would be strongly influenced by customer input.
While Unix Labs's value-added reseller and equity relationship with Chorus Systemes SA has prompted speculation that the Chorus microkernel would be used as a matter of course, Miracle said that in the US, and certainly in government circles, Carnegie Mellon University's Mach was a popular choice.
Other issues being considered for inclusion in future versions of Unix System V included object-orientation, where Unix System Labs was looking at Choices from the University of Illinois and ISIS, a product for virtual synchronisation from Cornell University — these technologies are needed for distributed systems.
Unix Labs is also examining object-oriented frameworks for coarse-grained serverising of ES/MP.
IBM JAPAN's RS/6000-BASED VIRTUAL MACHINING CENTRE FOR AUTOMAKERS
IBM Japan Ltd, Mazda Ltd, and French company ESI SA have jointly developed a virtual machining centre that IBM Japan is marketing.
The system is designed for testing of machine tool pressings of car parts on a workstation.
The system is called PAM-Stamp and runs on the RS/6000.
The software interfaces with crash simulation software PAM-Crash, which is used by almost all car-makers in Japan.
Price for a standard configuration system running on the high-end RS/6000 Model 560 costs around $243,000.
FUJITSU DOES SPARCSTATION VERSION OF ICAD
Fujitsu Ltd has developed an S-family — Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstation — version of its ICAD mechanical design software.
Known as ICAD/MX, it uses the Open Look graphical user interface with icons and button menus, and other features such as multiple windows.
Three-dimensional solid rendering functions use the feature parametric technique.
It has interfaces to a number of products such as Cadam, I-DEAS and Unigraphics and is from $13,000; Fujitsu looks to sell 3,000 systems over three years.
SRA LAUNCHES JAPANESE VERSION OF UNIX FRAMEMAKER
Major software house SRA Ltd has released a new Japanese version of Frame Technology Corp's Framemaker desktop publishing software, which includes peculiarly Japanese functions such as vertical printing and automatic numbering of Kanji and other characters.
The new version, Japanese Framemaker 2.1X, is available on the Solbourne Computer Corp Sparcsystems from Matsushita Computer Systems Ltd, on Sony Corp NEWS workstations via Rikei Ltd, and on the Okistation 7300 through Oki Electric Industry Co Ltd.
LUCID REELS IN LISP DEALS
Compiler house Lucid Inc, Menlo Park, California, has won a contract from the US defence agency, DARPA, to integrate Lisp, C and C++ environments for various image-understanding projects currently underway.
The company says it is also taking control of the Common Lisp interface manager for Apple Computer Inc Macintosh computers and is to become an Apple value-added reseller for Macintosh Common Lisp.
The interface, MacCLIM, which it will distribute and support, comes from International Lisp Associates and costs $500 — Macintosh Common Lisp, which it will support, is Apple's implementation of the language and also costs $500.
Without pausing for breath, Lucid says it has also signed with Artificial Technologies Inc, Elmsford, New York, to market and support the consulting firm's Lips-based tools — including a Motif-based toolkit — and has released XLT, a set of X-Windows-based tools for its own Common Lisp environment on Sun, HP and IBM workstations.
AST MANHATTAN RUNS SCO MPX 2.0 —‘CAN MIX AND MATCH CISC AND RISC’
AST Research Inc, Irvine, California, will use the stage set by the SCO Forum in California this week to roll out a new multi-processor system in a bid for a piece of the collapsing $30bn minicomputer market.
The fully symmetric multi-processor, officially dubbed the AST Manhattan SMP, will be the first implementation of SCO MPX 2.0 to support symmetric hardware, the company said, indicating it collaborated with SCO on its development.
An AST spokeswoman claimed Manhattan's architecture incorporates a processor-independent design that would allow unspecified RISC chips to be substituted for the Intel Corp 50MHz 80486DX microprocessors that will kick off the line.
This swap-out, however, which the spokeswoman attributed to the processor being kept separate from the I/O, would depend on AST developing one of its Cupid upgrade modules to handle it, according to sources close to the company.
They said AST has no current plans for such a development.
Provisions to go to Intel's P5 when it is available will doubtless be made.
The spokeswoman said Manhattan would be available with up to four processors.
Each order will apparently be custom configured.
A uniprocessor with 1Gb disk should begin shipping in the US in November priced at around $25,000.
AST plans to make the box available running other operating systems as well including Microsoft NT, Novell SuperServer, Banyan Vines and perhaps Solaris 2.0.
SPARC CLONERS CRY FOUL
The powers that be over at Sun Microsystems Computer Corp and SunSoft Inc are starting to collect complaints from cloners and resellers over the way SMCC salesmen are hustling volume accounts, not playing by the rules and nosing compatibles out of upgrade sites.
SMCC is allegedly telling customers SunSoft products can only be run on Sun hardware, making it harder for Sparcettes to snare the upgrade business.
Their premise directly contradicts SunSoft's stated position to its OEM customers that the operating system is transferable.
SUN SNARES MIPS VP FOR SPARC DRIVE
Sun Microsystems Inc pulled off another recruiting coup last week enticing MIPS vice president Chet Silvestri into the Sun fold as vice president, technology sales, a newly created slot reporting to Joe Roebuck, SMCC's vice president of worldwide field operations.
Ironically, Silvestri will manage a new group devoted to securing Sparc chip, board and system design wins, especially in market segments where Sun has little history such as embedded real-time.
Silvestri's role will be to bring focus to a task that Sun has previously handled only on an ad hoc basis.
During his six-year tenure with MIPS, Silvestri did the same kind of job.
He said he left for the thrill of a start-up rather than the tedium of maintenance, indicating Silicon Graphics, MIPS new master, did not consider making the MIPS chip a universal standard as much of a priority as Sun does the Sparc.
FAXIMUM AND HP WORK ON CLIENT/SERVER FAX SOFTWARE
Vancouver-based Unix FAX pioneer Faximum Software will announce an agreement with Hewlett-Packard this week at the SCO Forum that will have the pair jointly developing a true client/server FAX software product for Unix workstations.
Faximum is contributing its FAX software expertise and existing server technology while HP kicks in with human factors engineering and client/server technology.
Each will market what results independently.
The product will utilise TCP/IP networks to connect clients running an X-based Motif user interface to a FAX server supporting one or more external FAX modems.
The client/server protocol has been developed by Faximum and is network-and host-independent.
This will reportedly allow FAX clients and servers to run on different architectures and versions of Unix and still work together.
The product will support PCL and Postscript emulations as well as FAX viewing under X. Special patented technology will be used to route incoming FAXes to the appropriate client workstation automatically.
Faximum will port the product to a number of platforms including SCO's Open Desktop.
IBM PAID SEVEN FIGURE SUM FOR INTERACTIVE CODE TO HEAD OFF COMPATIBLE THREAT
There are many things now riding on IBM's AIX Unix implementation(s): the PowerOpen operating system for PowerPC platforms will be based upon AIX 4, some AIX technology will find its way into Pink — the object-oriented environment out of IBM/Apple Computer Inc's Taligent joint venture — Pink stuff will find its way back into PowerOpen Unix and Apple is committed to AIX for its future Unix requirements.
So it is perhaps not surprising, though it wasn't made public at the time, that IBM last year paid a seven figure sum to what was then Interactive Systems Corp for the substantial body of Unix development work that Interactive provided to IBM's Advanced Interactive Executive, AIX, effort.
IBM bought up the technology outright before going public on its agreement with Apple to ensure that no enterprising outfit could subsequently go off and get a licence from Interactive that would allow it to develop compatible versions of PowerOpen, AIX or even Pink.
NOW LOTUS DOES APPLICATIONS FOR HP
Girding its loins for a deeper plunge into the commercial market, Hewlett-Packard Co last week announced a strategic relationship with Lotus Development Corp that will see Lotus Notes, cc:Mail, Ami Pro and Freelance Graphics ported to its first native Unix platform, HP/UX.
HP is assisting.
Lotus promises that the prices of the Unix versions of the software will not be significantly different from their PC  forebears .
Client versions should be identical.
Initially Lotus will supply the software through its own channels, recently bolstered in a search for more sophisticated resellers.
HP, however, intimated the relationship might expand to include bundling.
The software will of course be ultimately ported to other Unix platforms and probably NT.
A Sun version of cc:Mail is already announced and Ami Pro and 1–2-3 as is also promised for DEC's Alpha platform running OSF/1 (UX No 398).
HP plans to have cc:Mail work with its own OpenMail with cc:Mail as the interface.
COROLLARY BACK ON INTEL TRACK
Irvine, California-based Corollary Inc is to launch a new multi-processor board set based upon Intel Corp's 80486 DX2–66 CPU at the SCO Forum in Santa Cruz, California, this week.
Utilising Corollary's Extended C-bus and the EISA I/O bus, the 486/smp XM is a dual-bus subsystem which can support up to 10 processors The personal computer-compatible set supports up to 256Mb RAM by virtue of the firm's Extended C-bus and will run Santa Cruz Operation Inc's SCO MPX 2.0 and Unix System Labs' SVR4.0 MP.
A base configuration with a 13-slot EISA backplane, 486/smp EISA bridge, 486/smp I/O and smp Memory/256 is priced at $12,500 — SCSI and serial I/O can be added for $7,500.
PUZZLE SOFTWARE ALLOWS UNIX BOXES TO ACT AS NETWARE SERVERS
Morgan Hill, California-based Puzzle Systems Inc has brought out SoftNet Utilities, software that will allow HP, IBM, SCO and Sparc platforms to act as Novell Inc NetWare-compatible file servers as well as run Unix applications.
First shipments, priced between $1,300 and $3,000 depending on the number of users, are for Sparc machines, with the others to follow by the end of the year.
Puzzle says NetWare 2.2 and 3.11 server emulation is selectable.
Personal computer clients can directly and transparently access the Unix file system and printing resources.
Conversely Unix users can access NetWare print resources.
Each package includes a MS-DOS terminal emulator for NetWare clients to access Unix hosts via the IPX protocol.
MINIGRAMS
Unix International Europe's technical director, Nick Price, wasn't taking a swipe at the whole Posix standards effort in last week's piece (UX No 397), he just wanted to point out that the Posix P1003.1 specification alone is no guarantee of portability.
As expected (UX No 395), Performance Technologies Inc, Rochester, New York, has announced a Sparc system for real-time and embedded markets based upon LSI Logic Corp's SparKit-40Mbus: the PT-SYS5000 SBus/System comes with four — $5,500 — or eight — $6,000 — SBus slots and will run Lynx Real Time Systems Inc's LynxOS real-time Unix implementation.
San Francisco, California-based PeerLogic has announced a port of version 3.1 of Pipes for SunOs: Pipes, the company's distributed computing framework, is claimed to support asynchronous, object-oriented messaging, a dynamic, global naming service and multiple operating systems and transport protocols — prices start at $700.
RDI Corp, San Diego, California, has piggybacked on Sun's exclusive Canadian distributor, Merisel, to peddle its BriteLite Sparc portables.
The Open Software Foundation is holding an end user forum in Brussels on September 29, followed by a special interest group on the 30th, which will focus on the telecommunications marketplace.
C++ World, The Users Conference, is scheduled for November 16–20 at the Meadowlands Hilton in New Jersey.
The August issue of RISC Management warns its readers not to believe any Intel Corp hype about the P5 being 64-bit.
‘It isn't!,’ it claims.
‘The address bus is 36-bits and integer registers 32-bits.’
However, the newsletter, which figures the chip will start life at 50MHz, reckons that performance will come in close to the R4000.
RISC Management also claims Microsoft Corp has a Sparc version of NT running.
PC Week columnist Will Zachmann writes: ‘…a good hard look at Windows NT leaves little room for optimism that it will deliver useful symmetric multi-processing capabilities anytime soon, either on the desktop or on a server.
That isn't because NT doesn't support SMP.
It's because NT supports SMP in a way that has very limited utility for most users…
NT's SMP implementation is not for existing iAPX-86 personal computers at all…
New hardware with new system board designs using new interrupt controller architectures will be required to make effective and efficient use of Windows NT's symmetric multi-processing capabilities…
[It's]a case of ‘all dressed up and nowhere to go.’’
John White, president of Texas Instruments Inc's Information Technology Group, will be keynoting NetWorld 92, October 14–15, in Dallas.
Netwise Inc has picked up $8.5m in third-round venture capital from eight firms including Hancock Venture Partners and the Japan Associated Finance Co, both of whom are new to the company: the money will be used for further development.
Australia's Collaborative Information Technology Research Institute is looking for a joint venture partner in North America for Atlas, its C-based database management system.
Call (213) 467–3532.
The first Unix Reseller Show & Conference, set for May 4–6, 1993 in Dallas, is apparently coming out of the blocks stronger than anticipated.
So far it's collected some 40 exhibitors and they're the kind of brand names show managers love: DEC, HP, Sun, SCO, USL, UI, Unisys, NCR, Compaq, Univel and MIPS/Silicon Graphics.
Software houses have been slow to response but the square footage sold to date is reportedly ahead of schedule.
Interested parties should call (609) 987–9400.
Colorado-based CERAM Inc can now put 960MB of external storage on a Sparc pizza box with its TurboSwap products: the peripherals are said to improve price/performance and response time significantly on fully loaded systems by eliminating latency.
Attention, international players.
Unigram.X has just published its annual statistical survey, ‘Unix Users in the UK 1992.’
The most significant Unix users in Great Britain were asked about their Unix installations, intentions and preferences.
The data collected covers issues such as brand name awareness, future expenditures, purchasing considerations, satisfaction, software usage, levels of systems failures and porting and migration plans.
The 62-page report, which sets out to establish both market share information by vendor and key trends, attempts to pinpoint where the real opportunities lie and provides some nifty competitive data.
We think it's essential reading but then we would say that wouldn't we.
US price is $200 — call (516) 759–7025.
UK price is £175, call (0) 71 867 9880.
Volume discounts available.
Digital Review, soon to turn into Digital News & Review because of a merger with Digital News (UX No 397), claims DEC is going after Wang, Unisys and IBM customers with a migration scheme that would allow applications running on System/36, System/38, Wang and Unisys CISC systems to run on Alphas.
The tools, it says, are an outgrowth of DEC's VAX Environment Software Translator (VEST) programme.
DEC expects to add other systems such as the AS/400 down the road.
We hear a PowerOpen consortium is in bud and will probably come into full flower in the fall: petals include Bull, IBM, Apple, Motorola and Thomson at least.
The X Business Group is predicting sales of PC X servers will top 175,000 units this year, up 300% from 1991, when total shipments were 58,500, with database application by far the most popular.
Chips & Technologies Inc, San Jose, has decided that the iAPX-86 microprocessor market is getting too crowded, and rather than go head to head with Intel Corp and what is becoming a horde of clonemakers, it has decided to redirect its Super386 design to the single chip processor and embedded control markets.
Sun Microsystems Inc has signed a long-term lease for three buildings in Chelmsford, Massachusetts to consolidate the four existing offices it has in the state.
It said that the move is not expected to impact the 1,100 employees that Sun has in the state.
The new facility will house the operations currently spread between Billerica, Andover, Methuen and Westford, and should be completed by the end of 1993.
Sun also plans to lease another building and has further options nearby.
We had a little chat with Unix System Labs president Roel Pieper last week and he didn't exactly rule out the possibility of USL making a takeover move on Santa Cruz Operation Inc (UX No 396): however, he said, it wouldn't be a good business value unless both firms were committed to going in the same direction.
He didn't want to usurp any announcement by SCO (see page one) and was still talking in terms of how SCO might gracefully go to SVR4 and whether the companies' two technologies might be blended.
He probably still won't believe he has a deal until he hears Doug and Larry Michels make a public commitment with his own ears.
Meanwhile, rumour, and this is only rumour, mind you, has USL president Roel Pieper becoming president of Novell Inc.
IBM is saying it's delivered a million copies of OS/2 and predicts it could reach two million by the end of the year: Microsoft Corp voiced scepticism about the number to The Wall Street Journal to which IBM VP Jim Cannavino retorted, ‘A stork didn't bring [the one million copies]and I assure you I haven't cooked the books.’
Applix Inc is moving to get itself well distributed: this week it will announce it's got Merisel handling Aster*x state-side and that it's pulled off an exclusive five-year $15m deal with K K Ashisuto, Japan's second largest software distributor.
OSF's business manager for DCE, Jon Gossels, says X/Open's endorsement of DCE — see front page —‘demonstrates the industry-wide support for DCE as a de facto standard.’
Indeed, most X/Open members have already committed to DCE in one way or another, including Unix International and Unix System Labs.
Even Sun is providing hooks for prospective DCE users in the Federated Services for its Sunsoft sibling's Solaris operating system.
The move is unlikely to open the way for X/Open to adopt OSF Motif as a standard for graphical user interfaces because ‘the desktop battle still isn't won,’ X/Open says, admitting that it ‘missed the bus,’on that one.