

UNIX SYSTEM LABS AND SCO REACH ‘STRATEGIC INTERFACE AGREEMENT’
Unix System Labs and The Santa Cruz Operation were patting each other on the back last week, their leaders having emerged from a late night session in the midst of SCO Forum with what they called a ‘workable plan to come together.’
For months SCO has resisted adopting SVR4 even though SCO co-founder Doug Michels recently told Unigram.X he had finally ‘bitten the ideological bullet’ and was prepared to step out on the SVR4 road provided it could get the right terms (UX No 398).
At SCO Forum the pair announced a ‘strategic’ interface agreement-in-principle that will have SCO licensing for a ‘fair price’all the SVR4.2 technology surrounding application development tools such as compilers, debuggers, C++ and linkers.
USL president Roel Pieper told Unigram the pact will allow SCO and USL to present a common uniform environment to ISVs.
This environment will apparently appear in a future version of SCO Unix, however, it was unclear at press time whether that software would be SVR4.
An official statement the companies were hammering out also at press time was unlikely to clarify that point.
Pieper said it was not in SCO's best interest to announce it was going to SVR4 now since it had no product and the admission would kill its business.
He explained that he was interested in SCO being as strong as possible for the mutual fight against Microsoft.
He also characterized the proposed agreement as ‘a practicable  manageable first step’ toward harmony and indicated that he and Michels had formulated ‘concrete and exact steps’for the future.
It's not important whether it's ‘SVR4 or SVR5,’ he said, ‘it just means Unix will be bigger.’
SUN ‘DEVELOPING ITS OWN X-TERMINAL’ AFTER INDUSTRY TALKS
Sun Microsystems is apparently considering taking back every nasty thing it ever said about X terminals and entering the business.
For the last year at least it's been talking with X terminal vendors such as Network Computing Devices, Tektronix, Visual Technology and Human Designed Systems under non-disclosure.
However sources say that all these talks, which don't appear to have progressed much beyond soliciting proposals from some, have come to nothing and that Sun is now resolved on developing its own terminal, an activity already believed to be underway, perhaps at its East Coast facility, long a champion of such a product.
One possible obstacle to an OEM deal is the narrow margin that such a low-end product would entail.
Another is the amount of control Sun would want to exercise over future technology.
Reportedly it wanted a leg up on the business to reduce its development time and eventually aimed to take over the whole project.
Then too, Sun has more than a touch of the ‘not invented here’ syndrome.
The only quality Sun is known to have wanted in an X terminal is that it be Sparc-based, something no existing X terminals house offers.
To save itself time in getting to market, it could write some software and cannibalise one of its diskless workstations for an initial offering.
The effect of Sun entering the market, which the other vendors anticipate will be in the next six to 12 months, could significantly stimulate it.
X terminal makers simply cannot imagine Sun not entering the business since it must defend its historical market, the desktop.
As it is, Sun remains the only major player to snub the box, yet X terminals leader NCD hangs a significant share of its machines on Sun sites or on heterogeneous systems involving Suns, while rivals HP has no problem with selling combinations of workstations and X-terminals for a considerable price-per-seat advantage.
But Sun will have to eat its words and may have to declare a product like its News windowing system dead.
Grass routes
Up until now it has maintained a purity of vision that sees a workstation not a terminal on every desk.
Many inside of Sun at the grass roots level have not agreed with that corporate gospel, hence the repeated attempts to wheel one out the door only to see those plans aborted by management and marketing.
Such a fate could await this current effort.
Sun could simply cut prices on its diskless workstations to fend off the X terminals crowd, says X Business Group analyst Greg Blatnik, but he doesn't really believe it, preferring to think they will join the fray instead.
Clandestinely Sun, which will only admit to tracking the industry, has already done some X terminals deals, sources say, including its agreement with Labtam in Australia (UX No 391).
X terminals sales, one of the liveliest computer sectors, are growing at 100% a year, according to X Business Group figures.
OSF STARTS WORK ON NEW-GENERATION MOTIF
The Open Software Foundation has unofficially put out a Request For Technology for its next generation graphical user interface, UEC II,(UX No 392).
Responding to the demand from the market that Motif should evolve from essentially what is a developer's toolkit to more of an end user product, OSF has kicked off its efforts by announcing the GUI Application Interoperability Architecture (GAIA) initiative.
Getting the ball rolling sooner than expected, OSF held a series of technology workshops in Cambridge, Massachusetts last week to formulate a standardised architecture to support application interoperability on the X-Window system.
According to OSF, the base specification for UEC II will be developed from the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA)— which, the OMG says, provides a standardised interoperable layer interfacing the application and the graphical user interface.
Incorporating this object-oriented technology in UEC II will enable applications written in different Motif environments to communicate with each other by treating services such as e-mail, fax, and file naming as objects, OMG says.
CORBA will also bring real-time functionality to the Motif environment.
Existing applications developed in Motif 1.2 environments will be compatible with future Motif releases, OSF claims.
Object Widgets
The Object Management Group meantime, is currently developing CORBA 1.2 specifications which will add security, lifecycle, naming and persistence functions to the architecture — CORBA 1.2 is scheduled for release in 1993.
Specifications for e-mail and word processing will follow in 1994 — CORBA 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 specifications will all be UEC II-compliant.
OSF meantime, has also put out a call for object-oriented widgets for the GAIA architecture.
Object-based widget libraries will enable UEC II and Motif 1.2 applications to integrate as interactive objects for rich text and PC-like user interface controls.
The request for widgets falls into two categories: a rich text widget to support editing of text with various colours and typefaces; and control widgets, which will provide equivalent functionality to PC user interfaces, spin button, field stepper and thermometer slider.
Submissions for widgets are due by September 4.
OSF which is said to have already started coding for the GAIA specification, has slated the middle of next year to deliver the first snapshots of the specification.
SUN JUGGLES WITH ITS EUROPEAN DISTRIBUTION STRATEGY
Revamping its Sparcstation distribution strategy, Sun Microsystems Europe Inc, based in Bagshot, Surrey, has opened a European product distribution centre (PDA) in Montfoort, Amsterdam, Holland.
The company is also to set up PDAs in North America and the Far East with dates to be decided.
European distribution was located at Sun's Linlithgow manufacturing plant in Scotland (UX No 300), also responsible for CPU production.
According to Sun's European marketing manager, Steve Raby, distribution staff from Linlithgow will be relocated to Holland, avoiding redundancies.
He said that the move would give Linlithgow more room to concentrate on CPU manufacturing.
Machine assembly will continue at the plant, with ready-made parts supplied by outside contractors, and finished products will be shipped to Holland for distribution to customers.
Holland was chosen as ‘it has the freight forwarding expertise and can get products to customers quicker’, claimed Raby, who said that Sun would continue to expand the Linlithgow manufacturing plant and has already opened new buildings there.
A Sun spokesperson also confirmed that the company was to terminate its contract with ICL Ltd for Sparcstation circuit board manufacture at ICL's Kidsgrove plant (UX No 291).
Sun will be manufacturing the boards itself from now on.
Mike Redfern, ICL's International Manufacturing Director, refused to confirm this: ‘It's business as usual.
Some contracts come to an end and others begin.
We are already negotiating new OEM deals with Sun’.
Inside sources also say that Sun is intending to cut back on its Value Added Resellers (VARS) with a major contract being review in October.
David Thompson, Sun's indirect sales director, claimed that the review is ‘to rout out rogue VARs who falsely say they have added value’.
Fifty per cent of Sun's business comes from indirect channels and this will remain so in future, said Thompson.
He also denied that Sun was to ditch its distribution contract with Technology plc, now owned by ICL (UX No 394).
INFORMIX SIGNS $9m DEAL WITH DEC
Informix Software has signed a pan-European contract with DEC to supply its relational database software — Informix-Online and Informix-SE — for DEC's Ultrix systems and Alpha-based machines.
Under the terms of the $9m contract, customers will be able to purchase Informix products from Digital as well as from traditional DEC resellers.
Informix's full line of development tools will also be supplied including the developers toolkit, Informix-4GL, Informix-SQL and Wingz — a graphical spreadsheet.
Connectivity products offered on DEC Unix-based systems will include Informix-Star, which works with Informix-Online to deliver distributed database capabilities; and Informix-Net, which provides connectivity for Informix database software in a client/server architecture.
SIEMENS NIXDORF CUTS 6,000 MORE JOBS
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG last week put numbers on its next round of job cuts, saying it will shed 6,000 from its 49,200-strong workforce between September this year and September 1994.
The new round is intended to save the firm $680m.
It adds that over the period, other areas will expand.
In the first round, 3,300 jobs have gone since the middle of 1991, saving $410m.
IBM's PARALLEL PLANS INCLUDE NEW VERSION OF AIX/ESA, MVS IN ROM, OS/2 AT DESKTOP
IBM Corp has begun briefing key integrators and software developers on its enterprise-wide client-server strategy.
According to Computer Reseller News, the new generation machines will be highly parallel systems using hundreds rather than thousands of processors in massively parallel configurations.
The machines may be demonstrated in November, but shipments are unlikely to begin before next year.
Core to the strategy is the ability to use multiple operating systems and IBM is believed to be developing a new version of AIX/ESA that will run on both the RS/6000 workstations and highly-parallel servers.
IBM has yet to say when the new operating system will ship, but users will be able to tie in the PowerPC, providing a single operating system from the desktop through departmental servers to highly-parallel enterprise servers.
MVS, OS/2 and AIX
The new machines will run MVS, enabling users to maintain mainframe databases and regardless of whether the operating system is MVS or AIX, both will act as servers for OS/2-based desktops.
Further, that integration is to be made more seamless over the coming year when IBM will begin merging OS/2 and AIX, enabling them to use the same database and share application development tools.
The chip technology is said to come from IBM's Yorktown Heights research centre, and the report suggests that it will be scalable from deskside towers to supercomputers, and IBM may target the Cray Research Inc market.
Nonetheless, critics say that getting to market in a timely manner may be difficult, and in addition to competition from the likes of Hewlett-Packard Co and NCR Corp, there is widespread concern that proprietary machines like IBM's AS/400 will supplant the mainframe before IBM can establish cost-effective highly-parallel systems.
Some analysts express concern that the new systems will be less secure and incapable of doing donkey work like batch processing.
Meantime, sources in the UK say that IBM's highly-parallel computer system will come with 16 boards per rack and 32 engines per board, 10 MIPS per engine.
MVS, believe it or not, will run out of ROM and the chips, contrary to the report in Computer Reseller News, will be based on CMOS technology and sourced from Intel Corp.
NOVELL DELAYS NETWARE 4.0 DELIVERY
Novell Inc will push back delivery of the beta version of NetWare 4.0 until September, according to prospective beta testers that have spoken to Microbytes Daily: at least two potential beta testers were told by sales reps that the 4.0 beta version, originally due last week, will be delayed while Novell improves the software's interface and ramps up staffing on the 4.0 support hot lines; also, one of the crucial issues Novell has yet to resolve is how easily network administrators will be able to migrate from their existing versions; 4.0 is expected to include major enhancements to the operating system's administration services, including audit trails for all file activity and a new retrieve-based user directory.
TIMING COULD BE KEY TO NOVELL-USL NEGOTIATIONS
The industry's reaction to news of the Novell/USL negotiations (UX No 398) is less one of surprise at the possibility that Novell might effectively buy Unix than at the timing.
Armchair strategists reckon that the terms AT&T can demand now for all or part of USL are less than it could get when both Univel and SVR4.2 have proven themselves.
Theoretically, the company's total valuation, based on estimated 1992 revenues of $90m, could range from a low of $270m to a high of $720m, but more probably lies around $500m give or take.
The number used for last year's private placement was $325m.
One way for Novell to increase its current minority position in USL might be for it convert its shares in Univel, where it controls 51%, into USL stock.
For AT&T to be seriously contemplating selling off Unix it would have to be guaranteed a self-sustaining source of the software, since so many of its internal operations, like telephone switching, are Unix-dependent.
Having assured itself of that source, however, doesn't translate into a positive factor — merely a neutral one.
It would have to decide whether or not Unix is integral to its corporate strategy and, if not, whether now was the most appropriate time to cash in its chips.
There was some fretting over the question of whether trading one parent for another rather than going public would put Unix right back where it was when the Open Software Foundation was formed.
Other voices, however, dismissed such concerns by pointing out that the Novell is a software company with a benign reputation and the neutrality of running on anyone's platform.
If it comes to pass, Sun, which wishes it had done the deal with Novell, and presumably The Santa Cruz Operation — though see page 4 — won't be happy.
Hopefully Bill Gates will have a few restless nights too.
X/OPEN SHIPS XPG4 TEST SUITE, READIES SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT API
As expected (UX No 385) standards body X/Open Group Co Ltd, based in Reading, Berkshire, is now shipping its VSX4 test suite.
Products complying with this will receive XPG4 branding, version 4 of X/Open's specification for open systems.
Developed by Unisoft Ltd, based in London, VSX4 incorporates nearly 2,000 extra tests and over 200 extra lines of code.
It is now fully aligned with Posix 1003.1 1990 and development capability for the federal FIPS151–2 extensions.
Also provided is testing for multi-lingual capabilities and wide character support.
VSX4 runs under the OSF/UI test-case harness (Test Environment Toolkit), which attempts to provide an industry agreed common test environment for systems and conformance testing.
In the first quarter of next year, XPG3 mode will be added to enable the transition from VSX3 to VSX4.
X/Open will also publish its Management Protocols Applications Programming Interface (API) which allows access to Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) and Common Management Information Protocol (CMIP) standards.
The API allows applications to be migrated between them and for objects to be managed on remote systems.
The specification is expected to become part of the Omnipoint initiative, a distributed management protocol coordinated by the Network Management Forum.
WANG FILES FOR CHAPTER 11
Saying that it wanted to reorganise as an 8,000-employee company with $1,400m in annual sales, Wang Laboratories Inc last week filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from its creditors.
The planned downsizing means that 5,000 more employees from the current 13,000 — down from 31,000 three years ago — will lose their jobs; the sales target of $1,400m a year compares with $1,900m now.
Wang hopes to continue to operate without interruption during the reorganisation process.
Wang will meantime focus on its big service business and developing selling software an will sell computers made by others, including IBM.
It will shrink its manufacturing operations, ‘considerably’, but will continue to do VS assembly.
The overseas operations of Wang have not filed for bankruptcy.
Meanwhile IBM Corp, which took a 3% to 4% stake in Wang for $25m last year and agreed to consider a 12% to 16% stake if its AS/400 and RS/6000 OEM deal was successful, will not be investing more money.
MICRON FRISC RISC CHIP EFFORT FLOUNDERS
An effort by $500m-a-year semiconductor maker Micron Technology Inc to develop its own 64-bit superscalar single-chip RISC processor has floundered, taking with it the subsidiary built a year ago to house it.
The FRISC chip, which also gave its name to the operation responsible for it, had reportedly reached working silicon and was being put on graphics cards and SBus accelerators for the Sun marketplace when Micron pulled the plug.
The FRISC was apparently intended to go into systems eventually.
A Micron spokesman said the company ceased investing and reassigned engineers to other projects last month because it wasn't getting the ‘best bang for the buck.’
It is unclear whether FRISC Inc sold anything or even attempted to, or whether Micron will try to peddle the technology to someone else.
RISC watcher Andrew Allison remembered FRISC as a merchant chip attempt and says he laughed at Micron months ago when it announced the subsidiary because it didn't have the resources or market presence to pull off a new proprietary architecture.
FRISC got its name from a design that included on-board floating point and  interleaved memory.
FRISC Inc had apparently produced a 80MHz chip capable of 80 MFLOPS single-precision at 64-bit and 160 MFLOPS at 32-bit.
Sustained performance was said to be 38 MFLOPS to 42 MFLOPS double precision.
RAID COMPANY PINS DOWN OEM DEALS FOR HIPPI DISKS
RAID pioneer Maximum Strategy, headquartered in San Jose, California, last week claimed its new fourth-generation HIPPI-based RAID technology will dramatically increase the performance of supercomputers, minisupercomputers and high-performance workstations and enable new applications, especially new commercial supercomputing  applications , by virtue of its faster access to independent blocks of data.
Its Strategy Gen 4 RAID (Redundant Array of Inexpensive Disk) storage combines the performance and capacity of up to 40 standard  high-performance 5.25-inch drives strapped into one fault tolerant storage server.
Maximum has cut Gen 4 OEM deals with IBM and Hughes STX.
Cray Research Inc, Convex Computer Corp, DEC, Intel Corp, MasPar, NEC and Silicon Graphics Inc are evaluating it.
The system will also be marketed to selected users.
Pricing begins at $178,000.
Beta shipments start this month.
Maximum's technology allows programmable RAID level partitioning, so systems can simultaneously support RAID levels 1, 3 and 5 or user-defined partitions.
Each RAID level is good for a particular kind of data.
For instance, level 1 is best for smaller blocks such as file system information and level 3 is best for main memory swaps.
By partitioning, Gen 4 claims to soup up performance.
Gen 4 also endows supercomputers with RAID level 5 storage using a 64Kb block size making its use appropriate for the first time.
Its implementation reportedly supports up to 500 I/Os per second and each I/O request addresses 64KB of data.
While storage systems for other computing markets can provide comparable numbers of I/Os a second, the size of these I/Os are typically 512 bytes or 128 times smaller than Gen 4's I/O size, Maximum says.
Gen 4 will support sustained transfer rates of up to 90MB/s.
Its level 3 implementation offers throughput up to 85MB/s for both reads and writes.
Total formated capacity ranges from 10Gb to 60Gb.
Cost-per-megabyte is $8 compared with $15 to $30 for currently available supercomputer disks.
Maximum, the first company to ship a RAID storage product, is one of only two sources of HIPPI-based RAID storage servers.
The other is IBM which uses Maximum technology in its product line.
BIGGEST SCO FORUM HAS SANTA CRUZ OPERATION CONSOLIDATING ITS RELATIONSHIPS
SCOForum ‘92 is the largest of the eight annual technical and marketing seminar weeks held by the Santa Cruz Operation so far.
Over 2000 delegates were in attendance with about one third coming from outside the US — this year a contingent of about 30 represented the former communist countries of Eastern Europe.
SCO now claims to have shipped over 650,000 Unix systems — more than any other vendor.
Aside from its last-minute agreement with Unix System Labs (see front), SCO was strengthening some other key relationships in preparation for the highly-competitive months ahead for those in the operating system software business.
Paul Lavin reports.
Now SCO cosies up to Novell
SCO is now shipping SCO IPX/SPX, its first Novell connectivity product.
SCO has licensed the NetWare transport protocol from Novell to provide users on PC LANs with access to SCO Unix System V/386 Release 3.2 or Open Desktop 2.0 servers and desktops via terminal emulation.
According to Doug Michels, executive vice president and cofounder of SCO, SCO IPX/SPX is just the first of a number of proposed SCO-Novell products.
‘Yet to come is a Netware client for Unix users that will allow access to Novell Netware LANs — that will be very interesting for users that want better integration between PC LANs and mission critical Unix applications.’
Michels praised Novell's move towards Unix integration: ‘We love ‘em.’,
he said.
Michels mentioned that Novell was using SCO's training program to get their LAN VARs up to speed for USL-Novell joint venture Univel's forthcoming UnixWare program.
Locus boosts speed of Microsoft Windows under Unix
At its Forum ‘92 event, The Santa Cruz Operation demonstrated technology from Locus Computing that will allow SCO users to run protected mode Microsoft Windows 3.1 and its applications under SCO Merge.
Windows applications are starting to require Windows 3.1 and protected mode.
Currently Merge can run Windows 3.0 in real mode only.
Running on a 33MHz 486 under SCO Unix, Windows appeared to be every bit as fast as a copy running in its native DOS environment.
A Locus spokesperson said its goal is 100 per cent of the speed — and felt that it could achieve it.
Availability of Merge 3.0 was quoted as first quarter ‘93.
Locus is working on running Windows 3.1 in enhanced mode for a later release.
Merge is part of the SCO ODT bundle.
PC users to have software video compression and decompression
Keynote speaker Andy Grove, CEO of Intel, announced that by the end of this year, every PC user would have access to software based video compression and decompression.
This was apparently a re-announcement’ and Grove beat hasty retreat.
No it wasn't an Intel product, but was the product of a big software company he was sure we were all familiar with.
In late 1990 Intel launched two chips suitable for building into motherboards to do compression/decompression in hardware for a cost of less than 100 dollars.
Despite the tremendous cost savings progress, no one bought them.
PC margins have grown so slim that no one was incorporating them into PCs for multi media applications as there were no applications that could provide value to a user that bought them.
The software comp/decomp is then seen as a way of pushing the boat out for future Intel processors that will have video handling capabilities built into the main CPU itself.
AST's Manhattan multi-processor is a ‘shrink-wrapped server’
As expected, AST formally announced its Manhattan SMP multi-processor PC' (UX No 398, 377)— it made its first appearance at CeBit in Hannover this spring.
Manhattan SMP carries up to four 50MHz Intel 486DXs with 256Kb of external cache on a 64-bit wide CUPID processor bus.
The system comes with 16Mb of ECC memory that can be expanded to 1Gb when 16Mbit chips are in full availability.
Disk capacity starts at 1Gb and can reach 32Gb.
Manhattan SMP includes many fault resilient features such as hot swappable fans, disks and power supplies.
AST founder Safi Quorshi said ‘This machine is designed to meet the requirement of companies committed to downsizing by replacing their minicomputers with equivalent computing power based on PC architecture.’
Quorshi commented that companies would only do this when they were satisfied that both the PC product and the company selling it had the proper standing.
AST is set to hit $1 billion in revenue in 1992 despite the recession, according the Michael Krieger, AST's director of advanced systems marketing.
Intel's Michael Pope said the the AST Manhattan was spot on for an emerging market for what he termed shrink wrapped servers — application server sold with pre-installed operating system and database software.
Intel sees this as a key development in the proliferation of client-server computing.
SCO hands its 3270 emulation business over to Cleo
SCO has signed a contract with Ann Arbor, Michigan-based Cleo Communications as a sales an support agent for SCO's UniPath SNA-3270 product from this September.
Unipath is an IBM 3270 emulation package for SCO-based systems.
After August 31st, SCO will no longer sell or ship the product, passing all orders, inquiries and support requests over to Cleo, a division of Interface Systems Inc specialising in IBM connectivity.
Cleo says it will continue to maintain and support the product ‘for several years’, but hopes to upgrade SCO users to its own 3270LINKix product, which offers greater functionality.
SCO offers upgrades to Unix and Xenix users
SCO announced a major upgrade program for SCO Xenix and Unix users, allowing them to trade up to SCO Open Desktop 2.0.
Current SCO ODT personal system users will now have an upgrade path to the Server System.
Sales policy for the ODT Small Disk System have yet to be finalised.
According to SCO Marketing Manager Mike Skelton, the Small Disk Systems will be sold in bundles to accommodate large users wanting to bring their legacy desktop PCs up to full client server computing.
The SDS needs only a networked 386SX with a 40Mb hard disk — most of the ODT files are held on a server.
DEC SELLS CUPERTINO MICROMODULE PLANT
Cupertino, California-based MicroModule Systems Inc has announced the completion of its agreement to acquire the assets and technology of DEC's high-density micromodule chip technology (MCM), and manufacturing plant in Cupertino.
The start up company which opened its doors in June, as an independent supplier of multichip packaging and subsystems, bought out the DEC operation as a going concern.
DEC still holds a minority equity position in the company, which is staffed by ex-DEC employees, and remains a customer of its multichip modules.
The cost of keeping the micromodule manufacturing operation was according to Micromodule Systems ‘burning holes in DEC's pockets’, with DEC unable to find enough business within its organisation to justify the plant staying open.
The plant which used to manufacture MCM's for the DEC VAX 9000, will now produce chips for DEC's Ultrix systems.
According to the company's product manager, Howard Green, ‘it's a fair assumption to make that the company will be doing implementations for the Alpha, but we're still negotiating terms.’
The technology itself — originally developed by IBM to produce a higher speed packaged dye on silicon for its thermoconduction module — takes multiple silicon or ceramic wafers and lies a high density raw dye on top of it, which binds a series of chips in a single package.
With the first chips hot off the press, the company is targeting the workstation and personal computer markets, especially systems houses and telecommunication specialists.
MicroModule Systems has also developed accompanying software to test the  substrates of the dye and the finished micromodule itself.
HP PREVIEWS 7100 PA RISC AT INTEREX
This week Interex, Hewlett-Packard Co's user group, will be having its annual meeting in sultry New Orleans and HP is expected to take it into its confidence and announce the first implementation of the PA-RISC 7100 chip in a new single-processor non-Unix business system dubbed the HP 3000 Series 987.
The chip is expected to wend its way into HP's Unix-based Snake workstations next month with the introduction of the Coral II and King Cobra II (UX No 397).
The company described the 100MHz part at the recent Hot Chips conference as registering in excess of 70 SPECint92 and 130 SPECfp92, the highest yet claimed.
HP will compare the 987 to IBM's top-of-the-line AS/400 E90 midrange system, chortling over the estimated 60% cost-of-ownership a 987 user will save over three years.
The 987 will let HP compete against the whole AS/400 family and gives the company added ammunition to continue its assault on the downsizing mainframe market.
HP estimates the 7100 chip will boost performance of the 3000 by 30% in transaction processing environments over the preceding 977 model.
It promises three to four times the performance of an AS/400 E90.
The 987 can be purchased as a pre-configured integrated package including HP TurboImage and Allbase/SQL databases and a 100-user license for $320,000.
A base system with hardware and OS is $220,000.
Shipments begin in September.
Other 3000 boxes can be upgraded to a 987 with a board swap for a third of the cost of a new system.
LSI LOGIC SELLS VIDEO LOGIC ARM
Munich, Bavaria-based Spea Software AG has rallied the Glenwood Capital venture capital company to help it to acquire the assets of the Video Seven graphics board subsidiary of LSI Logic Corp, on undisclosed terms.
Assets from the purchase will be combined with Spea's US subsidiary, whose name will be changed to Computer Visualisation Technologies Inc; it will market both the Video Seven and Spea graphics product lines for personal computers.
The new company will be based in Fremont, and will employ management, engineering and customer support personnel from both Spea and LSI Logic's Video Seven group.
Computer Visualisation Technologies will use Video Seven's established distribution channel to sell the combined graphics product lines in North America with European distribution handled by Spea Software AG.
PRECISION VISUALS SIGNS UP CONVEX
Boulder, Colorado-based, Precision Visuals Inc has announced that version 4.0 of its graphics visual  analysis data software, PV-Wave, will now support Convex Computer Corp's line of supercomputing machines.
The move by Precision to break out of the workstation market into the higher echelons of data analysis is, the company says, the first in a series of developments the firm is working on in the supercomputing arena.
PV-Wave is designed to visually display statistical and complex data by means of multi-dimensional graphics and tables.
The software is available in two versions, either as a command language for application developers wishing to migrate their own sub-routines into the environment, or as a point and click configuration for ad hoc users — Convex will take the command language version.
Precision and Convex are currently co-developing vectorisation and parallel  extensions of PV-Wave, which will add increased real-time and processing functionality for complex statistical analysis.
Precision plans to release a vectorised version of PV-Wave in December for Convex machines — beta tests are scheduled to begin in October.
Parallelised configurations aren't penned in until 1993.
Precision will also provide Canada-based, Visual Edge Technology Inc's Motif implementation, UIM/X, as a graphical user interface front-end.
A licence for PV-Wave is priced from £12,000 to £22,000 depending on CPU configuration.
WAVETRACER ADDS HIPPI INTERFACE
Wavetracer Inc has added a HIPPI, High Performance Parallel Interface, for its Zephyr deskside massively parallel computer: this will enable users to address real-time, interactive visualisation of large scientific computing problems at the desktop.
It supports visualisation of three-dimensional data sets for applications such as satellite and medical imaging, molecular modelling, and image compositing.
The Wavetracer HIPPI input-output module reorganises and transfers data between the Zephyr and HIPPI-compatible peripherals and systems, achieving a sustained data transfer rate of 100Mbps by exploiting the Zephyr's high-band width architecture; at the same time, Wavetracer announced a HIPPI Visual Display Processor plug-in option board that supports high resolution and high frame rate visualisation.
The Zephyr will also support industry-standard HIPPI visualisation devices available from other vendors.
IBM PREPARES SCSI-2 FOR THE RS/6000
IBM Corp is planning to introduce new technology that is intended to increase the input-output transfer rate of the RS/6000, helping eliminate bottlenecks between the microprocessor and disk drive.
Computer Reseller News says that the second generation SCSI, SCSI-2, will be added by the Austin, Texas team and that it will provide transfer rates of up to 10Mbps.
It is a necessary step if IBM is to remain competitive in networked environments because it enables data to move at the same speed between the CPU and peripherals as it moves over Ethernet.
Nonetheless, commentators say that while SCSI-2 will alleviate transaction processing problems, it is insufficient to handle multi-media applications which involve moving full-motion video images on a network.
SHORT-LIVED EXPLAIN RUNS OUT OF CASH
After less than six months in the X Window market, eXplain Solutions Ltd, based in London, has folded.
The company's managing director, Howard Sayles, says that the company ran out of money because of a lack of short-term contracts.
‘We could find people who wanted £3m worth of business over a few years, but failed to get any quick profit deals.
Although we broke even, we could not pay our wages and decided to call it a day’.
He claims this is typical of the market in general, because taking on X is a major strategic decision: ‘X Windows is still embryonic, and with the recession people are delaying their decision making’.
A former Metrologie employee, Sayles says eXplain was restricted from attacking the Metrologie X terminal customer base.
Now he is working as a sales director for Acer/Altos UK Ltd.
Former eXplain colleagues, Lisa Hammond and Brian Mulligan, are still looking for new positions.
MINIGRAMS
The more things change, the more they stay the same: taking a leaf from our own book, InformationWeek says it procured an internal IBM memo written June 26 by the director of advanced workstations and AIX systems Jeff Mason telling staffers not to push System/3x users to the RS/6000, which he himself is responsible for, for fear of undercutting sales of the company's highly profitable higher margin AS/400s.
It's truly gratifying to see that despite all this talk of reorganisation Big Blue is still willing to eat its own children.
Microsoft claims to have shipped more than 10,000 NT developers' kit in the month since they were first put out.
Meanwhile, the company is reportedly preparing to demo some previously unseen systems management functionality in NT this week at a conference in Boston including software distribution, performance monitoring and inventory control.
IBM is now saying the Taligent operating environment, its joint venture with Apple, won't be able to run OS/2, Mac or AIX applications until a year after its first release.
It will only run native programs when it appears, which even IBM now admits will be probably in 1995.
It's reportedly trying to recruit ISVs to write those programs now.
The second largest American X terminals contract, involving some 40,000 units, is due to be awarded next month when they let AFKAC 3000.
Paris-based Non Standard Logics has implemented its XFacemaker graphical user interface builder on SCO's Open Desktop.
Looking forward to the end of Brazil's protected computer market in October, Tandem has set up a wholly owned subsidiary there, its 21st worldwide.
The US-based Bull HN Information Systems is going to market Unidata's RDBMS on its DPX/20s, the first product introduced as a result of its alliance with IBM.
Sunrise Software International announced that its ezX 3.2 generates Ada source code for programs using Motif.
The software is a user interface management system that supports screen layout, colour editors, font editors, image editors, presentation tools and dynamic dialog management that claims a 20:1 code reduction ratio when used.
SunWorld latched on to a rumour circulating in Silicon Valley that says NeXT has completed a Sparc port.
Industry guru Marc Schulman has left UBS Securities to set up his own consulting operation, The Technology Strategies Group, whose primary customers are expected to be computer industry managers from both the hardware and software side.
He can be reached in Connecticut at (203) 329–2839.
Cypress has just got the first silicon on the HyperSparc CPU, according to Electronic Engineering Times, and it's reportedly almost completely functional.
That gives Cypress two of the three pieces it needs to complete the chipset: the 620 CPU chip and 627 cache SRAM.
Still lacking is the 625 MMU/cache, a redesign of an older model that gave it trouble and caused delays in the past.
The MIT-originated Sparcle CPU project described at Hot Chips (UX No 395) proved to be an old LSI single-execution 40MHz Sparc CPU simplified for fine-grain multiprocessing in a highly parallel MIT system called Alewife.
Enhanced communications features implement a parallel-processing technique called block multithreading speed performance.
It is not expected to be commercialised.
SunSoft last week launched the SunSoft Press, a publishing group to develop, market and distribute books on Solaris and associated Sun products to users in partnership with publishers Ziff-Davis and the Professional Technical Reference Division of Prentice Hall, part of Simon & Schuster.
The companies say the books will be available starting this fall in national bookstores in the US like B Dalton and Barnes & Noble as well as from Sun Express.
Titles will also be published in European and Asian languages.
Add Adcomp Data Systems in The Netherlands to the list of European distributors Univel has signed to handle UnixWare: Adcomp claims sixteen offices in eight countries.
The IBM/Apple/Motorola alliance named its Texas headquarters Somerset, after the county in England where King Arthur and the knights of the Round Table planned their quests, its press agents tell us.
They must have all walked out on the movie before they saw how the tale ends.
CrossWind Technologies is expected to take a step backwards at Unix Expo next month and announce a character version of Synchronize, its X-based time/task management tool, the first Motif-based commercial application on the market.
The company says you can't just sell technology alone to commercial accounts and its Fortune 500 and government customers have lots of PCs and Macs and a whole lot of character terminals.
So CrossWind is adopting a client/server strategy with Unix on the server and clients running the native Mac, Windows or OS/2 interface.
Both the X and character versions will be shipped together so users can upgrade for free.
Pricing is the same at $100 a user.
Wags are saying HaL is bringing new meaning to the phase ‘computerless computer company.’
V-Systems has significantly upgraded its FxServer Fax software combining a command line interface with an ‘lp’ spooler design structure and adding group requests, VGA viewing, Class II modem support, a menu-driven interface, automatic cover sheet generation and support for Postscript and Epson printers.
It also had an FxVision module for X Windows-based systems management.
Bell Atlantic Corp's Bell Atlantic Integrated Systems Inc has entered the network integration market with the formation of a new unit that will provide initial planning and needs analysis, product integration, network implementation, post-implementation support and education services.
Bell Atlantic Network Integration will provide these services to customers throughout the US from its headquarters in Frazer, Pennsylvania and through the existing network of 338 field service offices operated by the Bell Atlantic Business Systems Services arm.
Walnut Creek, California-based PeopleSoft Inc has put its PS/HRMS personnel management system onto Sequent Computer Systems Inc's Symmetries running Oracle and says the PeopleSoft Financials client-server financial accounting applications announced in April, will move to Sequent computers later; the two will team to sell applications on Symmetry running Oracle.
Frame Technology Corp, San Jose says it has been named as a defendant in a suit alleging breach of oral and written contract with respect to sums allegedly owed to Meridian Systems Inc, which provides sales representative and value-added reseller services; Frame said the suit is without merit and it will be defended vigorously.
In the wake of Wang's going Chapter 11, a bon mot dropped from Scott McNealy's lips to the effect that things are so bad in Massachusetts now they don't even bother to plough Route 128 when it snows.
Versant Object Technology is now developing a 32-bit OS/2 2.0 version of its object DBMS for release in the fourth quarter.
Over the winter, IBM picked Versant to supply object management technology for its AIX CASE framework.
Bell Atlantic Corp's Bell Atlantic Integrated Systems Inc has entered the network integration market with the formation of a new unit that will provide initial planning and needs analysis, product integration, network implementation, post-implementation support and education services: Bell Atlantic Network Integration will provide these services to customers throughout the US from its headquarters in Frazer, Pennsylvania and through the existing network of 338 field service offices operated by the Bell Atlantic Business Systems Services arm.
Walnut Creek, California-based PeopleSoft Inc has put its PS/HRMS personnel management system onto Sequent Computer Systems Inc's Symmetries running Oracle and says the PeopleSoft Financials client-server financial accounting applications announced in April, will move to Sequent computers later; the two will team to sell applications on Symmetry running Oracle.
Interactive Information Systems in Tucson, Arizona, developer of the CIIM family of integrated manufacturing, distribution and financial software, has changed its name to Avalon Software Inc.