

ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
JENNY BARNES/ANDREW BARNES
TERESA HOUGHTON/Moredon Safety Ground
Rev GEOFFREY CREES
Voice over
The tragedy at Akers Way changed the lives of Jenny and Andrew Barnes.
Their fifteen year old daughter Paula died.
A friend to everyone she met…much loved and much missed.
Male speaker
It's just left a massive void in our lives which we can't fill.
Female speaker
All our tomorrows have gone.
Male speaker
You think about the future of your children and grandchildren, and then everything goes.
Nothing is worthwhile.
You try to come to terms with it but you can't.
You take one step forward and two steps back.
It's a terrific loss.
Voice over
The tragedy touched the whole community.
Hundreds responded with a protest march…to highlight their concerns about road safety…and to release the tide of anger and emotion.
They lobbied councillors to ensure Akers Way would never witness another accident…they achieved many of the safety changes they'd called for.
Female speaker
The speed limit was dropped.
Signs were put up at both ends.
Most of the traffic has slowed down.
All you can do is open their eyes to the dangers of the road.
Voice over
It seems the majority of motorists have responded to the campaign.
Police say around ninety-five percent are keeping within acceptable speed limits here in Akers Way.
But elsewhere in Swindon the message hasn't got through.
As the children were buried, the families tried to rebuilt their lives.
They'll never forget what happened.
But will they forgive?
Male speaker
There are two reactions.
One the willingness to forgive.
They there's hatred and bitterness.
I pray the former will be the one they're most willing to understand.
They didn't set out to kill the children.
Although it was terrible and they must be accountable.
Voice over
It happens everyday.
Parents are going through the same or worse.
It's all based around people having fun and people not realising what could happen.
They must think, one day they may be parents.
I'm hoping in some way we can stop it happening again.
A year on, the families of the Akers Way children are still suffering.
They hope by sharing their agony, the lessons will be learned.
and a tragedy like this will never happen again.
That report from Erika Barnes and just to recap,
A man who tortured a cat in the cellar of his house has been jailed for six months.
Magistrates watched the seven minute video before passing sentence.
A charity has accused a psychiatric hospital of exposing women patients to the risk of sexual abuse.
GLOUCESTER
Police are trying to identify a man who's body was discovered in a barn destroyed by fire.
STROUD/Gloucestershire
The man is aged between twenty five and fifty years old, five feet ten inches tall, of slim build, with prominent front teeth.
He was wearing a brown knitted jumper and khaki trousers.
It's been a bad day for industry in the region.
The Rover Group has announced a six-month pay freeze at its plants in Cowley and Swindon, because of the decline in the motor industry.
And on the day computer giants IBM announced six hundred redundancies, the country's biggest independent computer maker sacked a hundred and twenty people, just a year after making big profits.
Wesley Smith reports.
OXFORD
MIKE FISHER/Chief Executive/Research Machines
STEPHEN DEXTER/Grant Thornton
A farewell drink for a fifth of the workforce at Research Machines in Oxfordshire who've just received their redundancy notices.
Although, many appear in good spirits at the moment, most know that when they get home the grim reality of unemployment and the bitterness felt at being one of the unfortunates will set in.
The company, with plants at Oxford and Milton near Didcot, make computers and software for schools and colleges.
Although it achieved sales of £65 million in the last financial year, it has shed a hundred and twenty of its six hundred staff.
Others have been offered jobs on lower grades and salaries or short contracts.
Although, the redundancies aren't a direct result of the recession, they add to the figures which can only shake the confidence of industry as a whole.
Statistics released today covering the Central South area, show an increase in business failures of up to fifty-five per cent.
So is there any hope?
Research Machines is offering advice to help former employees find new employmemt, but the outlook for these former computer workers, many now in their prime, looks uncertain.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
Company Video
JOHN MITCHELL/Engineers Union
KEITH TRANTER/Transport and General Workers
BRUCE HAWKINS/Operations Manager
Voice over
Employees at the Dupont nylon fibres factory in Brockworth, Gloucester were told today that a quarter of the workforce…250 out of a total of 990, are to lose their jobs.
It's only three months since Dupont took over the factory from ICI.
But the company says the nylon industry is in deep recession.
Overproduction coupled with falling sales have saddled Dupont Nylon with expected losses of forty million pounds worldwide this year.
Workers in Gloucester were aware of the difficulties…but shocked by the level of redundancies:
Union leaders have been meeting today to discuss their response to the job cuts:
Male speaker
They are bitter that when Dupont took over the workers were not told the true situation.
Male speaker
Some of the redundancies will be compulsory.
Morale is at rock bottom.
Voice over
Management say it's inevitable some of the redundancies will be compulsory:
Male speaker
The company hopes for some voluntary redundancy, but expects some will be compulsory.
He accepts morale is low, but hopes it will pick up.
Voice over
Union leaders are meeting management tomorrow to try to find a way of softening the blow.
But workers say few employees will volunteer for redundancy when they've little chance of finding another job.
Barclaycard staff have been meeting to decide what action to take over the news that the firm is cutting four hundred jobs.
NORTHAMPTON
The company employs three thousand people on six different sites in Northampton.
The Banking, Insurance and Finance Union has resolved to cooperate with a scheme for voluntary redundancies but says it could take industrial action if the job losses are made compulsory.
Police fear thieves are now stealing to order for body builders who want dangerous drugs.
Nearly fifty thousand pounds worth of a growth hormone called Genotropin has disappeared from a warehouse.
It's meant for children with growth problems, and can be highly dangerous if misused.
GARETH FURBY/Milton Keynes
Dr RICHARD WILD/Medical Director
Sgt DAVE PURNELL/Thames Valley Police
KEVIN CONELLY/Gym Instructor
Voice over
These weightlifters aren't tempted.
But others could be.
Five hundred and forty tubes of the drug have been stolen from this warehouse in Milton Keynes.
It's a synthetic hormone which helps stunted chuldren grow.
But now the drug has a street value of more than three hundred pounds a tube, as some body builders look beyond steriods, to give them that extra edge, even thought it can seriously damage their health.
He says it can distort bone structure, even cause heart problems.
The police the drugs were stolen to order.
Even thought the warehouse is full of many drugs, only the growth hormone was taken.
He says the thieves were clever.
They even resealed the box.
Experts say there's no scientific evidence the drug helps build muscle.
But neverthless it's still in demand.
But the users of the Oxford gym don't want to know.
He says he's been asked about it, but he can't help, and anyone who uses it is banned.
The police say the drug won't build mucle but it could destry a life.
They want any body builders who're offered it to contact them immediately.
A man's been sent to prison for a year after telling an air stewardess he was a terrorist who'd planted a bomb on a plane.
The flight from Gatwick was diverted because of the scare, even though twenty-six year old Jason Reszeter (Ressiter) from Wootton near Abingdon immediately told the stewardess he was’ winding her up.’
The crew were already on their guard because of an earlier bomb-scare associated with the same flight.
Diverting the plane to Frankfurt cost British Airways sixty-seven thousand pounds 
A conman has stolen antique rings and savings from a ninety year old woman just an hour after she was discharged from hospital.
He tricked his way into her home on Norman Road in the Gorse Hill area of Swindon by pretending to be a new neighbour.
He's described as between thirty-five and forty and white.
He was wearing a green suit and spoke with a local accent.
Welcome back.
The Gloucestershire Regiment has been on its last full-scale exercise before merging with the Duke of Edinburgh Regiment next year.
(WESLEY) Hundreds of soldiers went into battle on Salisbury Plain as part of a dawn combat exercise.
ERIKA BARNES/Wiltshire
RSM IVOR WOOD/Glosters
Lt Col MARTIN VINE/Glosters
Voice over
BANG!
The battle lights up the sky.
A village is under attack.
This is Salisbury Plain, but for the fighting men of the Glosters, it could be any trouble spot, anywhere in the world.
It's dirty and dangerous.
The battle is hard and hot.
Male speaker
They're gunned up and fired up and told it's for real.
The more fighting fluid, the better they react.
Voice over
The battle for Cope Hill Down is part of the Army's Iron Panther exercise.
The Glosters attacking, taking and consolidating positions.
The fighting lasts for three long hours.
It takes it's toll.
Male speaker
’ I've got two casualties.
One with gunshot wounds to the chest.
One with wounds to his leg, I'm administering first aid’
Voice over
For this battle though the wounds aren't real; the bullets are blanks; but the commitment is genuine.
Male speaker
It's probably the best training that can be done.
It's the favourite training for soldiers.
Voice over
’ Permission to water the troops sir?’
’ Certainly RSM!’
The Glosters won the day.
And this is their reward on what's likely to be their last full scale exercise before amalgamation next year.
A moment to savour; and a moment to celebrate the fighting spirit and tradition of the Glosters.
’ Singing the regimental song’
’ Cheers’!
A police force is trying to encourage more people to take part in identity parades.
It's offering ten pounds to anyone who's prepared to stand in line with a suspect, and is hoping that people of all ages, colours, shapes and sizes will come forward.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cheltenham
Insp DAVID REID/Gloucestershire Police
The entertainer Frankie Vaughan has been fulfilling his new role as a Queen's representative for his county.
He opened a new housing complex for the elderly, but with none of the pomp and formality normally associated with the job.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM Milton Keynes
FRANKIE VAUGHAN Deputy Lieutenant
Voice over
Frankie Vaughan started as a crooner in Variety, Now he represents the Queen in Buckinghamshire.
He's the deputy to the Lord Lieutenant of the county, with all the trappings…including a chauffeur driven limousine.
(He chats on an intercom)
Frankie's demonstrated his relaxed style by talking on the intercom installed throughout the new residential complex he opened in Milton Keynes.
It's a long way from the stiff formality of a normal Lord Lieutenant's engagement.
No uniform nor etiquette.
Just Frankie having fun.
Male speaker
The public knows me, I don't have to pose.
I am what I am and I represent the Queen through the Lieutenancy
Voice over
And he is clearly close to the hearts of the residents…
Female speaker
Show business people are the very people to do the job.
Female speaker
He's getting on now, he deserves these things
Voice over
It was only last year that Frankie had emergency heart surgery at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.
Today he was very much alive…although not high kicking, he doesn't do that so much these days.
The invitation to become deputy Lieutenant came in June this year, he still doesn't know why.
Male speaker
It was the first question I asked.
It's a job normally reserved for heroes, generals and admirals.
But they said to think of it as a big pat on the back
Voice over
But his fans have no doubt, he's always been a hero to them, and it looks like he always will be.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Up to ten thousand people are known to have been killed in the earthquake which struck India.
Yeltsin agrees talks
President Yeltsin has agreed to talks to try to end the political crisis in Russia.
Fire strike threat recedes
The threatened strike by firefighters is now almost certainly off.
Lawyer attempts rape
A solicitor, Angus Diggle, has been jailed for three years for attempted rape in Scotland.
New driving breath test
A new system is to be brought to Britain which will immobilise a car if the driver is over the legal alcohol limit.
FTSE up 7
In the city, the one hundred shares index closed up seven point four at thirty, thirty-seven point five.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty and up at two marks, forty-five.
Protestors are claiming that proposals to enlarge a trunk road are part of plans to build a new motorway.
They say the new road will just create more traffic and bring too much development to the area.
A councillor who's advising the Department of Transport on the road insists it won't be a motorway.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
MICHAEL WELBY/Protestor
Cllr BILL CHAPPLE/Bucks County Council
THAME/Oxfordshire
DAVID KENNINGHAM/Headmaster
THAME/Oxfordshire
ROBERT CROWTHER/Protestor
Voice over
Michael Welby and his wife had hoped to be carried feet first out of the home they lived in at Gerard's Cross for twenty-five years.
But then the M-forty was built half a mile from their door.
He says we were paid compensation, put in double glazing, but it was no good, the noise was too much.
So we moved to Haddenham for peace and quiet but now it starts here and we're very frightened we shall be driven away from here because you can't live with that noise.
In the garden of his old home, he recorded noise up to a hundred decibels from the motorway.
Now he fears proposals to build a new road linking the M40 to Aylesbury will bring another motorway to his doorstep.
A bypass is already planned though not approved for Aylesbury and campaigners believe the proposed east-west route linking the M40, the M1, the A1 and the M11 to Harwich and Felixstowe will eventually be upgraded from dual to three-lane carriageway, creating a new motorway.
But one councillor who's advising the Department of Transport on the proposed route denies that.
He says I don't think it's going to be a motorway.
That's why I'm saying to everyone that we should build it with two lanes and no more and so restricting the chance of it ever being a motorway.
Lord William's School at Thame has playing fields just off the A418 — the preferred corridor for the new route — its headmaster is concerned for the future of his two thousand pupils:
He says it'll destroy the semi-rural environment we have here.
We're clearly going to have noise, pollution, exhaust and congestion.
The Department of Transport which will take the final decison about the route says’ it's no secret plans to link Aylesbury with the M40 are part of an east-west route across the country…and adds that while the road’is likely to be dual carriageway, it's not planned to be a motorway.’
That doesn't satisfy campaigners who fear the development of what they're calling the M418 will bring increased traffic and more — this is a site bought by Esso to build what the protestors fear will be a motorway service station.
He says the whole problem of the Oxford to Harwich route is that it will create an urban sprawl, another outer London which we can't afford.
Mr Crowther is pressing for a judicial review of the whole Department of Transport that would look into the government's road policy.
The Department of Transport says it had hoped to complete the east-west route by the turn of the century, but that that's now unlikely.
Labour has promised to restore Trades Union rights to workers at GCHQ in Cheltenham if it forms the next Government.
The move has been welcomed by campaigners at the Labour Party Conference, which ends tomorrow.
Our Political Editor Peter Hayes has been looking at Labour's week in Brighton.
PETER HAYES/Political Editor
MATTHEW PARRIS/Times Columnist
SUSAN BROWN/Oxford West and Abingdon
Voice over
It's been a beach carnival of rhetoric by the sea.
This has been more like Labour conferences of old, with dust ups and cliff hanging votes, unlike last year's sanitised affair.
Conferences are about promises, and shadow Home Secretary Tony Blair said Labour would reverse the Government's ban on union rights at GCHQ.
John Smith's battle with the unions looked like a typically self inflicted Labour wound.
Until he won.
His victory transformed the conference, and Labour's chances of winning the next General Election.
Male speaker
’ Well, it was looking pretty dull.
It was looking just like a classic boring, musty, fusty Labour party Conference like all the others, and then it suddenly took off with the big OMOV debate and Smith's cliffhanging win’.
Voice over
The Labour Party is wrestling with its own conscience.
The traditonalists still talk about a class war, and there are constant reminders of picket lines past.
The modernisers, in their suits, are well into the computer age.
But after four consecutive General Election defeats, is Labour a spent force?
Female speaker
’ No, I don't think that's true at .If you look at Oxford City, we have many Labour councillors on the Labour city council.
We do in fact have control of the Labour city council.
On the county council we are now the second larget group.
In those areas people can see what Labour councillors are doing for them and they only have to look at what Labour councillors are achieving locally and they will transfer their votes to labour for a national election’.
Voice over
All of which may cut little ice in the Central South area.
With just one MP, Labour is hardly a political force to be reckoned with.
Many here, though, think the tide has turned.
Next week the conference circus moves to Blackpool, where even stormier waters await the feuding Conservatives.
Welcome back: Trading Standards officers have begun a campaign to stem the increasing flood of counterfeit goods on sale in shops and markets.
They're warning that traders selling illegal copies face heavy fines and imprisonment.
But can shoppers tell when they're getting the genuine article?
Ian Maclaren has been finding out.
REEBOK
DEBBIE DENT/Oxfordshire Trading Standards
Voice over
There's big money in training shoes…manufacturers like Reebok spend millions on research and development.
And millions more on marketing and glossy advertising.
Their top of the range shoes are highly prized by fashion-conscious youngsters…and can cost 70 pounds a pair and upwards.
So during a recession, glamorous designer names…offered at rock bottom prices can be alluring.
And there's no shortage of fake goods on display to tempt shoppers with tight budgets.
But the trading standards department at Oxfordshire County Council says cheap fakes can be shoddy and dangerous…
Debbie Dent, Trading Standards, says’ the genuine sports trainers have rigid ankle support and flexible soles.
The copies do not.’
Trading Standards officers say that counterfeit goods will be seized…and traders will face prosecution.
But how easy is it to spot a cheap imitation?
We brought Debbie Dent onto the streets of Oxford to find out if shoppers would be fooled…
’ I would say that's genuine.
Am I wrong?.
You are!…’
’ I'd say this one…
I'd say that one…
It'd bother me if I bought a fake.
This one's very light.’
But there was no fooling these expert youngsters…
’ This one's the fake.
This is the fake.
The fake is poor quality.’
Cheap perfumes can have unforeseen dangers too, such as skin allergies.
The packaging on these perfume bottles is almost impossible to tell apart.
But how about putting the scent to the test…
’ No.
I can't tell the difference.
It does bother me.
I know there are cheap versions around.’
’ No you picked the wrong one.’
’ That's the real one.
Yes.
Well done!’
The message to shoppers is be wary about cheap items for sale…and to traders don't deal in fakes…the penalties are high.
A lifelong railway enthusiast has been celebrating his perfect birthday.
Kenneth Leech spent his hundredth anniversary on the footplate of a restored engine from his beloved Great Western Railway.
From there he told Wesley Smith about his life as a railway enthusiast, composer and rock climber.
DIDCOT/Oxfordshire
KENNETH LEECH/Steam Expert
JEANETTE HOWSE/Didcot Railway Centre
Voice over
The age of steam railways will live as long as there are enthusiasts.
The master of them all must be Kenneth Leech from Wiltshire.
He was invited to the Didcot Railway Centre in Oxfordshire to celebrate his centenary in suitable fashion, on the footplate of Nunney Castle, which once graced the tracks of the Great Western.
Kenneth is greeted by an old friend who congratulates him on his centenary.
Then time to climb on board.
Kenneth had invited friends young and old to his special party.
Kenneth says what a joy it is to be back on one of the Great Western’ Castles’.
Kenneth was born in the year the Great Western changed its rail guage from wide to narrow.
His memories are remarkable.
Kenneth says his earliest memory is seeing Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee celebrations in 1898.
But what Kenneth really wanted was to be where the action is, on the footplate.
He'd come well prepared.
Trains influenced Kenneth's life.
He met his wife of 61 years on board a train on his way to work in 1921.
By 1935 Kenneth had discovered the pleasures of composing serious music and had several works published.
He's also an accomplished rock climber.
He had to give that up aged 85.
Jeanette Howse of the Didcot Railway Centre explains that Kenneth's popularity means they could have invited a thousand guests.
The crowds cheer Kenneth in singing’ Happy Birthday’.
Dr Who's Tardis, the bath that was used by Madonna, and an alligator that James Bond wrestled with, are just a few of the items included in an auction of film props.
The auction's attracted interest from all over the world, and Sylvester Stallone and Arnold Schwarzenegger may be among the bidders.
Clare Lafferty reports.
NORTON/Gloucestershire
RON JONES/Props Dealer
Voice over
He mightn't look too glamorous today…but nineteen years ago this rubber alligator was a film star.
Now the gators are collectors items.
They're up for sale at an auction of film props to be held in Norton in Gloucestershire.
Other items on sale include this movie star bath.
It appeared in the film Shanghai Surprise when Madonna bathed in it.
The film was a flop.
But the bath is expected to fetch more than a thousand pounds.
If you fancy something even more exotic how about these Egyptian mummies.
They starred alongside Harrison Ford in the Indiana Jones' film Raiders of the Lost Ark.
In the film they stood at the gates of a temple.
There's plenty of speculation as to where they'll end up after the auction.
The auction has attracted enquiries from all over the world.
Messers Stallone and Schwarzenegger might be interested in this Sicilian hearse.
It's appeared in several films about the mafia and carried a whole host of corsed actors.
Or these thrones from Robin Hood…
Prince of Thieves.
The most sought after item though must be this original tardis.
It's been home to generations of intrepid time lords, and won't be sold for less than fifteen thousand pounds.
At that price bidders will need to know whether it's still got all its the original characteristics.
If that is the case, it'll no doubt be going going gone in the only way a tardis knows how.
A motoring organisation has warned that some drivers are facing big increases in court fines for offences like speeding.
The RAC is worried about a new system of fines introduced today, which is worked out on a person's ability to pay.
It says the changes could create even greater unfairness, particularly for some high earners.
This report from Erika Barnes.
FEBRUARY 1990
M4/Wiltshire
DAVID BREWER/Clerk to Justices/Swindon Magistrates
HEATHER GIFFORD/Royal Automobile Club
Voice over
The Duke of Westminster…
Britains richest man…was fined a hundred and twenty pounds for speeding at a hundred miles an hour along the M5.
The same penalty would have applied to your average man on the road.
That was two years ago.
If the Duke had been caught speeding today…his fine would probably have been something like seven hundred pounds.
Because the 1991 Criminal Justice Act introduces a new unit fine system…
It will relate disposable income to the penalty.
So if you were caught speeding at 90 miles an hour along the M4 in Wiltshire your fine would calculate something like this
Speeding at 20 miles an hour over the limit is a five unit crime.
The value of each unit is between 4-pounds and 100-pounds depending on your means.
Multiply the two figures together and…
A low income driver would face a twenty pound fine.
That compares with a forty pounds fixed penalty fine.
And a five hundred pound fine for the well off.
But whilst the RAC accept the theory…it's concerned about the practice.
Yes…high earners will get bigger fines…but they may be disproportionate to the offence.
Female speaker
You're always going to have big earners.
They should have more to dispose of but not necessarily.
They may live up to their income.
We're monitering the situation.
If there are discrepancies we'll bring it to the attention of the home office.
Voice over
For motorists on the M4 today fines are a serious concern.
Male speaker
Whether you're poor or rich, the car is still as lethal driving at big speeds.
Male speaker
At the moment the fines are very heavy.
I was stopped for speeding when I was 15 miles over the limit.
I was fined 33-pounds.
That's over the top.
Male speaker
If you're driving in a flash car, driving a porsche you'll pay more than in a mini.
I think it's a good idea.
Voice over
Whilst Magistrates won't look at the motor…they will look at the means of the driver…and the madness of the offence.
The aim…to hit the high speeding, high earners just as much as the less well off, who still enjoy life in the fast lane.
An investigation is underway into a fire which caused thousands of pounds of damage to a plastics factory.
Families living near by were warned to stay indoors because of toxic smoke.
Fire experts still haven't ruled out arson.
Tim Hurst reports.
BRIMSCOMBE/Gloucestershire
MALCOLM EASTWOOD/Chief Fire Officer
Voice over
Dense toxic smoke poured from the burning building at Brimscombe near Stroud in Gloucestershire early today.
Fifty firemen were called to deal with the fire in a storage section of a plastics factory.
Neighbours were warned to stay indoors and keep their windows shut and half the firemen had to work in breathing sets to avoid the fumes.
Hours later an investigation involving firemen and police was going on to see if the fire was arson.
The company, which employs 70 staff, say work goes on as usual, the fire was confined to a storage area.
Councillors have turned down plans to import thousands of tons of German waste.
HEMPSTED/Gloucestershire
Gloucestershire County Council has rejected plans to send two hundred thousand tons of rubbish to a site at Hempsted near Gloucester.
The contract would have been worth five million pounds.
Forty people are being made redundant at a Birds Eye Walls ice cream factory.
GLOUCESTER
Most of the job losses will be in the ice cream processing section of the factory at Gloucester.
It's expected all the redundancies will be achieved voluntarily.
The maid accused of stealing letters from Princess Anne has urged the Labour Party conference to protect ordinary people attacked by the press.
Linda Townley, who's fought a three-year battle with a national newspaper, made a plea for legal aid to be extended to those with no money to sue for libel.
Kim Barnes reports from Blackpool.
BLACKPOOL
LINDA TOWNLEY/Stroud Labour Party
CLIVE SOLEY MP/Lab Hammersmith
Voice over
In part two: Putting the boot in.
Trading standards get tough on designer fakes.
All steamed up: The dream present for a hundredth birthday.
And going going gone.
The Tardis is sold, but to WHO?
I'm no hero: Body builder tackles two armed robbers.
Who will pay?:
Insurance fears after school arson attack.
And legal aid for libel: Former Royal Maid wants help for the poor.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
A body builder who tackled two armed raiders single-handed, after chasing them through the streets in his car has been hailed as a hero.
Christopher Farmer chased the robbers with his wife and children sitting in the back of his car.
HARRIET RYLEY
He caught up with the pair when they stopped to change getaway cars.
He fought with them, before making a citizen's arrest.
Tonight, he insisted he's NOT a hero — but says he'd do it all again if he had to.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
CHRISTOPHER FARMER
Insp MIKE PENNINGTON/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
He's built like Arnold Swartzenegger, Chris farmer, the body builder who terminated an armed raid.
He'd spotted two men driving away from a securicor van parked outside Bookers cash and carry centre in cheltenham.
With his wife and children in his car, ex policeman Christopher gave chase.
The car he was after stopped at a junction, so Chris jumped out and reached into their window and grabbed the keys.
The two men ran off to another car, but it just wasn't their day.
Chris was about to go into action.
He says that he hit both men, one ran off, he sat on the other.
Chris, who's now a psychiatric nurse, says he's no hero.
He reacted on instinct — and was only frightened afterwards:
He says he needed a cup of coffee and a sit-down after it was all over.
He says they can't praise Chris enough — he did a brilliant job.
But what did Chris's wife think of his heroics?
He says she wasn't impressed!
Especially when she saw the guns!
A substantial amount of cash was recovered from the raid, and it's possible brave Chris may be in line for a reward.
Two men are tonight helping with police inquiries.
An insurance company which is in financial trouble could leave poll tax payers to foot the bill for arson attacks on schools.
Disabled drivers, too, are worried that they could be left without insurance cover by the problems at Municipal Mutual.
Ian Maclaren reports.
27 SEPTEMBER 1992 CHIPPING NORTON Oxfordshire
Cllr KEN HOWARD Finance Chairman Vale of White Horse Council
DEREK VIZOR Association for the Disabled
Voice over
The high cost of providing insurance cover for local authorities against fires like this one…at Trinity School in Chipping Norton over the weekend…has landed Municipal Mutual Insurance in trouble.
This blaze caused damage estimated at half a million pounds.
Nine out of ten local authorities have insuruance cover with MMI.
But an increase in claims, especially against fire and damage to council owned property has forced MMI to suspend all payments of claims.
The consequences for council finance committees could be disastrous…
And a leader of the disabled community in Gloucestershire warned today that the crisis will hit handicapped motorists across the country.
120,000 of them lease vehicles from the government approved charity, Motobility, which has a block insurance policy with MMI.
The Cheltenham and Gloucester Building Society which directed more than 200.000 homebuyers to take out cover with MMI, has spendt the day transferring policies to General Accident.
They say premiums will be unchanged.
This afternoon anxious council chiefs have been meeting MMI representatives to assess the implications of MMI freezing its business.
The bottom line could eventually mean demands for higher council tax bills.
The Cheltenham and Gloucester Building Society which directed more than 200,000 homebuyers to take out cover with MMI, has spent the day transferring policies to General Accident.They say premiums will be unchanged
And a leader of the disabled community in Gloucestershire says the crisis could be a disaster for handicapped motorists across the country…120,000 of them lease vehicles from the government approved charity, Motobility, which has a block insurance poliocy withh MMI…
A further announcement's expected from MMI in a week's time.
But already local authorities are preparing themselves to meet the cost of bigger premiums and penalty clauses…which eventually will mean bigger council tax bills.
Maastricht Bill before Commons by Christmas
FTSE up 19
The hundred shares index closed up nineteen point three at two five seven two point three 
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy five and down at two marks, forty eight.
The Tiller girls and Russ Conway are set to reappear on stage for charity…recreating the heyday of Sunday Night at the London Palladium.
Thirty and Forty years ago they played to packed houses up and down the country…now they're doing it again 
SIMON GARRETT Oxford
RUSS CONWAY Entertainer
NORMA CHEYNE Tiller Girl — 1962
ROSALIE KIRKMAN Tiller Girl — 1962
Voice over
The Tiller girls have been high-kicking with the stars of stage and screen since 1896.
Not these Tiller girls of course, although the most senior was performing in the forties.
They're to appear at Oxford's Appolo theatre with fifties pop idol Russ Conway.
He suffered cancer a few years ago…and is putting the show on to raise money for cancer charities.
Despite a lifetime in showbusiness — he last appeared here thirty years ago — the disease has boosted his appetite
Male speaker
The main golden rule is make sure the audience leaves happy.
They can cry or laugh as long as they're happy.
These days I finish totally exhausted…sometimes because I'm blind drunk — not really, I couldn't play if I was.
Every single night I leave and hope I'll be able to do it again
Voice over
For the girls reforming was a scary idea:
Female speaker
I said no at first been very good
Voice over
Despite the years…the kicks ar still just as high
Today the Tiller girls fans include alternative TV comedians and chart show host Johnathan Ross.
Stars have always gone out of their way to watch them
The Russ Conway Cancer show is at the Apollo theatre on November 21st 
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Indian earthquake kills 20
It's estimated that the earthquake in India has claimed twenty thousand lives.
Firefighters suspend ballot
Britain's firefighters have suspended a ballot on strike action after pay talks with local authority employers.
Beckett speaks out
Labour's Deputy Leader, Margaret Beckett, has addressed the Labour Conference saying she won't be hounded out of her job.
Miners plea to Thatcher
The leader of the Union of Democratic Mineworkers has asked Mrs. Thatcher to make a public statement in support of saving coal mines after she spoke to the Energy Minister about such a move.
Bomb wrecks Ulster hotel
A bomb has wrecked a hotel in Ulster and damage neighbouring houses.
Appeal for old TV shows
The National Film and Television archive has made an appeal for people to come forward with copies of tv shows from the fifties and sixties which will otherwise be lost forever.
FTSE up 1
The hundred shares index closed up one point eight at thirty, thirty-nine point three.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-one and up at two marks, forty-five.
Welcome back…
Later on high kicking with the tiller girls…
But first with the sport here's Tim…
TIM
…
Hello there…
I 
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Starring at the County Ground tomorrow is Kenny Dalglish and his Blackburn team…his very first match as Rovers manager was at Swindon…both clubs have gone up in the world since then but what Town would give to turn the clock back and have the same scoreline again…2-1 it was to swindon Chalky White and Colin Calderwood got the Town goals…
David Speedie was Blackburn's scorer…
The County Ground is awaiting it's first premiership win…so let's hope they can celebrate after the Rovers Return…
Norweigan striker Jan Aage Fjortoft has been left out…
Steve White is called in…and what price Dave Mitchell returning in the future…he's back training at swindon…the move to Turkey has gone wrong…
Town have been getting stronger and wiser by the week…they could do it against Blackburn…
At the manor ground…a win is almost essential…
United have been tumbling into trouble over the last couple of weeks…last time they won was Denis Smith's first match as manager…
They blasted Bristol City apart 4-2 that day so the battle orders will be for a repeat performance against Grimsby Town tomorrow
There's a change in goal…a new face Phil Whithead signed on loan from Barnsley makes his debut…
Oxford's form is nothing special…
Grimsby always a hard team to beat are going well again…
Also going well are Hereford United down in Division three…two wins in a row now…it was 3-0 against Wigan last Saturday…one-nil against Walsall in the Autoglass Trophy on Tuesday night and they've got to play the Saddlers again tomorrow
Colin Anderson is hoping to be back after suspension…
Howard Clark is back in the running…
Chris Pike is facing a late fitness test…
Walsall do well at home…lets hope Hereford can do well away…
to send them on their way…the goal of the week…could be one of the goals of the season…a right footed rocked from Max Nicholson…
we've an all star cast for a round-up this week…topping the bill the big rugby match between Bath and Gloucester 
Voice over
What price…what chance the cherry and whites beating Bath…
Gloucester have never won at the Recreation Ground…the league champions look invincible…but that's when the Kingsholm men are at their best…when nobody gives them a hope…
there's rugby at Stow on the wold on Sunday…teague…hastings…andrew…skinner lots of big names lining up in a charity celebrity match they land by helicopter at lunchtime…
taking off on Sunday will be the Oxford Products Ducati team…they've three riders racing in the world championship round at Donington Park
they'll be flying around the squash court at Abingdon as the regions top players compete in the Oxfordshire championships…
over at Milton Keynes England are playing Ireland at Hockey…
on the ice…
Swindon and Milton Keynes both have home matches tomorrow…
Oxford have two away…
and as the going gets good…the race is on for top jockey…
Nicholson's new boy Adrian Maguire has thirty four winners already…but a double from Richard Dunwoody has taken him into the twenties
We're going to stay with racing now to see a sporting dream come true…
Cheltenham has launched a new scheme for racegoers to have their own horse…and you don't have to be a millionaire…fancy winning the gold cup or the grand national…you do…then lets go chase a dream in our Friday Feature 
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Racecourse Manager
TERRY BIDDLECOMBE
Voice over
If racing's your game…then the odds of you dreaming about leading a winning horse in after a big race must be 2 to 1 on…
But for many having a racehorse belongs to the world of rolls royces and luxury yachts…
Afterall a good horse will cost you a fortune to buy…and then having it trained and ridden by the best will set you back at least a thousand pounds a month…
So what would you say to having your own thoroughbred for one hundred and ninety pounds a year…no its not one that's fallen off the back of a horse box…but one that Cheltenham Racecourse has bought for its racegoers…
And this week the horse…
Fuzzy Logic…had its first run wherelse but at Cheltenham…
Edward Gillespie says that they wanted to give their racegoers something extra and more excitement…and when times are hard this is one way of getting more owners into the sport
Fuzzy Logic has 125 owners…all regulars at Prestbury Park and nearly all of them were in the paddock to see their very own horse getting ready for its first run…its trained by Nigel twiston Davies and his assitant Peter Scudamore
Peter Scudamore says he has a good chance and he's glad to see the rain
In the saddle was Carl Llewellyn…and weighing up the form was our racing expert former champion jockey Terry Biddlecombe…the horse was bought from the auctions he helps run at Malvern
Terry Biddlecombe says its a good horse and he thinks this is magic for racing…lots of happy people who own their own horse
The going for Fuzzy Logic’ s first outing…
The Willow Trust Novices Hurdle Race…was good…it started at 5-1 second favourite in the betting but at the off the money had piled on to make it 3-1…
But those with binoculars must have been worried when they saw their horse throw its jockey before the race had started…
When it did get going…there was no stopping it…
Fuzzy Logic made the running…a lot oif it too over two miles and five and a half furlongs…
There was one danger…the favourite Debacle…an American horse with two wins in its last two races…
As they came into the straight…headed up the Cheltenham hill it was a two horse race…
The owners say they are delighted with their horse…thrilled…
Cheltenham's owners club has proved so popular and so successful thanks to Fuzzy Logic that a second horse is being bought and put into training with the David Nicholson stables…
And if they keep on coming first past the post…they'll be queuing one hundred deep for a place in the winners enclosure with their very own favourite
Edward Gillespie askes have you ever seen so many happy faces…its good for racing…and hopefully good for Cheltenham
Cyclists have brought a city centre to a halt in a protest over traffic congestion.
They say there are so many cars in the city it's no longer safe to ride there.
But the council says it's already doing all it can to help the bikers.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
GEORGE MONBIOT/Protest Organiser
Insp GRAHAM HOOPER/Thames Valley Police
MARK JARMAN/Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
Two wheels are better than four.
That was the message from the cyclists who took over one of Oxford's busiest rouundabouts at the the height of rush hour.
Even in the city of bikes it seems the car has got the upper hand.
The bikers say its time to exclude many vehicles altogether.
Many of the motorists delayed by the protest were sympathetic.
And even the police were reluctant to spoil the bikers day.
The council says it's already doing what it can to make Oxford more b ike friendly.
Traffic planners say parking restrictions already discourage many people from driving into Oxford.
Officially statistics suggest there are no more cars in the city than there were back in the seventies.
But most of those who live here find that difficult to believe.
A pub landlord has been attacked with a knife and locked in his own cellar during a robbery.
The raiders escaped with the takings from two tills.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
JIM PATTERSON/Landlord
Dc NEVILLE SMURTHWAITE/Gloucester CID
Voice over
Two men armed with a butcher's knife and wearing balaclavas, forced their way behind the bar of the Vauxhill Arms pub in Gloucester after closing time and forced the landlord to open two tills.
The landlord is taking his family on holiday to help him recover.
Police believe both men must have used the pub in the past because they knew how to gain access to the cellar.
The men escaped with about £500 in notes and change and the police are linking the robbery with at least 2 others in the county.
The RAF Squadron which claims to have accidently dropped the first bomb on Nazi Germany, has reached the final day in its long history.
Aircrew who'd served with one-one-five Squadron bid an emotional farewell to their base at RAF Benson.
ERIKA BARNES/RAF Benson
Gp Capt GUY DEVAS/Former Commander
JOHN CARTER/Former Gunner
Sqn Ldr STEVE NEWTON/115 Squadron
Wing Cmdr DOUG BARR/115 Squadron
Flt Lt RAY NEWELL/115 Squadron
Voice over
The pride and the glory, past and present of one-one-five Squadron.
Airmen and women with memories of service through war and peace.
Male speaker
It was very happy despite the worst and losses.
I had to write to the next of kin.
It was a terrible blow.
Male speaker
Some of the raids.
We came back from Berlin on two engines.
We had some rough times.
Voice over
The final approach for one-one-five Squadron.
The crews that fly the Andovers from RAF Benson are being disbanded.
Their current job, to calibrate RAF runways, is being put out to a private company at East Midlands Airport.
Male speaker
It's very sad as the Squadron has strong associations with pilots who flew in the Second World War.
Unfortunately, it's more cost effective to privatise our work.
Voice over
The pictures in the Squadron museum tell their own story.
Of the Wellingtons and Lancasters which went on hundreds of bombing raids during the war and of the men who never returned.
Male speaker
Very early on I realised you're entrusted the history and spirit of the Squadron.
My biggest regret is that there'll be no new blood keeping the spirit going.
Voice over
One-one-five Squadron is proud of its long service — well most of it.
One of its team accidently dropped the very first bomb on Nazi Germany.
The rest is history.
And there's the incredible story of one man, Sergeant Nick Alkemade, whose plane was hit over Germany.
Male speaker
They were ordered to abandon the plane.
His parachute was on fire.
So he rolled out without it.
He passed out, and woke up on the ground having fallen 1800 feet into a fir tree and five feet of snow.
Voice over
But the Squadron won't have such a lucky escape.
It's loyal servants the Lancaster and Andovers bid their farewells.
One-one-five Squadron is no more.
But the memories live on.
Health watchdogs are calling on a hospital to clean up its act.
An inspection found some wards were overcrowded, and some toilets and bathrooms were dirty.
Management says improvements are in hand but they need more money for modernisation.
GARETH FURBY/Swindon
LOUISE AITKEN/Community Health Council
DAVID ROBSON/Hospital Spokesman
Voice over
Inspectors visted the Princess Margaret Hospital and found patients had nothing but praise for the staff.
But the report from the Community Health Council says some wards are overcrowded.
And standards of hygeine are sometimes low, with some floors far from clean.
She says as a housewife she notices dirty floors.
Hospitals need to be clean to encourage people to recover.
The report says in some wards there's an atmosphere of decay.
But managers say repairs are already in hand.
He says they know about it and work in most cases is underway.
Managers accept the hospital would benefit from complete modernisation.
But before work can start they need the money, and the final bill could come to several million pounds.
Still to come on Central News, success with the syndicate
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES/Stony Stratford
MALCOLM SWAIN/Son
Det Chief Insp PETE BURROWS/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
89 year old William Swain died at his home in Stony Stratford, 24 hours after two men had conned their way into his home.
It's thought he may have collapsed from the shock of the burglary.
Male speaker
He was a lovely old man.
A family man, very gentle.
I think the people who've done it are sick.
Voice over
One of the burglars called at the house in Calverton Road, telling the pensioner he'd won ten pounds.
He then asked for a drink of water.
Whilst William was distracted, a second man searched the house and stole hundreds of pounds in two rolls of bank notes — his life savings.
William was seen alive and well this morning, but by lunchtime he'd died.
Before the burglary he was said to be in good health.
Male speaker
The burglary that happened yesterday was traumatic.
His death today has come as a complete shock.
We're obviously looking at both events.
Voice over
Police have descriptions of the two conmen.
The man at the door is white 5 feet 6 inches tall.
Aged 25 to 30 with a broad build and a local accent.
He was smartly dressed in a two piece suit.
His partner was more scruffy.
He's white, in his late teens or early 20s.
He's 5 feet 10 tall with long, dark shoulder length hair.
William who was a widower told his son he could believe he'd been taken in by the conmen.
He was angry with himself.
Now police have begun house to house inquiries to track the men who caused his death.
Three men have died and five people were injured in two seperate head-on collisions.
BROCKTHORPE/Gloucestershire
Two men, both aged twenty, were killed when their Nova appearently crossed the wrong side of the Stroud to Gloucester road at Brockthorpe, and collided with a Sierra.
And a man was killed when a Sierra collided with a lorry on the Hereford to Worcester road at Shucknell.
Cyclists have brought a city centre to a halt in a protest over traffic congestion.
They say there are so many cars in the city it's no longer safe to ride there.
But the council says it's already doing all it can to help the bikers.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
GEORGE MONBIOT/Protest Organiser
Insp GRAHAM HOOPER/Thames Valley Police
MARK JARMAN/Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
Two wheels are better than four.
That was the message from the cyclists who took over one of Oxford's busiest rouundabouts at the the height of rush hour.
Even in the city of bikes it seems the car has got the upper hand.
The bikers say its time to exclude many vehicles altogether.
Many of the motorists delayed by the protest were sympathetic.
And even the police were reluctant to spoil the bikers day.
The council says it's already doing what it can to make Oxford more b ike friendly.
Traffic planners say parking restrictions already discourage many people from driving into Oxford.
Officially statistics suggest there are no more cars in the city than there were back in the seventies.
But most of those who live here find that difficult to believe.
A lollipop man has been ordered to stop helping pensioners across the road because he's breaking the law.
He's been told he can do it legally only if he takes his uniform off first.
He says the law is disgusting.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
JOHN WRAY/Lollipop Man
RICHARD SMITH/Road Safety Manager
Voice over
John Wray, who's 77, has been a lollipop man for three years, escorting schoolchildren across Stroud Road in Gloucester.
Like a policeman, he has the right to stop the traffic, but only for children, not adults.
Now he's been told to stop doing a good turn for pensioners and others who otherwise have to wait minutes for a gap in the traffic.
Road safety experts say they're not to blame, it's the law.
Only policeman, traffic wardens and lollipop patrols with children can stop the traffic.
The same rule applies to every lollipop patrol in the country, John Wray says it leaves a bitter taste in his mouth…
The former Royal maid accused of stealing letters from Princess Anne has received an apology from the national newspaper which called her a thief.
But she says she still plans to take the paper to court.
Kim Barnes reports from the Labour Party Conference in Blackpool.
YESTERDAY/LINDA TOWNLEY/Stroud Labour Party
Linda Townley, formerly Linda Joyce a lady's maid to Princess Anne came to the Labour party conference in Blackpool to make a desperate plea on behalf of those unfairly attacked in the press,
Speaking as a delegate from the Stroud labour party, she told the conference of her struggle after she was linked with the theft of royal letters in the Today newspaper over three years ago
actuality
This morning the Today newspaper published an apology on page two, saying…they now accept Linda was not responsible for taking the letters.
They apologise both for the sory and distress caused.
But Linda says althouigh she welcomes the apology her court case goes on.
She wwent to the High Court in August and won the riught to sue for malicious falsehood, a rare procedure, which she says she has to use because she can't afford libel proceedings.
An initial hearing could take place next week.
Meanwhile Today won't comment because of legal proceedings…they add Neither the editor nor the managing editor of Today were working for the newspaper at the time of the original article on April 25th 1989.
We therefore cannot comment.
A group of Bosnian refugees has said a tearful farewell to charity workers after spending a week in their care.
They escaped the scene of a massacre just a week ago, and have used the time since to come to terms with their ordeal.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
WENDLEBURY/Oxfordshire
CHRIS JANIUREK/Project Spark
Voice over
The fighting and horror stories from Bosnia seem a world away as fifteen refugee children and six of their mothers watch a video in Oxfordshire.
But only a week ago they were escaping a massacre by Serbs in their village…and the memories burn deep.
Female speaker
It was awful, I can't talk about it
Voice over
The Bosnians arrived at Wendlebury last weekend.
They were brought out by volunteers and flown to Britain.
They've been looked after by Project Spark at a house normally used for problem children from London.
They've been trying to come to terms with what's happened ever since.
Female speaker
Everything you here is the truth and much more is happening which isn't being reported
Female speaker
It's very nice here, no shooting, bombs, or grenades, and they're safe here
Female speaker
I don't want to go home now but I do when there's peace again
Voice over
Some still don't know what have happened to their menfolk, but one was able to make contact by telephone with her husband after six months.
Even now she's frightened to be seen on television for fear of reprisals.
Male speaker
He's been in a camp for three months.
His wife's a little sad today because he phoned here this morning and she's a little upset, she'd like to go home and be with him, but she's happy that he's safe
The group left with tearful farewells for Plymouth where they'll be spread amoung different families for a longer stay.
The House at Wendlebury is preparing to receive more refugees next week.
IN PART TWO: Crowning Glory.
Gloucestershire's racing Duke becomes King of the Castle.
And signing on and signing off…the goalie who's saved himself from the dole queue 
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
PAUL REECE
Voice over
…
Not one of our teams won last weekend…so we need a change of luck don't we…
Gloucester rugby club certainly do…they've lost both of their opening league games…tomorrow they play Rugby…the team that it is…at Kingsholm 
Voice over
The cherry and whites were just two points short of victory at Leicester last saturday…they fought back from ten points down with 13 men…
Paul Ashmead was sent off while number eight Bobby Fowke limped along with an injury…
Bearing in mind the Tigers were at full strength with a side full of Internationals it was a great showing by Gloucester…and winger Derek Morgan scored the try of the game
STING
here's the side to face Rugby tomorrow…
Pete Glanville comes in for his league debut he replaces Paul Ashmead who's suspended…
Bobby Fowke has managed to shake off his injury and plays…
last season Gloucester had two games against Rugby in seven days…they knocked them out of the cup by 23 points to 3 and also beat them in the league that was quite a tussle…the cherry and whites won by nineteen points to sixteen and once again got the try of the game…
Simon Morris the scorer…
that's the football…
Mark Kiff's action round-up has the rest of the news 
Voice over
Good news on the ice: the Swindon Wildcats and Milton Keynes Kings have both qualified for the knockout stages of the Autumn Trophy.
They're in action at home tomorrow.
But don't turn up at Oxford's Ice Rink on Sunday; their game's been cancelled.
The Swindon Robins are facing Black Thursday next week when they take on the Oxford Cheetahs at Blunsdon.
Defeat could condemn the Robins to relegation.
But Witney Town Football Club will definitely be celebrating that night.
They open their new stadium against Aston Villa, led by old boy Ron Atkinson.
Hospital cuts:Doctors fear lives will be at risk.
Safety alert.
Faulty hairstylers withdrawn from sale.
And tears of farewell.The Bosnians heading for a new life.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Worst affected, they claim, would be emergency cases, children, and pregnant women.
But the Health Authority insists no-one will be put at risk, and that the plan is to actually IMPROVE services.
Gareth Furby reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
DR DOUGLAS BOYLE/Doctors' Action Group
DR ALEC GATHERER/Oxfordshire Health Authority
Voice over
The Horton General Hospital has treated the people of Banbury for more than a hundred years.
Much of the money for its new accident and emergency department came from public donations.
But now Banbury doctors are worried about that department's future, along with the childrens ward, and the maternity unit.
The GPs fear those services could be moved twenty five miles away to Oxford under a review ordered by the District Health Authority.
Doctor Douglas Boyle, who's coardinating a GP's action group, fears lives will be lost if Horton Hospital is downgraded.
He says a child with meningitis could need urgent treatment and may not get it fast enough because its too far.
Up to ten jobs are already going to save money.
Today visitors and patients defended their hospital.
She says she wouldn't like to be an expectant mum and have to travel that far.
She says she doesn't see why they should have to go that far.
She says its their local hospital and they should keep it.
Oxfordshire Health Authority admits its having to look for a two million pound saving under the Government's Health Reforms.
He says they've got the interests of the whole county to consider and they want to provide modern patient care.
The review of services won't be complete until Novemeber, but already the people of Banbury are talking about organising a protest march to try to save their hospital services.
An electic hairstyler has been withdrawn from sale after one began to produce sparks.
Trading standards officers say the hot brush styler, made in the Far East has faulty insulation which has exposed live wires.
The distributors say they're prepared to give refunds for safety's sake.
Erika Barnes reports.
GLOUCESTER
PAUL GALLAND/Chief Trading Standards Officer
DEREK PACE/MD/Headgear International
Voice over
The hidden dangers of a hot brush.
The last person to use it saw sparks fly.
It overheated and melted the plastic cover.
Live wires were exposed.
The dangers are all to obvious.
He says
The Chinese made Groomers half inch hair brush has been on the market for eight years.
Many thousands have been sold through hairdressers for about seven pounds.
The UK distributers in Cheltenham were horrifed at the fault.
And will discuss their concerns with the makers in the far east.
He says
The brush doesn't comply with electrical regulations, because it has insufficient insulation.
Even this screw could become live in the hand.
Trading standards officers thought the days of faulty hot brushes were a thing of the past.
Anyone who has the brush, is advised to return it to the retailer.
They'll be refunded by Headgear International.
Meanwhile investigations continue into the brush, which is, quite literally, too hot to handle.
A man who raised the cash to buy a laser machine for a hospital is demanding his money back, because the equipment hasn't been bought.
Len Webb's organisation raised eleven thousand pounds for the machine, to carry out delicate throat operations.
But he says the hospital changed it's mind without telling him.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
LEN WEBB/Fundraiser
PAUL BURN/Gloucestershire Royal Hospital
Voice over
A laser machine like this one at Gloucestershire royal hospital is used for delicate throat operations — this one was on loan, but when fundraiser Len Webb heard the hospital wanted to buy one, his charity organisation, emergency station nine, set about raising cash.
A letter from the hospital confirmed that laser equipment was to be purchased if the money was raised.
But now Len says that instead of the hospital putting the eleven thousand pounds raised towards a NEW laser, it spent the money updating an existing model it already had.
He says he understood the new model was to be portable, and to be used by surrounding hospitals — and says he feels fundraisers have been misled.
He says that the hospital should have told them a new machine wasn't being bought.
But the hospital says Mr Webb has got it wrong:
He says in effect it is a new machine — the parts are the latest available, and the original machine they were going to buy is now obsolete.
Mr Webb says the row won't stop his fund raising activities — but he thinks the hospital should refund the money it spent, so that it can be put towards other needy projects.
The sport of horse racing has taken a tumble today with the news that there'll be less Arab money being invested in breeding and training…but as one stable door closes…another one opens…in Gloucestershire trainer David Nicholson and his team have moved into their new home…its the biggest and hopefully best yard steeplechasing has ever seen 
DAVID NICHOLSON/Trainer
DINAH NICHOLSON
Voice over
and we'll be back at Jackdaws Castle in ten days time for the official opening by the Princess Royal…finally tonight we've got the result of our Nigel Mansell competition…thanks for all your cards…we had hundreds and here's how it finished 
Voice over
And now to a village where the church bells have been rung properly for the first time in twenty years.
They'd been out of action because the church's spire was too weak to support them.
But after a sixty-five thousand pound refurbishment, the bells have been restored to full working order.
Jessica Fowle went along to listen.
SYDENHAM Oxfordshire
RALPH CARTMILL Vicar
DEN MUNDAY Bell Ringer
JULIENNE NEWHAM Restoration Committee
Voice over
The congregation of Saint Mary's Church at Sydenham in Oxfordshire gather for an extra special occasion.
After around twenty years of virtual silence, except for chimes at the occasional wedding, the sixteenth century church bells are finally back in place.
Male speaker
It's awful having a set of bells there which are almost in working order but can't be used.
It's wonderful to have something ancient returned to use.
Voice over
It was decided to stop using them because the stress of the three hundred and sixty-degree swing made the whole spire shake.
It was just too much of a risk.
Male speaker
When you've got a six hundred weight bell going over and over it could pull the steeple down.
Voice over
Once enough money had been raised the bells were taken to the Whitechapel Bell Foundry in London — where one of them was originally cast.
Now they're no longer swung from side to side.
Instead they're struck by the hammer while fixed in place on static mountings.
Purists might call it chiming rather than genuine ringing but Saint Mary's has some very satisfied customers.
Male speaker
Actually they're better today than ever.
I may be bragging about myself though.
Female speaker
It took four years of hard work and fundraising.
We raised over sixty thousand pounds ina village of only three hundred people.
Now we're delighted that it's over and thrilled that the bells are ringing.
Voice over
The sound of church bells in Sydenham dates back well over four hundred years.
Although there's some dispute about when they were last heard everyone's agreed that it's wonderful to hear them again.
Labour backs deep defence spending cuts
FTSE down 22
The hundred shares index closed down Twenty-two point six at twenty-five, forty-nine point seven.
The Bundesbank's refusal to cut German interest rates pushed the pound to a new low of two marks, forty-three and it's also down against the dollar at one, seventy-one.
Shire horses are proving they're just as useful as tractors in maintaining ancient woodland.
They're being used to thin out trees.
And although tractors could do the work in a fraction of the time, the shire horses have advantages too.
They don't churn up wild flowers and they are very popular with the tourists.
MARIA COYLE Westonbirt
TONY RUSSELL Forestry Commission
COLIN HORLER Shire Horses' Owner
Voice over
The sight of horses in harness hauling timber was commonplace fifty years ago.
And now the Forestry Commission is using shirehorses to thin out part of the ancient woodland at Westonbirt Arboretum in Gloucestershire.
Tractors may take a fraction of the time to do the job.
But to do it without damaging the flora and fauna, horse power still reigns supreme.
Male speaker
The area we're standing in now is a mass of bluebells and primroses in the Spring.
If we used tractors on here continually pulling out timber, it would cause a lot of damage to the ground structure and would reduce the number of flowers.
With the horses, they cause virtually no damage at all.
Voice over
The horses, Nelson, Regent, and Baron are part of a world record winning team from Bath, more used to taking part in displays.
Majestic grace is matched with brute strength…
Each horse is hand-picked for its temperament and skill.
Male speaker
Not only do they need a lot of power, they need a lot of patience.
They've got to stand while loading.
You don't want a horse that fidgets and it's got to trust you…then they'll go anywhere really.
Voice over
Interviewer: Is it harder for the men than for the horses?
Male speaker
So my men keep telling me.
You enjoy the job though.
I couldn't get enthusiastic about driving a tractor all day but I quite enjoy working with these all day.
Male speaker
It's an attractive thing to watch.
It's far more attractive than watching a tractor and we like to encourage people to come and visit us at Westonbirt.
We'd like them to come along and see the horses working in the traditional way at the same time they can look at the Autumn colours.
Voice over
The job's expected to take them until next Sunday to complete.
Sightseers are welcome…to watch this magnificent force pulling WITH rather than against the forces of nature.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Five bombs explode in London
FTSE up 28
The hundred shares index closed up twenty eight point four at three thousand and sixty seven point seven 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty one and up at two marks, forty six.
Anne Dawson
Welcome back.
In a moment the end of an era for football American style.
But with first news of the British game, here's Tim.
Hello There…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
In the premiership we have swindon town…on the bottom…still searching for the their first league win of the season…in the first division we have Oxford United.,…on the bottom…with just two wins all season…in the third division we have Hereford United five off the bottom…again just two league wins…in rugby's first division we have Gloucester one off the bottom recovering from their biggest ever league defeat
see what I mean…always look on the bright side of life…we have 14 cracking goals for you…and daring…thrilling comebacks by both Oxford and Hereford…our action starts in the premiership at the county ground 
Pictures BBC Sport
Voice over
and let's hope they're all looking on the bright side of life for this week's coca cola cup games…now there was a time when Gloucester rugby would always give us a cheer…but they're down in the dumps too…
Bath 46 Gloucester 17…was the score on Saturday…the worst ever 
KEITH RICHARDSON/Coach
Voice over
Bath are virtually unbeatable…that's the first point to make and even for Gloucester on top form this would have been mission impossible…the cherry and whites self destructed though…they missed five kicks and presented the champions with at least two tries…in all Bath got six…
Gloucester ran in two…both in the second half…
Damien Cummins got the first…
Paul Holford the second…that made it 32-17…not too bad…two more tries by Bath made it Gloucester's heaviest league defeat…so what's the verdict of coach keith richardson
keith richardson says that Gloucester made basic errors and could have helped themselves to nineteen points…you can't afford to make such errors against a team like Bath and in the end things went badly wrong
There won't be any more American football in US air bases, because the teams who played the game are going home.
Since the nineteen fifties each base has had a side.
But now the airmen are leaving and taking their cheerleaders and shoulder pads with them.
GRAEME BOWD/Upper Heyford
GEORGE BOVELL/Coach
Capt CASEY MAHON/United States Air Force
Voice over
They show more respect for OUR national anthem than you would find at any soccer match.
But for their own they put their hands on their hearts.
For more than forty years American football has been symbol of patriotism at the Upper Heyford airbase.
Not quite the Superbowl perhaps, but it's got all the trappings.
Hot dogs on the touchline, and of course the cheerleaders.
But the base is about to become a casualty of the peace dividend.
Next year the Yanks are going home.
The Skykings played their last home match to the enthusiastic support of wives and fellow servicemen.
For most this will mark the end of their playing days.
In America the game is confined to college sides and professionals.
Male speaker
Next year may be the end of football in Britain.
I think the people who live around the base will miss it.
Male speaker
We are saying goodbye to both our airforce friends and our English friends.
We have been here since the 1950s, it's going to be tough.
Voice over
This season the Skykings are the top of the air force league.
The final touch down saw a convincing win over Chicksands.
The final take off comes in December when the last bombers leave British soil.
A four year old girl who's undergone a revolutionary heart transplant operation has spent her first day at school.
Sophie Parke was only the third child in Britain to receive two hearts in a piggy back style transplant.
KEN GOODWIN/Prior's Norton
JANE PARKE/Mother
NIGEL PARKE/Father
Voice over
It's a special day for Sophie Parke — her first day at school.
It's thanks to the skill of surgeons and to the parents who allowed their childs heart to be donated.
Sophie's heart was damaged by a viral infection when she was three.
She says that Sophie became listless.
Her parents were told that her best hope was a special type of transplant, in which a donor heart would be joined to hers, piggy back style.
He says that because of the type of illness it was the best sort of transplant.
Because it's Sophie's first day there's a treat — she's allowed to ring the school bell.
Playtime's over, but before lessons begin Sophie is introduced to her new classmates.
She says welcome to Sophie, who's been ill, but is better now.
School is something Sophie's been looking forward to for ages, and it's not long before she's settled in.
It's a relief for mum and dad.
She says that it's made it all worthwhile.
It's all thanks to the donor and the doctors.
He says that the donors parents were very brave.
All thanks to them.
For a while Sophie was critically ill.
Now with her piggy back heart shinning up the climbing frame is childs play.
Vets are having to deal with the biggest outbreak of distemper in ten years.
So far seven animals have died of the disease.
But vets say the public is unaware of just how dangerous the virus can be.
KAREN THOMPSON/Hereford
GEORGE COOPER/Vet
Voice over
For this dog a trip to the vets could be a lifesaver.
Vets in Hereford have dealt with more than a dozen cases of Distemper in recent weeks.
Normally a practice would deal with just one infected dog a year.
Seven animals have been put to sleep.
It's the biggest outbreak in the city in more than a decade.
The disease leads to convuclsions and an agonising death.
So it's important the signs are spotted early…
The highly infectious disease can spread rapidly when unprotected dogs come into contact with those infected, frequently these are strays which have been left to fenmd for themselves.
Vets says there are two main reasons for this Distemper outbreak
It costs up to thirty pounds for the first series of jabs…ansd then between fifteen and twenty pounds for an annual booster.
But is it worth it?
It's hoped this latest worrying bout of Distemper in Hereford will have a knock on effect on people with trusty four legged friends.
A frightening visit to the vets for the animal may well esnure it's healthy future.
It's four weeks now since the Sun Valley poultry factory was destroyed by fire.
It left two firemen dead and a hundred and thirty employees without a place to work.
To keep up production, management moved some of their staff to a factory in France.
Many hadn't travelled abroad before.
Some are enjoying it, but others are homesick.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Orleans
6 September/HEREFORD
YVONNE NEILL/Worker
JULIE TOWNSEND/Worker
SIMON BISHOP/Worker
MARION BENNETT/Worker
GUY BLANCHOT/Factory Manager
OLIVER D'FAUTRALLA/Trainee
Voice over
It's the same people doing the same job.
But instead of working at the Sun Valley factory in Hereford, they're on a production line at Orleans in France.
The Hereford factory was destroyed four weeks ago in a fire that killed two firemen.
A hundred and thirty of the people who'd worked there volunteered to staff the new factory in France.
Many have never been abroad before, and they're having a problem with the language.
Female speaker
I can say the odd word, but I can't string a sentence together yet.
Female speaker
I can say stop and go because that's what it says on the machines.
Voice over
The French cuisine isn't to everyones taste either.
Female speaker
I like the garlic.
But all their meat is too raw.
Male speaker
The eating takes some getting used to, but the drinking's the same.
Although I do miss my pint of Murphy's.
Voice over
There's one thing that all the workers miss.
Female speaker
My family.
I do miss my family.
Female speaker
My husband and children.
I phone them up, but it's not the same as having them with you.
Voice over
The Orleans factory had to open two months ahead of schedule to accomodate the Hereford staff.
Despite that it's already running at full production.
French mangers put that down to the expertise of the English workers.
Male speaker
They're very professional and they get on with their work.
They've done very well.
Voice over
They're also responsible for training the French workers.
They're popular teachers.
Male speaker
I like to work with English people because I ractise my English.
I hope to make good friends with them.
Voice over
The Hereford refugees expect to leave Orleans for good by Christmas.
For those who enjoyed their time here it won't be Goodbye.
Just Au Revoir.
Still to come on Central News…
Struggling for survival
Central South teams hit rock bottom.
And, going back to the shires…harnessing horse power to clear the woods.
Good evening,
ANNE DAWSON
The families of five young people who were killed by a reckless driver say they're outraged over a decision to reduce his prison sentence.
Shaun Gooch was jailed for five years for causing the deaths and a further three months for driving while disqualified.
GARGY PATEL
The Appeal Court today ruled that the five-year term should remain, but that he did not have to serve the extra three months.
The victims' relatives say they have a life sentence to bare, and Gooch deserved to spend longer in prison.
They're angry he was even granted permission to appeal.
September 1992/ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
September 1991/SWINDON
ROYAL COURTS OF JUSTICE/London
RICHARD RAINS/Gooch's Barrister
ANDREW BARNES/Victim's Father
Voice over
Shaun Gooch was sentenced to the maximum five years in jail for causing the the deaths of five young people by reckles driving in Swindons Akers way.
At his trial last year he was told he should be punished for his wicked driving.
He'd raced another car reaching speeds of up to 80 miles an hour before losing control and ploughing into a roadside bench where the youngsters gathered.
Today at the appeal court his counsel asked for his prison term to be reduced, saying it was a bad case, but not the worst case.
Shaun Gooch was in court today to hear the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Taylor reject the appeal for three reasons:
Becuase five people had their lives cut short by his appalling driving.
Becuase he was indulging in racing.
It was a sober and deliberate decision.
And because the sentence had to reflect public concern.
However an extra three month sentence of driving whilst disqualified was changed.
It'll now run at the same time as his main sentence and means he'll spend less time in jail.
Male speaker
It's entirely to be expected.
the difficulty is, that an otherwise nice young man cuased these deaths and was bound to get a substantial sentence.
Voice over
Two years after the death of his daughter Paula in the crash, Andrew Barnes said he was outraged at the appeal.
Male speaker
I couldn't believe he'd even think about appealling.
Five years for five lives was soft.
Then there was panic that he'd be released today, when we have a life sentence to bare.
Voice over
And the father of the youngest victim, Ian Lilley, summed up the feelings of an entire community.
Martyn Lilley was sickened by the three month reduction in Gooch's prison term.
He said’ We've got a life sentence, whe should he get anything off his?’
Since the crash at Akers Way, a new offence of causing death by dangerous driving has been introduced.
It carries a longer maximum sentence of ten years.
It can't be given retrospectively.
A man lured his estranged wife to her death by claiming he wanted to discuss a problem with one of their children, a jury has been hearing.
Her body was found a week later hidden in the boot of her company car.
The court was told that he beat his wife unconscious before pushing her and her car into a river.
He denies murder.
September 1992/MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Reporting
Voice over
Tania Probyn has gone to see her estranged husband about their two children in the late evening of September 2nd last year.
Thirty minutes later she was drowning in the river Severn at Stonebench in Gloucestershire Bristol Crown court was told.
Her husband Jonathan Probyn denies murdering his wife.
The court was told Tania had been living with another man, Robert Cross, for five months.
Jonathan Probyn called his wife under the pretext of having a problem with one of their children.
She went round to her former home in Hardwicke, Gloucestershire, where she was beaten unconscious by Probyn, who put her back into her Renault 19 car took her to the River and some how pushed her in.
Mr Probyn later put out a TV appeal for his wife to come home.
He told Police she'd been violent and emotional when she left him at about 11.30, an hour after she was supposed to have arrived.
But her body was later found in the back of the Renault at the bottom of the Severn.
The prosecution say Mr Probyn was laying the ground for his defence as the search for his wife continued.
He told people of a bag he'd lent to her and which was found with her body; He said his fingerprints would be all over his wife's cars steering wheel; and he told the police she's been violent and upset when he left him.
The prosecution says he's prepared stories to answer all the police questions.
But the prosecution says she'd been badly beaten around the head before she died.
she may have been unconmscious before she went into the water.
The car Clock had stopped at 11 o'clock, her watch a few minutes after.
The prosecution says Mr Probyn saw an easy solution to his maritial and financial problems by killing his wife the case continues.
A lifetime's dream has come true for an ardent suitor.
Seventy five year old Reg Potter finally convinced the love of his life to marry him…fifty years after she first turned him down.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
CIRENCESTER Gloucestershire
REG POTTER Groom
ROSE POTTER Bride
DEREK JONES Bride's Son
Voice over
There was no disguising the joy on Reg Potter's face.
The seventy five year old bachelor had finally got his girl at the second time of asking years He'd waited half a century for this kiss with his new bride Rose, and he still couldn't believe his luck.
Male speaker
It was worth waiting for, this is the happiest day of my life, she's the only one
Female speaker
I'm still a bit shocked
Voice over
Rose, at seventy two, is a great grandmother.
Reg has remained a bachelor ever since he first asked her to marry him when they were childhood sweethearts in Cirencester.
They had a two year romance in the thirties but it was broken up by the war and the appearance of Rose's first husband.
Rose became a widow two years ago and by chance met Reg while shopping.
Female speaker
I'd been shopping in Smiths and I thought I recognised him.
It went on from there
Male speaker
I wanted to trail her back home but I thought it best not to go to too fast
Voice over
That led to the ceremony at Cirencester Register's Office at the weekend.
The marriage has gone down well with Rose's family.
Male speaker
I'm happy for them both, Reg has been a lonely man and my mother has also been lonely since dad's death.
I think coming together after all these years has given them a new lease of life
The couple celebrated with a glass of champagne in the local pub…and Reg was able to reflect that all things come to those who wait.
50
FTSE down 103
The hundred shares index closed down one hundred and three point four at two four four six point three 
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy and down at two marks, thirty nine.
A charity which paid for a group of Russian orphans to have a holiday in England has brought them back again.
The trust, which aims to help disadvantaged children around the world, says it wasn't satisfied with the conditions the orphans returned to.
Now it's arranged for them to spend a year living with families over here.
Robin Powell reports.
HEATHROW AIRPORT/London
JULY 1992
JOHN NOLAN/Foster Parent
Voice over
An emotional welcome at Heathrow Airport for twenty-one Russian orphans, over here for twelve months living with English families and going to English schools.
It's all a far cry from the last time they were at Heathrow — that was in July when they returned to Russia after a three-month holiday in Worcestershire.
The children are treated as mentally retarded back home, simply because they don't have parents.
Now the Henley-based charity which arranged that vacation in the Malvern Hills has arranged for them to stay over here until conditions in Russian orphanages are improved.
For chef John Nolan, who fostered two of them in the summer, it was an exciting coach trip to the airport.
The reunion was worth waiting for.
There had been red tape to contend with all along — but at last the children were back.
The orphans were hungry as well as tired, and the first thing they did when they got to the disused school in Malvern where they'll be based was to tuck into a slap-up meal.
From now on, they'll be acquiring a taste for school food — the next step is for the orphans is to start attending lessons as if they were English boys and girls.
As the conservative party prepares itself for a turbulent debate on Europe tomorrow, many of them will be turning to the work of a Cotswold publisher for guidance.
Anthony Cowgill has produced the only comprehensive guide to the Maastricht Treaty.
It's turned into a surprise best seller, with the European Commission and Tory Party headquarters among those wanting a copy.
Clare Lafferty reports.
SHEEPSCOMBE/Gloucestershire
ANTHONY COWGILL/Author
Voice over
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Hereford have got two weeks off now but there's plenty of football coming up…here's the fixture list for this week…
Three games to look out for…
Swindon have a six goal lead from the first leg so no danger for them…
Oxford trail by a goal and are up against it…while on Thursday its Witney's big night…a big match to mark the opening of their ground 
Now Gloucester folk are smiling again…their team are off the mark in the league…on Saturday the cherry and whites beat Rugby twenty one…twelve 
Voice over
One of the most famous paintings of the Italian Renaissance has found a new home in a college chapel.
It's now expected to become a tourist attraction.
Keith Hutchence reports.
OXFORD
Rev JONATHAN SEDGWICK/Dean of Divinity
Voice over
One version's in a monastery in Milan, but now another hangs in the Chapel of Magdalen College in Oxford.
Leonardo da Vinci's students painted the copy of the the Last Supper under their master's direction, and it was used in the recent restoration of the original wall painting.
The picture of Christ eating with his disciples shortly before he was crucified is on a long-term loan from the Royal Academy in London.
They paid six hundred guineas for the painting in 1821, but they didn't have the gallery space to do justice to the massive canvas, which measures 260 square feet.
Four men were needed to carry the picture into the Chapel.
Some art historians detect the hand of Leonardo himself on the canvas, and it's now generally accepted to be the most perfect version of the Last Supper in existence.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
FRENCHAY HOSPITAL/Bristol
DAVID SANDEMAN/Neurosurgeon
Insp PETER TOCKNELL/Gloucestershire Police
JIMMY TARBUCK/Comedian
MARK KIFF/Live from Bristol
Voice over
RUNS=0:45
Voice over
A Conservative supporter who resigned from the party over the selection of black candidate John Taylor has had his application to rejoin turned down.
Captain Don Ward asked to be readmitted after Mr Taylor was defeated at the general election, but party officials have now decided he can't come back.
Clare Lafferty reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Capt DON WARD/Ex Association Member
Voice over
Don Ward first contacted his local Conservative Association last year after learning that black barrister John Taylor was to to be the the Prospective Parliamentary candidate for Cheltenham in the General Election.
Mr Ward was so opposed to the selection that he told the Association he no longer wanted to be a member.
Now Mr Ward wants to rejoin the party.
He wrote to the local Conservative Association asking to be made a member.
Mr Ward says it's obvious why his application was rejected.
There was no one available at the Association Headquarters to comment on the refusal.
Officials there are believed to be dealing with it as a private matter.
An inquest has opened on a man whose badly burnt body was found in a blazing barn.
29 SEPTEMBER 1992/STROUD/Gloucestershire
The body of Justin Jeffrey, who was twenty, was discovered by firemen in the ruins of a barn at Stroud in Gloucestershire, last Tuesday.
The inquest was told that Mr Jeffrey, who was from Stroud, had died from carbon monoxide poisoning.
The inquest was adjourned to a date to be fixed.
Police investigating an arson attack at a school say they're disappointed by the public's response to their appeal for information.
27 SEPTEMBER 1992/CHIPPING NORTON/Oxfordshire
Almost half a million pounds damage was caused by the fire at Holy Trinity Roman Catholic School at Chipping Norton in Oxfordshire just over a week ago.
Yesterday police questioned worshippers at a nearby church, but say there have been no new leads.
The school's still shut but it's hoped that pupils will return on Thursday.
Oxfam, the charity founded by an Oxford University professor and a Church of England vicar, has been marking its 50th anniversary.
The charity used the occasion to call for fresh action to tackle the root causes of world poverty.
Ian Maclaren reports.
RON FORFAR/Actor
DAVID BRYER/Director
WORLD IN ACTION/Granada TV
1963/Canon DICK MILFORD/Co-Founder
LORD JENKINS of HILLHEAD
Voice over
The Oxford Committee for Famine Relief was founded to ease the suffering of refugees made homeless and hungry by the German occupation in 1942.
Some of the first victims to be helped came from the war-torn streets of Greece…
In the first few months more than 3,000 pounds was raised.
From those humble beginnings, Oxfam has grown into Britain's largest aid agency with an income of nearly 70 million pounds.
The charity marked its 50th anniversary today with the help of some of its oldest and youngest volunteers…from all over the world…and a number of celebrity supporters…
And in a special report to mark the anniversary, Oxfam set out an agenda to tackle the root causes of disaster and suffering…
And there was a warning of the effect proposed cuts in British aid would have on long term projects in the third world…
Oxfam had begun as a tiny war-time committee organised by a small group of friends, including the then vicar of the parish of St Mary's…
In that same St Mary's library, this evening, Roy Jenkins, one of Oxfam's principle supporters, marked the anniversary with a plaque.He has nominated the charity for the Nobel Peace Prize…
As always, Oxfam says it'll continue to rely on donations from ordinary people, which go towards relieving suffering and poverty across the world.
Non-swimmers are being offered a novel way to overcome their fear of water.
Instead of plunging into the pool you simply put your head in a salad bowl.
GRAEME BOWD Broadway
PIERRE GRUNEBERG Swimming Instructor
Voice over
Pierre Gruneberg says anyone can learn to swim.
But first you must learn to hum.
It sounds more like a yoga class, but Pierre's technique has helped thousands of people who either couldn't swim at all or just didn't like putting their head underwater.
His book explains how to breathe properly.
The lesson starts in a salad bowl.
He says the idea is to bring the water to the pupil rather than the other way round.
When they are in the water they are frightened.
The instructor cannot see what the pupil does and the pupil cannot see what the instructor wants.
By the time they get to the pool his pupils have lost their anxiety.
Pierre has taught all over the world — next month he's running a course here at the Lygon Arms Hotel in Broadway.
He's had some very special pupils — one of them was Paul McCartney.
He says McCartney’ a very nice person.’
He taught his children to swim and also helped the singer with his breathing.
Pierre says his clinics have children swimming within a couple of lessons, and its fun.
The ping pong ball is just to show what's meant by breathing in.
Taking the plunge with Pierre cost a mere £30, not much to conquer a phobia.
And for that he'll even supply the salad bowl.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Moscow counts cost of uprising
FTSE up 17
The hundred shares index closed up seventeen point five at three thousand and eighty five point two.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty one and up at two marks, forty six.
A pensioner who pulled two people from a burning car has received an award for heroism.
He ran out in just his dressing gown to pull them out.
The Red Cross has given him a Care award backed by the Princess Of Wales.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Reporting
KENNETH ARNOLD/Crash Rescuer
HAYLEY RICHING/Rescued Passenger
Voice over
When Kenneth Arnold saw a blazing car outside his home in Quedgeley in June he didb't stop to think.
He dashed out in his dressing gown and pulled the driver and passenger from the flames.
Today that bravery was recognised by the Red Cross with a Red Cross Casre in Crisis Award presented by Olympic skayting champion Robin Cousins.
Male speaker
I am pleased that when it came to the crunch I tried to help the people calling for help instead of thinking about what might happen.
Voice over
He was constantly aware that the car might blow up but he carried on.
Now both rescued people believe he saved their lives.
Twenty two year old Hayley Riching was at today's ceremony.
She lost the fingers of one hand in the accident but she admits it could have been a lot worse.
Female speaker
It was fantastic.
Thankyou just isn't enough.
He definitely saved our lives
Voice over
The award is given on a regional basis and sixty five year old Kenneth's name now goes forward for consideration at national level.
But while all the praise has been coming his way, he still ponders whether he'd do it again.
Male speaker
I've asked myself that time and time again.
In the cold light of day I wonder
Voice over
The Princess of Wales is backing the awards and finalists will get to meet her if their names are selected.
None of that matters to Kenneth Arnold so much as the fact that he acted selflessly at a time when he was needed.
A new method of catching fish is being used to test for river pollution.
The fish are drawn into nets using an electrical charge; the more fish that are caught the purer the water is likely to be.
KATE GARRAWAY/Clifton Hampden
SIMON HUGHES/National Rivers Authority
BRIAN ARKELL/Planner
Voice over
To a fisherman this must seem the ultimate piece of tackle.
A rod that fish just can't help swimming towards.
While the keen amateurs struggle with maggots and nets on the bank…these professionals cruise by sweeping up.
But then they have an unfair advantage.
Two hundred and forty volts of it to be exact.
Their rod sends an electrical current into the water which effects the muscles of the fish so that they are forced to swim towards their captors.
A little unsporting maybe but then none are likely to end up on the dinnerplate or as a fisherman's trophy.
These fish are perhaps the most important tool the National Rivers Authority has for testing levels of water pollution.
Male speaker
By electro-fishing and measuring the number of different types of fish and the different types of species which live in the water, we can learn about the pollution in the water.
Voice over
Monitoring of large rivers has been made easier by a new device, which tells scientists where fish are lurking.
Sound waves bounce off them and are registered on a screen.
Male speaker
This is a great development because it allows us to accurately get information about where fish are and so work out a basic picture of the river environment.
Voice over
The equipment may be more sophisticated but these fisherman say there are not so different from their more humble colleagues.
They too get a thrill from a big catch and as all the fish are thrown back there are still the stories about the one that got away.
Dave Lee Travis, the disc jockey sacked by the BBC after criticising its management on-air, is taking his Sunday morning show to independent radio.
The station which persuaded him to make a comeback says it can't believe its luck.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
DAVE LEE TRAVIS/Disc Jockey
STEVE ORCHARD/Station Director
GARY VINCENT/GWR Presenter
Voice over
3 months after his bust-up with Radio 1, Dave Lee Travis is back behind a microphone.
The Swindon-based GWR Group's signed him up to revive his Sunday morning slot.
The DJ they call the Hairy Monster's a little greyer than he once was, but he insists he's starting an important new phase of his career.
GWR was approached by DLT's agent 2 weeks ago, and market research showed he'd prove a hit with the listeners.
Now the station's delighted to have a former rival on the team.
Gary Vincent, the presenter giving up his prime time slot to make way for DLT, is philosophical.
He'll be bringing with him his popular quiz games, but not all his old listeners.
DLT's Swindon debut's this Sunday at ten.
A police force has introduced a new weapon in its fight against car crime.
A thermal imaging camera, which can find and follow suspects even at night, has been fitted to a police helicopter.
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
LEIGHTON BUZZARD/Bedfordshire
DAVID DIBLEY/Agema Infrared Systems
Sgt SIMON PONT/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
There's no hiding place, even in the dead of night.
The Thames Valley Police have a new eye in the sky.
More perceptive than before.
It can locate a person from a thousand metres up and at distances of three kilometres away.
Here officers are tracking a car they believed was stolen in Milton Keynes.
The helicopter's camera picks it up clearly.
Officers up here can direct their colleagues down there.
The camera was put together at Agema Infrared Systems in Leighton Buzzard.
It's the most sophistocated of its kind.
Gone are the bumps and jolts of more primative systems.
This can lock onto a target and stay there.
Male speaker
It's a surveillence camera.
It detects heat.
Like the pictures during the Gulf war.
Heat detection produces pictures at night.
It can be used when no other can be used.
Voice over
The camera — called FLIR -is mounted in a pod beneath the force helicopter.
Many thousands of pounds worth of technology.
The system is clearly paying it's way.
Here the helicopter spotted a crowd gathering for an illegal rave in Buckinghamshire.
The pictures help officers direct incidents and provides evidence for prosecutions.
Male speaker
When we go to court, we have good quality pictures.
At night, it might be the only resource that can help.
Voice over
The Thames Valley helicopter has been responsible for around 100 arrests this year.
A third are down to the thermal imaging capability.
The new system should increase that.
And whilst you probably can't see it in the air.
It almost certainly can see you!
The Conservative party conference is underway in Blackpool — it's been described as the most important in a generation.
The leadership's keen to put a disastrous year behind them.
MPs and representatives from this region know there's work to be done.
KIM BARNES/Blackpool
MICHAEL MACKINLAY MACLEOD/Tewkesbury Conservatives
CHARLES MULLER/Stroud Conservatives
SIMON COOMBS MP/Con Swindon
MARION WENDON/West Gloucestershire Conservatives
Voice over
Blackpool means thrills and spills, taking risks and dicing with danger and that's just the conference floor.
Conservatives politely queued to join the the key conference of John Major's career and prepared to be rallied…
He says there'll be a veneer of unity.
I think we will hear some impressive speeches.
I hope the unity will be more than a veneer by the end.
At stake the image of a party which prides itself on being loyal, but which has been riven by dissent.
As party chairman Sir Norman Fowler is used to being asked why…here he took his role literally…and in a keynote speech appealed for unity at the grass roots.
Charles Muller from Stroud came to his first conference in 1947.
He's loyal but he sees the problems.
He says most people have some qualms.
When polls are adverse there's a tendency to say there's something wrong at the top.
He says we've got a job to do.
The opportunity is for ministers to address the supporters of the party without any filtering of the views they want to express.
But how much is it general and how much John Major.
Some feel he isn't getting his message across.
She says sadly no.
It's people's perception of what's going wrong.
I could pick up areas I'm not happy with but that's inevitable.
Some faces are as yet absent…
Henley MP Michael Heseltine, recovering from a heart attack got a very public get well card.
With banana skins like VAT on fuel and the economy some ministers may soon wish they too were on their sick bed.
The Prime Minister gets his chance to pull them all together on Friday…it could be John Major's judgement day or the jackpot.
Still to come on Central News, the curse of the L plate 
Welcome back.
A town is being driven to distraction by emergency stops and three point turns.
Residents say too many learner drivers are taking lessons in their streets, and now they want the L-plates moved on.
GARETH FURBY/Henley
Voice over
They're calling it the curse of the L-plate.
A back-street of Henley clogged with learners.
Residents on the Wooton Manor estate claim more than sixty different driving schools are involved.
She says she gets scared by people doing three point turns.
The residents believe the L-plates flock to Henley because it's a driving test centre, and instructors want to give their pupils a taste of what's to come.
He says its time Henley was given a break.
So are the instructors deliberately targetting the roads used in the driving test.
He says it's his first time in Henley, so he doesn't know.
She says she believes the test examiners do use those roads.
The residents are calling on their local council to take action.
But the testers from the Driving Standards Association say they are only a limited number of roads in Henley suitable for three point turns, and there's nothing they can do to stop instructors give their pupils a pre-test rehearsal.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
GARGY PATEL
September 1992/MARIA COYLE/Reporting
Voice over
A bird breeder has been jailed for four years after stolen rare birds were found wrapped in sacking in the boot of his car.
The birds were valued at fifty thousand pounds.
The judge said the long sentence should serve as a warning to others tempted to join the illegal trade in exotic birds.
KAREN THOMPSON/Reporting
DAVID WOOLCOCK/Paradise Park Breeding Centre
COLIN FOUNTAIN/Cotswold Wildlife Park
RSPCA Video
DAVID NEVILLE/Breeder
Voice over
A pair of palm cockatoos, two buffons macaws and a hyacinth macaw were taken by thieves who forced their way into cages at a Bird Sanctuary in Cornwall.
Police found the birds wrapped in sacks in the boot of John Darker's Car when he was stopped in Cambridgeshire.
36 year old Darker from Bletchley near Milton Keynes was convicted last month of dishonestly handling the birds.
A Kingston Crown Court the umemployed father of six, was jailed for four years.
David Woolcock from Paradise Park says exotic birds are very important.
All the birds taken from the sanctuary had been fitted with microchip implants, which meant they could be clearly indentified when they were recovered.
This is common practice.
At the Cotswold Wildlife Park devices are fitted to their rare birds which are housed in large strengthened cages.
Colin Fountain says they've taken measures to stop thieves getting in.
There are big profits to be made in the international exotic bird trade.
Last year rare species worth half a million pounds pounds have been stolen in raids around the country.
The thefts are ruining breeding programmes.
Breeders have established their own intelligence network in a bid to combat the crime.
Breeder David Neville says in the past people have been fined small amounts.
The Exotic Bird Trade will be discussed by police from five forces at Thames Valley Headquarters in December.
But Darker's four year jail term could be the clearest signal yet of the risks dealers are taking by flouting international regulations.
There are fears over the future of a theatre following a decision to bring in new management.
The theatre has already laid off staff because of budget cuts.
It's director says the artistic quality of productions is now at risk.
GRAEME BOWD/Swindon
ALAN LORD/Theatre Director
STEPHEN LAMBE/Wyvern Arts Trust
Voice over
Swindon's Wyvern Theatre has been hit by falling ticket sales.
Today it had to cancel a matinee performance through lack of interest.
But the biggest blow was a cut of £200,000 in its council grant.
Now the theatre trust is seeking an management company to run it for them.
The director fears this could mean fewer quality productions.
He says the new company would have to go for shows which make money.
There would be less room for challenging productions.
But the trust denies this.
It says the move is the only way to keep the theatre open.
He says the public won't notice any difference.
Five theatre staff have already been made redundant.
The decison to seek new management means the jobs of a further 25 people could now be at risk.
More than fifty children with dyslexia have lobbied councillors to keep their school open.
They linked up in a silent demonstration of support for the school which is threatened with closure.
RICHARD BARNETT/Leominster
MARSTON/Herefordshire
MIKE HUGHES/Parents' Committee
RACHAEL EDWARDS/Parent
Voice over
Councillors arriving for Leominster's Planning Committee meeting had to walk a silent gauntlet of children and parents to get to the council chamber.
More than fifty dyslexic children lined the paths carrying placards.
The pupils were from Grange House School at Marston.
They're being taught in a converted pigsty while staff try to get retrospective planning permission for the school.
Grange House School took over the Marston farm last month after delays in getting planning permission for another site nearby.
Some villagers are opposing the school saying the site is unsuitable.
Today committee members were meeting to decide whether to close the school down.
Outside the council chamber parents were adamant it should be allowed to stay open.
Male speaker
It has taken me seven years to find the right school for my son.
He's only nine and it would upset him badly if the school had to close.
Female speaker
We don't want to fall out with the villagers over this.
We want to stay and we think the school would be an asset to the village.
Voice over
Meanwhile the pupils stressed the value of the teaching at Grange House.
Male speaker
The teachers are very good to us and we learn a lot from them.
Female speaker
They're not like teachers to us, they're more like members of the family.
Voice over
The Chairman of the Planning Committee, Councillor George Bray, refused to comment on the issue.
The parents have already warned that if the Leominster councillors decide to shut the school down, they'll consider an appeal.
And we've just heard that the school has been given a three month reprieve.
Councillors have now told staff to submit a full planning application.
The Bishop of Oxford has appealed to the Government not to cut aid to the Third World.
He says it would be morally wrong to reduce spending at a time when millions depend on it just to survive.
He's written an open letter to local MPs which includes frontline Ministers.
But tonight, the Government couldn't give any assurances about overseas aid.
Gargy Patel reports.
Rt Rev RICHARD HARRIES/Bishop of Oxford
Baroness CHALKER/Overseas Development Minister
Voice over
Innocent victims of war…the homeless and starving in the Third World…people who are powerless, says the Bishop of Oxford, without the help of this Government and those of other developed countries.
And they would face certain disaster if the treasury goes ahead with plans to cut 270 million pounds from it's overseas aid budget.
To coincide with the start of the Tory Party conference, the Bishop has written an open letter to MPs in the Oxford Diocese, which includes four senior Ministers, urging them to resist any cutbacks.
He says it would be morally and spiritually wrong.
No matter how painful the problems of economic recession here, he says, these are as nothing compared with the suffering of millions in less fortunate areas.
A deep concern shared by most people.
The Bishop's comments come after fears expressed by Oxfam, which yesterday celebrated it's 50th birthday.
The charity's director David Bryer says by cutting Third World aid to help reduce public spending, the Government would be cutting off it's nose to spite it's face.
The effect would be worst on their small projects…the kind which help poor people the most.
The Bishop says John Major should honour his pledge to raise the level of aid.
Today Overseas Development Minister Baroness Chalker did announce an extra 3 million pounds to help with the drought in Southern Africa, but couldn't give a commitment on future spending plans.
Now Oxfam is urging thousands of supporters to lobby the Treasury appealing for more, not less, money to the Third World.
Four Russian orphans have started a new life in Britain, at two of the most exclusive private schools in the country.
It's part of a plan to build friendships between Britain and the former USSR, but as Tim Hurst reports, two of the children may not live long enough to reach old age.
APRIL 1986
WESTONBIRT/Gloucestershire
GILL HYLSON-SMITH/Headmistress
ALEXEI
NATASHA
ELYNA
ILJA
ANDREW AUSTER
Voice over
When the Chernobyl nuclear accident contaminated surrounding villages in 1986, thousands of Russian babies were poisoned by radiation.
Two of those who suffered, now both seven years old, have been flown to Britain to study.
Both have heart murmours.
They were among four Russian boys who travelled to Westonbirt school near Tetbury to meet two Russian girl orphans, who'll be educated free of change for a year.
It was the first chance the girls had had to speak their own langauage.
An English school lunch, in surroundings far removed from any Russian orphanage, emphasised an obvious culture shock, but the staff felt they had had to offer their help.
Two Russian boys, being educated at Downs School near Malvern in Worcestershire, have been in Britain long enough to learn the language, one of them proud to interpret.
Sergei and Anton, from Chernobyl, too shy perhaps to speak even a few words in their own language.
A special treat, not just for the Russian children, but the whole school.
The Russian folk group, Zabava, from St Petersburg, currently on a UK tour, added a touch of home.
Welcome back.
The Test and County Cricket Board are to take no further action against the Worcestershire cricketer Richard Stemp following a positive drugs test on the player this summer.
Stemp appeared before a disciplinary committee in Birmingham today — and was cleared of all blame for the incident.
Phil Mepham reports.
KEN LAWRENCE/TCCB
This summer, Richard Stemp enjoyed his most successful bowling season so far for Worcestershire, with several matchwinning performances such as this against Gloucestershire.
But he ended it under the cloud of suspicion caused by a random test which confirmed he had taken drugs.
Today, The Test And County Cricket Board's disciplinary committee at Edgbaston were told of the events which lead to Stemp providing a positive sample during a match with Middlesex at Uxbridge in July.
Traces of amphetamine were found but the player was always confident he would provide a satisfactory explanation.
A three hour hearing was the result.
Stemp emerged, saying nothing.
A technical offence had been committed, but the explanation had satisfied the hearing.
’ The committee heard evidence from Stemp and from Worcestershire and were satisfied that he had not knowingly taken amphetamines and that they had been administered to him without his knowledge, approval or authority.
The committee decided therefore to take no action against him.’
’ They have accepted that somebody spiked his drink or food.’
’ It was something that was totally without his knowledge.’
For Stemp, the matter is now closed.
But the TCCB have emphasised that acceptance of his explanation is certainly not a precedent for possible future cases.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
SWINDON/Wiltshire
AMANDA CADDER/Psychiatric Nurse
KEITH BETTON/ABTA
Voice over
Tonight Amanda Cadder is relieved to back home in Swindon with her family.
They were all staying in this Florida hotel…where postman Keith Thompson was shot dead after he refused to hand over his money to muggers.
She says she heard a loud gunshot and saw a man lying on the ground.
Two men then ran past shouting’ leave him, leave him.’
Amanda, who's a psychiatric nurse gave first aid, but there was nothing she could do.
She says he was shot in the chest.
She tried to give him to kiss of life and heart massage but he was already dead.
It's just the latest in spate of attacks on British holiday makers in America.
Last year John and Rose Hayward from Banbury in Oxfordshire were shot and robbed within minutes of arriving in Miami.
The Foreign office and travel agents are now warning tourist never to resist muggers.
He says they shouldn't carry much money and if they are threatened they should never resist.
But Amanda Cadder, who was planning to emigrate to America, says she's never going back.
She says it was too close to home and it could easily have been them.
Tonight the family is celbrating, with a birthday party for three year old Anthony.
But for them American no longer means the good life, just bad memories.
Police investigating the accident in which Leslie Crowther was critically injured have ruled out a mechanical failure as a possible cause.
They say driver fatigue or error is more likely to blame.
Doctors say Mr Crowther is showing some improvement but he's still seriously ill.
Nick Clark reports.
Insp PETER TOCKNELL/Gloucestershire Police
PATRICK SHERVINGTON/Lord's Taverners
Voice over
The Price is Right star is still in intensive care after two operations to remove blood clots from his brain.
He's unconscious and on a life support machine.
It's still not clear why Mr Crowther's Rolls Royce careered off the M5 near Cheltenham in Gloucestershire.
Police inquiries so far have drawn a blank.
Male speaker
We've got nothing so far.
But we can rule out mechanical error.
Voice over
Mr Crowther's family have maintained their vigil at his bedside at the Frenchay Hospital in Bristol.
Close friend the director of the Lord Taverners Patrick Shervington has been in to see him too, he got to know Leslie Crowther through the entertainer's extensive charity work.
This afternoon there was more grief for Mr Crowther's wife Jean, she attended her mother's funeral.
But there is at least some positive news.
Doctors at the hospital say Mr Crowther is continuing to show signs of slight improvement although he's still in intensive care and in a critical condition.
An airshow accident in which a Spitfire crashed in flames has been blamed on pilot error.
An inquiry found that the vintage plane had been in good working order.
Simon Garrett reports.
JUNE 1992
DAVID OGILVY/Aircraft Owners and Pilots
29 JUNE 1992/DEANNA MOORE/Pilot's Widow
Voice over
Looping the loop at a Manchester airshow as he'd done many times before in the vintage Spitfire…pilot David Moore from Horsley near Stroud misjudged the manoeuvere.
The aircraft hit the runway flat and at speed with unavoidable consequences.
The official report from the Department of Transport says experienced display pilots felt’ the aircraft was being flown in a spirited but not unreasonable manner…but they agreed that the entry speed was insufficient for a full loop.’
Vintage aircraft enthusiasts say the Spitfire has been vindicated
Male speaker
This was no fancy twist and turn.
Looping the loop is a perfectly normal manoeuvere for this sort of aircraft and there's no reason whatsoever why it shouldn't be demonstrated to the public
Voice over
Mr Moore flew the Spifire for its owners Rolls Royce.
At the time of the crash his wife said flying was his passion
Female speaker
Flying meant everything to him.
It was his life.
If he had to go I think that was the way he would have wanted it
Voice over
Mr Moore had been displaying the Spitfire for nine years before the accident, and was regarded very highly as a master of the machine
A block of residential flats at Elsfield near Oxford has been badly damaged by fire.
FIRE SERVICE VIDEO/ELSFIELD/Oxfordshire
Seven people managed to escape before emergency crews arrived.
At its height twenty firefighters were needed to tackle the fire.
The cause is being investigated.
A man's appeared in court accused of murdering his wife.
Paul Warwick, who's thirty four and from Northampton, is charged with killing his wife Susan, who was thirty-two.
Her body was found at their home in the East Hunsbury area of the town yesterday morning — she'd been strangled.
Her husband was remanded in custody for a week by Northampton Magistrates.
Think of Emily Bronte's’ Wuthering Heights’and you probaby think of Laurence Olivier's classic film.
Well, now there's a new version, filmed on location on the Yorkshire moors and starring a French actress as Cathy.
Last night it was screened at a charity premiere.
Harriet Ryley was there.
Courtesy of Paramount British Pictures
SIMON SHEPHERD Edgar
MARY SELWAY Producer
SOPHIE WARD Isabella
Paramount British Pictures
Voice over
As one of the world's most famous love stories, a new film version of’ Wuthering Heights’is bound to attract alot of interest.
This one stars Ralph Fiennes as Heathcliff and a French actress, Juliette Binoche, as Cathy.
Last night it was shown for one night only at a charity screening for St. Edward's School in Oxford.
The audience included pupils, parents and guests — some of whom thought it compared favourably with the nineteen thirty-nine classic starring Laurence Olivier;
He says he thinks they both got the part right by not smiling.
She says she preferred this version because it follows the novel more closely.
Simon Shepherd whose character Edgar marries Cathy, defends the choice of a French actress to play the part:
He says it was very exciting to work with her because he never knew what she was going to do from one take to another.
Unlike the nineteen thirty-nine version for which the moors were re-created in Hollywood, this one was shot on location in north Yorkshire.
It also covers the whole book, whereas the Olivier film ended after Cathy's death, cutting out the last third of the novel.
She says she loves the Olivier film, but it's very old-fashioned and was filmed entirely in California — and that the acting is all rather terribly terribly…
After the screening, the audience had the chance to question, Simon Shepherd and Sophie Ward, who admitted they'd found it hard to play the second romantic leads;
She says we really were the B-team.
Everyone in the audience wants Heathcliff and Cathy to be together, but they're married to the wrong people and that's us!
Critics gave the film mixed reviews at a press screening at the Edinburgh festival…last night's audience was also divided on its verdict
She says she's read the book and the film was much more dramatic than she expected.
She says she couldn't get involved with the love story.
He says he didn't cry, but if he was a girl he would have done!
The true test for the film will be the box office returns when the film opens around the country in ten days.
Medic who masqueraded as doctor cleared of manslaughter
FTSE up 42
The hundred shares index closed up forty two point one at two four eight eight point four 
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy one and up at two marks, forty five.
Now to the second of our special reports on the region's brewing industry.
Two of the most exclusive beers in the world are drawing in the drinkers at the only pub where they're sold.
They come from a brewery not much bigger than the average garden shed.And, as Clare Lafferty reports, the head brewer is also the pub landlord.
APPERLEY/Gloucestershire
GEOFF ADAMS/Brewer
Voice over
It looks like a vat of unappetising porridge…but in two weeks time this mixture will have been transformed into two of the rarest beers in the country.
If you want a pint of Mayhem's Sundowner Heavy or Oddas Light you'll have to go to the Farmers Arms at Apperley near Tewkesbury.
That's the only pub in the world that sells them.
They're brewed by the pub landlord, Geoff Adams.
From this converted shed next to the pub, he's producing ninety gallons of each a week.
The beer is made in as traditional a way as possible, using the finest malt, only whole hops and no sugars.
The recipes though are the result of modern day trial and very lucky errors.
The Campaign for Real Ale agrees.
It's quoted as describing Sundowner Heavy as’ quite delightful’.
Regulars at the Farmers Arms agree.
But some want to keep it to themselves.
So will Geoff branch out with his home brew.
So, for , it looks like Geoff's Mayhem Brewery will continue to provide ales exclusively for the one own pub.Bearing in mind the dictionary definition of’ Mayhem’, that's probably just as well.
A collection of battered old toys has come under the hammer at an auction today.
And as Mike Rowbottom reports, it seems that a trawl around the attic can turn out to be very profitable.
OXFORD
TIM ARMITAGE/Dealer
MICHAEL WELCH/Auctioneer
JEFFREY KNIGHT/Model Train Dealer
Male speaker
by the door one thousand two hundred and fifty
Voice over
And you thought toys were just children's playthings…the bidding is on a set of porcelain dolls.
Male speaker
One thousand three hundred and fifty
Voice over
They were the big surprise at Phillips' auction of collectors' items in Oxford, they were only expected to get about fifty pounds.
Dolls and toys are big business these days…if you know the right person to sell them to.
Male speaker
I've been doing this for twenty five years so the best deal I've ever done is the sale I make each week which brings me three hundred quidHe later went onto spend over five hundred pounds on a Mickey Mouse Toy.
It was part of the contents of a unique toy museum in Buckinghamshire most of which came under the hammer today.
There was a wide range of dolls, cars, and gadgets which had been donated to the private collection over many years.
Male speaker
there is a model of a robot from Japan which was made in the 1960s.
You can hardly call that antique.
It all depends on the condition, the age and the rarity value
Voice over
At least you don't have to buy batteries for them as well.
Apart from the dolls the old toy railway stock gathered a lot of interest.
Male speaker
I'm a dealer and I've picked up a couple of pieces which I can probably place with clients
That summed it up.
No one was jumping for joy because they'd finally got the piece they'd been searching for for years.
No romance, no excitement, just a saleroom full of dealers No-joy just Lovejoys.
Drivers are being given the chance to find out what it feels like to skid across an icy road into the side of a building — without risk of injury.
A new computer simulator's been designed to teach drivers how to handle a skid before they end up learning the hard way.
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
MEMBURY SERVICE STATION/M4
DAVID WILLIAMS/Guild of Experienced Motorists
PC GRAHAM GODFREY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
It's no problem when police drivers are learning their craft…but what starts as a simple skid can end up with a car totally out of control.
Thames Valley Police have the luxury of a disused airfield and sophisticated equipment to learn about car control…now there's a computer simulation for the ordinary driver.
Male speaker
It will simulate a whole range of driving scenarios in computer graphics so people can experience skid problems in the safety of this caravan and trailer
Voice over
This prototype is touring service stations with the Guild of Experienced Motorists and Welcome Break.
Half the drivers surveyed said they'd been in a skid…most reckon they can handle one
Male speaker
You're getting the feel of the machine…ooops…nearly lost it on a dry road!
Female speaker
I think it's a bit like an arcade game…so you're likely to drive wrecklessly on it
Male speaker
I work for the council salting the roads.
Most people are dangerous in bad conditions
Voice over
Police driving instructors think the simulator has potential
Male speaker
I think it's a good idea.
It's cost-effective and lets people know what a car does when it's out of control.
The next step up is real cars in a simulated situation…preferably off-road in a real car.
Experience is the best way to deal with a skid or a non-skid situation
Voice over
In the end…not getting into a skid is always going to be better than having to cope with one.
Observation is the key…looking for wet leaves…the shimmer of diesel on the road…or being aware of icy conditions.
According to experts the other trick…is just to slow down.
Still to come, good news at last for Swindon Town.
Welcome back.
We've some good news at last for Swindon Town fans — their team's through to the third round of the coca cola cup
They're the only Central South side still going though — both Oxford and Hereford have crashed out.
Tim Russon reports.
Voice over
With a two goal lead from the first leg the pressure was off Swindon for once last night as they tackled Wolves at Molineux…and when Nicky Summerbee gave them the lead they could afford to sit back and cruise to the third rounds…
Sit back…they were nearly caught fast asleep as Wolves hit two goals in the last ten minutes and scared the life out of them…
Derek Mountfield got the first…
Mark Burke the second…the last few minutes were frightening…but thankfully Wolves 2-1 win wasn't enough to stop Town going through 3-2 on aggregate…
At the Manor Ground…
Oxford had a four goal mountain to climb against Tranmere after losing 5-1 in the first leg…what was improbable looked impossible by half-time with Rovers Kenny Irons giving his team a one goal lead…
There was no hope for United after that but they battled on…and at least won back some of their lost pride with a goal from sub Paul Wanless…
By rights Oxford should have won last night…
Chrissy Allen had a blinder and Joey Beauchamp was bubbling again…
The result was all wrong…6-2 on aggregate to Tranmere but there was a flicker of hope in the flames as United's cup run went up in smoke…
Down in London at Selhurst Park…
Hereford were hoping to be the giantkillers against Wimbledon…it takes something special to stop Vinny Jones and his men…one up from the first leg…the premiership side took control of this one with an early goal from Neal Ardley…
that man Jones made it two…and just before half-time it was all over as Dean Holdsworth thumped home number three…
Hereford battled on…they were down but not out…and gave everything they'd got…skipper Derek Hall struck them a goal midway through the second half…
but Wimbledon were always going to win it…and Robbie Earle rounded things off with number 4 which made it 5-1 on aggregate
Five gypsy camps have been raided by police investigating the deaths of two men.
The killing of a security guard, and the death of a man after a distraction burglary are both being linked to travellers.
Five people were arrested.
SIMON GARRETT/Milton Keynes
Det Sgt DAVID PURNELL/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Thirty-six police searched the five sites in Milton Keynes early this morning.
They were following up on descriptions of thieves allegedly involved in the deaths of two men in the town.
Security guard Ron Letts was crushed by a getaway van when he surprised a gang stealing scrap metal.
William Swain collapsed and died after a distraction burglary at his home.
Both incidents have suggested links with travellers.
Rewards…forty thousand pounds in the Letts case…have failed to illicit information.
Male speaker
We obviously on top of that want to make sure who lives in the camps and see if they match our descriptions.
They didn't but as a spin-off we recovered a stolen Ford Transit and caravan.
There are also several vehicles cut up by acetylene equipment and dumped in a pond.
Five men were arrested.
They're still being questioned at the moment
Voice over
None of the arrests is linked to the Swain or Letts inquiries.
Detectives are finding it very difficult to extract any information from the travelling communities
Male speaker
From our information both inquiries involve travellers.
We wanted them to know if they had information we could protect them if need be
Voice over
Anyone who does know about either the Letts or Swain case is asked to contact police at Milton Keynes
A pensioner was told he couldn't watch TV while his cheque for a new licence was being cleared.
Norman Stuart, who's eighty seven, says he was furious.
The TV licensing authority says the cheque HAS now been cleared, so Mr Smart no longer has anything to fear.
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
NORMAN SMART/Pensioner
Voice over
Norman Smart suffers from angina, so he can't get down to his local post office to buy a TV licence.
Instead he sent off a cheque last month for a new licence when his old one expired.
He rang the TV licensing office in Bristol to check how long it would take to get the new licence and he was told he must turn his TV off for up to three weeks until the cheque was cleared.
The TV licensing authority in Bristol confirmed Mr Smart had been told that technically he'd be breaking the law if he watched TV before receiving the new licence.
But a spokesman said’ Mr Smart is now adequately licensed.
His cheque was processed on September 29th, within five days of receipt.
Mr Smart has been assured that his TV licence is on its way, and that he can watch his television set with no worry of having a visit by a TV licensing inquiry officer.’
Mr Smart says he hasn't yet heard from the TV Licensing Office.
So he can only scan the pages of the TV Times to see what he's missing.
Motorists using the Severn Bridge could soon face fewer delays, following the introduction of a new electronic tag for paying the tolls.
The promoters hope the tag will cut queues.
But motoring organisations say it costs too much.
GARETH FURBY/Severn Bridge
DAVID FOICE/Severn River Crossing
GARETH MARTIN/Automobile Association
Voice over
It's queues like this which the new system is intended to shift.
The Severn Tag is stuck inside a car windscreen.
It electronically records how many crossings the driver has paid for.
As long as the ticket is valid, no money or tickets change hands, motorists pay automatically.
He says they won't have to look for change.
As long as they're in credit they drive straight through.
But motoring organisations have criticised the decision to charge a thrity pound deposit for each tag, and to withdraw the current system of tickets, which include a discount for every ten journeys.
He says they'll have to find a lot of money up front before they even pay for the tags.
Without the discount tt'll cost more to use the tags.
And each tag will be for a specific vehicle only, to guard against fraud, despite pleas from lorry firms to be allowed to transfer them around their fleets.
Two policemen who helped convict a fraudulent investment consultant have been given certificates of commendation.
GLOUCESTER
Last month, Christopher How was jailed for three years, after being found guilty of seven charges of fraud and theft.
He stole an estimated two million pounds from investors.
Detective Sergeant Gordon James and Detective Constable Paul Yeatman were commended by the High Sheriff of Gloucestershire, who praised them for their work on the investigation.
A health visitor who helped set up a therapy centre for sufferers of Multiple Sclerosis has been named as Britain's most caring person.
MILTON KEYNES
Janice Lancaster, from Milton Keynes, beat more than two thousand nominees for the title, which is open to NHS employees.
Janice was put forward for the competition after raising money to set up the centre.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
GARGY PATEL
Library Pictures/CLARE LAFFERTY/Dymock
AILEEN MERRICK/Ron Taylor's Niece
PAT SHAYLE/Landlord
TIM PERRINS/Forest of Dean District Council
WAYNE MERRICK/Ron Taylor's Nephew
Voice over
Ron Taylor spent his last years living in appalling conditions.
The four hundred year old cottage he rented in Dymock had no bathroom or toilet.
There were holes in the walls.
And he lived and slept downstairs because he could only afford to heat one room.
Three years ago Mr Taylor asked the Forest of Dean District Council to force his landlord to improve the building.
But Mr Taylor died before any work was done.
His relatives want to know why.
Last December the Forest of Dean District Council approached Mr Taylor's landlord Pat Shayle.
He was ordered to carry out thirty thousand pounds worth of improvement work on the cottage.
He says he couldn't afford it.
The council says it didn't renovate the cottage because it wasn't an emergency situation.
Mr Taylor's relatives had asked their Uncle to come and live with them.
But he refused.
After years of waiting, building work is now due to start on Stream Bank Cottage.
But sadly, it's too late for Mr Taylor to reap the benefits.
A dog breeder has been fined eight hundred pounds for causing a noise nuisance.
Neighbours say Barbara Mooney has kept up to twenty six German Shepherds in the garden of her semi detached home.
But Mrs Mooney is refusing to pay the fine.
And she says she'll carry on with her business.
GRAEME BOWD/Banbury
ELIZABETH SYMINGTON/Neighbour
PATRICK DRENNAN/Neighbour
JOY HOLLOWAY/Former Neighbour
BARBARA MOONEY/Dog Breeder
Voice over
Today Barbara Mooney had sixteen dogs at her home on a council estate in Banbury.
According to neighbours there are often more.
8 of the animals are kept in outside kennels.
And 8 puppies live indoors.
For most of the day they're shut in a darkened cupboard while Mrs Mooney works as a supermarket cleaner.
After a long battle with the local council, she was finally taken to court and fined £800.
Neighbours say the animals bark incessantly at all times of the day and night.
Many gave evidence against her.
She says they bark at all times of day and night.
He says there's no need for anyone to have 26 dogs.
Joy Holloway lived next door to the kennels until she persuaded the council to rehouse her.
She says noise is not the only problem.
She says the dogs escaped and upset bins.
She thinks they got her rabbit and was worried for her children's safety.
But Mrs Mooney is defiant.
According to her the dogs are not a nuisance and she won't pay the fine.
She says the dogs are quiet at night.
They're not barking now.
She says the people who complaint are jealous.
Cherwell Council is now trying to close the kennels under planning regulations.
But Mrs Mooney who sells puppies for a hundred pounds each will not part with any of her breeding dogs.
She says she pays the rent and no-one tells her what to do on her own property.
But if she loses a planning appeal in December she could be forced to give up her dogs — or at least to stop breeding any more.
A police frogman has told a court how he found a woman's body at the bottom of the River Severn.
He was giving evidence in the trial of a man accused of murdering his wife.
Tania Probyn from Longney in Gloucestershire disappeared after a row with her estranged husband Johnathan.
STONEBENCH/Gloucestershire
PC Mark Evans told the court how six days later he discovered her submerged car at Stonebench.
Her body was found drowned in the boot.
Johnathan Probyn denies murder.
The trial continues.
A man has been arrested after allegedly threatening neighbours with a twelve inch butchers knife.
CHELTENHAM
Several house windows were smashed and two cars damaged when the trouble broke out last night in Queens Retreat in Cheltenham.
A twenty year old man is now helping police with their enquiries.
A Roman Catholic nun is trying to introduce meditation into Britain's jails.
She feels that by teaching prisoners the arts of meditation and Yoga they can learn to deal with their lives more easily.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
Judge STEPHEN TUMIM/Chief Inspector Of Prisons
Sister ELAINE MACINNES/Phoenix Prison Trust
JEREMY IRONS/Trust Supporter
TIM NEWELL/Prison Governor
Voice of PETER/Grendon Prisoner
Voice over
The macho hurly burly of Britain's prison system seems infertile ground for mission work…especially if you're trying to introduce an oriental system of self reliance.
The Oxford based Phoenix Prison Trust is aiming to recruit prisoners to meditation using classes and a book of basic techniques.
And they have some powerful allies including Judge Stephen Tumin, her majesty's Chief Inspector of Prisons.
Male speaker
It's very valuable.
Quite a few prisoners have mentioned it to me without being prompted
Voice over
The organisation i9s centred in a small semi detacthed house in north Oxford, and is headed by Sister Elaine MacInnes, a Catholic nun and experienced Zen teacher.
Female speaker
There are many who feel prisoners have had it too easy.
They're looking at it the wrong way.
If someone's sick you send them to hospita.
If they're in prison it's usually because of some psychological problem 
Voice over
The actor Jeremy Irons is backing the scheme.
He read out a selection of prisoners' letters today at a reception for the Trust in London.
Male speaker
The prison service is overstretched and to stop the cycle of reoffending and being sent back, the more help, counselling and comfort the betterThe Trust has fourteen hundred prisoners practicing Yoga or meditation.
Out of a prison population of forty five thousand it doesn't seem much, but those involved are quick to sing its praises.
Male speaker
I've seen prisoners become much more calm and be able to put things in perspective instead of being demanding
Male speaker
Before I came to prison I thought I was introspective but ten minutes here and there is not enough to answer some of these questions
Voice over
But one thing going in the prisoners' favour is exactly that.
They have plenty of time.
The Prisoners' Trust want them to exploit it
A dozen babies born in the space of just over an hour have made one man very happy.
Snake breeder Okan Guney says the birth of twelve emerald tree boas was the most important event in his life.
MARIA COYLE Kidlington
OKAN GUNEY Reptile collector
KATHY COULTER Okan's girlfriend
Voice over
This is a rare sight.
An Emerald Tree Boa born in captivity.
Its owner, Okan Guney, has been trying to breed them at this home in Kidlington for two years.
A week ago he was successful…13 baby boas were produced in the same litter, 12 of them survived.
Male speaker
For me it was a breakthrough.
If I was a scientist it would be like finding a cure for for a disease or a technological breakthrough.
For me it's a first but I now hope to breed some more.
Voice over
It's extremely difficult to breed Emerald Tree boas.
They're vicious and can attack one another.
Their natural habitat is the Amazonian jungle with a high temperature and humidity.
Boas normally mate during the winter nights.
The trick was to adjust the temperature in their cages from 27 degrees celsius to 20 degrees over three weeks.
The result two proud parents.
Male speaker
The birthf itself started at half past two and it was virtually all over by half past three and there were thirteen babies.
Voice over
Okan, a production engineer, has seen his collection of reptiles grow as has his electricity bill.
He now has five adult snakes, and two cameleons.
Friends complain he's snake obsessed and spends too much time with his cold blooded brood.
Male speaker
They seem to say I spend more time with reptiles than I do with them or some people are very scared so they don't tend to come around.
Voice over
But his girlfriend Kathy doesn't mind the new additions.
Female speaker
It doesn't really bother me that much.
It doesn't really interfere too much in our life.
So I don't mind, mi
Voice over
Kathy says she wouldn't want to change his hobby.
And anyway she's rather fond of the chameleons herself.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Yeltsin declares day of mourning
FTSE up 15
The hundred shares index closed up fifteen point six at thirty one hundred point eight 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty two and up at two marks, forty seven.
Swindon Town are through to the third round of the Coca Cola Cup after a nine-two aggregate win over Torquay…and tonight Oxford United will be trying to join them but they've got to win at Aston Villa…
Tim Russon reports 
Voice over
Six up from the first leg…
Swindon were in no danger of missing the boat to the third round…just to make sure player manager Glenn Hoddle hammered them into the lead after just three minutes…
The first half was a stroll…more like a practice game for Town as they picked Torquay off…deadly serious for Swindon centre forward Steve White he was back in his favourite number nine shirt and celebrated with his 200 th goal in football…three cheers for Chalky…
Town rested top scorer Craig Maskell for this game…but the goals kept coming…next man in the queue was Dave Mitchell…3-0
Swindon could have made double figures…with a little more accuracy and determination…but in the second half they eased back…the hard work had been done…
Torquay who kept going…kept running, kept chasing a nine goal mountain were allowed back into the game which meant work for Town keeper Nicky Hammond…
For Swindon it was shooting practice young Marcus Phillips on as sub for the first time nearly got a goal but it was Torquay who tookover towards the end…
How about this for a cheeky goal…skipper Chris Myers caught Town asleep with a quickly taken free kick…
And Nicky Hammond was either still in shock or neutral when Torquay got their second…
Adrian Foster ran the ball into the net…
Right on the whistle the third division team almost broke the post with a shot…they made a game of it…but at 3-2 Swindon were cruising…
STING
Oxford United are facing the fight of their lives tonight…to reach the third round…
Villa away…the premier league team took the first leg 2-1 at the Manor…
Paul McGrath…and Shaun Teale got their goals…
United should be unchanged tonight but that means they're missing the suspended Magilton and the injured Beachamp…
Les Phillips plays on in midfield…
Nick Cusack leads an attack which has to strike…
It can be done here's the goal that United scored against Villa two weeks ago…what Brian Horton would give for two more like this tonight
A disabled man has made aviation history by qualifying as a glider pilot instructor.
He's also designed modifications to gliders which allow other disabled people to fly.
Mark Kiff reports.
HINTON-in-the-HEDGES/Northamptonshire
GARY BENNETT/Glider Instructor
MIKE CUMING/Senior Instructor
Voice over
High over Northamptonshire, Gary Bennett enjoys the freedom of skies.
Up here, Gary's in his element.
A glider pilot who's just won the right to work as an instructor, teaching others the beauty of unpowered flying.
It's only on the ground, that it becomes apparent what he's overcome to reach these heights.
Crippled in a hang gliding accident, Gary has fought his disability and the sceptics to earn his wings.
Gary says: I was the first person to go solo.
I've had a fairly close watch kept on me.
I've had to work doubly hard to get there.
If you wanted to be an instructor and you were serious about gliding, you could probably achieve it in a couple of years.
It's taken me 6 years.
Gary's inability to use his legs means he's had to modify the gliders so he can fly them.
It means using his hands for more than one job.
Now he's become an expert on the subject.
Male speaker
Up and down the country people ring me up and say they'd like to modify their glider.
I send them diagrams or fit them myself.
Voice over
Gary's now employed as an instructor at the Gliding Centre in Hinton-in-the Hedges near Brackley.
They're trying to revolutionise the way gliding is taught in this country, aiming to teach novices how to fly solo in a week.
For Gary, it means hard work and no concessions to his disability.
Mike Cuming, Senior Instructor, says that within a day or two, you forget that Gary is in a wheelchair.
Gary says: In gliding, disabled people can do everything that other people can do.
It's the ideal sport for the disabled.
It's exhilarating.
It's a challenge and it's just fun to be swooping around in the sky.
A new exhibition's opened called Space — the next Generation.
If it sounds like the opening words of an episode of Star Trek, that's because it's aimed at attracting schoolchildren to the world of science.
Ian Maclaren reports.
CHILTON/Oxfordshire
Professor JOHN HARRIES/Associate Director
Voice over
One of the star exhibits at the Laboratory is ATSR, an instrument currently on board the European Space Agency's satellite.
It's sending back measurements of global sea surface temperatures, with very high accuracy.
The instrument was designed and developed here and at Oxford University.
It's hoped such successes will promote the exhibition's theme: Space — The Next Generation…
One aspect of concern to environmentally-conscious youngsters, was the advanced space technology used to examine the depletion of the earth's ozone layer…
But opportunities for the next generation may be restricted in the current climate of spending curbs…
The exhibition continues this week, with more than a thousand youngsters expected to attend.
Verdicts of accidental death have been recorded on four people killed when two cars collided.
An inquest heard both cars somersaulted into the air before one burst into flames.
Clare Lafferty reports.
6 JUNE 1992/DUNTISBOURNE ABBOTTS/Gloucestershire
Voice over
The accident happened on the morning of Saturday June the sixth on the A417 Gloucester to Cirencester road.
The inquest at Cheltenham County Court heard it was a clear sunny day with little traffic on the road.
But at around eleven forty five the two cars…a Cavalier and a Metro collided.
Witnesses told the court that both cars somersaulted into the air.
They said that within minutes of the Metro landing it burst into flames and burnt like an inferno.
PC David Waters was on the scene in minutes.
He told the coroner how he and a local farmer struggled to pull two people from the burning Metro.
They didn't see the second passenger because she'd fallen into the well between the front and back seats.
Her body was discovered in the wreckage.
PTC
The coroner Lester Maddrell praised the courage of PC Waters and the farmer.
He said their evidence had made his blood run cold.
He recorded a verdict of accidental death on all four victims.
The Home Secretary's promising a crackdown on New Age Travellers and Rave partygoers.
At the tory conference Kenneth Clarke named a team of ministers charged with tackling the people he called’ parasites.’
Simon Garrett reports 
23 MAY 1992/CASTLEMORTON/Worcestershire
KENNETH CLARKE MP/Home Secretary
MICHAEL SPICER MP/Con Worcestershire South
Voice over
Castlemorton near Malvern five months ago.
Twenty thousand people camped out on common land for a music festival.
They were there for seven days and local people demanded new laws and tougher police action.
Today in Brighton they got their answer
Male speaker
I have asked Lord Ferrers to work on this with the Chief Police Officers, Sir George Young at the Department of Environment and Nick Scott at the Department of Social Security to draw up a strong package of measures which can improve our ability to protect the rural public against these parasites.
Voice over
After the Castlemorton event the MP for the area was besieged with demands for the law to be tightened up.
He's delighted with Mr Clarke's plans
Male speaker
These big events must be properly controlled if ever they take place and they must only take place with police permission and proper licenses.
The matters of law and order and drugs must be properly dealt with before they take place
Voice over
Just what strategy the ministerial group will devise is uncertain as yet.
But Mr Clarke's belief that travellers prey on people in country areas suggests they could be facing harsh government sanctions
The car makers Rover have unveiled a state of the art panel pressing plant.
It's cost sixty million pounds to build, and will double output.
Nick Clark reports.
JOHN TOWERS/Rover
JOHN BRIFFITT/Rover
Voice over
At more than five thousand tons the most technologically advanced press plant in the world is so big it was built in a shipyard.
It took a hundred and fifty lorries to transport it to its home in Swindon.
It's job to make panels for Rover cars at the rate of more than five hundred an hour, twice the rate of the old facilities which will slowly become redundant.
Next year another new press will be in place, the two producing eighty thousand tons of car panels a year.
They will also supply Honda's Swindon plant with panels for the new Honda Accord.
Male speaker
It's tremendous isn't it.
It'll change our methods completely.
Voice over
This is how a car body starts its life.
It goes through various pressing processes to mould it into shape.
The excess steel is recycled.
The aim is optimum efficiency.
All a far cry from the practices of old when panel pressing was labour intensive and slow.
But Rover say the new plant will not mean job cuts, it'll just improve productivity.
Male speaker
This investment will keep us up there competing at the top level.
Voice over
Meanwhile as Rover launches its latest vehicle, the coupe built at Longbridge, there's more good news.
Rover it seems have broken through the motor industry gloom with a twenty five per cent increase in sales in stark contrast to its rivals.
The company's also announced its flagship eight hundred range built at Cowley has now taken number one position in the UK luxury car market.
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GLOUCESTER
BRIGHTON
KENNETH CLARKE MP/Home Secretary
KAY POTTS/Mother
Cllr JACK NEWELL/Gloucs County Council
Voice over
Andrew Hagans was on remand for rape, when he murdered council worker Anna McGuirk.
He'd been staying at a bail hostel in Gloucester whilst waiting for the case to come to court.
Now the Government is taking action to stop offenders committing crimes whilst on bail.
Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke told the Conservative Party Conference there'd be tougher sentences for defendents and better guidence for the courts.
Male speaker
We are making sure that in future, courts will have much better information about people asking for bail.
Voice over
Anna's family fear the changes don't go far enough
Female speaker
They should be locked away.
Voice over
In Anna's home town, County Councillors highlighted the tragic case.
They unanimously supported calls for action to prevent bail hostels being used by potentially dangerous offenders.
And the motion by Councillor Jack Newell went further…also demanding protection for the families of murder victims.
Male speaker
They've suffered enough.
We put legal and administrative barriers in their way.
We're calling on the Home Secretary to bring in legislation to take care of them.
Female speaker
They don't seem to care.
If it happened to them, they'd do something.
But until then it could happen to someone else.
Voice over
Any legislation comes far to late for the family of Anna McGuirk.
But if Government words translate into action, they hope their suffering will not be shared by others.
Thieves have used a mechanical digger to smash their way into a supermarket and steal a safe.
A front wall was completely demolished.
It's the latest in a series of similar raids.
Gareth Furby reports.
STEVENTON/Oxfordshire
Det Sgt KENNETH KING/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The men took the digger from a nearby building site and drove it straight through the supermarket wall, shortly after four this morning.
Their target, a large safe inside the shop's post office.
It was carried back outside and loaded into a waiting getaway car.
He says the digger was taken from a site a mile down the road and the whole thing was over within five minutes.
Police say they've already contacted several potential witnesses and this afternoon they recovered the getaway car, a Sierra Cosworth.
It had been driven for more than thirty miles before being dumped in Chisledon near Swindon.
The police admit there's little shopkeepers can do to protect their property from a mechanical digger.
He says it's down to the strength of the building and in each case the JCB wins.
Cash, postal orders and documents worth more eight thousand pounds were stolen.
Police say one of the gang wore a mask, and was white, and around six feet tall.
Another was aged around 50, five foot nine inches tall, and well built with greying hair.
Students have accused Education Secretary John Patten of failing to understand their basic needs, after he pledged to put an end to automatic membership of the student's union.
He said it was the last’ closed shop’in Britain and it had to go.
Student leaders say it's the only way they can fight for their rights.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
BRIGHTON
JOHN PATTEN MP/Education Secretary
VICKI HOWE/Student President/Oxford University
Voice over
Banners, pamphlets and boxes being carried in for the start of fresher's fair.
The beginning of term for students at Oxford University.
As students they automatically become members of the union, and have the chance to join any of the hundreds of societies, from mountain climbing to chess.
But today Education Secretary John Patten launched a viscious attack on the students' union.
It was the last closed shop in Britain, he said, and it had to go.
Most students, after all, just wanted a good education.
He went on to say he would introduce a scheme for voluntary union membership as soon as possible.
Student leaders accuse him of failing to understand the system.
Mmembers themselves say being part of a national union gives them a voice to fight for their rights.
Union leaders in Oxford say the Education Secretary is welcome to come and see for himself how they operate.
But John Patten is determined to end compulsory membership.
He'll introduce proposals for abolishing it by the end of the year.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
GARGY PATEL
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
JOHN PATTEN MP/Oxford West and Abingdon
Prof TIM BRIGHOUSE/Birmingham Education Director
LIZ BRIGHOUSE/Wife
ANN TAYLOR MP/Lab Education Spokesman
Cllr JOHN TANNER/Lab Agent
Cllr ANDREW TURNER/Fringe Meeting Organiser
Voice over
Mr Patten, speaking at a fringe meeting at the tory conference made the remarks about Professor Tim Brighouse who ran schools in Oxfordshire for eleven years and now heads Birmingham's education department.
Male speaker
I fear for Birmingham with this madman let loose, wandering around the streets frightening the children.
Birmingham put this nutter in as Director of Education, Brighouse.
He used to be chief education officer in Oxfordshire…he couldn't run a press conference.
Voice over
This morning in Blackpool Mr Patten apologised for the comments, saying they were meant to be’ satirical’.
Male speaker
I haven't had my breakfast yet.
I have already apologised earlier.
I'm sorry if he's upset
Voice over
Professor Brighouse has no idea why Mr Patten singled him out for attack, but says the Secretary of State has been under a lot of pressure
Male speaker
One must understand Mr Patten was saying that in the heat of the moment but it's a very unfortunate description to make of anyone trying to do a reasonable job.
I can only assume he was under enormous strain
Voice over
Professor Brighouse still lives in Oxford — his wife is less magnanimous
Female speaker
He's caused so much hurt and upset and damage.
For him to brush it off in such a way — I don't know what would make him say things like that, he's the sort of man I just wouldn't expect to have…
I just don't understand it.
Voice over
Labour is calling for Mr Patten to resign or be sacked
Female speaker
Mr Major ought to dismiss Mr Patten who has repeatedly shown he's not fit to be Secretary of State.
We can't have Secretaries of State behaving in this way and talking about respected professionals in such disparaging terms
Male speaker
We think John Patten's gone too far and should resign — but it seems the way of things in government now — they call each other’ bastards’and’barmy’people, that's not how public life should be governed
Voice over
But the tory councillor who organised the fringe meeting says the Secretary of State was qujite justified
Male speaker
It demeans politics if we can't occasionally have a laugh.
John Patten's made it clear that it was satirical in a small meeting.
I think he can have a joke occasionally, even about someone as important as Professor Brighouse
Voice over
Professor Brighouse won't say definitely whether he's taking legal action against Mr Patten.
He has said a sizable contribution from him toward repairing a school roof would win the education officer's forgiveness
A flying instructor has been blamed for causing a helicopter crash.
A report says he made a series of errors, but goes on to praise him for rescuing his pilot and passengers when the helicopter threatened to catch fire.
MARIA COYLE/Oxfordshire
28 August 1993
JEREMY JAMES/Helicopter Club of Great Britain
Voice over
The seven seater long ranger helicopter crashed in a field at Noke near Oxford last August.
There were seven people on board, three received back injuries, a five year old boy walked away unhurt.
At the time emergency services said it was miraculous that no one was more seriously injured.
The man flying the helicopter fifty seven year old George Warren of Tackley in Oxforshire was a flying instructor.
The Department of Transport report says he made several errors while demonstrating a hover manoevre resulting in the crash.
Most importantly he misjudged the direction of the wind.He thought it was a light southerly it was north westerly.
As he tried to stop the helicopter from going into a spin, it travelled further than he planned because he'd mistaken the direction of the wind.
The helicopter warning horn then sounded advising that the main rotor blades were too slow.
Applying pressure to the pedals to regain tail rotor control failed.
But the report also says Mr Warren risked his own life by assisting the trainer pilot and passengers to safety as the helicopter threatened to catch fire.
And though injured himself he ran a mile over rough terrain to fetch help.
Chairman of the helicopter club of Great Britain, Jeremy James in Banbury says demonstrating the hover isn't a difficult manoevre but he doesn't blame the pilot.
Male speaker
There's a lot of training and safety instruction a huge amount of effort put in by the Civil Aviation Authority amongst others who explain to pilots and bring safety considerations to the forefront.
Every now and again you're going to get exceptional circumstances and these things happen once in a while.
Voice over
Mr Warren wasn't at his home in Tackley to comment on the report.
The helicopter had been hired by a qualified private pilot from London for a cross country navigational exercise.
A murder trial has heard that tyre tracks found near where a woman drowned in the boot of her car were not consistent with an accident.
Tania Probyn, who was twenty-eight, disappeared after a row with her estranged husband Jonathan at his home in Longney near Gloucester.
September 1992/STONEBENCH/Gloucestershire
An accident expert has told Bristol Crown Court that tyre tracks found on the riverbank showed the car rolled only slowly into the water.
There were no skid marks.
Probyn denies murder.
The trial contiunes.
Champion jockey Peter Scudamore is on course to break one of the great sporting records of Victorian times.
He's hoping to ride two hundred miles in less than eight and a half hours, beating the time set by an eccentric Yorkshireman in 1831.
ERIKA BARNES Naunton
PETER SCUDAMORE Former Champion Jockey
Voice over
Peter Scudamore made his name as one of the greatest steeplechase jockeys of our time.
Back in 1831 the man of the moment was one Squire George Osbaldeston.
The best amateur huntsman of his time.
A crack shot and a notorious gambler.
At odds of 10-1 he bet a hundred pounds he could complete 200 miles in less than nine hours on horseback.
He did it and now Peter Scudamore is out to rewrite the record books and raise fifty thousand pounds for the Animal Health Trust.
Male speaker
I'm trying to raise money for a good cause.
The challenge is a tribute to the man himself.
Voice over
Peter Scudamore has been building a new future since his retirement.
Training is his game but competition is still in his blood.
But this will be a true test of his endurance.
Male speaker
It's going to be boring.
I'll have plenty of padding for saddle sores.
Voice over
And the horse seems to agree on the tactics!
When Squire Osbaldeston won the bet at Newmarket he proclaimed’ He was so hungry he could eat an old woman!’
Peter Scudamore will doubtless end the comparisons there…
He may be a former jockey but he still has to watch his weight!’
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Quinlivan jailed for four years
FTSE down 8
The hundred shares index closed down eight point four at three thousand and ninety two point four 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty two and down at two marks, forty seven.
A new contraceptive is being launched which will give women up to five years protection against unwanted pregnancies.
It's said to be as effective as the pill and experts say it'll widen the choice for women.
KAREN THOMPSON/Cheltenham
YVONNE FINCH/Patient
Dr IAN McPHERSON/Cheltenham Family Planning Clinic
Voice over
Women in Cheltenham have been among the first to try out the NORPLANT contraceptive.
Six small rod-like capsules are inserted into a woman's arm under local anaesthetic.
Gradually hormones, which are already widely used in the PILL, are released into the bloodstream.
It was developed by the World health Organisation in a bid to find methods of population control.
NORPLANT gives cover against getting pregnant for up to five years and has been used for the past decade abroad.
The treatment's readily available in 29 countries including America, Sweden, Denmark and Finland.
But Yvonne Finch is one of the first British women to try this form of contraception.'
NORPLANT was licensed in Britain in May but it's launch has been delayed until now so that doctors and nurses have had time to be properly trained in patient counselling and implant techniques…
Family planning experts claim it's what women have been waiting for.
Intial Side effects from the implant include disruption to periods and some women have suffered from headaches, nervousness, stomach, breast and muscle discomfort…
But so far the majority have reported no problems after six months.
And it seems that women are keen to use NORPLANT.
Doctors have had dozens of enquiries for what family planners claim is another step forward in a woman's right to choose.
Michael Heseltine has once again brought the Conservative Party conference to its feet — but this time without saying a word.
The Henley MP couldn't give a speech because he's still recovering from a heart attack.
Conference watchers say his barnstorming oratory's been sorely missed.
KIM BARNES/Blackpool
MATTHEW PARRIS/Political Writer
Voice over
The first glimpse, the blond mane backstage…and then he was out to a standing ovation.
The conference darling back in his natural habitat, the platform…
Michael Heseltine was keen to demonstrate his fitness after the heart attack he suffered in Italy in summer…but he'd decided he wasn't strong enough to speak.
Earlier on the way to conference accompanied by his wife Anne he said he was feeling better.
She says are you sad you're not speaking?
He says I'm not speaking today.
Instead the Henley MP sat and listened to his deputy Tim Sainsbury.Political commentators say Tarzan's touch is missed.
He says
Earlier this week conference sent him a get well card…today the message was we miss you.
She says he gives tremendous verve and gaiety in his speech.
He says oh yes I'm very disappointed but if he's a sick man you can't expect him to get up in front of 6,000 people.
She says we couldn't help but remember the sort of thumping speeches
Amidst press speculation that poor health may prevent him ever resuming his old role, this was a cameo appearance from a reluctant silent star.
Still to come on Central News, in search of the Sunday Roast.
HARRIET RYLEY/Charlton
JOANNA CASTLE/Farmer
FREDDIE TROTTER/Teacher
Voice over
Joanna Castle is a busy woman — she and her husband run their 550 acre farm with just one son and one farm worker to help them.
But she also devotes some of her time to showing schoolchildren just where their food comes from.
Inside the field centre she's set up in an old barn, 30 eight year-olds are being introduced to life on the farm.
She asks what kind of meat comes from a pig.
The children answer pork and bacon.
The visit then becomes something of a treasure hunt — as Mrs Castle whips the children round, with plenty of chances to get first-hand experience of the animals:
They say the chicken's feet are like plastic.
The highlight is the week-old calves — they're encouraged to let the calves lick their fingers, and shown how the farmer reproduces their mother's teats, because the milk the calves would otherwise have ends up in the supermarket.
Then there's the demonstration of tagging — a reminder that these calves are numbers rather than names.
She says I put the tag in here.
It's not for real Stuart.
It won't hurt.
These children will return for two more visits during the year to see how the farm changes.
She says when we come in the summer there are geese, then they've gone at Christmas to be eaten.
Then we see the goslings in the spring.
She says she likes the calves licking her hands, it was very warm.
He says he found out the calves' tongues were grey and pink.
An introduction to Becka and her calf Kitty prompts several questions to Mrs Castle the following day — when she makes a return visit to the children at the Church of England Junior School in Wantage.
He asks what will happen to Kitty.
She says she'll become burger meat and be delicious!
Nextdoor are 10 year-olds who also spent the previous day at Home farm — looking at wildlife in hedgerows and a pond and checking for pollution.
Everything they've seen becomes part of their coursework.
Meanwhile the indefatigable Joanna Castle is taking yet another group of children around part of her downlands on the Ridgeway, where the calves they met last year are now only a year away from being next year's Sunday roast
She hopes to encourage other farmers to follow suit and help teach as many children as possible about where their next meal comes from and to respect the countryside that produces it.
Paintings by Van Gogh, Degas and Turner are on show together in one theatre — and every one of them's a fake.
They're part of an exhibition of famous forgeries to coincide with a stage play based on the life of one of the world's great forgers.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
Library Pictures
ROY MARSDEN/Actor
TEI WILLIAMS/Playhouse Theatre
Voice over
It would cost a fortune to see the work of the great masters spread around the art galleries of the World.
But you can see Degas, Cezanne, and Turner on your own doorstep.
if you're prepared to use your imagination.
They're all forgeries of course, nearly all done by the Master forger Tom Keating.
They are on display at the Playhouse Theatre in Oxford to accompany the current stage production.
Female speaker
These fakes…
Male speaker
They're not fakes they're forgeries.
A Machine copies, an artist paints.
Voice over
The play the Master Forger features veteran actor Roy Marsden rehearsing here with Jackie Smith Wood.
It's loosely based on the life of Tom Keating.
The paintings are there to illustrate the drama.
Male speaker
The play centres around the question of What Is Art.
Does An exact copy of a Michelangelo statue lose artistic merit because it doesn't have his name on it.
Of course not.
Tom Keating spent a lifetime cocking a snook at the art world.
He painted in various styles and passed them off as originals making a lot of money in the process.
There are nineteen paintings in the exhibition, sixteen of them by Keating.
One of them, a picture in the style of Samuel Palmer, is valued at over twenty five thousand pounds.
Female speaker
Samuel Palmer was what eventually led to Keating's discovery.
His girlfriend sold one of Keating's paintings to a dealer and it was discovered and eventually traced back
Voice over
The exhibition finishes with the end of the play's run this weekend.
So if you're prepared to see your art second hand then the playhouse is for you.
But then the theatre is all about illusion, so perhaps the forgeries have found their natural home.
Welcome back:Thousands of new Oxford students have been signing up for anything from scuba diving to tiddlywinks, in this year's freshers' fair.
It's the traditional event where hundreds of student societies try to attract new recruits, and some of the groups are definitely offbeat.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
CHARLOTTE NESER/Organiser
Voice over
The start of term for Oxford students…and the chance to join any of the 450 societies to help broaden the education.
The choice is staggering…the established groups for politics and religion…around seventy different sports, including American football, scuba diving, tiddlywinks…and juggling.
Freshers' fair is the traditional showground where societies fall over themselves to attract some of the 5000 new students.
Practical advice on what to do with money.
The chance to learn the art of being a Wychwood Warrior.
At the Douglas Adams stall there were free teabags on offer, courtesy of Arthur Dent from the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
Oxford's student societies have become world famous, especially the drama group and the Oxford Union.
Others use all the persuasion they can to draw in recruits.
Some were convinced, others just looked bemused.
Of course, everyone signs up for nearly everything, but then it's all part of university life.
Mostly it means concentrating on having fun, but for some it's all a very serious business.
Now football, and Oxford United are out of this year's Coca Cola Cup after losing to Aston Villa last night.
But Swindon Town have wonm themselves a third round tie against Oldham, from the Premier League.
Tim Russon reports 
Voice over
The odds were always against Oxford at Villa Park…trailing by a goal from the first leg United were desperate for a flying start…they were nearly grounded in the opening minutes by Dean Saunders…
Moments later they were deep in trouble…
Dalian Atkinson headed Villa into the lead and United's fight was not improbable but impossible…
The premier league side did what they had to do…
Oxford tried hard but couldn't achieve what they wanted…
At the start of the second half United tried a charge…a goal would have made a game of it…skipper Andy Melville came close with a header but you had the feeling that Villa were always in control…
Oxford never let go though…there's many a premier league side who'll fare worse than this at Villa Park this season…
And two minutes from time they were level…
Nick Cusack who's not enjoyed the best of starts since joining United showed control and a calculating finish for his second goal of the season…
Villa jumped back into the lead right on time with a 20 yard thunderer from Kevin Richadson…to make 2-l on the night…4-2 overall…so no cup run for Oxford…
but Swindon are on their way…and looking forward to a home tie against Oldham Athletic from the premier league in round three…
its a good draw for Town…they must fancy their chances…
One of the country's tallest trees has been under the doctor.
The one hundred and fifty-foot Grand Fir was operated on by tree surgeons who were worried it could be getting too big for its roots.
Tim Hurst reports.
WESTONBIRT Gloucestershire
AMATEUR VIDEO
TONY RUSSELL Westonbirt Arboretum
RICHARD TOWNSEND Tree Surgeon
Voice over
They first knew there was something wrong when the tallest Grand Fir tree in England, shooting 150 feet above the Westonbirt Arboretum near Tetbury in Gloucestershire, began to go bald.
The top 20 feet was decaying, and had to come down.
That meant taking a saw to the top, higher than the tree surgeons had ever climbed before.
After a strenuous climb, the first amputations were made, the rotten wood partly lowered to the ground to avoid uncontrolled damage to surrounding woodland.
An hour or so working at 150 feet is hard work.
The second surgeon climbed, taking with him a miniature camera.
A few moments later, the tree was 20 feet shorter.
But the staff at Westonbirt say lose one claim to fame, gain another.
As autumn comes into it's own, the number of visitors is expected to double as the pale leaves of summer change colour.
It proves perhaps that a tree needn't be tall to be proud.
Inflation to remain below two per cent 
Major welcomes Thatcher to party conference
She got a mixed reception from delegates.
Thirty thousand coal jobs to go according to report
of up to thirty thousand jobs.
One in twenty homes unfit for human habitation
FTSE up 21
The hundred shares index closed up twenty one point seven points at two five three eight point eight.
The pound is down at one dollar sixty nine cents , and up at two marks forty eight .
The chairman of Cheltenham Conservatives has accused former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of being disloyal to the Government.
Monica Drinkwater's attack came during an emotional debate on economic policy at the party's conference in Brighton.
Simon Mares reports.
BRIGHTON
MONICA DRINKWATER/Cheltenham Conservatives
Emotions were running high as Lady Thatcher made her triumphal entrance on to the conference platform.
Her supporters in the audience made it clear that her recent attacks on Government policy have, if anything, made her more popular with party activists.
During the debate speaker after speaker called for a return to the Thatcherite economics of a decade ago.
It was all too much for Cheltenham Conservative chairman Monica Drinkwater who became the only speaker to attack Lady Thatcher.
’ There are enough opposition politicians and media commentators rocking the boat.
We do not expect the elders of our own party to join this unhelpful cause.
This is a time for national and party loyalty.’
A rousing ovation in a tense debate for a brave political act — rather like one of the Christians turning on the Lions.
’ Emotions were stirred.
I didn't say it for the applause.
It's something I feel very deeply and sincerely about.
But passions were running high and I also think the conference did want to give our present Prime Minister a feeling of support.’
Lady Thatcher often accused her male colleagues of lacking guts…today she met her match in the Lady from Cheltenham.
The first cars to be made in Britain by the Japanese firm Honda have rolled off the production line.
The aptly named Honda Accord has been produced in co-operation with Rover.
By 1995 the Japanese plan to make fifty thousand vehicles a year in this country.
Mark Kiff reports.
COMPANY VIDEO/SWINDON/Wiltshire
SEPTEMBER 1992/ANDREW JONES/Honda UK
PAUL GROOMBRIDGE/Windmill Hill Motor Company
It's seven years since Honda set up in Swindon.
A seventy million pounds engine plant came on stream three years ago producing engines for Rover.
The new Accord marks the next phase of development.
If everything goes to plan, two thousand people could be working here by 1995.
The new car is a joint development between Honda and the Rover Group.
Andrew Jones says the Rover car will be produced in Cowley.
The new Honda will go on sale in May next year.
The Honda launch follows yesterday's unveiling by Rover of a new pressing plant in Swindon…
Rover will supply panels for the new Honda.
But the new Accord comes at a crisis time for the motor industry.
The UK car market has plummted from a peak in 1992 when nearly two and a half milklion vehicles were sold.
This year sales are unlikely to reach much more than one and a half million.
The first Swindon-built Accords are destined for Germany, but its announcement has brought optimism to local car showrooms.
Paul Groombridge says it's the good news they've been waiting for.
The new Accord is unvieled to the public tomorrow at the Berlin Motor Show.
Its arrival strengthens Japanese car production in Britain.
Swindon now joins Sunderland, with Nissan, and Toyota in Derbyshire, as the third centre in the Japansese drive to make inroads into the European car market.
An infant school has reopened after being severely damaged by arsonists.
The school shut down eleven days ago but now its ninety one pupils are back in the classroom…after some round-the-clock work from builders and staff.
Nick Clark reports.
27 SEPTEMBER 1992
MARIE MYERS/Headmistress
Voice over
Even at eight this morning the finishing touches were being applied to the temporary portacabin Holy Trinity school in Chipping Norton.
It's been a monumental effort by all concerned to get the school operational in just eleven days.
The speedy action meant the children missed only nine days.
The cause for the closure…arsonists who early last Sunday week set fire to a pile of books in the main school building causing half a million pounds worth of damage.
But that's history now the children are back in the classroom.
She says are you glad to be back.
They say Yes.
She says I owe so much to my staff for all the work they've put in to getting this place going again.
For the parents there's gratitude for the speed of response to the disaster.
She says the teachers have shown how much the school means to them.
He says it's tremendous how everyone's put their ishoulder to the wheel.
It's thought the main school will not reopen until September nineteen ninety three when all repairs have been completed.
Join the club.
The students juggling with their futures.
The bubble bursts.
Oxford lose their fizz in the Coca Cola Cup.
And getting in trim.The tree that's too big for its roots.
Extremely dangerous.Man charged over body in lake escapes from court.
Living in fear.
Young mum gets phone threats from her kidnapper.
And striking Accord.
The sun rises over the new Honda.
escape
GOOD EVENING:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Police describe Tyrone Evans as extremely dangerous.He's charged with dismembering the body of a man whose torso was found at the bottom of a lake.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
WALLINGTON/London
IAN WATKINSON/Eyewitness
JOHN KAPP/High Down Prison/Surrey
Voice over
It was meant to be a routine remand at Sutton Magistrates Court in South London.
A Police custody vehicle had parked by the side of the court with twenty eight year old Tyrone Evans inside.
He's been charged in connection with the alleged murder of Swindon man Stephen Davison whose mutilated Torso was found in a lake at Reigate in Surrey.
Tyrone Evans had been brought into the court's car park when he overpowered his guard and got away in a blue Renault.
No weapon was used and the guard wasn't injured.
Evans was facing his fourth remand on a charge connected with the death of Stephen Davison.
Two others are charged with murder, he's accused of disposiong of and dismembering a body
It was the second time there'd been a breakout at the court in the space of a week.
Neighbour Ian Watkinson saw some of the action.
Male speaker
Out of the corner of my eye I saw someone running to a car then it was driven off at speed, and they didn't seem to care about the traffic
Voice over
Tyrone Evans come from a gypsy site at Strteatham in South London.Stephen Davison, a father of four from Dulverton Avenue in Swindon, disappeared after a pub brawl in May.
A plastic bag containing some of his remains was found two weeks later at Reigate.
After today's breakout Officials at High Down Prison in London, where Evans was remanded, say they had no inkling he was going to make a run for it.
Male speaker
We hand over hundreds of prisoners to police every day form appearance in court without any problem.
This man was clearly determined to get away
Voice over
Police say Tyrone Evans is extremely dangerous and shgould not be approached by the public.
Theyadd that he'll do anything to evade capture.
A couple have been robbed at gunpoint on a dream holiday to Disney World.
It's the second incident this week involving British tourists in America.
Just days ago, a man was shot dead in the same area of Orlando, Florida.
Ian Maclaren reports.
APSLEY GUISE/Milton Keynes
MAUREEN HAYWARD
BOB HAYWARD
CHAS SIMMONS/Abingdon Travel
Voice over
Bob and Maureen Hayward, back home in their bungalow near Milton Keynes.
Their trip to Disney World in Florida was cut short after a terrifying ordeal when they were faced with a gang, brandishing a sawn-off shotgun.
This picture, taken 24 hours earlier, shows the spot where the Haywards were robbed of their bags, cameras, cash and travellers cheques.
The Haywards, seen here enjoying the sights that attract thousands of British holidaymakers to Disney World, have nothing but praise for the way their American hosts dealt with the situation.
And they say the response from the local police was prompt and efficient.
The Haywards say they now consier themselves lucky…
Just days before British holidaymaker Keith Thompson was shot dead by robbers in Orlando…and last year another family named Hayward from North Oxfordshire were faced by gunmen…on a holiday in Florida…
Hayward was shot.
But what advice should British tourists follow.
Bob Hayward is in no doubt…
And travel agents are currently giving clients this advice…
In Orlando police say every step is taken to ensure visitors are not subjected to violent attacks…
The Haywards have been offered another holiday in America…free of charge…courtesy of Virgin, the company who organised their trip.
But they say they'll think long and hard before they deciding whether or not to accept the offer.
A young mother says she's living in fear for her life after a threatening phone call from the man who kidnapped her at gunpoint.
The kidnapper has absconded from the probation hostel where he was awaiting sentence after admitting committing the offence.Since going on the run, Thomas Rennie has phoned the woman's family to say he's’ going to get them.’
Clare Lafferty reports.
JANUARY 1992/CHURCHDOWN/Gloucestershire
NORTHAMPTON
MARITA BROWN
JACKIE LOREN/Sister
JOHN ANDREWS/Stone House Probation Hostel
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Voice over
Welcome back.
Later on art by torchlight.
But first with the Friday sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
LOU MACARI/Stoke Manager
DENIS SMITH/Oxford Manager
Voice over
Colourful…fiery…controversial…you name it…
Lou Macari's been called…his football life…has been on a roller coaster these past few seasons…hitting the heights at Swindon…crashing into the law courts…running around Wembley with the cup…
Macari's yellow brick road these days is the cobbles and chimney pots which lead to the Victoria Ground…home of Stoke City
where Lou is riding to the top again…
Celtic want him back to be their new manager…that could be the future…but what of the past dare we mention Swindon…
Lou Macari says…he; s very annoyed about what happened at swindon.the people that ran the club let him doww…but it was up to him to get on with his football and he's happy at Stoke having won a cup at wembley and promotion to the first division
Lou Macari may be king of the potteries at the moment but on Sunday stoke will be facing one of their own folk heroes…the local paper still has the headlines…
Denis Smith was a captain and centre half who wore the red and white stripes with pride…played with passion happy days for the new Lord of the manor
Denis Smith says he enjoyed himself at Stoke especially in the early seventies when they had a good team…as a professional he wants Oxford to win but after the game will revert to being a stoke supporter…he says his young son also supports them
For the live match…there's one change in the United team…
Phil Whitehead returns in goal…on form…
United have drawn their last two matches…but watch out for Stoke's top scorer…
United old boy Mark Stein
in the third division its saturday as usual for hereford…united were given a pat on the back by Wimbledon this week for playing so well against them in the cup…it beats a kick on the leg…tomorrow its all change for Crewe
defender gareth davies has a heavy cold he could be missing…back in the running is Simon Brain he's fully fit again after breaking his leg last season
on form Crewe look the part…but they have to run out of steam sometime
goal of the week…comes from the Manor…and belongs to Paul Wanless…a real smasher
if you can't make it to the Manor don't forget to switch on and cheer the Central Live match this sunday afternoon…what else is going on…headlines in action round up 
Voice over
The new hockey season starts tomorrow…three local teams to follow in the second division…
Gloucester are at home to Edgbaston…
Cheltenham play at Neston…
Oxford University are away to Harborne…
At Kingsholm…
Gloucester are playing London Irish…the cherry and whites have to win this one…
Swindon speedway hope to make it 20 league wins out of 20 at Blunsdon tomorrow…star rider Jason Crump is racing for his 10th successive maximum…
on sunday the Oxford stars take on Blackburn…
the moto cross stars take to the track at Foxhill near Swindon
and setting sail the Kingham Hill round the world crew from Oxfordshire have reached Madeira…next port of call the Falklands
A group of young disabled mountaineers are on their way to Mount Everest to show…to prove they can climb…they can reach the peaks of life…
The expedition from the Macintyre organisation in Milton Keynes set off this week…their challenge is our Friday Feature 
BILL MUMFORD/Team Leader
BOB SILLITOE
PAUL SILLITOE
Voice over
The path that leads to the world's highest mountain is full of adventures…full of famous stories…but there's been nothing so grand and gallant as the expedition being planned by Macintyre of Milton Keynes…who cater and care for the mentally disabled…
They're taking seven climbers to the Himalayas to Everest Base Camp and then hopefully onto the top of one of the spurs of the great mountain…
For them it's the latest…possbily the last great mountain challenge…three years ago they reached the top of Mount Kilimanjaro…two years ago they made for Mont Blanc and the Alps…
Now its the king of the mountains…
Bill Mumford says that everybody goes on these trips comes back changed in some way…its a maturiing thing…and maybe it's a lesson for all of us we should feel inspired by disabled people trying something remarkable
Lead climber will be Paul Sillitoe from Wallingford in Oxfordshire…he was first of the macintyre men onto the peak of Kilimanjaro and was also on top of the Alps…this time his dad Bob is going with him as helper
Bob Sillitoe says that since he came back from Kilimanjaro he's been looking for something else…another challenge…the climbing has given his son a great sense of confidence
Paul Sillitoe says they'll be away for a month and walking to Everest base Camp…and he's looking forward to it
The plan this time is to walk to Everest Base camp…from there within sight of the great peak they'll tackle Pokalde…which stands at over 20 thousand feet
Bill Mumford says you need climbing skills and it's a challenge that takes them into a new realm…he says they are praying for dry weather…but it gets very cold…drops to minus twenty at night
The biggest battle for the Macintyre expedition has been finding the funds…the trip is costing seventy to eighty thousand pounds and they've still not raised all the money…but the charity's patron the Duchess of York is planning to join them at Everest Base camp…that’ ll wave the magic wand…will they make it
Bill Mumford says of course they will make it…they would not be going if they did not think they could do it…they have been well prepared…
Bob Sillitoe says Paul will make it he has the guts and determination
A Bosnian art gallery, which has been bombed nine times since the civil war started, has been recreated in Cheltenham.
The exhibits are displayed in a pitch black room and have to be viewed by torchlight.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cheltenham
JANE BYWATERS/Axiom Art Centre
Voice over
Enter into the Olaba Art Gallery in Sarajevo.
Constant bombing means there's no electricity here.
All the exhibits have to be viewed by torchlight.
This whole scene has been recreated at the Axiom Art Centre in Cheltenham.
Artists here have tried to duplicate the conditions under which their colleagues in Eastern Europe are trying to work.
The exhibition is part of the Fringe Cheltenham Literature Festival.
It includes work by Yugoslavian artists who've sent copies of their exhibits, sometimes by fax.
And studies by Western photographers and artists into the plight of the Yugoslavian people.
The exhibition runs until the end of October.
Tomorrow marks the start of National Otter Weekend, to highlight all the work that's being done to bring otters back to our riverbanks.
One school is building an artifical otter holt to provide them with a ready made home.
And there are signs that on one river the otter is already moving back into its old haunts.
RICHARD BARNETT Bushley
ALAN GREEN Bredon School
PAUL HOBON Worcestershire Nature Conservation Trust
ANDREW
Voice over
The otter…seen here on the Scottish coast…was almost wiped out by pesticide poisoning in England during the 1960s and 70s.
But now its making a comeback.
On the River Severn, the otter is returning to its old haunts, with colonies spreading from Wales all the way down to Gloucestershire.
Pupils at Bredon School on the Worcestershire Gloucestershire border are making sure the otters are made welcome by building an artificial holt.
It consists of a clay pipe to a brick inner sanctum which its hoped will become home to a breeding pair of otters.
Male speaker
It's teaching children to be good conservationists.
They're becoming experts on the otter.
Voice over
Conservationists say otters are recovering well from near extinction throughout England.
And they should be given a helping hand:
Male speaker
There are already otters in the area.
The holt should encourage them to stay.
Voice over
The project to encourage the otter is being backed by the National Rivers Authority, which is helping to pay for the artificial holt:
The presence of otters means the river is healthy which is what the NRA wants.
The chances of spotting an otter are remote…each animal has a territory of around ten miles of river, and they're nocturnal.
But even if they're unseen, it's good to know they're back.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Labour disowns Livingstone
FTSE up 16
The hundred shares index closed up sixteen point two points at three thousand one hundred and eight 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty three and down at two marks, forty six.
The Conservative Party Conference ended in Blackpool this afternoon.
The Tories have responded to calls for unity and fallen in behind John Major.
But as Political Editor Peter Hayes reports, all is not what it seems.
PETER HAYES/Political Editor
Voice over
It's been a multi layered conference.
Unfettered loyalty inside the conference hall.
A maelstrom of malcontents and intrigue on the fringe.
A separate agenda in the newspapers.
And no doubt where the blame lies.
’ It's media hype.
There isn't discontent.
’ So it's our fault?
’ Yes.
Yes.
You must get your act together.
Give us a bit of support.
’ Well, slap my wrist’.
On the platform, ordained adoration.
Spontaneous adoration.
Sour grapes.
And a lurch to the right.
Peter Lilley
’ Mio bambino est in Italia.
Send child benefit to my family in Italy’.
Voice over
The return of Tarzan unusually, seen but not heard.
Voice over
And everyone was selling memoirs:
Margaret Thatcher
’ The only real man in the cabinet was me.’
Theresa Gorman
’ Well John Major says I'm a bit of a bastard, and I've been spending the first part of this conference checking my birth certificate’.
Voice over
’ One thing Tories do know is how many beans make five’.
Voice over
’ I like him as a fellow.
But if he's going to be a leader, he's got to be a bit of a bastard’.
’ Um.
I'm sorry.
I'm not sure I understand the question’.
’ Well Margaret Thatcher was always the one to photograph I think’.
’ Why?’
’ She's animated and she had a great look in her eyes’.
’ No I don't want to.
I don't want it’.
’ Can we give you a sweet?
’ It's very kind of you.
Thank you very much’.
’ I get rather bored’.
’ When you get close to him, as you do occasionally.
’ Very close
’ Is there a frisson ever’.
’ He's quite sexy, for a woman, and he is very charming…
’ No, he's a man.
Oh I see.
’ To a woman, not as a woman.
Can we do that again?
Note to PA: the music is Teddy Bears Picnic played by a non MU organist.
The lighter side of the Tory Party conference as seen by our political editor Peter Hayes,.
who joins us now from Blackpool.
Peter joking apart have the tories done themselves any good this week?
PETER: What we've discovered this week is the old instinct the Tories have always had for self preservation, the leadership ordained unity and low and behold there was unity.
Idealogically of course it's been a battle of Left and Right the Right won, we've had a return a resserection of the 'Hang Em, Flog Em' Brigade some ugly xenophobia at times and of course multipule attacks on the Media.
Anne: What about Mr Major has he actually done himself any good this week?
Peter: Yes he has indeed he delivered, he did away with the autocue, he leaned forward, he didn't want a barrier between himself and his adoring party faithful they were adoring it was rather like the last night at the Prom, I can tell you.
He waved bnits of paper, the oldest trick in the book, props.
He still has a still has a few technical problems with his speeches, his voice is very thin, he falls away at the end of sentences and when he rises to a crescendo his voice is like the distance whine of an aeroplane engine but what he said was exactly what they wanted to hear a return to family life and strong law and order.
Anne: he had a long way to go do you think he's done enough to survive?
Peter: What he's done today is buy himself a little time, his troubles aren't over, Mrs Thatcher still casts her shadow over this conference he still has problems inside and outside the cabinet but he has bought some time.
Anne: They'll be doing it all again in 12 months time do you think things will be different, will Mr Major still be there?
Peter:I think he will be here in 12 mths time, I Don't think Mr Fowler will be at least not as party chairman, another prediction I will make I think the Tories will get a drubbing in the local elections in May, I think they are going to get a drubbing in the Euro elections in June.
Never forget the Tories are the most ruthless party in the democratic world if the men in grey suits do not think Mr M+ajor can win the next election for them, he'll be dumped.
Still to come on Central News, the peak of ambition 
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
GARGY PATEL
GRAEME BOWD/Bristol Crown Court
September 1992/STONEBENCH
Voice over
Jonathan Probyn stood to gain a substantial sum from his wife's death.
A jury at Bristol crown court was told of an insurance policy paying six thousands pounds a year until their children grew up.
But according to insurance brokers Probyn thought this wasn't enough.
Andrew Davis and Kevin Hewitt were asked to arrange a lump sum payment.
Both said the request was unusual.
Mr Davis said Probyn was seeking a payout of £150,000 pounds, far more than the average policy.
He wasn't interested in other benefits and he didn't want to insure his own life.
He told the brokers he wanted cover for his wife's death and nothing more.
In fact the policy was never taken out.
The body of 28 year old Tania Probyn was found in the River Severn.
The Crown say her car was pushed into the water after her husband had battered her to death and locked her in the boot.
Probyn, who made a television appeal after his wife's disappearence, was later arrested at his home in Longley near Gloucester.
Detective Constable Keetly was one of several officers who saw him searching the banks of the river near the spot where the car disappeared.
Probyn denies killing his wife who was living with another man at the time.
The trial continues on Monday.
A racial advice centre is facing closure after being criticised for failing to provide an adequate service.
The Racial Equality Council has been told it could lose its grant, leaving it's six staff facing redundancy.
The council say that would be a disaster for race relations.
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
VERONICA COOPER/Racial Equality Council
CLIFFORD BOAM-STEWART/Commission for Racial Equality
Voice over
Gloucestershire has an ethnic minority population of around 9,000…including 3,600 Afro Caribbeans, 3,300 Asians and nearly 700 Chinese.
For the past 27 years, if they needed help or advice, they could go to the Racial Equality Council centre in Gloucester.
But now the Commission for Racial Equality is threatening to withdraw its grant to the centre, claiming it's not doing its job properly.
If local councils withdraw their funding too, the centre could be forced to close.
The threatened loss of cash has already led the centre to issue redundancy notices to six of its staff.
Female speaker
There has been bloodshed in other communities.
The centre has promoted racial harmony.
It is determined to stay open.
Male speaker
The CRE is committed to good race relations.
It is looking into setting up an alternative advice centre.
Voice over
Meanwhile local people say there is a need for an advice centre for ethnic minorities in Gloucestershire:
All concerned believe Gloucestershire has a good race relations record…the question mark hangs over how to keep it that way.
An inquest's underway on a man who crashed a motorbike into a wall after a hundred mile an hour police chase.
Ian Arrol's parents say the police shouldn't have chased him and have lodge an official complaint.
SIMON GARRETT Gloucester
JOCK ARROL Father
GWEN ARROL Mother
Voice over
Around a mother neck the likeness of her dead son.
Ian Arrol died from massive head injuries when his powerful motorbike went out of control and hit a wall on Crickley Hill outside Gloster.
His body contained traces of amphetamines and cannabis.
His brother Mark was on the back of the bike and survived.
The Aroll family heard witnesses estimate the distance between police and rider during the chase as anything from point blank to three hundred yards.
Driver Helen Challoner who was passed by bike and car estimated their speed at around a hundred mills an hour and said there was no more than a car's length between them.
Her passenger said the car headlamps lit up the bike.
But police co-driver PC Bob Langley said they were never anything like that close
Pillion passenger Mark Arrol said he tried to get his brother to stop.
He believes if the police had backed off Ian would also have slowed.
The borthers parents agree
Male speaker
What we hope in the future is that police will back off so it doesn't end up in death
Female speaker
They should have held back and he would have stopped.
He'd have gone a different route, they could have gone to see him after.
They knew he was a disqualified driver.
They knew where he lived.
I hold the police responsible for my son's death
Voice over
Police denied any knowledge of who was on the bike.
They said they just wanted it to stop
The jury of seven men and three women will hear evidence from twenty-four witnesses in all before reaching their verdict.
The inquest's continuing
PM declares hopes on Europe
The Prime Minister has told the Conservative Party Conference that the things he cares most about are stability at home and in Europe, Education, and Britain's long-term economic strength.
Pledges on long-term future of Britain
He's pledged to reform teacher training, a crackdown on violent crime and to proceed with long-term plans for Britain's place in Europe.
Inflation rate steady at 3
The inflation rate has remained unchanged at three point six per cent.
Mystery caller in Nikki Allen murder case
Police hunting the killer of seven-year-old, Nikki Allen, in Sunderland, want to question a mystery woman caller who claimed to know someone who'd committed a murder.
FTSE up 2
The hundred shares index closed up two point four at twenty-five, forty-one point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy and up at two marks, fifty-one 
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
CRAIG MASKELL/Swindon Town
Voice over
We're on the goal trail tonight…with the big guns of the first division…
Portsmouth against Swindon…13 goal Guy Whittingham…takes on 11 goal Craig Maskell…they're the top scorers in the first division…what a head to head…
Maskell first here's his record…over the years he's nearly averaging a goal every other game…quarter of a million pounds he cost Swindon…one of the bargain buys of the season…
Maskell can fire them in from anywhere…
Maskell chat
And what about Whittingham…he's a Gloucestershire lad…who came out of the army to start shooting goals for Pompey…he's already scored two hat-tricks this season…last saturday he killed off Luton Town by scoring three of Portsmouth's four goals…he's enjoying his best ever start to a season…he can hit the ball hard…head with power…and finish with skill…
Maskell chat
STING
two changes in the swindon team to play at Portsmouth tomorrow Paul Bodin is back in the number three shirt…and Maskell returns to lead the attack both were rested for the cup game on Tuesday…
on current form Swindon are stronger…
Pompey have only been beaten once at home this season that was by West Ham…
Should be a few goals going in at the Baseball Ground on Sunday…the central live match is Derby County against Oxford United…
Top scorer for County is Paul Simpson…
Simmo the man who used to have the Manor Ground singing is now the darling of the Derby crowd…he scored two in their seven goal thrashing of Southend on Wednesday night…
STING
Team news…
Now Derby have hit form…after a rotten start…they've won their last four…
United are chasing their first win in seven…
goals we want more…
Witney Town's new ground celebrated eight last night…
Ron Atkinson brought his Aston Villa team for the offical opening
Oakey Park built at a cost of one point five million and named after club president Aubrey Oakey was packed out…
and what a show it was…
Terry Merriman scored a goal for Town…but Villa with Spink…
Barrett…
Teale…
Blake…
Parker…
Dalian Atkinson and Yorke all playing were of course different class
3-1 at half time Villa scored four more in the second half…they'll not forget the night in Witney that Oakey Park was unveiled
there're no games this weekend for Hereford United or Gloucester rugby club…all the action's on Central…there's Goals Extra tomorrow teatime…the live match on Sunday afternoon…
As for our action round-up…that's takes us to speedway first 
Voice over
Swindon Robins against Oxford Cheetahs brought a real battle to Blunsdon last night…both are desperate for points…
Oxford's Mark Carlsson was the first casualty crashing out of heat eleven…then it was Troy Butler's turn to tumble in the last race…
Swindon who are fighting against relegation for the second year running were six points down at one stage…they fought back…
Oxford upset at a referee's decision fell behind and the Robins won 46 to 44…
the league season starts in ice hockey tomorrow…we've got Oxford City stars at home to Blackburn…on sunday a local derby…
Swindon against Milton Keynes at the Link Centre…
celebrations this week at Jackdaws Castle…racing trainer David Nicholson's had two winners in his new stable…the first one Cannon Class was the Princess Royal's horse…
its time to slow down…time to head for the river bank…and go fishing for our Friday Feature 
KIM MILSOM
Voice over
A brother and sister are making their mark in the chess world…at the age of eleven and fourteen.
Adam and Harriet Hunt are hoping to make it to the big time.
Mark Kiff reports.
ADAM HUNT/Chess Champion
HARRIET HUNT/Chess Champion
CARO HUNT/Mother
TRACEY THOMPSON/British Under 16 Champion
Voice over
If you thought chess was a slow, perhaps even dull game, then you've never seen it played like this.
For most people breakfast is a time to renew contact with the world, often through bleary eyes at best.
But for Harriet and Adam Hunt it's valuable practice time.
Their Oxford home is crammed full with the spoils of their success at the chessboard.
FOr Adam in particular, the game was an early addiction.
Adam says he learnt all the moves when he was four.
Harriet says that all she basically does is play, play and play and gradually you get better.
Harriet and Adam's success has been remarkable by anyone standards.
Harriet's first big move was to become the first girl to win the British Junior Championships.
Adam was under 14 champion when he was just 10.
Harriet became the joint youngest girl to win an international ranking; Adam the joint youngest boy.
Harriet won World Bronze this year.
Adam finished in the top seven.
Enough to make any mum proud even if now she can no longer beat them.
Caro Hunt says that at the age of five he could beat her and it was then she realised he had a lot of promise.
Chess is not only a part of home life.
Chess clubs thrive at both their schools and when Harriet tires of playing Adam she can always enjoy a game with another national champion.
Tracey Thompson agrees there aren't many schools, especially girls schools which can boast two national chess champions.
So will Oxfordshire produce its own Spassky or Fisher?
Only time will tell.
Adam says he'd like to become a Grand Master.
For now Harriet's keener on seeing chess get a better press.
Harriet says it's unusual for chess to make the front pages of the papers, in spite of the fact that she's been on the front page of The Times.
But maybe not so unusual in the future.
Yet another Hunt is showing real promise and Laurence is only seven.
A mock motorway pile-up involving twenty seven vehicles and a chemical spillage has been staged, to help emergency services deal with the real thing.
It was the largest exercise yet held in Europe, and chemical companies were there to see what can happen when their cargoes are damaged.
Tim Hurst reports.
MORETON-IN-MARSH/Gloucestershire
RECONSTRUCTION
PAUL DAVIDSON/Organiser
RECONSTRUCTION
JIM BOOMER/Incident Commander
Voice over
Even the motorway is a mock-up, built for training at the Fire Service College at Moreton-in-Marsh.
It was used to stage Europe's biggest oil and chemical spillage exercise, involved police, fire and ambulances from Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire and Warwickshire.
It assumed that 27 vehicles had been involved, closing both carriageways.
The exercise was also aimed at big business — experts from some of Britain's largest chemical companies were invited, to show them first hand the consequences should chemcial cargoes be released in such an accident.
Such exercises are expensive to stage.
In the face of impending cuts in public spending, isn't there a chance that training will be cut back?
The hardest lesson learned from such an exercise is that the emergency services from Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire and Warwickshire believe that one day they will combione again, to deal with the real thing…what emergency planners call the nightmare scenario.
Now, hands up if you've actually READ the Maastricht Treaty.
Well, one couple are so determined that as many people as possible should at least have the CHANCE to read it that they're producing copies at a quarter of the official price.
And as Mike Rowbottom reports, they're nselling fast.
BRIGHTON/Sussex
OXFORD
DAVID POLLARD/Publisher
SUSAN NELSON/Publisher
PETER ARNOLD/Treaty Vendor
Male speaker
Maastricht Treaty Sir 
Voice over
We maybe in the depths of the recession but the Maastricht treaty has at least opened the way for one enterprise…and it hasn't been ratified yet.
Unofficial copies were doing great business at the Brighton Conservative Party Conference…and at three pounds each, they're ten pounds cheaper than the official Government version.
Male speaker
I've actually read it three timesThe idea was born in an Oxford workshop where David Pollard and Susan Nelson have been knocking out printed copies and computer discs since April.
Male speaker
We feel people have a right to read this and if the Government isn't going to help them, we are
Female speaker
After the French Referendum it's been hectic.
It will go through the House of Commons and people should know about it before
Voice over
It has sixty four pages with one hundred and ninety thousand words They spent two days working around the clock typing it into a computer, now their master disc is being used by a Sunday newspaper to publish the whole thing this weekend.
It's been given away on computer disc in a wideselling magazine as well.
Voice over
With all that work they know the document off by heart.
Male speaker
We both came in one day and said we felt a bit odd after reading all that, we felt there were psychological jammers in the thing
Voice over
Peter Arnold had got hold of some copies to sell in Brighton on his own initiative.
Male speaker
Most of them don't seem to have read it because there seems to be difficulty getting hold of a copy
They're sending them out to bookshops all over the country…thousands have already been sold, and the way things are at the moment there doesn't look like any let up in sight.
In part two: Showdown: Soccer's big guns prepare for a shootout.
And all the right moves.The youngsters who are King and Queen of the chessboard.
Poolroom murder: Man stabbed to death in hotel fight.
Skin and bone.The Great Dane who was allowed to starve.
And only make believe:The mock-up crash to prepare for the worst.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The fighting started among a group of men who'd been playing pool.
When police arrived they found the two victims lying on the floor.
Gareth Furby reports.
NORTHAMPTON
Det Supt DAVID JOHNSON/Northamptonshire Police
Voice over
Police were called to this hotel in Northampton just before closing time last night.
They found two men lying on the floor both with severe injuries.
Twenty nine year old Donald Allison from Northampton had been stabbed in the chest and died later in hospital.
The other man, said to be a workmate, is seriously ill.
He says violence suddenly broke out and a number of people were involved.
At least one knife was used and a broken pool cue.
It appears a fight broke out after a game of pool.
Forty detectives are now involved in the murder inquiry.
Neighbours who knew Mr Allison can't beleive what's happened to him.
He says he was quiet.
She says she's shocked.
At first it was thought the men may have been stabbed with a broken pool cue.
But police now know the murder weapon was a knife with a ten inch long blade.
Detectives are anxious to trace everyone who was in the bar last night.
They think the murderer may have been seen as he ran away from the hotel.
A couple who allowed their Great Dane to starve until it could hardly walk have been banned from keeping dogs for five years.
Animal inspectors said that when they found the dog, it was practically skin and bone.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
7 JANUARY 1992
DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
MARY MAULT/New Owner
Voice over
Today, Merlin, a seven year old Great Dane, is recovering with his new owners.
But when the RSPCA found him in January, he was in a starved condition, his ribs and hip bones showing through, and his back legs hardly able to support him.
He also had a number of sores.
His previous owners Peter and Glyn Lyon, from Beech road in Eynsham, were in court today, pleading guilty to charges of causing unnecessary suffering.
Their defence solicitor said Merlin had been well looked after for five years.
Last year he sufferred badly from diarrhoea, the Lyons tried to vary his diet but his condition got worse.
Magistrates banned the couple from keeping dogs for five years.
Along with the disqualification, the Lyons were also ordered to pay 500 pounds costs.
An RAF base which had been due to close next year as part of the Government's defence cuts is stay open and be taken over by the army.
The arrival of more than seven hundred new personnel will come as a relief to the local economy, as Ian Maclaren reports.
RAF HULLAVINGTON/Wiltshire
Wing Cdr MIKE CHAPPLE/Station Commander
Voice over
Parachute packing is coming to an end at RAF Hullavington.
The base had a long history as home to the packers, as well as medical and catering units.
Hullavington was scheduled to close next April as part of’ Options for Change’…the government's restructuring of defence.
The parachute packing hanger had been destroyed by fire, earlier this year…and the RAF's role will now be performed by civilians.
Four Army units will be moving in, including a technical warfare unit.
The RAF say they're sorry to leave.
But the army's arrival will benefit the local community…
Hullavington will be home to more than 750 soldiers, until December 1994.
It's future after that is uncertain.
Meanwhile, more than fifteen hundred new jobs could be coming to Swindon.
The Lloyds Register of Shipping is considering relocating to the town.
Mark Kiff reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
PETER STRATFORD/Swindon Chamber of Commerce
Voice over
This muddy field on the outskirts of Swindon could be the new site for the Lloyds Register of Shipping.
It could become home for fifteen hundred naval and industrial shipping experts, plus administrative staff under plans by the society to relocate from London and Croydon.
The news comes hard on the heels of an announcement by the Iceland Foods Group that it plans to build a distribution depot on part of the town's former railworks site, creating around five hundred jobs.
The potential economic boom has been welcomed by business leaders in Swindon.
Lloyds Register is looking at two other locations aside from Lydiard Fields.
If it does decide on Swindon, it would make it one of the biggest re-locations to the town.
A grammar school headmaster has been cleared of assaulting a twelve year old girl pupil.
CHELTENHAM
Robert Brown was suspended as head of the lower school at Pates Grammar in Cheltenham last year after the girl alleged she'd been indecently assaulted.
GLOUCESTER
But that charge was thrown out at Gloucester Crown Court last month and now the prosecution has dropped a further assault charge.
A taxi driver has been hijacked, beaten up and driven a hundred miles to London, where he was robbed of just twelve pounds.
The twenty seven year old driver was flagged down in Cheltenham by three Asian youths.
They threatened him with a spanner and screwdriver, then forced him into the back of his Sierra.
The gang assaulted him during the drive to Rickmansworth in Hertfordshire, then threw him out of the car.
He suffered a broken nose and bruising.
The pain and suffering of thousands of hip replacement patients could soon be ended, thanks to a new artificial hip joint which fits together like Lego.
Conventional joints often don't fit the patient exactly.
The new design should be a better fit, and so reduce the damage to the bone after an implant.
MARIA COYLE/Cirencester
BRIAN BLACKFORD/Hospital Porter
PETER McLARDY-SMITH/Surgeon
Dr PAUL EVANS/AEA Technology
Voice over
Peter McLardy-Smith, a surgeon at the Nuffield Orthopaedic Hospital in Oxford designed the Oxford Universal Hip now in place in this patient.
This check up shows he's fully fit to carry out his strenuous lifestyle as a hospital porter.
Staff at Corin Medical in Cirencester are producing the different pieces of the artificial hip joint which like lego can be made up in 120 combinations.
The conventional hip replacement is designed in one piece it's rigid and made in standard sizes.But the new design called the Oxford Universal Hip is made up of three components, each component is available in different sizes.
So it can be a better fit.
It should also prevent bone damage.
When the patient walks on a conventional rigid replacement the stress of the load is mainly borne by the bone at the tip of the implant.The top of the thighbone isn't exercised and is weakened as a result.
It's hoped the new design spreads the stress of the load, working the top of the thigh bone, making it stronger.
Clinical trials at AEA Technology in Harwell must yet establish whether the new hip replacements are working.
And whether they are reducing bone loss.
It's hoped that wneh the Oxford Universal Hip wears out the bone will be healthier to receive a new implant, causing the patient less pain.
The country's largest cidermaker is developing a tree that copes better with the apple harvest.
At the moment trees are shaken by automatic harvesters, and that can damage their roots.
But now Bulmers reckon they've invented a tree that can stand up to the stress.
RICHARD BARNETT/Hampton Bishop
TIM EPPS/Orchards Manager
Voice over
It's a hard life being a cider apple tree at this time of year…as the mechanical harvesters shake the fruit off the branches.
This method of getting the apples was introduced around 15 years ago.
The problem is the vigorous shaking of the trunk puts a strain on the roots.
And modern dwarf trees tend to have less sturdy root systems.
Now Bulmers reckon they have the answer…they've developed a designer tree which is actually three varieties in one.
They start with a normal apple variety which has a strong rootstock.
Then they graft a bud of a dwarf variety onto it, so that it produces a short trunk.
A year later they graft on a bud higher up the stem of a cider fruit variety.
The result…a dwarf cider apple tree with strong roots.
Male speaker
It will produce increased crops and cope with shaking.
Voice over
Experimental three in one trees are already undergoing trials at Bulmers Nursery.
This one is actually growing dessert apples on a dwarf stem.
But could all this messing about with the type of tree affect the taste of the cider:
Male speaker
The varieties are chosen to keep the traditional flavour.
Voice over
Bulmers have nearly two thousand acres of cider orchards…and they also supply trees from their nursery to contract growers too.
It will take four years for trials on the designer tree to be completed.
But Bulmers are hoping they can prove three into one will go.
Still to come on Central News, the only way is up.
Oxford United begin the long climb from the bottom.
And, ale and hearty: The pub where Czechs are always accepted.
In Central News tonight: Hostel murder: Man in court after care worker is stabbed to death.
Jailed for cruelty.
Six months for the farmer who neglected his animals.
And, no more pain.
New hip joint could end the suffering for thousands.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
GARETH FURBY
Jonathon Newby died in hospital from a stab wound to the heart, despite the efforts of doctors to save him.
Management at the hostel say they're deeply shocked by his murder.
A full internal inquiry has begun.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
Voice over
Jonathon Newby was stabbed in the heart on Saturday outside the Homeless hostel in Oxford where he'd recently started working.
Paramedics fought to keep him alive but he died an hour later at the John Radcliffe Hospital.
At twenty two Jonathon was embarking on his career.
He had been working for the Cyrenians at an annex to the Simon House Hostel for the Homeless in Rectory Road Oxford.
Before that he was a successful history and art student at the De Montfort University in Leicester.
Jonathon came from Devizes in Wiltshire and graduated in history and art during the summer.
He worked in an environment dedicated to caring for the homeless.
Simon House and the annex take in people from the street and try to help them sort out their lives.
The Cyrenians said today they were still deeply shocked by the incident.
They added that a full inquiry would be set up to investigate what happened.
Today a former resident of the hostel was charged with his murder.
John Paul Rous stood nervously in the dock at Oxford Magistrates Court as details of his charge were read out.
He spoke only once during the eight minute hearing, to say he understood the proceedings.
Mr Rous clutched the rail of the dock as magistrates remanded him in custody for four weeks
A farmer has been jailed for six months for cruelty to his animals.
He was supposed to be fattening them up, but instead, the cattle were starving, one was being attacked by rats, and the sheep were penned in broken glass with no food or water.
The farmer has said he'll appeal against the sentence.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
RSPCA Video
Insp ALVAR POWELL/RSPCA
Voice over
Reginald Oliffe, who's 44, was said in court at Cheltenham to have been a farmer for 25 years.
He admitted 29 cases of animal cruelty and neglect, following raids on two farms, filmed by the RSPCA.
Vets, police and RSPCA inspectors found some animals unable to stand, others emaciated, one cow collapsed in a barn, with rats running over it, apparently dead.
In fact it was still alive and had to be destroyed.
Dead sheep and lambs were found in farm machinery.
Oliffe's job, according to his defence, was to fatten up animals over the winter, and this was the first time he'd been accused of ill-treating animals.
The farms, one at Crickley Hill and another at Staverton, both between Cheltenham and Gloucester, were raided by the RSPCA earlier this year.
300 sheep were also found in Gloucester, penned in with broken glass, and without food or water.
After a 3 hour hearing Oliffe was jailed for six months, as well as banned from keeping farm animals for life.
His family visited him in the cells before leving the court.
Two more sections of the world-famous Dowty Group are being sold off by their new parent company.
The weapons and electronics divisions, worth forty million pounds, have been bought out by their own managements.
The new owners insist that the jobs of more than two hundred people on the two sites ARE safe.
ABI DONALD/Cheltenham
RICHARD LANE/Ultra Electronics
CHARLES LOMAS/MSF Union
Voice over
The Dowty group is slowly being slimmed down.
Its owner the TI group has announced the sale of seven companies, two of them in Gloucestershire.
Dowty Electrics in Kingsditch Lane in Cheltenham is one of the companies to come under the hammer, the other, Dowty Weapons Systems at Churchdown near Gloucester.
Management at five Dowty companies united to buy the businesses and will now trade under the the name Ultra Electronics.
He says: Both companies are well managed in Aerospace and Defence which complements the other five companies in the management buy in.
They are good companies with a good workforce.
They have good products with good people.
Ultra Electronics will continue with Dowty's existing projects, working on aircraft such as the European Fighter Aircraft…
Dowty electrics manufactures componets and illuminted panels for the project.
The latest sell-offs are in line the promises made by TI when it took the group over last year.
The Abingdon based company said it wanted Dowty to concentrate on aerospace.
Dowty Fuel systems has already been sold, as has Dowty's Information technology division.
The news has been welcomed by union leaders as the new company is promising that all two hundred and thirty jobs at Dowty Weapons and Dowty Electrics will be safe.
Male speaker
It takes a load off their mind they know who the new owners are going to be.
We don't think there will be a problem with jobs.
Certainly Dowty Electrics is a profitable company and I believe, our members have a reasonably secure future.
Voice over
The sale of the Dowty companies comes as no surprise to workers but as Dowty has a 40 year history in Gloucestershire, employees say it's sad to see the group being dismantled.
Finally tonight we're going to flex our muscles.
Well WE'RE not…were going to leave it to the strong men…something different too…the first ever weightlifting world cup for the disabled.
ROBIN POWELL/Northampton
ANTHONY PEDDLE/World Record Holder
DAVE GARNER/Coach
JOAN SCRUTON/Disabled Sport Administrator
Voice over
American Jerry Millhouse — one of 2 world record breakers at this weekend's inaugural Weightlifting World Cup for the Disabled.
The event was staged at the Danes Camp Leisure Centre in Northampton — fitting then, that the other record was broken by local athlete Anthony Peddle, who lifted more than 160 kilos, despite weighing little over 7 stone.
Looking on, Anthony's coach and stepfather Dave Garner.
The rules are similar to professional weightlifting, but competitors use only the upper part of their bodies, keeping their head, shoulders, buttocks and heels on the bench at all times.
This was a team event, with 7 countries competing for a trophy named after Joan Scruton.
Joan's been involved in disabled sport from its very beginning, at the Paraplegic Games at Stoke Mandeville in 1948.
For the record, Iran won the Scruton Trophy, with Britain 2nd and Australia 3rd.
But no-one was in doubt that the real winner was disabled sport.
Four visiting musicians from Czechoslovakia have been wowing drinkers in a local pub.
Karaoke night is out…and Moravian folk songs are in.
The Czechs are SO popular, that they're already planning a return visit.
RICHARD BARNETT/Reporting
PETER MUSTILL/Marengo
NICOLA HUMPHREYS/Marengo
HONZA/Fiddle Player
Voice over
Just over the Herefordshire Wales border, a musical revolution has taken place.
At the Farmers Arms in Presteigne, the sounds of a Moravian drinking song echo around the bar.
The performers are a Czech band called Czecho-Mor…and they've become regular visitors.
It all began when a group of musicians from Presteigne called Marengo went to Prague and met Czech fiddle player Honza.
They became friends…and the musical exchange began:
Male speaker
People are astonished when they come into the pub and find a four piece Czech band.
Female speaker
The Czechs are all excellent musicians.
Voice over
When the Czechs are in Presteigne, Honza doubles as fiddle player with Marengo:
Male speaker
He is happy coming to Presteigne and hopes to come back next year.
Voice over
There may still be something of a language barrier…but its clear the music knows no borders.
The Czechs have now returned to their homeland…but they'll be back next year.
Film director Steven Spielberg has thanked an eleven-year-old schoolgirl for pointing out mistakes in his blockbuster movie Jurassic Park.
He's congratulated her for being so perceptive…but says the errors were actually made on purpose.
ROBIN POWELL Aylesbury
ROSEMARIE MITCHELL Dinosaur Enthusiast
JURASSIC PARK Courtesy of UIP
SUSAN MITCHELL Rosemarie's Mother
Voice over
Rosemarie Mitchell's been fascinated by dinosaurs since the age of 5.
She's now so knowledgeable about the subject that she was able to spot 2 Brontosaurus-sized blunders in the hit film Jurassic Park.
Rosemarie had gone to see the film with her mum and dad — and let them know straight away that she wasn't impressed with its factual accuracy.
But Rosemarie felt so strongly that mum suggested she write to director Steven Spielberg…and to her surprise she received a reply from his scientific adviser Don Lessem in Massachusetts.
He blames the mistakes on the book on which the film was based.
As well as congratulations on her perceptiveness, Rosemarie was also sent some pre-historic goodies.
The question on eyeryone's lips is, will there be a Jurassic Park II?
Mr Spielberg's told Rosemarie he hopes so, but only if he finds the money.
And should he ever make a sequel, he's been warned — someone will be watching very closely.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Four arrested over IRA bombings
Two of the people arrested in North London by police investigating a series of IRA bombings have now been released.
Detectives are still questioning a man and a woman.
Figures hit recovery hopes
The economic recovery may be running out of steam.
Trade figures for July put Britain one and a half billion pounds in the red.
Tokyo shaken by earthquake
The city of Tokyo has been shaken by an earthquake.
But there are no immediate reports of damage.
Yeltsin orders new poll
Russia's President Yeltsin has ordered elections to be held for a new upper house of Parliament.
They'll take place in December.
Thatcher told to’ shut-up’
Mrs Thatcher's been told to shut-up by her former press secretary.
Sir Bernard Ingham says its a pity she didn't bring out her memoirs a lot earlier, and she should now support John Major.
FTSE down 6
The hundred shares index closed down six point four points at three thousand one hundred and two.
The pound is down at one dollar fifty three and two marks forty five.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Good game, shame about the score.
One-nil doesn't do any justice at all.
It could have been four all five all or even six all.
So many chances.
So many shots.
Only one goal.
How come?
There were lots of near misses: some great saves from both keepers, and sheer bad luck.
Who was on top: who had the best chances: hard to tell.
There were so many.
Stoke, and their top scorer Mark Stein missed some sitters:
United won a penalty: a real chop of a tackle.
But Magilton missed, or rather Muggleton saved: it was that kind of game.
after that, and then this, the fans must have wondered if they were destined to be watching a nil-nil draw.
thankfully United hit the target just before half-time: the scorer, the hero Dave Penney.
no-one in their right mind would have bet on that being the winner.
The second half was just the same.
Jim Magilton was made man of the match but for many United fans new keeper Phil Whitehead was the real hero.
He pulled off a couple of cracking saves, and for the first time this season United kept everything out.
The sheet was clean.
There were lots of crosses against the Stoke attack: only ticks for Whitehead and his defence.
A vital win for Oxford it takes them off the bottom.
Hopefully there'll be no looking back.
Hereford will be looking back on their game at Crewe in anger.
Six goals rattled into the United net — a disaster, a nightmare,
Nothing went right.
So what went wrong?
United had three defenders down with injury including keeper Alan Judge.
His stand-in, teenager Bryan Thomas, should not be blamed: now he knows how a coconut feels at the fair.
Poor lad was a sitting target.
Tony Naylor got a hat-trick, Ashley Ward got two, and Darren Rowbotham the other one.
6-0.
Hopefully a freak result
It's going to be a long, hard season for Hereford…but it could be even longer and harder for Gloucester rugby club.
It's five league games without a win now.
On saturday they lost a game they had to win, the score at Kingsholm was Gloucester nine, London Irish ten 
Voice over
There are some nasty facts and figures coming out of Gloucester this season.
Last week the Cherry and Whites suffered their heaviest ever league defeat.
This week it was the first time they've been beaten by the Irish in the league.
They had their points in the bag by half time.
A penalty was followed up with a try from Dan Dooley.
Ten-nil.
The Cherry and Whites came to their senses then, and Martin Roberts kick started them with a penalty.
Landing kicks on target has been Gloucester's main weakness this season and when Roberts made it two out of two just before half time they must have thought their luck was changing.
Then it was three out of three at the start of the second half.
Easy.
One point in it and the chance to win came with the very last kick of the game.
A penalty right in front of the posts.
This for victory.
That meant defeat.
As the ball hit the post the referee blew his whistle for full time.
A real blow, a real headache for coach Keith Richardson: here's his verdict.
Keith Richardson says that although they were unlucky with the last kick London Irish deserved to win and had they made more of their chances:
At the moment it's a mixture of bad luck and bad rugby.
Gloucester are making too many mistakes and giving too much ball away.
They are also thinking too much about what counts and when you do that you are up the creek, and at the moment Gloucester have not got a paddle
Three times world champion Ayrton Senna will be driving for the Williams team next season…that's official…and alongside him on the grid will be Damon Hill…that's a relief.
GRAEME BOWD/Didcot
DAMON HILL/Williams-Renault Team
FRANK WILLIAMS/Team Leader
Voice over
Today's announcement had been widely expected.
But it was still a relief for British fans.
In his first full Grand Prix season Damon Hill has driven brilliantly.
With the retirement of world champion Alain Prost, Frank Williams was left in no doubt that he was the man to partner his nerw signing Ayrton Senna.
The Brazilian has himself been world champion three times.
His new partnership with the Oxfordshire based team puts to be the world's fastest driver, in the fastest car.
But Senna's renowned diffidence towards fellow drivers could make it tough for his British team mate, as Hill diplomatically acknowledged.
He said Senna had a reputation for getting what he wanted.
It might not be as easy as his relationship with Alain Prost but he doesn't want to make any judgements before he has met Senna.
Frank Williams said he'd been hoping to sign Senna's for the last ten years, but he was also full of praise for Hill.
He said Hill would be giving Senna a hard time.
And many believe he could well surprise Senna in next year's battle for the Formula One championship.
Unsafe, and they knew it.
Five firms accused over Severn Bridge deaths.
Back in court.
Farmer on trial for breaking animal cruelty ban.
And lucky to be alive.Frankie Vaughan's close encounter of the worst kind.