

Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
and there's also soccer on sunday…
Oxford United ladies are playing their first game at the Manor…kick-off is at two…next for us is rugby…this weekend Gloucester go to Wasps 
Voice over
and here's the best of the rest…our action round up 
Voice over
The sporting heroes of ninety two…
Mansell…
Faldo…
Gunnell…
Christie…of course and two more Redgrave and Pinsent the Olympic rowers who this week started their build up for the next games…yes…in four years time…they're our special guests in this week's Friday Feature 
STEVE REDGRAVE
MATTHEW PINSENT
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
GLOUCESTER/Gloucestershire
WENDY RENNIE/Mother
Det Sgt PETE DAVIS/Gloucester Police
Voice over
Today Mrs Wendy Rennie should have been celebrating her eldest son's nineteenth birthday.
But instead he's a wanted man on the run from the police.
She says she can't give him cards or wish him happy birthday and it's sad.
Last January Rennie armed himself with an airpistol and kidnapped his ex-girlfriend Marita Brown, after she ended their relationship.
He took her to a house in Gloucester but gave himself up after police surrounded the property.
At Gloucerster Crown Court he admitted two charge of kidnap, but a month ago he escaped from a probation hostel.
Since then he's phoned his ex-girlfriend's family to warn that he's goiung to get them.
But tonight his mother made this desperate appeal.
She says give yourself up.
It's not doing you any good.
She says her son was a perfectly normal child until he reached 15 — when he got into trouble at trouble at school.
The police think Rennie is still in the region.
He says he thinks he is in Cheltenham.
But he doesn't think he is dangerous.
Tonight Mrs Rennie is hoping her son will phone home.
In recent years she's suffered two heart attacks and been treated for cancer and she says she can't stand much more of the strain.
A baby girl who was kept hidden away because she had a hare lip has had an operation that will change her life.
The baby, who was born in Russia, was destined to spend her life abandoned in an institution — until a nurse came to her rescue.
Clare Lafferty reports.
YORKLEY/Gloucestershire
URSULA FINDLAY/Nurse
TANYA PREDTCHENSKAYA/Katya's Mother
Voice over
DISFIGURE
To see them together now it's hard to believe that less than six months ago Tanya’ Pret chen ska’from Russia thought of giving up her baby.
Katya was born with a bilateral hare lip and cleft palate.
In Russia there's little care for such babies.
Eighty per cent are abandoned.
But Katya was lucky.
The day her mother was due to put her in an institution Ursula Findlay, a nurse from Gloucestershire visited the ward.
Ursula works in a hospital where operations to correct hare lips are performed at least three times a week.
She knew that with enough money, alot could be done for Katya in England.
Tanya and Katya came to stay at Ursula's home in the Forest of Dean.
After staging endless fund raising events Ursula raised the three thousand pounds needed for the surgery.
And last month Katya underwent her first two hour operation.
She'll need more surgery before the condition is completely corrected.
But to the mother who used to hide her away, Katya is already a hundred per cent better.
Katya and Tanya will return to Russia tomorrow.
But Ursula is already making plans to bring the little girl back in May for an opertion to correct her cleft palate.
Then Katya will be able to spaek.
It's likely her first words to her adoptive grandmother will be thank you.
Opponents of a planned incinerator for cattle carcasses infected with BSE have condemned a government minister for approving the scheme.
They're now considering taking their campaign to the European Court.
Chris Moore reports.
1990/CINDERFORD/Gloucestershire
BILL REED/Mayor of Cinderford
GUY TAMPLIN/Developer
Voice over
Fierce opposition to a plan to build the incinerator at Cinderford in the Forest of Dean prompted a public enquiry, which refused permission.
But now that decision has been reversed by Planning Minister Tony Baldry, in a U-turn that's shocked protesters.
The developer wants to deal only with animal carcasses, such as those affected by BSE.
He feels much of the opposition is based on the false belief that the incinerator will also handle toxic waste.
Protesters are now seeking advice on whether to refer the decision to the European Court.
Residents cheered when a bulldozer moved in to demolish wartime flats and maisonettes condemned by tenants as a disgrace.
They'll be replaced by new homes costing more than a million pounds.
Tim Hurst reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES/STONEHOUSE/Gloucestershire
RICHARD KETTLE/Stroud District Council
CHRISTINE GARDINER/Tenants' Association
Voice over
Doverow Avenue at Stonehouse in Gloucestershire was built for munitions workers in 1940.
In 1992 its been called a disgrace, even a ghetto.
Demolition day was a cause for celebration, schoolchildren were given time off to watch and tenants' leaders said not before time.
It took the 45 ton bulldozer just 8 minutes to flatten 4 homes that had stood for 52 years.
28 maisonettes will be demolished and replaced with new homes.
It's costing £1.3 million and is the first phase of a project to modernise the whole estate.
Now there's to be a schools painting competition about the bulldozers that can huff and puff and pull the house down.
More than two hundred children whose school was damaged by a severe gale have spent their last day in temporary classrooms.
To celebrate the occasion, they were given an emotional send off by the bus drivers who've spent the last three years transporting them to and from home.
Mark Kiff reports.
SWINDON Wiltshire
JANUARY 1990
BOB HOWE Bus Driver
Voice over
Setting off for home on the bus has never been so much fun for the children of Grange Junior School in Swindon.
For nearly 3 years they've made the 2 and a half mile trip from their temporary classrooms back to their homes.
Their school was badly damaged in gales in January 1990.
The roof was torn off, killing an 11 year old girl.
Since the tragedy, the Swindon Bus Company has been ferrying the children across town.
But now work on their old school is approaching its end and today was the last time for the children on the buses.
Bob Howe, Bus Driver, says it was the bus company's way of saying thank you to the children for their good behaviour.
The no-singing rule on schoolbuses was abandoned; sweets were given out; a pirate boarded ship.
If only all school trips had been like this.
The children say they had a great time, eating sweets and with a pirate on board their bus.
The parents all agreed it was a lovely way of sending the children off.
So no more trips on the buses.
French Professor stands down from British transplant centre
New Metropolitan Police Commissioner is named
Chief Constable of Kent.
FTSE up 11
The hundred shares index closed up eleven point six at two six six nine point seven 
The pound is down at one dollar, sixty one and up at two marks, forty seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
CHRIS MOORE/Dorton
Sgt DAVID KEW/Thames Valley Police
Sir BOB REID/British Rail Chairman
Voice over
It had all the hallmarks of the IRA…a high-explosive device planted on a metal service bridge at Dorton, over the Chiltern line between Banbury and London Marylebone.
The likely aim, to bring the bridge down onto the track.
It went off early today, but because of the remoteness of the spot, wasn't detected immediately.
COP ACTUALITY
This was the line that commuters had been asked to switch to to avoid the chaos caused by the night's earlier bombings…at Reading, where one device went off and another was defused, and at Basingstoke, where the device was also defused.
Army bomb disposal experts arrived at Dorton late this afternoon to join the search of the trackside that had already been going on for four and a half hours.
The line at this point runs through Rushden Woods, and it's hoped that the bombers may have left behind vital clues.
Security on the railways is a mammoth task.
Network South East say their well-rehearsed procedures worked well today
NSE
British Rail's chairman says security is constantly under review.
REID
After four bombs in less than twenty four hours, the message from British Rail tonight is one of vigilance.
The search of the trackside for clues to the Chiltern line bombers will resume at first light tomorrow.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
PRINCES RISBOROUGH/Buckinghamshire
KNOWLES MITCHELL/British Rail
Voice over
The Chiltern line is used by 9,000 people each weekday.
Tonight many of them faced long delays as buses ran between Princes Risborough and Bicester.
But seasoned commuters now seem to accept disruption by terrorists as part of everyday life.
He says it is a nuisance but he's putting up with it.
Earlier today it was the same story on the main line from Paddington to Bristol and South Wales.
The bomb at Reading stopped all trains between Tilehurst and Twyford.
Swindon became the end of the line for east bound Inter City trains.
Last night's IRA attack may have cost little in terms of life and property.
But for those who use this busy line there was a price to pay and the frustration showed.
Travellers said they would be late for work and miss meetings.
Some hit out at the IRA.
Most trains on the Oxford line were stopped at Didcot, there buses ran a shuttle service to Slough.
British Rail warned that journeys would be delayed by up to an hour.
But some travellers had been trying to reach their destinations since last night.
He says he set out last night and is still trying to get from Bristol to Bracknell.
But British Rail was satisfied with it's response.
The network has long established plans for such incidents and says these worked well.
He says they were able to move thousands of passengers.
Delays were kept to a minimum.
But tonight there were fears that these attacks will not be the last.
Past IRA campaigns have concentrated on similar targets for several weeks at a time.
And the current target would seem to be rail travellers.
Well, we can now join our reporter Kim Barnes at Princes Risborough, Kim what's the latest on Chiltern line services.
Live KIM BARNES Princes Risborough
Rail Bombers meant to kill
Voice over
The Police say the IRA bombers who attacked Reading station intended to kill emergency workers.
Commuters face rail chaos
Rail commuters throughout the Central South area faced chaos as services were suspended because of the Reading bomb and another placed near Brill in Buckinghamshire.
PM rejects Adams' offer
The Prime Minister has rejected an offer of talks over peace in Northern Ireland with the Sinn Fein leader, Gerry Adams.
Peace march in Ulster
Six thousand people marched in a plea for peace in Ulster following the Shankhill Road bombing which killed ten people.
Judge forces tape hand-over
A judge has ordered four TV companies to hand over video tape to the Police of a riot in East London.
FTSE down 15
The hundred shares index closed down fifteen point one at thirty-one, eighty-three point nine.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-nine and up at two marks, forty-nine.
Welcome back.
Later on, a contest that really was straightforward, but first with the all the sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Pictures BBC Sport
Voice over
The old pals reunion at White Hart Lane…that's Spurs v Swindon finished as it started all square…former Town favourite David Kerslake set up the Spurs goal for Jason Dozzell…and then another old County Ground hero Colin Calderwood went and gave away a penalty…it looked like a handball at first but Calderwood was guilty of pushing…
Paul Bodin smashed the penalty in…and 1-1 was a good result for Town
At the Manor Ground…
Oxford did all the attacking but Luton did all the scoring…it only took one goal to win it and that came from Ceri Hughes midway through the first half…
United could easily claim they was robbed…the evidence coming up…as chance after chance was missed…
The Luton goal was hit by a landslide of shots…crosses and headers but nothing went in…
Oxford tried every tactic…high balls…low balls…but no balls in the net…
it was the same in the second half…the save of the game stopped an equaliser from Joey Beauchamp…and after that well the United players just had to accept it wasn't going to be their day…
one nil to Luton…
United on the bottom of the table…hard times
if you want to see goals…go get a season ticket for Hereford United…there were eight on saturday…but Bury…in got five of those…
Carter gave them the lead in real ding dong of a game…
United who hit five themselves last week fired an equaliser through Chris Fry…
back at the other end acrobatics from Stevens made it 2-1
United's turn next…a free kick from Chris Pike…2-2
Bury who missed a penalty in the first half made it 3-2…
Mauge the scorer this time…
And by now it was all or nothing for both teams…
Hereford's next move was to win a penalty…and once again it was Pike who thumped it home…
United stuck on three…but Bury went for more…and got them…numbers four and five could be classed as freaks or flukes Daws and Rigby were given the the goals…but forget football this was more like pinball…
Hereford went down 5-3 but they didn't do so bad
hopefully there'll be a win for Swindon tomorrow night…they're playing at Portsmouth in the third round of the coca-cola cup…the other road to Wembley is underway again…the draw for the first round of the FA Cup was made today…
LINK DUR=0:00 
Voice over
our rugby action this week comes from the divisional championships…the South West are on course to win these because on Saturday at Gloucester they made it two wins out of two…this time out they beat the North by 29 points to 16 
Voice over
Time was when the South West would be filled with Gloucester boys…only two Paul Holford and Dave Sims made it on Saturday and there was nothing they could do in the first half to stop the north from taking control…a try from Jim Mallinder gave them a 13-6 lead at half-time…
in the second half the South West got going…and came good with three tries…
Paul Hutt got the first…
the second…the best was scored by Adedayo Adebayo of Bath…
Kingsholm has been starved of good tries this season so the locals must have really enjoyed this one…
Steve Ojomoh got the the last try…by then the South West were home and dry…final score 29-16
Now to an event that could hardly be called a sport, even though it did produce a new British champion.
Farmworkers have been competing for the title of Britain's best ploughman, and a place in the world finals in New Zealand.
KIM BARNES/Shillingford
KEN CHAPPELL/Society of Ploughmen
JOHN HILL/World Champion
JOHN BROOM/Judge
KEITH WALKER/Chilterns Champion
Voice over
It may have looked like a good ruse to get 300 acres lovingly ploughed, but Shillingford Farm happily played host to the British Championships.
A chance to see what makes a perfect ploughman.
He says he's got to be a good tractor driver and be able to go straight.
And then they have to turn the land well over.
For the technically minded there's two types of tractor ploughing…conventional and reversible…and for the traditionalists, the horse drawn plough…
Hot tip for the title is the current world champion John Hill from Sheffield…
He says you've got to have patience.
One of the main things is being able to spot faults.
If you leave it too long it's there to be seen the rest of the day.
The aim is to create something like this…and that means the judges methodically comparing furrows.
He says we like to see a good deep split.
That one there has a good appearance but to my mind it's not deep enough.
One of the few local contestants was at a distinct disadvantage.
Everyone else had a two furrow plough, whereas Keith Walker from Princes Risborough had a five furrow plough.
It made the nifty moves a bit difficult.
Does this have any relation to real ploughing, down on the farm…
He says it doesn't really.
But it's all good practice, a good day out.
In fact, John Hill cleaned up as predicted and is off to New Zealand to plough proudly for Britain in the world championships.
And Shillingford farm is beautifully ploughed…
She says so what does a ploughman have for lunch?
He says a ploughman's lunch.
And what is that?
A cheese sandwich today.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
A family who moved into a derelict house thirty years ago have been told they must move out so it can be demolished.
The owners of the house say the family knew the cottage was condemned when they moved there.
SIMON GARRETT/Cinderford
PETE PRITCHARD/Romany
MARIA PRITCHARD/Romany
MARK THORNEYCROFT/Forestry Commission
Voice over
Pete Pritchard's family are the last Romany gypsies in the Forest of Dean.
When they moved to their cottage it was meant to be temporary…despite the lack of facilities they've been here over 30 years.
But Mr Pritchard's had three heart attacks and now wants to improve the property.
The owners, the Forestry Commission say he can't — Mr Pritchard says it's victimisation
Male speaker
We're Romany people and people are still predjudiced against us.
The kids get it at school.
They call you dirty black gipsy.
I'm not a dirty black gipsy.
I've just been working.
I'm a gipsy and a proper Romany person
Voice over
Mr Pritchard's daughter, Oakey has to fetch water from a well behind the house.
Her mother Maria needs a hip operation and can't do any heavy lifting.
They also have no phone.
Something which caused a problem when Mr Pritchard needed an ambulance.
But the family insist it's their home and they want to stay
Female speaker
It's fantastic to live in and bring children up.
The only thing is we need a water supply, we need a bit of help now, because of what's happening to me and because of his heart.
We need some help and all we're asking for is a grant for help
Voice over
But the house owners the Forestry Commission say it must come down.
They say Mr Pritchard knew full well when he moved in that it was condemned
Male speaker
It's an unsatisfactory situation.
Obviously the standards are not satisfactory but they are the same as they have been for the last 30 years and they are of Mr Pritchard's choosing.
He has had the option of accepting council housing
Voice over
The Pritchards haven't given up yet, but they say putting them in a council house would be like putting them in prison.
And they'll go back on the road before that happens.
A wildlife rescue centre has cancelled an invitation to Princess Michael of Kent because she hunts.
The princess was due to plant a tree at the centre.
But staff say it would be hypocritical to welcome her to a place where foxes injured by hounds are nursed back to health.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Frampton Mansell
ALAN BROCKBANK/Vale Wildlife Centre
DAPHNE NEVILLE/Bee's Owner
Voice over
Otter lover Daphne Neville organised the tree planting ceremony in memory of her most famous pet, Bee.
Bee made thousands of public appearances and had many fans, including Princess Michael of Kent.
The Princess was asked to plant the tree at the Vale Wildlife Rescue Centre near Evesham.
Staff there were looking forward to the event until they realised that the Princess regularly went fox hunting.
The centre actively campaigns to abolish blood sports and cares for sick foxes.
So it felt obliged to withdraw the invitation.
Daphne Neville says the staff at the centre have put her in an embarrassing position.
No palace officials were available to comment on behalf of Princess Michael.
Meanwhile Mrs Neville says she'll find another way of paying tribute to her otter.
Around fifty support troops are about to touch down in Split at the start of a six-month tour of duty in the former Yugoslavia.
They're part of a four hundred-strong team whose task will be to keep two and a half thousand soldiers supplied with everything from food to clean clothing.
ROBIN POWELL/RAF Lyneham
Capt IAN WATSON/Royal Logistic Corps
Capt JOHN MACKAY/Royal Logistic Corps
Voice over
It'll be Christmas in Croatia for the men and women of 33 Supply Squadron based at Abingdon.
They're joining about 350 colleagues from Dalton Barracks already stationed there.
As one squadron leaves RAF Lyneham, another returns…to nearby Hullavington Barracks.
Nobody envies 33 Squadron flying out at the start of winter.
They're due to stay in Split until April, and though each is due 15 days' leave back in England between now and then, almost all of them will be away for Christmas.
Female speaker
The beer's cheaper out there, and as for missing loved ones, the unit itself is like a family.
Voice over
The Abingdon contingent will be doing its best to capture the festive spirit.
Already there are plans to put on nativity plays and join local children at a carol service.
Still to come on Central News, back on the bottom
Two robbers held a family at gunpoint while they searched their house for cash.
They bound and gagged two children and then forced one of them to take them to the money.
Now the family say they're terrified the robbers might return.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Northampton
MOSHAHID MIAH/Robbery Victim
Det Sgt STEVE STRATFORD/Northamptonshire CID
Voice over
Moshahid Miah was asleep in the early hours of the morning at his home in Merthyr Road, Northampton.
He was woken by a gun pointing to his head as he lay on the floor of his living room.
Two robbers, both with guns, had got in through a kitchen window and were threatening to kill him.
Male speaker
they said how many people are there in the house, they threatened to kill me
Voice over
Three members of the family were pulled from their beds: Mr Miah's wife and his four year old and eleven year old sons.
He was in the living room because of a back injury.
They were bound and gagged with masking tape.
The robbers repeatedly demanded money and jewellery.
Mr Miah's eleven year old son offered to help, so one of them put a gun on him and forced him to lead them to it.
Male speaker
he called to me saying’ Dad’.
They told him to shut up or they'd kill him
Voice over
Mr Miah, a forty four year old restaurant owner, is still unable to sleep, although his four year old son Amsa appears unaffected by what happened.
The rest of the family are still terrified and don't want to be identified.
The robbers, described as Afro Carribean, made off with with an unspecified amount in cash and jewels.
Police believe they didn’ t get anything near what they were expecting.
Male speaker
It may be because they thought he has access to money or stores it there but that information is wrong.
Voice over
For the mnoment detectives are stumped for the reason for the attack.
The takings from Mr Miah's reatuarant business don't go to the house and there's no important jewellery there.
The family is still frightened and fear it may happen again.
Six horses have been killed and fourteen others injured in a road accident involving a lorry.
The horses belong to a stud farm and were worth tens of thousands of pounds.
KATE GARRAWAY/Swerford
Sgt DENIS KUKANIS/Thames Valley Police
BOB ROSE/Manager
ALBERT HONEY/Animal Welfare Worker
Voice over
The damage here tells its own story about the impact which killed four horses outright, left two others so badly hurt that they had to be put down and fourteen more with serious injuries.
The driver, Brian Chapman was delivering for Banbury's Fine Lady Dairies along the A three six one towards Chipping Norton.
Policeman says: He tried to dip his headlights for an oncoming car then saw horses in the road and just couldn't stop in time so ploughed into them.
Mr Chapman escaped unhurt.
People living in a nearby travellers camp were woken by the crash, they describe the scene as something from a nightmare.
The horses, worth tens of thousands of pounds, belonged to Broad Stone Stud Farm at Swerford near Chipping Norton, which is owned by Jaguar Racing team director Tom Walkinshaw.
Farm staff were in shock.
Some believe accident might have had even more serious consequences.
Albert Honey says: If that had happened to a saloon car full of people from a family.
It is not yet known how so many horses managed to stray on to the road which was a quarter of a mile from their paddock.
The stud farm says it uses security methods such as electric fencing.
An investigation is now underway into the suggestion that the horses were released deliberately.
Hospital administrators have condemned a business course which sent one of their staff to America on Concorde.
They agree that NHS money could have been better spent, and one MP is demanding a full explanation.
TIM HURST/Reporting
JIM WAITS/Worcester District Health Authority
DAVID BARLOW/Worcester Health Liaison Forum
PETER LUFF MP/Con
Voice over
Concorde was booked to fly a dozen executives on a two week fact finding tour of America.
Most of those on board worked for private companies, but one of the passengers was Ray Gillard, the general manager of Worcester's Royal Infirmary hospital.
The NHS paid his bill of more than £8,000 for the two week course, and the hospital agrees Concorde was a mistake.
One of Worcester's leading health workers believes the entire American trip was a waste of money, Concorde or no Concorde.
The trip was a business studies course organised by Manchester Business School, and Worcester's MP is demanding an explanation.
Manchester Business School says’ all particpants flew on Concorde to inspect quality healthcare.
We know of no requests to make alternative travel arrangements.’
Found: Charity worker questioned in Turkey over missing funds.
Ambushed: Joyride mob attacks police with concrete.
And Auf Weidersehn Pet: Bosses say…
Move to Germany or be sacked.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES
Miss Hilali was a trustee of a charity providing aid for Kurdish refugees.
When she disappeared, the charity's bank account here in Britain was found to be empty.
Now she's being questioned by police in Turkey about possible drugs offences.
Ken Goodwin reports.
WORCESTER
MICHAEL CLARKE/Trustees' Solicitor
Voice over
The missing £130,000 was meant to help Kurdhish refugees.
But the cash was withdawn from a bank in Worcester by Hilali and a man she claims is her adopted son.
The police and charity workers from the Worcester Kurish refugee society would like to know what Hilali has done with the money.
The pair have now been arrested by Turkish police in the resort of Fethiye.
They'd origionaly been staying at the hotel Mediteran, but then moved to a villa.
He says that police have confirmed they've been questioned.
One of the solictors acting for another trustee says that it appears Mrs Hilali has been living the good life.
He says they moved out of one of the best hotels, into a villa.
The charity commission and the police are both investigating the dissapearance of the cash.
If Mrs Hilali has used the funds to buy supplies for the Kurds, they want proof.
Of course, Mrs Hilali may get the chance to explain to them face to face what's happened, because if she's broken Turkish law she could be deported.
He says there will be plenty of people waiting to talk to her.
In the meantime goods which have been donated to help the Kurds lie rotting in a warehouse, because there's no money left to pay for transporting them.
A charity's dream of helping Kurdish refugees shattered and the person who may be able to tell them why out of the country.
Two police officers have been injured after a gang of twenty youths ambushed their patrol car.
Concrete slabs were thrown through the windows while they were following a stolen car.
The attack happened on the Blackbird Leys estate in Oxford which just over a year ago was the scene of major public disturbances.
Liz Hannam reports.
BLACKBIRD LEYS/Oxford
PC TIM HURLEY/Thames Valley Police
WPC TRACY BEECHING/Thames Valley Police
SEPTEMBER 1991
Supt RALPH PERRY/Thames Valley Police
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Oxford East
Voice over
Constables Tim Hurley and Tracy Beeching were going to investigate a joyriding display in Blackbird Leys when they ran into an ambush.
The stolen car stopped, forcing Pc Hurley to brake and around 20 youths appeared and started throwing concrete missiles at the patrol car.
Male speaker
All I can remember is an object hitting me in the head as it came through the window and glass shattering everywhere.
Then I remember another object hitting my collegaue.
Female speaker
I was petrified.
I can't remember exactly what happened.
I could hear Timmy shouting.
It was shock.
Voice over
Both officers needed hospital treatment and Tim Hurley will be off work for several days.
He still has glass in his face.
But they vow it won't put them off policing.
Male speaker
They wont stop us.
It'll never be a no go area
Female speaker
I feel very sorry for them if that's they're idea of a good night out.
I can't quite understand it.
Voice over
The attack has bitterly disappointed Thames Valley police, who were hopeful that the disturbances which plagued the estate last year had virtually vanished.
It's the first time police officers have been assaulted at Blackbird Leys this year and police vow they won't be deterred.
Male speaker
I'm very upset on behalf of the officers.
It was a totally unpremeditated, vicious and cowerdly attack.
And I feel sorry for the officers' families who have to know that every time they go to work they're in this sort of danger.
It wont become a no go area and the youths involved know it.
Voice over
The MP for Oxford East, Andrew Smith, lives on the estate.
He heard the screeching of brakes last night.
Male speaker
It only takes a small criminal minority to cause these problems and the message must be that the residents of this estate will pull together to stop it happening again.
Voice over
Police believe some residents of Blackbird Leys are shielding the culprits and they've organised a confidential phone line which people can ring without giving their names and addresses.
The number is 0865 791066 that's 0865 791066.
A renowned rock guitarist is going back on the road with a new band, ten years after leaving the group that made him famous.
Bernie Marsden topped the charts on both sides of the Atlantic with Whitesnake.
Now he's rejoined forces with the group's other guitarist Mick Moody.
Simon Garrett reports 
COURTESY Picture Music International
BERNIE MARSDEN Moody Marsden Band
MICK MOODY Moody Marsden Band
Voice over
Bernie Marsden enjoying his favourite form of relaxation at home near Buckingham.
Ten years ago, he was topping charts worldwide with Whitesnake.
It's the same but this version appears on Bernie's latest offering with fellow Whitesnake guitarist, Mick Moody.
They've known each other for 20 years.
It's a return to musical roots.
The band also includes Ringo Starr's son, Zak Starkey on drums.
They start a nationwide tour on Wednesday at Banbury's Mill Arts Centre.
It's a far cry from some of the concerts played with Whitesnake.
But fame was put into context for Bernie when he met his own hero, the legendary Blues guitarist, BB King.
Bernie and Mick are working on some new songs for a second album.
The first is a collection of favourites.
Wife of Paul Ride hopes to visit Iraqi jail
FTSE down 8
The hundred shares index closed down eight point one at twenty-six sixty-one point six.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-eight, and down at two marks, forty-three.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
This is the view the Swindon fans had of the West Ham match and in the first half their hearts must have almost stopped as Town were hit hard by the Hammers…keeper Nicky Hammond played a blinder…
but there were times when swindon's survival was more down to West Ham's poor finishing…
the second half was the same…thank heavens for hammond…coming up the save of the game…and he followed that up with another…
Town's attack never really got going…but the longer the game went without a goal the more the Swindon fans must have fancied their chances…
Their lucky break came with six minutes to go…when Martin Ling was brought down by George Parris…a professional foul…the ref decided he had to go…
And from the free kick…came the winner…it was Craig Maskell's goal even though it took a deflection on the way…
Hammers reckon they were robbed…but then again Swindon have suffered the same fate this season…so it was their turn to sing and dance…
Oxford United got off to a flyer at Notts County thanks to a goal after only eight minutes from Nick Cusack…
They looked good for all three points but County came back with an equaliser from Phil Turner…
Notts had Agana sent off for using bad language but they came closest to winning…that man Paul Reece did the business again with the save of the game…
Notts County one…
United one…
Hereford's hopes of building a winning run came to an end at Doncaster…the Rovers took the lead in the first half when the United defence was asleep…
Grant Morrow the scorer…
Hereford were killed off at the start of the second half…they shot themselves as Steve Devine gave away a penalty…
Kieron Brady was the executinor…and Doncaster were home and dry…
Hereford got a goal back with one of the best moves of the game…they can turn it on when they want and it's affective…
Marcus Browning was the hit man…that's three goals in three games for him…but it wasn't enough to save United from a 2-1 deafeat…
this week its the third round of the coca cola cup…our only survivors are Swindon…they've got Oldham from the Premier League at the County Ground tomorrow night…kick-off is at seven forty five…
The draw's been made today for the first round of the FA Cup…and here's 
Rugby next…
Gloucester just missed the boat again on saturday…they went down to league leaders Wasps in London…the score fourteen…nine 
Voice over
Thousands of enthusiasts have re-staged an English civil war battle to commemorate its three hundred and fiftieth anniversary.
The Battle of Edgehill in sixteen forty two was one of the most important and bloody in English history, and the re-creation had its share of injuries too.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
RADWAY/Warwickshire
MEGAN PERRY/Sealed Knot Society
Voice over
It looked terrifying enough with the three thousand members of the Sealed Know Society trying to avoid hurting each other.
The Battle three hundred and fifty years ago left hundreds dead and wounded on both cavaliers and Parliamentarians' sides.
Voice over
The Battle of Edgehill was the first major conflict of the English Civil war and as such the Sealed Knot Society wanted to mark it properly.
They spent two years organising the site, getting volunteers from not only Britain, but abroad as well, and making sure that while the battle may have been seventeenth century, twentieth century comforts were still close at hand.
Male speaker
You have to organise the traffic and the catering, and there are so many different elements to bringing such a complex event together
Voice over
Losses in the original battle were heavy with neither side able to claim victory.
The commemorative battle was sufficiently well choreographed to avoid serious damage…although there were still plenty of cuts and bruises.
Female speaker
Yes sometimes things do get a little dangerous and we have a few bruises, sprains, the oidd breakage.
But we have Sealed Knot Medical staff on hand to look after them
Voice over
Some join the Sealed Knot to ensure that history is not forgotten…others because they enjoy a good bundle.
Male speaker
It can get a bit out of hand but it's up to the officers to keep discipline 
The aim was to demonstrate what happenedat this most important of English battles…and that meanst portraying the fog and confusion of war.
They were helped by having similar weather conditions…especially mud.
But at the end of the day, for all the period costume and accuracy, a four wheeled drive vewhicle still roved a lot more effective in towing a gun carriage than a bunch of weary foot soldiers.
More than a hundred workers at a computer company have been told they'll have to move to Germany — or lose their jobs.
The firm involved is moving its headquarters out of Britain, and says it will help with the transfer as much as possible, but the news has been greeted with dismay by local business leaders.
Mark Kiff reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
PETER STRATFORD/Swindon Chamber of Commerce
ROGER BARKER/Oxford Economic Forecasting
Voice over
Employees of the National Semiconductor company arriving for work in Swindon had more on their minds than usual this morning.
The microchip company has told more than half of its 216 staff that they must move to Germany next year — or face redundancy.
They say the news came as a shock.
Although many people were disappointed they coudn't argue with the logic of the decision.
The company has invested extensively in Britain.
Earlier this year it announced a 100 million dollar expansion of its factory in Scotland.
But now the company has decided to create a single European headquarters.
The toss up was between Swindon and Fuerstenfeldbruck near Munich, where they already have a business centre.
Swindon lost.
National Semiconductor turned down the opportunity of an interview with Central South.
They say they'll be giving as much as information as possible to the employees offered a move about working conditions, school and the German way of life.
Those unable to transfer will be offered a redundancy package and career counselling.
Some say they would move to Germany; others want to wait.
Swindon has made a name for itself attracting overseas investment into Britain, American, Japanese and German.
So this news has come as a disappointment to local business leaders.
PETER STRATFORD/Chamber of Commerce says Swindon is in competition with Europe and other towns and cities in Britain.
ROGER BARKER/Economist says Britain still has much to offer overseas investors.
For more than 100 employees of National Semi-conductor that's no consolation.
For them, it could be auf weidersen pet.
Police in Egypt have arrested a seventeen year old man over the killing by Islamic fundamentalists of a Gloucestershire nurse.
Earlier today her parents collected their daughter's body from Heathrow airport.
It's likely that an inquest on Susan Hill will be opened by the Gloucester coroner.
She was killed last Wednesday south of Cairo when the tour bus she was travelling on was stopped and gunmen opened fire.
A Swindon man is preparing to go to Pakistan to try to find his girlfriend, whom he believes is being kept there against her will.
Doug Robertson last saw Rabina Ali at the end of September when she flew to Karachi for a family holiday.
He now believes they may be keeping her there, because they disapprove of their relationship and want to arrange a marriage for her.
Mr Robertson says he's particularly worried because Rabina's employers have received a letter of resignation, written in broken English.
A new documentary is questioning the role of the Oxford-based relief organisation Oxfam.
Supporters say that although it provides vital support for millions, Oxfam has hardly any effect on the real causes of poverty and illness.
So after fifty years, they say, the world's best-known aid organisation is still fighting the same battles.
Gargy Patel reports.
DARING TO CARE/Richard Stanley Productions
OXFORD
COURTESY
RICHARD STANLEY/Film Maker
JIM HOWARD/Former Aid Worker
JOHN PILGER/Journalist
Voice over
50 years of helping and caring, 50 years of fighting poverty and illness.
Oxfam's work has brought the third world closer to home.
For his documentary, Oxford film maker, Richard Stanley looked not only at how Oxfam works, but why it exists.
In 10 years of filming around the globe, he's come across Oxfam time .But it surpised him to learn just how revolutionary it was back in the 1940's.
The film, Daring to Care shows how aid has followed war.
In Europe, in Africa, in Cambodia.
How the impact of television news turned Oxfam into an international agency.
The attitudes of the western world towards developing countries is debated.
The role of the arms trade.
And whether Oxfam and others really make any difference.
The film doesn't pretend Oxfam is the answer.
But it is trying to believe in the dignity of human beings.
In part two:Hitting back…a knockout performance from Gloucester.
Looking back…the battle of Edgehill revisited.
And biting back…the Whitesnake man plays it again.
Hundreds of people opposed to rail privatisation have been demonstrating outside the House of Commons.
They say if the sell-off goes ahead many rural lines will close.
LIZ HANNAM/Westminster
ANNE LYONS/Oxfordshire Against Rail Privatisation
PETER LUFF MP/Con
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab
Voice over
British Rail workers joined passengers to lobby M-Ps against the privatisation bill.
Among them was a delegation from Oxfordshire.
They'd caught the twelve fifteen from Oxford.
They're worried that after privatisation that journey might not be so simple.
Female speaker
I think that there'll be chaos in the transport system.
I think we'll lose any hope of a properly integrated transport system.
Male speaker
I fear that safety standards will go down the drain as people seek to make most profit.
Female speaker
I think we won't get a unified transport system.
That's the worst part of it.
Male speaker
I've spent the last 40 years protesting about all sorts of things and now I'm protesting for my railway, not theirs, ours.
Voice over
One of their biggest fears is for the loss making Cotswold Line which has eleven rural stations between Oxford and Worcester.
They take little comfort from Government assurances about the future of the line.
Female speaker
What it says in the Bill is that the Government will use its best endeavours and that's not a guarantee.
Voice over
Far from closing stations the Government believes privatisation will attract new investors who will bring badly needed cash to the railways.
The Worcester, Great Western Line will be one of the first to be privatised.
It runs at a profit and is one of the most self contained parts of the British Rail Network.
Male speaker
We'll see better rolling stock and an improvement in staff attitudes.
Male speaker
There's no doubt that the Bill is very unpopular with the British public.
Voice over
The bill returns to the House of Commons for its final reading next week.
The protesters need to persuade just nine Tory M-Ps to vote against the Government for it to be defeated.
Voice over
Anti-hunt campaigners have presented a nine-thousand signature petition to councillors urging them to ban hunting from council owned land.
Gloucestershire County Council will vote on the ban tomorrow — the anti-hunt groups say they're confident of victory.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
PETER PONTING/League Against Cruel Sports
TIM UNWIN/Cotswold Hunt Master
RICHARD WHITEMAN/Tenant Farmer
DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
Voice over
Twenty two different fox hunts use land owned by Gloucestershire County council.
Tommorrow they may be banned from doing so.
Nine thousand signatures — all against fox hunting on council owned land — were handed into Shire hall by members of the league against cruel sports.
He says they've had loads of public support.
But foxhunters say it should be left to the council's tenant farmers to decide.
He says that it's a matter of principle.
Tenant farmers should be able to make up their own minds.
Tenant farmer Richard Whiteman says that banning hunting could have repercussions.
He says that he has to do business with Foxhunters.
He doesn't think it's right that he should be told that they can't hunt on his farm.
Foxhunters say that they perform a valuable service, controlling the numbers of foxes, which can become pests.
But the RSPCA says that there's no evidence that foxes need culling, and if they do, there are more humane ways than hunting.
He says that the way a fox is chased by dogs and killed in not acceptable in todays society.
If Gloucestershire County Council does ban foxhunting on it's land it'll join the neighbouring counties of Wiltshire, and Hereford and Worcester which have already instigated similar bans.
Anti-hunt campaigners say they're confident that tommorrows vote will go their way.
The persecution of Iraq's Shia Moslems is to be revealed tonight in a Central Television documentary.
Pictures smuggled out of the country show for the first time how the Shia's holy city was destroyed.
Reporter Michael Wood found thousands of refugees in exile.
They spoke of mass genocide at the hands of Saddam Hussein.
CHRIS MOORE/Reporting
SADDAM'S KILLING FIELDS/Viewpoint 93
MICHAEL WOOD/Historian
Voice over
While the Kurds found refuge, the fate of Iraq's Shias has gone almost unreported.
These smuggled pictures show hundreds of Shia moslems seeking refuge in the Great Mosque at Kerbola.
Most of them died in the onslaught which followed, their historic city completely destroyed.
Michael Wood uncovered the plight of the Shias by speaking to exiles in neighbouring Iran.
Tonight his documentary will be shown on Central Television.
It reveals how thousands of Shias have fled across the border to escape.
Saddam Hussain has ordered the draining of six thousand square miles of marshland — an ecological disaster.
The marsh Arabs who lived here are being wiped out.
Last week it was revealed that two thousand people died in a single chemical attack.
The full scale of destruction remains unclear.
The Viewpoint 93 documentary shows how the Allied powers which liberated Kuwait have been reluctant to help the Shias.
They form the majority of Iraq's population.
Western oil company's are already bidding to exploit the newly drained marshes.
He says it may already be too late to save the Shias and their ancient culture.
Saddam's military machine is now thought to have fully recovered from losses sustained in the Gulf War.
That's Viewpoint 93, Saddam's Killing Fields, tonight on Central at Ten Forty.
Still to come on Central News, help for the boy from Bosnia
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES/BRILL
Chief Insp LAURIE FRAY/Thames Valley Police
GEORGE WALDEN MP/Con Buckingham
ROSIE GOOD/Resident
CHOLSEY/Oxfordshire
May 1993/OXFORD
Det Supt JOHN BOUND/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
An inch by inch search of the track near Brill in Buckinghamshire.
Looking for evidence that will lead them to the bombers.
The blast tore a hole in the wall of a bridge leading to a nature reserve.
The debris scattered to the ground.
It was only noticed yesterday, although the explosion apparently happened on Saturday afternoon.
Male speaker
The devise has blown a hole in the bridge.
We were lucky the bridge didn't come down.
Voice over
At the moment, the police aren't linking this incident with others at Reading and Basingstoke.
Unlike those, this happened in a remote area and police says there are other factors which don't tie up.
Nevertheless, it's worried and surprised local people and politicians.
Male speaker
It's a cowardly thing to do.
I'm going to take this up with the Minister, but it's difficult to police remote tracks.
Female speaker
It's an odd feeling.
You image these things happen in London, but not round the corner.
Voice over
After the alarm of yesterday, normality returned to the Chiltern line this morning.
Trains were running, albeit a rather cautiously past the bomb site.
But elsewhere, another security alert and more disruption.
A suspect package was found lying near the platform at Cholsey.
The station was evacuated, nearby homes were evacuated.
The box was blown up.
It finally became clear it was a false alarm.
Inside the box, an air rifle which was probably stolen.
Terrorist links were ruled out.
But the alert highlighted the tension associated with the recent bomb attacks.
So far no one has claimed responsiblity.
But in the light of the recent IRA attack in nearby Oxford city centre, there's concern that terrorists may be based somewhere in the Thames Valley.
Male speaker
It's a tactic of the IRA to move around the city.
I can't offer an explanation as to where they are.
They could be anywhere.
Voice over
After the disruption of the past few days, all now seems quiet.
But everyone is advised to remain on their guard and keep vigilant for any suspicious activity.
A teenager accused of attempting to murder a police inspector has been cleared on the orders of a judge.
Matthew Loveridge, who's nineteen, was also cleared of robbing a post office.
But the trial of his co-defendant goes on.
January 1993/SANDFORD/Oxfordshire
GARETH FURBY/Reading Crown Court
Voice over
Matthew Loveridge was arrested in January at this caravan site near Oxford.
The police found more than four hundred poundsw in cash hidden inside a caravan and today Loveridge admitted handling stolen property.
The prosecution claims the money came from an armed robbery by four masked men at a sub post office in Berkshire.
In the chase that followed two police cars were shot at, and the prosecution says Inspector Paul Kirby was nearly killed when a shotghun blast smashed his winscreen.
But this afternoon Judge Mrs Justice Steel directed the jury to find Loveridge not guilty of attempted murder, robbery and various firearms offences saying, in law, there was insufficient evidence to safely convict.
Loveridge then admitted handling stolen property and he'll be sentenced for that offence in the next few weeks.
But his co-defendant Frank Smith is still on trial.
He denies all offences, including attempted murder.
And the case will continue tomorrow.
A faulty machine is being blamed for the fire at a poultry factory which killed two firemen.
6 September/HEREFORD
The fire last month destroyed the Sun Valley factory at Hereford.
The firemen were killed when part of the building collapsed on them.
Sun Valley say the fire was started by what's described as an accidental fault in a machine.
The machine is being inspected by the makers.
A retired Ministry of Defence official has gone on trial accused of accepting a million and a half pounds in bribes to award arms contracts abroad.
Gordon Foxley from Henley on Thames was head of ammunition procurement at the MOD for five years.
It's claimed that he was secretly paid commission for awarding work to three firms in Italy, Germany and Norway.
He denies twelve counts of corruption, and the trial in London continues.
An Olympic breaststroke champion has taken on a junior swimming team — and lost.
Adrian Moorhouse blamed the shock defeat on a lack of concentration — he forgot how many lengths there were left to swim.
ROBIN POWELL Gloucester
ADRIAN MOORHOUSE Former Olympic Champion
EDWARD PITT Beaufort Swimming Club
IAN WILSON Former Olympic Finalist
Voice over
A gold medallist of yesteryear on the lookout for an Olympic champion of the future.
Adrian Moorhouse — now a consultant with the Amateur Swimming Association — has been in Gloucester as part of Swim 2 000, a national campaign aimed at nurturing young talent.
He may be an MBE, but Moorhouse has little time for Britain's sporting establishment.
Sport, he says, is being ruined by administrators, with the result that our sportsmen and women are lagging behind the rest of the world.
After working out with the region's most promising 12- to 14-year-olds, it was time for the main event.
Beaufort Swimming Club had challenged Moorhouse and another former Olympic finalist Ian Wilson to a relay race.
The Olympians had slightly further to swim, and while the juniors were allowed to crawl Moorhouse was made to swim the breast stroke at which he won gold at Seoul 5 years ago.
The outcome — a resounding victory for the home team, not that they appeared particularly surprised.
They've a long way to go if one of these youngsters are to compete at Sydney in the year 2 000…but already they've claimed a notable scalp.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Shankhill Road bombing funerals
The funerals have been held for those who died in the bombing on Belfast's Shankhill Road.
Two die in Ulster attack
Two people have died and five were injured in a gun attack by loyalists in Ulster
CBI doubts recovery
The Confederation of British Industry says business confidence has dropped sharply with only fragile progress on economic recovery.
Vincent Price dies at 82
The veteran horror-film actor, Vincent Price, has died from lung cancer at the age of eighty-two.
FTSE down 19
The hundred shares index closed down nineteen point five at thirty-one, sixty-five point three.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-eight and up at two marks, forty-nine.
Welcome back.
A five year old boy from Bosnia who's paralysed from the waist down could soon take his first steps with the aid of calipers.
Adis Advic was injured when shrapnel damaged his spine.
He was flown to Britain for treatment.
SIMON GARRETT/Stoke Mandeville Hospital
16 August 1993
MATTHEW SENECO/Physiotherapist
JAN SHAKESPEARE/Senior Physiotherapist
Voice over
After ten weeks of care and treatment living in hospital…
Adis Advic is back to being a noisy, naughty five year old.
He's like a different child to the one who arrived in Britain with his mother in August as a UN evacuee from Sarajevo.
By then Adis had already been hospitalised for three months.
At Stoke Mandeville neither he nor his physiotherapist, Matthew speak much English, but it doesn't seem to matter
Male speaker
When he comes here he thinks it's to play.
He doesn't think he's working.
He sometimes makes me crazy like him.
Voice over
Adis is unlikely to recover the full use of his legs…but his future mobility is a top priority
Female speaker
We've got future plans for him like getting him up on his feet and walk short distances with full-length calipers
Voice over
His day's quite full.
He often starts in the morning with hydrotherapy which he really enjoys.
Most of the pools in Bosnia are damaged so he hasn't had the chance to go swimming much before.
He spends some time at school.
He's learning English joining in the playschool activities he would normally do at his age anyway
Adis's future is as uncertain as that of the country from which he fled.
Since they arrived he and his mother have heard only once from his father who's a soldier in the Bosnian army.
For now they'll carry on living at Stoke Mandeville and Adis will continue with his treatment…taking each day as it comes
The skull of a Celtic princess which was dug up more than a hundred years ago could soon be given a face.
Historians are trying to raise enough money to pay for a medical artist to reconstruct features onto the skull.
They hope it'll reveal family resemblances.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
PATRICIA THOMAS/Historian
Voice over
The skull was dug up in eighteen seventy four by workmen who were quarrying for stone in the area around Barrow Wake near Gloucester.
Today it's on display at the Gloucester museum.
Historians there believe it's the skull of a Celtic princess.
Historians now want to put a face onto the skull.
Using a technique perfected by medical artists, they hope to be able to build up a picture of what the princess would have looked like twenty centuries ago.
This facial reconstruction is used by police when they're trying to identify human remains.
In this case it could help to identify family links.
Staff at the Gloucester Museum now need to raise two and a half thousand pounds to pay for the reconstruction.
If they get the money, it'll give the people of Gloucestershire the chance to come face to face with thir ancestors.
Conservationists are about to conduct a census of one of our rarest mammals — the dormouse.
As part of National Dormouse Week, which starts tomorrow, volunteers will be searching woodland for signs of dormouse activity — such as nibbled hazlenuts.
RICHARD BARNETT/Herefordshire
SUE HOLLAND/Herefordshire Nature Trust
FELICITY BURGESS/Herefordshire Nature Trust
Voice over
The dormouse is one of our most secretive wild creatures…
It only ventures out at night, and spends most of its time up in trees or scrambling through scrub.
And that's the problem facing conservationists who are trying to discover where the dormice are.
Here in an ancient Herefordshire broadleaved wood, members of the local Nature trust have been monitoring dormice for five years.
They've set up nest boxes so its easier to check the population regularly.
In this box there was adult female and four youngsters.
Female speaker
The dormouse is declining nationally, but Herefordshire is a stronghold.
Voice over
The dormice are weighed and then put back into the nest.
Weight is important…if the animals are undersized, they may not survive the seven month long hibernation period.
Luckily this family all weighed in at over 15 grammes…and that means enough fat to see them through the winter.
She says: It would be a tragedy if the dormouse became extinct.
Dormice used to be found all over the Midlands and South of England.
The loss of ancient woodland now means they're confined to the southern counties and Herefordshire and Worcestershire.
The way to help dormice is to encourage hazel and a wide variety of other trees and shrubs the animals feed on.
This week local Nature Trusts are asking volunteers to visit woods to search for hazlenuts that have been nibbled by dormice.
The information will help the campaign to ensure the survival of one of our most attractive wild animals.
Welcome back: One of the most successful musical shows of the last decade has arrived in the region.
Audiences are packing in to see Paul Nicholas play the lead role in Barnum.
But behind the glitter, an army of people are needed to put on the show, and keep it running.
OXFORD
PAUL NICHOLAS/PT Barnum
KIM ROBINSON/Production Manager
CAROL DUFFY/Charity Barnum
JON SAMUEL/Apollo Electrician
Voice over
It's first night again for Paul Nicholas; one of many he's known in his long career as a song and dance man.
Male speaker
This is it, I hope there's somebody out there.
We'll soon see.
Voice over
Tonight, at the Apollo Theatre in Oxford, he's just about to star in the smash hit musical, Barnum.
He's been playing the part in theatres up and down the country for over a year, so he's had several first nights for this production alone.
Male speaker
I do get nervous, but not necessarily on first nights.
I often get nervous on press nights though.
For the most part I go out to have a good time, and hopefully communicate that to the audience
Voice over
But this first night has taken a lot of work.
3 days of concentrated effort from the time Paul walked off stage in Manchester on the previous Saturday evening.
They drove through the night to start unloading at the Apollo the following lunchtime.
From then on, it was working around the clock with tons of gear filling 3 huge lorries.
Male speaker
We had to organise it so that we could move it on a Saturday night from Manchester to Oxford and get it ready for a full orchestra, circus, and technical rehearsal on Tuesday afternoon.
Then open to a full house on Tuesday night
Voice over
They come to a black empty stage.
The previous week had seen the Welsh National Opera carrying all before them.
But now there's not an echo of their presence
The theatre is a conspiracy of illusion which lasts as long as the audience is there.
There's a massive crew associated with Barnum and the Apollo chips in a few more.
As the show is brought up to performance night, 100 people can be scrambling around the stage.
The only people not seen are the performers.
Female speaker
There is an element of being seprate teams…but it all slots together.
They don't do the two shows on the last day of the run, but they do have to shift it all.
We supposedly get a couple of days to recharge and then turn up refreshed here to shine and glitter on the first night while they're wrecked.
But it's all part of the same jigsaw
Voice over
Eventually, they do come, because there are sound checks to be made and dangerous tricks to be practiced.
Male speaker
essentially we work with the same material, the only thing that might change is the part where I slide withg my hands down a rope.
Sometimes it can be a steeper angle than somewhere else.
I always make sure I check it before every performance
Voice over
For the crew it's the end of three hard days and nights, but at least they can now sit back and leave it to the performers.
Male speaker
It's been quite hard.
I finished at 4 a.m. this morning and others carried on until 5.30 p.m.
Voice over
But while the show is now safely up and running in the theatre, there's still plenty to do to keep it that way.
Tomorrow we look at the way that's done.
The man regarded as the all-time superstar of British Football has been meeting old friends at a special lunch in his honour.
Sir Stanley Matthews, who was the first footballer to be knighted says he still doesn't know what all the fuss is about.
He was just lucky to have such a great career.
Gargy Patel reports.
WOODSTOCK/Oxfordshire
Sir STANLEY MATTHEWS
GERRY HARRIS/Wolves 1956-1965
BRIAN HORTON/Oxford United Manager
Voice over
Soccer legend Sir Stanley Matthews, one of the best players ever to have graced the English game.
At a lunch in his honour, friends and former rivals gathered to pay him tribute.
In his time he was a superstar.
A career that began at Stoke City in 1930, he played as a professional for more than 30 years.
Fans loved his skill, he was regarded as the wizard of dribble.
His Genius on the field spurred Blackpool to a famous win against Bolton in the 1953 cup final.
It became known as the Matthews final.
At the age of 77 he still trains regularly, keeping fit he says was the best part of his career.
Sporting names from past and present say there's been no-one else to match the magic of Stan.
It was a day for remembering old times and old friends.
After 54 England Caps, Sir Stanley earned another cap when he was given an honorary doctorate by Keele University.
He's also an honorary President of his home team, Stoke.
He played league football at 50.
Sir Stanley's only regret is that he didn't play for a few years more.
Up to seventy staff at one of the region's biggest hospitals are facing redundancy because the hospital is too popular.
Stoke Mandeville is treating too many patients, and needs to save half a million pounds on its budget, so three wards will be closed, and thirty five nurses may lose their jobs.
Doctors and managers blame the Government's health service reforms.
Gareth Furby reports.
STOKE MANDEVILLE/Aylesbury
TRICHA PULLEN/Royal College of Nursing
MARTIN USHERWOOD/Consultant
CHRIS JAMES/Community Health Council
Voice over
Stoke Mandeville Hospital is best known for its spinal injuries unit, and the support of Jimmy Saville.
Huge sums have been raised over the years to build and fund the unit but that's of little comfort to the main hospital today.
It's over spent its budget by half a million pounds.
Now three wards will close — and fifty one beds will go.
Thirty five nurses are also facing redundancy.
She says there's a sence of shock and dismay.
Today Patients and visitors had a similar reaction.
She says it's disgusting.
He says the Government is playing with people's lives.
She says there's not enough nurses as it is.
Managers say Stoke Mandeville has simply been treating too many people.
Under the Government's health service reforms money should follow the patient in an internal market.
Health authorities contract a hospital to treat a specific number of patients.
But in Stoke Mandeville's case GPs have referred too many patients, effectively presenting the health authorities with an additional bill they can't pay.
Stoke Mandeville says Oxford health authority has overshot its contract by 53 per cent.
The balance sheet for Northampton and Milton Keynes is just as bad.
He says the money hasn't been following the patient.
The system isn't working.
He says he's worried patient with a bone injury may not get the care they need.
Aylesbury Vale Health Authority hopes the cuts will be temporary and says the books should be balanced by next year.
But tonight the Department of Health said it was the responsibility of health authorities to manage the internal market, and the first priority should be the patient.
One of Britain's top policemen has blamed reckless motorists for many of the five thousand road deaths in the country each year.
Despite vehicles themselves being made safer, Peter Joslin says drivers are still travelling too fast and too close to the person in front.
Robin Powell reports.
M40/Warwickshire
PETER JOSLIN/Chief Constable/Warwickshire Police
In an unmarked police car equipped with a speed detection computer, Peter Joslin, Warwickshire's Chief Constable and head of Britain's police traffic committee, showed us the type of driving which he blames for many fatal road crashes.
Male speaker
All of these vehicles are travelling too close to the vehicle in front.
If that lorry had to stop now the Volvo wouldn't have much of a chance.
Voice over
It's called tail-gating — driving too close.
West Mercia Police tried to introduce this Israeli computer to monitor vehicle distance and speed.
But it didn't work in fog.
Motorsists seen tail-gating risk prosecution for reckless driving.
Male speaker
That clearly is far too close to the vehicle in front.
What's that? 15 to 20 yards at the most.
I'm afraid we see a lot worse than that.
See that vehicle which has passed us?
That's now going more than 80 mph.
It's now travelling at 88mph; now 89 mph.
That was a case of excess speed.
Voice over
In London roadside cameras have just been set up which clock speeders without them noticing.
The summons arrives in the post.
Peter Joslin has a more radical approach.
Male speaker
One solution perhaps would be to give the best company car to the driver who has an accident free record or clean driving licence.
It would act as an incentive.
Then you would know when you saw the chap in the 1984 Cortina he was the company's worst driver.
Voice over
On the M40, our police driver struggles to keep up with a car in the outside lane.
Male speaker
The slightest accident on the motorway can become a multiple pile-up because there's people like him travelling at this speed.
Voice over
He's doing more than 100 mph.
This time it's a warning with a flash of the blue lights.
A nasty, but effective shock?
Male speaker
He's still probably sweating a little because he's waiting to be called off at the next motorway junction.
Voice over
Even though it was the Chief Constable following him, just this once he got away with it.
Next time it's a summons.
In part two: The Greatest Show on Earth…we go backstage with Barnum.
The Wizard of the Dribble:A footballing legend comes to lunch.
And happiness is…a romantic tycoon with his own private jet.
Left to die: Court hears of twins' death in barn fire.
I can explain.
Woman wanted for charity fraud claims she's innocent.
And the hospital that's TOO successful…now wards will close.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
Three men have gone on trial for the killing of twin sisters who were trapped in a blazing barn.
The court was told that the accused had used matches to help them see in the barn.
ERIKA BARNES
All five were trapped at first, but the prosecution says the three men ran away, ignoring a girl's screams, and later lied to the police…
All three have denied manslaughter.
Tim Hurst was in court.
JANUARY 1991/UCKINGTON/Gloucestershire
Voice over
Twin sisters Rebecca and Emma Harper, aged 17, from Cheltenham in Gloucestershire, died in a barn fire at Uckington near Cheltenham in Gloucestershire in January last year.
Their remians were found by firemen sifting the ashes.
Three men are accused of killing them, David Harper, no relation, aged 20, of Uckington, Wisdom Smith, who's 19, of Bishops Cleeve near Cheltenham, and 19 year old Daniel Winter, of Cheltenham itself.
They've all denied manslaughter and arson.
The prosecution say the three men and the twins had gone to the barn for sexual activity.
The men used matches to see around, one of them had lit a straw bail to get more light.
An hour later the barn was an inferno, the prosecution say the three men escaped, ignored a scream, and did nothing to raise the alarm.
They had not intended to kill the twins, but what they did with matches was criminally reckless.
The twin's mother Mrs Vicki Harper and her husband Stephen Harper, sat unmoving in court as the prosecution described how the girls died.
It was said Harper had been the boyfriend of Emma, but following a tiff at a pub that evening, he had preferred the company of Rebecca.
Both twins and the three men had later taken a taxi to the barn at Uckington, whichg had been rebuilt.
A model of the barn was used in court to explain to the jury how all five had climbed onto straw bales.
If matches were used, say the prosecution, to find spots for sexual comfort, then all the men were to blame if those matches led to the deaths of the girls.
The men had gone to the barn as a trio for a purpose, they stayed as a trio when they told a false story to the police.
It was, said the prosecution, one for all and all for one, even when the gravity of the situation meant a murder charge could be considered.
The trial is expected to last 2 weeks.
A woman wanted for questioning about the disappearance of thousands of pounds of charity money says she can prove her innocence.
She's under house arrest in Turkey after fraud officers there took action.
But fellow fund-raisers here say they're baffled by the case.
Kim Barnes reports.
FETHIYE/Turkey
WORCESTER
Det Insp MIKE COWLEY/Fraud Squad/West Mercia Police
SARA IRONSIDE/Co-Trustee
HEINO KOPIETZ/Friend
Voice over
Ruth Hilali is wanted for questioning following the disappearance of £130,000 from the Worcestershire Kurdish refugee association.
Meanwhile Turkish police have tracked her down to this resort.
Now under house arrest, she says it's all a dreadful mistake.
Detectives in Turkey have been questioning Mrs Hilali and a man said to be her adopted son.
It's claimed cannabis and counterfeit dollars were found at their rented villa.
Meanwhile police here are liaising with Interpol and taking legal advice on whether they can extradite Mrs Hilali.
Meanwhile goods collected by the Worcester Kurdish Refugee Association are gathering dust in a warehouse.
Sara Ironside, the charity's other trustee, today tried to get an explanation.
And with aid to refugees at the centre of the row, Mrs Hilali insists that Kurds in this country can speak up for her.
But we've been unable to track down an official aid organisation which has worked with her.
However, a friend says he saw her with refugees.
Fund raisers here hope the inquiry can find out exactly what happened.
The Home Secretary is being asked why a convicted paedophile is being allowed to return to the city where he sexually abused a dozen boys.
Social Services have taken the unprecedented step of writing to the young victims' parents warning them of Alan Stout's impending release.Adrian Britton reports.
WORCESTER
PETER LUFF MP/Con Worcester
LAURIE GREGORY/Social Services
A man from Gloucestershire has been voted the most romantic top tycoon in Britain.
Despite his hectic business schedule Richard Gabriel still finds time to cook candlelit dinners for his girlfriend.
And he always remembers to send her flowers.
as if that wasn't enough, Richard's also a multi-millionaire.
Clare Lafferty reports.
HUNTLEY Gloucestershire
RICHARD GABRIEL Most Romantic Top Tycoon
SARAH KHAN Richard's Girlfriend
HEATHER WALTON Competition Judge
Voice over
As Chairman of a multi-million pound Company, 38 year old Richard Gabriel from Gloucestershire has to spend alot of time at work.
When he's not in the office, he's jetting all over the world clinching deals and making money.
But Richard still finds time for his girlfriend Sarah.
And it's that devotion that's just won him the title of Britains most romantic top tycoon.
After a long day at the office Richard likes nothing more than to drive home to his little pad in Huntley for a quiet night in with 21 year old, Sarah.
That means Sarah travelling to Gloucestershire from her home in London.
But when your boyfriend's got a spare Bentley and chauffeur to lend you, that isn't so much of a strain.
While Sarah travels, Richard slaves over a hot stove, lovingly preparing a meal.
With a little something to wash it down of course.
The competition judges found Richard an easy winner.
Richard says even businessmen should set aside time for romance.
So, as the couple fly off for another holiday in Richard's private jet, they can be happy in the knowledge that in the unlikely event that Richard should ever loose his millions, they'll be able to live on love.
Major warns MPs against isolation in Europe
The Prime Minister has again defended the Maastricht Treaty warning that Britain faces isolation in Europe if it does not go through.
FTSE up 8
The hundred shares index closed up eight point two at twenty-six, sixty-nine point eight.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-eight and down at two marks, forty-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A local bobby who's helped to halve car crime on a council estate has decided he's ready for the challenge of another beat.
His boss has praised his work on the estate, saying it shows the value of community policing.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
PC JOHN DANBY/Community Beat Officer
MARION TRIGG/Neighbourhood Watch Coordinator
Supt CHARLES WONG/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
When PC John Danby began patrolling the Penhill estate in Swindon 2 years ago, it was one of the most crime-ridden areas in the region.
Now it's bucking the national trend…with crime elsewhere on the increase, Penhill's changing for the better.
The statistics are certainly encouraging.
In the past 12 months alone, burglaries are down almost 8 per cent, car crime around 50 per cent .
Modestly, PC Danby gives much of the credit to the Neighbourhood Watch schemes he's helped set up.
When he arrived, there were 10 such schemes…now there are 64.
If he has a secret, PC Danby says it's making as many friends as possible.
Residents appreciate the personal touch.
Female speaker
Everyone feels much safer having him around.
Male speaker
He's a gentleman.
He's all right.
Voice over
His boss wasn't familiar with the British tradition of community policing — he's on a 2-year exchange from Hong Kong.
But PC Danby's success has convinced him that our way is best.
The proposed introduction of performance-related pay, warns PC Danby, puts the future of community policing in doubt.
Officers, he says, would be paid for arrests, not crime prevention.
For the time being, he's training his successor before moving to another beat.
But one day Swindon's housing estates might not be so fortunate.
The first Bewick swans of the winter have just arrived in Britain.
They landed at the Slimbridge Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust at the end of a two thousand mile journey from Northern Russia.
RICHARD BARNETT Slimbridge
JOHN BOWLER Swan Researcher
ALISON BYARD Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust
Voice over
The latest flights from arctic Russia arrived at Slimbridge today…looking none the worse for their 2,500 mile journey.
Bewick Swans first overwintered at the Wildfowl and Wetlands trust 45 years ago, and nowadays around three hundred return every year.
Male speaker
It's a wonderful sight.
There are about 40 birds at Slimbridge already.
They navigate by the stars and by the lie of the land.
Voice over
The swans are attracted by the plentiful supply of food and safe lodgings, and Slimbridge is one of the most important overwintering sites in the country.
They're joined by up to 16,000 wildfowl that also enjoy a winter break here.
Every Bewick Swan is identified by its characteristic bill markings.
And researchers have recorded some birds returning each winter for twenty years.
Enthusiasts will get their first chance to watch the late evening floodlit feed of the Bewick swans and other wildfowl at weekends this December.
Female speaker
The floodlit feed will be very impressive as the population of swans will be high by December.
Voice over
The Bewick Swans will leave Slimbridge to fly back to their Russian breeding grounds next March.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Government warns travellers to Egypt
FTSE down 11
The hundred shares index closed down eleven points at thirty one fifty four point three 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty eight and up at two marks, forty eight.
Welcome back.
A woman whose daughter died after a lifetime in pain with arthritis has been raising funds for research into the disease.
Sybil Hurcombe has sold hundreds of copies of a book of poems which she wrote in memory of her daughter, Lorraine.
SYBIL HURCOMB/Mother
EVE ARNOLD/Arthritis and Rheumatism Council
Dr BRIAN SYKES/Genetic Researcher
Voice over
She says at school she had to wear splints on her legs.
She always had to stay in at lunchtime.
She'd only been at school 2 months and she was found to be blind.
Lorraine Hurcomb died at just 25 after 25 years of chronic arthritis.
Her mother Sybil has written a book of poems in tribute.
She wants to do all she can to reduce the suffering of other children…
She says when she was a child we thought it's just a few joint pains.
But it is so serious when children get it, and thousands of children have it…
The poems have raised two thousand pounds so far…which she presented to researchers in Oxford.
She's particularly keen to help find out how children get the disease.
One in a thousand has chronic athritis.
She says children can get it from a very tiny age and if you think of a child starting its every day, not even able to move its own limbs freely.
That's how a baby starts its day.
The council is currently funding research here at the John Radcliffe hospital into whether arthritis is inherited.
Scientists are trying to find out just how the disease works.
He says the basic idea is if you understand what's going wrong then you can design any therapy sensibly not on the hit and miss basis it's been done in the past.
She says a wonderful friendship has now disappeared.
Between mother and daughter, the child that I reared.
She says if it just helps keep the research going, every little helps.
The sooner they find a cure, the better.
Kim Barnes reporting there.
Swindon Town's disappointing start to the season has taken another turn for the worse with a cup defeat at first division Portsmouth…
But there's better news for Oxford fans…the club are in line for a windfall of three hundred thousand pounds which they're going to spend on new players…
Tim Russon has all the news 
DENIS SMITH/Oxford Manager
Voice over
Forget Swindon's league form: Portsmouth away in the Coca Cola Cup was never going to be easy, and the famous old Pompey chimes were ringing loud and clear as an old County Ground favourite Alan McLoughlin led the charge.
Town needed a win more to boost their confidence than anything else, and there were signs of hope as they fired in the high balls.
The Portsmouth defence creaked but it never cracked as Andy Mutch and Sean Taylor tried to get a goal.
But the best chances were at the other end, and John Durnin who's enjoying a new lease of life on the south coast should have set the ball rolling before half-time.
Town failed to spot the danger and sure enough Portsmouth and Durnin were back after the break: Walsh had a free run and Oxford's old striker a real blast to make it one-nil.
A comeback never really looked on: there was no giving up but it wasn't going to be Swindon's night.
And Portsmouth reckon they should be playing in the premiership instead of Town.
They proved their point with a second goal.
Paul Walsh got this one.
So Pompey go sailing on.
Swindon can concentrate on the league, but it's not easy picking yourself up week after week.
Talking of pick me ups: Oxford United have got one coming at last.
They're about to cash in on striker Mark Stein, who's on his way to Chelsea from Stoke for 1.6 million pounds.
United will be getting around three hundred thousand pounds of that…they sold him to Stoke on the proviso of a share of any future deals — bingo!
And manager Denis Smith is planning at least one new signing in the next few days: top priority a striker, and a centre half.
But what of Smith's future at the Manor?
Lou Macari packed his bags for Celtic today, and word from the Potteries is that Smith, one time skipper of Stoke, is high on their wanted list.
Let's ask the man himself.
Denis Smith says he's always been a Stoke fan and his name always comes into the reckoning when the job is going and he's made no secret of the fact that he'd like to manage the club
Chic Bates, Macari's old right hand man at Swindon, has taken over as caretaker manager at Stoke.
What happens next?
We could be in for another round of musical manager's chairs
The Government is facing a damaging defeat in the House of Commons over its defence policy.
Fourteen MPs have signed a letter to the Prime Minister warning they'll vote against any more big cuts in the defence budget.
One of the MPs says any further reduction in spending would cut Britain's defence to the bone.
JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
ROGER KNAPMAN MP/Con Stroud
Gen Sir ANTHONY FARRAR HOCKLEY/Defence Analyst
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Voice over
Cuts in the defence industry have already seen more than three thousand people lose their jobs at the Dowty Group and Smiths Industries in Gloucestershire over the alst three years.
Just last week thirty-two redundancies were announced at Dowty propellors.
Now a group of fourteen Tory MPs have written to John Major warning him of the consequences of further substantial cuts.
The letter says’ should such measures be put forward in the 1994 public expenditure estimates in November, we would find outselves bound to vote against them’
Roger Knapman, the MP for Stroud, signed the letter.
He says the region's suffered enough.
Male speaker
Under Options for Change we could see there was going to be a reduction in defence expenditure.
Those cuts have been very painful.
Further cuts would be cutting into the bone and not the flesh.
Voice over
The defence industry's not the only victim of the peace dividend and spending restrictions.
Last week it was announced that seventy-five people are to take voluntary redundancy at RAF Lyneham in Wiltshire.
Job cuts are also being made at Brize Norton and Benson in Oxfordshire.
There are calls for a defence review if the cuts go ahead.
Male speaker
We are working on the basis of defence policy arranged by the Treasury in which case there must be a whole-hearted defence review.
Voice over
With a government majority of just seventeen, another of Gloucestershire's MPs says such a rebellion would be divisive.
Male speaker
I find these tactics distateful.
It's not so much lobbying as blackmail.
They know the Chancellor has to view the budget as a whole and it's quite impossible if individual members try and force their will.
Voice over
The cabinet meets tomorrow to discuss public spending.
There John Major will try to find a compromise between saving money and saving his majority.
PETER HAYES/Political Editor
Voice over
The Prince of Wales has called on the world to stop Saddam Hussein wiping out the Marsh Arabs.
Prince Charles spoke out on a visit to Oxford, the day after Central broadcast a documentary detailing the persecution in Iraq.
GARETH FURBY/Oxford
SADDAM'S KILLING FIELDS/Viewpoint 93
FARHAN NIZAMI/Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies
Voice over
This was the first visit by the Prince of Wales as guest of the Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies.
His speech before an audience of mixed religions called for tolerance between Muslims and Westerners.
And the day after Central broadcast a documentary on the Marsh Arabs in Southern Iraq…revealing how communities are being destroyed…the Prince condemned Saddam Hussein for claiming the marshes are only being drained for agricultural purposes.
He says it's an obscene lie.
Even at the eleventh hour Islam and the West can join forces to stop it.
The speech has been well received by Muslim leaders throughout Britain…in Oxford its being hailed as milestone in race relations.
He says it will be seen by Muslims as acceptance that they are part of the British community.
Prince Charles said he'd been waiting for a year for the chance to speak publiclty about the fate of the Marsh Arabs.
And it was one of the most outspoken attacks by a Royal on a foreign power.
A prisoner who refused to join in a boycott of prison food had his cell set on fire by fellow inmates.
Prison staff say it was only their quick action which saved the jail from being burned down.
They say the problems are cause by troublemakers sent from other jails.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Bullingdon
Library Pictures
RON ADAMS/Prison Officers Association
JOHN THOMAS-FERRAND/Prison Governor
Voice over
Prison authorities say it's still tense on 'C' Wing where a cell was destroyed by fire during yesterday evening.
Fifty prisoners had to be evacuated while firefighters dealt with it.
The Fire was started to get back at a prisoner who had refused to take part in a food boycott.
Male speaker
We managed to bring it under control thanks to some courageous action by staff.
We’ d had an idea there was going to be trouble but the fire took us by surprise
Voice over
The prison has suffered regularly from fire incidents with lighted material being thrown from cell windows.
But it's the first time a cell has been set alight since the brand new modern jail was opened.
The prison staff say they have a difficulty with dealing with troublesome prisoners being sent from other jails.
Male speaker
What we want is a good mix of prisoners who come here wanting to take advantage of what we offer.
We want a few less troublemakers
Voice over
The Governor admits the fire was a serious incident but says that sort of protest isn't confined to Bullingdon and isn't unique.
Male speaker
Regrettably fires in cells are not unusual, they are classic means of prisoners taking revenge on others.
I am happy with the mix of prisoners here
Voice over
The prisoners have been returned to their cells with the exception of the damaged one.
The authorities say that will take a few days to put right.
Still to come on Central News, Pompey sink Swindon.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
Cllr DAVID DREW/Labour Stonehouse
TED WALLER/Berkeley Hunt
PETER PONTING/League Against Cruel Sports
Voice over
They wanted a ban on foxhunting — and they got it.
Even before the debate got underway in the council chamber there was plenty of discussion on the subject outside:
She says that killing even one fox doesn't justify pest control.
She says that she doesn't know why there's all this fuss.
Hundreds of people turned out to lobby councillors — some even brought their friends.
She says the ferret is a hunter, and they will want to ban it next.
The motion to ban hunting on council land was watered down when a Liberal Democrat ammendment was voted in.
It meant that instead of an immediate hunting ban on all the 148 tenant farms owned by the council, only new tenancies would be affected, so in reality ban will take years to have any real effect.
But Labour Councillor David Drew, who proposed the origional banning motion, said it was a moral victory.
He says that the ban will take some time to come into effect, but at least it's a ban.
But hunt supporters say they're not worried.
He says that the public will come to realise that foxes are a pest and need controlling.
He says that he's pleased with the result, despite the ammendment.
Gloucestershire joins neighbouring Hereford and Worcester, and Wiltshire councils which have also voted in similar bans.
Anti-hunt campaigners say public opinion is on their side, and that pressure is mounting on Westminster for a complete country wide ban on foxhunting.
TIM UNWIN/Cotswold Hunt
Male speaker
He doesn't think the vote will stop hunting on council land.
The council could change before the tenancies.
He denies the claim from opponents that foxhunting is a barbaric sport.
It is an effective way to control and disperse foxes.
Voice over
A youth has been charged with the murder of a security guard.
Ron Letts was knocked down and run over by thieves at a scrap metal yard three months ago.
KAREN THOMPSON/Reporting
Voice over
Fifty year old Ron Letts was working at Harmon Contracts at Wolverton in Milton Keynes in July.
He was run over by thieves who'd been trying to steel aluminimum worth less than two hundred pounds.
He was left lying in the road with serious internal injuries.
he died later in Milton Keynes General Hospital.
The getaway van was later found abandoned along with the stolen scrap metal.
Mr Letts who was married with two sons worked for Securicor who called his death a tragic waste.
They offered a reward of twenty five thousand pounds for information about the killing.
Last month the reward was increased to forty thousand pounds.'
Detectives say tonight the youth who's seventeen was arrested at Kempston in Bedfordshire.
He's been brought to Milton Keynes and will appear in court tomorrow charged with murder…
Meanwhile enquiries are still continuing into the Mr Letts death.
A couple who bought a flat which didn't officially exist are still fighting for compensation four years later.
Despite winning a court order in their favour, and consulting three firms of solicitors, the couple are still paying a mortgage on a home they wish they'd never seen.
TIM HURST/Ross on Wye
July 1991
ALLISON GREGG/Flat Owner
ALAN NEALE/Flat Owner
COLIN GORDON/Solicitor
Voice over
Allison Gregg and Alan Neale thought they'd found their dream home when they paid £43,000 for their flat at Ross on Wye in Herefordshire.
It was one of six in the same building, but because the conversion had been done without planning permission, it didn't officially exist, and they're saddled with a mortgage of £39,000.
Two years ago, another resident of the same building did get her money back when it was shown her solicitor had been negligent.
Since then Allison Gregg and Alan Neale have changed solicitors twice, and even won a court order against the developer, awarding them £51,000, money they didn't get because the developer had gone bust.
To complicate matters further, the flats have now been given planning approval, but major work needs still to be done to meet building regulations, work which they, as the owners, must pay for.
In desperation the couple have turned to a new solicitor, the same man who won compensation for their neighbour two years ago.
He's aware that they too were failed by their original solicitor when they bought their flat, a solicitor who has since died.
Four years after first wanting to sell, Allison Gregg and Alan Neale hope they have found a way out of their flat and their nightmare.
Ambush: Attacks on police planned with stolen radios.
Don't go.
Foreign Office warning after five die in Bosnian convoy.
And we're on your side.
The pub that's changed from Major to Miner.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES
The radios were stolen last weekend.
Since then, police have been listening in to the frequency used by the gang.
Now a reward has been offered to find the equipment, and the people using it.
Nick Clark reports.
OXFORD
Supt RALPH PERRY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Aid agencies are warning that relief work in the former Yugoslavia is being jeopardised by volunteers taking emergency supplies into war zones without proper guidance.
Five people helping lead a convoy of aid from Oxfordshire are missing feared dead.
It's believed they were shot after ignoring advice to turn back.
Charities say the efforts of well-meaning volunteers is hampering official aid workers.
Mark Kiff reports.
13 OCTOBER 1992/OXFORD
HEATHER BENBOW/Bosnia Aid Committee of Oxford
DAVID GRUBB/Feed the Children
Voice over
Delivering emergency aid in the mountainous regions of what used to be Yugoslavia is a dangerous business.
Volunteers from both east and west have been making mercy missions to the thousands of refugess caught up in the fighting.
2 weeks ago, a convoy of 4 lorries; one of them paid for by millionaire, Richard Branson, left Oxford with food, clothes and medicine.
The Oxfordshire volunteers met up with 2 Bosnian guides and 3 men from Bradford.
They got caught up in fighting.
The convoy turned back, but the guides and muslims from Bradford haven't been seen since.
Heather Benbow says they had an argument.
They turned back, but the 2 Bosnian guides and men from from Bradford went on.
They drove round a corner and the next thing they heard was gunfire.
The Oxfordshire volunteers had set off from Split inland.
They were heading for the besieged Bosnian town of Travnik but never reached it.
They returned to the coast with their supplies.
Aid agencies say that although well-meaning, the volunteers are threatening official relief work by making aid lorries vulnerable to attack.
David Grubb says that although volunteers are brave, their actions are dangerous.
Heather Benbow says they will be going again on Sunday to take much needed medicines, although not to such a dangerous area.
The reaction of the British Government is that volunteers shouldn't get involved.
The Foreign Office says although the concern of independent UK-based groups for the welfare of those trapped in the former Yugoslavia is understandable, they strongly advise against unofficial missions.
The judge and jury in the trial of three men accused of the manslaughter of twin sisters have visited the barn where the girls died.
UCKINGTON/Gloucestershire
They travelled to the barn near Cheltenham from Bristol Crown Court, where three men are accused of killing seventeen year old twins Emma and Rebecca Harper when the barn caught fire.
David Harper, aged twenty, Wisdom Smith, aged nineteen, and Daniel Winter, also nineteen, have denied the charge.
The rebuilt barn had been laid out just as it was at the time of the fire in January last year.
Two bunches of roses from the dead girl's parents, were placed at the scene after the jury left.
An inquest has been hearing how a bomb expert and four other workers were killed as they helped to clear Gulf War debris in the Kuwaiti desert.
Peter Snell, who was a former army explosives engineer, from Didcot in Oxfordshire died when a lorry load of mortars and shells blew up, thirty miles south of Kuwait city.
A verdict of accidental death was recorded.
The Home Office has ordered an urgent review into the case of a convicted child molester due to be released from prison next month.
Alan Stout has served three years for abusing boys as young as ten in Worcester.
Parents and social services were outraged that abuse victims might come into contact with Stout again if he returned to the city.
But local MP Peter Luff now says Stout will not be released until the Home Office review has been completed.
An inquest has been opened and adjourned on a nurse from Gloucester who was killed by terrorists while on holiday in Egypt.
Twenty-eight-year-old Sharon Hill's parents formally identifed her body at Gloucestershire Royal Hospital yesterday.
Sharon died when Islamic militants opened fire on the tourist bus she was travelling on south of Cairo.
Police in Egypt have been questioning a seventeen-year-old youth.
A centuries-old method of making cider is making a comeback.
A farmer is using a shire horse to pull the millstone which crushes the fruit.
It's nearly fifty years since farm cider was made this way.
Richard Barnett reports:
PENCOMBE Herefordshire
EDWARD LEGGE Farmer
KAREN BRADBURY Curator
DAVID LEGGE Farmer
Voice over
At Shortwood Farm at Pencombe in Herefordshire, Duchess the Shire horse is helping to revive an ancient tradition.
For centuries, every autumn horses like Duchess were harnessed to a yoke.
Then they plodded round a circular mill, crushing the cider apples.
For man and beast, it was slow, monotonous work.
And by the mid-1800s, a mechanical method of shredding the apples called the scratter, was starting to displace the old stone mills.
But in parts of Herefordshire the old ways die hard and at Shortwood they were using a shire horse for cider making until the 1940s.
Male speaker
Cider was last made on the farm in 1948.
It was a big family and they drank plenty of cider.
Voice over
No one knows how far back the stone cider mill goes and even researchers at the Cider Museum in Hereford aren't certain of its antiquity.
Female speaker
Stone cider mills were in use in the 1500s, possibly earlier.
Voice over
Shortwood attracts thousands of visitors and the idea behind the revival of the horse powered cider mill, is to demonstrate how life used to be down on the farm.
Male speaker
Every farm used to have its own cider mill.
But these days it's hard to track down the old equipment.
Voice over
The farm will be open from this Sunday to demonstrate how horsepower can make scrumpy.
As for the potent brew itself, that won't be ready until Christmas.
Labour to vote against Maastrict
The Labour party has announced it will vote against the Government in the Maastrict debate.
They say the real issue is confidence in the Prime Minister.
Unions claim 20 people died in ambulance computer failure
Health Unions claim twenty people died in London because a computer dealing with 999 calls broke down.
The London Ambulance Service Chief Executive has resigned.
An inquiry is to be held.
New figures reveal crime up by 11
New figures show that more than ten criminal offences are committed every minute in England and Wales.
That's a rise of eleven percent in the past year.
House repossessions down but no sign of recovery
The number of house repossession have dropped, but experts say there's still no sign of recovery in the market.
A hundred thousand homes have been repossessed so far this year.
FTSE down 19
The hundred shares index closed down nineteen point four at twenty-six fifty point four.
The pound is down at one-dollar fifty-seven, and up at two-marks, forty-three.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back: The hit musical Barnum, starring Paul Nicholas, is now up and running and playing to packed houses at the Apollo theatre in Oxford.
Last night we saw the cast and crew move in to start setting up Tonight Mike Rowbottom sees what it takes to keep things going, in Behind The Curtain.
OXFORD
JIM HENNAH/Maintenance Manager
NEIL STOCKFORD/Head Flyman
CAROL DUFFY/Charity Barnum
PAUL NICHOLAS/P T Barnum
IAN SIME/Deputy Manager
Voice over
The world of the theatre is about putting up an image of glamour, glitter and romance for a couple of hours each day.
But it's a full time job keeping it that way.
The performers, led by Paul Nicholas, know the value of publicity, so a photocall is is all part of the process.
The Apollo's photogenic new General Manager, Debbie Hope-Hawkins provides the female interest for local snappers.
And even while that was happening, the chaotic nature of the theatre contrived to show up the differences between those who seek to entertain and the people charged with protecting our welfare.
2 hours before the show starts, the Fire Brigade and 2 besuited men from the local authority are in grim conference over the safety of some fireworks in the production.
It's a tense moment not helped by the failure of the electrical apparatus to fire the devices.
The Apollo's Chief Electrician, John Samuels works furiously to fix it.
Meanwhile, Paul Nicholas is still posing for pictures, the musicians are doing some last minute rehearsals and the sombre looking safety men continue to look grim.
Eventually the authorities say YES and it's one less thing to worry about.
Out in the auditorium everything has to be checked every day for safety and there's a non-stop maintenance programme because the show must always go on.
Male speaker
There is a difference with the audiences.
Pantomime brings a lot of problems with the little children, especially with the toilets.
They block up the sinks and make a mess.
It's hard work.
Voice over
The theatre can be a risky place and the entire staff have to be on their guard.
Most, if not all, scenery is hung from the ceiling by the flies department.
They are permanently based at the Apollo and must acquaint themselves with every scene change of each production.
Sometimes it doesn't work.
Male speaker
During an opera we had a lighting change and they misinformed me about the weights.
I took the brake out slowly, but it was overweighted and I went up with it.
Fortunately an assistant stopped mew before I went through the roof.
Voice over
Barnum had 39 changes involving countless backdrops, circus tricks and effects.
It means constant activity above their heads as they perform their already risky stunts.
Female speaker
Fortunately I don't have to do the really dangerous stuff, buteven backstage in the wings I did have a few things falling about me on the last day in Manchester.
Male speaker
There is an element of danger in the show but it is thoroughly checked, but there's always a first time.
Voice over
Barnum is showing for 3 weeks, but the theatre must be thinking ahead all the time.
The Box Office is not only selling tickets for now, they're getting custom for future events like visiting ballet companies and comedians.
The administration keeps everything ticking over.
Ian Sime is Deputy Manager.
He sees every aspect of the theatre.
Male speaker
Chaotic is the word.
We're dealing with the day to day running of the theatre; shows coming in, maintenance, but also looking forward to the next productions.
Voice over
The world of the theatre is made up of those who like being on stage and those who enjoy being behind it.
They each need other but some are absolutely vital to a successful production.
Tomorrow we'll look at them.
Football now, and sadly no big birthday present last night for Swindon player manager Glenn Hoddle…
He was thirty five yesterday but Oldham ruined the celebrations, knocking Town out of the Coca Cola Cup, one-nil…
Here's Tim Russon 
Voice over
Glenn Hoddle's party was at the County Ground.
Rotten weather; it rained all night, but in the opening minutes, the Swindon players ran hard and challenged for everything.
They were playing pass the parcel with the ball and musical chairs with the Oldham defence, who froze like statues.
The prizes; the presents; the goals, had to come soon surely, as Swindon swept the premier league side off their feet with some stylish football.
And of course the birthday boy should always get the biggest slice of cake.
Well it was looking that way, as Glenn Hoddle closed in to shoot.
It's only good manners to make your guests feel at home and give them a go now and again, but Swindon were a little too kind just before half-time.
0-0.
Not fair on Town, but there was something just missing from their attacks; something not quite right; the ice cream wasn't the right flavour.
But the Swindon defence was wobbling like a jelly when Oldham turned on the heat and got their game going.
A shot from Graeme Sharp was the just a warning.
In the 67th minute, Oldham were celebrating.
Party poopers, that's what they were, as Paul Bernard scored with a flying header.
Not much Swindon could do about it either.
It was a good goal; a worthy winner.
Good game this, thought Oldham.
They went for more, but Nicky Hammond in the Town goal made sure they didn't have too many happy returns.
Swindon never stopped.
They wanted to make it a game to remember for their boss, for birthday boy, Glenn, but on the night, sadly, there was no icing on the Town cake.
Congratulations to non-league Aylesbury United.
They've won their way through to the first round of the FA Cup where they'll be away to West Bromwich Albion.
A printing firm has gone into liquidation, giving staff just a few hours' notice they were losing their jobs.
The company told its workforce it simply couldn't cope with the recession.
Robin Powell reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JASON ASHMORE/Media Union
Voice over
Up to 60 staff at S and S Press in Abingdon were told yesterday the company was going out of business and their services were no longer required.
The firm, which specialised in commercial brochures, had a shaky time last year and staff agreed then on a pay cut.
Today at an emergency meeting with Union Leaders to discuss their future, they were still coming to terms with the shock of redundancy.
The recession has hit the printing industry hard and the Media Union says it's unlikely staff will be able to find a similar job.
Male speaker
You've just got to rebuild your life.
It's happening all over the country — not just to me.
Male speaker
I've been in the trade for 29 years and I've never known it this bad.
Voice over
A skeleton staff of eight is finishing off the company's orders.
Liquidation proceedings will start once a creditors' meeting has taken place.
A country landlord is helping to fight pit closures by changing the name of his pub.
He says people are put off by the name’ Majors Arms’because of its link with the Prime Minister.
So he's renamed it’ The Miners Arms’.
Richard Barnett reports:
HALMONDS FROME/Herefordshire
TONY KING/Landlord
Voice over
For over 400 years, drinkers have made their way to the Majors Arms at Halmonds Frome in Herefordshire for good ale and company.
But ever since the Government became embroiled in the row over the plan to close 31 pits, local beer lovers have veered away from the pub with the Prime Ministerial name.
In response to falling trade and as a gesture of solidarity to the pitmen, the landlord has changed the pub's name to The Miners Arms.
And now drinkers are turning up in droves.
Male speaker
Major doesn't seem a very popular name at the moment.
That's why the name has been changed, and it does mean support for the miners.
Voice over
All the customers in the Miners Arms bar today backed the change of name.
There aren't many miners around Halmonds Frome, but Tony King says anyone who presents an NUM or UDM union card at the bar will get a free pint.
An old Cole Porter song goes’ How strange, the change from Major to Miner,’but in the depths of the Herefordshire countryside, it seems to make sense.
The private antiques collection of Arthur Negus has gone on sale at auction.
The treasures of a man who spent his life helping other people discover valuables in their own attics attracted interest from all over the world.
And they raised nearly a hundred thousand pounds for his widow.
Clare Lafferty reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
SIMON CHORLEY/Bruton Knowles
Voice over
In part two: Fireworks backstage: First night nerves for Barnum.
And party poopers.
Oldham spoil Glenn Hoddle's birthday.
People living near a former young offenders institution are fighting plans to turn it into a detention centre for the immigration service.
Protestors say war refugees will be locked up with illegal immigrants under the control of Group Four security.
Library Pictures/SIMON GARRETT/Kidlington
BILL MacKEITH/Campsfield Forum
LORRAINE RICHINGS/Kidlington Parish Council
Voice over
Campsfield House used to hold young offenders aged between fourteen and sixteen.
It closed two years ago and is now rundown and overgrown.
It's planned to turn part of the site into a detention centre for the immigration service.
People seeking political asylum will be locked up here while the Home Office decides if they can stay
Male speaker
Britain is the only country in Europe which imprisons people applying for political asylum.
That's appaling.
There's no time limit on detention under the immigration act.
Some are held for eighteen months…they've committed no crime but they have to prove themselves innocent
Voice over
Local people were well used to high security when Campsfield was a young offenders institution.
But there's confusion over its new role.
Detainees won't be criminals but asylum seekers…often avoiding persecution in Bosnia or Africa.
Yet for many residents are most concerned about their own security
She says It depends what type of people.
Is their going to be lots of escapes and that sort of thing by people who don't want to go back to their own country
Male speaker
As long as the controls are there to make sure they're not wandering around all over the place which one hears about Group 4 and their reputation for letting people go which has become a bit of a joke.
But even though it's run by a private company I see no reason to worry
Voice over
There are plans to form Kidlington support group for detainees.
Some believe the British approach is wrong
Female speaker
Some other European countries deal with refugees differently.
They allow them to live in the communikty and report to police daily or weekly
Voice over
The Home Office says local people have told them they welcome the jobs which the new Campsfield will bring.
A spokesman said:’ We will be detaining people under Immigration Act powers.
There's nothing to fear.
The reason they are detained is because we feel if we release them we won't see them again.
Opponants say for refugees fleeing home for their lives Campsfield will be a poor welcome to freedom
Still to come on Central News, Just champion.
A heavyweight line-up at the Oxford Union.
And we are not amused.
Queen Vic's nighties flop at auction.
Welcome back: The Red Cross is opening a temporary sanctuary to house refugees from Bosnia.
They'll be flying to Britain next week.
Wesley Smith
Meanwhile, as winter descends on the world's trouble spots, another charity is making fresh appeals for clothes and cash.
ROD HOLMES/Oxford
PAULINE SMITH/Red Cross
AID WORKER/Iraq
Voice over
Red Cross workers in Oxford are preparing beds and fixing up catering for the evacuees who can stay at the centre for anything up to four months.
Once the Bosnians have had medical checks, they'll be able to look after themselves and have the chance to send messages to the relatives they've left behind.
I think one has to remember that these are people coming from a war-torn area that had been held in either refugee camps or detention centres and they will be traumatised and although they may not be injured, they've suffered some horror, so they'll have emotional problems to be dealt with as well.
So the centre will be offering counselling support as well.
All this sort of responsibility will be taken on by the reception centre.
This we actually see is just a continuation of the service that we currently provide for refugees withgin the community, adding another dimension to us.
So we're quite excited about it and also it's quite a major problem.
We're busy getting our cat together so we can be as supportive as we possibly can.
At the end of their stay, the Bosnians can chose to stay in Britain.
They'll be able to apply for asylum.
Meanwhile, Oxfam has launched a double-edged appeal to bring aid to refugees in countries ripped apart by fighting.
They including Albania, Afghanistan and Iraq.
The Charity wants a million pounds and a million items of winter clothing as part of their 'Cold Front' appeal.
You can in what condition we are living and you can imagine what it will be like in the winter.
Even now it's cold already.
Oxfam say woman and children are particularly at risk from the bitter winter weather.
Aid workers reckon the lives of five million people are under threat.
Animal rights activists have been targetting people and shops in the region for the last five years.
Incendiary devices have caused millions of pounds in damage.
May 1989/MILTON KEYNES
May 1989/KATE GARRAWAY/Reporting
May 1991/OXFORD
Animal Activists Video
Febuary 1991/NORTHMOOR/Oxfordshire
July 1991
Voice over
This was animal rights activists most destructive attack…in 1989.
It wrecked two floors of the Dickens and Jones store in Milton Keynes and caused twenty million pounds damage.
Five months later a device exploded in the Macdonalds restsurant in the town.
In 1991, animal campaigners telephoned Central South saying they had planted up to ten bombs in Oxford University labs in protest against animal experiments.
One of the devices went off before bomb disposal squads arrived.
It started a fire.
Since then activists have focused on raids and break-ins.
In 1991 activists released more than two hundred, from Oxford University's labs at Northmoor.
They also forced the recall of hair products after caliming they's been contaminated with glass bleech.
Today's attacks suggest another switch in tactics, back to the use of bombs, although as yet, nobody has claimed admitted sending the letters.
Prisoners have started a series of fires at one the country's newest prisons for the second day running.
In a separate incident, a prisoner who was being moved, broke free and vandalised furniture.
But jail staff say the prison is still under control.
KIM BARNES/Bullingdon Prison
JOHN THOMAS FERRAND/Govenor
RON ADAMS/Prison Officers' Association
Voice over
The govenor of Bullingdon says it's been a very rough patch.
Last night three fires were started on C-Wing, a training wing.
Five members of staff had to be treated in hospital after breathing smoke and 45 prisoners were evacuated.
Then this morning a prisoner who was being moved, broke free and damaged furniture and fittings.
Later this afternoon there was a cell fire on another wing, B-wing.
But officials say this was unconnected and that now the situation is calm.
Male speaker
We have removed nine prisoners from C-Wing, they're now in the segregation unit.
We're trying to return C-Wing to normality.
Voice over
This string of incidents follows a cell fire reported yesterday.
The prison officers association say the strain is showing on staff.
They say its trouble makers and a run of concerted indiscipline.
POA
The prisoners' grievances appear to be the food here and the availablity of prison clothing.
The govenor says he's dealing with both issuses and both he and his officers say the situation is under control tonight.
An armed robber has been jailed for fifteen years after shots were fired at police during a chase after a post office raid.
The judge told Frank Smith he'd taken part in a’ journey of terror.’
GARETH FURBY/Reporting
Sgt DAVID KNIGHT/Thames Valley Police
VALERIE DRAKE/Sub-postmistress
January 1993/SANDFORD/Oxfordshire
Voice over
The pellet marks tell the story.
A few inches either way and police officers could have been seriously injured or even killed.
Frank Smith from Sandford near Oxford was part of a four man gang armed with sawn-off shotguns which robbed a sub-post office in Berkshire.
But as they made their getaway the gang crashed into a lorry, and then panicked hijacking four cars at gunpoint, and opening fire on police.
The judge said it was a mircale that Inspector Paul Kirby wasn't hit, and other officers told the court they'd never been so terrified.
He says he was thinking of chasing but they shot at him again.
The judge also said staff at the Berkshire sub-post office may never recover from the terror of that day.
She says they were just hoping they would go away without doing anything stupid.
The day after the robbery Frank Smith was arrested at this caravan site near Oxford.
The Judge told him:
The Judge said the gang may have been in a state of panic, but the police were unarmed and it was miracle they weren't seriously injured.
He was sentenced to 15 years in prison
In Central News tonight: Firebomb: City centre closed as shops are searched.
Letter bomb: Revenge attack on farmer jailed for cruelty.
And trouble behind bars.
Wave of unrest hits model prison.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
In seperate incidents, two farmers were injured by letter bombs thought to be from animal rights extremists.
One of the victims recently served a prison sentence for animal cruelty.
First this from Ken Goodwin 
GLOUCESTER
HELEN SMALLDON/River Island Clothing
Chief Insp COLIN HANDY/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Dressed in protective body armour, a bomb squad officer walks into the River Island clothing shop in Gloucester city centre.
He's looking for the remains of a rucksack which caught fire on a shelf in the shop.
The rucksack was part of a store display.
The shop's manageress says that staff saw it smouldering, so they evacuated the store as quickly as possible.
She says that they don't yuet know what caused the fire.
The police had sealed off only part of the city centre while the bomb squad investigated.
But when one of the squad emerged from the shop with the remains of the rucksack, and told police that he was unhappy about the cause of the fire, a full scale evacuation of the city centre was started in case it proved to be an incendiary device and in case others had been planted.
He says that recent bombings mean that the police must put public safety first.
Staff from shops were evacuated, many had not been told what was happening.
She says that they haven't got a clue what's going on.
She says that they were told that it was a bomb scare.
The police searched surrounding buildings and then asked some staff to return to shops and begin their own search.
With shops closed for more than six hours it's been a costly afternoon for businesses — but shopkeepers agree the caution is justified.
He says that it was the right decision.
Gloucester city centre has been virtually closed since midday, but the police are anxious to stress that with recent bombings in other cities public safety must come first.
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
Voice over
Two letterbombs have exploded at the homes of people who work with animals.
Police warn that there could be more waiting to be opened tonight or still in the post.
One of today's letterbombs was to a farmer with convictions for cruelty to animals, the other to a cat breeder.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Winslow
COLIN FRENCH/Farmer
Library Pictures
CYNTHIA O'NEIL/Animal Rights Supporter
Voice over
Farmer Colin French received injuriesd to hisbface and hands when he opned what he thought was a video package this morning.
It was a letterbomb with a battery operated detonating device.
Mr French believes he’ s been targetted by an aninal rights group.
Police are lionking his attack with another at a cattery at Hill Grove Farm in Minster Lovell, Oxforsshire.
Mr French had to be treated for shock and cuts in hospital.
He said
It blew up in my face when I opened it.
I had stuff in my hands, my face is swollen and I can't hear in one ear
Voice over
His aunt Miriam was with him at the time and she was showered in debris from the bomb.
Normally the farm manager's daughter would have been there as well.
Male speaker
Normally there’ s a two year old girl in the kitchen with me.
Thank goodness she wasn't there today
Voice over
Mr French was jailed earlier this year after being convicted of animal cruelty charges.
He had at one stage been described as the worst farmer in Britain and RSPCA investigators found emaciated animals when they went there.
His home has been attacked by animal rights activists in the past but now his farm is in the hands of managers and he says he's paid his price.
Male speaker
I've done my bit, I'm trying to get it right now but I'm scared to walk out the soor at the moment
Voice over
The bomb at Minster Lovell was exactly the same as the one in Buckinghamshire.
It bore the same postmark and was again disguised as a video.
The victim, the cattery owner Christopher Brown, also suffered cuts and burns.
So far no one has claimed responsibility for the bombs but an Animal Liberation Front supporter passing the Minister Lovell incident denied any knowledge.
Female speaker
The Animal Liberatyion Front never plant bombs.
They have never hurt an animal or a person
Voice over
Police say there could be many more of the bombs and they're warning people to be on their guard.
Britain's first world heavyweight boxing champion this century got a standing ovation after a knock-out performance at the Oxford Union.
More than a thousand students packed into the debating chamber to hear Lennox Lewis talk about his life in the ring.
KATE GARRAWAY/Oxford
LENNOX LEWIS/WBC World Heavyweight Champion
FRANK MALONEY/Manager
Voice over
This hall has seen some of the greatest figures of the twentieth century locked in heated debate.
But never before a heavy weight boxing champion of the world.
And the students wanted to see how Lennox Lewis stood up to their intellectual punches.
What did he think of those who thought he was passed it.
Male speaker
I'd like to see them get in there and try it.
Voice over
Was his success down to size or technique…
Male speaker
You're talking about boxing now.
Voice over
Fresh from defeating Frank Bruno there's little doubt Lennox Lewis is king in the ring.
But how did he feel about his debut in intellectual circles.
Male speaker
Infact it is alot easier doing something like this than going into the ring because you see all their fresh faces and all they care about is having their quetions answered.
Male speaker
It was wonderful to see so many people and when I walked into the room I was actually quite terrified.
Voice over
Reporter asks: And has he got a bright future?
Male speaker
What as a boxer or a politician after today I'm not so sure.
Voice over
The thousand odd fans of his current career who crammed into aisles to see him, were not disappointed.
Lewis says he'll know when to retire, but will never follow Frank Bruno into panto.
When he hangs up his gloves he says he'll just be doing alot more gardening instead.
Two of Queen Victoria's night dresses failed to attract any interest when they came up for auction.
They were donated to charity by a descendant of one of the Queen's ladies-in-waiting.
But even that didn't prompt any bids.
CLARE LAFFERTY Cheltenham
SYLVIA CHARLEWOOD Red Cross
Voice over
The nightdresses were worn by Queen Victoria in the eighteen seventies and eighties.
They're made of white linen and are embroidered with the Imperial Crown.
They were donated to the Red Cross by a mystery well-wisher who walked into the charity's shop in Cheltenham.
We were delighted.
The nighties went on sale this afternoon.
But bids failed to reach the reserve price of two hundred pounds.
The Red Cross isn't too disheartened by the lack of interest, but no doubt the original owner would not be amused.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Police reforms confirmed
The Home Secretary, Michael Howard, has confirmed that some of the changes recommended in the Sheehy Report on Britain's police forces, are to be introduced.
They include scrapping some top ranks and appointing chief officers for fixed terms although some of the more radical proposals have been rejected.
Ministers prepare for cuts
Government ministers have been meeting to prepare major spending cuts ahead of Chancellor Clarke's Budget speech next month.
Parents guilty of manslaughter
A couple from Nottingham who refused their young daughter live-saving medicine because of their religious beliefs have been found guilty of manslaughter
FTSE up 8
The hundred shares index closed up eight point seven at thirty-one, sixty-three point three.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-eight and up two marks, fifty.
A young scientist is planning to boldly go where no young scientist has gone before.
He's drawn up a route for a walk to the South Pole…of Mars, that is.
He'll have a bit of a wait though…probably about two hundred years.
Here's Nick Clark.
CHARLES COCKELL Scientist
Voice over
Even HG Wells might not have believed in the last years of the 20th century, plans were being laid to walk across the Martian south pole.
He wouldn't have dreamed that a superior mind in the Thames Valley was planning to cross the gulf of space with an expedition living off supplies of pineapples and nuts.
Unbelievable, but true.
25 year old, Charles Cockell is no science fiction writer.
He's studying for a PHD in Biophysics aOOxford university and next year he's being taken on by the American space agency NASA.
Charles has actually planned a route across the Martian south pole using photographs taken by the Viking and Mariner probes.
Male speaker
It does have a use, in that one day people will be on Mars and will get a lot of knowledge from exploration of the martian poles.
Voice over
Charles has already achieved notoriety in the world of science for extracting the genes from a piece of frozen mammoth and for embarking on a trip to Mongolia in search of the long-eared hedgehog.
He knows he won't live to see his Martian polar dreams fulfilled, although man may be on Mars early next century.
Male speaker
It won't be done before Mars is colonised.
Pineapples grow well in Martian soil, so they'll eat things like fruit and nuts.
Voice over
Of course, as a scientist who's planning an expedition that's going to take 200 years to get underway, Charles has his critics within the Oxford establishment.
But he's got his supporters too.
And as you might expect from one so young who's done so much, the next project is, shall we say, extremely ambitious.
Male speaker
I want to build a replica of Noah's Ark and fill it with animals and prove the voyage could have been made.
Three men questioned over semtex raid
Voice over
Police are questioning at least three people after discovering a huge cache of semtex in a tea chest in East London.
Detectives think they might have uncovered an IRA Christmas bombing campaign.
Lib Dems will back Government over Maastricht
The Liberal Democrats are expected to support the Government in the Maastricht debate next Wednesday.
John Major has announced that the motion will clearly define Government policy.
FTSE down 8
The hundred shares index closed down eight point one at twenty-six forty-two point three.
The pound is down at one dollar fifty-seven, and down at two marks forty-one,
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back: And it's time for our third and last look backstage at the hit musical Barnum.
Starring Paul Nicholas, it's been playing to packed houses for nearly two weeks.
OXFORD
TRISH McAULEY/Wardrobe Mistress
PAUL NICHOLAS/P
CAROL DUFFY/Charity Barnum
JON SAMUEL/Chief Electrician
IAN SIME/Apollo Deputy Manager
Voice over
Keeping a quick-changing all action-show like Barnum up to the mark needs not only a completely dedicated cast of performers.
It also needs a hardworking support team behind the scenes.
And crucial to every step of the show, is the wardrobe.
With 30 people in the cast and 19 in the orchestra; that means a lot of work.
Female speaker
You all have your notes.
I'll go through the individual changes with you.
Voice over
Trish McCauley is Wardrobe Mistress for Barnum.
She travels with the production, but uses Apollo based dressers for the shows.
They have to quickly get used to the changes.
She says she does get worried that she might miss a change.
The beginning can be quite hectic, but it settles down after a while.
The Wardrobe Department start working from the moment their hampers are unloaded from the trucks.
With the amount of energy generated by the cast, they want a fresh costume every night; and that means washing, ironing and more washing and ironing.
Female speaker
It is a long day, but you do the show and you have a buzz, so you go to the pub.
I do get a social life out of it.
But you can't just go home and watch TV after the show because you are on a high.
Male speaker
I've worked with a lot of wardrobe mistresses and she is my favourite.
She also dresses me.
Without Trish, I wouldn't survive.
She gets me food and she's a marvellous person, with a great sense of humour.
Female speaker
We depend on everyone totally.
If they're not there with my quick changes in the wings the next scene doesn't happen.
If my costume gets ripped then I'm a wreck for the rest of the performance unless they do something.
We're totally depenedant on them, but also on the lights and sound.
Voice over
But mistakes can happen.
Female speaker
There was one in this show when Charity Barnum's understudy went on for the first time.
For some reason, we had a very quick change and her dress was put on inside out.
We had to quickly change it back, but I only got one hook done up and she had to go holding one hand behind her back for the whole scene.
Voice over
These days no appearance in a theatre can go ahead without lots and lots of electricity.
The days of melodramatic voices and candles in the footlights are long gone.
Male speaker
I'm generally responsible for everything electrical backstage.
If a lightbulb goes in the dressing room, I have to change it.
Voice over
But in the end, this large and skilled army of people are there for one end; the performance.
And that requires its own dedication and risk taking.
Male speaker
It's a nice thing to learn.
They say you can't teach an old dog new tricks, but I'm living proof.
Voice over
Some performers are a dream to work with; others not.
Male speaker
We occasionally have to deal with some very sticky temperaments.
Sometimes they throw tantrums.
Male speaker
I like to be in a happy show.
If the show isn't happy and one of the artists is being a pain it spreads, particularly if it's a principle artist.
This show has a happy feel to it.
Voice over
It's curtain up time again, another opening of another show and the Smell of the Greasepaint and the roar of the crowd is as strong now as it ever was for the performers.
But it's just as strong for all the others as they toil away, unseen and unsung, Behind The Curtain.
An international showjumper has launched a campaign to try to reduce the number of horse thefts.
Owners are encouraged to security mark everything, including the horses themselves.
Liz Hannam reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
VIVIEN BURNHAM/Horse Theft Victim
PADDY MCMAHON/Showjumper
SANDRA BLACKMORE/Horse Watch
PC RON GLYNN/Thames Valley Police
WPC JOANNA CLEARY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Vivien Burnham had her pony Disney stolen 2 years ago.
She says she'll never get over the loss.
Female speaker
It wrecks the of one's life.
The whole family is affected.
This pony was a family pet.
The sort of pet that would come into the house and have a bit of birthday cake.
Voice over
It's to stop such thefts that Horsewatch has been formed.
Show jumper Paddy McMahon, who lives near Bicester, launched the Banbury branch.
Male speaker
When I was appreached I immediately said of course.
I've seen it.
Children having their ponies taken and the upset it causes.
Voice over
But it hasn't been easy to organise.
It took 2 years to get the money and membership needed to launch the campaign.
Female speaker
There's, there was quite a bit of apathy where horse secuirty is concerned.
But people are beginning to realise we're all vulnerable.
Voice over
Horsewatch encourages its members to look out for each others animals and to improve their own security measures.
Postcoding saddles, a service which is provided free by the police, is considered essential.
Male speaker
We have got lots of property we don't know owner of…and the burglar can't remember.
Voice over
The campaign also supports freeze marking horses.
A superchilled marker kills the pigment cells in the horses hair, which, when it grows back is white, showing the code distinctly.
But it's been criticised for being unsightly.
Female speaker
The distress caused by a horse being stolen, I'd have it all over the its body if it stopped them being stolen.
It's not a bit unsighlty.
Voice over
Of the 83 horses stolen this year, only 26 have been recovered.
8 of the stolen horses were freeze marked and all but one of those have been found.
A nine hour wait.Anger over long delays in casualty unit.
We told them to get out.Three deny they left twins to die in barn fire.
And call us.
Help for the children whose parents drink too much.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES
They're blaming the crisis on the district health authority, who they accuse of not providing the hospital with sufficient money to do its job properly.
Patients who've complained about the long wait have been sent letters of apology.
Ian Maclaren reports.
OXFORD
JULIE CLEMENTS/Patient
TONY STAPLETON/Hospital General Manager
PETER WARLOCK/Consultant
ALISON GIRAUD-SAUNDERS/Oxfordshire Health Authority
Voice over
Julie Clements was sent by her GP to the John Radcliff Hospital's accident and emergency department to check if there were any broken bones in her injured ankle.
She was told to expect a five hour delay…in the event she endured a nine hour wait…
Today Julie received a letter of apology from the hospital.
It appears she'd been unlucky to choose a particularly busy day.
This is the first point of contact for patients arriving at the accident and emergency department.
Their condition is assessed by a nurse within minutes of arrival.
But if their injury isn't considered serious, it could be hours before they're actually seen and treated by a doctor.
Hospital managers say the long delays in overcrowded waiting rooms is a worrying problem…
A reduction in Junior Doctors hours is making the situation more difficult.
And senior staff say the John Radcliff has just 6.9 doctors to deal with 58,000 patients a year…well below the national average.
They're calling for more resources from the District Health Authority…
Oxfordshire Health Authority is currently reviewing services…planners will then have the task of deciding whether more cash should go to the accident and emergency department…
Doctors say the problems shouldn't put lives at risk…but the problem will get worse unless more resources are forthcoming.
A woman and her adopted son could face at least five years in a Turkish jail after being accused of possessing drugs and pornographic videos.
The woman, from Worcester, is wanted for questioning in this country following the disappearance of thousands of pounds of charity cash.
Kim Barnes reports.
HEINO KOPIETZ/Friend
Voice over
Police efforts to talk to Ruth Hilali are continuing.
She's wanted for questioning following the withdrawal of £130,000 from the funds of the Worcestershire Kurdish Refugee Association.
Meanwhile, Mrs Hilali, who's been in this resort in Turkey for most of this year, has now been charged by Turkish police with possessing hashish and pornographic videos, along with Philip Baker her adopted son.
The charges carry a minimum sentence of 5 years, heavy fines and 2 to 5 years exile in a remote part of Turkey.
She was charged under the name Barbara Legge.
She's also known to have used the names Sarah Collins and Sarah Cohen.
Her friend in this country, Heino Kopietz, says she's now distraught.
He claims he took this picture of Mrs Hilali in Dahouk in Kurdistan last January when he says he saw her helping refugees.
Mrs Hilali, who's now had her passport confiscated, will appear in court in late November.
A court has been told that three men accused of killing twin sisters in a barn fire shouted to them to get out before the men themselves ran away.
One defendant admitted lying about setting fire to straw to see what he was doing.
Another said he and his friends were partly drunk.
Tim Hurst reports from Bristol Crown Court.
JANUARY 1991/UCKINGTON/Gloucestershire
BRISTOL
Voice over
Twin sisters Emma and Rebecca Harper, who died in the fire at Uckington near Cheltenham in Gloucestershire, were last seen looking for their clothes, according to two of the 3 men accused of killing them.
David Harper, from Uckington, no relation to the twins, who'd been with Rebecca, and Wisdom Smith, who was with Emma, both told the police they'd jumped from bales of blazing straw.
The girls were looking for their clothes while the flames were getting worse.
Detective Sergeant Alen Gibb, who'd questioned Harper.
told the court that Emma didn't stand a chance because she was on top of the stacked bales.
Rebecca, lower down the bales, should have had every chance of escape.
During police interviews, Harper changed his story about how the fire started, according to Sergeant Gibb.
He originally blamed a discarded cigarette, then he admitted lighting bunches of straw so that he and Becky could see what they were doing.
Each time he'd banged out the flames.
A third man man, Daniel Winter, had also gone to the barn.
He, Harper and Smith had jumped to the ground when the fire started.
All three men have denied manslaughter.
In another interview, Smith told the police he was fed up of lying for Harper, it was Harper who'd struck matches.
Harper told Smith little matches were harmless.
Smith also told police the three men were half cut, they'd lost their sense of safety.
The barn, rebuilt since the fire, has been visited by the jury.
In the bay where the fire started, flowers have been left by the twins' mother.
Smith told police he thought the girls had already jumped from the bay when he, Harper and Winter had run off.
When he heard the girls were dead he felt sick.
The trial continues tomorrow.
We're off to enjoy, or should it be endure, one of the great British sporting challenges now.
It's a two-day race over the highest peaks in Scotland.
It's on foot, with only a map, a compass and the stars as signposts.
It's called the Karrimor International Mountain Marathon, and it's our Friday Feature.
ROGER THETFORD
NIGEL BUNN
MALCOLM GREEN
STEVE ASTINGTON
JEN LONGBOTTOM/Organiser
STAN JOHNSTON/Race Controller
Voice over
There is a corner of a frozen field in Scotland…where once a year you'll find some of the toughest…some of the hardest…some of the wackiest racers in sport…
They come to the highlands to compete in the annual mountain marathon…its a race over the hills…of around 26 miles a day
And this is half-time…a night camp…but rest comes in short measures…the wake-up comes in the dark before dawn
Nearly three thousand runners…climbers…orienteers are competing in teams of two…among the fittest and fastest are two scientists from Oxfordshire…
Nigel Bunn and Roger Thetford…
Roger Thetford says it's an extension of orinteering and it's a real challenge
Nigel Bunn says it's hard because youhave to carry all your own stuff…he usually needs a week to recover
flying the flag for Gloucestershire are education officer Malcolm Green from Cheltenham and lecturer Steve Astington from the Forest of Dean…
Malcolm Green says he does a lot of orienteering and this is the big one
Steve Astington says he was a rock climber and then moved over to marathons…this is his thirteenth…you have to put a lot of training in…he does them for the enjoyment it takes him away from life and all the stresses
the name of the game is to race over the mountains…you can either go flat out for the fastest time…or take a treasure hunt sort of trail where you find and check in at remote control points…the route you find yourself…
Jen Longbottom says its a race for the country lovers…they try to take people to a part of the country where they would not normally get to…it's not a race for softies…
Stan Johnston it's like a disease…they look forward to it all year
the finish is at Drumlanrig castle…they've been running…slipping…sliding over the mounatins for seven hours…they've climbed into the clouds…they've crossed the streams…they've run through the glens for mile after mile…the Oxfordshire team of Bunn and Thetford were up to second place but have finished fourth…its been a long hard day…
Roger says he was taken ill half way round and suffered but he will try again next year
coming home late in the afternoon are Malcolm and Steve from Gloucestershire…
Malcom says he is shattered
and that's the Karrimor International Mountain Marathon…a race made of the right stuff
With Halloween looming, a farmer has been doing brisk business offering’ pick your own’pumpkins.
He's already sold much of his crop, and most are destined to become Halloween lanterns.
RICHARD BARNETT Gloucester
ROB KEENE Farmer
Voice over
It's the first time the farm at Over just outside Gloucester has offered people the chance to pick their own pumpkins…and already many of the 12,000 giant orange vegetables spread across the 5 acre plot have been sold.
And with Halloween on Sunday, a last minute rush is going on.
For some the pumpkins were just too big to handle.
But others who could manage to carry off some prize plants were delighted:
They say: It's a very good idea to be able to pick your own.
Farmer Rob Keene has been growing pumpkins for five years, and he's seen sales rocket.
It seems children can't resist them:
Male speaker
Children like to carve faces out of them.
But pumpkins are becoming increasingly popular as a vegetable too.
Voice over
In the field, local youngsters have produced a number of displays, including an ingenious Thomas the Tank Engine.
But the real fun is going on in a nearby barn with pumpkin lanterns.
These days Halloween wouldn't be the same without this scary idea from America.
But not everyone is frightened:
They say: They're not scared.
For the very young, like four year old Rebecca, the pumpkin lanterns hold no fear…just wide eyed wonderment.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Girl witnesses brothers' shooting
An eleven year old girl has witnessed her two brothers, who were Roman Catholics, being shot dead in their home by terrorists in Northern Ireland.
Major and Reynolds meet
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister and the Irish Premier have met in Brussels to discuss the search for peace in Northern Ireland.
Murder plot woman freed
Morag Taylor, who plotted to murder her husband has been sentenced to community service after his pleas to the judge not to imprison her.
Warning on police cautions
In a clamp-down on crime, the Home Secretary has said that offenders cautioned by police should not expect to be given a second chance.
California fires under control
The fires which have destroyed six hundred homes in California have now been brought under control.
FTSE up 8
And the hundred shares index closed up eight points at thirty-one, seventy-one exactly.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-nine and down at two marks, forty-nine.
Welcome back: In a few minutes, pumpkin picking with the trick or treat brigade.
But first, with the Friday sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Coming up a football health warning for Swindon Town…
Aston Villa can seriously damage your health…
Sunderland are still in intensive care after being hammered 4-1 in the coca cola cup…and they played well…they matched Villa kick for kick…apart from in front of goal…
There were two goals for Dalien Atkinson and one apiece for Kevin Richardson and Ray Houghton…tomorrow the Villa come a calling at the County Ground…
There's going to be changes after that cup defeat at Porstmouth…
Martin Ling may be rested…
Kevin Horlock may be called in to midfield
Villa's away record is quite something…and Town have got to find something special to break it…
Same thing goes for Oxford United…they're playing the league leaders Charlton Athletic at the Valley…last season United ran them close both home and away…they drew 1-1 in London…but lost 1-0 at the Manor Ground
No new players yet…and to make matters worse a flu bug has hit the club…
skipper Jim Magilton…and both full-backs…
Les Robinson…and Mike Ford are coughing and sneezing and facing fitness checks in the morning…
Charlton have been unbeatable at home…
United not so good away but you never know…
you never what will happen with Hereford these days that's for sure…
they lost by six at Crewe…won by five against Colchester…and then went down in an eight goal bonanza last week…
go give them a cheer…on current form you'll get your money's worth…
sad team news though…
Simon Brain broke his leg for the second time in the welsh cup on wednesday and is out for the rest of the season…local youngster Paul Eversham will be given a chance to prove himself…
It'll be a hard game tomorrow…
Preston have started well and are chasing that top spot…
goal of the week…comes from hereford again…and from Chris Pike again…the man's a shooting star
We promised you the world's top racer at the start.
He's not behind the wheel…we've got him in front of the camera.
Over to you Nigel 
MARTIN KERNAHAN
Voice over
don't give up the day job Nigel…not that he'd want to…red five flies again at Donington Park on sunday…
Britain's biggest motor racing crowd of the year will be there to see him driving in a touring car…what we all want to know is whether we'll see him driving in grand prix again…
Nigel Mansell says that things are changing and he's better than ever and he would like to give it another shot…
driving off to spain to rally…is the Witney team of Martin Kernahan and Bill Hitchcock…they usually get themselves geared up for the RAC Rally but this time around it spain…
Martin Kernahan says they've done the RAC rally before and they fancied something different…their car is built in spain and the rally is all on tarmac so it should be good
driving even further than spain is the Oxfordshire team of Francis Tuthill and Anthony Showell…the winners of the London to Sydney car marathon…are the first to enter the London to Mexico marathon which was unveiled for the first time this week…
racing for the last time this season are swindon speedway…it's the riders championship there on Sunday…a meeting not to be missed
People with head injuries who can't get the long-term treatment they need have been promised a better deal.
Victims and health authorities agree that services aren't being properly coordinated, but one authority has promised to try to find a consultant to sort out the problem.
AMANDA WITTON/Head Injury Victim
SIMON GARRETT/Swindon
APRIL FILLON-PAYOUX/Victim's Wife
SYLVIA WOODGATE/Headway
MIKE DAVIES/Swindon Health Authority
Female speaker
People always take me for being drunk.
It does get to me.
I lost half of my friends when it happened
Voice over
Amanda Witton was about to join the police when she suffered head injuries in a motorbike crash.
Now she'll never work.
She needs counselling and memory training.
She relies for both on the Headway head injuries charity.
Like many other towns, Swindon has no consultant overseeing the years of care such patients need.
John Fillon-Payoux was knocked down by a car.
His specialist care can't be found at all in Swindon.
The nearest appropriate bed is in Bournemouth.
His wife April just scrapes enough money together to make the hundred and fifty mile round trip to see him twice a week
Female speaker
The worst problem is we're separated.
I'm now looked on as a one parent family.
I can only afford to go to see him twice a week.
I need to be with him and I can't be.
Voice over
Most of the relevant services for patients and families do exist in Swindon.
But no one has responsibility for seeing they get them
Female speaker
We don't get a coordinated service because no consultant is there to take charge of a multi-disciplinary approach.
That's vital for patients and their families
Voice over
Health managers accept there's a problem, and despite the perennial lack of cash they're promising action
Male speaker
We've had a report from Headway which we agreed to take up to see if one of the consultants can oversee head injury services
Voice over
If such a change does take place for Amanda and her family it'll be seven years after time.
Police are claiming success for a new campaign to tackle crime in the countryside.
In one area some offences have fallen by thirty per cent since the start of the year.
The Countrywatch scheme is now likely to be extended throughout Britain.
But senior officers say they need help from the rural community.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
Supt ROGER MAYNE/Thames Valley Police
MAURICE ROBSON/Country Landowners' Association
Voice over
In recent months Thames Valley police have switched resources to fighting crime in the countryside, a move forced by a sharp rise in offences.
Last year crime in rural South Oxfordshire rose by almost half.
But now the trend has ben reversed.
Since January thefts have fallen by 20 per cent, car crime by 15 per cent and violent offences by 14 per cent .
Sex offences are down by 30 per cent.
At the official launch of the the new Countrywatch campaign the area's police chief said bobbies were going back on the beat in rural areas.
He says taking bobbies out of villages lead to more crime.
Now offences are falling again.
Police say extra vigilance has helped to kerb the recent spate of attacks on horses.
There's also been success in the battle against illegal gatherings of new age travellers.
And the Saturday rave craze seems to be on the way out.
But villagers are still concerned about burglaries, where country homes were once left unlocked security is now a high priority.
He says the M40 has made it easier for criminals to escape with stolen property.
The campaign may now be extended to other rural areas.
But police stress that they don't have any more money to spend on policing the villages.
Much will depend on the vigilance of local people.
The leader of Britain's biggest union has been touring an old industrial battleground, to see how times have changed.
Bill Morris, General Secretary of the Transport Workers Union was welcomed by management at Rover's body plant, and says the bad old days are gone.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Swindon
BILL MORRIS/General Secretary
ALLEN PENGELLY/Rover
Voice over
Ten years ago the idea of the general secretary of the Transport Union making a friendly tour of a British car factory would have been unthinkable.
But times have moved on.
Bill Morris came to Rover's Swindon plant to see just how much things had changed.
Male speaker
I wouldn't use the word enemy but we have seen a lot of changes in the relationship.
We didn't agree with everything the company said.
There has been a transformation in terms of attitude, in terms of product, in terms of quality and in terms of price.
Voice over
The bitter battles of the past are gone and these days Bill Morris can only sing Rover's praises.
The change has been dramatic.
Four years ago it would have taken a whole day to set up a run of car doors at the plant.
Now it can take as little as fifteen minutes.
New technology and new management attitudes have brought a different atmosphere.
Male speaker
Working with the management now is a lot better than it ever has been.
Communication is a lot better.
Voice over
Now Mr Morris wants to spread the union word to Rover's neighbours in Swindon Honda.
They have been non union since the factory was built.
It's Rover today which has the success story.
Who knows, it could be Honda tomorrow?
One scene on the tour summed up the attitude change.
Standing side by side the men in suits were from the union, the men in overalls from the management.
Still to come on Central News, taking the high road.
All the low-down on the mountain marathon.
And pick your own pumpkins…if you can, that is.
In Central News tonight:
Fighting the terrorists: Technology that can track down letter bombs.
It's ruined our lives: Sufferers attack court dismissal of RSI.
And a better deal.
Help at last for victims of head injury.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Meanwhile, a postal workers' leader has condemned the bombers, for putting his members' lives at risk.
He says the letter bombs could have injured any of the people who handled them on their way to their targets.
So far, no one has admitted sending the devices.
Yesterday/ERIKA BARNES/Winslow
COLIN FRENCH/Letter Bomb Victim
Library Pictures
PETE BOSWELL/Union of Communication Workers
MICHAEL SANDLING/K9 Scene of Crime Equipment
Det Chief Insp ROBIN NAPPER/Thames Valley Police
Yesterday/GLOUCESTER
Chief Insp COLIN HANDY/Gloucestershire Police
JOHN CRIPPS/Gloucestershire Chamber of Commerce
Voice over
The remains of a letterbomb which blew up in the hands of farmer Colin French.
A sinister delivery with a powerful message.
Male speaker
It was a box with sellotape.
It went off in my hands.
Voice over
This package and another delivered to a cattery in Oxfordshire passed through Royal Mail sorting offices unnoticed.
The staff there are trained to spot suspect packages, but with millions of letters and parcels to deal with, they can't see them all.
Now there's concern about their safety in the light of the latest campaign.
Male speaker
This is a cowardly form of protest and it's putting innocent people in danger.
Voice over
One firm has come up with a number of ways to find letterbombs, before they find their target.
This scanner looks for trigger points.
Inside this suspicious looking parcel is a make shift devise.
The scanner easily raises the alarm.
This spray means you can take a look at what's inside a letter without having to open it.
Thankfully this is a false alarm.
Male speaker
I don't think people take security seriously enough.
People say it won't happen to me.
But as we're seeing it's happening to all sorts of people.
Voice over
The police don't think we've heard the last of the attackers who seem prepared to endanger many lives in an attempt to reach their targets.
Male speaker
You can't scare people, but if you receive an unexpected package, check it carefully or call the police.
Voice over
Elsewhere investigations are continuing into a separate security alert in Gloucester City Centre yesterday.
A smouldering rucksack was left in a shop and the area had to be evacuated.
Male speaker
We're still looking at it, but it may be the work of the ALF.
But it doesn't have a terrorist connection.
Voice over
Whoever's to blame for the alert, it's cost thousands of pounds in lost trade for city centre businesses.
Male speaker
We have to live with it.
It's a fact of life.
Police have to take the necessary steps.
But it does have a detrimental affect.
Voice over
And tonight, at the end of a week of bombs and bomb scares, another security alert.
This time on board a train, which was stopped at Banbury.
The line was closed for nearly three hours.
But this time, it was a false alarm.
Sufferers of the crippling condition known as Repetitive Strain Injury are furious with a judge for saying there's no such thing.
John Prosser QC says RSI has’ no place in the medical books.’
But for its victims, the suffering is all too real.
GARETH FURBY/Swindon
ELSE TROTTER/RSI Victim
CHARMAINE BARROW/Former Secretary
JUDITH MOORE/Former VDU Operator
KAREN BARKER/Nuffield Hospital
ELAS TROTTER/Former Secretary
Voice over
Today some of the victims of RSI gathered in Swindon to share their thoughts about a judge.
She says it's upsetting.
It makes them look like shirkers.
In the High Court Judge John Prosser has ruled that Repetitive Strain Injury is is a’ meaningless’term, and has’no place in the medical books.’
But these women say the condition is real.
It's forced them to stop work.
And they haven't received a penny in compensation.
She says it's affected her whole life.
Swindon's Princess Margaret hospital is currently about three new cases of RSI every week.
One doctor prefers to call it work related upper limp pain.
But most sufferers tell the same story.
It's brought on by repetitive typing on a computer or word processor keyboard.
And many medical experts agree.
But RSI sufferes who're hoping for some compensation from their employers are worried the Judge's ruling may make harm their chances.
y.
Hospital demo…nurses and patients protest as closure fears grow.
Hitting back…
Bottomley defends Government's record on health.
And final farewells…colleagues attend funeral of nurse gunned down in Egypt.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
As you join us tonight, a torchlight procession is getting underway as doctors and patients protest against plans to cut services at their hospital.
Mrs Bottomley told them the health service had to move with the times and some closures were inevitable.
ERIKA BARNES
Now we go live to Banbury…and Gargy Patel 
GARGY PATEL/Live from Banbury/
Hundreds of protestors have already started to converge on the area around Horton General Hospital.
Many have come from outlying towns and villages, in fact, from across the wide catchment area of the hospital.
They plan to march through Banbury led by a procession of funeral bearers to signify what they say could be the death of the hospital.
Doctors, nurses, unions, patient groups and even local schoolchildren are adding their voices to the protest.
There are grave concerns about the effect any cutbacks will have on local services.
The campaign has gained overwhelming support not only from those within the medical profession, but also ordinary people who rely on the hospital.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
MICHELE LEE/Mother
Dr DOUGLAS BOYLE/Family Doctor
Dr RICHARD MAYON-WHITE/Oxfordshire Health Authority
GARGY PATEL/Live from Banbury
STEVE THORPE/Protest Organiser
Dr LOUISE WALLACE/Horton General Manager
Dr PETER FISHER/Hospital Consultant
SUE EDGAR/Protest Organiser
Voice over
As we said earlier, the Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley faced demonstrators angry about plans to close another hospital in the region.
She told protestors that the Health Service must move with the times and it was inevitable that some hospitals would close as the nation's health needs changed.
This report from Ken Goodwin.
STROUD/Gloucestershire
VIRGINIA BOTTOMLEY/Health Secretary
MARIELLA DEXTER/Hospital General Manager
Voice over
There were flowers for the Secretary of State for Health and a message to go with them; Save Standish Hospital.
She says there are logical arguments for keeping Standish open.
Mrs Bottomley was visiting the Stroud headquarters of the Meningitis Trust.
But campaigners who want to save nearby Standish Hospital from the axe were keen to get their message across.
He says the hospital should be kept open — it's a jewel.
He says the public want this hospital to stay open.
Question: Isn't the Standish protest, and problems at other hospitals in the region a symptom of a crisis in the health service?
She says that the health service can't stand still.
There are bound to be changes, some will involve hospital closures.
But better patient care is the ultimate aim.
Standish Hospital treats orthopaedic and chest ailments and when it closes, patients will have to travel to Gloucestershire Royal Hospital.
She says the catchment area is large, it'll be easier for patients to travel to Gloucester.
It's unlikely that Mrs Bottomley will step in to save Standish, unless there's a major change in Government policy.
Whatever the protests, it seems that Hospital's days are numbered.
Nearly three hundred mourners have attended the funeral of a nurse shot by Muslim terrorists while on holiday in Egypt.
The mourners included colleagues from the hospital where she worked.
Richard Barnett reports:
CONEY HILL/Gloucester
Rev HUGH BROAD/Rector of Matson
LOUISE BODEN/Head of Nursing
Voice over
So many mourners turned up to say a final goodbye to nurse, Sharon Hill, that some had to stand outside Gloucester crematorium for the service.
Sharon, who worked at Gloucestershire Royal Hospital, died 10 days ago while holidaying in Egypt.
The tourist bus in which she was travelling was fired on by terrorists.
The mourners were led by Sharon's parents, John and Sheila Hill.
After the service, the rector gave his reaction to Sharon's untimely death.
Male speaker
It was shocking and bewildering.
She had a greeat zest for life and was a dedicated nurse.
Voice over
Many colleagues from the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital attended the service.
Female speaker
It is a very sad day.
She will always be remembered as a fine nurse.
Voice over
Among the flowers, a tribute from the hospital, to a nurse they'd known for 5 years who'll be deeply missed.
our action round-up is devoted to one sport tonight…and that's ice hockey…the big match was last night…
Milton Keynes against Swindon in the semi-final of the Autumn Trophy…
Mark Kiff reports 
Voice over
The Bladerunner Rink in Milton Keynes was bubbling with excitement as the Kings faced the Wildcats in the first leg of this semi-final battle…and what a start…
Milton Keynes were three up in six minutes…
Doug McCarthy had bagged a hat trick…the Wildcats…were reeling…the Kings were skating to success…
only two places and one point seperate the two teams in the league but in the trophy…they were miles apart…the Kings were different class…
McCarthy's goals gave Milton Keynes a three nil lead at the end of the first period…
and when they changed ends…the goals kept coming…
Dave Heath got the fourth…the Wildcats finally stirred thanks to a goal from Bryan Larkin…the Kings kept going though…they led by 10-1 in the third period before Swindon came back with four late goals…it finished 11…5…with fists flying as tempers flared towards the end…the second leg in two weeks time at Swindon should be a scorcher
Now our Friday Feature this week reflects a sporting revolution…
Oxford United have their own ladies team this season…they're in the first division of the National League and this week played their first game at the Manor ground…and the girls done well.
CAROL HARWOOD/Captain
TIM MIDGLEY /Oxford United Director
BRIAN HORTON/United Manager
MICK STOCKWELL/Womens' Team Manager
Voice over
A nineteen twenties warplane is to be rebuilt at the same factory where it was made.
When it's finished the Gloster Gamecock will be the star exhibit at a new aircraft museum.
Clare Lafferty reports.
CHELTENHAM Gloucestershire
ROLF JONES Designer
Voice over
The Gamecock; a single seat fighter plane, best remembered as the aircraft in which the famous pilot, Douglas Bader crashed and lost his legs.
Only 92 Gamecocks were made.
Each one, at the HH Martyn factory in Cheltenham.
That was back in 1925.
Today, the factory is used to make elevators.
But soon it will produce just one more Gamecock.
In an office nearby, 2 aircraft enthusiasts are preparing the drawings that will be used to rebuild a model Gamecock.
None of the original Gamecocks has survived.
But Rolf was lucky enough to find these original struts from one of the planes.
A farmer in Didcot had been using them as fence posts.
It'll take around 4 years to complete the Gamecock.
When it's finished it'll take pride of place in a new aircraft museum to be opened in Gloucestershire.
Maastricht word ommitted from Treaty motion
The word Maastricht won't appear in the Government motion for Wednesday's Commons debate on Europe.
Boxing promoter loses libel action
Boxing promoter Frank Warren has lost his libel action against his former protege Terry Marsh.
RUC pledge they won't be bombed out of Ulster
The RUC Chief Constable says his officers won't be bombed out of policing the province, after a massive car bomb exploded outside a police station in County Antrim.
FTSE up 16
The hundred shares index closed up sixteen points at twenty-six fifty-eight point three.
The pound is down at one-dollar fifty-six, and down at two marks forty-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
Police and charity commissioners investigating the disappearance of thousands of pounds of funds have been meeting the trustee who raised the alarm.
Meanwhile, the charity's founder insists the money was spent on aid for refugees.
Kim Barnes reports.
ZDF/German Television
JANUARY 1992/RUTH HILALI/Charity Trustee
MICHAEL CLARKE/Solicitor
Voice over
It's scenes like these which Ruth Hilali claims to have come to Kurdistan to deal with.
She says she can prove she spent money from the Worcestershire Kurdish Refugee Association on aid.
In this interview, said to have been carried out in Kurdistan last January, she outlines the difficulties in getting resources through.
But Worcester police want to talk to her about the withdrawal of £130,000 from funds.
The Charity Commission today met co-trustee, Sara Ironside, who first alerted her solicitor.
Meanwhile, Mrs Hilali is under house arrest in Turkey after being charged with possession of drugs.
Developers who've begun turning an old railway site into a multi-million pound housing, shops and offices complex, have promised that work will continue even though they've put the development up for sale.
It's hoped that three thousand jobs will be created but now council leaders fear that, because of the recession, a buyer will be difficult to find.
Mark Kiff reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
JIM D'AVILA/Deputy Leader/Thamesdown Council
SIMON COOMBS MP/Con Swindon
Voice over
This 138 acre construction site in the heart of Swindon is one of the most ambitious urban regeneration schemes in Europe.
Once the home of the town's railway works, the developer Tarmac has already %s begun work on a three hundred million pounds plan to transform the derelict site with offices, shops, houses and a hotel, creating thousands of jobs.
But after losing fifteen million pounds in the first half of the year, Tarmac has put its property division up for sale, including the Churchward development.
The news has come as a surprise to the local council.
Jim D'Avila Deputy Leader of Thamesdown Borough Council says much of the private investment in Swindon depends on private companies and they are finding it hard in the recession.
Simon Coombs MP for Swindon says although it's disappointing news, he's confident other companies will want to get involved in the development.
In the meantime, Tarmac says work on the site will continue and they have no intention of going back on any of their committments to the development.
But Thamesdown councillors are worried that few private companies will want to take on the project in the depths of a recession.
In part two: A sporting revolution…the women become the new Lords of the Manor.
And a flight of fancy…the bid to rebuild a nineteen twenties aeroplane.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
At 35, some folk are suggesting that Hoddle's too old.
Don't you believe it!
The Swindon sweeper doesn't need a broomstick to weave his magic and cast his soccer spells, just pure genius.
He's taken his team to second in the first division.
They're the talk of the football town; they're the team everyone wants to beat.
Tomorrow, it's Barnsley at the County Ground.
Steve White may be in from the start; with Moncur and Ling both injured by teenager, Austin Berkley is standing by for his debut too.
On form, it has to be Town, but Barnsley are improving and they're a pig of a team to beat.
At the Manor Ground tomorrow, it's Oxford against Watford.
United have been going well in recent weeks, but they really could do with another win at home this was the last 6 weeks ago against Cambridge United.
No worries for Brian Horton tomorrow.
He can name an unchanged side.
Jon Narbett is fit again and could be back on the bench.
Anybody's game, this one.
Watford have improved a lot over the past few weeks.
In the third division, Hereford United's aim is to make it 2 home wins in a row.
The last one was Torquay; the next one hopefully should be Halifax.
Only one change in the Hereford team.
Young Jason Rowbotham who's on trial gets his chance at right back.
And Goal of the week comes from Hereford striker, Marcus Browning.
He's the man in form; 3 goals in 3 games.
one team that has to win this weekend are Gloucester…the Cherry and Whites have lost 3 of their opening four league matches…tomorrow though…
Kingsholm should be full of cheers 
Voice over
It's more a question of nothing's gone right, than what's gone wrong for the Cherry and Whites.
They lost by 5 points at London Scottish, then went down to Leicester Tigers by just one point.
Last weekend they huffed and puffed at the unbeaten league leaders Wasps and were within one try of blowing them down.
There's no panic, because Gloucester know they're on the right track and tomorrow at Kingsholm, West Hartlepool will probably find themselves rail roaded.
Winger, Jerry Perrins is back in the team, but there's a doubt over Derek Morgan who's got flu.
Damien Cummins is standing by.
Last home match, Gloucester ran in 6 tries and 38 points against Bristol.
Tomorrow, the score doesn't matter; a win does.
Welcome back: In a few minutes, the firm that's exporting Victorian bathrooms to Japan.
But first, with the sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
DENIS SMITH/United Manager
JOHN BYRNE
Voice over
Reading from left to right…we've got Irish international striker John Byrne from Millwall…goalkeeper Phil Whitehead from Barnsley and of course the United manager…
The signing of Byrne is exciting…he gets goals…has scored them for a list of clubs…
QPR…
Sunderland…
Brighton…
Millwall and York where he kicked off his career with a manager called Denis Smith…
Denis Smith says…he's known John for a long time and has just the experience and talent that Oxford need
John Byrne says…he's looking forward to playing first team football again and has still got a lot of goals left in him
The fee for John Byrne hasn't been disclosed…and the fee for goalkeeper Phil Whitehead who's been on loan at the Manor for the past month will have to be fixed by tribunal…
Denis Smith says that Phil is a good professional and has signed a two and half year contract and hopefully will be at the club a lot longer
and manager Smith plans to be at the Manor for a long time too…he's brushed away speculation about going to Stoke…he's happy at Oxford…well he will be when they start winning
and hopefully that will be tomorrow night at the Manor…when United play Barnsley…we have to look back now to saturday…no joy I'm afraid…swindon…oxford…hereford all beaten…here's what went wrong 
Pictures BBC Sport
Voice over
So near and yet so far…that sums Saturday up for all three of our teams…
Swindon must have thought their lucky break was coming at last when they won a penalty against Aston Villa at the County Ground…and took the lead thanks to Paul Bodin…
Villa were nowhere near their best…could Town cash in…sadly not…the premiership is about taking your chances when they come…
Sean Teale proved that with the equaliser…
And then in the second half when there were chances at both ends…it was Villa's coolness…experience…little bit of sparkle that won it…with Dalian Atkinson hitting the winner…2-1 to the Villa…
Down at the valley there was only one goal…and the league leaders Charlton got that early on…bit of scramble…but Garry Nelson made it count…
United were unlucky…so what's new…they could or is it should have had a penalty in the second half when Chrissy Allen was brought down…
Denis Smith reckoned you couldn't tell which was the top club…and which was the bottom…that's a fair point…but Charlton took all three…1-0 the final score…
goals galore again at hereford…
Preston North End fired first…
Moyes gave them the lead…and seven minutes later Ellis made it two…
The incentive for Preston to win was to go top of the table…enough said in the second half Ellis ran away with it to make it three-nil…
Some of the Hereford fans left early…they'd have got their money's worth if they'd hung on…as United hit two goals in the last six minutes…
Owen Pickard got the first and the second came from Howard Clark…the comeback came too late…3-2 to Preston
As one motor racing season comes to an end, a Banbury engineering company are looking forward to the next.
They've unveiled their first Grand Prix car and will go racing next year if…and it's a very BIG if…they can raise six million pounds in about six weeks 
NICK WIRTH/Designer
SIR JACK BRABHAM
Voice over
This is the Simtek S941…made in Banbury…it's the brainchild of designer Nick Wirth…
Simtek is his firm…in the driving seat is David Brabham he's been signed up to drive the new machine…the father figure of formula one's newest team is Sir Jack Brabham…three times world champion…
Exciting times…their only problem is finance…to go racing they need around six million pounds…
Nick Wirth says its like dribbling the ball around the goalmouth…they've got to put it in the net…he's confident but not over confident…they will do their best
Sir Jack Brabham says he's never been so excited about a new motor car and the challenge is to go and take on the best
some challenge…but in motor racing…the name of Brabham…has always been a winner
A company that makes replicas of Victorian bathrooms has won an order from Japan.
They're shipping out cast iron baths, washbasins and tiles to the Land of the Rising Sun.
But try as they might, they can't persuade the Japanese to buy English loos!
CLARE LAFFERTY/Ross-on-Wye
SALLY BAILEY/Bailey's Traditional Interiors
Voice over
Just a few finishing touchs and the thirty six cast iron baths are ready to be shipped out to Japan.
They're heading for an English style village that's being built just north of Tokyo.
The village is being created to teach Japanese people about the English way of life.
An Herefordshire company, Border Oak, is building the oak framed houses.
Another Herefordshire company, Bailey's Traditional Interiors is fitting out the bathrooms.
The Victorian styles went down very well with the Japanese buyers.
The order consists of everything from baths to bathroom tiles.
But the Japanese didn't want the traditional English toilet.
It'll take five weeks for the shipment to get to Japan.
Then the Japanese will be able to soak their troubles away in true English style.
A tall ship which starred in the TV series the Onedin Line, has bid farewell to the docks which have been her home for the past ten years.
After a long refit, the Soren Larsen has begun a voyage to the other side of the world.
ERIKA BARNES Gloucester
JOSEPH BARRY New Crew Member
DESMOND FORD New Crew Member
IAN HUTCHINSON Permanent Crew Member
BETH ROSE New Crew Member
Voice over
Before the goodbyes — the hellos.
Making new friends who'll be ship mates for a voyage to New Zealand.
Over the next weeks and months The Soren Larsen too will become a great friend.
She'll be home to the volunteers who've spent up to three thousand pounds for the chance to sail some of the seven seas.
Male speaker
It's lovely, magnificient.
The people are nice.
It's something I wanted to do all my life.
Male speaker
The challenge is the mechanics of sailing.
It's an interesting concept for the future.
Voice over
Before they set sail there are final checks to be made.
It's hard work, but then no one said sailing to the other side of the world would be easy.
But after her refit it seems there's little to concern the crew.
Male speaker
Tip top, she's in perfect shape after her refit in Gloucester.
Excellent condition for a big ocean voyage.
Voice over
The new crew members have different hopes and fears about the trip.
Time away from the demands of work and home.
Although some things never change, wherever you are!
Female speaker
For the first time my life won't be ordered.
Learning to sail and seeing the world will be wonderful.
Voice over
As in the days of the Onedin Line, the welfare of the crew is paramount.
On board enough fruit and vegetables to keep the scurvy at bay and more provisions than Captain Onedin could have wanted.
Male speaker
It's monstrous.
We've got spare parts for the engine.
Spare sails, half a ton of flour, 1000 litres of fuel and enough toilet paper for nearly a year.
Male speaker
All ashore that's going ashore.
Voice over
And so the parting of the ways.
Goodbye to Grandma and Grandpa.
Goodbye to friends and families.
And even goodbye to one mans best friend.
The Soren Larsen is heading out of the docks bound for Auckland in New Zealand.
En route new challenges to face, new places to see.
It may be the last farewell from Gloucester, but it's the first of many new adventures.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Fishermen challenge the government
FTSE down 6
The hundred shares index closed down six point six at thirty-one, sixty-four point four.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-seven and up at two marks, fifty.
RUNS=0:10
One of the smallest village schools in the country has been spared from closure for a second time, but there's a catch.
Parents and villagers who have campaigned to keep it open have been told their only hope is to merge with other schools.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
June 1991
BROCKWEIR/Gloucestershire
BEVERLEY JUGGINS/Parent
Cllr LIZ BOAIT/County Education Committee
Voice over
Parents, teachers and pupils from Guiting Power primary school near Bourton on the Water in Gloucestershire lobbied county councillors who were to decide today whether to shut it.
The school, at one time down to 9 pupils, was threatened with closure two years ago but reprieved when parents vowed to increase numbers to 19.
Then it was one of four schools in the county at the centre of a campaign to keep open village schools.
It was saved then, as was Didbrook school, near Winchcombe, where parents pupils and staff again campaigned to save their school.
But Brockweir school in the Forest of Dean did close, because of lack of support, although some parents are now petitioning the county council to sell it to them so it can re-open.
Today's meeting of Gloucestershire Education Committee has questioned the future of Guiting Power school again because it has only 14 pupils, not the promised school roll of 19.
Today's debate was split, keep it open or close it because it may not meet the requirements of the National Curriculum.
Eventually the committee agreed to defer a decision to see if the school could team up with neighbouring villages to boost numbers.
If that fails it will be the first village school to be closed by the county council in the last five years.
School governors will hold talks before the next meeting of the Education Committee when a final decision is expected.
A giant film set has been opened to children to teach them how to stay alive.
The Safety Centre features full size mock-ups of nearly every danger a child could face including house fires and high speed trains.
GARETH FURBY/Milton Keynes
PC ALAN BROOKS/Project Manager
Voice over
Two brothers who worked with asbestos have been awarded a hundred and forty thousand pounds compensation for lung damage.
The money will help offset big medical bills, but the brothers say it still doesn't make up for their suffering.
KAREN THOMPSON/Swindon
DAVID NICHOLLS/Asbestos Victim
BRIGITTE CHANDLER/Solicitor
Voice over
David Nicholls from Swindon and his brother Martin from Milton Keynes worked as laggers mates in the early nineteen fifties.
They wwere employed by a London company Thermofelt and both brothers worked for eighteen months working with blue, white and brown asbestos.
In 1897 David's health began to fail…he became breathless.
Doctors ruled out any co nnection with his time on Christmas Island and nuclear testing.
Eventually plueral thickening and bilateral diffuse of the lungs wwere diagnosed in both men.
The Nicholls brothers began legal action four years ago with Swindon firm Townsends.
In February this year Martin was awarded 130,000 in an out of coirt settlement but there was no money.
David says working with absestos has ruined his life.
The seventy thousand pounds awarded to each brother will help wiuth medical costs.
David estimates that in his last year of life medical bills will be more than fgifteen thousand pounds.
Writers and actors have been pledging their support at the start of National Library Week.
They've joined councillors and regular book borrowers in calling for a better-funded and better-used service.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
JILLY COOPER/Writer
Cllr LIZ BOAIT/Gloucestershire County Council
ANNE COLEMAN/Library User
Voice over
It was appropriate that one of Gloucestershire's most famous writers should launch National Library Week in the county.
Other celebrities who couldn't attend the ceremony sent messages of support.
They all spoke of the importance of easy access to books.
More than half the population of Gloucestershire use libraries regularly.
But council officials want to attract even more people through the doors.
They say to do that they need the Government to give them more money.
Presentations were made to two of the county's most distinguished library users.
At just four weeks old, Thomas Colawrean is the youngest person with a library card.
And at a hundred and three, Anne Coleman is the oldest.
She's been using Gloucestershire's libraries for ninety three years.
The ceremony ended with the release of balloons each carrying a message to the people of Gloucestershire to support their libraries.
Still to come on Central News, to the Manor bound.
Two new signings for Oxford United
And, plugging the trade gap.
A cast-iron deal with Japan.
In Central News tonight: =
A dying wish denied.
Manor house left to the public is sold privately.
Re-think on steroids.
Government review after a child dies.
And a walk on the wild side.
Welcome to Hazard Alley.
Good evening:
WESLEY SMITH
A woman who left her manor house to the public in her will has had her dying wish denied.
The house has been sold privately tonight, despite two attempts in court to stop the sale.
HARRIET RYLEY
Fresden Manor should have become a centre for local children to study Roman history.
Instead, the trustees of the will have sold the building, because the cost of coverting it was too high.
Friends of the former owner say it's a scandal.
ROBIN POWELL/Shrivenham
HARRY BROMLEY/Friend of Audrey Barrie-Brown
DAVID GLEDHILL/News Editor
MICHAEL BARLOW/Hancock's Solicitors
Voice over
Fresden Manor near Swindon — sold tonight to an un-named bidder.
But friends of its former owner, Audrey Barrie-Brown, say the sale goes totally against her wishes.
Mrs Barrie-Brown left Fresden to the Roman Research Trust, specifying in the codicil to her will that she wanted it to be turned into an educational centre.
But the Trust claims it can't afford to carry out her wishes, and after an all-day meeting with proespective buyers at Townsends Solicitors in Swindon, it announced tonight that the manor has been sold.
Swindon's local evening newspaper, which has run a campaign to keep Fresden in public hands, says the idea wasn't given a chance.
But try as they might, friends of Mrs Barrie-Brown including Norris McWhirter from the Guiness Book of Records, were unable to dissuade the Trust from selling, and 2 legal attempts to halt the sale have failed.
The Roman Research Trust declined to be interviewed, but a spokesman denied that it had acted in any way improperly.
The sale procedure, he said, was approved by the Charity Commissioners, who've been kept informed throughout.
Meanwhile, the lawyers' advice to anyone leaving property to a charity in their will to be as clear and specific as possible.
It's thought Fresden's new owner may be the former racing driver Paddy McNally, who already owns a house in nearby Sevenhampton.
But whoever the mystery buyer is, the manor will remain closed to the public.
The parents of a young girl who died after being treated with steroids have welcomed the news that fresh warnings about the drug's side effects may be on the way.
The government is examining the advice given to parents and doctors.
But, as Kim Barnes reports, Lexie McConnell's family say it won't stop their legal action for negligence.
ARTHUR McCONNELL/Lexie's Father
Voice over
Lexie Mc Connell died last year at just nine years old.
She'd had chicken pox which she picked up while she was on steroids rescribed for an eye infection.
Her parents say no-one warned them that the drug, Pre, could affect the immune system, making Lexie more susceptible to infection.
Now the government is considering new warnings on steroids…
He says it's become increasingly obvious to us that many doctors don't know what they're doing.
The committee on the safety of medicines which advises ministers is currently examining steroids.
They're looking at information for parents rather than doctors.
He says parents should be involved in all of the discussions.
We weren't involved satisfactorily.
Had we been Lexie wouldn't have died.
This is very important.
Doctors should be advised, they must inform patients about side effects and dangers.
The McConnells still plan to take court action…they've recently won legal aid to sue Oxford regional health authority for negligence.
They say they just want someone to be accountable for the death of their daughter.
A man accused of murder has been granted bail by magistrates.
NORTHAMPTON
Michael Drury was found stabbed to death at his home in Clipstone Field Place at Ecton Brook in Northampton nine days ago.
Twenty one year old Wayne O'Hora, also from Ecton Brook had been in custody since the killing, but Northampton magistrates granted him conditional bail until next month.
A main post office has been closed after burglars stole tens of thousands of pounds.
DURSLEY/Gloucestershire
Police believe thieves broke into the post office in Parsonage Street at Dursley in Gloucestershire after it closed on Saturday afternoon.
The burglary was discovered this morning when staff arrived at work to find the building had been ransacked.
People who normally collect pensions and other benefits from there are advised to go to nearby sub-post offices.
Several chainstores have been in court today, accused of breaking the Sunday Trading laws.
OXFORD
Oxford City Council has brought the prosecutions against the Reject Shop, B and Q and the HMV record shop for opening on a Sunday.
The case is being heard at Oxford magistrates.
Counsel for B and Q say the sunday trading laws unfairly discriminate against women because many female staff can only work on Sundays.
This year's Christmas stamps have been unveiled.
They're based on nativity scenes taken from stained glass windows, and for at least one local church it's meant a thousand-pound Christmas bonus.
Ken Goodwin reports.
BIBURY Gloucestershire
RAY BEDSON Royal Mail
Rev FRANCIS BRUCE Vicar
Voice over
You're going to see a lot of this stained glass window over the coming weeks.
It'll be gracing millions of christmas cards and letters, as a first class stamp.
The window is in St Mary's church in Bibury and to launch its Christmas stamps, Royal Mail invited children from the village school to sing carols.
The window was designed by Karl Parsons, during the Arts and Craft movement.
It was installed in 1928.
The second class eighteen pence stamp also features a Karl Parsons design, this time taken from St James church at Pangbourne in Berkshire.
It was the Saint Mary's window though, which was considered best for the first class stamp.
He says that the bright colours, as well as the subject matter, made it an ideal choice.
As well as getting his Church window seen by millions, there's an extra Christmas present for the vicar of Saint Mary's.
Royal mail are donating £1,000 towards the Church window restoration fund.
He says he's delighted and hopes more people will come to see the window.
And as for the young singers, they certainly gave the design the stamp of approval.
They say that they like the subject and the colours.
It's an appropriate choice for a stamp.
The new stamps will go on sale on November 10th.
Major meets backbenchers over Maastricht
The Prime Minister has been meeting Conservative backbenchers to try to persuade them not to vote against the Government on Wednesday's Commons debate on the Maastricht Treaty.
Cabinet meets to discuss spending cuts
Meanwhile, splits in the Cabinet are rumoured as it meets to discuss next year's Government spending programme.
Lord Parkinson says Government has lost control
The former Conservative Cabinet Minister, Lord Parkinson, has said the the Government has lost control and that John Major is to blame.
FTSE up 29
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-nine point five at twenty-six, eighty-seven point eight.
The pound is down more than two cents at one dollar, fifty-four and down at two marks, forty-one.
Before we go, a word about a new series starting tomorrow on Central South.
Just after the Second World War a film crew made a documentary about life in rural England.
They filmed every aspect of life in an area of twenty-four square miles of north Oxfordshire.
Almost half a century on, Harriet Ryley has been back to see what changes have taken place.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
At the County Ground the swindon fans were ready for a runaway win; ready for a landslide of goals, after Nicky Summerbee went and won a penalty in the opening minutes.
Top scorer, Craig Maskell banged the kick in for his 13th of the season.
But that was it.
Instead of taking Barnsley to the cleaners, it was Swindon who went in the washtub and were all but scrubbed out.
One man saved them; one man won them the game.
That was keeper, Nicky Hammond.
The Barnsley players couldn't believe it.
They threw everything they had at the Swindon goal, but Hammond stopped the lot.
And for the second week running, the encouraging thing about this game, was that Town still managed to win, even though they were way below their best and that's the hallmark of a successful side.
The only man that glittered like gold on Saturday though, was goalie Hammond.
Here's his best save or saves coming up.
A 1-0 win keeps Swindon second in the first division.
At the Manor Ground, Oxford United won themselves a draw after a diabolical first half.
They went and gave away a goal after only 5 minutes.
Lee Nogan was let through by his old mates and Paul Furlong did the damage.
United really should have been finished by half-time.
Watford were in total command.
They made and missed 3 or 4 cracking chances.
Paul Reece played his part in keeping them out.
But Watford's shooting was suspect and at half-time Oxford believe it or not went in happy.
They were still in with a shout.
And a call up for sub, Chrissy Allen at half-time changed everything.
After the break, United were a different team.
Allen led the charge, but could they get a goal back?
Sure enough, the young Winger set up the equaliser with a ball to Beauchamp, who was tripped.
Watford said, outside the area.
Oxford and the ref said, inside.
So it was down to Jimmy Magilton.
No problem.
Oxford l; Watford 1.
There was an early goal at Edgar Street too.
Marcus Browning got it to send Hereford on the way to an easy win over Halifax Town.
More to come before half-time.
Here's the second.
The scorer, Gareth Davies.
His first league goal; as sweet as any cup final winner.
And once United get going, there's no stopping them.
They've a future star too, in striker, Marcus browning who's on loean from Bristol Rovers.
He scored number 3.
That's 5 goals in the last 4 games.
So top priority now is to find enough money to buy him.
NCVOand all three are back in action tomorrow…here are the matches…
Oxford and Swindon both kick-off at seven forty five…
Now on Friday we were saying that Gloucester were on the right track…that West Hartlepool would be railroaded by them on saturday…bad news…the cherry and whites suffered a points failure…they went and lost by six points to twenty one 
Voice over
This game; this day will go down as one of the blackest.
One of the bleakest in Kingsholm history.
The might of Gloucester beaten by bottom of the table, West Hartlepool, who'd never won a first division game before.
The alarm bells started to ring when flanker, Alan Brown dived over to score the opening try midway through the first half.
The cherry and whites came back with 2 penalties.
One from Tim Smith the other from Neil Matthews and at half-time they led 6-5.
Full-back, Smith and hooker, John Hawker, both went off injured though and in the second half, Gloucester just couldn't find a way through the Hartlepool defence.
They had plenty of ball, but no breakthrough.
Hartlepool slipped back in to the lead with 3 penalties from the boot of skipper, John Stabler and then the unthinkable happened.
Now, the Gloucester players are being made to watch our pictures tonight, so no slipping behind the settee lads.
This is your moment of truth; more like moment of terror as West Hartlepool ran through for a second try.
6 points to 21.
What can coach, Keith Richardson say about this?
Keith says this match was a nightmare scenario and Gloucester are in trouble.
They could; and should have won this match and the players have to look to themselves.
They need to start thinking about the basics and how to win games.
And for the first time, the word relegation is being banded about in Gloucester.
4 teams go down this season, so come on you cherry and whites.
Railway enthusiasts are queueing up for a nostalgic trip on a steam train.
The line last saw a steam loco in the early sixties…and the opening day of the event proved so popular that several passengers had to stand.
Robin Powell reports.
SHIPLAKE/Oxfordshire
NICK ILLSLEY/Network SouthEast
Voice over
It's almost 30 years since the last steam train crossed the Thames at Shiplake.
But now British Rail has turned the clock back — temporarily offering steam rides from Henley-on-Thames.
In the golden age of steam, the Henley Branch was one of the busiest lines in the country, linking the Regatta town with the capital.
Today's passengers have to make do with a 10-mile return trip to Twyford.
But judging by the crowded platform, nobody seems to mind.
After all, for children of the diesel age, it's a totally new experience.
The engine, built at Swindon in 1953, is only on hire for the winter.
Enthusiasts have just a week to book a ride back in time.
A weightlifter who was sent home from the Barcelona Olympics after failing a drugs test WILL be allowed to compete in the next games.
The Sports Council has confirmed that Andrew Saxton CAN take part, if selected, but it has attacked weighlifting's ruling body for not taking any action against Saxton.
Harriet Ryley reports.
SATURDAY/ANDREW SAXTON/Weightlifter
Prof ARNOLD BECKETT/Drug Abuse Expert
ANDREW DAVIES/Weightlifter
Voice over
Andrew Saxton heard at the weekend that his sport's ruling body had cleared him of cheating.
The weightlifter was banned from this summer's Barcelona Olympics for failing a random drugs test, carried out by the Sports Council.
At his home in Oxford, Andrew Saxton welcomed the latest decision.
But said he would be seeking legal advice over the original ban.
Andrew Saxton and his colleague Andrew Davies faced a life ban after being found to have taken Clenbuterol while training for the games.
They freely admitted using the drug, which is used in the treatment of asthmatic and bronchitic conditions, because they said they didn't realise it was a banned substance.
Today a drugs expert who's on the drugs abuse advisory committee of the Sports Council said the council
But the Sports Council refused to comment on Professor Beckett's accusations.
It said it couldn't understand why the British Amateur Weight Lifter's Association had reached the decision not to take action against the two weighlifters.
It said in a statement that’ in future, if any any competitor is found to have traces of Clenbuterol in his urine, we would expect disciplinary action by the weighlifter's association.’
Andrew Saxton's colleague Andrew Davies said it appeared the Sports Council was still convinced the men were guilty.
But the Sports Council has confirmed that both weightlifters can now take part in the next Olympics if selected.
A man's appeared before magistrates charged with attempted murder.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Twenty-five-year-old Frank James is alleged to have stabbed another man at a house in Hermitage Street on Saturday.
The injured man's in a stable condition at Bristol Royal Infirmary.
James was remanded in custody for seven days by Cheltenham magistrates.
Arsonists are believed to be responsible for destroying part of a film-processing laboratory causing thirty thousand pounds damage.
RADLEY/Oxfordshire
Police are questioning a man about the fire at the Microfilm Express laboratories at Radley in Oxfordshire.
No-one was hurt although a substantial part of the building has been severely damaged.
Library users have been protesting against plans to close libraries as part of a cost-cutting exercise.
The local council says it can't afford to run them, but objectors say the libraries are an important part of their community.
Clare Lafferty reports.
GLOUCESTER
MARK GALE/Protest Organiser
LINDA HOPKINS/Gloucestershire County Council
Voice over
LIBRARY
Library users lobbied councillors as they turned up for todays education committee meeting.
On the agenda, how best to make half a million pounds worth of cuts to Gloucestershires' library service.
One way would be to close eight of the counties smaller libraries like this one in Matson, just outside Gloucester.
But that's not an option locals here want to consider.
Protestors argue that it's the disadvantaged who'll feel the loss of he library most.
Gloucestershire County Council says its reluctant to make the cuts, and blames the Government for forcing its hand.
Other options open to the council include reducing the opening hours of all libraries or cutting back on the money it pends on books.
The final decision on how best to save the money will be made in the new year.
In part two: Crisis at Kingsholme…trying times for Gloucester.
A signal occasion…the steam train turning back the clock.
And letters pray.
The stained glass window that's a Christmas stamp.
Heroes in the fog.
Tales of bravery from the M-Four crash.
Sheer panic: Accused describes the barn fire that killed twin sisters.
And I won't let it rest.
Weightlifter may sue after Olympic ban is quashed
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The awards, to fifteen civilians, five firemen, and three policemen were presented today, more than a year and a half after the crash on the M-Four near Swindon.
They were told that without their bravery, many more people could have died in the crash.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
MARCH 1991
MARK BENFIELD/Silver Award Winner
SULHAMSTEAD/Berkshire
MARK HENCHER/Award Winner
ARTHUR SANDO/Award Winner
PC ROGER COOPER/Award Winner
CHARLES POLLARD/Chief Constable/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
It's been nineteen months since fog and the M4 combined to create an inferno of blazing cars and lorries.
Fifty vehicles were involved, ten people were killed, many more hurt on the motorway just outside Swindon.
It could have been a lot more but for the brave actions of some people.
Mark benfield.
from Cheltenham.
was one of three people to receive silver Awards from the Royal Humane Society today, in recognition of their bravery.
He resisted intense heat to rescue one person and try to get another out.
Another twelve civillians received Awards on Vellum.
They received their awards at The Thames Valley Police Training School in Sulhamstead.
So intense was the dosaster, and so complicated that the Thames Valley Police have compiled a computer video showing what happened.
Mark hencher from Newent In Gloucestershire was amoung the first on the scene.
He hepled rescue a woman from a car.
Arthur Sando from Swindon lent a hand with the rescue, then helped to flag down traffic to prevent it making it worse.
Five firemen were honoured…and three policemnen, including Pc Roger Cooper who was also given a Chief Cosntable's commendation.
He adds that to one he received for work during the Hungerford massacre five years ago.
The police now hope to broadcast their video nationally to ram home the dangers of driving fast in fog.
The ceremony was both proud and sad today.
Nearly everyone is still troubled by the memory of what happened, and all hope nothing like it happens again.
A man charged with the manslaughter of twin sisters in a barn fire has been speaking of his’ sheer panic’when the fire broke out.
David Harper said he became frantic when the hay bales in the barn caught light.
Harper and two other men deny the charges of manslaughter and arson.
Richard Barnett reports:
UCKINGTON/Gloucestershire
Voice over
David Harper was giving evidence during the 7th day of the trial at Bristol Crown Court.
Harper, from Uckington near Cheltenham, Wisdom Smith, aged 20, from Bishops Cleeve and Daniel Winter, who's 19, from Cheltenham are charged with manslaughter and arson, following the deaths of 17 year old twins, Becky and Emma Harper.
The teenagers died in a barn fire at Uckington on January 24th last year.
Harper told the court he'd gone out with both Becky and Emma in the 6 months he knew them.
On the night of the fire, he'd been in a pub with Smith and Winter.
He'd invited Becky and Emma to the pub.
All 5 then left the pub and went to the barn at Uckington.
They climbed up into the bales.
Harper said it was very dark, so he lit a tuft of hay with a match.
The hay was only alight for 3 seconds before he put it out with his hand.
Later he was with Becky when he smelled smoke and burning.
Harper said he felt’ sheer panic.’
Asked if he realised he'd left Becky behind, Harper replied,’ It did not really go through my mind.
I was concentrating on how to put the fire out.’
As the flames became more intense, he said he shouted to the girls to get out.
Then he rejoined the other 2 defendants outside the barn.
The prosecution alleges one of the 3 defendants started the fire and all 3 did nothing to save the twins or raise the alarm.
The trial continues.
A council which has been urged to fit smoke alarms to all its properties says it can't because it's worried about the legal implications.
Thamesdown Council fears it could be held liable if the alarm batteries failed and somebody died.
It could fit mains-powered alarms, but that would mean putting up rents.
Gareth Furby reports.
FIRE SAFETY VIDEO
STEVE LAW/Wiltshire Fire Service
DES MOFFAT/Thamesdown Councillor
Voice over
Fire claimed more than six hundred lives in Britain last year, many may have been saved if a smoke alarm had been fitted.
Just last week pensioner Phillip Frampton died after a fire at his council flat in Swindon.
He didn't have a smoke alarm.
The fireservice now wants smoke alarms fitted to in all council properties.
He says they're advising housing authorities to fite them and he would be concerned if that advice was ignored.
But at the moment Thamesdown Borough Council isn't acting on that advice…because its worried about the legal implications.
He says the batteries may be taken out and then the alarm wouldn't work.
The council is worried it counld be sued even though a tenant has removed the batteries and dies as a result.
But some of Swindon's council tenants can't understand the local authorities position.
She says the council should be able to agree with the tenant.
She says the tenant should be liable if they take the battery out.
The council will decide what action to take next month.
The best option may be a mains operated smoke alarm…which will require minimal maintance…but the council warns the cost will be passed onto the tenants in the form of higher rents.
He says it could mean an extra 15 to 20 pence a week.
But the council beleives that will be a small price to pay for saving a life.
Heroes in the fog.
Tales of bravery from the M-Four crash.
Sheer panic: Accused describes the barn fire that killed twin sisters.
And I won't let it rest.
Weightlifter may sue after Olympic ban is quashed
The man behind the famous rooftop shark in Oxford is creating quite a stir in another city centre.
He's opened a cinema there, with nude statues outside.
ABI DONALD/Reporting
Cllr JOHN ALDEN/Birmingham City Council
BILL HEINE/Cinema Owner
The row over fibre glass figures adourning buildings seems to have moved from Oxford to Birmingham.
This time it's over twelve fibreglass figures which have been built in the windows of the Electric cinema in Birmingham.
They've been designed by sculptor John Buckley.
He built the famous shark sculpture sticking out of Bill Heine's house at Headington in Oxford, and also the legs which once adourned the front of Mr Heine's Oxford cinema, Not the Moulin Rouge, but the lease ran out and the famous legs had to go.
So Mr Heine turned his attention to Birmingham, found a cinema, and immediately commissioned the sculptures.
But local councillors don't like them.
He says, If the cinema should have nudity there, the statues should be inside out of the view of people.
He says, When you are talking about art you have to decide if you want fig leaves or not.
I think that is a prudish approach.
And it seems others agree with Mr Heine.
Female speaker
Personally I think they're fine.
Voice over
For the moment the nudes will stay, but the row is likely to continue.
Perhaps Councillors in Oxford should be grateful that they only had a shark and a pair of legs to get upset about.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Early warning in Elton John case
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down nought point three at thirty-one, sixty-four point one.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-eight and up at two marks, fifty-one.
The nuclear industry has opened its doors to show how it checks reactors aren't leaking radiation.
It involves regular tests on grass, water, even cows milk.
But anti-nuclear campaigners say it still doesn't prove nuclear power is safe.
GARETH FURBY/Berkeley
DR TIM SWAN/Nuclear Electric
Voice over
At a new laboratory in Gloucestershire, scientists are trying to end the auguments about the safety of nuclear power.
They're testing grass taken from a field next to a nuclear power station.
They're also checking milk, dust and water.
Samples come from all twelve nuclear plants in England and Wales.
The results go to the Government, which checks them against its own findings.
He says if they didn't carry out checks a problem might go undetected.
The disaster at Chernobyl raised doubts about the safety of nuclear power.
But scientists at Berlkeley, who work in the shadow of the old nuclear station, insist there's no danger from British plants.
They do discharge some radioactivity, in cooling gas or water, but tests show the levels aren't dangeous.
He says there's more radioactivity in the environment.
Anti-nuclear groups say the fact that such complex tests are needed, shows just how dangerous nuclear power can be.
But Nuclear Electric insists the test show it is safe.
Still to come on Central News, the slugs are coming.
Welcome back.
Farmers are struggling to cope with an invasion of slugs.
They'v been thriving in the wet weather — and many are now resistant to slug pellets.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
RADLEY/Oxfordshire
JOHN HOMEWOOD/Farmer
CIRENCESTER/Gloucestershire
MICHAEL LIMB/Royal Agricultural College
Voice over
They might look harmless enough…but slugs are costing farmers dear.
Cereal growers are worst affected…only with the use of costly slug pellets is this this field of oil seed rape near Abingdon starting to recover.
Michael Limb from the Royal Agricultural College at Cirencester says there are several reasons why slugs are a particular problem this year.
Effective chemical treatment meant this field was largely unaffected, but with up to 60 per cent of slugs proving resistant to pellets, many farmers are fighting a losing battle.
A scheme which takes teachers out of the classroom to give them experience in industry has been celebrating its one hundred thousandth placement.
The idea is to introduce teachers to new skills which they can take back to their pupils.
KATE GARRAWAY/Didcot
CHRISTINE FOORD/Teacher
BARRY KENT/Senior Scientist
PETER DAVIES/Director
Voice over
From controlling seven year olds…to controlling satellite dishes is a giant leap in anyone's book.
But such a manoeuvre is all in a days work if you are a teacher on a placement scheme.
Christine Foord from Stephen Freeman school in Didcot is working in the satellite division of Rutherford Laboratory in Oxfordshire.
She is the one hundredth thousand person to take part in the project which sends teachers out of the classroom and into industry.
Female speaker
I will be able to bring what is going on here in science back to the children in the classroom, and make them realise that it is not so far away from what they are learning about.
Voice over
The orgainisers say industry also benefits.
Male speaker
Industry needs well qualified scientists and the future's scientists are in the schools.
So if you can get to the teachers you have got to the children.
Voice over
Back in the classroom it is not always easy to translate the high tech knowledge down to a child's level.
Female speaker
Can anyone one tell me about the solar system, or anything they know about it.
Voice over
But the organisers say there are other lessons to be learnt.
The teachers come back very motivated, and I think this translates to the kids.
And they have a real sense of being more credible.
They say: It is a very interesting talk, we think we would like careers in industry now.
Top marks for the scheme so far, but the project's real test will come when they choose their careers.
Until then at least they can take comfort knowing adults sometimes have to suffer uniforms even worse than their own.
A fashion show has raised almost a thousand pounds for a special school for handicapped children.
Some of the children were also guests at the show, which featured the latest winter fashions.
GARETH FURBY/Oxford
KATHLEEN CROKER/Organiser
TIM SOUTHGATE/Headteacher
PAM WRIGHT/Teacher
Voice over
For the children this was a day to wonder.
And for the buyers there was the knowledge that it was in all a good cause.
She says they care.
The Ormerod School educates handicapped children from Oxfordshire.
It relies heavily on volunteer help.
And donations are always welcome.
He says they need bikes and computers.
Not only will the children benefit from money raised.
There's also the experience of a day out to remember.
She says she likes the hats.
She says it's fun.
She says they've had a good time.
And the organisers are now planning further fashion shows, which should raise even more money for the school.
In Central News tonight:
A sickening case — Woman faces jail for animal cruelty.
The heaters that can kill — warning to elderly as they search for cheap fuel
And how safe is nuclear power — testing for radioactivity.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
TIM HURST/Leominster
January 1993/LEINTWARDINE/Herefordshire
SUE PIKE/Glenda Spooner Animal Trust
Voice over
Margaret Hughes, from Lentwardine in Herefordshire, has been warned she may go to prison after admitting 14 cases of cruelty to farm animals.
Her husband, Avery George, denied similar charges, which were dismissed after after he agreed never to keep animals again.
The charges, heard at Leominster, follow eight visits by the RSPCA last winter to two farms, at Lentwardine and Eardisland in Herefordshire, where inspectors and vets found horses so neglected one of them had hooves 10 inches long.
Others were lice infested, and ulcerated.
One had been locked in its stable in its own manure for months.
Six horses had to be shot.
Others were running wild, frightened of human contact and impossible to catch and treat for many days.
Dozens of angora goats were rescued from the farms, they too were neglected, with foot ingections so severe one could only walk in it's knees.
Pigs too were taken to sanctuaries to recover, as the RSPCA worked at the farms for days on end, work which eventually cost the RSPCA £15,000.
Margaret Hughes was said in court to have been a farmer for 40 years.
On her behalf it was said she'd won 100's of prizes for her livestock.
But the prosecution said conditions on the farms were horrific and appalling and no animal should be allowed to exist in such conditions.
Many animals have since recovered and been found new homes by an animal welfare workers, some of whom were in court to listen to the evidence.
Well, those animals that did survive were treated at a number of animal shelters.
Joining us from one of them is Mike Rowbottom.
Inspector SIMON DIX/RSPCA
Voice over
Elderly people who worry that they can't afford VAT on fuel are putting their lives at risk by buying second hand paraffin heaters.
Age Concern says the elderly think it'll be a cheap way to keep warm.
But firefighters say the heaters are potentially lethal.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
NIGEL LIMBRICK/Gloucestershire Fire Service
DELLA MARTIN/Age Concern
PAUL GALLAND/Gloucestershire Trading Standards
Voice over
This demonstration shows just how dangerous old fashioned paraffin heaters can be.
If they're knocked over, the paraffin leaks and ignites, causing what firefighters say are some of the worst fires.
Despite these hazards, trading standards officers say they're finding more and more second hand heaters on sale at car boot sales.
Age Concern thinks they're being bought up by elderly people who are worried about not being able to pay the VAT on their fuel bills.
Paraffin heaters sold in shops must now, by law, be designed so that if they're tipped over, the flame is automatically snuffed out.
But that law can't be used to stop people selling heaters at car boot sales.
So Tradings Standards Officers are issuing warnings.
Age Concern now wants elderly people worried about keeping warm to contact its officers or the fire brigade for advice.
Their message for the winter is keep warm…but keep safe.
An unemployed man who caught pike out of season to feed his family has been given a conditional discharge by magistrates.
Alan Soden told the court that he caught the fish because his family was desperate for food.
KEN GOODWIN/Tewkesbury
ALAN SODEN
ANITA SODEN/Wife
ALAN CHURCHWARD/NRA
Voice over
Times are hard for Alan Soden and his family — he can't get a job and his family have to live on state benifits.
But however short of money they are he won't see his children go without food.
He'll use his ferret to catch rabbits, or take the occasional pike from the river severn.
It's here that he was caught fishing out of season by National Rivers Authority water bailiffs.
But Mr Soden says that he was only trying to look after his family.
He says that there's no point in going to the DSS, they'll just laught.
She says that they were desperate for food, and the pike fed them for two days.
Mr Soden, who's been made redundant seven times, was given a conditional discharge by magistrates after pleading guilty.
He was ordered to pay ten pounds costs.
Afterwards he critisised the NRA for bringing the prosecution.
He says that he only takes pike because eels have become inedible due to pollution.
She says that the prosecution was a wasste of time and money.
But the NRA says the prosecution was justified.
He says that the law was broken and they had to prosecute.
They would do the same in similar circumstances.
Mr Soden is teaching his children to fish and use a ferret.
He says that if they fail to get jobs he wants them to know how to live off the land and be able to feed their families.
A woman who staged an IRA bomb hoax at an army barracks after being jilted by a soldier has been jailed for four and a half months.
Rachael Read admitted making the threat in a phone call to Dalton Barracks at Abingdon in Oxfordshire.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
She said a woman had planted a bomb at the base, which houses the Royal Logistics Corps.
The security alert, involving five hundred people, cost ten thousand pounds.
The court was told that Read made the call after her third unsuccessful relationship with a soldier at the base.
A man who allowed a greyhound to suffer for six weeks after it broke its leg has been banned from keeping dogs for three years.
The court heard he ignored professional advice that the animal should have an operation, leaving it to suffer chronic and constant pain.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
11 August 1993
DAVID ODEY/Banned Dog Owner
TOM COULING/RSPCA Inspector
PHIL KNIGHT/New Owner
Voice over
37-year-old David Odey from Penhill in Swindon denied cruelty.
His friend, Helen Woodruff had admitted the same charge, and already been banned from keeping dogs for 7 years.
The court was told that the RSPCA found Capri, a greyhound, in immense pain when they called at Odey's house in June.
They later discovered he'd broken his leg in a road accident 6 weeks earlier, and although Odey had taken it to the vet he'd ignored advice to have it operated on.
The veterinary surgeon who treated Capri said he should have recovered within 8 weeks.
But because he didn't receive immediate attention, he's likely to remain partially lame the rest of his life.
The magistrates told Odey that at present he's incapable of looking after a dog, and banned him from doing so for 3 years.
But Odey insists he's innocent.
The dog, he says, was Miss Woodruff's responsibility, and he'd tried his best to help him.
But the RSPCA inspector who found Capri says the ban's too short.
Capri now has a new owner.
He still limps a little, but he's starting to lead a more normal life.
And he now enjoys a walk again…though until the mental scars heal, nowhere near the traffic.
The trustees of a charity which was left a manor house in the will of a wealthy widow have defended their decision to sell it.
The widow had wanted the house to be opened to the public — the trustees say they're sorry the owner's dying wish was denied, but it wasn't legally binding.
CHRIS MOORE/Shrivenham
Sir JOHN SYKES/Roman Research Trust
If Audrey Barrie Brown had had her way, Fresden Manor near Swindon would have been a Roman history study centre.
Instead, it's been sold to Paddy MacNally, former racing driver, and one-time boyfriend of the Duchess of York.
He already owns farming land in Wiltshire.
The Roman Research Trust, which was left the manor in Mrs Barrie Brown's will says the cost of conversion in line with her wishes was too high.
Male speaker
The house had a big mortgage which we have had to pay off.
It came with no endowment to meet the cost of conversion.
Voice over
Friends of Mrs Barrie Brown, including publisher Norris McWhirter, are appalled at a deal done behind closed doors.
One friend, Harry Bromley says the Trust received substantial financial offers from the Countryside Commission and local business.
The Trust says none of those offers included the necessary cash.
It's apologised for Mrs Barrie Brown's dying wish not being fulfilled, but says anyway, it wasn't legally binding.
The Roman Research Trust says the publicity from the case helped to sell the manor for more than the reserve price.
It adds that Paddy MacNally is a keen conservationist, so the manor should be in safe hands.
A former bus driver is staging an all night sit in outside the offices of a training organisation he claims forced him out of a job.
Mike Belcher says he'll stay there until he gets his old job back.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
MIKE BELCHER
GRAHAM HOYLE/Gloucestershire TEC
Voice over
Mike Belcher faces a long cold night camped outside the offices of the glostershire training and enterprise council.
He claims the organisation sent trainees to the lydney based dial a ride scheme — undermining his own work with the organisation.
He left, but says the enterprise council is to blame:
He says he feels he's been badly treated.
He says that Mr Belcher resigned.
But they want to do all they can for him.
Mr Belcher says all he wants is his job back — and he's staying put until he gets it.
Farmers have produced so many potatos this year there's now a serious glut.
Many of them are being forced to turn the crop into cattle feed because Britain has more potatos than it needs.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
BODICOTE/Oxfordshire
ROLAND BRATT/Potato Farmer
ROB BURROWS/Potato Marketing Board
Voice over
There's only one thing potato farmers want on Britain's menu this autumn…spuds, spuds, and more spuds.
They're up to their ears in them because the wet summer has produced a glut…and forced prices to rock bottom.
Male speaker
With a crop with a limited amount of sales surplus production suppresses prices, and you must be more competitive with your fellow farmers
Voice over
Roland Bratt farms several hundred acres in North Oxfordshire.
He's one of the area's biggest producers.
This year he's produced thirty per cent more than last year…
Male speaker
We're actually producing more for less money especially since last year
Voice over
Last year Britain consumed six million tonnes of potatos.
This year seven million will be produced.
It's meant the Potato Marketing Board, Based in Oxford, has had to step in.
They've bought up two hundred thousand tonnes of the crop…and they've been asked to fork out for another two hundred fifty thousand tonnes.
Nearly all of that has been turned over to animal feed.
Male speaker
We don't see it as dumping as such, it is part of the food chain, and there doesn't seem to be a better way of doing it.
If there is we'd like to hear it
Voice over
One of the problems they face is transporting potatos to hunger spots.
Twenty per cent of the crop is still in the ground and growers are having difficulty digging it out in the wet conditions…so it remains to be seen if the present glut will last.
But if farmers didn't have enough problems a potato disease previously unseen in Britain has been found in Oxfordshire.
Potato brown rot has only affected a few tonnes on one farm so far…but experts are keeping their eyes on it.
Prince Charles has paid tribute to soldiers from the Gloucestershire Regiment who died in a fierce battle forty one years ago.
During a visit to Korea, he laid a wreath at a memorial to the men who held back the full might of the Chinese army at the battle of Imjin River.
Richard Barnett reports:
IMJIN/South Korea
Pte SAM MERCER/Glosters Veteran
Bandsman GEORGE NEWHOUSE/Glosters Veteran
Major CLAUD REBBECK/Regimental Secretary
Voice over
The Prince and Princess of Wales came to a lonely hilltop in South Korea to honour the 900 men of the Gloucestershire Regiment who held back the Chinese Army pouring across the Imjin River in January 1951.
For 4 days, the Glosters held out, although the Chinese outnumbered them by 10 to 1.
When their food, water and ammunition ran out, the Glosters were ordered to break out.
113 of the soldiers lost their lives, more than 100 were injured.
One of the veterans described the battle to Prince Charles.
Male speaker
Their job was to hold back the Chinese, and they did.
Voice over
Meanwhile back at the Regimental Museum in Gloucester, George Newhouse remembered the moment 41 years ago when the Chinese attacked.
Male speaker
When it became light, waves of Chinese came across the river.
The Glosters held them back as long as they could.
Voice over
The Glosters action enabled US forces to regroup and the regiment received the American Presidential Citation for their brave stand.
Male speaker
The battle of Imjin River was the most important of the Korean War.
He is very proud.
Voice over
Today those who fought and those who fell in the Chinese onslaught were remembered.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
BRISTOL
JANUARY 1991/UCKINGTON/Gloucestershire
Voice over
The men who were acquitted, Danial Winter, who's 19, and Wisdom Smith, who's also 19, had nothing to say after the judge directed they should be found not guilty.
The judge, Mr Justice Auld, had directed that the men had no case to answer on charges of manslaughter or arson.
The third man, David Harper, who's 21, has also been cleared of arson but still faces a charge of manslughter, arising from the deaths of twin sisters Rebecca and Emma Harper, aged 17, who died in a barn fire near Cheltenham in Gloucestershire, last year.
The twins and three men had gone to the barn after an evening in a pub.
On Harper's behalf it was said that although he'd been reckless, dangerous and stupid by starting the fire, there'd been no evil or mischief in his mind.
Harper has admitted lighting tufts of straw to see inside the barn, but put them out immediately.
It had started as an evening of fun, said Harper's defence team, 5 young people doing what young people have done for centuries.
During a brief adjournment, Emma and Rebecca's mother, Mrs Vicki Harper, broke down, sobbing loudly and was helped from the court by officials and family.
A few moments later, acquitted defendant Daniel Winter, who'd been listening to the closing speeches, ran from the building.
The judge has been summing up the case against Harper and the jury will consider the case against him tomorrow.
Two men have been jailed for a total of fifty five years in America for shooting a British couple who were on holiday.
Jack and Rose Hayward were attacked by two men who fired at them at close range.
Mrs Hayward needed emergency surgery after the bullet narrowly missed her heart.
Today the couple say they're relieved the case is finally over.
Gargy Patel reports 
OCTOBER 1991/GREAT BOURTON/Oxfordshire
JACK HAYWARD/Victim
ROSE HAYWARD/Victim
Voice over
Jack and Rose Hayward came home from Florida last year to recover from an armed robbery that almost cost them their lives.
Just hours after they arrived in Miami, they were tricked into stopping their hired car by two armed robbers.
Jack was shot in the shoulder.
Rose underwent emergency surgery after a bullet pierced her lung, narowly missing her heart.
Two men were arrested by police.
Today in court, a year after the shooting, Demetrius McDuffy was jailed for 23 years.
Frank Linwood Sanders, who'd fired the shots, was sentenced to 32 years.
American journalists who watched the hearing say there was no reaction from either man in court.
McDuffy and Sanders will serve their sentences in the Florida State Prison.
On the eve of the crucial Commons vote on the Maastricht Treaty, Conservative MPs in the Central South region are divided on the issue.
Five say they'll vote against the Government, even though that is seen by some as a direct challenge to the Prime Minister's leadership.
One of the rebels has even published a book today which labels Maastricht as A Treaty Too Far.
Chris Moore reports from Westminster.
ROGER KNAPMAN MP/Con Stroud
PETER TEMPLE-MORRIS MP/Con Leominster
MICHAEL SPICER MP/Con South Worcestershire
It only has 25 lines, yet the Bill to ratify Maastricht has split the Tories like nothing before.
But the amendments tabled on it run to 60 pages.
Tomorrow night's motion only suggests the Maastricht Treaty should be considered further, yet nationally 38 Tories are threatening rebellion.
In the Central South region, 18 out of 26 MP's will vote FOR.
17 Tory, plus the only Liberal Democrat.
6 will vote AGAINST.
5 Tories; 1 Labour.
One Tory, Paul Marland was seeing John Major today, before finally deciding.
Another doesn't vote, because he's deputy speaker, so Major gets his way in Central South.
Some are antis because they don't like Europe full stop.
But this Thatcherite anti-Federalist says over-regulation in Europe is killing our economy.
Male speaker
70% of British people are aginst the Maastrict Treaty.
If we who are against it have to speak up for them, then it's a duty we willingly undertake.
Voice over
However, one backbencher who did more than most to unseat the Iron Lady, says approving Maastricht is a matter of life and death.
Male speaker
It's a very big vote.
The whole future of the country, the pound and the economy rests on ratification.
If we're defeated, it's the end of Europe.
Voice over
And underlining the case for the Euro-sceptics, is this book, published today.
A Treaty Too Far by Michael Spicer, MP for South Worcestershire has a forward by the High Priestess of anti-Federalism, Lady Thatcher.
What we need, it argues, is a fresh start.
Male speaker
The book is about the threat to our economy and democracy from a Federal Europe.
But it also shows the alternative way, with independent countries trading and co-operating, rather than forming a European super-state.
Voice over
The author describes publication today as a co-incidence rather than an act of mischief.
All the rebels insist defeat on Maastricht tomorrow night wouldn't sound the death knell for John Major OR his Government.
People have written hundreds of books about dogs, but now a dog's written a book about people.
One Dog and Her Man is the definitive guide to life viewed from two feet off the ground.
And it's earning the chocolate-coloured Labrador that wrote it a worldwide reputation.
Robin Powell reports.
KINTBURY Berkshire
CHAPMAN PINCHER Ghost Writer
Voice over
Who said it's a dog's life?
This contented canine's living it up.
Having just secured world rights for her first book, she's leading a life of food and snooze; interrupted only by the occasional television interview.
One Dog and Her Man is a collaboration between Dido and her master, the spy writer, Chapman Pincher.
He's taken a break from the murky world of espionage to help his 5 year old Labrador unravel the mysteries of the canine psyche.
Mr Pincher, though, is only the ghost writer and it's Dido who's grabbing the headlines.
She counts the Queen and the Queen Mother among her fans.
George Bush's dog, Millie, is a penfriend.
There's an even an air of professional jealousy at the Pinchers' Berkshire home.
It can be hard work being a prima dogga, and after a long book-signing session there's nothing Dido likes more than going fishing in the River Kennet.
But first that special treat — a car journey.
Dido doesn't claim to have got to the bottom of what she calls the Canine Predicament.
She's still in correspondence with the Vatican about whether dogs go to heaven.
She'd really like to bump into Mr Pincher in Paradise, though privately he doesn't rate his chances of getting in either.
Whether or not their souls are immortal, dogs, like humans, do SIN.
Indeed, if they ever made a film version of Dido's next book — about mating and motherhood — it would almost certainly carry an X-certificate.
The inspiration for the next book was this lot — a litter of puppies now seven weeks old.
Tonight she's putting them early to bed, before tuning in to the American election.
She'll be rooting for Bush, by the way.
With no Millie in the White House, she'd lose her mole in the corridors of power and for a dog of Dido's standing, that would never do.
Two cleared over barn blaze deaths
FTSE up 17
The hundred shares index closed up seventeen point eight at twenty-seven, oh-five point six The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-four and up at two marks, forty-two.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Just after the Second World War, a film unit made a documentary about life in rural England.
They chose an area of twenty-four square miles in north Oxfordshire and spent a whole spring filming every aspect of life there.
We've been back to some of the places in the film to see what changes there've been and to talk to some of the people who were in the original film.
In the first of three parts we look back at the working life of country people featured in’ Twenty-Four Square Miles’
Courtesy of/Central Office of Information
Courtesy of/ROYAL ORDNANCE SURVEY
GEORGE WOOLGROVE/Farmer
DAVID CLARKE/Hook Norton Brewery
Voice over
The film was made in the spring of 1946 and records life in rural Britain.
The idea was to capture on film how the countryside was changing as the nation underwent great social and economic change.
It was called’ Twenty-four Square Miles’— a record of how people lived, their work, their homes, education and entertainment.
The film's makers, the Central Office of Information decided to focus on an area of 24 square miles in north Oxfordshire and chose the broadcaster, John Arlott as narrator.
’ There is nothing very outstanding or individual about this area — but it's typical of the countryside where things change slowly.’
And today, little has changed at the farm that featured in the original film; Mead Farm in Barford St John in north Oxfordshire.
In 1946 when the’ Twenty-four Square Miles’crew were filming, it was run by Albert Woolgrove.
The methods he used then had altered little over the years, but he was aware change was in the air.
’ It needs a bit of money to modernise a place like this.
I've a good yard down here by the house roomy with enough buildings for all I need.
Breeding for beef as I do, milk production is only a side-line.
We still use the old byre for milking and the few cows I keep don't call for a new mechanical milker.
My cow-man can manage them alright on his own.’
Filming on the farm took 5 days to complete, but as Albert's son, George explains, the film crew hadn't finished with him yet.
He says his father wrote it a script and went to London to record it, but he was rather worried because he was a big smoker and he had to keep clearing his throat.
But they assured him that they could take that part of it out, which of course they did.
George also appears in’ Twenty-Four Square Miles,’hard at work on a tractor pulling a drill.
Like his father, he had some apprehensions about the filming, especially being told to do things several times over for the film crew.
He says he was a little bit fed up becausehe had to plough up the same strip of the field several times for the film crew.
Then on another shot, he had a POW on the drill, who turned round and waved at the camera crew, so that was scrubbed out and done again.
The POW, Adolf, ended up on the cutting room floor in that shot, though he did survive in an earlier one.
Today, George is still going strong, giving his son, Robin a helping hand with the ploughing.
But some things are still the same; the old yard near the farmhouse is still thereand the old barn covered with its First World War tin roof.
5 miles west of Mead Farm, lies the village of Hook Norton.
Its tiny independent brewery also appears in’ Twenty-Four Square Miles.’
The Clarke family have been brewing beer for past 140 years.
Bill Clarke was in charge in 1946.
He made beer the same way as his grandfather had and today it's brewed just the same way.
Bill Clarke's son, David literally following in his father's footsteps.
The whole brewing process takes 10 days from start to finish.
Finally, the beer is piped into barrels which go down to the cellars for storage before delivery.
When business was good, the brewery employed 20 people.
Today, 35 local people work there, making 3 times as much beer a week.
Apart from that, David Clarke says little has changed.
He says nothing's really changed.
The brewing process is just the same as it was all those years ago.
They still use the horse and dray, which he remembers going out on when he was a boy.
That's something they've re-introduced again.
It's a different story just up the road where a big ironstone quarry used to be.
Now you wouldn't know the works had once been there.
It's almost as if Hook Norton Brewery were locked away in a time warp; even in the heart of the brewery, the steam engine which runs it is still there.
While not far away at what was once Bloxham railway station, the steam era is long gone.
Now it's hard to imagine a train pulling out of here.
And just as the train gave wayto the motor car, so the countryside life chronicled in’ Twenty-four Square Miles’was changing forever.
Good evening 
WESLEY SMITH
New age travellers have lost their battle to force local councils to give them camp sites.
A High Court judge has ruled that they don't have the same rights as traditional gypsies.
The councils have welcomed the decision — the travellers say they'll fight on.
HOLLOW FOSSE/Gloucestershire
GRAEME BOWD/London
JANET SMITH/Gloucestershire County Council
STEPHEN DAVIES/Traveller
Voice over
Today's test case follows attempts to evict travellers from land at Hollow Fosse near Cirencester.
The travellers said that as gypsies the council was obliged by law to give them a camp site.
But the council said they weren't gypsies at all.
The High Court also considered similar disputes in two other counties.
In a 70 page statement Mr Justice Harrison said the councils involved were entitled to seek possession of the sites.
He said the best definition of a gypsy was someoine who had a nomadic lifestyle.
But itr was up to the council to decide who was a gypsy and who was not.
The decision has been welcomed by the councils.
She says if they had lost the case it would have opened the flood gates fort many more people to claim gypsy status and demand sites from the council.
He says the ruling shops that travellers don't have any rights.
Thew ruling opens the way for the council to evict them.
But the travellers have been given leave to appeal.
A former Ministry of Defence worker, has been found guilty of accepting one and a half million pounds in backhanders from arms companies, in what's thought to be the biggest ever corruption case.
Gordon Foxley, from Henley on Thames, was found guilty of receiving the money in return for giving large orders to European firms while he was director of the MOD'S ammunition procurement department.
Foxley was granted bail and will be sentenced next month.
Four shops in Oxford have escaped fines for trading on Sunday.
The prosecutions were brought by Oxford city council against B and Q, HMV, Ritz Video and the Reject Shop.
All four shops were found guilty, but were given an absolute discharge.
A psychiatrist who helped former hostages to overcome their ordeal has been presented with a People of the Year award.
Dr Gordon Turnbull was based at RAF Lyneham in Wiltshire when the Middle East hostages were released.
John McCarthy, Terry Waite, Jackie Mann and spent time in a special unit where Dr Turnbull helped them come to terms with what had happened to them.
Oxford United are still stuck at the bottom of the first division…after last night's draw against Barnsley…while Hereford suffered a worse fate…they lost at Gillingham…
Tim Russon reports 
Voice over
Life at the bottom is no easy run…survival becomes more important than style…but Oxford are trying to play their way out of trouble…
Nick Cusack's goal against Barnsley proved that very point…
But United's shortcomings…weakenesses are still all too obvious…a leaky defence let them down again just when it mattered most when the final whistle was minutes away as Redfearn hit the equaliser to make it one-all
Hereford are only two off the bottom of the third division now after slipping up at Gillingham…their defence was well beaten by the opening goal from Arnott…
there was worse…much worse to come…the second goal from Forster was a case of soccer suicide…
Hereford are their own worst enemy at the moment…2-0 to Gillingham
One other piece of football news — Swindon Town hope to step up their fight for survival tomorrow by signing Roy Wegerle from Coventry City — the fee five hundred thousand pounds.
That's it, no 6.25pm programme due to football, we're back after News at Ten.
Goodbye.
RUNS=0:05