

An MP has claimed in the Commons that car boot sales are being used by thieves to get rid of stolen goods.
He wants tighter controls on the sales.
But police say they have no evidence of large-scale criminal involvement.
KEN GOODWIN/Reporting
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con
CHARLES WARDLE MP/Home Office Minister
Insp DAVID MORGAN/Gloucestershire Police
DAVID GREEN/Gloucestershire Trading Standards
Voice over
Car boot sales are a great way of clearing out the attic, and making a few pounds into the bargain.
But now an MP is concerned that it's the thieves who are cashing in by using the sales as clearing houses for stolen property.
Douglas French is so concerned he's raised the matter in parliament.
He asking if the minister is aware that car boot sales are used by criminals to launder stolen goods?
He replies that there's no evidence of this, but if Mr French has evidence he should pass it on to his chief constable.
The police say that they do monitor car boot sales, but they believe the vast majority of people using car boot sales are honest.
He says that there's a lot of speculation, and there have been one or two arrests, but there's no evidence of large scale crime.
Mr French says he's worried that thye home office isn't taking the matter seriously.
He says that he was not happy with the answer he received.
Trading standards also keep an eye on car boot sales — and say that tighter controls would help them.
He says that in some parts of the country, car boot sales have to be registered with the local authority, this could help.
Mr French says it's also up buyers at car boot sales to watch out for so called bargains: if something is unbelievably cheap ask yourself: Could it it be stolen or counterfeit?
Still to come on Central News, five days to the budget.
So, is commuting about to become even more taxing?
And is this the turning point?
A league win at last for Swindon.
Welcome back: Next Tuesday, the Chancellor will unveil his first Autumn budget.
There's been plenty of speculation about what will be cut and what will be taxed, but it's widely expected that there'll be a big increase in the scope of VAT.
This week we've been looking at what VAT on fuel and books would mean.
Tonight, we hear reactions to the threat of a tax on public transport.
BOB BROWN/Cotswold Line Promotion Group
JANET BLUNDRED/Thames Transit
Dr PHILIP GOODWIN/Oxford University
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Voice over
These are worrying times for rail travellers.
Not only are they having to come to terms with the latest three per cent rise in fares and the implications of rail privatisation, but now the spectre of VAT hangs over them as well.
If the Chancellor is to balance his budget this autumn it looks likely that VAT will be added in several areas which have been zero rated until now, and public transport may be one of them.
Transport pressure groups believe this will be the last straw for some services.
Lines like the Cotswold line which runs from Worcester to Oxford are most at risk.
I/view Bob Brown Cotswold Line
Male speaker
This another way of driving people off the trains.
It will drive people onto the roads.
Voice over
And it's not only rail travellers who'll feel the pinch.
Thames Transit has been running bus services in Oxford for the last seven years.
In that time they have built up a force of one hundred and fifty vehicles and three hundred and forty staff.
VAT on bus fares could destroy all that at a stroke.
Janet Blundred/Managing Director Thames Transit
Female speaker
It would be disasterous.
We'd have to pass the increase onto passengers.
It would force more people onto the roads.
Voice over
Vox Pops 
Female speaker
I'd ride my bike
Female speaker
I'd grumble but then pay.
Female speaker
We don't have any choice.
Voice over
While those and many other bus users would simply cut the number of journeys they make, experts believe there would be a body of people, especially rail commmuters, who'd be driven back into their cars by fare increases.
Dr Philip Goodwin/Transport Expert
Male speaker
Some journeys may be lost, and there will be an increase in traffic.
It would be bad for public transport and for congestion.
Voice over
In real terms the cost of rail and bus travel has risen by an average of no more than five per cent above the rate of inflation in the last five years.
For a Government with a fifty billion pound deficit to tackle it's a tempting target for VAT, bringing in an estimated two and a quarter billion pounds.
Douglas French MP
Male speaker
We've had a VAT holiday for ten or fifteen years.
The rest of Europe has it and it's time we came into line with them.
Voice over
And motorists won't get away scott free either, the Chancellor is expected to increase the cost of petrol by three per cent above inflation.
Charging drivers to use certain roads is also seen as a way of increasing government revenue.
But what's certain to hit motorists hardest of all would be the extra congestion caused by the the imposition of VAT on public transport.
And you can find out just what Kenneth Clarke's budget plans are by watching Central on Tuesday afternoon.
ITV's Budget '93 begins at 3:15, and includes full live coverage of the Chancellor's speech to the Commons.
In Central News tonight.
Outrageous.
Hit and run victim condemns decision to free joyrider.
Out of time: Eviction threat returns for a dying man.
And a magnet for stolen goods.
MP calls for clampdown on car boot sales.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The magistrates in the case say the girl wasn't locked up because she wasn't driving the stolen car.
But an MP says he'll be taking up the case, and demanding it go back to the courts for a stiffer sentence.
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
FRANCES MAIDMENT/Hit and Run Victim
March 1993/OXFORD
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Oxford East
Voice over
Frances Maidment has vivid memories of the day she was run over by a stolen car.
Female speaker
I can remember the rave music.
I couldn't work out where it was coming from.
But when I looked up I saw I was underneath a car.
Voice over
Frances had been walking along a pavement in Oxford when she was hit from behind.
She was trapped between the car and a hedge.
She suffered head, neck, back and leg injuries and still feels the effects of the crash several months on.
A fifteen year old girl, who was a lookout for the car theft and who was a passenger during the hit and run, appeared before Magistrates today.
She was given a year's supervision order.
Female speaker
I think it's outrageous as I could have been killed.
She didn't cooperate with the police.
I don't think she should have been given a custodial sentence, but a community service to make her think about what she's done.
Voice over
The girl's defence solicitor said she was now living at home after months in a children's home during family difficulties.
The Magistrates took that into account when imposing the sentence, but warned the girl that they take the offence extremely seriously.
They had considered sending her to youth custody and said if she gets in trouble again she'll be lucky to stay out of prison.
Female speaker
If they're minors they won't even get their name in the paper.
They'll get off.
That's not a deterrant, unless the Government does something about it.
Male speaker
I can and shall take the matter up with the Attorney General in relation to the sentence which has been past.
This isn't giving a strong enough message that this murderous activity has to stop.
Voice over
Frances will also receive forty four pounds in compensation from the girl.
Though nothing can really compensate her for the pain and shock of what happened.
A dying man and his family are again facing eviction from their home after failing to raise the money to pay off mortgage arrears.
A judge gave Peter and Maureen Harris two weeks to find eight thousand pounds.
That expired today.
GRAEME BOWD/Sandford-on-Thames
MAUREEN HARRIS
PETER HARRIS
Rev ROBERT MORGAN/Vicar of St Andrew's
ANDREW LANE/Oxfordshire Money Advice Project
Voice over
This week Peter Harris came home from the hospice where he's being treated for cancer.
But while his condition has improved the couple are still face eviction from their home near Oxford.
The Harrises were given two weeks to pay off mortgage arrears of £8,000.
That deadline passed today, but less than half the money has been raised.
She says she worries all the time.
The whole family is devastated by what is happeneing to them.
He says he's feeling better but he has to go back to the hospice.
It's very worrying.
The couple have had help from the local church.
An appeal in the parish newsletter brought several offers of cash.
He says everyone knows Mr Harris's plight.
It is a terrible situation for the family.
They now wait to see if the mortgage company Dorend will apply for possession.
If so the Harrises with their 7 children and several animals could be out within a fortnight.
At the last hearing at Oxford County Court Judge Charles Harris said their payment record was intolerable and that he was not mindful to postpone the eviction again.
But debt counsellors believe the money can be raised.
He says they are getting towards £8,000.
Earlier this month Mr Harris was given just a few days to live but for now his illness seems to have regressed.
Whether the family can keep the bailiffs at bay may now depend on the continued generosity of wellwishers.
A man has been charged after a policeman was stabbed in the eye with a wooden stick.
CALCUTT/Wiltshire
PC Donald Lucey approached a man who was sitting on the central reservation of the A Four-One-Nine at Calcutt near Swindon.
The man ran off into nearby fields and stabbed PC Lucey in the eye when he followed.
The long term effects of the injuries are not yet known.
A man has been charged with grievous bodily harm and will appear before Swindon Magistrates tomorrow morning.
A gang posing as police officers hijacked a lorry driver and stole his fifty thousand pound load of wine, beer and spirits.
The driver was forced off the A four two two near Milton Keynes when a car with flashing red lights signalled him to stop.
Two men got out and bundled the driver into the car.
They then drove fifteen miles before dumping him on the Buckinghamshire border.
The lorry has not yet been recovered.
Around a hundred and fifty animals which were threatened with slaughter have been saved.
HEREFORD
The Hereford animal sanctuary is being forced to close down because of complaints from neighbours.
It was feared a hundred and fifty animals would have to be destroyed.
But after appearing on Central Television the sanctuary has been inundated with calls from people offering the animals a home.
There have also been offers of land for an alternative site for the sanctuary.
Two boys who were rescued from the fighting in Lebanon are back tonight at the hospital that rebuilt their bodies and gave them hope for the future.
Bilal Shebib and Samir Medina were smuggled out of the infamous Bourje Al Bourajnee refugee camp in the Lebanon five years ago by British doctor Pauline Cutting.
1987/BEIRUT
She knew that the conditions in the camps meant they would die if they were not treated properly, which meant coming to Stoke Mandeville hospital in Buckinghamshire.
HEATHROW AIRPORT/Today
That was in nineteen eighty seven, but earlier today the two boys arrived at Heathrow airport once again, on the final stage of their return visit to Stoke Mandeville.A short time ago Bilal and Samir were expected to arrive at the hospital near Aylesbury.
We're going live now to our reporter there, Gargy Patel.
Gargy: have the visitors arrived?
LIVE/GARGY PATEL/Stoke Mandeville
Yes, Anne.
Just a few minutes ago the ambulance carrying the two boys arrived at Stoke Mandeville.
Doctors and nurses from the Spinal Injuries Unit were waiting to greet Bilal and Samir.
They were very popular patients and everyone is delighted to see them back.
Of course the initial treatment was five years ago, and they've grown up since then.
RUNS=0:30 
In a moment we'll be speaking to the doctors who've helped Bilal and Samir.
But first let's look back at how Stoke Mandeville came to play such an important part in their lives.
JUNE 1987/AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
Sir JIMMY SAVILE/Speaking in November 1987
Dr PAULINE CUTTING/Speaking in November 1987
SAMIR MEDINA/Aged 8
BILAL SHEBIB/Aged 7
DECEMBER 1988/ITN Report
Voice over
When Bilal Shebib and Samir Medina came to Stoke Mandeville for treatment in 1987, their severe spinal injuries meant they couldn't even sit up.
They'd been caught up in gunfire at home in Beirut, which left them paralysed.
Their lives were saved by Pauline Cutting, the British surgeon who made the headlines through her work with the Palestinian victims of the civil war.
After 6 months of specialist treatment here at the National Spinal Injuries Unit, doctors said they'd made miraculous progress.
Even Jimmy Savile, the man who helped bring them here, couldn't keep up with them.
They were sad to be leaving, but looking forward to being re-united with their families.
Bilal and Samir returned home to Lebanon, but doctors feared there would be a setback in their recovery because of conditions in the Bourj al Barajneh refugee camps and the lack of medical facilities there.
Some thought they might die.
As the civil war continued, the boys did survive.
Now they're coming back to Stoke Mandeville for more treatment and new wheelchairs.
Today staff have been preparing to welcome 2 young men whom they thought they might never see again.
LIVE FROM STOKE MANDEVILLE
Dr PAULINE CUTTING/Surgeon
SAMIR MEDINA
Mr ISAAC NUFEIBEH/Surgeon
RUNS=2:00est
In part two: Skin and bone.
Life ban for couple who starved an alsatian.
And is the end in sight?
A view of the comet that's heading for Earth.
Welcome back: A father and daughter have been banned from keeping animals for life after admitting cruelty to an Alsatian dog.
The court was told that the dog was so emaciated that it was little more than skin and bone.
A vet described it as the worse case of neglect he'd ever seen.
Ken Goodwin reports.
DURSLEY/Gloucestershire
NEIL FORBES/Vet
ALLAN BROCKBANK/RSPCA
Voice over
This is Breeze, a 12 year old alsatian dog found by RSPCA officers locked in a damp filthy backyard shed.
Her fur was matted and she was so emaciated she could hardly stand.
This is Breeze today, shown to magistrates at Dursley, where Roy Davies and his daughter, Dawn pleaded guilty to neglecting the dog while it was in their care.
Vet, Neil Forbes says it was the worse case of starvation he's ever seen.
He says that it was half it's normal weight.
A sorry sight.
The court had heard that the Davies family had kept animals for years without any problems, but the dogs neglect happened during a traumatic period when one of Mr Davies' daughters died from an illness.
Magistrates banned Mr Davies and his daughter, who live in Frampton on Severn, from keeping animals for life; the only exception being that Mr Davies will be allowed to keep racing pigeons he already owns.
In addition, the couple must pay fines and costs totalling £875.
Afterwards the RSPCA said it was an approriate sentence.
He says the ban is the right result.
He says a pet is for life, if circumstances change it's up to the owner to arrange to have the pet looked after.
Breeze the Alsatian now has a new home and is thriving.
Why didn't the police listen?
Murder victim's mother says her fears were ignored.
Pay up or get out.
Nuns face eviction from convent.
And back in town.
The boys rescued from the bullets of Beirut.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Mrs Titcomb, who's eighty two last saw Christine on the night of Wednesday the 18th of November, in a Swindon club.
She says she got little or no response when she reported her missing.
Police say they'll treat her remarks as a formal complaint.
We have two reports on the hunt for Christine Campbell's killer…the first from Ian Maclaren.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
ELSIE TITCOMB/Mother
PETER SANDALL/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
Elsie Titcomb joined her daughter Christine for a drink last Wednesday night, at the Royal British Legion Club in Swindon.
Her daughter went on to visit a night club.
It was the last time she saw Christine alive.
Mrs Titcomb says she reported her daughter missing 2 days later.
She was only found, when the landlady of the All Travellers Quest Guest House reported blood dripping through a ceiling.
Police found Christine's body crammed into a suitcase in the loft.
The discovery confirmed Mrs Titcomb's worst fears.
Mrs Titcomb firmly believes Christine Campbell met her killers last Wednesday night.
And Mrs Titcomb is convinced her daughter would have resisted any attacker.
At her home in central Swindon, Christine's mother is now trying to come to terms with her daughters brutal murder.
Family and friends describe Christine as slim and pretty; a woman who enjoyed life and looked younger than her 46 years.
MARK KIFF/Reporting
Det Supt TOM FRASER/Wiltshire Police
ANGELO ROSSI/Nightclub Owner
Voice over
Detectives leading the hunt for Mrs Campbell's killers said today they'd made vital progress.
They revealed they're looking for two suspects.
Another breakthrough came with the discovery that the Swindon nightclub where Mrs Campbell spent her last hours had filmed her leaving the premises on its security video.
After leaving the nightclub with a friend known only as Sharon, Mrs Campbell was last seen alive in the Harding Street car park just behind the Guest House where she met her death.
There she was seen with a man at a hot dog stand.
Police say they're keen to talk Swindon taxi drivers who may have given anyone a lift from the Guest House last Thursday or shortly afterwards.
In the attic of the Guest House where Mrs Campbell's body was hidden, police have now found her coat, shoes and handbag.
Britain's docks and airports have been alerted to look out for the suspects.
An eleven year old girl has been raped as she walked to school.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
She was grabbed from behind as she walked along a footpath near Monks Way in Milton Keynes.
The attacker dragged her into bushes and raped her.
The girl raised the alarm after returning home.
Milton Keynes police have set up an incident room and they're appealing for any witnesses.
They say its possible the attacker ran off across Monks Way.
He's described as white, aged twenty to thirty, with short blond hair, wearing bleached jeans which may have been muddy and wet.
A group of nuns are facing eviction from their convent after running up debts of more than a million pounds.
Creditors have applied for a court order to take over and sell the building.
The debts arose out of a ten million pound plan to build a village to care for the elderly in the grounds of the convent.
Richard Barnett reports:
BARTESTREE/Herefordshire
SISTER MARY/Sister Superior
Voice over
The Sisters of Our Lady of Charity have been at Bartestree Convent in Herefordshire for 130 years.
Now they're faced with a court order that could force them to leave within 28 days.
The nuns have run up debts of more than £1 million with an ambitious plan for a care village in the grounds of the convent.
They wanted to build 130 homes for the elderly and convert the convent into an amenity centre complete with a swimming pool, library and restaurant.
But as the recession deepened, no backers could be found for the scheme which had already cost over £1 million.
Two creditors, the consultant engineers on the project and the architects involved, have applied for a court order that the convent should be sold off to meet the debts.
It's hoped the building and ten acres of land could fetch over a million pounds so the creditors can be paid off.
The Sister Superior at Bartestree says the nuns were already planning to sell up.
Female speaker
It's a sad day as the sisters were planning to sell.
They won't be evicted as they plan to leave.
Voice over
Meanwhile villagers say they're shocked by the news the nuns are to go.
Only 7 nuns remain at Bartestree and they'll be gone by the time auctioneers sell off the contents of the convent in 3 weeks time.
Meanwhile for the first time since 1863, the needy of Herefordshire will no longer be able to look to the sisters of Bartestree for compassion and care.
Why didn't the police listen?
Murder victim's mother says her fears were ignored.
Pay up or get out.
Nuns face eviction from convent.
And back in town.
The boys rescued from the bullets of Beirut.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Mrs Titcomb, who's eighty two last saw Christine on the night of Wednesday the 18th of November, in a Swindon club.
She says she got little or no response when she reported her missing.
Police say they'll treat her remarks as a formal complaint.
We have two reports on the hunt for Christine Campbell's killer…the first from Ian Maclaren.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
ELSIE TITCOMB/Mother
PETER SANDALL/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
Elsie Titcomb joined her daughter Christine for a drink last Wednesday night, at the Royal British Legion Club in Swindon.
Her daughter went on to visit a night club.
It was the last time she saw Christine alive.
Mrs Titcomb says she reported her daughter missing 2 days later.
She was only found, when the landlady of the All Travellers Quest Guest House reported blood dripping through a ceiling.
Police found Christine's body crammed into a suitcase in the loft.
The discovery confirmed Mrs Titcomb's worst fears.
Mrs Titcomb firmly believes Christine Campbell met her killers last Wednesday night.
And Mrs Titcomb is convinced her daughter would have resisted any attacker.
At her home in central Swindon, Christine's mother is now trying to come to terms with her daughters brutal murder.
Family and friends describe Christine as slim and pretty; a woman who enjoyed life and looked younger than her 46 years.
MARK KIFF/Reporting
Det Supt TOM FRASER/Wiltshire Police
ANGELO ROSSI/Nightclub Owner
Voice over
Detectives leading the hunt for Mrs Campbell's killers said today they'd made vital progress.
They revealed they're looking for two suspects.
Another breakthrough came with the discovery that the Swindon nightclub where Mrs Campbell spent her last hours had filmed her leaving the premises on its security video.
After leaving the nightclub with a friend known only as Sharon, Mrs Campbell was last seen alive in the Harding Street car park just behind the Guest House where she met her death.
There she was seen with a man at a hot dog stand.
Police say they're keen to talk Swindon taxi drivers who may have given anyone a lift from the Guest House last Thursday or shortly afterwards.
In the attic of the Guest House where Mrs Campbell's body was hidden, police have now found her coat, shoes and handbag.
Britain's docks and airports have been alerted to look out for the suspects.
An eleven year old girl has been raped as she walked to school.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
She was grabbed from behind as she walked along a footpath near Monks Way in Milton Keynes.
The attacker dragged her into bushes and raped her.
The girl raised the alarm after returning home.
Milton Keynes police have set up an incident room and they're appealing for any witnesses.
They say its possible the attacker ran off across Monks Way.
He's described as white, aged twenty to thirty, with short blond hair, wearing bleached jeans which may have been muddy and wet.
A group of nuns are facing eviction from their convent after running up debts of more than a million pounds.
Creditors have applied for a court order to take over and sell the building.
The debts arose out of a ten million pound plan to build a village to care for the elderly in the grounds of the convent.
Richard Barnett reports:
BARTESTREE/Herefordshire
SISTER MARY/Sister Superior
Voice over
The Sisters of Our Lady of Charity have been at Bartestree Convent in Herefordshire for 130 years.
Now they're faced with a court order that could force them to leave within 28 days.
The nuns have run up debts of more than £1 million with an ambitious plan for a care village in the grounds of the convent.
They wanted to build 130 homes for the elderly and convert the convent into an amenity centre complete with a swimming pool, library and restaurant.
But as the recession deepened, no backers could be found for the scheme which had already cost over £1 million.
Two creditors, the consultant engineers on the project and the architects involved, have applied for a court order that the convent should be sold off to meet the debts.
It's hoped the building and ten acres of land could fetch over a million pounds so the creditors can be paid off.
The Sister Superior at Bartestree says the nuns were already planning to sell up.
Female speaker
It's a sad day as the sisters were planning to sell.
They won't be evicted as they plan to leave.
Voice over
Meanwhile villagers say they're shocked by the news the nuns are to go.
Only 7 nuns remain at Bartestree and they'll be gone by the time auctioneers sell off the contents of the convent in 3 weeks time.
Meanwhile for the first time since 1863, the needy of Herefordshire will no longer be able to look to the sisters of Bartestree for compassion and care.
A Christmas tree growers' charter has been announced to make sure that the festive firs are really value for money.
Farmers say in previous years the public haven't always got a fair deal, as Simon Garrett reports 
MALVERN/Worcestershire
WALTER BEARD/Christmas Tree Farmer
DON WILLIAMS/Grower
Voice over
For more than 40 years, Don Williams has been growing Christmas trees at Leigh Sinton farms near Malvern.
They're one of the largest producers in Europe, and with Christmas a coming, it's harvest time.
This year, with an eye to future continental competition, they're bringing in new standards on value for money.
Male speaker
They're only paying from the top branch up to the last branch on the tree.
If you're buying a cut tree, you'll be paying obviously from where it's cut up to the bottom branch, or if it's a rooted tree you'll be paying from ground level up to the bottom branch again.
Voice over
Re-usable trees with roots are growing in popularity and packaging is becoming a serious selling point.
But as with all trades and professions, the man who lives amongst Christmas trees, is often the last to have one in his living room.
Male speaker
Oh, very often my wife goes out and digs one up on Christmas Eve and that has happened regular.
Voice over
Maybe it's a search for the feelgood factor in the midst of recession, or maybe it's got something to do with modern architecture, but the market for Christmas trees is sort of growing.
Most people used to want a 4ft tree, now the demand is for 5 or 6 footers.
A comet which could one day wipe out life on earth has been captured on film…by a postman.
John Fletcher, who spends his spare time stargazing, photographed comet Swift Tuttle — an object which some astronomers fear may collide with the earth on it's next visit.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
JOHN FLETCHER/Astronomer
Voice over
When Postman, John Fletcher isn't at work, this is what he spends most of his time doing; peering at the sky, in his backyard Observatory he calls Mount Tuffley.
His most recent observation has sent a chill down his spine; the comet, Swift Tuttle.
Some astronomers think that on the comets next visit in 135 years, it will approach the earth so close, it may even collide, wiping out most life forms.
John says the comet is quite easy to spot, even with small binoculars.
He says that it can be seen for the next week or so in the west, but it's too faint to be seen with the naked eye.
A comet is like a huge dirty snowball, a mixture of ice and rocks.
As it approaches the sun it starts to evaporate, giving off the familiar long gassy tail.
Swift Tuttle's next visit will be in the year 2126, when at best there'll be a close shave, giving a spectacular night time fireworks dislay, or at worst, it'll actually collide with the earth.
A large commet hitting the earth would mean catastrophe.
Travelling at over 100,000 mph — dozens of times faster than a rifle bullet — it would vapourise on impact, excavating a vast crater hundreds of miles across and filling the atmosphere with scalding steam and rock vapour.
This would cause the earths atmosphere to heat up enough to kill most forms of life and would also blanket out the suns light for years to come.
In the past, comet and meteorite strikes were much more common in the solar system; the pitted surface of the moon is evidence of that.
It's thought that a comet colliding with the earth may have caused the mass extinction of the dinosaurs.
Could Swift Tuttle do the same to mankind?
John is optimistic.
He says that he thinks it's unlikely that it will hit; in fact there's less than a one in 10,000 chance.
John spends every spare moment watching Swift Tuttle, as it rockets past the earth, knowing that on its next return, mankind may be in for a much closer encounter.
Finally, back to Stoke Mandeville and the return tonight of Bilal Shabib, and Samir Medina, five years after they were rescued from almost certain death in the civil war in Lebanon.
The man who was the driving force behind bringing them to Britain for surgery was Sir Jimmy Savile.
He's talking now to our reporter Gargy Patel.
LIVE FROM STOKE MANDEVILLE
SAMIR MEDINA
BILAL SHEBIB
Sir JIMMY SAVILE
RUNS=1:30
Desert Orchid’ holding his own’
FTSE up 32
Voice over
The hundred shares index closed up thirty two point two at two seven four one point eight 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty two and down at two marks, forty two.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
It's reckoned the RAC Rally was watched by two million people over the four days.
Football still draws the biggest crowds in this country, but here's a surprise for you…the second most popular spectator sport is greyhound racing.
So for our Friday Feature we're off to the Cowley Stadium in Oxford for a night at the dogs 
JOAN GIBBS/Owner
MICK WHEBLE/Racing manager
LITZI MILLER/Champion Trainer
Voice over
For most greyhound racing…has always been a world of the cloth cap…a world for the workers…all spit and no polish…
but that was the world of yesterday…today its a world that runs along making money and giving pleasure to millions…
a sporting revolution has brought dog racing a life of luxury…there's no freezing on the terraces here…most watch from the warmth of a trackside resturant…
and for Britain here's something new…you'll here no moans down at the dogs…managers…trainers…owners…watchers…they all love it
Joan Gibbs an owner says it's a good night out…you can sit and watch while you have a meal…have a bet…it's everything…
Mick Wheble racing manager says its's tremendous fun
Litzi Miller champion trainer says that some people don't even bet they'e just happy to see their dog win
You see what I mean…they're a happy bunch…there's lot of racing to keep them going as well…
Oxford has four meetings a week…that's forty four races…and they run all year round…they're are 48 tracks up and down the country…so a lot of people are getting a lot of enjoyment…
Mick Wheble says the thrill is to see the dogs win…and even if you don't know much you pick any dog and win
value for money is another proud boast of the greyhounds…you can own and race a dog for just over a thousand pounds a year and there's prize money for all…that's why so many more people are coming racing…why so many are owners
Joan Gibbs says she really wanted a racehorse but couldn't afford it and so she bought a greyhound and that's the next best thing…it's something of yours
and what about the dogs…well the sporting life seems to suit them…they're trained and treated in style…
Lizti Miller says you have to have a love of greyhounds and understand them and the art of winning is to put the dog in the right race
it's betting of course that makes the sport go round…
Oxford will turnover anything between 30 to 60 thousand pounds a meeting…two hundred million pounds is bet on the tote in this country every year…
that's why some come of course to seek their fortune…they may go home with empty pockets but you can bet they'll be back for another night at the gryehounds…for another night of fun
A hotelier has had to recruit chefs and waiters from France because he can't find anyone suitable here.
Richard Buswell spent hundreds of pounds advertising for staff, but so few people applied that he had to look abroad.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Bibury
RICHARD BUSWELL/Manager
CAROL DIKE/Waitress
ALAIN POICHEL/Head Chef
CHRISTOPHE DELANDE/Waiter
Voice over
The head chef at the Swan Hotel in Bibury is from France.
So too is his deputy, the pastry chef and three of the waiting staff.
The hotel manager says he was forced to employ French staff because no one in this region, or this country, seemed willing or able to take up the positions.
English staff have their own theories.
The French staff say they're glad to get the opportunity to work here.
Even though there are a few language problems.
The chefs and waiters will work here for a year.
The the Swan Hotel will have to embark on another search for suitable staff.
Now a look ahead to a series of special reports on Central next week, when we look at the future of transport.
With the number of cars on our roads set to double by the year twenty-twenty-five,: our environment reporter Harriet Ryley considers whether we really NEED more roads.
We go to a Dutch city where motor traffic is banned from the centre and where more than half of all local journeys are made by bike.
We follow a family from the region having to manage without their car — and they'll be reporting back on how they got on.
That's all in’ The Road Ahead’starting next Monday on Central News South at six twenty-five.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Advisor walks free
FTSE up 18
The hundred shares index closed up eighteen point three at thirty one eleven point four 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty eight and down at two marks, fifty three.
Welcome back: Coming up, the hotelier who's had to hire French staff because nobody here wants the work.
But first with the sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
DENIS SMITH/Oxford Manager
Voice over
The wait is over for both Oxford and Swindon.
United's search for their first away win of the season ended at Leicester: 3-2 it could and should have been more.
They've looked a different team these last few weeks so what magic has manager Denis Smith been working
Denis Smith says the three players he's bought have made a big difference.
and things are just about going to plan
United's next test is Notts County away on Sunday.
It's the central live match and it's another toughy, at home County are winners.
Denis Smith says there's no match you can bank on for points but as long as they get results they don't care where they come from.
The sign of success is an unchanged team and once again Denis Smith can keep a settled side.
On form there's nothing much between the two.
The only team to have won at Meadow Lane in the league are Middlesborough.
The wait is over for Swindon.
They've won at , and tomorrow's big test takes them to Leeds United.We're turning the clock back nearly four years to give Town a boost for this one.
The last time they met was in the old second division at the county ground.
It was a real old battle.
One nil leeds: 1-1, 2-1 Swindon; 2-2, and finally 3-2 to Town.
Swindon can keep their winning side unchanged too.
Nicky Summerbee is still unfit so Martin Ling keeps his place.
Hopefully the form book means nothing for Swindon from here in on.
Norwich are the only side to win at Elland Road in the lague so far.
Hereford United put the breaks on their fall last week.
They got a goal and a draw at Torquay but should have won.
So no changes from Greg Downs tomorrow, and United need to shake up their home form because Doncaster are no pushovers.
Goal of the week goes to Oxford's Alex Dyer: a real winner.
And you can see Oxford in action on Sunday.
They're topping the bill in the Central Match Live which kicks off at ten to three.
Action round-up time now…two big events this week…we're looking back on the RAC Rally and forward to the Hennesey Gold Cup 
MARK PITMAN
DAVID STAIT/Assistant Trainer
TERRY BIDDLECOMBE
Voice over
When it comes to winning gold cups…
Garrison Savanah has a few tales to tell…he won the big race at Cheltenham 3 years ago and tomorrow the Gloucestershire favourite will be off and running for the big prize at Newbury
Gary as he's called is still trained by the Pitmans on the Lambourn Downs…
Mark…the jockey that rode him to victory at Cheltenham has retired from the saddle but still rides him out on the gallops and is now helping to tarin him
Mark Pitman says the horse has done more for him than he can ever do for it in return…he's a good performer
the only non runner in the Pitman yard this week has been the trainer…
Jenny Pitman's been hit with flu…so assistant David Stait has been getting Gary ready for the gold cup…
David Stait says he's a great old character and it's a question of harnessing their skills
Royal Athlete is another runner from the Pitman stables…but what chance…our racing expert is Terry Biddlecombe…who says that Garrison is in terrific shape and could well win it
In racing terms the going for this year's RAC Rally was soft to slippery…
A winter wonderland greeted the cars as they drove through north from Birmingham through the lakes and the Yorskhire Moors…
The great Central South hope…
Colin McRae missed out again…he was in the lead when his radiator blew…
Banbury teamate Ari Vatanen came in fifth…the best local finisher…
What of the rest…
Burford's Trevor Smith…held on and held out in the worst of conditions to come home in twenty eighth spot…
Kevin Williams of Hereford…was only a few seconds behind him
Our camera…got the closest shave and nearly crashed in the middle of the forest…
So top marks to all the local club drivers who managed to keep on road
Steve Claridge of Witney made it from start to finish…
and two more Oxfordshire drivers Alastair Barnes and Jeff Orford also got home…and this year that was victory in itself…
In Central News tonight:
Killer was on bail.
Murder and suicide verdict after car park double shooting.
No danger here.
Nuclear workers told cancer risk isn't worth the worry.
And, a shambles: Government attacked over the road that will blight a dream home.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The killings took place six months ago in a busy car park.
Today's inquest was told that two grandchildren of the murdered woman were so close to the shooting that they too were hit.
June 1993/TIM HURST/Cheltenham
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
Voice over
The double shooting happened in a public car park beside a Texas superstore in Cheltenham town centre in Gloucestershire in June.
Mrs June Smith, a home help, aged 45, was shot dead by her former boyfriend, out of work lorry driver Stuart Jobson, who was 42.
Both lived in the Springbank area of Cheltenham.
Mrs Smith's daughter, Mrs. Tracey MacIllarry, was among family witnesses who attended a double inquest into the deaths at Tewkesbury this afternoon.
Mrs MacIllarry and her two children, aged 2 and 4, had been with Mrs Smith when she was shot.
For months before the shooting, Mrs Smith had complained of being harrassed by her former boyfriend Jobson, who wanted her to return to him.
Mrs MacIllarry said she'd been told by her mother that Jobson had once phoned saying he would kill her and then himself.
He'd also followed Mrs Smith and spied on her.
On the day of the shooting, according to Mrs MacIllarry, her mother, herself and her two children had returned to their car in the car park.
Jobson approached with a coat over his arm, said he wanted to taslk to Mrs Smith, who told him to leave her alone.
Jobson said’ do you want to die’and pushed his arm into her midriff.
Under the coat was a sawn-off shotgun and he fired.
The coroner, Mr Lester Madrell, heard in a statement from Mrs MacIllarry, who was pregnant at the time, that she jumped on Jobson, who then pointed the gun at her, she was absolutely terrified, she grabbed her children, leaving her baby buggy bahind, and ran into the store.
Both children had been injured in the head and hand by shrapnel.
Other witnesses said in statements Jobson had reloaded and fired four shots at Mrs Smith.
Then he fired the gun into his own chest.
Workers at a nuclear research plant are being assured they're NOT in danger of developing prostate cancer, despite a new report claiming an increased risk for men who've been in contact with radioactive material.
The number of cancer deaths at the plant is slightly higher than normal, but staff are being told that the added risk isn't worth worrying about.
GARETH FURBY/Harwell
Dr VALERIE BERAL/Imperial Cancer Unit
Dr BRIAN WADE/Head of Radiological Protection
JOHN BILLARD/IPMS Union
Voice over
Over the years one thousand seven hundred people have worked at Harwell on these two reactors.
Tonight some of those workers…retired or still employed…may be worried about their future health.
It follows the publication of medical research which says men who've worked for the Atomic Energy Authority and may have been exposed to certain radioactive materials have more than twice the normal risk of developing prostate cancer.
For men with known contamination, the risk increases five fold.
She says when reactors get old the corrode and radioactive materials get into the body.
The two reactors were closed down in 1990.
The statistics show four men who worked there have died of prostate cancer.
But the Atomic Energy Authority says that figure is only just above what's expected in the general population.
He says the workforce are disgustingly healthy.
But the unions say any member who fears he's developed cancer becuase of his work should contact them immediately
He says it's not a big risk but they can help.
The Atomic Energy Authority beleives its workforce is very healthy.
But employees who're are worried by the results of this latest reasearch will be offered medical counselling.
The Education Secretary has apologised in the Commons for calling a top education official a nutter.
Professor Tim Brighouse, formerly of Oxfordshire is now Birmingham's Chief Education Officer.
He issued a libel writ after John Patten's comments at a Tory party fringe meeting.
Mr Patten, who's the MP for Oxford West and Abingdon, was pressed for an apology by Labour.
JOHN PATTEN MP/Education Secretary
I am happy to repeat in this House an apology to the Chief Education Officer of Birmingham Mr Tim Brighouse for anything I said that offended him.
There can be no more public place to apologise than the House of Commons.
A retired couple have gone to the High Court to force the Government to buy their home.
David and Barbara Owen say the property is blighted by plans for a bypass just yards away.
The Department of Transport says they should have known about it before they bought the house.
GRAEME BOWD/High Court
BAUNTON/Gloucestershire
DAVID OWEN
David and Barbara Owen say planning blight has made their home impossible to sell.
They want the Government to buy it and today they took their case to the High Court in London.
Two years ago the couple paid £175,000 for the house at Baunton near Cirencester.
Since then they spent another £100,000 on it.
But the Cotswold valley that made the property so attractive will soon be the route of a new bypass.
The duel carriageway A417 will run just 200 yards from their garden.
The Owens have been unable to persuade the Department of Transport to buy their property, though it has bought out some of their neigbours.
In Court their barrister Ian Glen asked for a judicial review.
He said that although the couple wanted to move their home was now unsaleable.
Mr Glen said the bypass would have to be blasted out of solid rock.
As well as the noise the couple would have to put up with a landfill site within a few yards of their garden.
The stress had already afected their health and they would be in their 70s before the project was completed.
But the Department of Transport claims the couple will not be seriously affected.
Its guidlines state that the bypass would have to be within a hundred yards of the road or the conditions intolerable before the property would be bought, though the Judge Mr Justice Latham said that in his view those guidelines were a shambles.
It was also claimed that the Owens should have known about the bypass before they bought the house.
They say detailed plans were not available.
He says they were shocked when they discovered the extent of the plans.
They found out about the tip and that part of the site would be on land closeby.
None of this was known when they bought.
The couple say the house is already worth less than their mortgage.
If they lose the case they will also face substantial legal costs.
The judge's decision will be known next week.
A community, which helps rehabilitate former drug addicts, has opened a new purpose-built unit.
It'll mean people will have more space in which to solve their problems before facing the outside world.
ERIKA BARNES/Yarnton
RAY/Former Drug User
TONY/Former Drug User
PAUL TOON/Director
ALFRED PALMER/Founder
Voice over
Facing their problems and facing the future.
At the Ley Community in Yarnton near Oxford, residents Ray and Tony share their hopes and fears with worker Steve.
Drugs almost destroyed their lives.
But with help, they can try to begin to live again.
Male speaker
I started with substances like petrol, then it was acid and heroin.
Over 28 years I've had two broken marriages and broken homes, family and friends.
And it came to the crunch in April, I was on a death wish.
Male speaker
When I was out on the street, I was into crime and I was in prison all the time.
I couldn't cope and got into drugs more and more.
Voice over
The courts will often use the Ley Community as an alternative to a jail sentence.
Sometimes it's a last resort.
Winning back lost confidence and trust is a key to their rehabilitation.
Residents will spend a year here, working for others as well as themselves.
The new building will provide more space for new residents and sometimes their guests.
But it also gives them space to express themselves.
Male speaker
It's like saying there's a building that's worth something and here's a person that's worth something, so live up to it, rather than putting people into a cramped space they're used to.
Voice over
One of the founders of the Community, Alfred Palmer officially opened the building which takes his name.
He's a former Magistrate who needs no convincing about the benefits of this kind of rehabilitation.
Male speaker
Centres like this is a vital alternative to prison and the Government must give all the financial backing that's possible.
Voice over
It's a year of preparation for a new life away from the troubles and temptations that drew them to drugs and crime.
Male speaker
Everyday strengthens me.
Everyday I look at myself, and see how I can better myself.
Male speaker
If you work hard, you find the confidence inside you.
But it's the first day of the rest of my life when I get out there.
Voice over
Still to come on Central News, a night at the dogs.
Why IS it the second most popular spectator sport?
And no work please, we're British.
The hotel that has to recruit abroad.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
AMSTERDAM
LIBRARY PICTURES
Dr SALIM VERJEE/GP
BIRMINGHAM
Det Insp WAYNE MURDOCH/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Twenty-seven year old Alan Dobbs from Tredworth in Gloucester collapsed at Schipol airport as he waited for a flight to Briatin.
Hours later he was dead.
He never regained consciousness.
Inside his stomach thirty bags believed to be cocaine.
One had split.
It's a terrible risk commonly taken by drugrunners.
The results of a bag leaking can be devastating
Male speaker
Rapid heart rate, respiratory failure, untreatable convulsions and then coma
Voice over
Dobbs flight was headed for Birmingham airport, but police are in no doubt the cocaine was intended for the streets of Gloucester.
Detectives say young people are putting their own lives at dreadful risk for a mere fraction of the dealers profits
Male speaker
They're tempted by a few hundred pounds to go to places such as Amsterdam where cheap and plentiful crugs can be bought and brought back to Britain.
The people who exploit them can make a lot of money, but those fat cats don't get their hands dirty
Voice over
Police say they don't yet know when Mr Dobbs body will be released but the Gloucestershire coronor's expecting him to be returned for an inquest
Two men have been arrested and questioned by police but released on bail.
Investigations by police are continuing here in Gloucestershire and in Holland
Thousands of children are being warned not to go out alone after an eleven year old girl was raped as she walked to school.
Today police stepped up their search for possible witnesses.
GARETH FURBY/Milton Keynes/Buckinghamshire
Voice over
The 11 year old was grabbed from behind as she walked to school along this path in Milton Keynes.
And today detectives returned to the scene.
The attack happened at about 8.30 a.m. yesterday morning.
The girl was dragged into bushes and raped.
The police believe her attacker may have ran away across nearby Monks Way road,
This morning they set up road blocks and questioned hundreds of motorists.
He asks her if she saw anyone suspicious near to the road.
He says a rape in daylight involving an 11 year old as she walked to school is particularly serious.
Detectives experienced in interviewing and caring for children spent several hours with the girl yesterday.
She was also seen by a doctor but didn't need hospital treatment.
News of the rape has appalled parents living on nearby estates.
She says you would think your children are safe at 8.30 a.m.
She just hopes they catch him.
She says it is dark after 4 p.m., so she can't let her children walk home.
She says she won't let her child out of her sight.
Education officials in Milton Keynes say it is the latest in a series of attacks on schoolgirls.
A year ago, a 14 year old was raped.
Last March, a 15 year old was indecently assualted.
Now school children in Milton Keynes are being warned again.
He says they shouldn't walk to school or go home on their own.
They should always go with someone.
Tonight the police said they are checking for any similarities with previous attacks.
But at this stage they are not linking them.
Today the girl was kept away from school and she's now being cared for at home by her parents.
The rapist is described as aged 20 to 30 with short blond spikey hair.
He was wearing a blue and yellow shell suit top and light, almost bleached jeans.
The police say his clothes may also have been covered in mud picked up during the attack.
Detectives hunting the killer who dumped a woman's body in the loft of a guest house have renewed their calls for help in tracing the victim's last movements.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Christine Campbell's body had remained hidden at the Swindon Guest House for several days.
Detectives know from a security video that she left a nightclub in the town early last Thursday morning.
She was later seen at a hamburger stand in the car park behind the Guest House where she met her death.
An aerospace company which has been making large numbers of workers redundant has won a two hundred million pound order.
STAVERTON/Gloucestershire
Dowty Aerospace Propellers will supply Lockheed with propellers to be fitted to the new Hercules transport aircraft.
Dowty's already shed fifteen hundred jobs.
The new order should mean a more secure future for the remaining staff.
A mother has called for a brand of bubble gum to be taken off the shelves after her eight-year-old son nearly choked on one of the sweets.
Trading standards officers are warning other parents of the possible dangers.
IAN MacLAREN/Oxford
JANE RAY/Mother
DAVID RAY/Father
ROY HILL/Trading Standards
Voice over
A packet of Jaw Breakers cost 15 pence for four.But they could have cost an eight year old boy his life.
Christopher Ray began to choke and turn blue after the candy-coated ball lodged in his voice box.
His father managed to clear the obstruction by slapping Christopher on his back seven times.
The Rays now want to warn other parents…s
Trading standards officers say the manufacturers are under no obligation to give warnings on the labels…
Trading standards officers point out that there are dozens of similar products that could be potentially dangerous.
Finally, traffic on a busy road was brought to a standstill this afternoon…by a train.
CRICKLEY HILL/Gloucestershire
A lorry transporting Rodney the hundred and eighty seven tonne diesel engine broke down half way up Crickley Hill, near Gloucester, causing long tailbacks.
It was on its way from Hampshire to a railway museum at Toddington, near Cheltenham.
It will be taken away tomorrow.
A mother has called for a brand of bubble gum to be taken off the shelves after her eight-year-old son nearly choked.
Trading standards officers say there are no regulations requiring the product to be banned.
But they warn that parents should be aware of the possible dangers.Ian Maclaren reports.
OXFORD
CHRISTOPHER RAY
JANE RAY/Mother
DAVID RAY/Father
ROY HILL/Oxfordshire Trading Standards
Voice over
A packet of Jaw Breakers cost 15 pence for 4.
But they could have cost an 8 year old boy his life.
Christopher Ray began to choke and turn blue after the candy-coated ball lodged in his voice box.
His father managed to clear the obstruction by slapping Christopher on his back 7 times.
There are regulations governing the safety of toys, which are tested to see if they will fit into a tube the width of a child's throat.
But food products and balls of bubblegum like this aren't subject to the same restrictions.
But the Rays say they want to warn other parents.
Trading standards officers offered this advice.
Trading standards officers point out that there are dozens of similar sweets and gums that could be potentially dangerous.
An aerospace company which has been making large numbers of workers redundant has won a two hundred million pound order.
The contract to build propellers for the new Hercules transport aircraft was won in the face of stiff competition from the Americans.
And it will safeguard hundreds of jobs.
Richard Barnett reports:
STAVERTON/Gloucestershire
DAVID DAVIS/Managing Director
RON SUMMERS/Inspector
Voice over
Dowty Aerospace Propellers are flying high, after clinching their biggest contract.
The Gloucestershire firm will supply the Lockheed Company of America with £200 million worth of propellers over the next 15 years.
They'll be fitted to the new generation of Hercules transport aircraft.
The plane looks almost identical to the old Hercules which has been in service for over a quarter of a century.
But the new aircraft will have more powerful engines, combined with the Dowty propellers, to give it a greater load carrying capacity and range.
Dowty's pioneered the production of composite carbon and glass fibre propellers, which are much lighter than their metal equivalent.
The fibres come off an industrial braider; in effect, a giant knitting machine.
It's space age technology that helped to snatch the order from under the noses of major American competitors.
Male speaker
The company is delighted.
It's taken years of research and development to win the order.
Voice over
The order comes at the end of 2 years in which Dowty Aerospace has shed 1,500 jobs in Gloucestershire.
And it should mean the 370 employees working on propellers can look forward to a more secure future.
Male speaker
The workers are delighted.
They hope the order will give them a brighter future.
Voice over
Clinching the deal with Lockheed makes Dowty the biggest manufacturer of propellers in the world.
And for company and workers alike, it is a very welcome early Christmas present.
In part two: Spin and win…is this the next Ayrton Senna?
Crest of a wave…the powerboaters planning to be world champions
And Holy Smoke!
Planners incensed over the chapel in a coal house.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Swindon Town are live on Sunday.
Their game with Peterborough at London Road is the Central Match.
More than 2 million watched their last big show up at Newcastle; no goals, but what a classic.
Town are still second in the first division, but are reckoned to be playing the best football.
Glenn Hoddle won't be naming his side, until he's given himself a fitness test on a calf strain.
He hopes to play.
Swindon may be the style side, but Oxford United are the entertainers at the moment.
They've hit 15 goals in the last 4 matches.
A 5-5 draw, a 3-0, a 4-0 wins and a 5-3 defeat at West Ham last week.
You pays your money and gets full value from Brian Horton's team.
Tomorrow they're off to Brentford.
United hope to be unchanged.
Skipper, Andy Melville took a knock last Saturday, but should be fit.
Down in division 3, Hereford United are trying to shake off a run of 3 league defeats in a row.
Biggest home win was a month ago against Halifax, so they need to find this form again to shake off Colchester at Edgar Street.
Here's the team news.
kevan Smith is out.
He was injured in a car crash this week.
Colin Anderson is back in and he'll be playing alongside Tony Cousins, who's come on loan from Liverpool.
Goal of the week by a whisker, it is Swindon's second at Bristol City.
Classic build up and a classy finish from Nicky Summerbee.
Death by drugs.
Smuggler swallowed thirty bags of cocaine.
Don't go out alone.
Police warning after rape of schoolgirl
And ban this bubblegum.A mother's plea after boy almost chokes.
Detectives hunting the killer who dumped a woman's body in the loft of a guest house have renewed their calls for help in tracing the victim's last movements.
The search for two suspects is being continued nationwide.
Mark Kiff reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Det Supt TOM FRASER/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
The area around the Guest House where the body of Christine Campbell was found, hidden in a suitcase, is still the focus of police efforts in Swindon to track down her killer.
Mrs Campbell, who was 47, had been sexually assaulted and strangled at the All Travellers Quest Guest House last week.
Her body had remained hidden for several days.
Detectives trying to trace her last movements know from a security video that Mrs Campbell had left Pasha's nightclub at around 1.30 a.m. in the early hours of last Thursday morning.
Shortly afterwards, she was seen at a hamburger stand in the car park behind the Guest House where she met her death.
The search for 2 suspects who stayed at the Guest House around the time of the murder is being continued across the country.
Meanwhile, Wiltshire Police say claims by the dead woman's mother, Elsie Titcombe, that she reported her daughter missing 4 days before her daughter's body was found are still being investigated.
…in Rugby its the third round of the cup this weekend…
Gloucester are away to Newcastle Gosforth…another big battle for the Cherry and Whites 
Voice over
The last time Gloucester went to Tyneside to play in the cup they took on the old Gosforth team…the score that day…26-15 to the Cherry and whites…that was almost three years ago…
Gloucester went on to the final that season while Gosforth merged with the Newcastle club to create a new force in northern rugby…this season they lead the second division…they're unbeaten too…so Gloucester are up against it
STING
here's the cup team…the injury to Marcus Hannaford means Jerry Perrins is called back…he plays on the wing…and with skipper Ian Smith playing for the BaBas…
Andy Stanley comes in and takes over as captain…
and there's more news today on the incident in which scrum-half Hannaford fractured his eye socket…the Saracens number eight Barry Crawley who threw the punch in the league game last week has been suspended for three weeks…
Gloucester say the punishment fits the crime
Our action round-up this week takes us first to the world of grand prix…to meet the newest and youngest driver in formula one 
Voice over
As the youngest car racer takes to the track at Silverstone…the oldest boat racer is across the other side of the world battling for the world championship…in Singapore this weekend its showdown time…we've got two Central South pilots on course for the powerboat crown…and they're the stars in our Friday Feature 
STEVE KERTON
JOHN HILL
Voice over
A signwriters studio in Cheltenham is where John Hill earns his living.
He's in his 50s and when he's not working, loves to brush with danger.
On the water, he's a 3 time world formula one champion.
This weekend victory in the last race of the season in Singapore will give him the crown for a record 4th time.
His main rival has been tuning up on Burford golf course.
Steve Kerton from Gloucestershire leads the powerboat championship race by just one point.
When he swings into action on the water, Kerton is one of the fastest men afloat.
He's taken 4 British Titles and one European…but the world is the one he wants.
And what of John Hill?
In Cheltenham, he goes unoticed; untouched by the glare of publicity and yet abroad, where powerboating can catch motor racing for fans and followers, he's a big shot.
The conversion of a coal house into a Greek Orthodox chapel has sparked a bizarre row over religious freedom between a local council and one of its tenants.
The council says a holy coal house doesn't qualify as a home improvement and has refused planning permission.
Gareth Furby reports.
DENNIS KEEGAN/Brother Luke
JOHN DOLMAN/Housing Manager
Unemployed Dennis Keegan, or Brother Luke, as he likes to be known, is now well known on his council estate following his decision to joined the Greek Orthodox Church.
But for Brother Luke the incense and gowns were't enough, he needed somewhere to worship as well.
He sings’ Lord Have Mercy.’
His church is the old coal house on the landing outside his flat.
A modest home for the Madonna.
But for Brother Luke it's the House of the Lord.
He says he likes his chapel.
He's proud of it.
But it seems even the way of the Lord can't cut through council planning laws.
Brother Luke hjas been told his chapel is only fit for coal.
He says we could not approve his application.
Chapels are not improvements to coal houses.
But brothger luke insists he's just the victim of religious persection.
The Council object because of local politics.
I am suffering persecution because I am different.
Different to everyone else and they don't like it.
Brother Luke has asked his congregation to pray for the Council to change its mind…other wise he could soon be in the doghouse over his coal house.
Germany bans Neo-Nazi National Front
Russian deputies reject Yeltsin vote
Mr Yeltsin's cabinet.
Art treasures destroyed in Vienna palace fire
FTSE up 18
The hundred shares index closed up eighteen point three at twenty-seven, sixty point one.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-one and down at two marks, forty-one.
Finally, traffic on a busy road was brought to a standstill this afternoon…by a train.
CRICKLEY HILL/Gloucestershire
A lorry transporting Rodney the hundred and eighty seven tonne diesel engine broke down half way up Crickley Hill, near Gloucester, causing long tailbacks.
It was on its way from Hampshire to a railway museum at Toddington, near Cheltenham.
It's not likely to be moved until a specialist breakdown vehicle is brought in tomorrow.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
Welcome back: In a few minutes, the first in a series of reports on the future of transport in Britain.
But first, with the sport, here's Tim.
Hello there.
TIM RUSSON
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
They say television can never lie…don't you believe it…all we can show you from Elland Road are the three Leeds goals that beat swindon…
this match will go down in the records as a runaway victory for United but all the goals came in the last ten minutes…
and even the Leeds fans and players admitted afterwards they were lucky to win let alone get three…
Deane…
Wallace and Speed were the scorers…shame Town can't appeal and ask for a replay…
no such excuses for Oxford United…we've got them in close-up…this match was touch and go for a long time…lots of action…lots of shots…lots of saves…
not a lot of goals…most of the chances came to quick
United's Phil Whitehead had a blinder in goal…
the county keeper was shaken a few times but not often stirred
Whitehead kept Oxford going…or at least kept them in touch
and they jumped in front just before half-time…
Jimmy Magilton made the goal with a belter of a pass and new signing Matt Elliott finished things off…
one goal was never going to win it but could County break through…
fraid so…only took them just over a minute as Paul Devlin poked the ball home from a corner
and Oxford's brains and boots must have still been in the dressing room as County hit them hard after the break with the winner from Tony Agana…
United fought hard for a comeback…as County tried to shut up shop…
Allen hit the post Byrne had one cleared off the line…a win would have shot them up the table defeat leaves them too near the bottom…
Hopefully Hereford are on the way up after beating Doncaster…good win this…a good performance which kicked off with an early goal from Owen Pickard…
the United fans enjoyed this game…they should have been celebrating a bigger win too…
Hereford made one bad mistake…and they paid for it…
Greg Downs missed his header but Paul Whitmarsh didn't miss with the shot…
No sulks from United they came back with a bounce…and this should have been 2-1…the run and shot was down to Chris Pike but the referee gave off-side against Pickard who was minding his own business…bad decision
Justice was done right on half-time…
Howard Clark's free kick was faultless in every way…
Second half was slower and scrappier…
Hereford saw off the Doncaster attack but missed good chances to get a few more goals…2-1 top marks to Greg Downs and his men
there was only one rugby scoreline that made the news at the weekend…which is fair enough…but tonight there's only one that matters to us and that's Gloucester 19 Sale 16 
Voice over
These days any win by the Cherry and Whites is welcomed…but in days gone by they'd be holding an inquest at Kingsholm into what went wrong against a side from a lower league…
Gloucester were good enough for most of the game…they ran in three tries and were 19-6 up at one stage…
lock Peter Bell got them going with the opening score…
and then scrum-half Bruce Fenley rounded off another charge with the second try…14-6 at half-time…
and with so much steam coming from the forwards all the signs were that Gloucester were going to take sale to the cleaners…
the cherry and whites pack bulldozed their way to the line and sure enough after lots of huff and puff pushed over and touched down for try number three…
Andy Martin the scorer…
but Sale came back with ten points in ten minutes and were still going strong when the whistle went…too close for comfort
Doctors are trying to find a cure for a four-year-old girl who's allergic to eating.
At the moment, Gemma Swann can only be fed by a tube through her nose.
Experts say it's one of the worst allergy cases they've seen.
ROBIN POWELL/Milton Keynes
PAUL SWANN/Gemma's Father
Dr VANDA JOSS/Consultant Paediatrician
GEMMA SWANN/Allergy Sufferer
Voice over
Gemma Swann's one of only 5 children in Britain with a condition known as multiple food intolerance.
If she eats anything, she's ill within days.
Most sufferers overcome food allergies by their 3rd birthday…and it's only since turning 4 that doctors have acknowledged that Gemma has a serious problem.
Until now, Gemma's had to be fed through her nose, using a naso-gastric tube attached to a pack which she wears on her back for 16 hours a day.
The specially-fortified milk is enough to sustain her…but now experts at Milton Keynes General Hospital say it's time to start weaning her on to solid foods.
This week it's potatoes, next it's carrots…and then, just in time for Christmas, turkey.
But what would Gemma want to eat if she had the choice?
Doctors admit Gemma's case is one of the worst they've seen, but they're confident she will get better.
Gemma's parents are less optimistic — their immediate target is that by the time she starts school next Easter, there will be something she can eat.
In the meantime, there's just one solid food Gemma's system does accept — Fox's Glacier Mints.
But even they're rationed — her father's a dental technician.
Shareholders in Central Television are being urged to accept a multi-million pound takeover offer from Carlton Communications.
The deal would create Britain's largest independent broadcasting group, but both companies say the viewer shouldn't notice any difference.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
LESLIE HILL/Chairman
MO MOWLEM MP/Shadow Heritage Secretary
Voice over
The Carlton bid comes just a week after the Government announced plans to relax rules on mergers within the ITV network.
The deal, worth £758m, would result in Britain's largest independent broadcaster with 20 million viewers across the Midlands, London and the Home Counties.
But both companies say the regional identity of the stations will not be affected and viewers won't see any difference.
In this year's ITV shake-up Central secured its regional franchise for just a fraction of the price paid by most of its rivals.
That's helped to make it one of the most profitable independent companies.
Spitting Image is one of its many successful network programmes.
It's local news attracts more viewers than any other region.
Carlton which took over the London weekday franchise from Thames, already owns 20 per cent of Central.
The Central board has recommended acceptance of the offer and says the resulting group will be better able to compete on world markets.
He says the two companies will form a strong group which will play an important part on the international stage.
But some Labour MPs say the takeover is premature.
They point out that Parliament has yet to approve the changes which would allow it to go ahead.
She says they will fight for regional production at Central's three studios to be guaranteed.
It is however unlikely that the move will be blocked when MPs vote on the rule changes next year.
Both Central and Carlton shares have made substantial gains following today's announcement.
Still to come on Central News, who dares, wins…at last.
Hereford United regain the killer touch.
Plus, the Road Ahead.
Has transport policy lost its way?
And ding dong WARILY on high.The church that daren't pull out all the stops.
In Central News tonight: Victory at last.Crash victim wins damages after seven year court battle.
Under attack: Britain's biggest detention centre for immigrants.
And, and all she wants for Christmas is a sandwich.
The little girl who's allergic to food.
Good evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Simon Wright has almost lost his memory, and can only walk a short distance.
But he says the payout can't begin to compensate him for the devastating effect the accident has had on his life.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
SIMON WRIGHT/Head Injury Victim
ASHTON KEYNES/Wiltshire
BYRON CARRON/Simon's Solicitor
SYLVIA WOODGATE/Simon's Mother
Voice over
Simon Wright didn't expect to be back from the High Court for at least another week.
But lawyers struck a deal before his case was due to start, and Simon returned to Swindon tonight around 600 000 better off.
Simon was riding pillion on a motorcycle when it hit a car head-on at the Three Horse Shoes crossroads at Ashton Keynes in September 1986.
The motorbike rider, Patrick Gregory, was fatally injured…
Simon, then 18 and a trainee fitter, spent several weeks on a life-support machine.
Today Deputy Judge Patrick Bennett was due to hear evidence about the extent of Simon's injuries…but the award was agreed outside the court.
It's a relatively large sum, but Simon's solicitor says it's the least he deserves.
Simon's parents estimate they've travelled around 35 000 miles from their home at Gosditch to the various hospitals where their son's been treated.
His mother was so disappointed with the lack of facilities nearby that she helped to found Headway House in Swindon, providing support for head injury victims and their families.
Simon now lives at a nursing home in Hampshire…but after all they've been through together, he's spending time with his mum and dad.
A headmaster who resigned from a private girls' school is waiting to see if he's to be prosecuted for allegedly importing child pornography.
Customs and Excise officers say they intercepted a Dutch magazine addressed to the headmaster, and then found a dozen more in his study.
One parent says she's angry that the school didn't tell her the whole truth about why the head left.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
JUSTINE DARLING/Parent
Voice over
Alan Beatson has now resigned from his post as headmaster of Selwyn Girls School in Gloucester.
It comes after Customs and Excise officials intercepted a magazine addressed to Mr Beatson which was said to have contained a copy of a child pornography magazine.
Officers visited the school, and are alleged to have found further copies of the magazines, which come from Holland, in Mr Beatson's study.
Justine Darling has a five year old daughter at the school.
She says governors told her and other parents that Mr Beatson left because he was suffering acute mental exhaustion.
She feels they didn't tell her the whole truth.
Selwyn School has 380 pupils…all girls from nursery age up to 18.
In a statement released this morning governors said that there was no evidence that Mr Beatson was, or had been, any moral or physical danger to the pupils.
Customs and Excise Commissioners are now taking advice from lawyers before deciding whether Mr Beatson should be prosecuted.
A new detention centre for immigrants has taken delivery of its first inmates, despite protests from local people.
Campsfield House, a former young offenders' institution has been refurbished for the Immigration Service.
But campaigners say it treats refugees as criminals.
KIM BARNES Kidlington
BILL MacKEITH Oxford Trades Union Council
CLAUDE MORAES Council for the Welfare of Immigrants
Voice over
The campaign against Campsfield House continues even though the new immigration detention centre opened its doors today.
A van full of immigrants arrived early this afternoon, the first people to be detained at the centre.
He says I'm very sad that now Oxford is a centre for imprisoning more refugees in this counntry.
We think the government is using its powers much too fiercely.
When people are seeking asylum they shouldn't have to put up with this.
Just this morning the Home Office showed off the empty premises following a five million pound refit of the former youth custody centre.
People whom the Home Office has described as illegal immigrants unlikely to comply with voluntary restrictions will have the centre explained to them on video when they arrive.
Facilities include a sports hall, a library and a prayer room.
The Home Office says it will be run like a secure hostel but campaigners claim its maion purpose is as a deterrent.
He says we feel the numbers justify the claim that prison is being used in a strategic way against asylum seekers.
But the main purpose is to deter other people which is tantamount to an abuse of human rights.
Campsfield will house 200 people making it the biggest detention centre for immigrants in the country.
It'll be run and managed by the security firm Group 4.
Detainees will be kept here for anything ranging from one week to several months, depending on their case.
Meanwhile the campaigners say their protest against what they call a refugee prison will go on.
Mayhew speaks out on IRA
The Northern Ireland Secretary, Sir Patrick Mayhew, has told the Commons that the Government had a duty to respond to IRA overtures on how the conflict in Northern Ireland could be ended.
Adams IRA ceasefire claim
The Sinn Fein President, Gerry Adams, has said that the IRA agreed to a two-week ceasefire last May to allow talks with the Government.
The Government has said only a full end to violence is acceptable.
Paisley suspended from Commons
The Democratic Unionist Leader, the Reverend Ian Paisley, has been suspended from Westminster for five days after refusing to withdraw accusations about Sir Patrick Mayhew.
Three charged over PC shooting
Three men have appeared in court charged with the killing of PC Patrick Dunne in London.
FTSE up 24
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-four point four at thirty-one, thirty-five point eight.
The pound is worth one dollar, forty-nine and two marks, fifty-five.
This year, the number of cars on Britain's roads will reach twenty million and over the next thirty-five years, that number is set to double.
Rail privatisation has brought fears that ticket prices will rise, forcing loss-making lines to close, and yet more commuters onto the roads.
The Department of Transport spends ninety per cent of its budget on raods, but do we really NEED more of them?
All this week, Central South's environment reporter Harriet Ryley, will be examining the growing problem of transport, in 'The Road Ahead’.
JONATHAN PORRITT/Environment Campaigner
OXFORD
HELEN KIMBLE/Protestor
GRONINGEN/Holland
BARBARA COMPTON
The car — symbol of independence, style, status.
It's probably the single most significant invention of the industrial age, in terms of its effect on our everyday lives.
The motor industry is a key measure of our economic performance, and hundreds of thousands depend on it for their livliehoods.
But there's a flipside.
Our motoring culture has a price all too evident to the police investigating car crime, to the victims of road accidents, and the nurses caring for them to the one in seven children suffering from asthma and the environment, as more and more areas of the countryside are carved up to make way for roads.
Motor transport accounts for a quarter of Britain's emmissions of carbon dioxide, a major 'greenhouse' gas, and recently, the Secretary of State for the Environment, John Gummer, said that motor cars have
’ inreasingly destroyed our cities and increasingly destroyed the quality of life of many people.’
The Council for the Protection of Rural England has noted that there are’ fewer and fewer places left in the countryside where you cannot hear traffic.’
The Countryside commission has said’ we believe that the countryside can neither afford nor accommodate the predicted growth in road traffic’
The government argues the current road building programme is essential for Britain's continued prosperity.
Yet road congestion is estimated to cost the country fifteen billion pounds annually.
And the quality of life for many has been eroded by traffic noise and pollution.
He says what we've got now is a projection that the number of cars on our roads is going to double by 2025.
We've got a committment to spen £23 billion on new roads.
And everybody knows from the Depratment of transport downwards that it isn't going to work.
There simply isn't enough money in the world to build enough roads to soak up that kind of demand.
Protests like these are becoming more and more common.
It seems that whilst we all want to be able to travel around quickly, conveniently and in comfort, the price for many may be too high.
The cost for Helen Kimble of a proposed new bypass near her home in north Oxford would be her house.
She feels there's a hidden agenda behind the proposed road:
She says it's turning what was presented to us as a local bypass into a major through-way — motorway style — six lanes, elevated to 35 feet in places, lit all night slap through Oxford's green belt.
This week, we'll be examining the need for bypasses more closely, and asking why so much freight is carried by road.
But in Europe, other approaches to traffic control have been shown to be highly successful.
In Groningen, the sixth biggest city in Holland, fifty-seven per cent of all journeys are by bicycle.
She says I always go with my bike shopping — I couldn't imagione to go by car — there are no problems parking…
I can put lots of things in my bags and you can go whenever you want…it's the most easy thing to do
This week we'll be asking — could such an approach could work here?
For the Compton family in Bicester life without a car has been the norm while their car is repaired after a serious accident.
She says I think everyone should have the freedom to be able to travel as and when they choose, not just the people lucky enough to be able to afford a car.
They'll be reporting back to us later this week on how they coped without a car and with their views on how public transport filled the gap — or not, in’ The Road Ahead’.
A church organist has been told not to play low notes because it could damage the spire.
The church was recently struck by lightning, and although there's no danger of the spire falling in on the congregation, a rousing hymn could be enough to make the damage worse.
ABI DONALD/Broughton
Rev IVAN MEADS/Rector
RHYS WILLIAMS/Organist
Lord SAYE
Voice over
They won't be bringing the house down at Saint Mary's, Broughton, this Christmas…at least, that's the plan.
Storm damage to the spire has prompted the Rector to ask the organist to choose his notes wisely…or as he puts it, Ding Dong Merrily without the Dong.
Or indeed the organist.
Seated where he is, Rhys Williams knows one false move could mean the might of God descending on him at any moment.
The damage was done in a storm 6 weeks ago…
Church Patron Lord Saye and Sele the man appointed to fix it.
The repairs are likely to cost at least 20 000 pounds…though the Rector's hoping the national attention his spire has attracted will help with raising the funds.
Meanwhile, the choir's busy preparing for the carol service as if nothing had happened.
After all, they've a new one to learn this year — Ding Ding Merrily on High.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Flooded out: The worst rain for twenty years and still they warn of drought.
Willing to die.: House arrest hunger strike by wife of Oxford don.
And inside The Maxwell House.Treasures of a tycoon, under the hammer.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
Worst affected is the county of Gloucestershire.
In the Forest of Dean the A-forty eight near Chepstow is closed.
The A-four-one-three-six between Huntley and Longhope is badly flooded, and the B-four-two-one-five is under water between Highnam and Newent.
Wesley Smith
But despite the heavy rain, water companies are still warning that last summer's drought can't be forgotten.
We have two reports, the first on today's flooding chaos comes from Ken Goodwin.
WESTBURY-ON-SEVERN/Gloucestershire
JULIAN CHAPMAN/Teacher
JACKIE HAWKINS/Neighbour
Voice over
Teacher Julian Chapman came home to this: his living room a virtual pond.
Two feet of flood water swamped the Chapmans house at Westbury on Severn after a day of torrential rain.
The drains couldn't cope, and Julian's house began to fill up.
He says that it's the second time in a year the house has been flooded.
There's no justice.
Neighbours were anxiously watching the rising water levels.
She says they had the house raised off it's foundations a while ago…maybe that's protected them this time.
On the A48 Gloucester to Chepstow road there was traffic chaos after the road flooded.
Queues of cars and lorries stretched back towards Gloucester for several miles — in the end police closed the road.
Ambulancemen helped rescue a number of stranded motorists — including a pregnant woman.
More rain is expected during the night — that's bad news for families like the Chapmans — flooded for the second time in a year.
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
BUCKLEBURY FORD/Berkshire
RUPERT HARTLEY-RUSSELL/Resident
AUGUST 1989
CHARLIE NEIL/Weather Department
DAVID STOTT/National Rivers Authority
Voice over
The torrential rain turned roads into rivers.
It also gave life back to rivers that hadn't held water for many years like the River Pang on the Berkshire Downs.
Male speaker
I couldn't believe it.
In the last half hour, it's gone up 6 inches.
It's tremendous as it's been dry for 10 years.
Voice over
We filmed here 3 years ago.
It was bone dry.
Today the water at Bucklebury Ford is deep enough to completely submerge this little girl.
Even bicycles have to steer a path clear of the road.
Cars daren't risk taking the short cut.
The river level revived by one of the the wettest Novembers for many years.
Female speaker
Over the last 24 hours, we've had one inch of rain.
In some parts more.
We've had half a months rainfall in one day.
It's extremely wet.
Voice over
But the downpour has helped ease the water shortages of previous years.
Across the region, the water authorities say the drought is well and truely over.
In the Thames Region, water supplies are said to be robust.
In the west, Severn Trent say their reservoirs are full.
It's the same story in the Anglian region.
But despite this, the National Rivers Authority is asking the public to use water wisely at home, to protect against a possible shortage if the drought returns.
Male speaker
The drought last year was the worst.
More people are living in the Thames Valley region and rely on rivers.
They used water wisely then and we hope they will continue to.
Voice over
And whilst some villagers are a little cautious about one of the wettest months for some time.
Some of them can revel in the return of their long lost river.
An Oxford University academic whose wife has been imprisoned by the Government in Burma says she's started a hunger strike — and is ready to die for her political convictions.
Ow San Sue Chee, who's the leader of the Burmese Democratic Party, was a student at Oxford in the sixties.
Her old tutor is horrified, but her husband says he supports the hunger strike -- even if it claims her life.
Gareth Furby reports.
DR MICHAEL ARIS Oxford University
THEODORA COOPER Tutor and Fellow
SANDA BO Burma Affairs Monitor
Voice over
Aung San Suu Kyi's Democratic Party won overwhelming support in Burma's general elections 2 years ago.
But the country's army ruler refused to hand over power.
And the Demomcrats leader remained under house arrest.
In the 1960's she was a student at St Hugh's College Oxford.
This portrait was drawn at the time.
Today her husband Dr Michael Aris called a news conference at St Hugh's.
He met her when she was a student.
And today he revealed that his wife is now prepared to die for her political convictions.
He says she will refuse food or anything her captors offer.
Last year, Aung San Suu Kyi was awarded the Nobel Peace prize for her peaceful opposition to martial law.
Her former tutor at St Hugh's is shocked by the news that she's now on hunger strike.
She says she's horrified by her treatment.
St Hugh's students are also fearful for the future of one of the college's most famous old girls.
She says hopefully the hunger strike will achieve something.
He says she shouldn't have to die.
But supporters of democracy in Burma fear their leader is now prepared to sacrifice her life.
She thinks she will die for the cause of freedom.
Dr Michael Aris and had hoped to visit his wife this Christmas.
The couple have 2 teenage sons.
But she's written saying he should stay away.
This is battle she must fight on her own.
Five killed as train derails in Holland
Labour calls for debate on Lamont legal fees
for the removal of a tenant from his London home.
Blissett on trial for greivous bodily harm
FTSE up 18
The hundred shares index closed up eighteen point seven at two seven seven eight point eight 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty one and up at two marks, forty one.
Finally tonight, a look ahead to a series of special reports starting tomorrow on Central.
The destroyer HMS Gloucester is currently on patrol off the coast of Bosnia.
Its orders from the United Nations…shoot first, and ask questions later…if that's what it takes to enforce the naval blockade of the former Yogoslavia.
Our reporter Tim Hurst has spent five days on board, as the Gloucester prepared for her new role, and also visited Albania, a country that once lived under the world's toughest dictatorship.
Voice over
HMS Gloucester has been stationed off the former Yugoslavia as part of a NATO naval force for almost three months.
Limited by United Nations rules, the ship's crew of 280 officers and men have been able to simply monitor merchant shipping which may be breaking the UN arms embargo to Serbia.
Now though, the gloves are off.
If it's necessary, the warship has orders to shoot, to stop, board and search suspect vessels.
No merchant ship is likely to argue with HMS Gloucester, with her 4.5 inch radar controlled gun, Sea Dart missiles, and helicopter armament.
The ship and the crew are accustomed to a great deal of respect.
She got it when she sailed into neighbouring Albania a week ago, the first British warship to visit the country for 54 years.
Oppressed for 40 years by the world's toughest dictator, Albania has been democratic for only 6 months.
Grindingly backward, it's hardly moved out of the 19th century.
It can't supply itself with water and electricity, let alone care for its poor.
Moved by such squalor, volunteers from HMS Gloucester renovated an orphanage in just eleven hours, before going back to sea and action stations.
Our three part series begins tomorrow, as we join the crew of HMS Gloucester, at the sharp end.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A man has appeared in court accused of causing the death of a pensioner by dangerous driving.
The woman was killed while she was out walking with her husband, when two cars collided at traffic lights.
This report from Mark Kiff.
GLOUCESTER
Voice over
The death of the 75 year old woman followed a collision between this Ford Sierra and and a Minin in Gloucester.
The cars collided at the junction of Tredworth Road and High Street just after midnight on Sunday.
Gwendoline Thornton was walking past the junction when with her husband.
The momentum of the collision forced the cars apart, one of them knocking Mrs Thornton down, killing her.
This afternoon the driver of the Ford Sierra 4x4 appeared before magistrates.
Mark Whereat, who's 26 and from Gloucester, was charged with causing death by dangerous driving and failing to stop and report an accident.
The driver and passenger of the Mini, both 16 years old, are seriously ill at Gloucestershire Royal Hospital.
One has a broken neck and two broken legs.
Police are still waiting to talk to them.
The case was adjourned for a week.
Whereat was remanded in custody after magistrates said there were substantial grounds for fearing his well being and safety if he was given bail because of the seriousness of the alleged offences.
Police have launched a new initiative to tackle a rising wave of crime.
In one county, the crime rate is up thirty percent in a year.
Now, in a unique experiment, officers have called in members of the public to help.
Richard Barnett reports:
GLOUCESTER
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
PAUL WILLIAMS/Victim
JEAN WILLIAMS/Victim
ALBERT PACEY/Chief Constable
Voice over
Over the past 10 months of this year, more than 5,600 homes have been burgled in Gloucestershire.
Among the latest victims, are Paul and Jean Williams.
Their home in Cheltenham has just been broken into.
The thieves stole over £5,000 worth of tv and video equipment and jewellery.
Male speaker
It was horrible to find their home broken into.
Female speaker
She lost pearls that had been given to her for her 21st birthday.
Voice over
Crime went up by over 30% in Gloucestershire last year; 3 times the national average increase.
And house burglaries and car thefts account for more than half all crimes reported.
In a unique experiment, police called together members of the public for an all day seminar to discuss how to turn the tables on the burglar and thief.
Male speaker
It's important to discuss with the public how they can help the police to fight crime.
Especially as there is a shortage of officers.
Voice over
Meanwhile up to 1,000 more break-ins are expected in Gloucestershire before the year is out.
So many families will face the heartbreak of burglary before Christmas.
In part two: Let down…the mis-kick that cost Swindon dear.
Touch-down: Cherry and whites out of the Cup
And knocked down…the Maxwell treasures up for auction.
Voice over
The private possessions of Robert Maxwell are going up for auction.
They include the contents of the late publisher's mansion in Oxfordshire, and the money raised will go towards paying the enormous debts on his estate.
Simon Garrett reports 
HEADINGTON/Oxford
HARRY DALMENY/Sotheby's Auctioneers
Voice over
Headington Hill Hall, the Maxwell House.
From here what deals were made.
But almost the entire contents are going on sale at Sotheby's next month.
The proceeds will be split between the asset fund being assembled by the receiver and Mrs Maxwell.
Nearly every piece tells a story.
There'll be a lot of interest
Male speaker
Three types of people will buy.
Those who are antique dealers buying good eighteenth and nineteenth century furniture.
Peole furnishing their own homes, and people wanting objects with the unique stamp of Mr Maxwell on them
Voice over
The best pieces include three paintings by Jewish artist Ruben Ruben worth about twenty thousand poundas piece.
But some objects are hard to value.
What price a framed christmas card from president Bush, giving the publisher a knighthood.
Or the military cross awarded him by Montgomery after displaying great bravery advancing under heavy enemy fire
Male speaker
We're selling that with all the other medals some of which were British campaign medals, some were given to him by countries like Poland because of his special friendship or good deeds
Voice over
Everything about the house and its furnishings is big and very bright.
Everywhere there are reminders of who lived there and of the troubles which afflict those left behind him.
Alongside the expensive and unusual, the utterly commonplace
Male speaker
Not much was thrown away, creature comforts were very important in this house
Voice over
It'll need quite a sizable house to take the Maxwell bed.
Here, in a private study, surrounded by the corals collected on family holidays Mr Maxwell held private audiences.
Despite frequent reports to the contrary Mrs Maxwell has continued to live in the house since her husband's death, making just a few short trips away from Oxford.
It's understood several offers have been made for the remainder of the lease but none has so far been accepted.
An insurance company's giving two million pounds to help battered women and their children.
One in six women are believed to be victims of domestic violence, yet many are suffering in silence.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
SARAH/Resident
DES PALMER/Allied Dunbar
JENNI MANNERS/Warden
Voice over
Sarah's one of more than 80 women and children living at this refuge for victims of domestic violence.
She says she was mentally and physically abused by her boyfriend, but after 10 months at the hostel with her 2 young sons she's starting to turn her life around.
The refuge has been supported for the past 18 years by the Swindon-based financial services group Allied Dunbar.
Now the group's pledged 2 000 000 pounds over the next 4 years to setting up similar hostels elsewhere.
The warden of Sarah's refuge has welcomed the move.
But with domestic violence on the increase, she says it's a scanadal the problem's being tackled with private rather than public money.
A recent study suggested that as many as 1 in 6 women have been the victims of some form of domestic abuse, which means that many are suffering in silence.
The advice from women who've sought help is that others shouldn't hesitate to do the same.
Female speaker
There are women in a much worse situation than I am.
They shouldn't hesitate to find help.
Voice over
Allied Dunbar gives 2 500 000 pounds every year to charity, but prefers to support less fashionable causes.
It now hopes to push domestic violence higher up the political agenda, and provide a safe haven for more women like Sarah.
Christmas shoppers are being warned to steer clear of seasonal bargains which turn out to be clever fakes.
Trading standards officers have seized counterfeit goods with a face value of thousands of pounds.
And they say if the price SEEMS too good to be true, then it probably IS.
KIM BARNES/Aylesbury
DAVID McCRUDEN/Buckinghamshire County Council
Voice over
It's the kind of haul which could end up in lots of Christmas stockings, videos, perfume, clothes and even watches.
If these had been real Tag Heuer watches they'd have been worth thousands, but in fact at around 25 pounds each they're a rip-off.
He says we have watches that are meant to be divers' watches but immersed in a small amount of water they fill up.
So obviously if you're a swimmer they're not much good.
As Christmas approaches goods like these are turning up at one day sales, car boot sales and market stalls.
The videos have even been sold door to door from delivery vans.
They're offered for sale at around six pounds…and in cases like these available before they'd even reached the cinema.
He says what might appear to be a bargain in terms of price quite often isn't in terms of quality.
Organised crime rings are now thought to be behind the increasingly professional packaging and production of the fakes…now a multi million pound market.
He says its Christmas, isn't it?
This sort of thing is going to increase and what we're saying is beware.
What might appear to be a bargain probably won't be when January comes around.
And from a wider point of view, We're not helping the genuine trader.
The council has set up a special investigation team to try and track down the copiers.
When they find fakes any they prosecute the vendor.
All the you can do as a customer can do is keep your eyes open…and if it's suspiciously cheap, be suspicious.
Objectors say a holiday village that's being planned near a historic Cotswold village could ruin the whole character of the area.
A public enquiry has now opened: the developers say that local planning policy is on their side.
SIMON GARRETT/Fairford
IVOR JONES/District Council Consultant
ROBERT GILLESPIE/Developer's Consultant
Voice over
Lakes 103 and 104 at Fairford were formed from old gravel pits.
Now they're treasured local beauty spots.
Developers want to build a holiday village round them for skiiers and other watersport fans.
Eleven hundred locals signed a petition calling for the site to be protected
Male speaker
People go there with their dogs, their children, old people walk round there, tourists walk it and it's referred to in the guide books.
The site has been restoered and landscaped.
Waterskiing and all the other activity including the building will debase the surroundings and spoil it for the people of Fairford which will be sad
Male speaker
250 They've become accustomed What they're forgetting is that this fits in with the stated local plan and with original proposals set out in 1989 which isn't so long ago but people tend to forget that sort of thing 328
Voice over
Waterskiing already takes place in lake 105 a few yards from the contested area.
If the developers succeed in winning over Environment department inspector, Roy Foster, they plan to be up and running in three years.
Evidence will be heard at the Palmer Hall in Fairford all this week
Still to come on Central News, billions down the drain?
Is our transport policy a waste of money?
Winter in Bosnia.
The army takes aid to the needy.
And the secret of my success.
The Olympic athlete with a big heart.
In Central news tonight: Double rape charge.
Teenager denies attacking two children.
Stop the suffering…two million pounds to help victims of domestic violence.
And too good to be true.
The designer fakes come out for Christmas.
Good evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
It's claimed the boy carried out the first attack behind a row of shops, holding his victim to stop her struggling, and laughing at her cries for help.
The boy denies both charges.
KEN GOODWIN/Bristol
Voice over
The 11 year old girl claimed that the boy, who's sixteen, led her to the back of shops in court road, brockworth in Gloucester.
There she claimed that the boy, who went to the same school, raped her.
The court was told that the teenager held onto the girls hands to stop her struggling — she screamed for help, so he slapped her around the face.
He laughed and ingored her pleas for him to stop.
The jury at bristol crown court heard that the girl did not immediately tell her parents, but told friends the following day.
Teaqchers were allerted, and the police called.
As a result of her claims, another rape allegation, relating to the autumn of 1991, involving a schoolgirl then aged 13 came to light, the jury was told.
The boy denies raping the 11 year old last october, and raping the 13 year old bewteen october and december in 1991.
Both incidents were said to have taken place in Gloucester.
A prisoner who threw boiling water over a fellow inmate has been jailed for a further three and a half years.
Anthony Gould was said to be one of the most unpopular men in the prison because of a crusade against drug abuse.
BULLINGDON PRISON/Oxfordshire
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford Crown Court
Voice over
The attack at Bullingdon Jail near Bicester followed a row over a stolen stereo.
Colin McMichael spent 12 days on a life support machine after boiling water was thrown in his face.
He lost the sight of one eye.
At Oxford Crown Court it emerged that he attacker Anthony Gould was intensely disliked by his fellow inmates.
Defence counsel William Carter said Gould had been campaigning against drug abuse within the jail.
He complained to the area manager and even sought an outside inquiry by police.
And one of the prison officers who gave evidence, Brenda Pringle, agreed that the use of cannabis was widespread at Bullingdon.
But 41 year old Gould had a long history of crime.
He was already serving a 7 year sentence for violnce and had threatened to kill a probation officer.
The recorder Nicholas Jarman jailed him for a further 3 and a half years for what he described as a terrible act with the most appalling consequences.
His victim Colin McMichael has now been moved to Wood Hill prison at Milton Keynes.
Doctors say there are reasonable prospects that his sight can be restored.
Security on railway lines in country areas is being tightened up to beat terrorists.
It follows the recent IRA bomb on a busy commuter line.
But the MP for the area where the device was planted says he's still concerned for the safety of passengers 
SIMON GARRETT/Dorton
Insp LES PRICE/British Transport Police
GEORGE WALDEN MP/Con Buckingham
Voice over
October 25th this year.
IRA bombs in Reading and here on the Banbury to Marylebone main line fortunately hurt no-one but caused widespread delays for commuters.
Transport police officers told the local MP it was difficult to effectively police deserted rural stretches of track.
Now the force has been restructured to cope
Male speaker
We've got more officers on trains and in stations so people are more aware of them being about
Voice over
The local MP says he's pleased with the security improvements but believes the terrorist threat is far from gone
Male speaker
We must be realistic about what can be done on miles and miles of open line.
I'm still concerned and hope the public will still keep their eyes open
Voice over
Despite talk of an IRA ceasefire the public is still urged to look out for suspicious objects
A woman's been assaulted in her car just yards away from a police station.
MILTON KEYNES
It happened on Silbury Boulevard in Milton Keynes.
The woman screamed when a man got in beside her.
She was punched in the face by the attacker, who then ran off.
A businessman has given five thousand pounds to a dying man so that he and his family can stay in their home.
SANDFORD-on-THAMES/Oxfordshire
Peter Harris, who has cancer, and his family were due to be evicted from their home in Sandford on Thames unless they could pay eight thousand pounds in arrears.
They managed to raise three thousand and now a businessman, who doesn't want to be named, has stepped in and paid the rest.
Soldiers from the Central South region are braving snipers and shell fire to get food aid to remote parts of Bosnia.
The Royal Logistic Corps is transporting the aid in convoys in the worst winter there for fifty years.
Andrew Simmons of ITN has been travelling with the convoy, and has sent us this special report.
ANDREW SIMMONS/Vitez
Cpl HELEN STAPLES/Royal Logistics Corps
Private CLIFFORD SAMPSON/Royal Logistic Corps
Private EDWARD DUELL/Royal Logistics Corps
Voice over
It's dawn on base in Vitez, Central Bosnia, and Corporal Helen Staples, already tired after a gruelling convoy drive through treacherous weather conditions, along with the risk of shell fire and snipers bullets, doesn't have to go far to wake up her team.
27 year old Corporal Staples is well respected by the young men from Dalton Barracks, in Abingdon.
Most of them volunteered for service in Bosnia.
Today they're preparing to drive back to their tented barracks on the coast in Split, to pick up another consignment of supplies.
It's a rough cold life in the severe conditions of this Bosnian winter.
But there are no complaints.
Corporal Staples once worked as a receptionist.
Now she's giving the orders to get out of the washrooms, into the freezing cold, alongside the other troops in this collosal humanitarian operation for the British Army in Bosnia.
Work with Royal Logistics Corps plays a crucial role in getting supplies and troops in and out of the war zone.
She says they're in soft skinnned vehicles and any shooting they encounter is dangerous but so far there've been no injuries.
The guys just put their foot down and get through.
She says the drive fast to get through the other side.
19 year old Private Clifford Sampson used to be a painter before joining the army.
Like most of the others he has stories of near misses.
He says there were bullets flying over the fence.
He says he'll get over being out there over Christmas.
20 year old Private Edward Dwell has also had his share of action.
He says you get used to the fighting.
He says he's quite enjoying it.
It's a change from being stuck in Abingdon!
The British convoy drivers in Bosnia are regarded as unsung heroes.
This is the start of a long, arduous days at the wheel.
It's about a hundred miles from Vitez to Split but they have to cross and recross the front lines in a war that's unpredictable.
The start of this winter is the worst here since 1942.
As Chrismas approaches the Abingdon team will be facing even more hazardous conditions keeping the convoys rolling.
Andrew Simmons, ITN for Central South
One of Britain's most popular athletes has been sharing the secret of his success with a group of schoolchildren.
Olympic four-hundred metre hurdler Kriss Akabusi told the youngsters they can achieve as much as he has, if only they give their best.
ERIKA BARNES Tewkesbury
KRISS AKABUSI Olympic Athlete
Voice over
It just takes a smile or a joke, and Kriss Akabusi has won them round.
Youngsters from special schools in Tewkesbury are finding out what's behind his winning formula.
Male speaker
The first medal I ever won was in the egg and spoon race.
I used to cheat and put chewing gum on the spoon.
Voice over
His more famous and satisfying medals came later in life.
The European championship win still has him and his fans on the edge of their seats!
’ Cheers!’
Kriss now leads by example promoting the Duke of Edinburgh awards.
An all round athlete and an all round communicator — his aim is to inspire youngsters to have a go, what ever their limitations.
Male speaker
I don't just say taking part for taking part sake.
Taking part and giving your best.
Knowing you've achieved your goal.
Voice over
This is no Olympic race.
But one mile cross country is a big challenge for many of these youngsters.
Male speaker
Ready, go!
Male speaker
It's important that people on TV don't just stay icons, but meet people in living colour, if you don't mind the pun!
Male speaker
He's a brillient athlete.
He tries all the time and never gives up.
Male speaker
Kriss is great.
I think he did well.
Thank you very much.
Voice over
Whether they're first or last in this race…or in future life…it doesn't matter to Kriss, as long as they give it their very best.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
VAT base unchanged
First taxation, the Chancellor has said that new Government public spending limits mean he doesn't need to change the VAT base.
No income tax rate changes
and the present income tax rates and allowances remain, the lowest band is increased to three thousand pounds.
Some insurance premiums will be taxed but not life insurance.
VAT on domestic fuel stays
VAT on domestic fuel will come in as detailed in the last budget.
There will be some extra benefits for the needy and help with the increased fuel costs for all pensioners.
Pension age equalised by 2020
The Pensionable age for both men and women will be fixed at sixty-five by the year twenty, twenty.
Mortgage tax relief changes
Mortgage tax relief will be reduced to twenty per cent from next year, and to fifteen per cent the year after.
Petrol up 3p per litre
For motorists, at six o' clock, the price of petrol and diesel went up by three pence per litre.
Road Tax up by
The price of car tax discs will rise by five pounds to a hundred and thirty pounds a year.
Moves towards toll roads
and the Chancellor said that as soon as the electronic technology is available, tolls will be introduced on Britain's motorways.
No rise on beer
There'll be no increase in the price of a pint of beer, or spirits.
Wine
Wine and Cider will increase by two pence a bottle from after Christmas.
Cigarettes up 11p for 20
The price of cigarettes will rise by eleven pence for a packet of twenty.
FTSE up 31
On Budget Day, the hundred shares index closed up thirty-one point one at thirty-one, sixty-six point nine.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-nine and down at two marks, fifty-five.
Welcome back: Today's budget has confirmed that we will soon have to pay to drive on motorways.But the bulk of the twenty three billion pound road building programme has been left intact.
Wesley Smith
Opponents say it's a policy doomed to fail — creating massive environmental damage.
In the second of her series,’ The Road Ahead’our environment reporter Harriet Ryley looks at the road building programme and examines its affect.
LYDNEY/Gloucestershire
TONY BREAR/Lorry Driver
STEPHEN JOSEPH/Transport 2000
NIGEL RICE/Road Haulier
OXFORD
HELEN KIMBLE/Protestor
ROGER WILLIAMS/Oxfordshire County Council
JOHN CRADDOCK/Protestor
Dr PHIL GOODWIN/Oxford University
A lorry-driver's eye-view going through the town of Lydney in Gloucestershire.
The narrow High Street is easily blocked as traffic builds up behind the heavy goods vehicles trying to get through on a route avoiding the increased toll on the Severn Bridge.
He says there's no end of traffic that comes through — articulated lorries — especially with the new charge on the bridge and they just come this way.
He says Fridays are unbeleivable through here and it used to be such a nice quiet town.
A bypass is being built, due to be finished next year.
Schemes like this are part of the £23 billion
He says it'll be great relief — really good because as you can see by the column of traffic now coming through this small tiny town it's crazy.
We haven't got enough room to manoevre these big trucks.
Forty years ago thirty-five per cent of freight was taken by road with forty-two going by rail.
By nineteen ninety-one sixty-one per cent was being carried on the roads with just seven per cent going by rail — part of the continuing trend of freight away from rail to road.
He says transport is very very cheap for firms and it's been made cheaper by successive governments building more roads to help freight and also by raising the weight limits so that we've got bigger and bigger lorries.
Road hauliers argue they're providing industry with a more flexible service.
He says it's the most efficient and adaptable form of transportion.
We can react very quickly to the customers demands — many of our deliveries are just in time — the customers require that, they don't carry stock.
We are effectively their warehouse in this country.
British Rail, currently embroiled in the turmoil of privatisation, declined to be interviewed, but groups like Transport 2000 fear that when the railways are sold off in April next year, even more freight will be pushed onto the roads.
A recent map leaked from the Department of Transport shows the plans for the’ Trans-European Road Network’linking continental and British routes.
The Department has denied there's anything secret about the plans, but objectors claim a series of bypasses and road-widening will eventually add up to a new motorway.
This route known as the’ east-west link’would connect Felixstowe and Harwich to the M40.
Part of it includes two bypasses north of Oxford.
Helen Kimble would lose her home if they went ahead.
Her life now revolves around a protest group fighting the road.
At first they thought they were fighting a small local plan, but they're now calling this road a’ motorway by stealth’.
She says it's turning what was presented as a local bypass into a major through-way — motor-way style — 6 lanes — elevated to 35 feet, lit up all night — slap through Oxford's green-belt.
And it will bring traffic from the east coast ports right to Oxford City.
Helen Kimble's fears are echoed by her local county council.
He says the county council has been trying to find out for 6 years about the planning of the east-west route because we were very worried about the effect it would have on Oxford and the countryside around Oxford.
It was only earlier this year when the announcement was made about the extension of the east-west route that we had some of the information we'd been seeking.
Protests like this one against the Oxford bypass and east-west route have been echoed across the region — from Hereford to Aylesbury where proposed bypasses are also being fought.
John Craddock who feels he'd have to leave his home of twenty-five years because of the noise if the north Oxford bypass went aheadsums up the feelings of many in a plea to the government on its transport policy:
He says please do what no British government has done since the war — take a very long term look at it.
Whatever decision the government takes on the East-west route, the amount of traffic on the roads will continue to grow — and despite the problems of freight, the vast majority of vehicles on the roads — over 80% — are private cars.
He says there are vastly more vehicle miles travelled on the road system with 3 carrier bags of shopping in the back of a car than there is with 38 tons of shopping being delivered to the supermarket in a lorry.
The more traffic, the more exhaust.
Almost two thirds of car journeys are five miles or less — distances at which catalytic converters — designed to reduce dangerous emmissions are at their least effective.
Tomorrow we visit Groningen in north Holland which has banned most traffic from its centre.
Almost half local journeys are by bicycle, since the scheme began 16 years ago.
In part three of’ The Road Ahead’we ask could it happen here?
A family who've been saved from eviction by an anonymous donor say it's the best Christmas present they could have hoped for.
The Harris family had been given just two weeks to find eight thousand pounds in mortgage arrears.
But they hadn't found the money when the deadline passed a week ago.
STEPHANIE REEVE/Sandford on Thames
MAUREEN HARRIS
11 November 1993
PETER HARRIS
Rev BOB MORGAN
Voice over
After months of worry Peter and Maureen Harris now know they'll be spending Christmas in their own home.
Last week the deadline for finding eight thousand pounds to pay back a loan from a mortgage company expired.
An appeal in the parish magazine has raised three thousand pounds, still leaving them five thousand short.
Now their home is saved.
An anonymous businessman has given them the remaining amount.
The Harris family have no idea who their benefactor is:
She says all we know is that he comes from London and he wants to remain anonymous.
I'd have loved to have thanked him personally, but we have to respect his wish to remain anonymous.
Peter Harris who has cancer had been told last month he only had weeks to live and has been staying in a hospice.
Now he's back at home and feeling much better.
He says I feel alot better.
This news has been wonderful.
I really feel better now.
I have to go back into hospital before Christmas but then I hope to be at home.
Now the Harris' and their seven children and 8 dogs and cats can rest easy that the bailiffs won't be calling round.
Their vicar who was involved with the local appeal was overwhelmed by the response:
He says it's great that people have responded so generously.
Now Peter's family can get on with looking after him and coping with his illness without worrying about losing their home.
Peter says he can now relax and look forward to enjoying Christmas.
In the new year he'll begin his fight against cancer again, with a new session of chemotherapy.
But for the moment, he and his wife are happy to have won the battle to keep the family home.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Canoe survivors visit No
FTSE up 66
The stock market has been pushed to a new record high by yesterday's budget.
The hundred shares index closed up sixty six point three at thirty two thirty three point two .
The pound is down at one dollar, forty eight and two marks, fifty four.
Welcome back.
The number of cars on our roads is expected to double over the next thirty years.
Yet three quarters of all personal car journeys are over a distance of five miles or less.
CHELTENHAM
ANDRE CURTIS/Cheltenham Cycle Campaign
Cllr KIT BRAUNHOLTZ/Gloucestershire County Council
OXFORD
GRONINGEN/Holland
FRANS HASELAAR/City Councillor
WILKO HUYINK/City Planner
GEORGE MONBIOT/Oxford Is Choking Campaign
Voice over
One in three people own a bike.
Cycling is cheap, it's green, and it's healthy…but despite the fact that over two million new bicycles were sold in the UK last year, less than three per cent of journeys are made by bike.
For years the Department of Transport argued that it was not its role to promote cycling, but recently the men from the ministry seem to have had a change of heart.
In a speech that echoed Norman Tebbit's infamous call to people to get on their bikes, Roads Minister Robert Key announced a series of measures designed to encourage more people to cycle.
A bit of hard labour in Cheltenham.
Volunteers from Cheltenham Cycle Campaign are putting recycled tarmac onto a path cleared from brambles to make a cycle track.
He says there should be more work done by local government providing a network of cycle routes — but we felt the only way to make progress on this paritcular section was to do it ourselves.
The scheme relies on private money — in this case a donation of a thousand pounds from BT.
Most funding for traffic comes from the Department of Transport — but bids for cycling schemes are in a curious Catch 22 position:
He says one problem is that the new scheme for support from the DOT involves putting packages together that must cost at least £2 million and it's quite hard to find a package of cycle-ways that actually cost that much!
Even in Oxford, one of the region's most cycle friendly cities, cyclists are getting more and more frustrated with the dangers posed by traffic and pollution.
Many drivers sympathise with the suggestion cars should be kept out of the city centre.
She says today because I've got the little boy with me I've got to come by car unfortunately, but it's far quicker on a bicycle and I do do it yes!
He says I think the more cycling the better definitely.
He says I suspect it's a good idea in a romantic idealist world — it's probably not a realist option — I mean people do move about in cars nowadays.
The people of Groningen in Holland would disagree.
Here 57% of all journeys are made by bicycle.
There are bikes everywhere in Holland's sixth biggest city, and you don't have to be young trendy or lycra clad to cycle.
This is Grote Markt, or Market Square in the centre of Groningen.
If I'd been standing here fifteen years ago I'd have been run over by now because there were four lanes of traffic running around here.
That all changed in 1978 when most traffic was banned from the square.
In two years' time it's planned it'll be completely car-free.
When the left-wing city council decided to ban cars from the city centre in the late seventies, they rushed the scheme through against considerable opposition from local businesses.
Today it's a different story:
He says nowadays shopkeepers are really asking please city government can you get our street or our part of the city centre car-free because it creates…such a better way of doing shops and walking and you can really enjoy the city centre much more.
There are now so many bikes in the city centre there's a bike-park next-door to the library where cyclists can have their bikes repaired while they take out a book or go shopping.
People here get just as excited about the prospect of buying a new bike as they might a new car.
She says I always go with my bike shopping — I couldn't imagine to go by car…there are no problems parking…and can put lots of things in my bags.
He says it's better to live in a town without too many cars with everybody with just a bike.
She says when you want to do something in the city it's much handier to go with your bike than with car.
Groningen paved the way for many other cities in Holland to become cycle friendly, and a second phase to the plan, which will further restrict traffic in the city centre, has just started.
He says what you can see is most of the cities not only in Holland, but the whole world and of course in England have to deal with the growing of cars and it's not only that the car is a good thing — the car has very bad things for the city as a whole.
There are plans to bring in a similar scheme in Oxford — it's going to cost eighteen million pounds and take five years.
It won't come a day too soon for cyclists:
He says we need to get private cars out of the city centre and make it into a place which is safe for pedestrians and cyclists, not polluted and where the buildings aren't being torn apart by traffic.
The protestors welcome moves to take motor traffic out of the city centre, but are frustrated by the cost and the time it's going to take.
Planners in Groningen say putting such a scheme into practice is simply a question of political will.
And tomorrow in’ The Road Ahead’we follow the Compton family from Bicester as they find out what life is like without their car.
A councillor who's facing a legal bill of a third of a million pounds after a failed libel case has lodged an appeal against having to pay.
Anthony Gilberthorpe originally won his case against two tabloid newspapers, but that judgement was overturned.
But he says he'll go on fighting.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
Cllr ANTHONY GILBERTHORPE/Libel Appellant
Voice over
Gloucester City councillor Anthony Gilberthorpe was awarded £60,000 when he sued the Daily Mirror and the Sun for suggesting six years ago he'd undergone an AIDS test in America.
Then the ruling was reversed in the appeal court and Councillor Gilberthorpe was told he'd have to pay all legal costs which could reach £300,000.
From the city council office, he's confirmed he's lodged an appeal aginst costs, just 3 days before the legal deadline.
News International, owners of the Sun newspaper, say they'll fight the appeal.
They said they had no reason to believe the Appeal Court won't uphold the original judgement, but they doubted the case would be heard before the middle of next year.
Still to come on Central News, going Dutch.
Three hundred and eighty jobs are to go at an engineering firm.
The plant was taken over just two months ago, and now the new owners have decided to relocate in the Midlands.
The workforce claims it's been betrayed.
ROBIN POWELL/Cheltenham
BILL EVANS/AEEU
CHARLIE LOMAS/MSFU
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib Dem
Voice over
All 380 staff at Lucas Aerospace Engine Systems in Cheltenham have been told they've lost their jobs.
Leaving work tonight, some expressed anger, but others admitted they weren't surprised.
The firm, which makes fuel systems for Harriers and Tornados, used to be owned by the Dowty Group.
But Dowty was bought out last year by the Abingdon-based TI Group, who in turn sold the fuel systems operation to Lucas Industries.
Just 2 months later, Lucas has announced it's moving to Birmingham.
The engineering union says its members have been betrayed.
But another union blames bad management on Dowty's part, and says Dowty Fuel Sytems would have shut down anyway if it hadn't been sold.
The Arle Court plant won't be left empty.
Lucas Bryce, now on the Gloucester Trading Estate, will switch there.
It's thought most of its 330 employees will agree to make the nine-mile move.
The re-shuffle won't affect Lucas's other local plant — at Stonehouse near Stroud.
But Cheltenham's MP hopes to persuade Lucas to change its mind.
After yesterday's announcement of huge cuts in the defence budget, things can only get worse.
And 200 jobs are at risk at Ferranti in Newport Pagnell after the defence electronics firm called in the receivers.
Two clothing factories are to close in a country town, throwing one in ten of the working population onto the dole.
The company says it's been forced to shut the factories because of competition from abroad where wages are much lower.
The workers say they've little chance of getting another job.
RICHARD BARNETT/Kington
TERRY JAMES/District Councillor
MILES SWINBURNE/Kington Connected
PETER TEMPLE-MORRIS MP/Con
Voice over
The E. Walters clothing factories have been the second biggest employers in the north Herefordshire town of Kington for the past thirty years.
But now they're to close, with the loss of 70 jobs.
The town has a working population of around 700, so the closures will put one in ten on the dole.
The factories manufacture mens and womens trousers.
And the company blames foreign competition from firms paying lower wages for the shutdown of two factories in Kington, and others in Shropshire and Wales which will cost more than 240 jobs.
Workers about to be made redundant at Kington are pessimistic about the chances of finding another job:
In the local council offices, a department of employment vacancy board offers meagre opportunities for the job seeker.
There are only four vacancies in Kington…one of them offering just a week's work.
Male speaker
It's desperate in view of the national economy and decline in manufacturing.
Voice over
Kington was recently chosen to spearhead a hi-tech answer to job creation.
Half a million pounds was spent on Kington Connect…which links the town to the rest of Britain and abroad with the very latest computer technology.
The project manager says he can help the workers from E. Walters:
Male speaker
Training courses are being run to use computers to help those out of work
Voice over
His hopes are echoed by the local MP:
Male speaker
It's important to retrain people to find new jobs.
Voice over
The factories in Kington will close at the end of February.
E. Walters says in future it will have to import from overseas to stay in business.
Young offenders should no longer be cared for by social services departments according to one Tory MP.
He says they should be made the responsibility of the Home Office instead.
It follows the case of a youth who was sent on safari while awaiting sentencing.
Library Pictures/JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
WARREN HAWKSLEY/Con
DAVID BROOM/Gloucestershire Social Services
Voice over
The youth, who was being cared for by Gloucestershire Social Services Department, was sent on a safari trip to Africa.
Magistrates agreed to delay sentencing for three months so he could take the holiday.
His criminal record includes convictions for assault and dangerous driving.
This year alone he'd been arrested twenty three times.
The safari trip, estimated to have cost three thousand pounds, was organised by this outdoor activities centre in Wales where the youth was staying.
Conservative MP Warren Hawksley says it gives the wrong message to young people.
Male speaker
A lot of law-abiding youngsters may feel the way to get a holiday is to commit a crime.
Voice over
But Gloucestershire social services department says policies towards young offenders have been misrepresented.
Male speaker
The media portray some of the efforts that have been made as holidays or rewards for young offenders.
In fact the reality is completely different.
Voice over
Social Services departments have been caring for young offenders since 1972.
But Warren Hawksley says the Home Office would do a better job.
Male speaker
I think we've got to put them back under the home office and make sure they're treated as young criminals and not as social cases.
These are hard persistent offenders who are not benefitting from the treatment they're getting from social workers.
Voice over
Proposed changes to the way young offenders are dealt with will be discussed in an adjournment debate in the House of Commons tonight.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
CLARE LAFFERTY/Leominster
DEE WHITE/Horse Rescuer
FREDA GARGET/RSPCA
Voice over
When Margaret Hughes arrived at court in Leominster she knew there was a chance she'd be sent to prison.
But when magistrates told her she'd be jailed for three months, she collapsed in the dock.
Mrs Hughes was sentenced after admitting fourteen cases of cruelty involving animals on farms in Leintwardine and Eardisland.
RSPCA inspectors found more than eighty animals neglected, underweight and suffering.
Horses were covered in lice.
One had hooves ten inches long.
Another had been locked in a stable in its own manure for more than five months.
Some of the people who rescued the animals from the farm were in court.
They ran from the public gallery to help Mrs Hughes when she fainted.
When she recovered, she sobbed in the arms of a probation officer as magistrates told her…
’ We can only guess at the pain and stress those animals suffered.
But we know that that pain and suffering could have been avoided had you accepted earlier advice.
You chose not to.
And for that you will be punished.’
Mrs Hughes solictor Mark Bridgeman appealed for leniency.
But magistrates said that’ the multitude and magnitude of these offences, coupled with little or no signs of remorse’made that difficult.
Margaret Hughes wept in the backseat of the police car that took her from the court to prison.
She's appealed against the sentence.
In the meantime she's been banned from keeping animals for the rest of her life.
The rest of her livestock will be sold to meet the twelve thousand pounds costs awarded against her.
A family who've been on a council waiting list for four years have finally been offered a house which has been wrecked by vandals.
Stefan Holland and Teresa Brain have been told they'll get just two hundred and ten pounds to make the place habitable.
But they're worried that if they turn down the property they may not get another.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
STEFAN HOLLAND
TERESA BRAIN
Voice over
Every window is smashed, the walls are daubed with graffiti.
But this is the house which a young family have been invited to make their home this Christmas.
Stefan Holland, unemployed and officially homeless, was given the keys today.
His first task was to remove the iron bar securing the front door.
On a tough Oxford estate drastic measures were needed to prevent further damage.
The windows are now boarded up, but the rocks which came through them still litter the floor.
For the last year Mr Holland and his girlfriend Teresa Brain have been living in temporary accomodation with their two young children.
Today a letter from the council offered them a home of their own.
But they weren't expecting something quite like this.
He says the house is in a dreadful state.
Even homeless people have a right to expect a reasonable standard of accomodation.
Even with the outside damage repaired the house on the Rose Hill estate is hardly inviting.
The couple have been offered a decoration grant of £210, hardly enough, they say to turn it into a home.
He says it would take him years to get the house the way he'd like it.
But they're worried that if they turn it down they could go to the bottom of the housing list.
The council says that people who reject accomodation must wait a year for another offer.
There are fears too that the house will remain a target for a local gang.
The letters stand for Rose Hill possee.
In a car outside these youngsters seemed to know something about the vandalism.
He says they are members of the gang.
They didn't vandalise the house, but they know who did.
Local housing officials wouldn't comment today.
They've told the couple that if they take the house the windows at least will be repaired.
But the family say they'd rather stay in temporary digs.
They certainly won't be here for Christmas.
Forty jobs could go because of council spending cuts.
The cuts will also mean redundancies at a theatre which has seen its grant reduced by forty percent.
The theatre's director says the cuts are bound to affect the quality of their productions.
Jessica Fowle reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
ALAN LORD/Theatre Director
TONY MAYER/Thamesdown Council
Voice over
The Wyvern is Swindon's only professional theatre.
Employing 30 full-time staff, until now it has relied on its council grant for 40% of its funding.
Now that the grant's to be cut by £200,000 at least 5 jobs will have to go.
Its feared that quality and variety will suffer as work in the community is cut back and making money becomes a priority.
Meanwhile there's relief at the town's museum and art gallery.
The proposed cuts had led to talk of its closure but today a reprieve was announced.
The council says it's in an impossible position.
Demands on its resources are increasing but the government limits its ability to raise money.
The result; a shortfall of around £4 million.
The package of cuts will be presented for approval to the council's Strategy and Resources Committee tomorrow.
The husband of a murdered British tourist is flying out to South Africa tonight to formally identify his wife's body.
Thirty year old Julie Godwin was sunbathing with a friend at a nature reserve when they were attacked and killed.
Police believe the women were raped before their bodies were mutilated and then thrown into the sea.Mike Dolan reports 
SPRATTON/Northamptonshire
TIM GODWIN/Julie's Husband
CUAN CRONJIE/Elizabeth's Fiance
COLIN RICHARDSON/Julie's Neighbour
ALAN WISEMAN/Village Postmaster
This idyllic stretch of beach is the beauty spot where two friends lost their lives in a frenzied attack.
In a country where murders are common place the senseless killings of Julie Godwin and her friend Elizabeth Over have shocked the local community.
Thirty year old Mrs Godwin from Spratton near Northampton was on holiday visiting her friend.
The two women had travelled from Durban to the holiday resort at Sordwana near South Africa's border with Mozambique on Friday.
Their mutilated bodies were found by a motorist on Monday.
Their blood spattered jeep was found nearby.
Mrs Godwin's husband Tim was feeding the couple's twenty three month old baby when was told of the murders.
Tim Godwin, husband of murder victim, says
The area where the women were killed is a popular tourist resort.
South African police believe the women may also have been raped after the killers found them sunbathing.
Their mutilated bodies were then thrown into sea.
South Africa has the highest murder rate in the world but the area where the women were holidaying is relatively crime free.
Clip
Mrs Godwin and her husband had lived in the pictureque village of Spratton for the past four years.
Today the local community was shocked by the murders.
Colin Richardson, Mrs Godwin's neighbour, says
Police believe the motive for the murders was robbery.
Sixty officers have been drafted in and they're confident of finding the killers.
Today Mr Godwin left his home to fly to South Africa to bring back his wife's body.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
OXFORD
WILLIAM SKELTON/Brother
Det Insp DAVID BUCKENHAM/Thames Valley Police
HARVEY McGREGOR/College Warden
Dr ELIZABETH FRAZER/Dean of College
Voice over
The 21 year old student fell from the top floor window of this house, just yards from Oxford's famous Bridge of Sighs.
Henry Skelton, from Farringdon in Oxfordshire was studying fine art.
It's known there was a small party in the house last night.
Police are interviewing everyone who was there.
One theory is the student leapt from the window while under the influence of drink or drugs.
He says all they know is that he fell out of a window at a party.
He says they are examining the drugs angle.
A dustman who found the body early this morning called an ambulance.
But Henry Skelton died three hours later in Oxford's John Radcliffe hospital.
He was a second year student at New College.
And tonight the traditional college Christmas dinner was cancelled as a mark of respect.
He says everyone is shocked.
She says it's the last week of term before Christmas and everyone should be happy.
But this has cast a shadow over the College.
Last February, Georgina Meinetzhargen, a student at an Oxford tutorial college, died after falling out of her flat window.
But the authorities at New College say it's never happened there before.
A memorial service is being planned.
Three men have been jailed for a total of eighteen and a half years for a violent robbery on a jewellers shop.
A court heard that the shop owner would have died but for the prompt action of two ambulancemen.
Mark Kiff reports.
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
JUNE 1992
GRAHAM TOWNSEND/Watchmaker
Voice over
Graham Townsend has been back at work for only 4 weeks.
Last June, the jeweller was stabbed 6 times, as he tried to fight off robbers at his shop at Witney in Oxfordshire.
He came close to death and is still trying to come to terms with the attack.
Mr Townsend spent 6 weeks in hospital.
He was forced to close his shop, costing him thousands of pounds.
At one stage, he considered closing up shop for good.
This was the knife used in the robbery which almost cost Mr Townsend his life.
He was only saved by the quick thinking of 2 paramedics.
Mr Townsend says he feels justice has been done.
Mr Townsend says he's now happy to be working at his shop repairing and selling the clocks which have been his life's work.
The heavy rain has caused more flooding.
Villages were cut off and drivers stranded as roads became impassable.
With more rain on the way, river levels are expected to rise even further.
We have two reports, the first from Ken Goodwin in the west of the region.
PETERCHURCH/Herefordshire
HEREFORD
LYDBROOK/Gloucestershire
WESTBURY-ON-SEVERN/Gloucestershire
Voice over
Torrential rain turned the main street through Peterchurch into a fast flowing river — cutting the village off and catching it's residents by surprise.
She says it was very frightening.
He says it seemed to come from no-where.
It's been the sheer volume of rain water that's caused all the problems.
Drains simply can't cope and with fields already too saturated to soak up the water there's simply no-where else for it to go.
Parts of the river wye have been put on red flood alert, the highest level, as it's waters continue to rise.
This toll bridge was at Whitney suffered damage from the fast flowing flood, and parts of Hereford are already underwater.
In Gloucestershire, drivers trying to navigate through floods at Lydbrook soon found that car engines and water don't mix.
He says he thought he'd give it a try, but he got stuck.
He says he didn't realise how deep it was.
For some, the floods meant a miserable day stuck indoors.
For those who did venture out there were traffic jams.
The A48 at Westbury on Severn was badly hit, with several feet of water in places, making it a decidedly soggy beat for police trying to sort out the chaos.
The river Severn itself has started to burst its banks along flood plains, though the NRA says there's no cause for concern yet.
But with more rain forcast, that may all change.
GARGY PATEL/Henley-on-Thames/Oxfordshire
SHIPLAKE/Oxfordshire
LINDA MARETT/Resident
READING/Berkshire
STUART DARBY/Flood Defence Manager
ALAN GRIFFITHS/Manager
WESLEY SMITH/
Voice over
Good evening.
The husband of a murdered British tourist is flying out to South Africa tonight to identify his wife's body.
Julie Godwin, who was thirty, was sunbathing at a nature reserve when she was killed.
RUSSELL TROTT/Reporting
TIM GODWIN/Julie's Husband
COLIN RICHARDSON/Julie's Neighbour
An Oxford University student has died after falling from a second floor window during a party.
He was found unconscious on the pavement by a dustman, who called for an ambulance.
GARETH FURBY/Oxford
WILLIAM SKELTON/Brother
Dr ELIZABETH FRAZER/Dean/New College
Police are questioning a sixteen year old youth tonight about the rape of an eleven year old girl in Milton Keynes.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
The girl was attacked as she walked to school along a footpath on the Two Mile Ash estate, last Thursday.
The teenager, who lives locally, was arrested this afternoon.
He's expected to be charged shortly and will appear in court tomorrow.
Three men have been jailed for a total of eighteen and a half years for a violent robbery on a jewellers shop.
A court heard that the shop owner would have died but for the prompt action of two ambulancemen.
MARK KIFF/Witney/Oxfordshire
JUNE 1992
GRAHAM TOWNSEND/Watchmaker
Up to forty jobs could go at Thamesdown Council because of cuts announced today.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
The council has to make savings of around four million pounds.
The package of cuts, to be discussed by its Policy and Resources Committee tommorrow, includes plans to reduce the Wyvern Theatre's grant by two hundred thousand pounds.
However, the town's art gallery and museum will not have to close as previously suggested.
The heavy rain has caused more flooding across the region.
Villages were cut off and drivers stranded as roads became impassable.
PETERCHURCH/Herefordshire
WHITNEY-on-WYE/Herefordshire
LYDBROOK/Gloucestershire
HENLEY-on-THAMES/Oxfordshire
BABLOCK HYTHE/Eynsham/Oxfordshire
Now to the second of our reports from HMS Gloucester, which has been helping to enforce the United Nations sanctions against Serbia.
The ship took a break from patrolling the former Yugoslavian coast to dock in Albania.
The crew had been asked to help in diplomatic efforts to keep Albania out of the Balkan conflict, and to keep a promise to sixty orphans.
Tim Hurst reports.
DURRES/Albania
ANDREA NANO/Democracy Party
JOHN DUNCAN/Charge d'Affaire/Albania
Sgn Lt Cd ROB CHAKRAVERTY/Ship's Doctor
Voice over
HMS Gloucester is the first British warship to dock in Albania for 54 years.
The country has been closed to all outsiders for almost 50 years, under a totalitarian dictatorship, the hardest regime in the world, shocking even hardline communists of the former Soviet bloc.
The country rebelled last year; became a democracy just 6 months ago.
But it will take years, not months, to catch up on decades of neglect, brought about by a regime which year after year spent it's money on barbed wire and secret police.
Even trees in the street had to be kept short to give the army and police clear lines of fire in the event of war, civil or global.
Despite 50 years of isolation, some nursed dreams of outside contact, even secretly learning English.
Free to advertise, but too poor to buy the product.
The average Albanian wage is about £10 a month, worth 20 times that if it can be exchanged for blackmarket US dollars.
Begging, sometimes very ingenious, is rife, in urban areas where most familes live in one or 2 rooms in unfinished blocks of flats.
There's no glass to repair windows, no plaster for the walls.
Albanian hotels are a travellers nightmare, but the country shares the same climate as Greece and Italy.
The ship's company from HMS Gloucester is advised to be back on board before dark because what street lights there are don't work, sometimes because of damage, but usually because there's no electricity.
There's not much of anything in Albania, but foreign aid is beginning to arrive as European governments urge stablity in the region.
Like help for the city orphanage, neglected for years.
Also locked, but the ship's company has volunteered a day's work tomorrow, so some, including the ship's doctor, must see inside tonight.
It's overcrowded, dank and dark; there's a pervading smell of urine.
Upstairs, it was advised, should be seen tomorrow; the older children, some mentally handicapped, should be seen tomorrow.
Toddlers though lived next door.
Electricians, plumbers, carpenters, painters, every ship has its craftsmen — 70 of them want to come tomorrow.
Starting tomorrow there'll be so much to do and so little time; the ship has promised a safe electrical supply powered by a generator, a washing machine, painted wards, new door frames, repairs to the walls and furniture.
And medical help.
The doctor doesn't know it yet, but 2 of these babies have pneumonia.
Because there's nowhere to move the children, all them orphaned or abandoned, the work tomorrow will go on around them.
In just one day, a strong bond will develop between strong men of the Royal Navy and defenceless orphans, a bond some will find hard to break.
At least until tomorrow and the Navy's version of Challenge Anneka.
Tomorrow night we follow the crew of HMS Gloucester as they keep their promise to the children of Albania, before sailing back to the frontline.
An ardent Royalist hopes she's about to realise a lifelong ambition by meeting the Queen.
Eighteen months ago Lynda Murray was diagnosed as having cancer and given just six months to live.
Tomorrow she'll be the proudest guest of all when the Queen officially opens the cancer unit that saved her life.
Robin Powell reports.
SHIPTON-under-WYCHWOOD/Oxfordshire
LYNDA MURRAY/Cancer Patient
OXFORD
Dr DENIS TALBOT/Oncology Unit
ELWYN LEWIS/Landlord
Voice over
Visitors to the Red Horse pub at Shipton-under-Wychwood, where Lynda Murray works, are left in little doubt where her loyalties lie.
She's been a Royalist since childhood and tomorrow she hopes to meet the Queen at the official opening of the new Oncology Unit at the Churchill Hospital in Oxford.
It's a day she thought she'd never live to see.
In March last year she was told she had lung and liver cancer, and without treatment would die within 6 months.
The Churchill Hospital saved Lynda's life.
After 5 months of chemotherapy treatment like this, the tumours shrank.
She's now officially in remission and extremely grateful to the doctors who've helped her.
Preparations for the Queen's visit to the new unit have been going on all day.
Her Majstey's the Patron of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, which raised the money needed to build it.
Lynda's a long way from a full recovery yet.
No matter how hard she tries to give up, she still admits to smoking the occasional cigarette.
But right now, the Royal Visit is all she can think about.
WESLEY SMITH
Good afternoon: An inquest on four-month-old twins killed in a car accident has heard that their safety seats had been fitted wrongly.
But the coroner told their parents that correct fitting still wouldn't have saved their lives.
September 1993/BURFORD/Oxfordshire
Accidental death verdicts were recorded on Christopher and Matthew Key, who died in September when their father's car hit another on the A-Four-Two-Four near Burford.
Both were thrown out of their seats, which had been fitted facing forwards instead of backwards.
But because of the severity of the accident, the seats would not have protected them.
A retired couple whose home has been blighted by a by-pass scheme have lost their battle for compensation.
A High Court Judge accepted that David and Barbara Owen would suffer substantial hardship, but he said the Department of Transport had not broken the law by refusing to buy their property.
GRAEME BOWD/High Court
DAVID OWEN
BARBARA OWEN
Voice over
David and Barbara Owen say they now face financial ruin.
Not only has their home halved in value.
But their bill for legal costs is likely to top fifty thousand pounds.
The couple sought a judicial review after the Department of Transport refused to buy their home at Bournton in Gloucestershire.
The a417 Cirencester by-pass will run just two hundred yards from the property.
But a High Court judge said the plans were already public when the bought the house.
He says they've lost all their money.
She says it's highway robbery.
In his judgement Mr Justice Latham said he had every sympathy with the couple.
The Judge said they'd made a strong case about how they'd be affected by noise from the road.
And he said there was no doubt they would suffer substantila hardship.
But he said the Department of Transport had exercised its discretion on whether to buy the property.
In refusing to do so it had acted within the law.
Although he did criticise its guidelines which he said were badly drafted.
The Owens must now decide whether to risk further expense by appealing.
Although they want to move they say the house is now virtually unsaleable.
A fourteen year old criminal who's had holidays in Spain paid for by social services has been given a two-year supervision order.
SWINDON
The boy, who can't be named for legal reasons, appeared before Swindon Youth Court for sentencing on twenty-one offences ranging from shoplifting to assaulting police.
Since the age of nine he's been in the care of Wiltshire Social Services who paid for holidays with his grandparents in Spain.
And the weather,
Windy with patchy rain this afternoon, and staying around thirteen celsius, fifty five fahrenheit.
Cloudy tonight with rain and mist and more wind.
A mild night, around nine celsius, forty eight fahrenheit.
That's all for now.
Join us for our main programme at 6.25pm.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
A coroner has called for tougher safety standards for child car seats following the death of baby twin brothers in a road accident.
Christopher and Matthew Key died when their parents' car collided with another on a waterlogged road.
WESLEY SMITH
The inquest heard they both suffered fractured skulls, probably through their heads hitting the sides of the car seats.
Now the family are considering seeking compensation.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
Dr STEPHEN RATTENBURY/Vehicle Safety Consultants Ltd
DAVID CHARLTON/Boots' Solicitor
NEVILLE GARDINER/Family Solicitor
Voice over
Christopher and Matthew Key were just four months old when the accident happened.
They were strapped into car seats in their parents Metro when it crashed into a Pontiac near Burford after heavy rain last September.
Christopher was hurled into the boot.
He was found beneath his buggy.
Pathologist Dr Stephen Gould said boys fractured their skulls, probably when their heads hit the unpadded sides of the seat.
Their parents Trevor and Yvonne Key told the inquest the children were secure…
Trevor Key had fitted 2nd hand seat belts and new car seats with a friend and was happy with the job.
But the coroner heard the Rainbow seats made by a Birmingham firm called Jeenay and sold as a Boots own brand were put in facing the front instead of the rear.
The seat meets two British standards relevant to two age groups…but should be fitted differently according to the age of the child.
After recording a verdict of accidental death coroner Nicholas Gardiner said it was known that the seats should have been rear facing but he didn't think this would have affected the outcome.
But he added that didn't mean it might not affect others and that's what worried him.
He hoped that new standards currently under discussion would be introduced rapidly and that manufacturers would respond.
And he said that he hoped manufacturers would look again at the instructions to see whether they could be made clearer.
Safety expert Dr Stephen Rattenbury told the inquest that both British and European standards are currently being reviewed.
He says there will I hope be improved protection for side impacts.
I hope we'll some action in the near future.
Boots have stopped selling car seats but say they will offer further information to people who've bought the Rainbow seat.
He says certainly we will make sure that simple clear advice will be available to any customers who may have concerns.
Meanwhile the family's solicitor says they are considering seeking compensation from Boots.
He says the family are considering their position vis a vis the manufacturers and the suppliers.
But child seats give cause for general concern.
Mr and Mrs Key are said to be grief-stricken and still undergoing therapy after the loss of their baby sons.
A retired couple who claim their home has been blighted by plans to build a by-pass have lost their battle for compensation.
A High Court Judge agreed that David and Barbara Owen would suffer substantial hardship, but he said the Department of Transport had not broken the law by refusing to buy their property.
GRAEME BOWD/High Court
DAVID OWEN
BARBARA OWEN
Voice over
David and Barbara Owen say they now face financial ruin.
Not only has their home halved in value.
But their bill for legal costs is likely to top fifty thousand pounds.
The couple sought a judicial review after the Department of Transport refused to buy their home at Baunton in Gloucestershire.
The A417 Cirencester by-pass will run just two hundred yards from the property.
But a High Court judge said the plans were already public when they bought the house.
He says they've lost all their money.
She says it's highway robbery.
In his judgement Mr Justice Latham said he had every sympathy with the couple.
The Judge said they'd made a strong case about how they'd be affected by noise from the road.
And he said there was no doubt they would suffer substantial hardship.
But he said the Department of Transport had exercised its discretion on whether to buy the property.
In refusing to do so it had acted within the law.
Although he did criticise its guidelines which he said were badly drafted.
The Owens must now decide whether to risk further expense by appealing.
Although they want to move they say the house is now virtually unsaleable.
Two farmers have found a way of beating the recession…they've become fashion designers.
Although they own over five hundred goats the price of fleeces fell so low on the market they couldn't afford to sell them.
So instead, they're using them to create an exclusive new range of classic clothes.
CLARE LAFFERTY Longhope
JILL KING’ Mohair Classics’
YVONNE WILLIAMS’ Mohair Classics’
PAMELA THOMAS Spinner
Voice over
Nine months ago Jill King from Longhope had a big problem…500 angora goats…and a recession that meant no one wanted to buy their fleeces.
Nine months on, Jill and her business partner Yvonne have used that cloth and yarn to create their own exclusive range of clothes called’ Mohair Classics’.
But it hasn't been easy.
And there can't be many fashion designers who have to shear their own fabrics.
Most of the yarn is spun in factories, but for an extra special jumper, there's still room for the traditional methods.
Jill and Yvonne have come up with dozens of designs for jumpers, blazers, trousers and skirts.
They say they've enjoyed the transition from farmer to fashion designer.
The Mohair Classics range goes on sale at their farm tomorrow.
The women hope it'll turn Gloucestershire into the angora goat capital of the world.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Breast cancer breakthrough
Doctors believe they've made a breakthough in the treatment of breast cancer using drugs instead of surgery.
Soldier shot by sniper
A soldier has died after being shot by a sniper whilst on duty in Northern Ireland.
Life terms for sex offender
Gary Gavin, who's twenty-four, has been given three life sentences for a series of sex assaults on women, girls and young boys.
Inquiry into runaway tube
An inquiry is underway into how a tube train with passengers on board took off without a driver and travelled for a mile and through a station before being halted by an automatic signal.
FTSE down 9
The hundred shares index closed down nine point three at thirty-two, twenty-three point nine..
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-eight and at two marks, fifty-five.
Welcome back: Over the last fifty years the car has become a vital part of most people's lives.
But what is life like for people living in rural areas who can't afford a car?
In the fourth part of her series’ The Road Ahead’our environment reporter Harriet Ryley looks at whether public transport is a viable alternative.
She's been visiting the Compton family who have been without their car for the last two months.
LANGFORD VILLAGE/Bicester
JOELLE COMPTON
During the month they've been without it, Barbara, who's divorced and her children Joelle, eighteen and fourteen year-old Bobby are getting used to managing without a car.
They live in Langford Village, two miles from Bicester in Oxfordshire Barbara works as a clerk for a removal company, Joelle is a care assisstant at a home for the disabled, while Bobby is still at school.
A Saturday trip with Barbara's mother who's visitng from Manchester to the superstore on the edge of the town takes minutes by car.
Without, it's rather longer.
She says shopping I think has been the main problem.
First of all we have to time ourselves according to the buses which are one an hour out of the village into town, which is just a five minute journey.
I think having a car you do make more unnecessary journeys — when you're on a bike or public transport you really have to plan well ahead.
Of course the superstore like most superstores is built outside the town centre — I haven't yet found the bus that runs there — if there is one it isn't advertised very well.
Then from town it's a good 15-20 minute walk to Tesco's.
We do the shopping and of course once you're laden with your shopping — it's necessary to get a taxi back home.
Then telephone for a taxi and wait maybe 15 minutes and then home again.
All told we're adding maybe another 45 minutes to the journey using public transport and foot as opposed to using your own car.
It's Tuesday morning and Joelle, who works as a care assisstant at a disabled home in Bicester is on the early shift.
She says I think the greatest problem for me is the mornings — having to work early — starting work at half past seven — there isn't a bus as early as that, leaving from Langford village into Bicester — so normally I have to walk it which takes 20-25 minutes — in the cold, which I absolutely hate!
It's two and a half miles from door to door and there are buses later on, but if she's on the late shift and just misses one, Joelle is faced with another long walk if her mother can't pick her up by car.
By Thursday Bobby and Barbara are getting used to cycling to school and work a couple of miles away in Bicester.
Bobby often takes his bike anyway, though when it's cold or dark, mum usually gives him a lift.
He says sometimes it's a pain cos you get up and if I'm late I've got to rush around and go as fast as I can to school and you get cold and your fingers start freezing up so it's not much fun.
The one up the main road — I don't like taking that route because it's colder and there's alot of traffic.
She says the difficulty is the route — a very busy main road full of heavy traffic, particularly early in the morning.
It's just the pressure that you feel on the road particularly when you have a large vehicle behind you — a big lorry and they can't overtake because there's something coming in the opposite direction…it does make you quite nervous.
He says my mum used to take me everywhere I wanted to go but she can't anymore so I've got to get there by bus or by bike.
There's not very many buses.
It's Friday evening and Joelle rings a friend to discuss what they're going to do that night:
She says I can't get a taxi because I haven't got enough money cos I don't get paid til the end of the month.
She enjoys going clubbing in Oxford, 20 miles away, but the last bus home is at ten-forty and she can't afford the £18 taxi fare back.
She says it's hard work having to think of other ways of getting around — having always to take into consideration the bus timetables — I can't arrange to meet friends unless there's a bus at that time and coming home — leaving the pubs — I have to drink up quickly if I want to catch the last bus home.
She says it has made me think why is there no local transport readily available.
I think everyone should have the freedom to be able to travel as and when they choose — not just the people who are lucky enough to be able to afford a car
She says I would like to go up to Manchester soon and I'm hoping my car is on the road because the trains to Manchester are pretty costly compared to the price of the petrol in my car.
And as long as this country persists in being the only one in Europe which doesn't have a subsidised railway service, Barbara and everyone else with a car will continue to be put off going by rail.
The car, with all its hidden costs in pollution, traffic accidents and congestion, will continue to be more popular.
The Compton's experience of life with public transport certainly left them longing for the return of theirs.
In the last part of her series tomorrow night Harriet Ryley talks to Roads Minister Robert Key about the issues raised throughout the week.
A council that's been paying for a fourteen-year-old criminal to stay in Spain has been criticised in court.
The boy admitted a string of offences, all committed while he was in the care of social services.
The magistrates ordered the council to pay compensation to one of his victims.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
Dr RAY JONES/Director of Social Services
DAVID MACLEAN/Home Office Minister
Voice over
The boy, who can't be identified, hit the headlines in June…after revelations that he'd spent several weeks at his grandparents' house on the Costa Blanca at tax payers' expense.
He appeared at Swindon Youth Court today for sentencing on 21 charges, ranging from shoplifting to assaulting police.
After an hour's deliberation Bench Chairwoman Hilary Tulloch announced she was making a 2-year supervision order.
But she told the boy his offences were so serious that had he been 15, not 14, he'd almost certainly have received a custodial sentence.
The boy's foster mother refused to be interviewed, but his real mother gave us this reaction.
The court expressed dismay that Wiltshire Social Services had called in a voluntary agency — the NSPCC — to help look after him.
And although it accepted that on the whole the department did all it could to control him, on the day he assaulted a 70-year-old woman the court ruled that he hadn't been properly supervised, and ordered the council to pay 700 pounds in compensation.
Social Services say they're not surprised they've had problems.
But last night the Governemnt urged a crackdown on foreign trips for young offenders.
Social Services have again defended their decision to send the 14-year-old to his grandparents'.
He's now expected to return to Spain — again at public expense — early in the New Year.
A teenager concerned about the plight of the homeless has decided to do something about the problem herself.
Fourteen year old Catherine Pearse has organised a sponsored sleep-out to help the increasing number of young people with nowhere to live.
ERIKA BARNES/Banbury
PHIL/Homeless Teenager
DAWN/Homeless Person
CATHERINE PEARSE/Sleep-Out Organiser
DAVID ROLF/National Trust for the Homeless
Voice over
These children are out late.
Youth workers Kate and Mike want to make sure they've got somewhere to go tonight.
They say they've got to be home by nine.
They're lucky they've got a home to go to.
Dozens of young people in Banbury don't.
This is where we might find somebody sleeping rough, or sheltering from the rain.
It's protected it's safe.
You can see if anyone's coming and hide in the bushes.
It's a nice place for them.
But not a roof over their heads.
Here at the Bridge Bar drop in centre, young people can find sanctury and find friends and advise.
Often they've fallen out with family and have nowhere to live.
Some are in bedsits or B and B. Others are sleeping rough.
They now face the stigma and tragedy of being homeless.
Male speaker
They look as if you're on the street in cardboard boxes.
Not like someone who's crashing on someone's floor.
Female speaker
I didn't have enough money to buy food.
I had nowhere to cook.
I had to sleep in a car for two weeks.
I didn't have money to go to the laundrette.
It was very demoralising.
I didn't know what to do or where to turn.
Voice over
Finally, Dawn came here, where she's been given practical and moral support.
Now to help raise money for the centre, volunteers are staging a sponsored sleep out on Friday.
In Banbury the task of organising the event falls to a fourteen year old.
Female speaker
It's terrible.
You think; you're living in a home, you've got everything and someone else hasn't.
It's difficult.
Male speaker
At last something is being done.
Some people are accused of playing with the problem.
But some of the people sleeping out are homeless themselves.
Voice over
It's got to be a political solution.
With good will from Government, charities, housing associations and local councils, something may be done.
The problem of homelessness won't be solved overnight.
But one night — sleeping out — may just help some homeless people get the help they need to find a home of their own.
Still to come on Central News, life in the slow lane, the family learning to cope without a car.
And from farming to fashion.
How angora goats saved a farm from recession
One of the most spectacular sights in the world of wildlife was opened to the public for the first time tonight.
The floodlit night feeding of thousands of birds at the Slimbridge Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust has only ever been seen by the centre's staff.
The first outsiders were in for a real treat.
RICHARD BARNETT Slimbridge
TONY RICHARDSON Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust
Voice over
For decades, the floodlit night feed has been one of Slimbridge's best kept secrets.
Every evening throughout the winter thousands of birds, including Bewick Swans, Canada Geese and Greylag Geese queue up on the Swan lake for their late meal of wheat.
It's a spectacular sight, as the wildfowl jockey for position to grab the biggest beak or bill full of food.
And tonight, for the first time, the public were invited to watch the feed, and listen to a commentary.
One visitor had come all the way from Israel to see the birds enjoy their supper:
Every day, the wild birds on Swan Lake consume up to a quarter of a ton of wheat.
And it's the promise of food and a safe roost that brings the Bewick swans more than two thousand miles from their summer breeding grounds in Russia.
Around twenty thousand wild birds overwinter at Slimbridge.
And the floodlit night feed is vital to help them fend off the cold.
For the staff at Slimbridge the evening feed has always been one of the highlights of the day.
And they're glad to share it with the visitors:
Male speaker
It's a wonderful sight, and it's important for the public to see it.
He's been feeding the birds for twenty years, and he still finds it exciting.
Voice over
The evening feeds are open to the public on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays until the end of February.
And by next month the Swan Lake will be even busier as more birds fly in.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Princess cuts public workload
The Princess of Wales has announced that she is to cut dramatically the number of public duties she performs.
Media intrusion blamed
The Princess said she feels the intrusion by the media into her private life has been,’ hard to bear’, and will try to reduce her public profile.
Progress in Dublin talks
John Major and Albert Reynolds have said there has been some progress in talks on the future of Northern Ireland.
Patten attacks failing schools
The Education Secretary, John Patten, has given two schools forty days to present a plan for how they're going to improve their standards after failing Government requirements.
FTSE up 10
The hundred shares index closed up ten point three at thirty-two, thirty-four point two..
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-nine and two marks, fifty-six.
Welcome back: In a few minutes we take the wraps off one the great secrets in the world of wildlife.
But first, with the sport, here's Tim.
Hello there.
TIM RUSSON
GREG DOWNS/Hereford Player-Manager
BATH CITY v BROMSGROVE
Voice over
Coventry v Spurs at Wembley in 87…maker of the first goal…winner of a cup medal was Hereford's player manager Greg Downs…
action…and Greg Downs says it was a great day…all footballers want to win the cup
and Greg Downs will be pulling his boots on again on Sunday when United face Bath City at Twerton Park in the second round of the cup…
Bath are non-league part-timers but just as good as the pros…
Greg Downs says there's no gape between the teams players in the conference get as much money as those at hereford
United have splashed out ten thousand pounds on Andy Reece from Bristol Rovers…the first transfer fee paid by Greg Downs…he plays on sunday as does Gerry Harrison whose loan from Bristol City has now been extended to three months…
the cup form gives no clues…
Hereford start as favourites but it's anybody's game…
in the first division its Oxford against Millwall at the Manor…it's only four weeks since they fought out at a two all draw at the Den…
Joey Beauchmap and Nick Cusack got the United goals…this was one of their best games of the season away lets hope they can do it at home…
there are changes…
Les Robinson is back after injury…
Darren Jackson comes in for the suspended Mike Ford…
Millwall are going well this season but on recent form there's nothing in it
Swindon have won just two games this season…both at home…this one if the Coca cola cup against Wolves…and one in the league against Queens Park Rangers…every Town fan will be praying for number three tomorrow when their team face Sheffield United at the County Ground
No changes…a new skipper though Shaun Taylor has officially taken over from Ross Maclaren…
Town need…have to win tomorrow…if they can't beat teams like Sheffield United then it's big big trouble…
goal of the week…comes from Hereford a wizzer of a free kick from Howard Clark
and of course both Oxford and Swindon go into the cup draw at the weekend for round three…while we're going into our action round up 
Voice over
It's snowing in Europe and winning for Britain on the international bobsleigh circuit are Oxford brothers…
Matt and Chris Symonds…
Chris is riding at number two in britain's number one bob and has just won bronze and silver in the latest round of the world cup…
Matt is competing in Germany in the European Cup and is up with the leaders…
out on their own are the crew of Dodo's Delight…the boat from Oxfordshire that's sailing around the world…the wrong way against the winds and currents…the crew of old boys from Kingham school have landed in Rio next stop is the Falklands where they plan to be ashore for Christmas Day…
The big race this weekend is at Sandown Park…it's the Tingle Creek Chase and the Central South horse to follow is Waterloo Boy from the the Nicholson stables at Ford in Gloucestershire…
Riding the Boy is Adrian Maguire who had two winners this afternoon and now has a lead of over thirty in the race for champion jockey…
Gloucester rugby are back in league action tomorrow…the cherry and whites are away to orrell…last time out they beat Northampton so let's hope they're on a winning roll…
it's cup day in hockey too…mighty Sutton Coldfield are playing the Oxford Hawks on Sunday…ikts like Manchester United playing Banbury…come on the Hawks
Right, now for something completely different…and I mean different!
We've a new sport to show you.
The equipment list reads like this…plumber's piping…garden netting…safetey pins…an ice hockey stick, and a unicycle.Put them all together, and you get this week's Friday Feature 
BEN MATTHEWS/Oxford Cycos
Voice over
So what game can you play with an ice hockey stick, a unicycle, plumbers piping, garden netting, and safety pins.
Why, unicyle hockey of course: yes this is the latest sport to come from the playing fields, or grounds, of Oxford.
They call themselves the cycos — well they admit they're a little crazy — but then again you have to be to have a go at this.
Ben Matthews of Oxford cycos says it's a bit like ice hockey, not like polo.
It's an exciting game that calls for great skill.
You can go forward and backwards on the back and your hands are free to play.
They've got some good cyclists, some good ice hockey players, but not many good unicycle hockey players.
Unicycle hockey is going nationwide now.
Oxford has started a new league: there are sixteen teams from all over the country competing, apart from the cycos there are the London Loonies, the Molesey Maniacs: its a whole new ball game.
Ben Matthews says that it's fast and furious.
Flat out action.
All sorts of people play it: students, businessman a lot of jugglers too.
the players say it's a mad sort but very enjoyable It's great fun.
Great fitness and anyone can do it.
One player says he's only had his cycle this term and finds it very diifficult and he falls off a lot and hurts himself.
And that's Unicyle Hockey for you What about the plumbers piping, the garden netting and safety pins?
They're used to make the goal.
What a game!
A nurse who was burgled while she slept says she's disgusted that the man convicted of using her stolen chequebook has walked free from court.
The man has ninety-one previous convictions, but was released because he had already spent time in jail on remand.
KATE GARRAWAY/Milton Keynes
PEGGY MARGRAVE/Burglary Victim
Det Sgt MARK KEARNEY/Thames Valley Police
PAUL STELLATO/Persistant Offender
Voice over
It'll be a long time before children's nurse Peggy Margrave again feels safe in her own home.
Nearly two months ago, while she lay asleep in her house in Milton Keynes, thieves broke in and took her cheque book and card.
But now added to her feelings of distress, are disgust and anger.
The man found in possession of her stolen cheque book and card has been allowed to walk free from court.
Magistrates at Milton Keynes found Paul Stellato who's twenty two guilty of handling stolen goods and sentenced him to three months in jail.
But because he'd already served five weeks on remand he was released.
Female speaker
I think he should have got a longer sentence or maybe tried in Crown Court, but not just got away with three months.
It is disgusting.
Voice over
Stellato had his first conviction in 1989, he now has ninety-one convictions.
Police in Milton Keynes says he is a persistant criminal who should be locked up.
And believe that his case highlights the failing of the criminal justice system.
Male speaker
This lady has suffered a lot of distress and I just don't think courts are considering the victims when they are imposing sentences.
Voice over
Stellato says he has paid for his crime, but believes the sentence was a mistake.
Male speaker
Maybe the sentence was a bit short but I've served my time on remand, I've been in prison six times and have served about thirteen weeks altogether, but I do think they made a mistake I don't know why.
Voice over
But Peggy Margrave doesn't believe Stellato has paid for his crimes and she wants the system changed.
She doesn't understand why he shouldn't have to serve his sentence, when the sentence of fear he helped to impose on her, will be with her for life.
A teenager has been cleared of raping two schoolgirls.
BROCKWORTH/Gloucester
The boy, who's sixteen, had been charged with raping an eleven year old behind a row of shops at Brockworth in Gloucester.
The jury at Bristol Crown Court were told that when details of this attack came to light, a second girl had accused the boy of raping her two years earlier, when she was thirteen.
The jury delivered the not guilty verdicts on the fourth day of the trial.
Detectives are questioning a Gloucestershire man about the murder of a man in Scotland.
DURSLEY/Gloucestershire
The twenty two year old from Wotton-Under-Edge is being held at Dursley police station.
Officers from the Lothian and Borders force are expected to take him back to Scotland tonight.
The body of twenty one year old Craig MacKie was found at Dunbar in East Lothian.
Disabled people are demanding improved facilities in city centres.
They say that although many shops THINK they're providing for the disabled, the facilities are often inadequate.
Their call is timed to coincide with the first European Day for disabled people.
STEPHANIE REEVE/Oxford
PAUL SLAY
SEAMUS McARDLE
BARRY TANSWELL/Manager
PETER NORTHFIELD/Manager
JANET MACE/Oxfordshire Council for the Disabled
Voice over
For Paul Slay coming to Oxford to shop takes a lot of effort.
He can't go into some shops in the city, because of his disability.
He says getting into shops and going from floor to floor is often impossible.
Paul and other wheelchair users want the Government to make sure disabled people have the same access as the able bodied.
He says, we want legislation — we want to go to places the same as everyone else.
Many of Oxford's shops have facilities for those in wheelchairs, and with walking sticks or pushchairs.
He says, we have lifts, automatic doors, disabled fitting rooms and shopping trolleys.
When Oxford railway station was refurbished three years ago, it was criticised for its lack of disabled facilities.
This footbridge used to be the only way to cross to the other platform.
The station manager's now confident that the problems have been overcome.
He says, we aim to improve our facilities and we recently spent in excess of 300 thousand pounds on installing a lift.
But so far there are no signs evident to tell wheelchair users there IS a lift and the disabled toilet is locked.
Staff have to be asked for the key.
Today, wheelchair users are trying to raise awareness of how difficult it is to get around.
She says, over 500 people are meeting at the European Parliament in Brussels today, to talk about disabled people's human rights.
Often, shops think they have good facilities for the disabled but they're often used for other things.
Disabled people have to choose carefully places where they CAN go.
But they're frustrated that most of the time, they're forced to rely on a helping hand.
The Roads Minister Robert Key has dismissed suggestions that the country's transport policy is a mess.
In our special reports this week we've heard complaints of under-investment in railways, over-reliance on road building, and of harm being done to the environment.
Mr Key watched our reports and was then questioned about his policy by our environment reporter Harriet Ryley.
JONATHAN PORRITT/Environmental Campaigner
ROBERT KEY MP/Minister for Roads and Traffic
Male speaker
we're in a real mess on transport in this country — largely because we haven't had a policy for the last fourteen years.
The consequence of that is that we've seen a continuation of road-building schemes which have caused considerable damage to the countryside, devastated communities and have no real hope of soaking up the so-called demand for new roads.
Voice over
The government's enthusiasm for roads and motor cars worries many people.
The number of cars alone is set to double from twenty to fourt million by the year twenty-twenty-five.
Male speaker
first of all we've made great strides in terms of pollution and in terms of engineering we've made it much safer, and new road engineering makes driving more efficient.
Now we have to look at the real cost of motoring.
That's why we're looking at charging for motorways, bringing the cost of motor vehicles in line with that of other modes of transport.
Voice over
Anti-road campaigners like Helen Kimble say motorways are being built across trhe country by stealth.
She argues that two local bypasses proposed for north Oxford are really part of a much bigger project.
The East-west link would connect Felixstowe in Suffolk with Fishguard in Wales.
Male speaker
there are no firm proposals for the route between Aylesbury and Oxford.
We commission consultants who produced a report suggesting a southern route, but the northern route, the A41 route, is not ruled out, because we haven't made any proposals — so we're looking some years down the road.
Voice over
Reporter says: turning to cycling now, it's clean, it's healthy and it's green.
What is this government doing to encourage cycling?
Male speaker
I said to the local authorities in September that from now on I will be looking for schemes which encourage cycling — they're more likely to attract grants from central government than authorities which concentrate exclusively on roads.
Voice over
However the minister admitted that most of the grants given to local authorities for cycling schemes — anything under two million pounds, are in the form of loans — they have to pay the money back.
The Compton family from near Bicester spent two months without their car.
They found their local bus service a poor substitute.
Male speaker
it's always going to be the case that you cannot provide a bus for everybody at every time.
Alot of local councils and alot of private industry under deregulation are now turning to the buses.
It does mean though bus services being used on routes which people want to use.
Voice over
He denied that his department's policy wa short-sighted — an accusation made by several during the week.
He argued the future for transport lies in a marriage of private and public money.
Male speaker
when you look at the massive investment in the Channel Tunnel rail system, private sector for the tunnel and massive public sector investment in the rail facilities and depots around the country — that's the balanced long-term future we must have.
Voice over
And that committment to building railways as well as roads with private cash was boosted this week.
The budget did cut the building programme for roads and motorways, though it left untouched current agreed plans.
In future, private finance will be encouraged to build Britain's roads.
The Chancellor said the’ motorist and taxpayer alike would benefit.’
He didn't mention the environment.
Still to come on Central News, it's a whole new ball game.
The sport where a balanced approach is everything.
And feed the birds.
A side of Slimbridge the public never sees.
A nurse who was burgled while she slept says she's disgusted that the man convicted of using her stolen chequebook has walked free from court.
The man has ninety-one previous convictions, but was released because he had already spent time in jail on remand.
KATE GARRAWAY/Milton Keynes
PEGGY MARGRAVE/Burglary Victim
Det Sgt MARK KEARNEY/Thames Valley Police
PAUL STELLATO/Persistant Offender
Voice over
It'll be a long time before children's nurse Peggy Margrave again feels safe in her own home.
Nearly two months ago, while she lay asleep in her house in Milton Keynes, thieves broke in and took her cheque book and card.
But now added to her feelings of distress, are disgust and anger.
The man found in possession of her stolen cheque book and card has been allowed to walk free from court.
Magistrates at Milton Keynes found Paul Stellato who's twenty two guilty of handling stolen goods and sentenced him to three months in jail.
But because he'd already served five weeks on remand he was released.
Female speaker
I think he should have got a longer sentence or maybe tried in Crown Court, but not just got away with three months.
It is disgusting.
Voice over
Stellato had his first conviction in 1989, he now has ninety-one convictions.
Police in Milton Keynes says he is a persistant criminal who should be locked up.
And believe that his case highlights the failing of the criminal justice system.
Male speaker
This lady has suffered a lot of distress and I just don't think courts are considering the victims when they are imposing sentences.
Voice over
Stellato says he has paid for his crime, but believes the sentence was a mistake.
Male speaker
Maybe the sentence was a bit short but I've served my time on remand, I've been in prison six times and have served about thirteen weeks altogether, but I do think they made a mistake I don't know why.
Voice over
But Peggy Margrave doesn't believe Stellato has paid for his crimes and she wants the system changed.
She doesn't understand why he shouldn't have to serve his sentence, when the sentence of fear he helped to impose on her, will be with her for life.
A teenager has been cleared of raping two schoolgirls.
BROCKWORTH/Gloucester
The boy, who's sixteen, had been charged with raping an eleven year old behind a row of shops at Brockworth in Gloucester.
The jury at Bristol Crown Court were told that when details of this attack came to light, a second girl had accused the boy of raping her two years earlier, when she was thirteen.
The jury delivered the not guilty verdicts on the fourth day of the trial.
Detectives are questioning a Gloucestershire man about the murder of a man in Scotland.
DURSLEY/Gloucestershire
The twenty two year old from Wotton-Under-Edge is being held at Dursley police station.
Officers from the Lothian and Borders force are expected to take him back to Scotland tonight.
The body of twenty one year old Craig MacKie was found at Dunbar in East Lothian.
Disabled people are demanding improved facilities in city centres.
They say that although many shops THINK they're providing for the disabled, the facilities are often inadequate.
Their call is timed to coincide with the first European Day for disabled people.
STEPHANIE REEVE/Oxford
PAUL SLAY
SEAMUS McARDLE
BARRY TANSWELL/Manager
PETER NORTHFIELD/Manager
JANET MACE/Oxfordshire Council for the Disabled
Voice over
For Paul Slay coming to Oxford to shop takes a lot of effort.
He can't go into some shops in the city, because of his disability.
He says getting into shops and going from floor to floor is often impossible.
Paul and other wheelchair users want the Government to make sure disabled people have the same access as the able bodied.
He says, we want legislation — we want to go to places the same as everyone else.
Many of Oxford's shops have facilities for those in wheelchairs, and with walking sticks or pushchairs.
He says, we have lifts, automatic doors, disabled fitting rooms and shopping trolleys.
When Oxford railway station was refurbished three years ago, it was criticised for its lack of disabled facilities.
This footbridge used to be the only way to cross to the other platform.
The station manager's now confident that the problems have been overcome.
He says, we aim to improve our facilities and we recently spent in excess of 300 thousand pounds on installing a lift.
But so far there are no signs evident to tell wheelchair users there IS a lift and the disabled toilet is locked.
Staff have to be asked for the key.
Today, wheelchair users are trying to raise awareness of how difficult it is to get around.
She says, over 500 people are meeting at the European Parliament in Brussels today, to talk about disabled people's human rights.
Often, shops think they have good facilities for the disabled but they're often used for other things.
Disabled people have to choose carefully places where they CAN go.
But they're frustrated that most of the time, they're forced to rely on a helping hand.
In Central News tonight: Meningitis alert: Warning to parents after a schoolgirl dies.
An accident: The man who died when friends tried to stop him drink-driving.
And, we're people too.
Cities under fire for ignoring the disabled
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Worried parents have attended a special clinic to learn more about the first signs of meningococcal meningitis.
Experts say it can be treated successfully, but has to be spotted in its early stages.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
Dr TOM FAHEY/Oxfordshire Health Authority
FRAN WILLIAMS/National Meningitis Trust
Voice over
Four year old Carly Surman died from the contagious meningococcal meningitis just three days after falling ill.
Now doctors say parents must be on the look out for the symptoms and not be misled by flu.
He says there is flu in the community at this time of year so expect children to have flu symptoms.
But be extra vigilant partcularly in terms of headache, vomiting, or if they're irritable, or if you can't bring their temperature down by sponging down and Calpol.
Watch out for neck stiffness.
Carly was a nursery pupil at Wolvercote First School near Oxford.
Doctors have held a special clinic in the village to talk to worried parents.
Parents collecting their children from the school this afternoon will be understandably anxious, according to experts.
She says I should imagine they'll be feeling shocked and they may be panicking.
But we say not to panic, most cases occur on their own.
All they should be doing is making themselves aware of the symptoms.
He says we have to say parents have been very sensible, they appreciate there's a slighltly increased risk in the community.
Doctors point out that most cases are isolated and secondary spread of the disease is rare.And they stress meningococcal meningitis is treatable if its picked up early.
They're urging any parents who're in doubt to contact their GP for advice.
An inquest has heard how a man died in a scuffle with friends who were trying to stop him driving while he was drunk.
Nick Pollard fell and hit his head.
The coroner was told that he had drunk between twelve and sixteen pints of lager.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
Voice over
Nick Pollard was a well liked member of Newent town football club.
The inquest into his death was attended by friends who were with him last september when he was having a night out in Newent after his football team had won a match.
They ended up in the George hotel, by then, the court heard, Mr pollard and his friends had drunk between twelve and sixteen pints of lager each.
Mr Pollard's girlfriend Zoe Mitchell had met up with him at the pub.
She said in a statement that he and his close friend Gary Burn and one or two others were in a boisterous mood, and had obviously been drinking heavilly.
When they went to leave she realised that Mr Pollard intended to drive home:
She said that she begged Mr Pollard not to drive, he pushed her and told her to get lost.
Gary Burn stepped in and said,’ don't do that mate’he was trying to calm him down.
Her boyfriend ended up on the floor, she wasn't sure if he'd been punched or pushed.
he'd hit the right side of his head.
She said she was hysterical.
The Pollard had suffered serious head injuries and later died in Frenchay hospital in Bristol.
The following day Gary Burn was arrested by police on suspicion of murder.
But on the advice of the crown prosecution service no charges were brought.
In a statement to police Mr Burn had explained how he had tried to calm Mr Pollard down.
They had both pushed each other— and Mr Pollard had ended up falling over, hitting his head on the pavement.
Mr Pollards father david also gave evidence, saying in a statement how Gary Burn had been sobbing hystericaly when tring to explain to him what had happened.
Girfriend Zoe had told him at first that she had seen punches being exchanged betweeen the two, then that she had not, but he said she was confussed and highly distressed.
Coroner David Gibbons said he was satisfied that Mr Pollards death was was a tragic accident.
He recorded a verdict of accidental death.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
KIM BARNES/Oxford
Dr TOM FAHEY/Oxfordshire Health Authority
FRAN WILLIAMS/National Meningitis Trust
Voice over
Four year old Carly Surman died from the contagious meningococcal meningitis just three days after falling ill.
Now doctors say parents must be on the look out for the symptoms and not be misled by flu.
He says there is flu in the community at this time of year so expect children to have flu symptoms.
But be extra vigilant partcularly in terms of headache, vomiting, or if they're irritable, or if you can't bring their temperature down by sponging down and Calpol.
Watch out for neck stiffness.
Carly was a nursery pupil at Wolvercote First School near Oxford.
Doctors have held a special clinic in the village to talk to worried parents.
Female speaker
We say not to panic, most cases occur on their own.
All they should be doing is making themselves aware of the symptoms.
Voice over
Doctors point out that most cases are isolated and secondary spread of the disease is rare.And they stress meningococcal meningitis is treatable if its picked up early.
They're urging any parents who're in doubt to contact their GP for advice.
An inquest has heard how a footballer died in a scuffle with friends who were trying to stop him drink driving.
Nick Pollard had drunk between twelve and sixteen pints of lager.
NEWENT/Gloucestershire
When friends tried to stop him driving he fell and sustained fatal head injuries.
The coroner recorded a verdict of accidental death.
A nurse who was burgled while she slept says she's disgusted that the man convicted of using her stolen chequebook has walked free from court.
He'd had ninety-one previous convictions, but was released because he had spent time in jail on remand.
KATE GARRAWAY/Milton Keynes
PEGGY MARGRAVE/Burglary Victim
PAUL STELLATO/Persistant Offender
Voice over
It'll be a long time before children's nurse Peggy Margrave again feels safe in her own home.
Nearly two months ago, while she lay asleep in her house in Milton Keynes, thieves broke in and took her cheque book and card.
But now added to her feelings of distress, are disgust and anger.
The man found in possession of her stolen cheque book and card has been allowed to walk free from court.
Magistrates at Milton Keynes found Paul Stellato who's twenty two guilty of handling stolen goods and sentenced him to three months in jail.
But because he'd already served five weeks on remand he was released.
Female speaker
I think he should have got a longer sentence or maybe tried in Crown Court, but not just got away with three months.
Male speaker
I've been in prison six times and have served about thirteen weeks altogether.
Voice over
But Peggy Margrave doesn't believe Stellato has paid for his crimes and she wants the system changed.
Today is the European Day for disabled people and campaigners have been demanding improved facilities in city centres.
They say that although many shops THINK they're providing for the disabled, in reality, they are not.
STEPHANIE REEVE/Oxford
PAUL SLAY
SEAMUS McARDLE
JANET MACE/Oxfordshire Council for the Disabled
Voice over
For Paul Slay coming to Oxford to shop takes a lot of effort.
He can't go into some shops in the city, because of his disability.
He says getting into shops and going from floor to floor is often impossible.
Paul and other wheelchair users want the Government to make sure disabled people have the same access as the able bodied.
He says, we want legislation — we want to go to places the same as everyone else.
Often, shops think they have good facilities for the disabled but they're often used for other things.
Disabled people have to choose carefully places where they CAN go.
But they're frustrated that most of the time, they're forced to rely on a helping hand.
Wildlife enthusiasts have been enjoying a treat tonight.
For the first time the public have been allowed in to watch the floodlit night feeding of thousands of birds at the Slimbridge Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust.
RICHARD BARNETT/Slimbridge
Voice over
For decades, the floodlit night feed has been one of Slimbridge's best kept secrets.
Every evening throughout the winter thousands of birds, including Bewick Swans, Canada Geese and Greylag Geese queue up on the Swan lake for their late meal of wheat.
It's a spectacular sight, as the wildfowl jockey for position to grab the biggest beak or bill full of food.
And tonight, for the first time, the public were invited to watch the feed, and listen to a commentary.
The evening feeds are open to the public on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays until the end of February.
And by next month the Swan Lake will be even busier as more birds fly in.
now when it comes to hard luck stories…or ripping sporting yarns…the tale of Oxford University's Audley Lumsden takes some beating…on Tuesday at Twickenham he wins his blue in the annual varsity game…some achievement for a man who's fought back from a broken neck and two fractured ankles 
AUDLEY LUMSDEN/Oxford University
Voice over
The rugby career of Audley Lumsden ranges from the absurd to the amazing.
He started out as a full-back with Bath and looked set for the glittering prizes.
Then 4 seasons ago, he broke his neck in a club game.
He was lucky to walk again let alone run.
His playing days looked over, but then came a comeback and last year Lumsden was ready, fighting fit to play for Oxford at Twickenham.
2 weeks before the big game, he broke his ankle and then suffered the same fate in a Sevens tournament last April.
Many a player would have called it a day then; not Audley.
He battled on and at Twickenham next week wins his reward; his Oxford blue.
if you want to watch a match tomorrow…then take yourself off to Kingsholm…its Gloucester against Leicester…we're off now to the action round-up 
Voice over
The going is soft but Oxfordshire jockey Richard Dunwoody is still racing along…one more winner today…at Nottingham…
Banbury showjumper Joe Turi…is chasing a clear round in France this weekend as he leads the british challenge in the world cup qualifier…
Will Hans Nielsen ride again for Oxford…talks over a new contract have crashed…ice hockey this weekend…
Milton Keynes versus swindon on Saturday…
Oxford against the Stevenage Sharks on Sunday…
around or over the world in 30 days of driving…that's the dream of two local motoring enthusiasts who are taking their old morgan car on the longest…the toughest rally of them all…they've been getting themselves into gear in the Malverns and we're off there to join them for our Friday feature 
BRUCE STAPLETON
DOUGLAS MORRIS
Voice over
The worlds oldest Benedictine Monk celebrated his one hundredth birthday today.
Father Francis McLachlan first became a monk in 1924.
Today he's received messages from the Queen and the Pope.
Ken Goodwin reports.
HEREFORD
FATHER FRANCIS Belmont Abbey
ALAN REES Abbot
Voice over
It took some doing, but father Francis managed to blow out all one hundred candles on his cake.
Then it was time for a rousing chorus of happy birthday from the boys of Belmont Abbey school, where Father Francis once taught Latin, French and Mathematics.
Afterwards, the Abbott asked Father Francis if he would grant the boys the rest of the day off.
He says certainly.
And that was just what they wanted to hear.
They sing 3 cheers.
Father Francis has been a monk at belmont Abbey since 1924.
In those days, life wasn't so sedate.
He says they got up at four in the morning and went to their parishes in all weathers.
Now he enjoys the popularity that being the worlds oldest benedictine monk brings.
He says that he's very popular with everyone.
He enjoys a stroll across the Abbey's fields, sometimes forgetting there's a rugby match going on.
He says that he just walks right into the middle of a match.
He says he's done well to survive the monastic life for so long!
There was one more treat for Father Francis.
At the start of a special mass, even the monastery bellringers were celebrating his 100th birthday.
IRA admits planting bombs in Manchester
FTSE down 11
The hundred shares index closed down eleven point six at two seven five nine point four 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty six and up at two marks, forty eight.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
Scientists may have found a new vaccine for malaria.
If it works, it'll save millions of lives, and give peace of mind to thousands of Britons who visit Africa each year.
Robin Powell reports.
OXFORD
Dr ADRIAN HILL/Malaria Expert
WELLCOME TRUST VIDEO
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
GWENDA SAMS/Former Malaria Sufferer
Voice over
Malaria; a disease that annually kills a million children.
As yet, there's no suitable vaccine, but thanks to scientists at the Institute of Molecular Medicine in Oxford and funding from the research charity, the Wellcome Trust, things may be about to change.
Malaria is transmitted by mosquitoes.
When they bite, they inject a parasite into the blood stream, which grows in the liver for a week, before spreading throughout the body via red blood cells.
The effects range from flu symptoms and fever, to unconsciousness and death.
Dr Hill hopes that by stimulating the body's own immune system, the parasite can be killed before it leaves the liver.
The theory will be tested in the New Year; there's no time to lose.
But it's not just children who are at risk.
Gwenda Sams from Abingdon caught malaria in the 70s, while her family was living in Uganda.
Travellers to Africa should take anti-malaria tablets, prescribed by their G-P and available at local chemists, but they're not an absolute guarantee against infection, and there are other precautions to take.
It's not certain, of course, that the new vaccine will work.
But if it does, travellers like Gwenda need worry no more and scenes like this can be consigned to the past.
The former U.S. President Ronald Reagan has called for military intervention by NATO to end the fighting in Bosnia.
He was speaking to a thousand students at the Oxford Union.
Erika Barnes reports.
OXFORD
TOBY LEWIS/Oxford Union Society
Voice over
They'd been queuing since 5 a.m. in the morning and as the wait continued, so did the length of the queue.
But worth it to see and hear former President, Ronald Reagan.
This is Mr Reagan's only public speaking engagement on his tour to Britain.
Anticipation now of a little bit of history in the making.
But all the attention to the young pretender, there's no dismissing the appeal of his older predecessor!
Male speaker
I'm delighted to be here this morning.
In fact at my age, I'm delighted to be anywhere!
Voice over
Down to business now…
In Bosnia he proposed intervention by NATO; a humanitarian velvet glove he said, backed by a steel fist of military force.
The student audience were impressed by his performance, though not necessarily with his argument.
Ronald Reagan's Oxford visit reminded him of his college days.
The Oxford oar presented as a momento, will help bail him out of any troubled waters he's yet to encounter.
Voice over
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
LINDSAY PARSONS/Cheltenham Manager
ALAN JUDGE/United Keeper
GLENN HODDLE/Town Manager
Voice over
The long road to Wembley winds its way into the second round this weekend and cup romance takes us to Cheltenham to see the Town; the Robins getting ready for their big day.
Tomorrow, the boys from the Beazer Homes League take on second division Bournemouth at Whaddon Road.
It is 45 years since Cheltenham made it this far, nearly 60 since their one and only appearance in the third round.
So come on you reds.
Whenever you hear of the cup and of giantkillers, you hear the name of Yeovil Town.
They've slain some mighty teams in their time and tomorrow Hereford United are at Huish Park for a tie which should bring pleasure, but could carry pain.
On Sunday, the Central soccer shows arrives at the County Ground.
The Live match Swindon against Derby County.
Last week Town were the stars of this thriller at Peterborough.
It brought 6 goals and the man of the match award for Glenn Hoddle.
Town team news.
No injuries; they're unchanged, which means Nicky Summerbee has won that number 8 shirt and can consider himself first choice.
Goal of the week; the 17th of the season for hit man, Craig Maskell.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
MARLOW/Buckinghamshire
STUART RINGSELL/Father
EDIE RINGSELL/Step-Mother
Voice over
Meanwhile the foreign office is also being criticised for failing to help a man who's being prevented from leaving India.
Nicholas Brown was jailed for possessing drugs.
He was later cleared by an appeal court, but his passport hasn't been returned.
Ian Maclaren reports.
GRAFTON/Oxfordshire
MARILYN BROWN/Mother
KEITH BEST/Prisoners Abroad
Voice over
Nick Brown thought his two year ordeal was over when he walked free from a Goan Jail last month.
An appeal against his conviction for possessing cannabis was quashed, after a High court ruled there was no evidence against him.
These photographs taken by Nick's mother Marilyn show his joy as he left jail.
He'd spent 18 months in prison awaiting trial and served 6 months of a 10 year sentence.
Nick claimed 15 grams of cannabis was planted on him by police, in an attempt to extract a bribe.
As a condition of his release, Nick's passport was withheld for 90 days, pending an appeal by the prosecution.
He'll then have to wait another 4 weeks before he's allowed to apply for his passport to be returned.
Nick's mother, Marilyn who's campaigned vigourously for his release, says her son has now moved to a neighbouring state in Western India because he's fearful of repercussions.
Marilyn Brown is also critical of the Foreign Office, for doing little to assist her son.
The Foreign Office says it wouldn't be proper to interfere with the court's decision to withdraw Nick's passport, pending any appeal.
Group's representing prisoners abroad, say Nick's predicament is a familiar one.
Marilyn Brown says she accepts her son now won't be home for Christmas and his 29th birthday on January the 2nd.
A shopkeeper whose premises have been smashed open by ramraiders twice in three weeks says his local council have stopped him installing protective security shutters.
The council say that shutters are not the answer.
Simon Garrett reports 
OXFORD
PAUL EDWICK/Children's Shop Owner
Cllr JOHN POWER/Oxford City Council
Voice over
Stocks of exclusive children's fashions have been taken from the Wobbly Jelly store in Oxford.
It's the second new shop front in three weeks but the owner says he's helpless because of a council ban on security shutters
Councillors say they don't believe shutters are the answer
2 other shops were attacked in Oxford within half an hour of the wobbly jelly attack.
A white Sierra has been recovered and a man arrested.
Police fear an increase in ramraid attacks in the run up to Christmas
An MP has called for a full review of flood defences following the chaos caussed by torrential rain over the past week.
Flood warnings are still in force on the River Wye and the River Severn, and today another river overflowed its banks.
Richard Barnett reports:
MORETON ON LUGG/Herefordshire
WORCESTER
COLIN SHEPHERD MP/Con Hereford
TERRY WIDNALL/National Rivers Authority
WORCESTER
HEREFORD
Voice over
The major rivers have already flooded.
Today, it was the turn of the River Lugg to overflow its banks in Herefordshire, inundating hundreds of acres of farmland.
Elsewhere, vehicles were stranded in the middle of lakes of floodwater.
It was scenes like this that prompted the MP for Hereford to call for a review of flood defences.
Male speaker
With such a major flood, we must ensure the defences prevent people suffering.
Voice over
The National Rivers Authority has spent £2 million improving the flood walls on the Wye.
But it welcomes the idea of a review.
Male speaker
Flood defences are thge Cinderella of public services.
This is a chance to review them.
Voice over
Meanwhile, sporting venues across the region have disappeared in the deluge.
This is Worcester Racecourse and also on the riverside, the County Cricket ground.
And it will be a few days before anyone scores a goal through these posts in Hereford.
A group of villagers say measures to slow down traffic on their main street have actually made things worse.
They claim a new chicane is turning the road into a racetrack, and they now want it replaced with traffic humps.
SIMON GARRETT/Milton
GEORGE STRANGE/Milton Parish Council
Dr PHIL GOODWIN/Oxford University
Voice over
When residents of Milton near Abingdon heard their traffic was going to be calmed they were delighted.
But many say the chicane built in their village has made matters worse
Female speaker
It hasn't slowed it at all.
They go just as fast but it's now a bending race instead of a straight one
Female speaker
You hear beep beep all night long as they try to pass each other.
There's the screeching of brakes all the time.
Female speaker
It doesn't slow em up.
It hasn't made a bit of difference
Voice over
The chicane's a temporary experiment put in by the county council at the request of the parish.
Traffic's increased in Milton since humps were put in at nearby Sutton Courtenay.
Commuters switched their route to avoid the inconvenience of slowing down.
Locals are being asked to give the chicane a chance
What would you like to see in an ideal world?
Male speaker
No traffic through the village.
It'd be wonderful but it won't happen.
We've got a big industrial park at one end and the highways department at the other end of the village so we're always going to get traffic
Voice over
Many say humps would be better than their chicane.
But that would cost more and might damage emergency vehicles.
Experts say chicanes do work but wrongly designed they can speed traffic up.
Traffic calming has to be individually tailored
Male speaker
If it's to work it has to be part of a general strategy for traffic in an area not on one street at a time.
You can't just put a speed hump down everywhere.
You've got to design the measures for the street they're supposed to be implemented in
Voice over
At the moment, mostly because of cost, traffic calming's targetted on individual villages.
A fully integrated policy's a long way down the road
A vegetarian's challenge to a farmer to live like a battery chicken for a week has ended in farce after both sides accused the other of backing out.
Eventually, four non-farmers took up the challenge in the hope of winning a ten thousand pound nest-egg.
But they only lasted eighteen hours.
RICHARD BARNETT/Woolhope
REBECCA HALL/Vegetarian Author
NICOLA de PULFORD/Farmer
BILL DAVIES/Volunteer
RICHARD BRETT/Volunteer
Voice over
It seemed simple enough at the outset…vegetarian author Rebecca Hall offered to pay ten thousand pounds to any farmer willing to live like a battery chicken for a week.
She claimed chickens and other animals were kept in appalling conditions that no human would endure.
Female speaker
She has issued the challenge because millions of animals are kept in concentration camp conditions.
Voice over
Farmer Nicola De Pulford, who keeps free range poultry in Devon, agreed to take up the challenge.
She turned up at Woolhope in Herefordshire yesterday ready to climb into the cage.
But Rebecca Hall insisted the challenge stipulated that five people must squeeze in together.
Mrs De Pulford said she would get in alone, which she did.
But within moments a security guard appeared:
Before leaving, Mrs de Pulford put forward the farmers point of view:
Female speaker
The conditions in battery cages are not cruel.
The birds are warm, dry, and safe from predators.
It's not like a concentration camp.
Voice over
Rebecca Hall then came up with four other volunteers…all of whom admitted they weren't farmers.
They said they didn't have strong views on intensive farming.
Male speaker
He's doing it for the challenge.
He doesn't have strong views.
Voice over
Once inside, it was clear just what a tight squeeze it would be.
The vegetarians said the cage, five feet high and just over three feet wide, was a true representation of the conditions chickens face.
The farmers argued the correct size would be six times bigger.
The volunteers certainly felt cramped:
Male speaker
It's going to be cramped and unpleasant.
But he's determined to stay.
Voice over
Eighteen hours later, they'd had enough and gave up.
Meanwhile the argument between the vegetarians and the farmers over who'd chickened out of the original challenge goes on.
We've got sport coming up shortly, and after that…a special guest
A police force is targeting lunchtime drinkers in a new campaign against drinking and driving.
Almost a quarter of road accidents happen in the middle of the afternoon and experts are warning that just one drink at lunchtime can make you fall asleep at the wheel.
DAVID CRABTREE/Worcester
MIKE ASHTON/West Mercia Police
Prof JIM HORNE/Sleep Researcher
CARL REILLY/Drink-Driver
Wrecked cars were outside West Mercia Police headquarters today as a stark reminded of the dangers on the roads.
This year the emphasis is on trying to prevent lunchtime drink driving in an area where twenty two per cent of accidents occur between one thirty and four thirty in the afternoon.
’ It might seem a hard message, but it is a meaningful one and I would ask people to respect it.’
At a news conference today the police brought in a sleep experts from Loughborough University.
He says research has shown that many people would be incapable of driving safely over long distances in the early afternoon even after one drink.
’ We have a natural dip in the afternoon.If you're already sleepy and you have alcohol, the two interact’
’ In many parts of the world they have a siesta and if you have taken something like alcohol, the two interact.
Carl Reilly was stopped after having a few too many at a business lunch.
’ I felt mortified, but cushioned by the drink.’
’ But when I was put in the cell I was terrified.’
All police forces in the region are saying don't have one for the road — have none for the road.
A court has heard that a father battered his baby daughter to death because she wouldn't stop crying.
CHELTENHAM
Five month old Tia Organ died from a fractured skull at Cheltenham General hospital in November last year.
Her father, William Kwavalskie , who's from Shurdington in Gloucestershire, denies murder but has pleaded guilty to manslaughter.
The trial's continuing at Bristol Crown Court.
The Government has unveiled a multi-million pound contract to build a bypass around an accident blackspot.
Roads Minister Robert Key 
BROCKWORTH/Gloucestershire
A teenager has seriously injured his spine playing rugby at school.
He had to be airlifted to hospital, but his teacher says the accident was a total freak, and there was nothing the school could have done to prevent it.
LIZ HANNAM/Stowe
LIONEL WESTON/House Master
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
TIM HASTIE-SMITH/Chaplin
Speaking Last Week/NIGEL HENDERSON/RFU Surgeon
Voice over
The eighteen year old, who has not been named, is an experienced rugby player.
He's represented the first fifteen at Stowe School near Buckingham for the past five years.
His housemaster Lionel Weston is an former Englad scrum-half.
Male speaker
The ball was loose on the ground and he went in to retrieve it.
In the process he was trying to turn and give the ball back to his own team and he fell awkwardly and landed on his head and twisted his head under his body.
Voice over
Over the past twenty years, the rugby union has worked hard to improve safety at school level.
Rules governing scrums, rucks and line-outs have been tightened up.
But Mr Weston believes there's nothing that could have prevented this accident.
Male speaker
It was such a freak open accident that no amount of preparation or legislation could have prevented what the boy did on that particular occasion.
Voice over
It's also left the boys at the school devastated.
They're being counselled by the school chaplin.
Male speaker
It's in a way like a bereavement in as far its the middle of the afternoon and everything is going well, then suddenly everything's changed and they're pretty devastated and don't know how they ought to react.
Voice over
Reporter asks?
Do they want to carry on playing rugby?
Male speaker
Most of them do.
Their reason is out of respect and because they know it was a one-off injury.
Voice over
Statistics on school rugby accidents only have only started being collected over the past five years.
Last year three hundred and sixty pupils were injured from three thousand schools who regularly play the game.
Nigel Henderson is a consultant who's involved in the management of rugby union and deals with worst of these cases.
Male speaker
Rugby is a contact sport.
There are inevitably going to be injuries.
But I suppose the best way of answering that is to say that my own two sons aged 9 and 11 are playing rugby, love it, and I have no hesitation in letting them do so.
Voice over
The injured boy is being treated in the spinal injuries unit at Stoke Mandeville.
It's too early to assess the full extent of the damage.
In Central News tonight: Lonely this Christmas.
The woman in a wheelchair banned by British Rail.
One's enough to kill.Police target the lunchtime drinker.
And nobody here but us humans.
The battery chicken challenge falls foul.
Good evening:
WESLEY SMITH
A disabled pensioner has been told she can't travel by train to visit relatives this Christmas — because her wheelchair's too big.
British Rail used to let her travel in the guard's van, but has now changed its rules.
ERIKA BARNES
B-R has told Margaret Wilkinson that if she wants to go by rail she'll have to get a narrower wheelchair.
But doctors say a smaller chair couldn't take her body weight.
Mrs Wilkinson now faces the prospect of Christmas on her own.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
MARGARET WILKINSON/Disabled Pensioner
KNOWLES MITCHELL/British Rail
Voice over
62-year-old Margaret Wilkinson from Lower Stratton was looking forward to spending Christmas with family and friends.
But now British Rail has told her it can't find room for her 20-inch wheelchair, and unless she finds herself a smaller one she'll have to make alternative arrangements.
Margaret, who's wholly dependent on BR for transport, used to travel in the guard's van.
But now she's been told she can't.
British Rail says it can now accommodate 16- or 18-inch wheelchairs in its passenger carriages, and insists it would be unfair to ask those in larger chairs to sit elsewhere.
BR's advising Margaret, who has osteo-arthritis, to squeeze into an 18-inch wheelchair.
But at 17 stone, the health authority's told her that only a 20-inch chair will do.
Margaret says she and thousands like her are being discriminated against.
Margaret will also miss the birth of her next grandchild — her daughter Wendy in Cheltenham is expecting a baby any day now.
She's resigned to spending this Christmas on her own…but says she won't let the matter rest until British Rail backs down.
A divorced father says he's facing financial ruin after his maintenance payments for his children were increased from five pence a year to almost three and a half thousand pounds a year.
Absent fathers are being made to pay up by the new Child Support Agency to cut the government's benefits bill.
But campaigners say fathers who are already paying are being treated unfairly.
KIM BARNES Kidlington
MARTIN DYER Divorced Father
WENDY GALE Child Maintenance Legislation Campaign
WENDY DYER Martin's Wife
Voice over
Martin Dyer may soon have a lot more time to play with his daughter…he says following a maintenance order from the Child Support Agency he may not be able to afford to work.
The new agency has just upped his payments from 5p a year to 65 pounds a week…
He says I was horrified.
I can't afford to pay it.
I've married again.
I got in touch with the Child Support Agency.
They don't want to know.
Martin has two children by his first wife.
When they divorced he gave her the house in a clean break settlement and paid twenty pounds a week maintenanace.
But when his second wife Wendy became ill, incurring extra expenses, that was cut to a nominal five pence a year.
Campaigners say the sudden increase in Martin's bill is not unusual.
She says most typcial cases are people having their maintenace cases trebled.
It's going to force them out of employment, if they can't manage then a lot of other things are going to go, they're going to have to move to smaller houses.
The CSA which aims to save 530 million pounds in benefit payments says’ The new system assesses maitenance in accordance with a formula, taking account of the income of both parents and certain essential outgoings.
Most absent parents are left with 70-85 per cent of net income after payment of maintenance.’
That isn't how it seems to Martin Dyer's family.
She says it's so worrying, I just don't know what to do.
He says thousands of families have already been thrown into chaos and we've had the first suicide as a result of the operations of the Child Support Agency.
Concern has been raised in Parliament today and the Social Security Select Committee called for the eight month old agency to be overhauled.
That can't come too quickly for Martin Dyer…
Divorce law reforms proposed
New reforms to the divorce laws have been proposed, including a quick divorce apportioning no blame.
Murder sentence changes urged
The former Lord Chief Justice, Lord Lane, has called for the abolition of automatic life sentences for murder allowing Judges to use their discretion in individual cases.
Damages for leukaemia victim
A former dockyard fitter who contracted leukaemia after working on nuclear submarines, has been awarded more than a hundred and sixty-seven thousand pounds in damages against the Ministry of Defence.
FTSE up 3
The hundred shares index closed up three point eight at thirty-two, thirty-eight exactly .
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty but down at two marks, fifty-six.
Welcome back: In a few minutes, some advice on stranger danger from Delboy.
But first, with the sport, here's Tim 
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Pictures SKY SPORT
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
Hereford's cup defeat at Bath was the biggest blow of the weekend…there's not much to chose between the bottom pro league and the top amateur table these days…
but United still should have won…after going a goal down skipper Derek Hall pulled them level and on chances it was Hereford's game…
but the cup doesn't run like that…and with fifteen minutes to go Bath sub Paul Batty who wortks in a swindon sportshop during the week hit the headlines and the back of the net with the winner…so he's the only local player with something to celebrate from the weekend…
at the county ground…it was hard going…we've slowed the action down to make the most of Swindon's best chance against fellow strugglers Sheffield United in a goaless draw…
Town should have won too…
At the Manor Ground…
United played some classy football against Millwall in the first half…they looked good for a few goals but ended with nothing…
some of the approach work was divine watch how Joey Beauchamp beats his man here…but in front of goal too many miskicks and misses…
guess what manager Denis Smith wants for Christmas…a few wins…a few goals…
it was all over at the start of the second half…it took Millwall just 17 seconds and ten touches to win the game…
United had two touches including the last…the fateful one with Darren Jackson scoring an own goal…
Alex Dyer was brought on…and at first it looked as though Oxford had found their santa claus…
No presents from the Millwall defence though…
United kept on trying…but it was the same old story…no luck
Millwall on the other hand made it look all to easy…their sub Verveeay was a yard too quick for the Oxford defence…and his shot was spot on…
victory for Millwall…for Oxford it's the bleak midwinter…
the FA Cup may be over for Hereford, but we hope for better things from Swindon and Oxford: Here's a reminder of the draw for the Third round — they were the first two out of the bag — both at home too.
But Ipswich…
Tranmere…tough games.
There's better news for the rugby fans: Gloucester have rediscovered that winning touch…two league wins in a row now…on Saturday they beat Orrell 10-6 
KEITH RICHARDSON/Gloucester Coach
Voice over
The wind was blowing in their faces, the odds were against them too up at Orrell, but the Cherry and Whites are at last beginning to stir.
In the first half they were on the defensive for all but five minutes.
They kept Orrell out with a lot of judgement and a bit of luck.
At half-time Gloucester were only a penalty down, but they soon made up the three points and took the game with the only try.
Orrell made a mistake by losing possession and giving the ball away but their hand was forced by the cherry and whites relentless drive forward.
Ashley Johnson got the score and Tim Smith added the conversion to push them in front.
Smith who's got his kicking boot working again added a penalty too, and Orrel came back with three more points but it was Gloucester's day.
10-6 to the Cherry and Whites.
Good news for coach Keith Richardson and his men.
Keith Richardson says:
Television's most loveable wide boy has kicked off a new campaign to warn children of the danger of talking to strangers.
Delboy Trotter, alias actor David Jason opened a show for fifteen hundred youngsters, with the message run, yell, and tell.
KATE GARRAWAY/Aylesbury
DAVID JASON/Actor
Sgt PHILLIP GELL/Crime Prevention Officer
Voice over
A stranger David Jason is not…having played such hit characters as Pa Larkin in the Darling Buds of May and Delboy in Only Fools and Horses he's known by everyone, well almost…
Male speaker
Does anyone not know who I am?
Well you're a wally!
Voice over
Yet its the subject of strangers and the dangers they pose that this performance is all about.
To a packed house of fifteen hundred children in the Civic Hall in Aylesbury, he gave his backing to a new show designed to raise children's awareness.
Male speaker
I think if anything can stop some of the things happening to youngsters that have been this year then it is a good thing.
They asked me to come along and I thought I would because I thought children might respond more to me because they recognise me from television.
Voice over
The show, organised by Thames Valley Police, has all the elements of a Christmas pantomime with larger than life characters and lots of audience participation.
Male speaker
You show me what to do when I am approached by strangers.
Male speaker
With a play it brings the message home more and the message we want to get accross today is’ Run, yell and tell’.
Female speaker
I think it was very interesting and it warns you not to talk to strangers.
Female speaker
I learnt not to talk to strangers and I thought it was funny.
Voice over
The real test of whether the message to run yell and tell when they see a stranger will be when the children leave the theatre.
But so far they at least seem to have got the hang of the yelling bit.
Returning to our lead story about the disabled pensioner who was banned from using the train because her wheelchair was too large.
You'll be pleased to know that a minibus driver from Faringdon in Oxfordshire has offered to take Mrs Wilkinson to her family and friends in Blackpool.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
right now though Swindon are more concerned about their league form…in yesterday's live Central Match they came a cropper…
Swindon two…
Derby County four was the scoreline at the County Ground…here's what went wrong 
Voice over
its Oxford's turn this week…the Live match is coming to the Manor Ground on Sunday for United against Leicester City…to rugby now…and Gloucester's season is having all sorts of ups and downs…they're on a high at the moment thanks to a resounding win over Leicester Tigers on saturday…the score at Kingsholm was thirty six…thirteen 
Voice over
if you think that was muddy…you ain't seen nothing yet…because on Friday we're off to the Forest of Dean with the Mad Dogs of Gloucestershire 
Voice over
Santa Clause's reindeer brought an entire city centre to a standstill when they arrived to give children a treat before Christmas.
The reindeer come from a herd living wild in the Scottish highlands, so arriving in a built-up area caused a few problems, as Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
ROSIE HUMPHRIES Reindeer Keeper
HENRY HUMPHRIES Reindeer Keeper
Voice over
There's only one real way for santa to get about and that's using Reindeer.
On a tour through Gloucester, traffic came to a standstill, as a procession made it's way through the streets.
And it wasn't just the children who were excited.
She says he wants to play.
The Reindeer spend all year living wild in the Cairngorm mountains in Scotland.
But, during the winter they're drafted in to help santa make his deliveries.
They're very particular about what they eat.
Only moss will do and 2 tons of it — freshly handpicked — has to be taken on tour to keep them in peak condition.
And there's no skiving, even the young ones come along.
Reindeer are ideally suited to working with children.
He says they don't frighten easily, and they're very docile.
For most children, this is the first time they've ever seen Reindeer.
They say that they're very furry — though one boy says they're bigger than he thought.
And how does Santa get them to fly?
A few magic words, of course!
The reindeers owners are bombarded with questions.
She says they fly by sprinkling magic dust on their antlers.
They also get asked if they bite or kick.
They don't.
All the reindeer are popular, but there's no doubt that the most cuddles are reserved for the baby of the herd called Kiwi.
Princess Anne to marry on Saturday
FTSE down 4
The hundred shares index closed down four point nine at two seven five four point five 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty eight and up at two marks, forty eight.
Finally, the television presenter Leslie Crowther has taken his first steps since being injured in a road accident.
The fifty nine year-old host of The Price Is Right, was critically injured when his Rolls Royce crashed on the M-Five, at Cheltenham, in Gloucestershire, nine weeks ago.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
He's in intensive care at Frenchay Hospital in Bristol.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Floods have been causing more problems for motorists.
Heavy overnight rain has helped swell some rivers…but elsewhere the flooding seems to have peaked, and forecasters say the worst is over…at least for now.
Ken Goodwin reports.
NORTON/Gloucestershire
CHALLOW/Oxfordshire
CLIFTON HAMPDEN/Oxfordshire
HEREFORD
GLOUCESTER
PAUL BAILEY/National Rivers Authority
RICK CARPENTER
ANDY CLAIR
Voice over
Flooding may have brought misery to some, but for this jet skier the lakes which cover thousands of acres of Gloucestershire fields are there to be enjoyed.
For more conventional transport though, the going is a little slower.
At Challow in Oxfordshire, deep floodwater meant it was strictly snails pace only for motorist.
At Cliften Hampden, fields were swamped by the rising waters of the Thames, though the flooding is now thought to have peaked.
In Herefordshire were the river wye burst it's banks, levels are now stablising and are not expected to increase.
In Gloucestershire the river severn's level has dropped slightly, but the national rivers authority is being cautious about giving the all clear.
He says that there's a spring tide next week, if there's more flooding there'll be problems.
Of course there are some who'd like the floods to stay just a little longer.
jetskiing across flooded fields is more dangerous than it looks, because of the hiden dangers of submerged fence posts and barbed wire.
And of course, it's freezing cold.
He says it's great fun.
He says as there are no lakes in the area; the flooding helps them practice.
And if you've been wind surfing and you can't get back, you can always hitch a lift to dry land.
Robert Maxwell's son Kevin says his father's war medals should NOT be included in next month's auction of the publisher's personal possessions.
The Military Cross, and other awards from companies and foreign governments are expected to sell for more than two thousand pounds.
But in an exclusive interview with Central South, Kevin Maxwell told our reporter Simon Garrett that his family should at least have been given the chance to buy the medals.
HEADINGTON/Oxford
KEVIN MAXWELL
Voice over
Field Marshall Montgomery presented Robert Maxwell's Military Cross in 1945.
The second lieutenant in the Queen's Royal Regiment had fearlessly led his platoon straight toward heavy German fire, scattering the enemy.
Now the MC and his other medals must go, partly to raise money towards the missing pension funds.
Male speaker
I'm particularly sad my mother hasn't had the opportunity to buy even his MC.
She would have liked them to go to his regimental museum and I still feel that would be one of the best homes for them.
Voice over
The medals were never on display in Headington and Kevin never heard his father tell the story of his award.
But his bravery was called into question in 1967 when an ex-tory MP queried whether the MC was genuine or a fiction invented by the publisher.
The familiar Maxwell reach for a libel writ brought about an immediate public apology.
But he found the whole episode deeply hurtful.
Male speaker
Yes and I'm sure anyone else would find it hurtful too.
To be awarded the Military Cross is a rare honour exemplyfying service to crown and a county and exemplifies a moment of persional bravery and to have that called into doubt is very shocking.
He got an apology from that particular ex-MP.
Voice over
Is there a connection in your mind between the medal winning father and the man much villified after his death?
Male speaker
I don't make a comparison.
For myself and the family we take great pride in his military service and his awards for bravery.
One doesn't need to compare and contrast — It's a moment one can be justly proud of.
Voice over
Were you aware of the medals as a child?
Male speaker
No.
My father never glorified war, but we were always aware of the traditions of service and the military traditions of the family and in his generation my father was the exemplar.
But my grandfather on my mother; s side and my grandmother too both won military awards in the first war for bravery, so the oral traditions of both wars were always with us.
Voice over
The medals are worth around £2,000.
Collectors may well bid far more for such a piece of Maxwell memorabilia.
In part two: Pure gold…the teenager who kept Cheltenham in the Cup.
Ramraid: Swindon and Derby in a six-goal sizzler.
And all I want for Christmas is a reindeer.
What happened when Rudolph came to town.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Pictures BBC NEWS
CHRISTER WARREN/Cheltenham Town
GREG DOWNS/Hereford United
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
The third round draw of the FA Cup is something new to modern day Cheltenham.
The Town team, the Robins, are singing louder than ever.
Today at Whaddon Road, they were rolling the pitch back into shape after Saturday's cup battle against second division Bournemouth.
The game finished 1-1 with Peter Shearer scoring for the league side in the first half and then with just 7 minutes to go, Town teenager Christer Warren, a Bournemouth boy would you believe, scored the equaliser.
A goal that gives Cheltenham a replay and the dream of playing Kenny Daglish's Blackburn Rovers.
Today, young Christer as you'd expect was 10 ft tall.
The ladder helped mind you.
Saturday's hero was back at work at the ground changing the fixtures board.
Bournemouth hopefully won't get off the floor.
Shock tactics.Parents of drink-drive victim say it's the only way.
Caught in a riot.MP escapes the mob in India.
And don't sell my father's medals.
Kevin Maxwell talks exclusively to Central.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The couple say their son's death has wrecked THEIR lives, AND the lives of the family of the driver involved.
Their decision to speak out coincides with a hard-hitting national campaign which begins on television tonight.
Tim Hurst reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
JANE/Andrew's Mother
SHANE/Convicted Drunken Driver
NIGEL BURGESS/Asst Chief Constable/Gloucestershire
Voice over
17 year old Andrew died this year when he was a passenger in a car driven by a drunken friend.
His parents, from Gloucestershire, have joined the county's pre-Christmas campaign to highlight the tragic consequences of drinking and driving.
She said a policeman knocked on the door at 3am, the family had to go to the hospital to identify their son.
A hard hitting television campaign, so shocking it can't be shown before 9 p.m., begins tonight.
The tv campaign underlines the consequences for every driver over the limit, involved in an accident or not, like Shane, from Gloucestershire.
In 10 years the number of people killed in drink related accidents has more than halved.
In Gloucestershire, the number of positive pre-Christmas breath tests has halved in 6 years, reflecting a public change of attitude.