

Crues offer no clues
CRUSADERS didn't show a glimpse of their usual goal-snapping fury in a dismal Seaview flop.
Servette spy Pont's clipboard remained unused on his knees as he watched from the grandstand.
A day of sorrows for Crusaders was capped just before half-time when the usually lethal Sid Burrows was booked for throwing the ball away and referee Alan Snoddy had a word with manager Roy Walker for coming on to the pitch.
Distillery, beset by injuries to key players, had another shock.
Key forward Tom Cleland was missing after his wife was taken to hospital early this morning seriously ill.
Crusaders had nothing of note to show in the first half apart from a drive lofted over the bar by Stephen Lynch from Burrows' free kick in the second minute and a double save by Distillery keeper Steve Collins from Steven Livingstone in the 31st minute.
Crusaders did have tough luck seconds before the final whistle when a desperation drive by Jim Gardiner bounced off the crossbar.
Ironically it was Distillery who settled into the game and looked dangerous in a brief spell midway through the first half but in the space of two minutes Stephen Baxter's shot was touched away by Kevin McKeown and midfielder Philip Mitchell's header landed on the roof of the net.
Distillery played with great spirit but Crusaders must be kicking themselves for the chances they threw away.
Even Roddy Collins, their bustling Dublin striker, was right out of touch and was replaced late on by Glenn Hunter who didn't really have time to get into his stride properly.
In a hectic 64th minute spell Collins headed the ball back to midfielder Martin Murray who completely fluffed a header and Gardiner raced in only to blast the ball over.
And in the 72nd minute Distillery keeper Collins pawed the ball away on the goal-line as Gardiner raced in for the kill.
Clearly Crusaders had one of those days in-form teams dread.
They could hardly be as nervous again with their UEFA date on Tuesday week in Geneva looming.
Their best effort of the entire proceedings was a superb save in 75 minutes by keeper Kevin McKeown who brilliantly touched away a searing drive by full back John Drake who had moved on to a Totten free kick.
Back with a bang
BARRY Patton's two goal first half salvo helped sink Coleraine and give Omagh Town their first victory of the season at Ballycastle Road this afternoon.
21 year old Patton, a villain two weeks ago when he was sent off at Portadown, returned from suspension to put this game beyond doubt within 16 minutes.
Coleraine boss Billy Sinclair must have shuddered as he watched his side's dismal performance.
Up until today they have been winning praise for the quality of their football but everything seemed to go wrong this afternoon.
Scottish striker Gary McVie's feeble header in the opening minute seemed to indicate what was to come.
He was well placed but failed to trouble Omagh keeper Declan Devine.
A minute later Paul Dunnion steered the ball through a crowded midfield for Patton to gallop clear and guide the ball past Davy O'Hare.
Coleraine's only other clear cut chance in the first half fell to central defender Stuart McClean.
His header from a Brian Donaghy corner was cleared by defender Eamon Doherty.
Coleraine, like Omagh, were also without a win before this meeting and they failed to get their game together allowing Omagh to capitalise on their hesitancy.
With 16 minutes gone another through ball this time from Stephen Doherty caught the ragged home defence and Patton couldn't believe his luck.
It was deja vu as he breezed in to outwit O'Hare a second time.
Worse was to follow for Coleraine in the 29th minute.
Omagh won a free on the left close to the penalty area and as O'Hare moved to cover Joe Lawless' forward run Lee King simply floated the kick into the net.
Half time Coleraine 0 Omagh Town 3 Mark McWalter forced a brave save from devine in the 65th minute, his stunning 25 yard shot bounced back off the keeper and the Scotsman drove his follow up effort into the side netting.
Omagh lost Lawless after 72 minutes, stretchered off following a challenge by McClean.
In the closing stages McVie and substitute Paul Gaston had chances for a consolation strike.
But this was not to be Coleraine's day and in injury time striker McWalter, who had earlier been cautioned for dissent, was sent off following a challenge on keeper Devine.
Ten men too good for Glens
PORTS ROLL ON
IT TAKES more than a sending-off to halt the Portadown juggernaut these days.
Reduced to ten men after the early dismissal of Tony Gorman Ports kept their shape — and their 100 pc record in a typical blood and thunder TNT Gold Cup tie at the Oval today.
It was Gregg Davidson who grabbed the winner for Ports 18 minutes from the end and, it must be said, against the run of play.
Glentoran had their chances — good ones — but didn't convert them and now face a battle to make the quarter finals; Portadown's disciplined display today should be enough for them.
They took the lead courtesy of Trevor Smith's sixth goal of the season but were pegged back by an equaliser from Johnny Jameson who failed to appear for the second half.
Matches between these two sides are traditionally ‘needle’ affairs and in this respect today's game didn't disappoint, especially in the first half.
Within three minutes Glentoran's Gary Hillis was booked for dissent; Joey Cunningham of Portadown followed him into the book for a foul on Michael Smyth two minutes later.
But the game really boiled over with Gorman's dismissal on 18 minutes.
It started off harmlessly enough with the Portadown player challenging Glentoran midfielder Jim McCloskey for the ball.
However, it developed into a full scale fracas involving a dozen players from either side.
Fists were thrown and for a while things began to get very ugly.
Common sense prevailed in the end and when tempers cooled referee John Ferry consulted his linesmen.
Gorman was singled out as the culprit who started it all and was promptly dispatched to the changing rooms.
It didn't end there; Gregg Davidson, still obviously frustrated by that incident upended McCloskey in midfield and he too entered the referee's notebook.
As for the football in that opening 45 minutes, it was good in places — committed stuff all round.
The match really came to life when Smith put the visitors ahead five minutes before the scheduled break.
Collided
Ports skipper Brian Strain made a fine run into enemy territory before squaring the ball to the Scottish striker who buried it past John Grace from 16 yards.
It was a fine effort to give Ports the lead but they'll be disappointed at conceding an equaliser a few minutes later.
Candlish's cross from the left seemed safe for Keenan — but he collided with Davidson and the ball spun towards the net.
Alfie Stewart cleared it off the line, but only into the path of Johnny Jameson who steered it home from an acute angle.
The turn of fortune lifted Glentoran, and they nearly scored again in first half injury time when Candlish unleashed a sizzling drive but this time Keenan responded with a terrific save.
Jameson, injured earlier, was replaced by substitute Gary McCartney before the half time whistle blew — his first appearance of the season.
Half time: Glentoran 1 Portadown 3
Macartney had a couple of early sniffs at goal but really found his feet with a fine shot which brought an equally fine save from Keenan.
And Glentoran went even closer when Gary Smyth hit the inside of the post after Keenan had fumbled a Hillis cross.
Portadown however remained dangerous and it took a superb block from Michael Smyth to deny Cunningham after brilliant work from Martin Russell on the left.
Smyth had earlier been booked for a nasty tackle on Cunningham.
Philip Major rescued Ports at the other end with a neat challenge on Macartney — but minutes later Cunningham put the visitors ahead.
A neat passage of midfield play involving Russell, Cunningham and Tony Shepherd end with Davidson making an incisive run; as Glens defenders waited for a pass the little full-back suddenly let fly with his right foot, squeezing the ball past Grace.
He flung off his shirt in delight — obviously enjoying his first goal of the season.
Glentoran's Colin Ramirez, a replacement for Damien Kelly gave his side hope with an excellent drive near the end but once again Keenan was equal to it.
Rovers strike back
TRANMERE substitutes John Kenworthy and Ian Muir earned the points after Notts County had taken a 46th minute lead.
Notts went ahead when Mike Simpson volleyed home after a long throw-in.
John Aldridge grabbed his first goal of the season six minutes later, rounding keeper Steve Cherry after collecting a cross by Tony Thomas.
Tranmere's Tony Thomas was booked in the 81st minute for a foul on Andy Legg and went off two minutes later with a leg injury.
John Kenworthy replaced him and in the 86th minute netted with an angled shot.
Then in the 89th minute Ian Muir, who had replaced Kenny Irons in the 65th minute, combined well with Chris Malkin and volleyed home superbly past Cherry in the 89th minute.
Six-hit Glenavon bank £1,000 prize A 20 yards volleyed goal by Trevor McMullan in the 88th minute against Bangor at Clandeboye Road today earned Glenavon the £1,000
TNT prize for the first team to reach ten goals in the competition.
It was a substitute act which brought the lolly.
Trevor Williamson, an 82nd minute replacement for Stephen McBride, floated in a corner which was knocked down and McMullan, who had come on in the 64th, hammered it into the net.
That £1,000 was in the Mourneview bag.
The scheme, which also includes £60 per goal, was only introduced this season and it certainly has proved a success.
More goals have been scored than in many previous seasons at this stage.
‘I must ask questions about my goalkeeper,’ said Bangor manager Nigel Best, when he returned disappointed from that 2-1 mid-week European Cup Winners Cup defeat by Apoel of Nicosia.
And he can repeat them tonight after his side lost 6-1 to Glenavon in a remarkable game with a dramatic finale.
For it was a mistake by the giant Eachus which transformed the game, gave Glenavon the breakthrough they needed and an upsurge in confidence to sweep to a victory they had wrapped up by half time.
Bangor led 1-0 with a ninth minute goal from Johnny Magee after fullback Mickey McKeown failed to clear.
It was the culmination of concentrated Bangor attacking with Mark Glendinning heading over and a Magee shot blocked.
The scene looked set for another Bangor triumph, to continue their unbeaten run in domestic football.
And then it all went so wrong.
Eachus, challenged by Stephen McBride, palmed out Raymond McCoy's left wing cross when he could possibly have grasped it.
Waiting to pounce was Nigel Quigley with a header into the net.
Glenavon, who had won two and lost two of their previous matches, had succeeded in taking control and they did so with a vengeance.
Geoff Ferris gained possession, took the ball round the keeper but Raymond Hill succeeded in scooping his low drive off the line.
When a penalty was awarded after 37 minutes, Tony Canning impeding Ferris and Glenn Ferguson, given the job of marking John O'Connor, scored from the penalty spot.
But the piece de resistance had yet to come.
With four minutes remaining until half time McCoy, so often a match-winner and making his second appearance after a prolonged lay-off with a groin injury, darted down the left flank, crossed and Ferris with a hurtling header of power beat the hapless Eachus.
You will not see a goal of more classical quality and execution than this one.
More problems for Eachus in the 56th minute.
He attempted to dribble a Stephen Brown back-pass from out of his goal area but the ball broke for Ferris who chipped it to the far post where the lurking McBride made it four with a diving header.
Glenavon had not finished yet.
In the 84th minute Ferguson out on the right picked up a pass, took two strides forward and with a ferociously hit shot found the target.
Glenavon now had six minutes left to get that tenth goal.
Was it too brief a time?
It wasn't — and McMullan saw to that.
Mixu proves that he's a ‘big name’
ABERDEEN scored their first victory at Parkhead in three seasons when a Mixu Paatelainen goal in the second half gained them the spoils today.
It was a deserved success in the end for the Dons who showed plenty of spirit and organisation as they subdued Celtic's vigorous style.
Paatelainen had only been introduced as a substitute but he certainly made his presence felt in no uncertain manner with his 56th minute strike.
The Dons had enjoyed the better of the early exchanges with Scott Booth in particularly lively form.
In five minutes he showed his menace with a sharp turn which left Mike Galloway standing.
Duncan Shearer just failed to get on the end of the youngster's cross.
Celtic did have the ball in the net in ten minutes, but Frank McAvennie was clearly offside when he pounced to beat Theo Smelders from eight yards.
Moments later the visitors suffered a setback when Lee Richardson limped off — and it was then that Paatelainen made his important entrance to the fray.
In 14 minutes Alex McLeish rose above the Parkhead defence to head Robert Connor's cross inches over the bar.
But Celtic gradually forced their way into the match with both Charlie Nicholas and McAvennie going close within the space of three minutes.
McAvennie was particularly unlucky to see his angled shot sneak inches wide of the post after he had done the hard work by walking the ball round Smelders.
However, defences finished the half on top and the scoreline remained blank.
But Aberdeen's persistence was eventually rewarded with Paatelainen's golden strike that provided a welcome victory.
Hateley saves Rangers' blushes
LATE SHOW RANGERS suffered a shock defeat at this venue early last season and a repeat looked on the cards as the Ibrox side struggled to find any rhythm after their extra-time exertions against Aberdeen in midweek.
Dundee started the day at the foot of the Premier League but looked the superior side as the Glasgow club failed to deal with even the simplest cross into the box.
As early as the fifth minute Ally Maxwell completely missed a Billy Dodds high ball and only Steven Pressley's headed clearance prevented Morten Weighorst giving the home side the lead.
Dundee did deservedly edge in front in the 12th minute when Gary McKeown curled in a cross from the right and defender Gary Paterson was allowed to chest the ball down before hooking it high into the net.
Rangers mid-field was particularly ineffectual with their best chance of the first period coming from a Jim Duffy mistake which allowed Duncan Ferguson in.
Britain's costliest player rounded the keeper but Duffy got back to block the former Dundee United man's acute angled effort.
In fact, better finishing from the Den's Park outfit would have increased Rangers' embarrassment but they were let of the hook on a number of occasions, particularly by Dodds.
Either side of the interval the tiny striker had chances to convert simple headers but pushed one wide of the post and saw Maxwell claw the other over the bar.
Ian Durrant took over from an out-of-touch Peter Huistra at the interval and Rangers certainly produced a higher work rate in the second period.
Trevor Steven went close with a volley from the edge of the box while Dusan Vrto kicked an Ian Ferguson shot off the line.
Rangers piled on the pressure in the last 15 minutes and an instinctive Mathers save kept out Mark Hateley but the big Rangers frontman had the final say after Dundee had been reduced to ten men.
Paul Ritchie was sent off for his second bookable offence following a lunging challenge on Richard Gough and the visitors quickly pressed home their numerical advantage.
With just five minutes remaining Mathers tipped a Ferguson shot on to the post and Hateley bundled in the rebound from close range.
Then the triple champions almost snatched a dramatic winner in injury time as Robertson hammered in a powerful shot which Mathers spectacularly kicked over the bar.
Kilmore Rec 4 Ballycastle 3
KILMORE snatched a dramatic victory in the final minute of extra time when Gorman scored from the penalty spot after a hand ball incident.
It was the visitors who went into an early lead when Plumb took advantage of a defensive error to slip the ball past Gribben in the 20th minute.
Fifteen minutes later centre forward Quigg was left free to hammer the ball home from 20 yards.
Half-time: Kilmore 0, Ballycastle 2
Ballycastle weathered the early pressure from the home side during which Lynas hit the post before Kilmore introduced their two subs who immediately brought more life into a listless home side.
From a Bazil cross Lynas rose at the back post to head into the bottom corner of the net with eight minutes to go.
Just before the end Trainer slid in an equalizer to send the game into extra time.
It was Trainer himself who deftly headed in a right wing free kick at the start of the second period, but Ballycastle came back to equalise through Woods with two minutes to go before Gorman's winner settled an exciting tie.
Dungannon 36 Highfield 6
DUNGANNON without the services of Paddy Johns and Paddy Cleary hosted Highfield in their annual friendly at Stevenson Park and ran-out convincing winners.
Andrew Gallagher on the right wing, beat two tackles and scored in the first five minutes of the game, following a neat Jeremy Hastings pick-up.
Blair missed the conversion.
Dungannon nearly increased their lead when Jonathon Hastings charged down a Highfield kick in midfield.
Blair was wide by the narrowest of margins with three well-struck penalties before Gallagher went over for his second try following a quick transfer right from Johnny Hastings.
Early in the second Donagh O'Mahony cut the deficit with a fine penalty from nearly half way.
The Dungannon scrum-half Blair was forced to retire with a leg injury and Gallagher came in from the wing to deputise in his regular position.
Highfield's New Zealand lock forward David Mayhew created problems for Dungannon in the line-out.
Keith McGarry, last year's leading point scorer in Ulster increased Dungannon's lead to 12 points before prop David Miller surged over for a try after good work from Jeremy Hastings near the Highfield line.
Another try quickly followed with captain Hugh McCaughey crossing over McGarry converting both.
Highfield came back strongly and should have scored in front of the posts but lost possession their hooker was held up on the line, their only reward was a penalty from their captain Terry Dillon.
At the other end Tyrone Howe who saw very little of the ball during the match went over for a try in the left corner, following a fine break from Andrew Gallagher.
DUNGANNON — S McDowell; A Gallagher, D Lewis, W Nelson, T Howe; K McGarry, A Blair; D Millar, H McCaughey, G Leslie, W Dunne, J Davidson, J Boyd, Jeremy Hastings, Johnny Hastings.
HIGHFIELD — D McCarthy; P Hally, T Dillon (capt), D O'Mahony, N Boland; S O'Meara, E McCarthy; P Harty, V Nelson, C Cadagon, D Mayhew, E Kilbane, P Macdonald, C McCarthy, E O'Callaghan.
Referee — A Watson (Collegians)
Armoy Utd 1 Dundela 4
THREE goals in extra time sealed Dundela's path into the second round.
But the scoreline gives a false impression as United gave as good as they got.
Falling behind to a 30th minute goal from Doey, Armoy got back on level terms when Holmes scored a superb goal in the 50th minute.
With both sides level at normal time the visitors went in front five minutes into the extra period when Hanvey scored from the spot after a controversial decision by the man in the middle.
Dundela stretched their lead with further goals from Wilson and Doey.
Paul immaculate in ‘Saville-row’ show
PAUL Peschisllibo, Birmingham City's Canadian International striker, demonstrated why he is currently a player attracting considerable attention with a brilliant display of attacking football which destroyed the multi-million Derby side.
Peschisllibo ravaged Derby's defence in an exhilarating first half when Birmingham rocketed into a three goal lead.
Andy Saville, a bargain £150,000 buy from Hartlepool last season, was the player to prosper from Peschisllibo's penetrative play.
The Derby defence had no answer to the pulsating attacking moves made by Birmingham and Saville threatened on several occasions to open his account with Derbys defence in total disarray.
Saville was given a lot of space and had a field day.
In the 28th minute he collected a Peschsllibo pass to turn and score with a low shot into the far corner of the net.
Skipper John Frain got into the act in the 37th minute when he made a charge through Derby's rear guard to convert Dave Smyth's pass on the run.
Birmingham were now in complete control and put the icing on the cake four minutes before the interval when on loan Karl Shutt put over a cross which Saville, completely unmarked, headed into the root of the net.
In the second period Birmingham eased up but Derby were still unable to make any impact as the Blues maintained a strong grip on the proceedings.
Collegians 15 Instonians 28
THERE was no quarter given at Deramore Park where Instonians justified their victory although the margin was rather flattering against Collegians.
There was plenty of open rugby but with Instonians gaining the better of the forward encounters especially in the loose, their three-quarters had the better opportunities to move the ball.
In consequence to this, they ran in four tries to their opponents' two, but the Shane Park side could well have found a real prospect in winger Graeme McCluskey.
The former Portadown and Ulster junior has a tremendous burst of speed and time and again he played havoc with the home defence.
The visitors led 9-3 when Stuart Laing kicked two penalties and dropped a goal while Simon Aldred replied with a penalty and Collegians took the lead when Keith Black took a quick penalty and ran in from his own half for Aldred to convert.
Just before half-time Instonians stretched the home defence and Darren Wady passed inside for McCluskey to score.
Laing added a penalty nine minutes into the second period and then midway through McClusky cut through the defence for another try which Laing converted.
Instonians were then awarded two penalty tries, Laing converting both before Michael Dorrity had the final score of the afternoon with a try for Collegians.
Killyleagh YC 2 Ballyclare Reserves 1
AMATEUR League champions Killyleagh YC earned a place in the second round of the Steele Cup when they defeated B Division side Ballyclare Comrades Reserves 2-1.
YC made a dream start and were two goals up after 10 minutes.
The opening score was a quality goal from Alan Young who chipped keeper Paul McCabe after a superb through ball from John Scott in the 4th minute.
Six minutes later Philip Jennings doubled the lead when he doubled up Scott's through ball.
After Ronnie McCullough had pulled one back in the opening minute of the second half, the Comrades dominated until the finish without being able to find an equaliser.
Indeed Killyleagh's Cahal Hynds and Barry Montgomery both had chances to seal victory after fine work from Man of the Match Colin Murray.
Chimney Corner 0 Bangor Reserves 2
THE CORNER met a strong Bangor Reserves at Alan Park today and, as expected, it was a keenly contested game.
Bangor failed to break the deadlock in the 15th and 26th minutes when Paul Gray and Stephen Hill squandered two good chances.
After the interval Bangor Reserves played with great fluency and not surprisingly Dean Doherty scored from an easy chance in the 50th minute.
Minutes later the Corner almost equalised when Dale Kelly's goal-bound header was pushed over the bar by keeper Mark Gillespie.
Bangor dominated matters in the final stages with Gary McCartney scoring number two in the 70th minute.
Hawick 10 Ballymena 21
BALLYMENA opened their season by making the long trip to the Scottish Borders where they defeated Hawick after leading 13-0 at the interval.
With the wind in their favour Ballymena dominated the first half being encamped for long spells in the Hawick territory.
Two penalties by Derek McAleese put them 6-0 up in as many minutes and five minutes later after a huge McAleese kick had taken play to the corner Davie Tweed won the line out and Johnny Caskey nipped over for the try which McAleese converted.
Ballymena continued to do all the pressing but could not add further to their tally until the break.
Early in the second half Davie Tweed was replaced by Tony McWhirter as the Hawick pack began to win more possession.
However McAleese kicked another penalty for Ballymena and made the running for an unconverted try by Paul McBride before Hawick staged a late recovery.
Fullback Gregor Sharp kicked a penalty for the home side and converted a gift try scored by winger Keith Suddon to leave a final scoreline which hardly reflected Ballymena's overall superiority.
Ballnahinch 9 North 16
BALLYNAHINCH'S pack dominated the opening exchanges and made their intentions known when they won the first scrum against the head.
North were pinned in their own half for practically all of the opening quarter with 'Hinch full back John Peake finding some good touches.
After 20 minutes Stephen Dyer, the North outhalf, missed the first scoring opportunities with a couple of penalty misses.
But he found the target just on the half-hour to edge his side into the lead.
Two minutes later Philip Gregg equalised with a penalty.
Dyer was almost over for a try but put a foot in touch at the corner flag spoiled the effort.
Davy Marrs stretched North's lead with a try a minute before half time following a good three-quarter line movement.
Three minutes into the second half Gregg had his second penalty and two minutes later gave 'Hinch the lead with his third kick.
John Porte, the hinch general at the base of the scrum, saved a certain try when he tackled the North full back Christie in full flow.
Christie took over the kicking duties and restored North's lead with a penalty.
Then winger Crawford Dobbin ran half the length of the pitch for the final score at the corner flag.
Hinch lost Ray McCavery on 33 minutes with a jaw injury, but North ran-out deserved victors.
Shorts 0 Dromara Village 4
FIVE minutes into the game Dromara picked up a loose ball and Finlay opened the score from ten yards out.
Shorts returned the pressure and Beck's drive went high over the net.
Continued pressure by the home side gave Shorts numerous corners but they failed to convert.
Half-time: Shorts 0, Dromara Village 1.
The second half was played at a faster pace and in the 65th minute Dromara went further ahead with a well taken goal by Johnstone following a fierce attack on the home goal.
Dromara broke away and Kearney rammed in No.3 followed by No.4 from Roy McVeigh to put the match beyond Shorts' reach.
Newry Town Res 0 Glenavon Res 4
FIRST excitement came when Paul Prentice brought off a superb save from Newry's Nigel Rees.
Then keeper Peter Turtle stopped a John Smyth pile-driver, but made a quick recovery to grab the ball as it was trickling over the line.
Centre-forward Kieran Feehan was given a picture pass by Liam Smyth who had only Turtle to beat but unaccountably went wide.
Mark Porter gave the visitors the lead in 42 minutes when he ran onto a splendid cross from Liam Smyth.
Half-time: Newry Town Res 0, Glenavon Reserves 1.
Turtle tipped over the bar from Andy Coulter whose shot was going in following a great cross from Garth McIlwain.
The Newry keeper parried Liam Smyth's angled drive but sub Victor Welch moved sharply in to score in 70 minutes.
Three minutes later at a Newry defensive lapse saw Porter drive home from four yards.
A Dessie Edgar corner was neatly side-footed home in 79 minutes by Victor Welch who had just come on as a sub.
Britain land gold medal
GREAT Britain won their first gold medal of the world rowing championships today through lightweight coxless four, Alison Brownless, Jane Hall, Annamarie Dryden and Tonia Williams.
It meant the quartet went one better at Roudnice in the Czech Republic than in the last championships, when they won silver behind Australia.
But this time the British four were technically superb, and had the Australians trailing in fourth place.
Today Canada took the silver, and the United States the bronze medal.
The slight tail wind provided ideal conditions for lightweights as stroke Williams confirmed afterwards.
‘We knew we had to go off fairly fast,’ she said.
‘The Americans always have a tendency to bolt off the blocks, and we had to go with them.
In fact we did our best start of the week.’
At 500 metres Britain were a third-of-a-second down on the Americans, but at halfway began to move ahead, and with 500m to go had opened up clear water.
Williams, 27, a Nottingham-based architect, confirmed that the race had gone entirely to plan.
‘A lot of crews can try and win outright, but we knew we had the boat speed to move it through,’ she said.
But there was disappointment for Britain with the men's lightweight four of Christopher Bates, Carl Smith, Thomas Kay and Toby Hessian, who were chasing their third successive world gold.
Going off the start at a blistering 51 strokes-a-minute, they sat in the field until the 1500m mark where they were expected to make their challenge.
The rate went back up as expected, but the British crew could make no impression, trailing home in fifth as the United States took the gold.
Bangor 34 Banbridge 6
IN summer-like conditions Bangor and Banbridge provided plenty of entertainment for a good crowd at Upritchard Park with the home side running out comfortable winners.
Good work by Martin Strutt supported by Stephen McKinty led to a scrum on the Banbridge line and when they failed to clear Michael Long made good ground down the right touch line before slipping the ball inside to full back Mark Tinman who scored at the corner after seven minutes.
Strutt was unsuccessful with the conversion attempt but kicked a 25-metre penalty goal five minutes later to put Bangor eight points ahead.
Former Ireland schools star Kieran Dawson was enjoying a most impressive Bangor debut and he capitalised on a break by scrum-half Stephen Matchett to power over for a try in the 23rd minute which gave Bangor a comfortable 13-0 lead.
Banbridge started the second half in more determined mood and forced Bangor back and the home side were rattled by some excellent play by the visitors.
A snap drop goal by out-half Richard Chambers opened their account but Bangor restored their advantage with a good try by Don Whittle after McKinty had made initial ground and Strutt made the score 20 points to three with a conversion.
Chambers added a penalty goal for Banbridge after 15 minutes but Bangor were now well in control and Jeffrey McMaster almost got his name on the score sheet following a run down the left wing but he was stopped short and hooker Darryl Flanagan was up quickly for the try which Strutt converted.
Bangor's forward power was evident but Banbridge defended well and their defence was not breached again until the 37th minute when McKinty again made the initial surge for Dawson to cross for his second try of the game.
Strutt's conversion gave Bangor a 34-6 victory.
Ards 9 Portadown 10
THERE was much early enthusiasm from both sides in this senior friendly at Hamilton Park with visitors Portadown just hanging on for a narrow victory.
Ards fell behind in the first five minutes when uncertain defence allowed left wing Bell in for a try which was converted from the touchline by Barnes.
The remainder of the half was evenly contested.
Barnes added a further penalty to give Portadown a comfortable 10-0 lead at half-time.
Ards attacked from the start of the second half and pulled back the arrears with a well-judged penalty from Gareth Fry.
Portadown came more into the game and their backs impressed with some with some sharp running and passing, but the Ards tackling was sound.
Ards kept going forward at every opportunity and Fry kicked further two penalties in a storming finish but failed to get the deciding winning score.
Dalglish delighted
KENNY Dalglish spoke today about the waiting game he played in the signing of Paul Warhurst from Sheffield Wednesday.
Although the £2.7 million deal still has to be formalised, the Blackburn manager said: ‘We are delighted.
When the opportunity came up again we didn't hesitate.’
Dalglish is enjoying a golfing break in Spain and has left deal in the hands of assistant Ray Harford.
But he revealed today he'd never given up hope of signing the defender turned striker despite the breakdown of the original negotiations two months ago.
‘At this stage of the season many managers start to reassess what they have got.
Trevor Francis had a change of mind and we have benefited from it.
He called us to say Paul was available and asked if we were still interested the answer was yes,’ explained Dalglish.
‘We kept everything quiet until it had all been confirmed and there was no risk of a repeat of what happened last time.’
Armagh 18 Lisburn 20
AFTER an early penalty setback, Armagh responded when they scored a tremendous try through Tim Scott after an initial decisive break by left-winger Alex Graham.
A Davie Nicholson penalty moments later put Armagh further in front, 8-3.
But junior side Lisburn levelled with a superb backline move rounded off by a Brian Dale try which was splendidly converted by Jeff Alderdice.
The same player struck a penalty moments later to put the visitors 13-8 in front, but a Davie Nicholson's try for Armagh then tied up the scores at 13-13 at half-time.
But just after the interval Davie Preece put the visitors ahead with a well-taken try with Alderdice converted to make the score 20-13 in Lisburn's favour.
Alex Graham brought Armagh back into the match at 20-18 with a try in the corner after a clever kick ahead by James Scott.
The conversion was missed and Armagh's chance of a share of the spoils was lost.
Adams, Clough take it easy
GRAHAM Taylor was down to the bare bones today when only 14 of his England squad took part in his first Bisham training session before next week's critical World Cup clash against Poland.
Tony Adams and Nigel Clough were added to the contingent of players resting minor knocks.
But an FA spokesman said: ‘Graham is not worried because he feels that if the game was being played at Wembley today, they would all be fit enough to be available for selection.’
The biggest worry for Taylor will be first choice goalkeeper Chris Woods, who also missed yesterday's exercises at Lilleshall with a groin strain.
Speculation
His continued absence increases speculation that Arsenal's David Seaman will step out of his shadow for the first time in 18 months against the Poles next week.
Manchester United pair Gary Pallister and Paul Ince took the opportunity to rest sore backs, while Paul Merson and Andy Sinton were also missing.
But the rest of the England squad looked bright and enthusiastic as they were put through their paces by a manager who knows his future rests on victory against the Poles.
The Under-21 squad, which plays at Millwall next Tuesday, is even more shorthanded after the withdrawals of Oldham goalkeeper Paul Gerrard, Newcastle's Lee Clark and Bristol Rovers' Marcus Stewart.
It leaves manager Lawrie McMenemy with just 16 players but he has so far resisted calling anybody off the standby list.
Wrappers off for a super festive show
THE Thompson Christmas show gets underway today and runs right through till Thursday.
There will of course be refreshments for all callers and the range of merchandise will be the most comprehensive available.
Trevor Thompson says they are aiming to attract a vast range of customers — from charities to post offices.
Business cards on which company information can be added are a growing aspect of the Ravenhill Business Park operation.
Ideas
T&A Thompson can provide almost everything that a customer suggests and is receptive to new ideas at all times, Mr Thompson said.
The firm will arrange for a customer to have their particular message printed on specially prepared cards.
The cards show a strong emphasis on quality with many products still being finished by hand, giving them special appeal.
Cute
‘Some people like the traditional card, others choose something cute, so we always carry a vast range of cards,’ Mr Thompson said.
‘Greeting cards are like fashion…they change all the time, and the secret is to keep in touch with the market.
‘The quality of cards has changed, particularly over the last 10 years and publishers now spend a lot of time trying to get the perfect finish, and indeed just the right verse for a particular occasion,’ he added.
Thompsons also stock a large range of gift wrap and stationery to cover most businesses, and right now they are showing off the most unusual range of candles which are just right for that special occasion.
Goran counts great ‘Cost-a’
GORAN Ivanisevic became the latest big-name casualty of the US Open at Flushing Meadow when the 11th seeded Croatian lost to Spaniard Carlos Costa.
‘I just missed everything,’ moaned Ivanisevic, who crashed 6-3, 7-6, 7-6 to a clay court specialist who also beat him at the French Open this year.
‘I didn't look for my chances.
I didn't come in.
I didn't do anything.
Just relied on my serve and that was not working.’
He was the seventh seed in the men's championship to go out in the first two rounds, a record for early exits at the tournament.
Top-seed Jim Courier and fourth-ranked Boris Becker managed to avoid the plague which has claimed so many of their rivals, including two-time defending champion Stefan Edberg.
Courier had a light workout against 315th-ranked qualifier Michael Joyce, rolling to a 6-1, 6-2, 6-2 victory in the opening stadium court match on a hot and humid day.
Becker was back in his boom-boom form less than 24 hours after surviving a five-set first-round match as he cruised to a 6-2, 6-2, 6-4 win over Jakob Hlasek, of Switzerland, in one hour and 47 minutes.
But the player who most resembled the Becker of old was 31st-ranked Costa.
He came back from 0-5 down in the third-set tie-breaker and reached match point at 6-5 with a fully-extended diving volley right out of the Becker Wimbledon highlight films.
It brought a huge ovation from the packed grandstand crowd, and Costa said later: ‘I feel great.
I didn't expect this match.’
High riding Reid
‘IT'S NOT the number of winners I am after this year.
It's the big race success which attracts me.’
Dromore jockey John Reid who is having his best ever season was in a suitably bullish mood when I spoke to him about the remainder of the 1993 Flat racing year which has seen him head inexorably towards 100 winners for the first time in his career.
Reid has had a memorable season and as the big autumn events loom up he must be relishing a crack at races like the Prix de l'arc de Triomphe and the Champion Stakes.
He has already sampled success at the highest level and after winning the Celebration Mile at Goodwood last Saturday on Swing Low he has his eyes firmly focused on more Group One events.
Yet despite his undoubted success Reid has never really got past the stage of being regarded as a ‘nearly man’ a jockey who never quite clicked with the racing public.
It's amazing when you think of his record but true nonetheless and Reid of the rapid fire Ulster wit, is not the thin skinned type who will tell you you're talking nonsense.
‘I just don't understand it,’ he laughed, when we chatted about a career which has been chequered to say the least.
‘Maybe people don't like my face.
You know when I talk to friends they tell me that despite all my big race wins I have still been virtually ignored by the public who seem unaware most of the time that I am around.
Funny world…
‘Yet I have been in the game for two decades, I've had a number big race successes and I was even stable jockey for Vincent O'Brien for three years.
As Margaret Thatcher said ‘It's a funny old world, isn't it’.
Reid's star began to rise with a vengeance last year when he became associated with the stable of Peter Chapple-Hyam who provided him with the horse every jockey wants to have — a Derby winner.
‘I still regard my win in last year's Derby on Dr Devious as the greatest, thrill of my racing career,’ he told me.
‘The feeling was indescribable and nowadays when things don't quite go as planned I often sit back and think of other jockeys who never had a Derby win and who, for the remainder of their careers, will be chasing this elusive rainbow.
‘I can at least say that I have been there and I count myself one of the lucky ones.’
Reid almost didn't have the mount on Dr Devious for the maestro Lester Piggott, was hovering in the background and might have pushed Reid to one side.
Lester had been booked by Chapple-Hyam to ride Rodrigo de Triano in the Derby after the latter's memorable success in the 2,000 Guineas which had given Lester his 30th English classic win.
However, there had always been a doubt as to whether or not Rodrigo could stay the mile and a half at Epsom.
Piggott realised his chance was minimal and Reid could be forgiven that Lester might wish to switch to Dr. Devious at the last minute.
The morning before the big race Lester was cantering alongside Reid and quietly remarked: ‘Yours is going well.’
Reid felt the first spasm of panic sweeping over him for he knew what Lester was after but Reid just grunted back at Piggott which provided no encouragement at all and he must have been one of the most relieved jockeys in the race to see the starting stalls open for even in the parade beforehand he still had visions of Lester taking over.
‘I remember earlier in my career when I rode Ile de Bourbon in the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes I was almost taken off the mount because Lester was hovering around,’ he told me.
‘I had ridden Ile de Bourbon for trainer Fulke Johnson Houghton in all of his home gallops and also won on the colt in the King Edward VII stakes at Royal Ascot but when Piggott asked me had the horse made any improvement from then and before the big King George race I had to tell him that I was unaware of it just in case he might want to take over.
Padding
The Guv'nor told me to ride Ile de Bourbon in the big race telling me that I knew what he could do and that win was the biggest of my career so far but I'll always remember Lester who had finished nearly last padding disconsolately into the weighing room and asking me ‘Did you know your horse had improved so much’.
‘I told him I did and he gave me a look which suggested that I shouldn't have kept it from him!’
Since that day Reid has scored in many major races including the Arc which he took on Tony Binn in 1988 and the Irish Derby which he won on Sir Harry Lewis in 1987.
But he regards the connection with Peter Chapple-Hyam as the best move he ever made.
‘Peter has provided the ammunition and this year we have had a wonderful run with our two-year-olds.
Turtle Island who won at Royal Ascot, Leopardstown and York has done most so far but at this point in time I couldn't make up my mind between Turtle Island and my other two big race winners, State Performer and Stonehatch.
‘There are exciting days ahead as the two-year-old classic races loom in the next few months and we could have something hot for next season.’
Debut
Indeed, another highly-rated two-year-old from the Chapple-Hyam emerged on Thursday when Balanchine made a winning debut and earned a 25-1 quote for next year's 1000 Guineas.
Reid never had an anxious moment on the Storm Bird filly which like the others, is owned by Robert Sangster.
Reid also had praise for trainer Richard Hannon for whom he rode Swing Low last Saturday.
‘Richard has also given me many opportunities and without him and Peter my life as a freelance jockey would be made just that little bit more difficult.’
No ‘Ulster’ dates yet
IRISH League secretary Harry Wallace revealed today that no dates had yet been finalised for the outstanding Ulster Cup ties Linfield v Ballymena Utd and Bangor v Ballyclare Comrades.
‘There has been an added complication with the Tbilisi expulsion from the European Champions Cup and we have to await the outcome of the appeal if any’ he said.
He has been examining a number of options including staging both on Tuesday September 21.
By next week however the picture should be much clearer.
With Irish League clubs almost certain to be given preliminary round status in next year's European competitions a new structure will be needed for Ulster domestic football for the start of next season.
League officials are to take this on board and make a thorough examination.
There are no simple solutions unless one of these competitions is abandoned.
Clubs may be asked to come forward with their ideas.
The current formula for the opening tournament cannot continue with preliminary games staged in August.
Hugh's marathon paddle aids school
IT may be called ‘the short sea route’ from Scotland to Ireland, but for Ballygalley man Hugh Montgomery the trip from Cairnryan to Larne presents a huge challenge.
Today saw the culmination of months of hard training as Hugh slipped his canoe into the waters of Lough Ryan for the solo trip back to his home town.
But for Hugh, the challenge is not only to paddle across the North Channel, but also to raise money for Roddensvale Special Care School in Larne.
Canoeing
‘I've been canoeing off and on for about ten years, but this is my first venture on the open sea,’ he said.
‘I'd thought about it for some time, and decided to give it a go.’
Hugh was already committed to the marathon trip when he heard that the special care school had been burgled and had lost a vital computer and software, which is crucial in helping the children's development 
Safety boat
‘Since I had all the arrangements made for the trip, I thought it would be a good opportunity to get some sponsorship to help replace the missing equipment.’
Hugh will be accompanied by a 30-foot safety boat, and he is making the journey, which he estimates will take him about ten hours, in a standard sea kayak, and he is due in around 4.30 this afternoon.
Caution key for Bingham!
NORTHERN Ireland manager Billy Bingham is unlikely to make any widespread changes in his team which meets Latvia in Wednesday's World Cup Group Three qualifying tie at Windsor Park (8pm).
Caution will be the name of the game as he attempts to collect more points and take another step towards fulfilling his ambition of winning all remaining fixtures before the December retirement.
With Alan McDonald (Queen's Park Rangers) declared fit after some doubt over an Achilles tendon injury the defensive set up should remain the same.
Indeed, there won't be much alteration from the side which triumphed so convincingly in Lithuania and Latvia although we could perhaps see the return of Nottingham Forest winger Kingsley Black at some stage.
‘He has been playing on the right side and doing very well,’ said Bingham who has always been a Black admirer.
‘He has now got a new incentive at Forest where there have been so many changes.’
Black could operate on the right for there is no challenge now from Robbie Dennison (Wolverhampton Wanderers) who did not sign his new contract until earlier this week and has not played a first team game this season — missing out also on the club's Scandinavian tour.
Now he is intent on winning back that international place.
Black has not played since the 3-1 defeat by Spain in Seville last April and was an unused substitute in the two Baltic end of the season fixtures.
Who would be dropped, if anybody, for Michael O'Neill (Hibernian) has also been producing consistent form since his transfer from Dundee Utd.
He is the man in possession.
It is a selection dilemma however with which Bingham is happy to cope.
At last he has players challenging for virtually every position.
Meanwhile Irish FA secretary David Bowen announced today they were extending their double match ticket offer to the public until Wednesday — by a briefs for the Latvia game and be assured of getting the same number for the November clash with the Republic.
‘The scheme has been a great success — so much so we have decided to continue it,’ he said.
‘Anyone who comes to our office at Windsor Avenue between now and Wednesday will be able to register to buy tickets for the Republic match’ he said.
This scheme will be used in future for it provides an opportunity for the genuine fan who attends games against less glamorous opposition not to lose out in the real crowd pullers.
PLANS have been announced by World Cup USA to reunite Jose Carreres, Placido Domingo and Luciano Pavarotti at the Dodger Stadium, Los Angeles — on the eve of next year's World Cup final.
The event has been named ‘Encore — The Three Tenors’ and will be a repeat of the memorable live performance in Rome 1990 which captivated the world.
They will be accompanied by the Los Angeles Symphony Orchestra and hundreds of dancers in a spectacle which will set the scene for the greatest soccer occasion in the history of the United States.
Three new coins have been minted, gold five dollar, silver dollar and clad half dollar.
The winning designs were chosen from 1387 entries submitted to the United States Mint.
Shining example of craftsmanship
WHEN the new Irish Cup, presented by Belfast jewellers John H Lunn was unveiled at a reception in Bass Ireland there were gasps of awe — and rightly so (writes Malcolm Brodie).
It is a masterpiece of the silversmith's art — a trophy which will be the envy of the other National Associations.
It was handed over by Peter Lunn, vice chairman of Linfield, in memory of his father John H Lunn, founder of the company, president of Linfield and a member of the Irish FA Council.
As the original trophy, 113 years old and now so wafer thin it can be easily dented, was taken away to be placed in the Ulster Museum, nostalgic thoughts flashed through the mind of many great Cup finals, of glory and tragedy, jubilation and disappointment.
None more so than for four of the oldest surviving players to win Cup medals in the thirties — the Belfast Celtic quartet Sid McIlroy, Norman Kernaghan, Jimmy McAlinden and Harry Walker who gave this appropriate advice to young players — enjoy your football and not make money their God.
Made from sterling silver and standing 30 inches high the cup weighs 325 ozs, has two handles and is topped with a lid on which sits a miniature football.
One side of the trophy is adorned with traditional Celtic motifs and Irish shamrocks and on the other the IFA crest is inscribed with the title ‘Irish Challenge Cup, established 1880.
Presented to the IFA by John H Lunn Ltd, Jewellers in memory of the late John H Lunn 1993’
A silver band with the names of all the previous winners of the Cup since 1880 surrounds the plinth.
Irish FA Senior Club Committee, responsible for running the competition, lucratively sponsored by Bass for seven years, will decide on the safekeeping of the trophy.
It will probably be placed in a vault, brought out on Cup final days and placed in safekeeping by the winning club who will also have to take out special insurance.
‘We are looking at this matter.
Obviously great care has to be taken for it is one of the most valuable trophies in football,’ said Irish FA secretary David Bowen.
Bangor dream dashed
BANGOR chairman Gifford McConkey must have dreamt of seeing a team in yellow shirts and blue shorts coming off the pitch victorious in Europe.
On Wednesday night he did but it wasn't Bangor wearing their usual strip…they are also Apoel Nicosia's colours and it was the Cypriots who squeezed through 3-2 on aggregate.
McConkey had started the day celebrating his retirement as headmaster of Gransha Primary School.
He almost ended it celebrating his club's finest hour.
‘I was very pleased with the way the team performed,’ said McConkey.
‘The team showed great character to take the sting out of the crowd with that first goal.
‘Some of our football was super.
I thought Raymond Hill has scored with that shot in the second half and Tony Canning had a great opportunity as well.’
Hill, Bangor's quiet, consistent midfielder went oh so close to scoring a second for Bangor — a goal which would have put the Seasiders through.
‘I struck it right and was sure it was going in.
The keeper did brilliantly to get to it,’ said Hill.
So Bangor miss out on a windfall that a first round meeting with Paris St Garmain would have brought through television rights and advertising revenue.
McConkey had already negotiated an attractive deal with a German TV company.
Crusaders, and now it seems Linfield, will be in first round action later this month.
And that has given Bangor secretary Freddie Anderson plenty of food for thought.
‘Being realistic, it looks as if Northern Ireland's clubs will always be in the preliminary rounds of the European Cup and the Cup Winners' Cup and you won't draw a big name,’ said Anderson.
‘If you wanted to be sceptical, you could say it would be better to finish second in the league than win it.
That way you would be in the UEFA Cup where there is no preliminary round and at least have a chance of getting a lucrative pay-day against a big club.’
TOTTENHAM Hotspur's assistant manager Steve Perryman will be at Allen Park, Antrim, tomorrow to launch the club's new season of coaching schools.
The sessions involve boys that Spurs want to have a look at and among the 16 taking part tomorrow will be two already signed — Paul McVeigh and Jason Carlisle.
The schools, which cater for boys aged from 11 to 14, have been going for five years now and are organised by Robbie Walker, Tottenham's representative in Northern Ireland.
The shameful episode of a fistful of dollars…
LOLLY AND FOLLY HARD to believe, isn't it?
There seems to be no end to the drama surrounding the fixture Dinamo Tbilisi v Linfield, European Cup preliminary round, 1993.
Firstly we had the ‘zoning’ row that followed the draw, with Linfield protesting about a 6,000-mile round trip to southern Asia.
Then there was the emergency landing in The Ukraine, courtesy of a plane which didn't have any food and manned by a crew who had no money to pay for fuel.
This was followed by a mystery stomach bug which struck down Blues midfielder Ian McCoosh and several directors in Tbilisi — plus virtual house-arrest in the hotel as Georgian security feared for the safety of their Western visitors.
In Belfast the Georgian flight crew were fined for not having proper entry visas — then the Forte Crest stepped in with cheap accommodation on learning Tbilisi could only afford to stay in university halls.
Now the Big Daddy of them all…the astonishing revelation that the Georgians had attempted to bribe Turkish match officials prior to the first leg game.
Today, Linfield are back in Europe pending what is certain to be a fruitless appeal by Dinamo to UEFA on Monday.
The news has prompted a wave of euphoria at Windsor Park and rightly so — it seems Linfield will now pocket an estimated £100,000 from the hitherto unexpected meeting with FC Copenhagen in the next round.
On Wednesday night Linfield were out of the competition, beaten fairly it seemed by an aggregate score of 3-2 and facing a loss of around £15,000 on the failed European venture.
Less than 48 hours later you'd think they'd just won the pools.
The joy is understandable and who would begrudge Linfield this unexpected lifeline?
Another chance
Don't forget that it gives us another chance to make progress in Europe this season; success for Linfield and of course Crusaders may yet lift us away from the bottom of the ladder and give us a chance of avoiding those detested preliminary rounds.
But the joy should be mixed with a tinge of sadness.
What on earth were Tbilisi playing at?
The dramatic events of the last few days might have been more easily understood had the Georgians been playing Milan or Manchester United.
But a part-time outfit from Belfast?
It beggars belief.
I feel sorry for their players; I'm certain they had no idea about what their officials were up to.
It's the players who will suffer because of this, not just this week but for years to come.
Tbilisi were good enough to win this tie on the pitch…everyone who saw them in Belfast on Wednesday knows that.
But if this is what the club resorts to than good riddance to them.
They have sullied the good name of their country; they desperately wanted to make an impression on Europe and they have — in the most unexpected way.
Three cheers to UEFA for taking such swift action — in contrast to the way they dithered with Leeds United and Stuttgart last season.
If you're guilty, you're out and that's the way it should be.
Mr Toroghu, the Turkish referee, deserves a pat on the back for his bravery.
He took the money in Georgia — but presented it to UEFA in Geneva as irrefutable evidence of a bribes scandal which has rocked Europe.
I'm sure Linfield would rather have got to the first round proper by playing football but at least they've played it by the rules and good luck to them against Copenhagen.
Yesterday afternoon's news was greeted with equal enthusiasm in the Danish capital.
FC Copenhagen, who were due to play Tbilisi in the first round proper, have no doubt that Linfield will now be their opponents — in Belfast on Wednesday week.
Manager Benne Johannsen said: ‘We are already making travel arrangements for Belfast.
‘I can't see UEFA overturning their decision.
They do not make decisions like this on the spur of the moment.
The evidence against them appears to be overwhelming.’
Johannsen accompanied Linfield to Tbilisi for the first leg game in Georgia, and like everyone else was unaware of the cash offer to the Turkish officials.
‘It took me completely by surprise,’ he said.
‘Having said that I'm not disappointed that we're set to play Linfield and not Tbilisi.
‘I saw at first hand the problems Linfield had with travel arrangements and communications…give me Belfast every time.’
Chairman David Campbell said: ‘We're still in a state of shock over this development.
‘As far as we were concerned Tblisi had won the tie fair and square.
‘The idea of them trying to bribe the Turkish officials is nothing short of astonishing.’
Manager Trevor Anderson added: ‘I've played all over Europe and have never come across this sort of thing before.
‘I suppose we should be flattered that Dinamo Tbilisi felt they needed a little help to get past us.
Unsavoury
‘It's an unsavoury business but anyone involved in this sort of corruption deserves everything they get.’
The first inkling that something was amiss came on Wednesday, when Linfield were requested by UEFA to organise flights for Tbilisi officials to Geneva.
The Blues suspected the Georgians would be carpeted for their haphazard arranging of the first leg tie; the Windsor Park club had already complained to UEFA about this.
But Linfield had no idea that Dinamo were being investigated for suspected bribery.
Secretary Derek Brooks said: ‘We arranged flights for club president Marab Jordania and Georgian FA president Nodar Akhalkatsi; they flew to Geneva while the rest of the party took a chartered flight to Georgia.
‘There was no inkling that a bribery scandal was about to unfold; we certainly didn't instigate it.’
A UEFA spokesman explained: ‘The referee presented his match report which stated that money had been offered to both him and his officials.
‘He presented this as evidence at our investigation on Thursday and the action we took was as a direct consequence.’
This is a tale that will run and run; it will be interesting to see what evidence, if any, the Georgians come up with.
But there is no doubt that, as an episode in Linfield's European history this has been the most dramatic of the lot.
What can you say about a club which apparently could not afford to stay in hotel accommodation but had no problem finding 5,000 dollars to slip into a referee's back pocket?
The phrase ‘money talks’ obviously hadn't reached the former communist country.
It has now.
The story that shook Europe…from later editions of yesterday's Belfast Telegraph
Floodlit games
FLOODLIT midweek hockey will become a prominent feature of the Renault Senior League season for the first time this season.
The enforced move is a response to the fact that, otherwise, teams would be depleted of their Irish internationals during Terry Gregg's weekend training sessions.
Portadown and Pegasus will be most heavily involved with a total of seven such fixtures scheduled mostly at Blaris and the University of Ulster.
Two particularly attractive games which could have a significant bearing on the title race have been pencilled in with Randalstown entertaining Portadown on Wednesday October 13 at Antrim Forum and Portadown taking on Pegasus at Blaris on November 24.
Although the players may not welcome the switch it should prove an attractive proposition for spectators and one which will almost certainly lead to increased television coverage for the women's game.
‘PLASTIC’ AGE
Graham Hamilton looks ahead to the new hockey season
TWO out of every three senior hockey matches in Ulster will be played on synthetic pitches this season as the ‘plastic age’ gathers momentum.
Banbridge are the only one of the ten Senior One teams who won't be playing home games on such surfaces, and now that Ballynahinch and Portadown have elected to slot in at Valley Leisure Centre and Newry respectively, half of the Senior Two games will be played on synthetic too.
Last season 59% of senior games were on synthetic but that will rise to 68% at least…and more if Civil Service can get their proposed pitch up and running before the end of the campaign.
A further four teams — an increase of two (Wanderers and RUC)— will play on synthetic pitches at intermediate level which brings ever closer the day when all games above junior level will be staged on such surfaces.
Indeed Leinster have already ruled that all their Senior One games must be played on synthetic this season.
Cookstown aim to play home games on various synthetic pitches, depending what slots are available, until their proposed pitch gets up and running, and that leaves Banbridge as the sole shale pitch in use in Senior One.
There hasn't been much movement in the way of players this season, but two Senior One teams — Lisnagarvey and Mossley — have new coaches.
Philip Anderson (Holywood) has taken over the reins at Lisnagarvey from Terry Gregg and hopes to emulate the numerous successes achieved there in recent seasons.
If he succeeds, then he will deny his former club Holywood from retaining their Harp Kirk Cup and Senior One titles!
Robert Nelson takes over from Harry McNeill at Mossley.
Internationally, there is little planned this season, following the failure of the Irish team to qualify for the World Cup finals in Australia.
However, coach Cees Koppelaar is anxious that games are found so that his young squad can mature in time for the 1995 European championships being staged in Dublin.
‘Beef cattle were not my scene’
John's move par for course
THE LATEST in Ulster's fast-growing line of new, privately-owned golf courses will be open for play next week-end.
It's within a good tee shot of Crossgar's main street and the brainchild of John Cuffey, once a toolroom fitter with plane-makers Shorts.
John's nine-hole Derryboye Road lay-out may not be what championship courses are made of, but they don't come any prettier or more golfer friendly.
For as little as £100,000, some of it by courtesy of the Department of Agriculture, Cuffey has turned 40 acres of rolling farm land into a snug 4,800-yard, par 66 course that high-handicap players especially, will enjoy and want to play again.
‘Beef cattle were not my scene, so I decided to try something different,’ says this 28-year-old one-game-a-month golfer.
‘I couldn't have done it without help from a Ministry grant and my brother Matthew.
He's a landscape gardener by profession, and did most of the spade work.’
Dale Baker and Downpatrick clubmate, David Gibson, have already played the course and liked what they saw.
From a pulpit tee at the fourth, there's a splendid view of the Mournes and Crossgar's top two eating houses, and of the four good short holes, the eighth over a pond to a wickedly sloping green is certainly the most intimidating.
Designer Cuffey, I feel, has tilted several greens too much, but this can be put right in time.
It took months of heavy work — and £6,000 worth of grass seed — to tailor new fairways everywhere, and in this week's Riviera sunshine, some of them looked like carpets.
First sod
‘It's hard to believe we cut the first sod here only 15 months ago,’ smiles John, who naturally didn't go into a project like this blind-folded.
‘The nearest courses to Crossgar are Downpatrick and Ringdufferin, both about six miles away, so the need for one close to the town was obvious,’ he adds.
‘Already I have over 60 applications for membership, and 200 in all means a full house.’
A tiny portacabin substitutes as a clubhouse, which might explain the hint of cut-price green fees — £7 for an all-day ticket, and £9 at week-ends.
The annual sub will vary between £200 for men and £65 for juveniles, but entrance fees have been waived for the time being.
Prognosis — not a punishingly long course, but you'll need to be a good putter to break par!.
Graham misses out on two finals Double heartbreak
IRISH international Noel Graham, who came to Dublin yesterday in the hope of winning two Irish National championships, goes home today empty-handed.
The Lisnagarvey player was seeking to win the pairs and fours at Blackrock but was beaten in both semi-finals.
Graham, who made such a tremendous impression in the international series in Worthing this summer when he celebrated his skipping debut with three wins for Ireland, was beaten 20-11 by James Talbot and Michael Nutt of Old Bleach in the pairs and then lost his fours semi-final to Belmont's Brian Daly (18-7) after an extra end.
Disappointed
It was a disappointed Graham who sat in the clubhouse after his second defeat.
He knew he was very much in the reckoning to skip a Northern Ireland rink in next year's Commonwealth Games in Canada and yesterday's double defeat could well be talked about when the Irish selectors sit down in the not too distant future to pick their side.
Personally, I would expect him to still make the trip.
He is a young player with loads of confidence and ability and although he didn't produce is usual form yesterday he still will be very much in the Games plans.
With Alan Leonard leading for him in the pairs semi-final, Graham got off to a 6-0 lead after five ends but Talbot and Nutt came storming back to open a 12-8 lead after 15 ends and after that never really looked like losing.
Then in the afternoon fours game he fought back brilliantly, assisted with some great bowls from his No 3 John McLoughlin — another Games candidate — to level the match 17-17 after the stipulated 21 ends.
In the extra end the shot position changed three times before Brian Daly played a magnificent bowl to win the game for the Belmont four.
Meanwhile, Noel Weir of Rathfriland got through to the singles final with a 21-7 victory over an out-of-touch Noel O'Hara from Herbert Park.
And young Paul Daly, the son of Brian, had a rather one-sided 21-10 win over Martin McHugh of Carrickfergus in the under-25 singles semi-final after McHugh selected to drive at the wrong time, which was right up Daly's street.
Brilliant
There was a brilliant performance from the Dunluce rink skipped by Malcolm McMullan who beat the Blackrock four skipped by Ian Gillen 15-13 and now meet Daly in today's final.
In the pairs Ronnie Oliver and Ian McClure had a 21-14 win over Emmet Downey and Gary Rutledge in a match which saw the brilliant McClure on the top of his form.
And it was joy too for the Ballymena triple of Billy McCandless, Jack Robinson and Roy McCune who had a 19-15 victory over the CYM trio skipped by Alf Keegan to earn them a crack at the strong Portrush triple of Barry Moffett, Jeremy Henry and Ian McClure who had an easy 19-9 win over Alex Beggs, Gary Clarke and Mark Shannon from Clarendon.
By Ronnie Harper BOWLS
Linfield sensationally poised for European Cup return
WINDSOR WIND FALL
THE REFEREE at the centre of the Dinamo Tbilisi bribes scandal DID accept the 5,000 dollars offered by the Georgian club prior to their European Cup match with Linfield.
But Mr Erman Torughu handed over the cash to UEFA on Thursday as evidence of a bribe, prompting Tbilisi's sensational dismissal from the competition.
Tbilisi have 48 hours to appeal the decision but it looks as if Linfield are back in the competition — and suddenly £100,000 better off courtesy of UEFA payments and television rights.
The news was greeted like a pools win at Windsor Park, a mix of euphoria and amazement.
Chairman David Campbell said: ‘We're still in a state of shock over this development.
‘As far as we were concerned Tblisi had won the tie fair and square.
‘The idea of them trying to bribe the Turkish officials is nothing short of astonishing.’
Manager Trevor Anderson added: ‘I've played all over Europe and have never come across this sort of thing before.
‘I suppose we should be flattered that Dinamo Tbilisi felt they needed a little help to get past us.
‘It's an unsavoury business but anyone involved in this sort of corruption deserves everything they get.’
FC Copenhagen, who were due to play Tbilisi in the first round proper, have no doubt that Linfield will now be their opponents — in Belfast on Wednesday week.
Manager Benne Johannsen said: ‘We are already making travel arrangements for Belfast.
‘I can't see UEFA overturning their decision.
They do not make decisions like this on the spur of the moment.
The evidence against them appears to be overwhelming.’
Johannsen accompanied Linfield to Tbilisi for the first leg game in Georgia, and like everyone else was unaware of the cash offer to the Turkish officials.
‘It took me completely by surprise,’ he said.
‘Having said that I'm not disappointed that we're set to play Linfield and not Tbilisi.
‘I saw at first hand the problems Linfield had with travel arrangements and communications…give me Belfast every time.’
It's likely Tbilisi will appeal the decision, with UEFA hearing it next Saturday — but FC Copenhagen would like a earlier confirmation.
‘As far as we're concerned we will arrive in Belfast a week from Monday.
A Saturday decision would give us very little time to alter our plans,’ said the manager.
The first inkling that something was amiss came on Wednesday, when Linfield were requested by UEFA to organise flights for Tbilisi officials to Geneva.
The Blues suspected the Georgians would be carpeted for their haphazard arranging of the first leg tie; the Windsor Park club had already complained to UEFA about this.
But Linfield had no idea that Dinamo were being investigated for suspected bribery.
Secretary Derek Brooks said: ‘We arranged flights for club president Marab Jordania and Georgian FA president Nodar Akhalkatsi; they flew to Geneva while the rest of the party took a chartered flight to Georgia.
‘There was no inkling that a bribery scandal was about to unfold; we certainly didn't instigate it.’
A UEFA spokesman explained: ‘The referee presented his match report which stated that money had been offered to both him and his officials.
Down Royal await July festival all-clear By Jimmy Walker
RACING DOWN Royal are hoping to have a clear date for their big July fixture next year.
An application has been made once more for July 13 and 14, but the key factor is the meeting at Killarney which normally clashes with the Maze festival.
There are some observers — myself included — who feel that the July meeting at Down Royal has now gained in importance to such an extent that it deserves to be kept on its own and I understand that the Killarney executive are not totally against a move to an earlier date.
Bumper
If that's the case then Down Royal can look forward to a bumper fixture and then maybe those small fields for the Ulster Derby will begin to be only a bad memory.
The dates clash is usually trotted out by trainers, along with the firm ground, as an excuse for having no runners up here.
Well, this year the firm ground excuse didn't hold up for in the worst July for years the going was very much on the soft side.
so it was left to the hardy annual of the clash of dates, although I for one never fully believed this to be a valid argument.
Anyway, if Killarney decide to allow the Down Royal executive a free date we should be up to our ears in runners.
Down Royal appear to be on a ‘high’ these days and after having been voted ‘Racecourse of the Year’by the Racing Club of Ireland, who knows what new horizons are in sight.
Another interesting move is to have some evening fixtures.
This view has been put to the Turf Club's fixtures committee and, I believe, has been well received.
So things are looking up, although to be honest I am a bit puzzled about certain aspects of the ‘Racecourse of the Year’ award.
I'm not going to attempt to pour cold water on it, for any plaudits we get here from the South where racing is concerned should be gratefully received, but I noticed that the award was based on the votes of a panel of members of the Racing Club of Ireland and ‘leading racing writers’.
Well, the only racing writers who were at Down Royal for the two day July meeting when the new stand was put into use for the first time were Tony and Peter O'Hehir and myself.
There were quite simply no other racing Pressmen here.
Tony and Peter were far from complimentary about the new facilities and Peter made this clear in an article in the Irish Field while I wasn't asked to vote about anything.
So we must surely deduce from the following that those Pressmen on the panel were voting about something they had never actually experienced!
Most odd…
Leopardstown is generally reckoned to be the model for the new Down Royal stand and there are certain similarities I must confess.
Certainly Leopardstown has the best facilities of any racecourse in Ireland and the Dublin course is again mentioned in dispatches in the Racing Club of Ireland awards.
The other courses who come in for kind treatment are Listowel, Punchestown and Tipperary with, on a lesser scale, favourable mention of Galway, Kilbeggan, Roscommon and Wexford.
Well, that's all very well but there is one other I would like to add to the list and put it near the top — Downpatrick, who have been battling on their own for years, and who still manage to attract huge crowds as they showed last Monday.
There is a special atmosphere about the place and although their facilities don't come anywhere near those at Down Royal, I feel they should be encouraged in their efforts.
Next Saturday the big race is the Guinness Champion Stakes at Leopardstown and with Market Booster in the field we could be looking at a future star.
Dermot Weld decided to take Market Booster out of a big race at Baden-Baden tomorrow in order to run in the Champion, and after that it's the Arc.
Leopardstown's race hasn't the charisma of last year when Dr Devious took on St Jovite, but then you can't have everything.
Intriguing
At the moment it looks as though shock Juddmonte International winner Ezzoud will come over from England and if that's the case we could have an intriguing race on our hands.
It was sad to read of the death of Michael Seely, racing correspondent of The Times, who lost the fight against a serious illness earlier this week.
Michael was one of that old school of English gentlemen whom you never see nowadays in the era of the yob.
He had time to have a word with everyone and on the occasions when I met him in England he was more than helpful — unlike some of his colleagues in the Press room who pestered you for information when at Leopardstown, then pretended you were from another planet when you went to a big meeting in England.
Michael will be sorely missed.
Damon proves value of his winning ways
IT'S hard to believe that Damon Hill is still in his first full season of Formula One.
His back-to-back victories in the Hungarian and Belgian grands prix were models of control, both in the car and afterwards.
The 33-year-old son of former World Champion, Graham Hill — he will be 34 in just two weeks time — looked cool and calm when he climbed out of his Williams Renault FW15C after 200 miles flat out round the dauntingly fast circuit at Spa.
Not for him the histrionics which always seemed to accompany a Mansell win last year.
Damon has a different style.
He doesn't complain about his car and he doesn't fall down.
When he wins, he looks quietly pleased.
When things go wrong, he looks quietly disappointed.
There are no tears, no recriminations, and if he has anything to say to his team afterwards, it's the team he talks to, not the tabloids.
When he does have something to say he does so politely, almost shyly, but with a touch of the tongue-in-cheek humour which made his father the darling of the fans in the Sixties and Seventies.
Married, with two young children, Damon Hill comes across as a genuinely nice guy who keeps his family safely away from the limelight.
He admits he enjoys a beer or two away from race weekends.
‘You have to keep a perspective on things.
If you're looking for every conceivable thing to give you an advantage then you maybe have to consider dropping alcohol and becoming a monk or something.
But I know enough about myself to know that as long as I get eight hours sleep I'm alright’.
A year ago, he might even have considered signing the pledge and going to bed at six.
Attempts to qualify the obsolete and underfinanced Brabham Judd had earned him only two starts and one finish, in last place.
And more often than not, while Mansell was chalking up the victories and lapping up the accolades, Damon was reduced to the role of spectator.
Between races it was a different story.
As official test driver for Williams, he probably did more high speed miles than Mansell as the team worked to develop the complex electronic systems which have made the car the dominant machine in Formula One.
And it was his ability to work with the engineers as much as his speed which decided Frank Williams to sign Hill as partner to No 1 driver Alain Prost.
The early races were inconclusive.
Hill had his critics — he still has — and they were quick to say that he showed an unwillingness to get stuck in, yet all the early season races were led at some point by the quiet man bearing the colours of the London Rowing Club on his helmet, just as his father had.
There was an accident —‘My fault, I think’— a batch of second and third places, and some retirements throughout which the Hill upper lip remained stiff.
In Hungary he got his first win — by almost a lap over the entire field — and in Belgium last week he did it again, although not without some drama.
In first qualifying he was fastest, ahead of team-mate Prost.
In the second session Prost improved and Damon ran into brake problems which left him doing very few laps, none of which was faster than his Friday effort.
Second on the grid was the result, but Damon was philosophical, if not particularly happy.
‘Pole positions are important to give you some kind of record against your team mate.
Currently I've only out-qualified Alain once so I'm not too impressed with that.
‘I'm still on the front row but it's difficult to make a good start and have any effect at Spa because it's such a short run-up to the first corner, so Alain would have to make a really dreadful start…
‘He's quite good at that, though I don't expect him to do it again!’
Prost didn't.
He led into the first corner, and for two third of the Belgian race looked to be completely in control.
Then a slow pit stop let Damon through, and despite heavy pressure from Michael Schumacher in the closing stages, Damon took his second win.
Prost finished third.
Afterwards, he was quietly ecstatic.
‘I feel happy about Hungary of course, but these things are short-lived.
You're only as good as your last race, and this was a real one!
‘I wanted to prove that I can race as well as drive, and I think I've done that today.’
Hopefully team owner Frank Williams — rumoured to be courting Ayrton Senna as Prost's team mate for 1994 — will have noticed.
Present-day sporting heroes tend to spend their off-duty moments sounding off about anything and everything.
Damon Hill isn't like that.
The high-pitched whine from his Williams comes from the engine, not the cockpit.
Cycle report slammed as ‘dangerous’
FORMER transport minister Peter Bottomley today described as ‘potentially murderous’ a claim that wearing helmets gave cyclists a false sense of security and could encourage them to take greater risks.
He said: ‘If every cyclist of every age wore a helmet, each cyclist and each parent of a cyclist could save up to two deaths a week.’
‘False’
Mr Bottomley was responding to a report by the Policy Studies Institute whose author, Dr Mayer Hillman, said: ‘Cyclists are being given a false sense of security.
Helmets would have to be the weight of motor cycle helmets to offer protection in the event of a collision with a motor vehicle.
‘Cycle helmets are a means of slightly reducing the extent of head injury if an accident occurs.
But in the same way that the adoption of helmets and other protective equipment has altered the behaviour of cricketers, cycle helmet wearing is likely to encourage riskier cycling.’
The report called on the Government not to introduce laws forcing cyclists to wear a helmet and advised against encouraging cyclists to do so.
But Mr Bottomley, who made road safety a dominant feature of his work as a Minister and still campaigns on it, said deaths would be more than halved if every cyclist wore a helmet.
‘The way that the Policy Studies Institute has presented this story is potentially murderous.’
HOCKEY
Scots squeeze through in Harp Masters
THE organisers of the Harp Masters men's hockey tournament exhaled a sigh of relief last night when the only visiting team — Glasgow Western — scraped into the quarter-final stage with a hard fought 2-1 win over section two side Collegians at Blaris.
Collegians seemed to be heading for a shock win which would have ruined Western's chances of a possible date with Lisnagarvey in tomorrow's final when winger David Hutchison put them in front with a superb solo effort in the 20th minute.
But the Scots equalised with just four minutes left on the clock, Khalid Bashir's shot taking a deflection off Roger Johnston's stick before beating Iain Kelly and then, with seconds remaining, experienced international Roddy Philip grabbed the winner from a penalty corner.
But the highlight of the night was a superb five goal haul from last season's leading goalscorer Kenny Morris — three from short corners — as Harp Senior League champions Holywood coasted to a 7-0 win over Civil Service at Olympia.
Lisnagarvey were also in good nick, Dan Clarke (2), Brian Waring, Jimmy Kirkwood and Peter Richardson on target in a 5-0 at Mossley which signalled a triumphant return for new boy Craig McGrugan, who played at the heart of the Garvey defence.
There was one surprise result as Brent Kidd's double strike gave Section Two side Ballynahinch a 2-0 win over Newry at Blaris and a quarter-final tie with Garvey this afternoon.
CRICKET
Run record at Hove
ESSEX raced to a stunning seven-wicket victory over Sussex as the record books were rewritten at Hove.
They reached a target of 411 in a match which produced the highest-ever aggregate score in England.
A total of 1,808 runs were scored, beating the 1,723 amassed in the Test between England and Australia at Leeds in 1948.
The previous best for a championship match was 1,650 when Surrey played Lancashire at The Oval in 1990.
There were seven centuries on a batsman's paradise of a pitch, with John Stephenson and Nasser Hussain getting two of them as Essex romped home with eight overs remaining.
The pair shared a second wicket stand of 215 in 51 overs.
UNITED FRONT
Harrison ‘signs on’ for Ards
Brothers in arms
TWO old buddies who came through the rugby school of warfare together are poised to lift Ards out of doldrums.
Former Ulster half-backs Ashley Armstrong and Annsley Harrison have teamed up again to renew their dalliance with the game they grew up with back at Methodist College.
Now it's all hands to the deck for the close friends as they knuckle down to bring back the sparkle that has been missing down at Hamilton Park for the past few seasons.
Armstrong was first to take up the cudgels at the end of last season, and a little piece of bantering brought in Harrison.
‘I was out with Annsley one evening and I was giving him some stick about not putting something back into the game,’ said Armstrong.
‘I was really getting stuck into him, but it was mainly tongue in cheek.
‘But to my surprise, he phoned me back a few days later, and offered to help me.
I just couldn't believe it.
‘He's a very busy man, but he has not missed a session, and he's proving a great asset.
Annsley has a very high-powered job and a hectic business schedule, but he finds coaching as a great escape valve and a chance to relieve tension.
He knows a lot about back play, and he's the ideal man to put things over to the younger players.’
Intelligent
Both Armstrong and Harrison played through school together, with the former a doughty scrum-half, and the latter an intelligent out-half with a hefty boot.
They later moved to Collegians, before Armstrong rebounded between the Old Boys and Bangor, while Harrison moved to Dungannon.
They both played for Ulster in the Seventies but representative appearances together passed them by.
Armstrong himself took on the role of coach because he wanted a big challenge.
He's certainly got that after Ards ended their worst senior league season with two wins from 16 outings.
‘Coaching a Division One or Two side is very demanding and very tight.
It only takes one bad result and the pressure on.
It's not so bad in Division Four, and when the opportunity came up at Ards, I jumped at it,’ said Armstrong, who captained and coached Bangor before going back to end his playing days at Collegians a few seasons ago.
Hard
‘I always wanted to work with a squad of young players and bring them on for a few seasons.
I now have that, and I am really enjoying it.
Ards lost about dozen senior players in two seasons, and it was very hard on them.
They were turning out raw youngsters last season in the Ulster league and there was no way they could survive.
They just couldn't cope.
‘Now there is hope.
There are no stars at Hamilton Park but they are hard and learning to play as a team and that is very important.
‘The club realised that something had to be done.
Now they have taken a very professional attitude to the game.
They've got things organised off the pitch with the structures to keep things moving.
Money has been spent to kit the players and to buy much-needed equipment, and a tour is being planned for next season.
‘There is now a big push on to build up a healthy youth policy.
Now it's up to people like myself to get the on-field matters right.
‘It's going to be very tough though.
Dublin sides Skerries and Monkstown will be very hard up front, while Queen's are looking very strong this season with most of their big names back again.’
Views
On the subject of overseas coaches or players coming over for big money to coach Irish clubs Armstrong has strong views.
‘I don't really agree with it,’ said Armstrong whose wallet would certainly not be getting as heavy as other coaches brought in to knock teams into shape.
‘To be honest I don't think it fits in with the Irish way of things.
I don't really see the advantages.
‘I know Ards get numerous letters from players from Down Under.
But really most of them just want to travel and earn a few bob.
I preferred life as it was.’
However, life will never be like it was when September 18 comes around and Ards step into a whole new ball game with their first All Ireland League game, albeit against Armagh.
Lucky Jim plans a welcome break
PENSIONER James McNeill has won £2,000 in the Belfast Telegraph's Lottocash competition.
Mr McNeill (74) from Imperial Street, Belfast, who checks his numbers every night without fail, said he couldn't believe his luck.
‘I'm over the moon and I'm going to give something to my two daughters and son and maybe take a trip to England to see my brother-in-law’, he said.
Crossword
Mr McNeill said he has had been reading the Belfast Telegraph for years and enjoys doing the crossword first, perusing the television viewing and then gets around to reading the news.
‘Orchard’ win stretches lead By Sammy Hamill Motorsport
RALPH Ewing and co-driver Kevin McCracken extended their lead in the Walter S Mercer Northern Ireland navigation rally championship which resumed after a summer break last night.
Driving a 1960 Austin Healy Sprite on one of the toughest routes of the year, they won the North Armagh Club's Orchard Rally by a convincing 17 point margin from the class two crew of Neil Fletcher and John Erwin.
Ewing and McCracken now have 41 points in the championship, four more than Fletcher and Erwin who share second place with Alan McCann and Philip Murray who finished in third place last night.
The 90 mile route started in Portadown and finished in Banbridge but the difficulty of the event is reflected in the high number of penalty points accrued by the crews.
The winners dropped 19 points, Fletcher and Erwin 36 with McCann and Murray on 50.
Pensioner strikes it rich with Roman treasures
RETIRED gardener Eric Lawes was today looking forward to a glowing future as a probable multi-millionaire after a coroner's jury decided that a hoard of 14,000 Roman coins and jewellery he found with his metal detector is treasure trove.
But 70-year-old Mr Lowes, who unearthed the historic treasures while searching for lost tools on Home Farm, at Hoxne, Suffolk last November, is totally relaxed about the whole thing.
After yesterday's jury ruling in Lowestoft, a calm Mr Lawes said: ‘I am glad it is all over.
We shall just wait and see now.
‘I was not that excited.
It was just one of those things.
Public
‘The place for this is in the British Museum for all the public to see.’
He will share the money with his friend Peter Whatling, the tenant farmer of the land where the treasure was buried.
Partnership
Mr Lawes and Mr Whatling said they had signed a partnership deal once it became clear how important the find was.
The cash will be decided on by a special committee from the Department of National Heritage.
Mr Lawes was praised for bringing in experts from Suffolk County Council's archaeological department, who were astonished to find thousands of coins, sets of spoons, pepper pots and other valuables from the fifth century.
Short straw
WORLD chess champion Garry Kasparov has gained an early advantage in his battle with British challenger Nigel Short — without even moving a piece.
The draw to decide which colour pieces the players have in the first of their 24 games ended with Kasparov gaining white — and so the opening move in the series which begins at London's Savoy Theatre next Tuesday.
Although Short (28) will play black in the first game, colours will alternate from then on.
The draw took place at Simpson's-in-the-Strand, London, yesterday.
‘I AM talking about a man that has done 26 years behind bars and if he had done the same crime today he would have got 10 years and would have got out five years ago’— actor Mike Reid on Reggie Kray.
‘I WILL be back at work for my shift tonight at 10.30’— miner Bernard Amos after being trapped by a roof fall for more than eight hours.
‘KASPAROV has weaknesses.
You just have to probe them’— challenger Nigel Short on world chess champion Garry Kasparov.
‘THERE is nothing like this feeling, I am shaking all over.
It's just so great to be on this beach at last’— Ffyona Campbell at Tangier after completing her walk the length of Africa.
‘HE has tasted all the bread in the sandwiches and approved the menu although he can't try all the fillings because some of them are meat and he is vegetarian’— Laurence Myers on the opening of Gary Glitter's sandwich bar.
‘WE at Sky are happy to be walking the skies.
Who knows where it will all lead?’— Rupert Murdoch on five years of his satellite TV station Sky.
‘I WOULD like to see a good sports journalist reporting on the House of Commons’— Kate Hoey, Labour MP and Arsenal supporter.
‘IT IS a toss-up whether Norman Fowler was a bigger embarrassment to Group 4 than Group 4 was to Norman Fowler.
But it has reached the stage where Group 4 have now ‘lost’ Sir Norman’— Labour's Frank Dobson on the announcement that the Tory chairman is to stand down from the board of Group 4.
‘FOR most people nowadays the Good Samaritan has, sadly, given place to Neighbours.
The soaps are our modern myths, hyped up versions of morality tales subtly conveying their own standards’— Dr John Habgood, Archbishop of York.
Free offer
Visits to Ulster's historic monuments will be free next weekend.
The offer by the DoE Environment Service is to mark European Heritage Days on September 11 and 12.
Ulster peace pioneer dies
DENIS Phillips Barritt, a pioneer of the peace movement in Northern Ireland, and an author and veteran community worker, has died, aged 78.
Mr Barritt had been planning to retire from the executive of Bryson House, formerly known as Belfast Voluntary Welfare Society, next week after 30 years' service.
Born in Dunmurry in 1914, he was educated at Friend's School, Lisburn, and Bootham School in York and graduated from Manchester University.
His first book, ‘The Northern Ireland Problem’, co-written with Charles Carter after extensive research and published by Oxford University Press, appeared several years before the Troubles.
In 1964, he became secretary of the then Council for Voluntary Welfare and was closely involved in the establishment of Citizens' Advice Bureaux, War on Want, Voluntary Services Overseas and Voluntary Services Belfast, as well as the Crossing Care Attendants Scheme and Family Supports, now called Family Aids.
He was a founder of the Protestant and Catholic Encounter (PACE) group and a member of the Fellowship for Reconciliation.
He lectured extensively in the United States and Canada and published two more landmark books, ‘Orange and Green’ and ‘Northern Ireland: A Problem for Every Solution’.
He is survived by his widow, Monica, three sons — Paul, Jonathan and Christopher, who are all musicians — and four grandchildren.
Back in flight
EGLINTON and District Darts league.
After the summer lay-off, it's back to darts on Thursday evening with a full programme as follows: — 
Section A — Connollys v McEleneys, Cellar v Weavers, Eglinton CC v Foyle Street, Whitesides v Glendermott CC.
Section B — Connollys v McEleneys, Longfield B1 v Longfield B2, Foyle View v Eglinton CC, Donaghys v Whitesides.
Section C — McEleneys v Connollys, Granada v Longfield, Rising Sun C1 v Rising Sun C2, Whitesides v Donaghys.
The league welcomes new teams Cellar and Weavers.
Clubs are reminded of Rule 9 regarding recording of scores and return of same to the league secretary by the allotted time.
United can be beaten, says Bonds — but they are still…
A CLASS ACT Manchester U 3 Norwich 0
BILLY Bonds delivered the message the rest of the Premiership is desperate to hear when he left Old Trafford insisting: Manchester United are not invincible.
Alex Ferguson's champions have taken just 18 days to open a three point gap from just six games of their title defence.
After thrashing his West Ham newcomers 3-0, Bonds had to admit: ‘They have got to compare with anyone in Europe.
They are a very exciting side.
‘They have to be everyone's favourite to win the league again.
But it won't be a cakewalk for them.
‘They are taking a hell of a lot on.
They've got to go into Europe and they'll get involved in domestic cup competition.
There's not many you can put up against them, but there's two or three, like Arsenal, who you can make a case for.’
At the moment, Fergie's high-flyers look as if they can only give away the title if it was not for carelessness against Newcastle they would still have a 100% record.
Lee Sharpe's fourth goal in three games opened the way after seven minutes, Cantona rapped in a 45th minute penalty and Steve Bruce wrapped it up with an 88th minute header.
The eagerly-awaited showdown between Alan Shearer and Ian Wright was upstaged by two Kevins Gallacher and Campbell as Blackburn Rovers drew 1-1 with Arsenal at Ewood Park.
England strikers Shearer and Wright had attracted all the pre-match publicity but their contest turned out to be a non-event.
Blackburn star Shearer still on the way back from injury began on the bench for the fifth successive game, while for once Wright failed to get his name on the scoresheet.
It was left to Gallacher, in Scotland's squad to face Switzerland next week, to lead the way with a well-taken 37th minute goal after Mike Newell had passed Tony Adams down the right to supply the cross.
But Arsenal began to display some of the tidy, organised football that had brought them four consecutive victories and they were rewarded with a superb equaliser 16 minutes from time when Campbell latched onto Martin Keown's long pass, ghosted past two defenders and hammered the ball home.
Last season Jamie Redknapp was sent off as Coventry thrashed the Merseysiders 5-1 but at Coventry last night it was a more slender winning margin but no less deserved, with the impressive Phil Babb crowning a fine display with the winner in the 21st minute.
Heroic Seagulls felled in Cyprus Apoel Nicosia 2 Bangor 1 (Apoel win 3-2 on agg)
BANGOR'S heroic team flew out of Cyprus today reflecting on how close they came to their first win in European competition.
In the intimidating atmosphere of the Mararios Stadium they silenced the partisan crowd with an early goal and then came so close to getting a second which would surely have put them through to a money spinning meeting with Paris St Germaine.
But all their Parisian dreams — and the club's 27 match unbeaten run — came to an end as the Cypriots scored from a direct free kick and straight from a corner.
‘I always knew we could score from a set piece, but what I did not expect was to concede two from set-pieces,’ reflected manager Nigel Best.
‘I can half accept the free kick because it was in a central position but to let one in straight from a corner is something else…
‘My team put up a good workmanlike performance.
We restricted Apoel to one good chance in the first half and in the second they created little from open play.
‘To be honest, Apoel have some good players and a high level of fitness and it was difficult.
But it is irritating to lose to such a goal.
‘They did not outclass us.
Everyone did well and although I don't single out players, I thought Jim O'Connor was particularly outstanding’.
Best had spent the last two weeks preaching that Bangor could score in Nicosia.
The huge stone-faced clock overlooking the stadium had progressed less than four minutes when his confidence was vindicated.
Kenny, that set-piece specialist, delivered the corner and in came Glendinning, to power the header.
After that shock opener Bangor, predictably came under a lot of pressure.
Ray McGuinness did superbly to cut out a dangerous ball from Willy Nwukanma.
Dangerman Vesko Mihaljovic won a free right on the edge of the box and scored direct.
Smoke bombs erupted everywhere so did manager Best who raced to the touchline to protest that defender Stephen Brown had been felled by a punch after the goal.
Bangor enjoyed a bright opening to the second period, terrier Tony Canning twice creating danger on the right.
But on 69 minutes Apoel went ahead for the first time in the entire tie and it was to prove decisive, Christodoulous Pounas curling his corner into the far corner of the net.
Teams —
Quiet primary school's quota boosted by quads
THE ROLL of a class in a Co Down primary school jumped by more than half in one go when four children from the same family — all born on the same day — arrived.
Fortunately for the teachers in Kircubbin Primary the children, Danielle, Jenny, Ryan and Christopher Mills, from Portaferry, are not identical.
The school's principal, Liz Breen, said there were just seven children in the P4 before the Mills quads arrived.
‘They are all blonde and are all about the same size and although none of them are identical you would know they are from the same family.
‘They have caused a lot of interest here, as we are a small school with just 60 pupils,’ she said.
Corks popping in the Republic
CORK City ended tiny Cwmbran's European dream and dashed the Welsh club's hopes of a glamour trip to Turkey.
The Konica League part-timers had only 16 minutes left of their second leg in Cork to negotiate when late goals by Pat Morley and substitute Johnny Glynn earned the Irish champions victory on away goals.
Cwmbran were left to rue the goals they conceded in their 3-2 win at home two weeks ago.
Cork go through to face Turkish champions Galatasaray in the first round proper of the European Cup.
Shelbourne, meanwhile, scored a 3-1 victory over Ukranian side Karpaty Lvov at Tolka Park, wiping out a one goal deficit from the first leg to earn a place in the first round proper of the Cup Winners Cup against Greek side Panathinaikos.
Greg Costello set up the Shelbourne victory with a 25th minute goal and further scores from Brian Mooney and Antonio Izzi in the second half closed out Karpaty.
NEWRY
Festival fun time
THE Newry and Mourne area is to stage a number of festivals and outdoor events over the next two weeks.
Among those planned is the Crossmaglen traditional weekend which opens tomorrow night, and on September 10 Bessbrook will stage a heritage weekend and Ballyholland, south of Newry, the first gathering of the Clann Mac Atsaoir.
Celtic call it wrong
RANGERS will take a valuable advantage into their League Cup semi-final against old foes Celtic later this month thanks to the spin of a coin.
Celtic, who have had to bow to Rangers' superiority in recent years, lost out again last night after the semi-final draw paired the Old Firm rivals on September 22.
With neutral Hampden Park ruled out due to renovation work, Rangers manager Walter Smith and Celtic No.2 Joe Jordan were involved in the bizarre situation of having to toss a coin to determine the semi-final venue.
Jordan called incorrectly and cup holders Rangers will stage the game on their own ground 24 hours after Hibernian and Dundee United clash in the other semi-final at Tynecastle.
Rangers offered a glimpse of last season's form as they overcame Aberdeen in an action replay of the 1992 League Cup final, which also finished 2-1 after extra time.
In a tie full of flashpoints, Rangers were awarded a penalty within 10 seconds when Ian Durrant was tripped by Brian Irvine, allowing Mark Hateley to score.
Early in the second half it was Aberdeen's turn to score from the spot through substitute Joe Miller after Richard Gough tugged Scott Booth's jersey.
Then in extra time, Ian Ferguson rifled home his fourth goal of the season from 20 yards to bring Rangers within two games of retaining the cup which set them on their way to the treble last year.
Smith added: ‘We didn't plan for a start like that, but it helped us to play well in the first half.
Aberdeen started the second half better but we finished strongly.
If we get matches like that every week the supporters won't complain.’
Lendl joins ‘sorry’ list
IVAN Lendl joined the long list of seeded players to fall at the US Open when he was forced to retire because of tendinitis in his left knee.
But the 33-year-old former champion vowed he would be back for another crack at the title in Flushing Meadow, New York.
Lendl, who won his third successive Open title in 1987, retired against Australian qualifier Neil Borwick while trailing 4-6 6-4 3-1 and became the record fifth men's seed to lose in the first round this year.
‘I came in with a bad knee and it just started getting worse,’ the 13th-seeded Lendl said.
‘It was a bit painful to push off.
I had no strength to push off, so I didn't see any point of playing.’
Lendl, who lost in the first round of the Australian and French Opens this season and had won just one match at Wimbledon, insists he is not about to fade into the sunset.
Lendl, whose only tournament title this year came on clay in Munich, stood and watched 15 aces from the 143rd-ranked Borwick fly by.
He converted only one of six break point opportunities against the 25-year-old lefthander.
A rain shower forced the postponement of the featured night match between fourth seed Boris Becker and unseeded Russian Andrei Cherkasov.
The pair had played only two points, splitting them, before their match was washed out.
They will continue later today.
England the team to beat
IRELAND'S chances of success in this weekend's Home International series in Glasgow have been hampered by the re-emergence of England on the scene.
In recent years, Ireland have done particularly well in the annual triangular event but Ulster Branch Secretary, Mavis Hogg, believes England will field a strong lineup on this occasion.
‘We won't know the precise composition of their side until we arrive in Scotland tonight but while they are unlikely to parade any big name players, England have tremendous strength in depth’, said Mavis today.
Ulster are particularly well represented in the U18 lineup with talented teenagers, Claire Curran and Zara Wolseley, the flag-bearers.
Ulster No 1, Ken Rowe, joins Irish Davis Cup player, Scot Barron, in the Senior lineup while the U14 team is composed entirely of players from south of the border.
The action begins in Glasgow tomorrow when a match programme will be announced, and continues on Saturday and Sunday.
New boys' outing
INSTONIANS give six newcomers a chance to prove their worth when the new season swings into action tomorrow with an all-city clash against Collegians at Deramore.
With the Insurance Corporation League beginning in a fortnight's time, Instonians, like most senior outfits, are experimenting on the opening day of the season to quickly assess their strengths and weaknesses.
Stuart Laing and Norman Robson, two big captures from Ballymena head the cast with the former filling in at full-back and the latter at the base of the scrum.
Laing fills the void left by Marty Strutt's return to Bangor while Robson is given his chance ahead of a bevy of scrum-halves that are on the Shane Park books.
Former Ireland under 21 winger Graeme McCluskey pins down the right wing slot after his end of season move from Portadown.
Simon Burrowes, from junior side Cooke, partners Mark Wylie in the centre, while Darren Wady steps in for Keith Crossan who is playing for an international side in Donegal.
Skipper Gary Bell will have a new front-row partner in former CIYMS and Ulster under 20 prop Brian Barrett who has a chance to usurp Brian McKibbin.
McKibbin is due to enter hospital for an operation on his hand, while Barrett has impressed in pre-season training.
Another new face in the pack is lock Jeremy Cruiks who has come up through the ranks, while back in action are back-row duo Mark Hampton and David Croft, who fills in for injured number 8 Roger Wilson.
Croft took a year's sabbatical to recover from a string of niggling injuries and is now raring to go again.
Also back is New Zealander Bruce Cornelius, who will be spending his third term with the Shane Park side.
As usual, Queen's haven't their sorrows to seek at the start of a new season while they wait to see who will turn up for the new University term.
The students will be taking a 22-man squad to Gibson Park to face Malone although skipper David Humphreys will be an absentee because of holidays.
They should have a reasonable squad this season with seasoned campaigners Gary Longwell, Innes Gray, Andy Dick, Tom Cromie, Adrian Stewart, Johnny Bethel and Darren Blewitt in their ranks.
Also returning is centre Andy Hewitt who returns after a year's charity work in London while Neil McCluskey, brother of Graeme, joins the students after a one-year stint in the States.
However, Queen's will be struggling for a scrum-half with former Irish Schools' skipper Kenton Hillman ruled out for two months because of a shoulder injury, while centre Gerry Ross is heading for Trinity.
Malone will also be parading a large squad of players tomorrow including giving former Armagh back Simon Willis a chance to show his paces at out-half with Ballymena's Davy Nickel also getting a run-out.
ULSTER
Children of the Year contest
CASH prizes, cameras and toys await the winners of the Boots Northern Ireland Children of the Year competition to be held on the 7-11th of September.
The competition will run in all stores, and entry is free.
Help The Aged sale Help The Aged has started a two week summer sale in which all clothing and accessories will be offered at half price in its eight stores across the province.
New plea for hospital
HOSPITAL campaigners in Castlewellan have demanded the early provision of a new hospital in Downpatrick.
John Duggan, who was re-elected as chairman of the Castlewellan Hospital Support Group, made the plea at the group's annual meeting.
He urged the Government to listen to the representations of the 60,000 people of the Down area seeking a new hospital.
D.J.
set to spin a hit for ‘Cats’
ALL Ireland champions Kilkenny will put their title on the line against challengers Galway in Sunday's decider at Croke Park.
And the bulk of their scoring hopes will be pinned on the player regarded as perhaps the hottest property in hurling, D. J. Carey.
No player has a higher profile at the moment than Kilkenny's lethal forward whose scoring feats this year have been nothing short of phenomenal.
On Sunday, he will have an important role in the final against a Galway side who stunned Tipperary at the semi-final stage.
Confidence
No wonder, then, that manager Jarlath Cloonan has given a vote of confidence to his ‘semi’ line-up.
This means that Peter Finnerty, one of the most experienced players in the Galway squad, is still on the substitutes' bench.
‘But we will amend our side if necessary as we go along.
We are fortunate indeed that we have players of his calibre to call upon,’ says manager Cloonan.
Against Tipperary, Galway showed superb resilience and determination, quenching the fire and verve of Babs' Keating's side to such an extent that they could and should have won by a much greater margin.
Their defence with newcomers Kelly and Kilkelly outstanding erected the shutters and stifled the Tipp attack to a large extent.
They may experience rather more difficulty in mounting a similar operation against Kilkenny, though.
The ‘Cats’ stormed through the Leinster championship and then destroyed Antrim in the second half of their All Ireland semi-final.
They revealed awesome finishing power on that occasion — and most of it was personified by D.J.
Carey.
Galway know that they must come up with something extra special if they are to curb this young player who has gained immense respect throughout the sport.
Awkward
He can convert half-chances, possesses great vision and is deadly accurate from frees.
Adrian Cronin and Eamon Morrissey are also central figures in a dynamic Kilkenny attack while Michael Phelan and Bill Hennessy are solid midfielders.
Pat O'Neill is a formidable rock at the heart of the Kilkenny defence and behind this unit Michael Walsh is a magnificent goalkeeper.
Galway will obviously be keen to shake Kilkenny out of their stride in the early stages — just as they did to Tipperary, indeed.
They may find this rather more awkward though given the abrasive edge which Kilkenny possess.
John Power is prepared to run through a wall; Willie O'Connor is as hard as nails and Liam Simpson takes no prisoners.
Certainly, Galway will find it hard but in Ger McInerney, Michael Coleman, Joe Rabbitte and Joe Cooney they have players capable of exerting a strong influence on the game.
Rabbitte and Cooney, along with Michael ‘Hopper’ McGrath, will carry the main attacking threat but they know that they must avail of all their chances.
Kilkenny have acquired just the right degree of confidence and resolve and unless Galway can produce the unexpected then the Leinster champions will reign supreme for another year.
Bell makes the break into senior arena
JONATHAN Bell, former Ireland Schools' full-back will be given his big break in senior rugby when he lines out for Ballymena against their old Scottish foes Hawick in the Borders.
The talented Bell has been ear-marked for big things this season and has thrown in his lot initially with the Eaton Park side.
Bell, who played on the wing for Queen's in his first season out of school, will be available for Ballymena when the All Ireland League commences before returning to Loughborough University.
Indeed, many reckon that Bell will be pushing for senior inter-provincial honours this season.
He's a natural ball player with an exciting turn of pace, and Ballymena will gladly benefit from the former Coleraine Institution star, whose now preferred position is in the centre.
However, with Colin Dick still on his way home from Australia, Bell fills in as the last man in defence with Alan Simpson and Michael Rainey in the centre.
Paul McBride is back home after finishing at Nottingham University and partners Davy Tweed in the second row with international Brian Robinson making a welcome return to Ballymena's colours.
Ballymena will have the services of former London Irish flanker Gareth White, who played for the Irish Exiles last season, but is now home working in Coleraine.
Dungannon face Munster visitors Highfield tomorrow at Stevenson Park, but will be without centre duo Paul Archer and Alan Burns as well as having to find a player to fill the void left by Willie Anderson.
Former Irish Schools lock Jeremy Davidson has been entrusted with the job of filling Anderson's broad shoulders tomorrow.
Other friendlies see Ards host Portadown while Armagh, who have former Ireland winger Kenny Hooks playing in the centre this season, face Lisburn and North are away to Ballynahinch.
Bangor's new coach, New Zealander, Duncan Dysart will be on hand to see his charges when they face junior side Banbridge at Upritchard Park.
The boot is on the other foot
A wind of change has been blowing around Windsor Park
THE IRONY was not lost on Glentoran fans.
For years they taunted bitter cross-town rivals Linfield for being a sectarian football club, for making Windsor Park a no-go area for Catholics.
The boot is now on the other foot, so to speak.
Glentoran are about to lose their top player Raymond Campbell — a Roman Catholic from Downpatrick — to Linfield.
It's a story which has danced across the back pages of our newspapers for weeks.
A year ago it would have been splashed across the front.
Not any more.
Linfield may break the transfer record to land Campbell but the mould is already in pieces.
A wind of change has been blowing around Windsor Park over the past 12 months and Campbell is now regarded as just another new player who will breeze in.
Linfield are keen to get him; so are their fans.
The terraces may still be 100pc Protestant but they're also 100pc behind their newly-cosmopolitan side.
The predicted backlash from true-blue supporters has never materialised.
If anything, the Windsor Park attendance figures have increased over the past year.
And incidences of crowd trouble — which blighted the Belfast club for decades — have deteriorated.
Rival clubs' fans are now more worried about Linfield signing their top players; for decades the talented Catholics in opposing teams were safe from the Windsor predators but all that has changed.
It's a scenario which has delighted Linfield chairman David Campbell.
Reaction
‘We have tried many times in recent years to land Catholic players but failed — largely because the players themselves were worried about adverse reaction in their own neighbourhood.
‘But we knew that once one player took the step others would follow and that's what has happened.’
The ghost of Linfield past has been laid to rest and it was former team manager Eric Bowyer who began the exorcism — in somewhat bizarre circumstances.
Early last year, in an interview with a low-circulation Blues fanzine, Bowyer stated that the current political climate in Northern Ireland would make it almost impossible for Catholics to cross the sectarian divide and play for Linfield.
It was a common-sense answer to a direct question — but was seized upon as a black and white declaration of Linfield's policy on mixed-religion teams.
Within a week the news had reached the United States, sparking off a campaign by Irish-born priest Father Sean McManus against the Blues.
The leader of the US-based Irish National Caucus pressure group urged sponsors — the lifeblood of local football — not to support this ‘sectarian club.’
Linfield's board, alarmed by the adverse publicity, released an unprecedented statement outlining their position and policy, and revealing that over 70 Catholics had played for the club in the past.
What outsiders didn't know was that Bowyer's remarks had been based on his own fruitless attempts to sign a big name Catholic — Jim McFadden of Cliftonville.
McFadden turned him down — stating that he feared a backlash from his own community.
Later, McFadden went to the media and praised Linfield for their bold approach.
‘Under different circumstances, I would have been more than keen to join a club of their stature,’ he said.
Ironically, it was McFadden's Cliftonville team-mate — the virtually-unknown Chris Cullen — who showed no such hesitancy when he signed for Linfield towards the end of the 1991-92 season.
The move made national headlines simply because of Cullen's religion.
He opened the door for others — and Dessie Gorman broke it down when he arrived at Windsor Park last Christmas.
Unlike Cullen, Gorman was a big-name player.
He was also a Catholic, and a southern Irish one at that — the first to pull on a blue shirt in half a century.
Pitch
Observers held their breath as the former Derry City and Shelbourne star took to the pitch for his first game but the thunderous greeting that cascaded down from the Windsor stands proved it was unnecessary caution.
Linfield needed a gifted player to lift them from the doldrums after a disappointing start to the league campaign which prompted Bowyer's dismissal.
New manager Trevor Anderson saw the Dundalk man as the answer, the club backed his judgement and the fans accepted him straight away.
As a buoyed-up Blues strode towards their first championship in four years Martin Bayly, another southerner, joined the ranks.
The headlines were smaller this time and Bayly's religion didn't merit a mention in the Press.
Both he and Gorman went on to win championship medals in April.
Now Raymond Campbell is set to become the latest arrival.
He stunned Glentoran by first making a transfer request — and then revealing he wanted to play for Linfield.
It was an unprecedented remark from a man of his ‘background’ but indicative of the pulling power of the new-look Blues.
Meanwhile, David Campbell is wondering how many other youngsters have shared his namesake Raymond's ambitions in the past but never had the opportunity to achieve them.
Perhaps they should have followed the advice of the 107-year old club's motto ‘audaces fortuna juvat’— fortune favours the brave.
Getting well with a dose of meditation
Relaxation is good for the immune system — and will help you fight off illness.
That's the message from the Yoga Centre which is attracting a growing number of people in Northern Ireland each year.
‘Relaxation and meditation play a major role in yoga and in the treatment of stress-related illnesses, the scourge of modern society,’ says Norma Duffield of the Centre, currently enrolling for its autumn courses at Queen's University, Belfast and Holywood.
Responses
‘A calm mind makes possible the achievement of many objectives that would otherwise be beyond us.
Yoga teaches that the metabolic responses in the body are the result of how we interpret outside experience.’
‘For example, you are on a roller coaster and because you are having such a wonderful time, you produce Interleukin 2.
‘This is a wonder drug and a single course of it would cost a small fortune — yet you make lots of it through delight.
‘The next day you are on an aircraft and having a bumpy ride.
You feel exactly the same sensation as you did on the roller coaster but now you panic and produce cortisol and adrenalin.
‘The self is speaking to the self.
In the first instance it sends out a happy message and in the second a threatening one — yet the sensation is the same.’
The Centre is associated with the Yoga Bio-Medical Trust of Cambridge which conducts research into the effect of yoga on a range of illnesses — from asthma, backache, diabetes to hypertension.
Stress
‘Where an illness or condition is stress-related it responds, sometimes dramatically, to yoga's mental exercises and physical postures.
It unites the forces of mind, body and spirit in the fight against disease.’
The Centre may be contacted on Belfast 428370.
Successful
Enrolment for classes takes place at Queen's University staff common room on Monday September 6 at 7pm.
‘If BA gets foot in City Airport door’
UNTIL now Belfast City Airport has expanded in an orderly, and leaving aside car parking space, reasonably well planned manner.
There is no question that it provides a service to the community, especially those living in north Down and urban Belfast.
However, your article ‘BA to fly into the City?’
(Business Telegraph, August 24) prompts me to pen this letter.
BA is not the benevolent ‘world's favourite airline’ as portrayed in the commercials but in reality a fiercely competitive and sometimes predatory organisation (as the Virgin affair has shown).
I can understand the excitement and anticipation of the City Airport's management but they should stop, draw breath and think this one over very carefully.
Let's suppose BA did get its foot in the City Airport's door — they would obviously use some of their Heathrow's landing slots and operate on that route but they would also want to fly to Birmingham, Glasgow, Manchester and perhaps Edinburgh.
This would have two major impacts.
The first would be a dilution in the domestic passengers throughput at Belfast International Airport, which at best might delay the sale of the airport to a private buyer or at worst, if the numbers were so poor, that no buyer would come forward.
The second would be at the City Airport, where BA might offer attractive low fares, sustainable over a long time period by cross-funding from their worldwide profitable operation.
Airline finances and particularly those of small independents are very volatile, sometimes the difference between profit and loss resting on two or three additional seats being filled.
Given the image of BA coupled to the lower fares I can see passengers defecting in their droves from the City's resident airlines.
Brand loyalty is, I am afraid, a myth.
The only possible response from the independents would be to also reduce their fares but without the cross-funding safety net.
Fewer passengers, less income, you don't need to be an accountant to see the outcome.
Then comes the second part of the double whammy — after say two years BA would announce that it was withdrawing from Belfast City Airport in order to consolidate their operations at Belfast International whose superior facilities interface more readily with their corporate image (or similar doublespeak).
After they have gone there would be financial chaos with severely or perhaps mortally wounded airlines remaining at the City — it might take years for a network of routes to be soundly re-established.
The net results of all this?
Well Belfast International has got rid of its rival and BA has ‘freedom of the skies.’
One must ask would this be in the best interests of the travelling public?
‘Royal’ fox hunt banned
A FAVOURITE fox hunt of the Prince of Wales and other members of the Royal Family has been banned from National Trust land after a joint master was found guilty of two offences of interfering with badger setts before a hunt meeting.
Captain Ian Farquhar (47), of the Beaufort Hunt, was said to be planning an appeal after North Avon magistrates at Yate, near Bristol, convicted him at the end of a three-day trial yesterday.
It was said he ‘aided, abetted, procured or counselled’ the illegal stopping-up of two badger setts by an unnamed hunt helper on National Trust land at Horton, on the Avon-Gloucestershire border.
The court heard the setts' entrances were blocked with hard-packed earth on October 20 last year to deny fleeing foxes bolt holes next day.
Farquhar, joint master with the Duke of Beaufort, was given a conditional discharge for two years.
He was ordered to pay £4,000 towards the prosecution costs of £9,977.
The captain, of Warren Cottage, Acton Turville, Badminton, would not comment after the case but a member of his legal team said an appeal was planned.
New age dawns for rugby players
CITY of Derry Rugby Club enter a new era tomorrow with their first competitive match at their new Waterside ground.
Belfast club CIYMS provide the opposition on what will be a landmark day in the history of the club.
The new pitches at Judges Road have been meticulously prepared over the summer for this weekend's opening match.
First
In a fortnight's time, Derry will be playing their first all-Ireland League game when they travel to Belfast to take on North.
The following week, they play their first league home match, when Bective will provide the opposition.
DEVON
Ffyona's home joy
TRANS-AFRICA walker Ffyona Campbell (26), was today recovering after arriving in Britain, declaring: ‘It's great to be back.’
The 26-year-old from Devon, whose 10,000-mile trek from Cape Town ended in Morocco on Wednesday, plans to return to the road in Europe next year.
She has already walked across Australia and the US, and now plans to walk from Gibraltar to John O'Groats to become the first woman to circumnavigate the world on foot.
GWYNEDD
Driving ambition
LIVERPUDLIAN professional golfer Karl ‘Hitman’ Woodward (42), was today aiming to establish his claim as the longest driver in the world.
He was teeing up at Caernarfon Golf Club in Gwynedd, North Wales, hoping to improve his own UK record 395 yard drive.
YEOVIL
Paddy's prizewinner
LIBERAL DEMOCRAT leader Paddy Ashdown and his wife Jane have won the best front garden award in their home village of Norton sub Hamdon, near Yeovil, Somerset.
The couple have lived in the house for more than 20 years and most of the gardening is done by Mrs Ashdown, who said: ‘I just potter and have a chat to people passing by.
It is a wonderful waste of time.’
Ladies first!
FIVE local girls have been included in the Irish Women's waterpolo squad that plays Scotland at the Drumchaple pool in Glasgow on October 2.
They are Karen Stead, Stella Murray and Alana McGuigan from Donegall and Edel McGoldrick and Mandy Kavanagh (Cathal Brugha).
Donegall's Tom Irvine takes on his first role in international management with the coaching duties being undertaken by Conor Sheridan from Marian.
Waterpolo suffered another sad loss last week with the sudden death of Donegall's Eddie Neill.
Eddie was associated with the Donegall club for more than 50 years and did tremendous work over the years at developing young talent.
Deepest sympathy is extended to his wife Jean and family.
Derry sign Lemon
DERRY City today signed midfielder Paul Lemon, who was recently released by Chesterfield.
Lemon is best known for his involvement with Sunderland; he made over 100 appearances for the Roker men.
Now a free agent, he has signed a short term contract which is renewable after four weeks.
‘I've known about Paul for some time and he should bring experience and stability to our midfield,’ said Derry manager Roy Coyle.
There was less encouraging news for Coyle last night; young striker Brian McCarron broke his leg in a freak training accident.
Last week another new recruit, John Sayers, suffered a similar fate.
Montgomery take ‘battle honours’
THERE was no reprieve for the Scottish Pipe Bands last Saturday, as Field Marshal Montgomery, under the leadership of Richard and Gordon Parkes, claimed the premier prize of the Cowal Championships — the gigantic Argyll Shield — and the accolade of Overseas Champion of Champions.
The Cowal Highland Gathering, celebrating its centenary this year, is held in the picturesque town of Dunoon on the bands of the Clyde.
Field Marshal Montgomery's trophy sweep includes first in British, first in European, first in Scottish, first in World and now first in Cowal, leaving only the British Championship to clinch.
It is a safe bet to assume this competition will present no problems for them leaving them the first pipe band in history to collect every available award and go undefeated for the duration of the season.
In a rich day of piping and drumming, the R.U.C.
pulled off a double victory, when their drum corps defeated the World Champions — Shotts and Dykehead — to win first in the drumming section, and first in Marching and Deportment.
Add to that the overall third placing in Grade 1, and young Pipe Major Mark Faloon and Drum Sergeant Gary Corkin, had plenty to celebrate.
Grade 2 World champions Monkstown Mossley Pipe Band had a disappointing result when they were awarded fifth.
Thrive
The Irish Bands continued to thrive with World champions Ballynahinch coming first in Grade 3 under Pipe Major Ian Jess.
Pipe Major Brian Rea's Ballycoan Band, repeating last year's result, were second with their World Champion Drum corps with Drum Sergeant Mark Armstrong, successfully defending their Cowal title, took first for Best Drums.
After a round trip of almost 1000 miles, Ringaskiddy from Cork, playing in their first season in Grade 3, took a well deserved fifth place.
Three of the seven prizes in Grade 4 went to Ulster bands with Bangor Caledonia with Pipe Major J Griffiths, just missing first place by half a point, in runner-up spot.
Fifth place was won by Glassdrummond Pipe Band under Pipe Major Ian Bryson and seventh place was taken by St. Patrick's Annsborough with Pipe Major J McEvoy.
Pipe Major Tom Buchanan and the Boys and Girls of Monkstown Mossley School Band had a glorious day when they took second prize and Best Corps of Drums in the Novice Juvenile Band section.
In the Drum Major Senior event, there was a tie for first place between John Noble (Scotland) and Alan McBride (N. Ireland) with the verdict going to the Scotsman.
Roger Young and Mark Uprichard were third and fifth respectively.
It was a clean up for the Irish in the Junior Drum Majors competition, with Darren McBride once again dominating the top placing, and J Elvin in third, A McKeown in fourth and R Elvin in fifth places.
Under-25s learn a very hard lesson
THE Irish selectors, obviously pleased with the performance of the Under-25 team in the Home Countries Championship in Carlisle last week-end, really haven't got their sorrows to seek at this level of competition.
They came home from the sortie on Sunday knowing that the next time they sit down to pick an Under-25 international side they will be looking for three new skips.
Keith Taylor of Bangor, Glen Thompson of Knock and Rathfriland's Gary McIlroy will be over the age limit by the time the next series comes around.
Yes, the life span of a junior international is a short one and it seems that it's the back ends of rinks which suffer as a result.
It is difficult to get skips in this age group capable of keeping their end up at this level of competition.
It is a hard school to learn in and even this year one of the English team who skipped a rink, Norman Jones of Bournemouth, was beaten in the final of the British Isles senior fours championship in Worthing.
Little wonder he went through the series with an unbeaten record and a plus high up in the forties.
‘We improved in as much as we won one game,’ said North McQuay, secretary of the Irish Bowling Association and an international selector.
England, arguably the strongest team on show, gave Ireland a rough passage, but lost to Scotland — the only team Ireland beat.
The Under-25's don't really get time to settle.
Last year was the first time they played at that level, while Scotland, England and Wales have been involved in ‘international friendlies’ for a number of years.
Considering that, Ireland did well to win a game at all !
They were without the strong Provincial Town's players Barry Moffatt and Jeremy Henry but late call-up Damien Olphert was very impressive playing third to Cookstown's Colm McHugh.
Incidentally, the McHugh family set a record in Irish bowls, as Colm's sister Bernie played in the Irish ladies team which was competed in their Home International Series in Portrush, also last week-end.
Keith Taylor, Glen Thompson and Andrew Hughes also had a good series but sadly two of them need to be replaced next year.
Wooden spoon
So it was the dreaded wooden spoon for the Irish — in both ladies and gents competition, too.
But at least a lot of players have sampled international competition at their own level and that can only be good for the game.
Meanwhile, the World Bowls Board and the World Indoor Bowls Council have joined forces following a meeting between representatives of both Associations at the Mazda Pacific Championships in Canada last month.
A joint press release states —‘A major new joint initiative from the two world governing bodies has been formulated, promoted by the recognition that bowls needs a marketing arm to properly develop and promote it as a major sport worldwide.
‘Prime movers in what will be viewed as one of the most welcome innovations in bowls, will be Kerry Clarke of New Zealand, representing the WBB, Australia's Al Mewett, President of the WIBC and David Harrison who will be representing both bodies.
‘A significant element of the new initiative will be the production of a Development Plan, the introduction of new world tournaments and a comprehensive manual to guide those seeking to introduce the sport to non-bowling countries.’
I will be following their progress with a little more than a passing interest.
GROVE United are holding an Open Charity Rinks Tournament at the Grove Park next Saturday in aid of the Masonic and the Northern Ireland Hospice.
This is the second tournament for the York Road men and last season they gave £300 to charity.
The tournament starts at 1-00pm and anyone interested in entering should contact John Higgins, 4, Innisfayle Gardens, Belfast (Tel 773603).
BELVOIR IBC are holding an ‘Open Day’ on Monday (7-30pm) to celebrate  its 20th Anniversary Season.
The club, at Belvoir Activity Centre, will welcome anyone interested in indoor bowling who will have a chance to try out their facilities.
Belvoir doesn't have a large membership and I am sure the Open Day will soon change that.
Anyone wanting further information regarding the club can contact Andy Jordan and Belfast 644993.
New signing for Derry City
FC manager Roy Coyle has just signed former Sunderland midfielder Paul Lemon.
He will be in Sunday's line-up against Shelbourne in Dublin.
Injured Bangor fan out of hospital
THE woman struck by a bottle during Bangor's Cup Winners Cup match in Nicosia on Wednesday night has been released from hospital.
She was treated for a cut on her head but the injury was not serious and she is continuing her holiday in Cyprus.
The incident happened as Apoel Nicosia fans reacted violently to Mark Glendinning's early goal for Bangor.
Another Bangor fan was struck by a flare, others among the small group said they were pelted with coins.
‘Some of our fans said they were happy we didn't get a second goal because they feared more trouble,’ said Bangor secretary Freddie Anderson.
‘In the end they were relieved we lost.’
Sportsmen tossed on horns of dilemma
ALL-ROUND sportsmen Stephen Smyth and Marshal Kilgore have a dilemma this weekend — historic rugby match or a prestigious cricket final.
Both men have plumped for the cricket final in Dublin in which they will be key men in the Brigade team which is attempting to win the Schweppes all-Ireland final for the first time.
Smyth and Kilgore form a formidable half-back partnership in the City of Derry rugby team but both will be absent when the club plays its first game at its new Judges Road ground tomorrow.
Smyth, an Irish international cricketer, is one of the most exciting batsmen in the country at the moment and he and Kilgore are both hoping to score a lot of runs in tomorrow's final against North Down.
Skipper Colin Jeffrey, another talented batsmen, is hoping Brigade can end their recent run of disappointing batting displays.
He said: ‘Hopefully the recent spell of good weather will give us a pitch better suited for batting.
We are looking forward to the game and hopefully a win.’
Brigade have three capped players on their team — Smyth, Paul Wallace and Alan Rutherford.
Triumph in sight for ace Dunlop
BRIAN Reid and Joey Dunlop are neck and neck at the top of the McBride Fashions Irish 250cc Roadracing championship and this pair will be the focus of attention when the Carrowdore 100 takes place tomorrow.
Reid has won the last two Ulster rounds in the series at Temple and the Mid-Antrim 150 while James Courtney sneaked in to take the round at Dundalk.
However, Dunlop who has been setting the pace in the championship for most of the season and was successful at Tandragee, is the man they all have to beat.
Denis McCullough is also involved but perhaps Reid, who was successful at the Dundrod meeting as well as Temple and Mid-Antrim, will push on into a useful lead.
Joey Dunlop is second in the Roadracing Ireland Open Championship and would appear to have it wrapped up following the injury to the championship leader, Derek Young, at Kirkistown last Saturday.
Dunlop only needs to finish in both final rounds to take the title.
Final
On the Moto Cross front the final round of the Ulster Championship is staged by the Mourne Club at Dundrum tomorrow.
The course is on Tony Steele's hillside track at Shague Hill and should provide a fitting finale for the series.
Leader in the 250cc championship is Alan Morrison on 120 points followed by Philip Neill on 109 and Mark Farrelly on 90.
Farreely leads the 125cc class on 143 followed by Neill on 126 and David Renshaw on 84 while in the Support Series David Moore leads on 139 followed by Michael McBride on 95 and Paul Gray and Jason McIntyre on 90.
Memorial
The Cookstown club are also holding a Moto Cross tomorrow.
This is the Andrew Chambers Memorial which forms the seventh round of the British Youths Championship.
The big name in the line-up will be Carl Nunn, son of former John Donnelly winner, Stuart Nunn.
There will be five championship races with the meeting beginning today at 2.30pm and on Saturday at 10.30am.
Alert on Ulster's fine old buildings
HISTORIC buildings in Northern Ireland have become an ‘endangered species’ it was claimed today.
Now the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society is to set up a ‘Buildings at Risk’ service to identify those most in danger and to encourage potential restorers in the public and private sector to help out.
The service, funded by the DoE's Historic Monuments and Buildings, is operated by Belfast based architect Helen Hossack.
‘The aim is to encourage public awareness about the value of the buildings around them and to get owners who no longer want the properties, to sell or lease them to new people.’
Northern Ireland has already lost a large number of fine buildings, but Helen believes the tide is now turning.
‘In the past many people didn't know a building was under threat until it was about to be demolished.
We are hopeful now that we will be informed well before the JCBs are called in.’
The initiative is based on a Scottish scheme which had proved to be highly successful in pre= serving buildings of interest.
The first bulletin illustrating the most interesting examples will be issued next month, but the society will also regularly release details to encourage public interest in their re-use and restoration.
Anyone wishing to nominate a building should contact the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society, 185 Stranmillis Road, Belfast, telephone 660809.
Buildings currently at risk:
Lytles and McCausland's warehouses,(1867) probably the most important building at risk in Belfast.
Restoration and re-use in jeopardy.
Riddel's Warehouse, Ann Street,(1867): blighted by proximity to police station, has been empty for many years.
St George's Market (1896) handsome redbrick buildings — may now be saved from ruin by proposals for restoration
Belfast Gas Works Ormeau Road,(1896) Klondyke building, Retort House, Meter House and workshops — all are fine examples of Belfast's industrial past which have suffered through vandalism and theft of original materials.
Former Ewart's Warehouse (1869) Bedford Street, a former linen warehouse, designed in opulent Venetian Renaissance style — plans for its future have been put ‘on hold’, outlook now uncertain.
Irish rocked by World Cup draw
IRELAND'S women's hockey coach Terry Gregg got an unpleasant surprise when he heard the draw for next year's World Cup finals, which are scheduled for Dublin from July 12-24.
Ireland have been pooled with Olympic champions Spain, 1990 World Cup silver medallists Australia, Korea, Argentina and Russia with Canada, China, England, United States and reigning champions Holland making up the other group.
‘I had been looking at the world ratings and the draw certainly isn't what I had expected,’ said Gregg.
‘What has changed is that Germany are the wild cards and the effect is that the draw is very much worse than what I had hoped.
Realistically, at this moment in time, only Russia are within our reach.’
Blues replicas stolen
LINFIELD fans anxious to get their hands on the club's new-look kit will have to wait.
The Romanian factory which produces replicas of the Lotto strip was broken into last week — with nearly 500 Blues shirts stolen.
Linfield's new strip has caused some controversy with certain fans complaining that there isn't enough ‘blue’ in it; Lotto are planning a darker hue for next season.
But there remains a big demand for the replicas — and the robbery has prompted a delay in their delivery.
In the meantime, Romanian police are on the lookout for a new breed of Blueman roaming the streets of Bucharest.
Weir set to miss bogey
RATHFRILAND'S Noel Weir brought his golf clubs to Dublin today and hoping he never uses them.
All depends on his semi-final performance in the Irish Bowling Association's National Championships at Blackrock.
Keen golfer Noel, the NIBA singles champion, takes on Herbert Park's Noel O'Hara in the opening semi-final and victory means that the clubs stay in the boot of his car.
And Weir will have to be in top form to get a decision over the Dublin champion who could well be his bogey and the host Association's best bet to win an Irish title this weekend.
Carrickfergus's Martin McHugh, a former champion, was bidding to regain the under-25 title this weekend and today faced a tough semi-final tie against PGL champion Paul Daly of Belmont.
By Ronnie Harper BOWLS
DOWNPATRICK
Time stands still
TIME is standing still in Downpatrick after workmen removed all the clock faces from the town's Assembly Hall timepiece.
The hands on the Irish Street clock have stood still since the building was gutted by fire ten years ago.
Now the clock is being repaired by the owners, Down District Council, as part of the council's contribution to the regeneration of Downpatrick.
ATHLETICS
Annadale stride towards another title
ANNADALE Striders look set to retain their Panasonic Northern Ireland League title at Antrim Forum tomorrow.
Annadale are almost certain of victory and making a clean sweep of the male athletics competitions in the province from the under-13s upwards.
Their 100 plus points lead is virtually unassailable and the only question remaining is who will be relegated.
As usual, Annadale will be expected to dominate the middle distance events despite the absence of Davy Wilson through injury.
Sparta, currently lying in fifth place, have recovered after a shaky start and now lead Lagan Valley by 29 points in the relegation zone.
Only a failure on their part to contest all the events will give the youngsters of Lagan Valley any chance of survival.
At the top of Division Two are East Down who are waiting in the wings, well clear of second placed North Down.
Shock defeat for top Swede
STEFAN Edberg's hopes of a third successive US Open crown came to an abrupt end when Karel Novacek pulled off a shock victory at Flushing Meadow.
The third seed was beaten in four sets by the 18th-ranked Czech and the highly-rated Swede was forced to admit: ‘It was one of those days.’
He added after the 7-6 6-4 4-6 6-4 shocker: ‘I thought I had a chance to come back but it ended so fast.
‘Karel played a good match but I was always struggling with my timing.
I couldn't generate any power when I wanted to.’
Edberg appeared a bit off form but seemed on his way to yet another dramatic five-set win after taking the third set.
But Novacek kept up the pressure throughout the fourth and in a nail-biting final game he unleashed a pair of winning service returns to set up victory.
Novacek fell over on his back in disbelief and triumph before running to the stands to kiss his wife.
‘I did what I could.
I was fighting but it was not enough,’ Edberg said.
Edberg is the sixth seed to go out of the men's championship after a record five seeds were beaten in the first round.
‘Today I beat Stefan Edberg, the two-time defending champion here at the US Open, one of the biggest tournaments in the world,’ Novacek said.
‘When I lost that opening game in the fourth set I said to myself ‘this is your match’.
I was still believing in myself.’
The last time a defending champion lost as early as the second round of the US Open was in 1989 when Mats Wilander was picked off by a young Pete Sampras.
Earlier, Wimbledon champion Sampras opened the day's programme with a solid 6-4 7-5 2-6 7-6 victory over Czech Daniel Vacek.
Courtney in Manx double
JAMES Courtney became the first man to win the Manx Grand Prix Lightweight, Junior and Newcomers Lightweight races when he completed a double in the Isle of Man yesterday.
In winning the Light Manx Courtney added on to his Junior win on Wednesday and this was in addition to the Newcomers success he scored last year.
Promoted
In Wednesday's race Courtney was promoted to first place following the disqualification of the winner Nigel Davies but yesterday there was no such drama as Courtney led from start to finish to win by 20 seconds from Nigel Hansen with Greg Broughton third.
Courtney said afterwards: ‘That's the way I like to win races.
I was a bit upset after Wednesday and wanted to show that I could win on my merits.’
Courtney was never in any trouble.
He controlled the race from the start and led by eight seconds at the end of the first lap, an advantage he increased to 15 seconds before winning by 20 at an average of 109.69 mph.
Finishers
Other Northern Ireland finishers were — Jim Kelly from Carrickfergus 24th, Brian Mateer from Lisburn 38th and Adrian Fegan from Newry 48th.
Nigel Davies received some consolation for his disqualification on Wednesday when he won the Senior Manx from Brian Venables and Mattie Brown.
Chris Richardson from Belfast finished seventh, Brian Lavery from Dungannon was 38th and Alex Coulter from Crumlin was 50th.
By Jimmy Walker MOTOR CYCLING
Clarke races up rankings
DARREN Clarke has jumped another 15 places in golf's World rankings.
The towering 25-year-old Dungannon man is now about to break through the elusive century barrier on the Sony ladder.
He is currently 114th, his reward for top-four finishes in the recent German and English Opens, and no fewer than 11 under-par rounds from four big tournaments during August.
There are only three Irish players ahead of Clarke in the ratings prior to this week's European Masters — Ronan Rafferty at 39th, David Feherty (66th) and O'Connor Jnr (109th).
Darren has already banked over £125,000 in prize money this season, which boosts his career winnings to over £300,000, an average of £100,000 a year.
‘I'm now 36th in the European merit order, but I feel I can make the first 25’, said big hitter Clarke before teeing off in Switzerland.
‘I have six tournaments left in which to reach this goal.’
Rafferty is 10th best in Europe right now with winnings of £227,000 for the year and Feherty is 24th at £152,000.
Rafferty is best on shot average too at 71.03 and 72 under par from 89 rounds played.
Feherty has averaged 71.59 from 69 rounds and is two-under for the season, compared to Clarke's 71.70 from 81 rounds and four-over par.
Figures say it all!
ANDREW Coulter plays soccer in winter for Glenavon Reserves, and golf in summer at Lisburn.
This husky 18-year-old not only captains the Juniors there, he is the club's Mercer Medal winner and brightest young prospect off a handicap that has tumbled to ‘six’ in as many months.
Lisburn have a wealth of juvenile talent, 20 of them girls and all in the class of coaching pro, Damien Mooney, and encouraged to the hilt by a club that wisely believes in giving youth its chance.
Tribute
Roy Colvin and lady captain, Joan Gough, both attended the end-of-term prize-giving at which young Coulter, an A-level student at Wallace High, paid special tribute to Alan McMaster, juvenile convenor, and that livewire duo of Watson-MacDonald incorporated.
Bobby and Ian both sacrifice a lot of time to Lisburn's teenage golfers and it's beginning to show.
Richard Snodden won the McClintoch trophy as club champion and is now down to ‘12’, an improvement of seven shots this year.
Ancient putter is Philip's saviour
THE Ryder Cup is without question the big golfing event this month.
But for Ireland's Philip Walton nothing is more important than the final two rounds of the Canon European Masters in Switzerland this weekend.
Former French Open champion Walton goes into the third round of the £618,000 championship in second place, two strokes behind Swede Mats Lanner, and 36 good holes away from saving himself from the trip that no player wants to make.
The 31-year-old from Malahide near Dublin lies 131st in this season's money list and if he fails to move into the top 120 in the two months that remain he will have to go to the European tour qualifying school for the first time.
Discover
To try to discover the form which put him on the verge of Ryder Cup honours in 1989 he finished 17th on the money list that year Walton has gone through around a dozen putters.
That includes a broomhandle type for three months and now an old hickory-shafted one which his father gave him last weekend.
‘He's a wheeler-dealer and he came across it in a house where he was doing some plastering,’ said Walton, who used a similar one when he played in the 1981 Walker Cup match in America.
‘As soon as I took it in my hands it felt beautiful,’ he said.
‘I just hope I can keep shooting birdies like I have in the first two rounds.’
He has had rounds of 65 and 68 on the 6,000-feet high Crans-sur-Sierre course, but Lanner went ahead of him yesterday by adding a 66 to his opening 65.
Joint third two strokes further back are world No 1 Nick Faldo and Dungannon's Darren Clarke who shot a superb 66 to back up his opening 69.
Clarke is having a purple patch at present, but sickness nearly overcame him yesterday.
‘I felt very light-headed and nearly toppled over twice,’ said Clarke.
‘I put it down to not having a decent breakfast before I went out to play.’
Interest
A keen interest this weekend will be on how Seve Ballesteros, the inspiration of Europe's side in previous years, fares.
Ballesteros described his 66 yesterday as ‘the best round I've played this year’.
It left him on seven under, six behind Lanner and in with a chance of a first victory since March last year.
TENNIS Injury rocks Claire
BELFAST's Claire Curran could be out of today's second round of the Four Nations tennis championship in Glasgow following the recurrence of a back injury in yesterday's opening round.
On a day which saw the All-Ireland side go down to England 16-2, Curran made a strong start in her under 18 confrontation with Kate Warne-Holland.
She took the first set 6-4 but a sideways stretch to make contact with an English passing shot had the Belfast girl in trouble.
Despite the pain she struggled on but almost inevitably lost the two remaining sets 6-3 6-3.
Strong persuasion was required to keep Curran from her evening doubles match but as she left the court to return to her hotel for physiotherapy, England claimed another point by default.
Zara Wolseley took the first set of her Under-18 match with Jo Ward 6-4 but at the end of a hard encounter saw Ward claim the next two sets 6-3 6-2 for victory.
Ticket boost for big fight
THE Lennox Lewis-Frank Bruno world title clash has received a single box office boost of nearly £28,000 for the fight at Cardiff Arms Park on
October 1.
Lewis' manager, Frank Maloney, has revealed that a Welsh businessman personally collected 293 tickets from the London headquarters of promoters Champion Enterprises, including 44 ringside seats at £250.
Maloney has also handed over another 473 tickets to participants on the undercard of Britain's biggest-ever heavyweight confrontation.
Surge
The surge has hoisted sales to 12,500 from Thursday's figure of 11,275 out the 49,271 limit with 28 days to go.
Lewis will return to Britain on September 18 after preparing in Washington and switch to a Cardiff headquarters.
Linford backs Colin for jackpot
LINFORD Christie today backed Colin Jackson to scoop athletics' biggest jackpot after watching his Welsh pal conduct yet another sprint hurdling master class in Brussels.
Christie believes his buddy is in the sort of shape to be crowned the overall men's Grand Prix champion at Crystal Palace next Friday and collect the £87,000 that goes with the title.
‘I wouldn't back against him in this form,’ said Christie, unable to shoot for the title himself because the 100 metres is not a Grand Prix event this summer.
‘Besides, I hope to be on a percentage!’
Jackson lived up to Christie's description of him as ‘pound for pound perhaps the best athlete in the world’ as he scorched to victory in the Heysel Stadium in 12.99 secs the seventh fastest of all-time.
His dazzling victory makes him one of just six men with a realistic chance of hitting the jackpot at the Palace 100,000 dollars for overall victory and 30,000 dollars for winning their particular event.
But the competition is red hot, because the other five are all brilliant world champions Jan Zelezny (javelin), Sergey Bubka (pole vault), Mike Powell (long jump), Frankie Fredericks (200m) and Noureddine Morceli (1,500m).
The big prize looks sure to be decided by a special scoring table which will gauge which man performs best on the night at Crystal Palace and Christie insisted: ‘Colin's got a very good chance I reckon only Zelezny and Morceli will challenge him.’
Christie enjoyed his own Heysel triumph with an emphatic 100m win over the US trio of Leroy Burrell, Andre Cason and Jon Drummond in 10.06 secs.
Sally Gunnell will also go to Crystal Palace with an opportunity to earn the equivalent women's title and same bumper pay-day but her chances look more bleak after she was beaten in the one-lap hurdles for the first time in a year by her US rival Sandra Farmer-Patrick.
Both women have maximum Grand Prix points and whoever wins their next head-to-head on Friday could be the overall winner.
But Ireland's new track queen Sonia O'Sullivan also has her eyes set on the prize, and she has the taste for mega-bucks after her 3,000m win in Brussels earned her four one kilogram gold bars worth about £33,000.
It was her reward for being one of five athletes who completed a set of wins in the ‘Golden Four’ meetings in Oslo, Zurich, Berlin and Brussels.
The Grand Prix title could bring her earnings in just one week to an unprecedented £120,000 nice work for a girl who last year was considering taking up a full-time job because she was struggling to make a living on the Grand Prix circuit.
Smart Alex lands prize
ALEX Ferguson can spend his weekend off toasting Manchester United's unbeaten start to their title defence after scooping the season's first manager of the month award.
Ferguson has guided his side to the top of the Premiership with four wins and a draw.
It's his seventh award after seven years at Old Trafford, but the first under its new title.
He receives £750 and a magnum of champagne.
United have made their best start to a season since Ron Atkinson led the club to 10 straight wins in 1985.
Norwich City are planning a new multi-million stand at their Carrow Road Ground next season after announcing an increased profit of £276,000 for the 92/93 season.
The Premiership outfit, who have already built three new stands in the past 15 years, are drawing up plans to replace the old south stand which was built in the 1930s.
Festival marks ‘Scottish roots’
THE people of Ballycarry, Co Antrim, gathered for a special pageant today to remember their Scottish forefathers.
The Broadisland Gathering is turning the clock back to the early 1600s when the area was settled by Scots Lowlanders.
Other events today include a tour of Templecorran Cemetery (3.45pm), and a set dancing workshop in the Old Presbyterian Church Hall (4pm to 6pm).
Speaker
Tomorrow a special service in Ballycarry Presbyterian Church (3pm), will mark the 380th anniversary of Presbyterianism in the village.
The first Presbyterian minister came to Ballycarry from Drymen, Stirling — and the guest speaker will be the present minister of Drymen, the Rev John Hay.
Derry to face difficult hurdle
INJURY-hit Derry City will receive little sympathy from high-flying Shelbourne at Tolka Park tomorrow afternoon in what is expected to be a severe test for the Brandywell side (kick-off 3.30pm).
Roy Coyle, who watched two of his first team squad sustain fractured legs over a five-day period last week, made a bold move into the transfer market on Thursday and signed former Sunderland midfielder, Paul Lemon for an initial period of a month.
And a lot will depend on the 27-year-old tomorrow when he gets his first taste of League of Ireland football.
‘He's a seasoned professional,’ said Coyle.
‘He's played extensively in the Football League and I can't see him encountering any difficulty with the game over here.’
The Derry boss was in no doubt as to the task which awaits him at Tolka Park.
‘Obviously Shelbourne are on a high after their excellent win against Karpaty Lvov on Wednesday night in the UEFA Cup.
I watched that game and they played very well.
There's no doubt it's going to be difficult for us but if we play for 90 minutes the same way we did against Cork in the first half last week, we'll return with something from the game.’
Warhurst plans a screen debut
PAUL Warhurst is set for a screen debut for Blackburn against Liverpool at Anfield tomorrow week.
Sheffield Wednesday's makeshift striker has all but clinched a big money move to Ewood Park at the second attempt just three weeks after signing a new four-year contract at Hillsborough.
Blackburn chairman Rob Coar said that Warhurst had undergone a medical and x-rays, the results of which would not be known until next week.
If all is well the £2.75 million deal will then be completed.
Warhurst was originally set to jump aboard the Kenny Dalglish bandwagon for £3 million last month, but the deal was put on ice when Wednesday failed to land Brian Deane from neighbours Sheffield United as replacement.
The thaw came yesterday afternoon when Dalglish's right hand man Ray Harford stepped in.
Warhurst said: ‘Ray rang me right out of the blue at 5pm on Thursday afternoon to say the deal was back on again and would I come to Blackburn.
‘I didn't even have to think about it, I just said yes.
There is a lot of potential at Blackburn where they are building three new stands and have a very good team.’
Warhurst described himself with a grin as ‘versatile’ and went on to say: ‘I know Rovers have three top quality strikers in Alan Shearer, Mike Newell and Kevin Gallacher.
But I am prepared to play in any position the manager might ask me.’
Disappointing
Warhurst switched to an emergency front line role with stunning effect last season when Wednesday reached both major domestic cup finals.
He scored 12 goals in eight pre-season games but has not netted in the Premiership so far and his partnership with David Hirst has been deeply disappointing.
Last season's top scorer Mark Bright returned to the attack, after being left out at the start of the season, to hit two goals in as many games and clear the way for Warhurst to finally go, especially with England Under-21 striker Chris Bart-Williams also pressing for a starting spot.
Cork now the ‘target’
SAFETY FIRST
THE Cork ‘20’ Rally, its position in the Dunlop Tarmac championship already believed threatened, is coming under more pressure.
The safety plan for the October event, final round of this year's Tarmac series, was returned by the RIAC with a request for it to be modified and updated.
This follows a surprise inspection visit by RIAC insurers at the recent Limerick round of the Irish national series.
It seems rallying in Ireland is again under scrutiny from insurers and Cork, the last big event of the year, will be closely monitored — hence the RIAC's insistence on a strong safety plan.
Rumoured
It has been rumoured for the past year that there are moves afoot to remove Cork from the list of Tarmac championship rounds.
Sponsors Dunlop are said to be unhappy with it and wanted it axed from the 1993 calendar.
I understand they were persuaded to give it a further year's grace in the hope of improvements to its organisational structure.
But the change of format to this year's championship has done little to help Cork's case.
Instead of being the penultimate round of the series and — usually — crucial in the title battle, it is now the last event following the move to May by the Rally of the Lakes.
It is just Cork's luck that the main championship is already over, Bertie Fisher having retained the title on the Ulster International at the end of July.
He has indicated he won't be going to Cork, where he won a year ago, and Kenny McKinstry also says he plans to opt out.
Austin McHale, Fisher's main challenger for the Tarmac crown until he was forced out of the Ulster Rally, hinted that he might not appear again this season and, of course, is not listed among the entries for the Manx International in 10 days time.
Absence
Some people may suggest that the absence of Ireland's top three drivers might actually be a good thing for Cork, making it a much more competitive event, but it will do little to improve the profile of a rally that has been losing ground for the past few years.
The Cork area still boasts some of the best rallying country in Ireland and I understand this year's route includes many of the classic stages from the region.
But the organisational side needs to move up a gear — or the RIAC may be looking towards Wexford for a replacement round for next year's championship.
EQUESTRIAN
Top two set sights
LUCINDA Murray and Mary Thomsom have a similar aim as they started out as Burghley three-day event leaders in today's cross-country section at Stamford.
Both partner horses whose careers took down turns after a promising start and now need to prove themselves again.
Murray's Just Jeremy, on which she led the dressage section from Thomson by less than half a point, has only recently returned to competition following a lengthy lay-off after an operation to cure a breathing problem.
It is the 27-year-old Hampshire rider's first important outing with him since his recovery and she hopes he can re-discover the touch which brought the 10-year-old  chestnut gelding his one major success in the Blenheim Event three years ago.
Thompson, meanwhile, is giving King William the chance to redeem himself after the disappointments of Badminton in May, when a last day showjumping flop led to him being dropped from European Championship reckoning.
Fisher had the power
PRODRIVE have refuted suggestions that the engine of Bertie Fisher's Subaru was down on power during the Ulster Rally.
‘Bertie has been over to see us and has driven the car fitted with the engine management system he used in Donegal and the one that was fitted for the Ulster Rally.
He felt there was virtually no difference in either of them,’ says Dave Campion, a member of the Prodrive management team.
‘I have to admit we let him down over the gearbox which was slipping out of sixth gear and we have apologised for that.
It was an error that should never have happened.
‘But suggestions that the engine was down on power are completely wrong.
It has been checked on the dyno and Bertie has driven the car with the two management systems.
It that department the car was as in good in Ulster as it was in Donegal.’
And, claims Campion, there were only minor differences in the specification of Fisher's Subaru and those used by Richard Burns and Alister McRae.
‘The Elonex cars used water-cooled brakes but Bertie could have had those if he wanted them.
On my advice he decided not to.
‘I'm aware that the engine note from his car is different to the other two Subarus but that is down to the exhaust system — nothing more.
It is not related to the specification of the engine or the power output which is as good as any Subaru outside our World championship cars.’
Tarmac champion Fisher is in the Isle of Man this weekend preparing for the Manx International and was not available to comment.
Taylor ready to wield the axe
DES Walker and Chris Woods, two of the foundation stones of Graham Taylor's 35-game reign, could find themselves dug up and dumped as the England manager builds his team for World Cup survival.
Only David Platt can rival the Sheffield Wednesday pair for caps in the last three years.
But a summer of mistakes and ebbing confidence means that loyalty will count for nothing when Poland arrive at Wembley next Wednesday.
It has taken Gary Pallister a long time to fulfil the promise that tempted Alex Ferguson to part with £2.3m but in America the Manchester United centre-half delivered a powerful case for elevation to first choice.
In the past he has been seen as too similar to form a partnership with Arsenal's Tony Adams, but he said: ‘I see no reason why we cannot play together.’
He made his debut five years ago and collected just a handful of caps before stringing a four-match run together at the end of last season.
‘Up until then my longest run in the side was one game!
Now I've had a few in succession, it has given me a lot more confidence.
I feel I belong there now,’ he added.
Walker always looked at home until his move to Italy sapped his self-belief and left the normally swift-heeled defender looking as if he had feet of clay.
He inflicted the first wound to Taylor's hopes by conceding a penalty equaliser against the Dutch at Wembley and was also criticised for goals by Poland and Norway which threw away the points that would by now have left qualification a formality.
Returning to England has restored his morale, but Wednesday have hardly looked invulnerable around him, conceding six goals in the past three games.
Comings and goings
ANNADALE — Alan McMurray (Banbridge) joins Drew Larmour and John Tormey to give coach Smyth Patterson three top-class keepers.
Andrew McBride (Collegians) and Johnny Todd (Bangor) have also joined, while Ronnie Smyth's starlets continue to progress.
BANBRIDGE — The departure of striker Lee Tumilty to university is a blow to coach Mark Sinnamon, but there's still plenty young talent, including Lee's brother Mark who may feature more often.
Norman McGladdery will captain the side after completing suspension.
BANGOR — Coach George Blackwood has captured striker Kerri Kidd (Ballynahinch), Robin Moran (East Antrim) and Stephen Cumper (Cliftonville) to try consolidate in the top flight.
On the debit side, John Poole has gone to Cliftonville and Johnny Todd to Annadale.
CLIFTONVILLE — The acquisitions of John Poole (Bangor) and Mark Wallace's return from England strengthens skipper Jonathan Rose's team as they look to build on last season's consolidation.
The arrival of Stewart McNulty to help coaching should improve matters too.
COOKSTOWN — The Coolnafrankey side will be without three of their talented youngsters for much of the season.
Peter Cunningham is still at university and is now joined by younger brother Michael, and Paul Mitchell is on crutches and will be out to Christmas.
HOLYWOOD — Coach Norman Crawford's squad is along the same lines as they defend their League and Kirk Cup titles.
Peter Bell is now in England but Keith Alexander returns from university and Colin Mockford joins from North Down.
Kenny Morris is skipper.
INSTONIANS — The return of David Wilson from France and the availability of Tim Taylor, Johnny McBride and Mark Irwin strengthens the squad and prompts coach Denis Guiler not to feature as a stop-gap this season!
New captain is defender Paul Hollway.
LISNAGARVEY — New coach Philip Anderson (Holywood) has the same successful squad moulded by Terry Greg available, plus the addition of Craig McCrugan (Mossley).
Jimmy Kirkwood will again captain the team with Raymond Geddis vice-captain.
MOSSLEY — New coach Robert Nelson's first priority will be to strengthen his defence, following the departure of Craig McCrugan to Lisnagarvey and the decision by stalwart Harry Burns to play down the club.
Davy Hull has also joined Larne.
NEWRY — Errol Lutton won his first international caps in Poland, and it is not only a boost to him but also to the club as they bid to match the big boys.
Coach Stephen Jackson aims to build on last season's progress, and has Robbie McMinn returning from Queen's.
Poyntz slams the men of violence
MOURNERS at the funeral today of murdered prison officer Jim Peacock will hear a hard-hitting address from the Bishop of Connor, Dr Samuel Poyntz.
Speaking before the service, Dr Poyntz said that his sermon would be ‘very direct’ but added: ‘Wrong is wrong and must always be condemned’.
Hundreds of people were expected to attend the service for Mr Peacock, who died in his teenage daughter's arms minutes after UVF gunmen shot him in the back at his north Belfast house.
Private
A private service, attended by his wife Sandra and children Mark, Lisa, Samantha, Kelly and Penny, was being held in the family home at Joanmount Park at noon.
The cortege was then due to make its way to Holy Trinity Parish Church on the Oldpark Road for a service at 1pm.
All prisons and the Young Offenders Centre cancelled visits and parcel deliveries today to enable many of Mr Peacocks colleagues to attend the funeral.
Slept
Fifteen children have been left without a parent after loyalist terrorists murdered four people this week.
Roman Catholic mother-of-four Teresa Dowds de Mogollon was shot dead in her north Belfast home and Catholic delivery man Jim Bell was killed outside an ice-cream factory in the east of the city.
Father-of-six Michael Edwards was murdered in bed as he slept beside his wife yesterday.
After the service, Mr Peacock was being buried in Ballymoney Cemetery later this afternoon.
The Northern Ireland Prison Service said that any visitors holding passes for today should contact their relevant prison on Monday to rearrange their visit.
By Gail Walker
Linfield's £82,000 pay-out
LINFIELD'S European Cup reprieve has guaranteed them an £82,000 pay-out from UEFA, it was revealed today.
The Belfast club were facing an estimated loss of £15,000 on their preliminary round ties with conquerors Dinamo Tbilisi — before the Georgian side were found guilty of trying to bribe match officials.
Now the loss will be converted to a profit of around £65,000 — money which would have gone to Tblisi as qualifiers for the European Cup first round proper.
Tbilisi have another 48 hours to appeal the decision.
It seems they will and UEFA will re-examine the case next Saturday.
Irish FA secretary David Bowen said, however, it was unlikely the appeal will be upheld.
See story, back page.
Ivanisevic flushed out
GORAN Ivanisevic became the latest big-name casualty of the US Open at Flushing Meadow when the 11th seeded Croatian lost to Spaniard Carlos Costa.
‘I just missed everything,’ moaned Ivanisevic, who crashed 6-3, 7-6, 7-6 to a clay court specialist who also beat him at the French Open this year.
‘I didn't look for my chances.
I didn't come in.
I didn't do anything.
Just relied on my serve and that was not working.’
Seventh seed
He was the seventh seed in the men's championship to go out in the first two rounds, a record for early exits at the tournament.
Top-seed Jim Courier and fourth-ranked Boris Becker managed to avoid the plague which has claimed so many of their rivals, including two-time defending champion Stefan Edberg.
Courier had a light workout against 315th-ranked qualifier Michael Joyce, rolling to a 6-1, 6-2, 6-2 victory in the opening stadium court match on a hot and humid day.
Becker was back in his boom-boom form less than 24 hours after surviving a five-set first-round match as he cruised to a 6-2, 6-2, 6-4 win over Jakob Hlasek, of Switzerland, in one hour and 47 minutes.
Tiebreaker
But the player who most resembled the Becker of old was 31st-ranked Costa.
He came back from 0-5 down in the third-set tiebreaker and reached match point at 6-5 with a fully-extended diving volley right out of the Becker Wimbledon highlight films.
It brought a huge ovation from the packed grandstand crowd, and Costa said later: ‘I feel great.
I didn't expect this match.’
Dunmore card
DUNMORE card for Monday, 8pm.
Parkside 410 — Proud Moll, Jocoem Charles, Winning Boy, Fortissimo, Slippy Silk, Gleaming Holly.
Woodvale 410 — Cloneen Duchess, Jocoem Francis, Kentish Megan, Killoe Tom, Starlight Timmy, Konje.
Reserve Scara Abiathar.
Loughview 525 — Railway Tip, Emerald Eyes, More Jive, Carnmoni Queen, Beko Bill, Lacken Jane.
Autumn Stakes first semi-final 410 — Linwood Lad, Thornhill Ceili, Ballylough Team, Kentish Rose, Brown's Bay, Tornaroy Bull.
Ards 575 — Sparrow Lady, Jonathan's Choice, I'm Pleased.
Glosha Bar, Perfumed Mittens, Mayflower Hawk.
Autumn Stakes second semi-final 410 — Satin Fish, Santanta, Hymer Tiger, Kentish Boy, Bellair Girl, Sarah's Fox.
Antrim 525 — Another Barney, Touchdown Dinny, Gigi, Glenbrien Cruise, Haywood Rose, Mellerary Meadow.
Autumn Stakes third semi-final 410 — Kinnego, Tom's River, Glengarry Flash, Linn Star, Or A Hothead, Sheila's Brindle.
Yorkgate 410 — Lost Randy, Carnwood Mover, Jays Jewel, Coolroe Val, Flamingo Playboy, Lynsey Mark.
Reserve Political Band.
1
YOUR editorial ‘Home Truths’(BT 17/8/93) together with map B (BT page 2 20/5/93) point clearly to what is by far the best solution to our present predicament in this province; viz re-partition.
As you rightly say, the present border was drawn on a sectarian head count in such a way as to include a large area which has never consented to partition.
That area should now be hived off along the line delineated in Map B.
The new Northern Ireland should then be firmly secured within the political set-up of the United Kingdom by being treated thereafter on exactly the same basis as, say, Yorkshire or Lancashire.
The very last thing either community in Northern Ireland needs is Belfast City Hall writ large transferred to Stormont.
WLF Belfast 5
YOUR STARS
ARIES (Mar 21 — Apr 20):
While there are good ideas tumbling from your head, you'll need to slow them down if you are to make any use of them.
The more organised you are the better will be the results.
Someone is vulnerable this evening, so try to be sensitive.
TAURUS (Apr 21 — May 21):
There will be some good chances for you to do yourself a bit of good today.
Don't let them slip by without cottoning on.
Confusion seems to reign in many areas of your life at present, so try to get on an even keel.
GEMINI (May 22 — Jun 21):
Your touch of originality will mark all that you do today.
Those around you will want you to help out with their ideas because of this.
Be courteous.
A touch of Gemini magic will draw others to you this evening.
CANCER (Jun 22 — Jul 22):
The past could be in evidence today, but do not let it stop you making progress along your chosen route.
Choose your entertainments wisely this evening, as you could spend a lot more than you have bargained for.
LEO (Jul 23 — Aug 22):
Your star quality will show through today and most people will be hanging on your every word.
Don't let this go to your head.
Other people will quickly disillusion you this evening.
VIRGO (Aug 23 — Sep 23):
As an independent soul you usually prefer to plod along in your own time.
However, other people will be rushing you along today.
Try not to make mistakes — they could be costly to you later on.
LIBRA (Sep 24 — Oct 23):
Chores will be taken care of in record time today, leaving you with more time to relax and ponder your future.
Friends will be in touch this afternoon and you'll need to make time to accommodate them this evening.
SCORPIO (Oct 24 — Nov 22):
You will be feeling ruthless and ambitious and walking all over those who drag their heels.
You could make some alarming enemies if you don't modify your behaviour and the price you will pay just isn't worth it.
SAGITTARIUS (Nov 23 — Dec 21):
There could be some vibrations at work that are making you feel uneasy.
Do not become too paranoid as any changes that are taking place will work to your benefit.
Gather friends around you this evening for something to eat and a glass of plonk.
CAPRICORN (Dec 22 — Jan 20):
You'll be mentally flexible today, rather more than is usually the case.
You'll even be open to the suggestions and ideas of others.
This evening you'll have a fresh slant on jobs and chores around the home.
AQUARIUS (Jan 21 — Feb 19):
Your finances seem to be complicated at present.
While you may gain from a long overdue cheque, you'll lose out again when a rather large bill presents itself for payment.
Don't spend a fortune on entertaining this evening, do it all at home.
PISCES (Feb 20 — Mar 20):
Come out of your fantasy world for a moment and face up to what is happening around you.
There some excellent opportunities around, brought to you by friends and business contacts.
If your head isn't too far in the clouds you may be able to recognise a good thing when you see it.
GOLDEN HOPES
IRELAND'S ‘big four’ for Europe flew out to Istanbul this afternoon as Ulster celebrated the fruits of boxing's nine-medal haul in Canada.
Three gold, five silver and a bronze was the final count from a dry run Commonwealth Games tournament in which the best boxer award, plus a magnificent trophy went to the tall 20-year-old Woodvale lad, Stephen Kirk.
Young Kirk suffered a nasty eye injury against the Canadian champion Dale Brown in a rousing light heavyweight final in Victoria, but took gold on a count-back after a five-five tie on punches landed.
‘Kirk was outstanding,’ declared Ulster's team manager Jack Monaghan.
As a bronze medallist at the last two World Championships, Brown was everybody's favourite, but Stephen hit harder and more often.
His left jab might have been the cleanest scoring punch of the entire championships.
It was at the expense of last year's Irish champion Mark Delaney that Kirk, from the Cairnlodge club rose to Ulster title status some months ago and if the Games team of '94 was picked tomorrow, this lanky shipyard apprentice would be in it for certain.
Unlucky
Two others whose gold medal form in British Columbia caught the eye were Eddie Fisher and heavyweight Paul Douglas.
It could have been as an unlucky loser against Fisher in the Ulster championships that Stephen Gibson got this glamour trip, but there was nothing controversial about Eddie's win this time over the Immaculata lad.
He strolled home by a comfortable margin thanks to some good body work early on.
Douglas too looked good in a steam-rolling victory over the towering French Canadian Jean Bergeron.
Jim Webb was a real hero in defeat, according to manager Monaghan and maybe unlucky to lose a thrilling final against the hardest puncher of the week, Randall Thompson, a coloured Canadian.
‘Thompson is a street fighter and was warned several times for outlaw punches,’ says Jack.
‘They don't come any tougher than Webb, however, and with luck, his silver medal would have been gold.’
An off-key Danny Ryan lost to an Australian by 3-1 in the lowest scoring contest of the tournament, and Frankie Slane, at 18 the baby of this Ulster side and Colin McFarland were both beaten by Canadians on finals night.
Poll
Nearer home, former Olympic coach Gerry Storey topped the poll, as he always does, for Council election at the IABA's annual convention in Castlebar.
Antrim's new president collected 220 votes in all as the finances of the Association came in for some healthy but heated discussion.
Combination cooking…
THE FOOD scare of several years ago is now well behind us with microwave cooking back in vogue.
Combination ovens are the most popular models, allowing conventional cooking, grilling, combi convection which is conventional cooking combined with microwave and the combination of microwave and grilling.
The autocook option available on some models allows uncomplicated automatic programming.
Some Sharp models track the progress of the food as it cooks by assessing the moisture level.
Teenagers 50 years on
HAVE heard many stories of people running into old school friends after a number of years, but this one takes the biscuit.
Betty McCaw, who lives out Templepatrick way, tells me she was in the electricity showrooms the other day when she happened to catch the eye of another woman in the queue.
Recognition
From both there was a glint of recognition and Betty said, ‘hello, Sheena.’
‘It was Sheena Hawthorne, and it was the first time we had set eyes on each other for 50 years,’ Betty says.
‘We both went to Glenwood Public Elementary School, and though we were not close friends we were acquainted.
‘Features’
‘I just felt that though we were 14 when we last met there must have been something of the child left in our features to make us recognize each other after half a century.’
But the reunion almost ended as soon as it started, for after chatting for a time and parting, Betty realised they had not exchanged phone numbers.
‘I was feeling that was a pity when some hours later I was coming out of a supermarket and just happened to bump into Sheena again, and we arranged to make contact again,’ says Betty.
‘Secret’ operation for Hughes
THERE'S one good thing about living in faraway France; you can have a major knee operation and no-one knows about it.
Bet you didn't know Northern Ireland star Michael Hughes was under the knife several weeks ago?
No, neither did I. Would have made a good headline, wouldn't it…
Hughes in knee op scare, doubtful for Northern Ireland, etc.
But he's okay now and revving up for next week's World Cup group three game against Latvia at Windsor Park.
The Strasbourg winger missed the opening games of the new season but has featured in the last four with no ill effects from his ligament damage.
Ironically, it was against Latvia last season that Hughes first felt the twinges.
‘I saw a couple of specialists but nothing showed up.
Then, in the middle of pre-season training the knee got very painful,’ said the 22-year old.
‘This time an X-ray revealed the damage and I was packed off to hospital for surgery.’
‘I'm fine now and looking forward to getting home for a few days.
It seems a lifetime since I last played at Windsor Park.’
Actually, it was just under 11 months ago, when Denmark defeated Billy Bingham's side 1-0.
Since then there have been five away games, with Northern Ireland winning three and losing two.
Hughes and company ended last season on a high by winning in both Lithuania and Latvia and although the World Cup finals are now beyond them, they still want a strong finish over the last few games.
‘We may be out of the running but we can still have a big say in who goes through to the United States,’ said Hughes.
‘Remember, after Latvia we have Denmark away and the Republic at home.
It's shaping up to be an exciting climax to the group and I know Billy Bingham wants to end his managerial career on a high note.’
Certainly if Hughes plays against Latvia in Belfast the way he played against them in Riga the first of those farewell games for Bingham will yield another two points.
The 22-year old Larne man was devastating in the Baltic country; indeed, most of his performances on the continent have been top notch.
Remember the friendly against Germany in Bremen last year?
And the balmy night in Seville against Spain?
It begs the question however; when's he going to do it at Windsor Park?
So far the little flank-man has been solid and workmanlike in his home stadium.
No-one could accuse him of having a truly awful game at Windsor but we still await the ‘big one’ from Michael on Ulster soil.
Perhaps next week we will get it; Latvia are a hard-working side but no great shakes in international football.
In Riga they paid Hughes the compliment of putting two defenders on him but that merely created space for the other Northern Ireland players.
Bingham will be expecting a solid win and it will be disappointing if he doesn't get it.
The team should choose itself with Wright in goal, Fleming, Taggart, McDonald and Worthington in defence, a midfield of Donaghy, Wilson, Magilton and Hughes plus the strike pairing of Dowie and Gray.
Should things go well, it would be nice to see the likes of Darren Patterson and Keith Rowland getting a run.
They have been in the squad several times before but have yet to get on the pitch, even for a couple of minutes.
Bingham says they're ones for the future but how can we gauge their potential on a substitutes' bench.
As for young Pat McGibbon, he is unlikely to make the final panel on the day after his 20th birthday.
Like Patterson and company in the past, he is being brought along for the experience.
Meanwhile Hughes is hoping to double his strike rate for Northern Ireland.
That goal in Germany is his only one so far.
‘It's more than I've got for Strasbourg,’ he admitted.
‘Mind you, I'm regarded more as a provider than a goalscorer and I haven't done too badly in that department over the last couple of years.’
A ‘pint-sized’ pay-off line
I HAVE been hearing of a move on at the moment which, if it spreads, could see us all getting our pay in pints.
Not the drinking pints, but a unit of non-currency, a handy name for a replacement of cash.
The idea is called LETS, which stands for Local Exchange and Trading Systems, and apparently there is a group of about 30 people in Belfast already working the idea.
What happens is this.
Supposing you want your house rewired.
You get an electrician to do the job for you and you write him a cheque in pints.
He lodges it in his account with a LETS banker.
He, say, needs a new roof on his house, so he checks how much he has in his account, gets a roofer to do the job, and writes him a cheque in pints.
Handymen
And so it goes on.
If you don't want to trade in pints then you can barter goods against one another or against services.
‘In the Belfast group we have handymen, electricians and people like that, even baby sitters.
Mostly it is services which are traded, but goods can be used as well,’ says Mary Ringland, from the One World Centre in Belfast.
The idea, she says, is spreading throughout the world, and interest is growing here as well, with community groups beginning to look at it.
Hard cash
‘Anyone with skills to offer can take part,’ Mary says.
‘By its very nature it would appeal to unemployed people, although it is not geared towards them.’
The only drawback that I can find is that if the participation is not 100pc across the population then you still need hard cash.
‘That is quite true,’ Mary admits, ‘but a directory is published with the names of those involved so that you can select the services you want.’
And for those who think the idea is crazy, comes the last word from Mary.
‘It seems that in Australia, where LETS is very big, there are people who pay their tax by it.’
How exactly, she didn't quite know.
It's not my way to leave behind a wrecked side
I DIDN'T sleep too well on the night before our last Inter-Continental Cup match against Cuba in Poznan — I woke up at six o'clock in the morning thinking about the future of the Irish hockey team and began to put down some of my ideas on paper.
Although I cannot go into too much detail, I would like to look at players between the ages of 15 to 17, as they will hold the key to the future, but I don't think too many of them would be ready in time for the 1995 European championships in Dublin.
If I were to leave the job in 1995 or 1996 I would not want to leave behind a wrecked team because that's not my style.
I will be discussing with the Irish Hockey Union how far I would like to go — and then it will be a matter of reaching a compromise.
That would mean asking how far the players can be extended in terms of time and commitment.
Remember, many of them are married men with families and jobs.
In Holland, it is a different situation as most of the players are students and those that aren't are compensated financially for additional time off work.
It is not only a matter of picking the right players — schedules and choosing the right programmes will also be important if we aren't to be fighting out for seventh or eighth place in Dublin.
I take the squad to Holland every year and that is something I would like to see continued but I have other ideas which it may not be possible to put into practice.
Irish hockey coach Cees Koppelaar reflects on his team's failure to qualify for the World Cup and his plans for the future I know there was some criticism when I had to leave before the final inter-provincial game in Dublin last season — that was because of my club commitments in Holland.
All the time I feel guilty but, to a certain extent, I also have to make a living as coach to Leiden.
However, my contract with the club is up next May and then I will have more time on my hands, but I will still need help with the Irish job.
The problem will be finding the right type of assistance — John Clarke has been excellent, but I also need the McConnells, Martins and Filgases of this world.
Ireland, again unlike Holland, is a relatively big country and the players are spread over a wide area.
That too is a problem, but I must say that we were much better prepared for the Inter-Continental Cup than a couple of other tournaments — that only makes our failure to qualify more disappointing.
One of the main reasons on the pitch was our inability to convert opportunities.
If we had scored five or six more goals which the statistics prove was possible, then we would have been going to Sydney next year.
I put that down to a lack of maturity and the effects of tension — there were many occasions when players tried to blast the ball into the net at 100mph instead of remaining cool under pressure.
However, both my goalkeepers played exceptionally well in Poland, Gregg Sterritt did a good job in defence, Errol Lutton played with confidence and hits the ball strongly.
Paul Hollway did a good job as attacking full back while Alan Dowd was solid and performed capably when he joined the midfield and attack.
Jimmy Kirkwood improved greatly as the tournament went on while Rick Johnson was a revelation in midfield — so it certainly was not all negative in Poznan.
In an interview with John Flack
Upset?
Not us!
I WOULD just like to assure Raymond Campbell that he should not for one moment think that Glentoran fans will be upset about his move to Linfield.
It is a preposterous suggestion.
Firstly Raymond, you will not be called a ‘moneygrabber’ or ‘greedy.’
I mean, if a bank manager can earn that amount of money, why not a part-time footballer in the Irish League.
Also, never think that Glentoran fans regard you as a traitor because you want to move to our biggest rivals Linfield.
No Way!
Surely after three years with the Glens you have realised that we supporters also see Linfield as a superior team with superior resources.
I wish I could be like you and just give up the Glens for Linfield.
Unfortunately I have been diagnosed as a sufferer of ‘loyalistus onehundredpercentus.’
Well Soupy, all that's left is to wish you all the best, and roll on your first goal for Linfield.
I'll like it even more if I get to see it live against Glentoran.
It is only a game Raymond so do not think we will be upset with you.
I mean no one got upset with Alfie Stewart (did they?)
Drew Watson A little bit of cheek there, Drew…with your tongue firmly imbedded in it.
Big two ‘milked’ all the coverage
AS a devoted and dedicated follower of junior football, especially around the Lurgan area, I headed to the North West to take in the Milk Cup and follow the fortunes of my county team Armagh.
This year's Milk Cup competition actually proved to be the most successful ever for Northern Ireland teams with Co Armagh finishing fourth in the Premier Milk Cup U-16 section and Co Down and Co Fermanagh contesting the Plate final.
The introduction of league representative teams at U-14 level this year also was a plus for junior football in Northern Ireland.
Unfortunately despite this success I feel compelled to write this letter of complaint about certain aspects which undermine the efforts of managers, coaches and boys from this country who gave their all in this tournament.
The success achieved was not reflected in press and TV reports.
Indeed one could be forgiven for thinking only two teams has entered the tournament.
Of course, the participation of teams like Rangers and Manchester United have made the Milk Cup the most prestigious youth football competition in Europe and with the huge support they enjoy it would be naive not to accord them good coverage but let's also recognise fine results by local teams when they occur.
Promote
Surely Co Armagh's quarter final victory over favourites Slovakia warranted more than two lines in the middle of a Rangers match report.
The semi-final against Cherry Orchard was small print compared to the News Letter and Telegraph's build-up to the other semi-final between Rangers and Man United.
Every day as I bought these papers more photographs involving the big two appeared and not one of any local side.
Was the media told to promote visiting teams by the committee?
There also appears to be an anomaly in the system for deciding some awards.
Teams from the Republic, if they win the Milk Cup, are also automatically awarded two other trophies.
For teams north and south of the border who have done well and they are classed as foreign for the Tourist Board's crystal trophy for the best visiting team.
A team from Northern Ireland would only receive one of these awards.
I truly feel Co Armagh should have been the winners of the Irish award as Cherry Orchard fully deserved the visiting award.
Brian Gordon Laudable sentiments Brian, but I have a funny feeling the organisers were more than glad that a big name team made it to the final.
They bring out the big crowds which stimulate the competition.
Mind you, the performances of the Cherry Orchard — and the Orchard County — were more than noteworthy.
Support lacking
HAVING watched Carrick Rangers through the years from as far back as the B Division days I feel I must comment on the pathetic lack of support given to the manager by the board.
Last season Kenny Shiels worked absolute miracles in transforming a team of very average players into one of the most attractive footballing sides in Ulster, culminating in a well deserved trophy — the Co Antrim Shield.
Now that a new season is upon us, I and a lot of other Carrick supporters were looking forward with very much optimism and excitement to challenging and competing seriously in all competitions.
Not that I think Carrick will win very much but at least they would be recognised as serious contenders.
Having watched, however, the last two home games against Linfield and Bangor, I now feel as pessimistic as ever.
Okay Linfield and Bangor are probably two of the best teams in Irish football but the point I'm making is that Carrick's team deficiencies were blatantly exposed for all to see.
How on earth can Kenny Shields sweat blood again this season and achieve success especially now when points in the league are so crucial when he's not ‘allowed’ to strengthen his team when everyone can see it needs to be strengthened.
If Kenny Shields isn't allowed to buy players soon, instead of being expected to rely on free transfers etc, then it is going to be a very, very long season for all at Carrick when everyone has been looking forward to so much.
‘Wise up’ the powers that be or else all last year's good work will be lost forever.
My prophecy is that if the powers that be don't support the manager and buy players then the best manager Carrick have had since the glory days of Jimmy.
Brown will resign!
A very frustrated Carrick supporter Perhaps if a few more ‘frustrated supporters’ came through the turnstiles on a Saturday the problem wouldn't exist.
Carrick deserve better support than they're getting at present.
Malcolm is no Blueman
I FIND it absolutely incredible that last week's contributor, the anonymous Carrick fan, can come off with the statement ‘Everyone knows Mr Brodie likes Linfield’.
I have just read through his reports of Linfield games, in the ‘Ulster’ last season.
You'll have to go a very long way to find a series of more disparaging, gloom laden, negative reports, and this, in a season when Linfield's performances actually won them the league!
A couple of examples which bear this out are: After Linfield played out a goal-less draw at Coleraine in September, Mr B described the game as drab with nothing to recommend it.
And as early as the fifth game of the league campaign, following defeat at Distillery, Mr B told anyone who cared to listen that ‘Linfield's league title hopes were slipping away’.
After just five games?
Hope you didn't have too much trouble removing the egg from your face Malcolm!
Admittedly not all Linfield's games are classics, whose are?
But it got to the stage that I dreaded seeing Mr B's smiling face in the press box at Blues games, as it was sure to mean another gloom and doom match report in the ‘Ulster’ that night.
B Wilson He was also the only person who tipped Linfield to win the championship last season but perhaps you forgot about that.
Lithuania cut it fine
FAI officials are getting worried that Lithuania are cutting things a bit fine in their travel arrangements for Wednesday's World Cup qualifier in Dublin.
The Lithuanian party, including 100 fans and 20 journalists, are not due to arrive at Dublin airport until 1.30 on Tuesday afternoon.
FIFA rules state that away teams must arrive at their destination at last 24 hours before the scheduled kick-off time and Wednesday's game gas a 2.45 start.
If Lithuania are delayed the match could be ruled as a void fixture and that's something the FAI don't dare even think about.
‘The Lithuanian FA say they expect to arrive between 1.00 and 1.30 but they seem rather vague.
It's also worrying that we don't have a flight number yet,’ said an FAI spokesman.
After Wednesday's game striker Niall Quinn could be on his way to Sheffield Wednesday.
Quinn has made no secret of his disapproval of the manner in which Manchester City axed manager Peter Reid and he's an obvious target for Wednesday who will be seeking a top class replacement for Paul Warhurst.
Everton are also in the hunt for Quinn.
Preparing
‘I know nothing about any Sheffield Wednesday interest,’ said Quinn.
‘At the moment I'm just concerned with preparing for the Lithuanian game.
‘I will speak to City chairman Peter Swales when I get back to Manchester on Thursday.’
Kicked out Tbilisi to appeal European Cup axe
DINAMO TBILISI confirmed today they WILL appeal against their dismissal from the European Cup for allegedly bribing officials before the first leg of the preliminary tie against Linfield in Georgia two weeks ago.
‘We have hired six lawyers from different countries and sent an appeal to UEFA.
God and the truth are on our side,’ Nukri Kakilashvili, a member of the Georgian soccer federation's directorate, said on national television.
The UEFA control and disciplinary committee said Dinamo had arranged for 5,000 dollars to be paid to the referee, linesmen and fourth official before the home game on August 18.
Kakilashvili said: ‘We had received a letter from UEFA instructing us to cover expenses for referees, so on the eve of the match a number of officials presented four envelopes to the referee (and linesmen).
The envelopes contained a total of 5,000 dollars,’ he said.
‘Suddenly we received a note according to which these dollars had been interpreted as a bribe.’
Dinamo were suspended from this year's competition and from the next European club competition for which they qualify.
The team won the first leg 2-1 and drew the second leg in Belfast on Wednesday night to qualify for the first round of the tournament.
Lolly and folly — Pages 16 and 17
Ian crowned Regal king
IAN KING is the new Regal 600cc Motorcycling champion.
But he failed in his ambition to beat his idol, Joey Dunlop, when he finished a close second to the maestro in today's Carrowdore 100.
With four more rounds to go King cannot be caught but he was still disappointed when he spoke afterwards about a race during which victory was snatched from his grasp only a few miles from the finish.
‘I was in the lead at Carrowdore Village on the last lap and I thought that Joey couldn't possibly catch me.
‘It's been a lifelong ambition of mine to beat him but at the big jump before Ballyboley Corner, Joey whizzed past me and although I tried to catch him again and take a tight line at Ballyboley he had just too much experience and he held on to beat me.
‘Although I'm champion and it's been a wonderful year I feel I can't truly call myself the title holder until I beat Joey on the roads.’
It certainly was touch and go for Dunlop who was registering his fourth Regal win on the Ulster roads this year.
Joey doesn't compete in the short circuit section of the championship in which King has excelled but he has generally been in command between the hedges and today it looked like the same old story when he took the lead after the first lap.
However, King was determined to catch him and he moved into the lead for the next two laps before Joey hit back and with a speed of 110.34mph regained the advantage.
Third place went to Johnnie Rea who was the only rider likely to catch King in the championship but even if Rea wins the next four rounds — both at Bishopscourt — King cannot be caught.
Dunlop also ended up with the fastest lap with a speed of 110.64mph on the last lap.
Dunlop continued to set the pace when winning the 250cc McBride Fashions Irish Championship race from Davy Johnston with Stephen Hazlett, third.
Earlier in the day Joey finished second to brother Robert in the Shell 125cc race after leading for the first three laps.
Robert was never far away, however, and he took the lead on the lap before the finish to run out the winner of a tight contest.
Third place went to Denis McCullough but the hard luck story of the race belonged to Phelim Owens who had to take a slip road at Cardy Corner when lying fourth then rejoined the race in 10th place before ending up back where he had started — in fourth place.
With another couple of laps he might have finished close on the heels of the two Dunlops.
There was a spectacular incident at the finish of the race when Jonathan Aiken, in attempting to squeeze past a bunch of riders at the line, clipped a grass verge and bounced across the track but although he took a nasty looking fall he was uninjured.
Britain take silver medal
BRITAIN'S dressage riders made history today when they took a European Championship team silver medal in Lipica, Slovenia.
It is the first time a British team has ever won a dressage medal and only the second in any major international championship.
The only other previous success was in 1978 when Jennie Loriston-Clarke won an individual bronze in the world championships at Goodwood.
Emile Faurie, from Gloucestershire, got them underway yesterday when he became the first Briton to reach 1600 marks and today Laura Fry was only 20 points below on Quarryman, while Richard Davison, the last of the team, won 1483 points on Master JCB.
Faurie finished seventh and Fry eighth in the international placings.
Tommy's gunning
IRISH 25 mile time-trial champion Tommy Evans (Banbridge CC) added the Ulster 10 mile championship to his titles with victory over Cormac McCann (Phoenix CC) in the Team Trainor Solicitors promotion on a new course at Nutts Corner.
Evans started favourite following a string of victories at the distance which included twice breaking the Irish record last month.
However McCann, who got to within 8 seconds of him last Saturday in the Movilla 10, started very quickly and at the turn, which he reached in 9.30, he was 10 seconds up on the Banbridge man.
Davy McCall of the promoting club was third at this stage in 9.54 while 4th fastest was Scott Hamilton (Banbridge) in 10.00 leading the juniors.
The return leg was into the wind and included a 2 mile drag from Nutts Corner roundabout on the Belfast Road and Evans, turning his 100 inch fixed gear clawed back to once again beat McCann by 8 seconds with a time of 21.32.
David McCann (Phoenix CC), who had been 6th at the turn in 10.10, came back quicker to take the bronze in 22.39.
Hamilton faded somewhat finishing 6th fastest but was an easy winner of the junior title in 23.07, ahead of Ryan Lyttle (Team Devlin) 24.46 and Paul McConaghie (Team Route) 26.01.
Irish under-16 10 miles TT champion John Grant took the under-age gold with 23.39, a time which was equal 10th fastest of the day.
Kirk Sloan (Ards CC) took silver and new Irish under-15 champion Denis Cormican (Phoenix) the bronze.
Irish 25-mile ladies champion Claire Moore gave Trainor Solicitors a home win in the ladies championship after Aishling Baird (Phoenix CC) had led her to the turn but lost over a minute on the run back.
Mary Stewart (Phoenix) was third.
Rallying Leckey leads around Lakes
JAMES Leckey led the Lakeland Stages Rally by 35 seconds after six of today's eight scheduled tests.
In glorious sunshine the Hillsborough driver took the lead on stage one with his Village Homes Escort Cosworth, and opened up a one minute margin over championship leader Stephen Emerson, before centre differential failure saw his lead almost cut in half.
Second placed Emerson struggled for grip in his two-wheel-drive Opel Manta, complaining of a marble like surface in the County Fermanagh forests.
But in terms of the Maxol Northern Ireland championship he had little to worry him.
Rivals
Emerson's closest rivals for the title, Philip Young and Garth McCartney both retired their Sierra Cosworth early in the proceedings.
McCartney suffered from throttle linkage problems while Young put the Solaglass car in a ditch on stage two.
A strong performance from Lionel Kerr in the G3 Escort has brought him up the leaderboard to third overall with Ken Graham (Toyota Corolla) and Jon Joannides (Sierra Cosworth) rounding off the top five.
North-West Cup Moyola Park 1 Tobermore Utd 0
THIS first round North West Cup tie between Moyola Park and Tobermore United, the second meeting within eight days, proved more entertaining.
Both sets of forwards put their respective defences under pressure for periods and Moyola in particular, with Lavery having a good game, missed a couple of scoring opportunities, especially when Calderwood failed to take advantage of a good cross from Devine in the 35th minute.
Tobermore's best chance came five minutes later when Reid sent to Pattison, but he fumbled and his effort went wide.
Moyola looked the more likely to get the winning score on the resumption and it came when Ruddock, who was unlucky earlier with a header which struck the Tobermore upright, sent in from the wing in the 79th minute and their big outside left Calderwood was on hand to head to the net.
At the other end former Bangor striker Francis Smith, making his first appearance for Tobermore, went close after receiving a good ball from White on the right wing.
Banbridge Town 1 Dungannon Swifts 3
THE visitors were the first to threaten danger as Swifts looked to get onto a winning run, but from a right wing cross Douglas shot over when well placed.
As the half progressed Banbridge came more into the game and in the 29th minute.
Montgomery made a timely intervention through Sneddon after the latter had been put through by Kerr.
Hanley made two fine saves from the dangerous Mackey.
In the 50th minute Dungannon forced a corner on the left which was taken by Denver whose cross deceived the home defence to enter the net.
Five minutes later they were two up when the home defence got into an awful tangle and Denver was at hand to shoot home.
Banbridge tried hard to get back into the game but Dungannon stuck again in the 75th minute when Denver beat Hanley with a neat lob to complete his hat-trick.
With two minutes left Sneddon scored a consolation goal for Banbridge.
Cookstown Utd 1 Armagh Cty 1
IN the first few minutes Armagh could have opened the scoring when Eugene Mullan was forced to pull off a string of good saves.
Just on the quarter hour mark, Armagh City were again denied the opening when Jason Murtagh saw his 15-yard volley brilliantly saved by Mullan in the Cookstown goals.
In the 55th minute Cookstown opened the scoring through Colin Bell who latched onto a flick from Bobby Foster before drilling the ball past Farrell in the visitors' goal.
In the 28th minute of the half Cookstown's goal scorer was again played through by McGreavy but his stinging 15 yard volley clipped the Armagh crossbar.
In the dying seconds of the match Jason Murtagh grabbed his side a share of the spoils with a brilliant dipping volley which flew into the top corner of the Cookstown net.
Parents in attack on Adams
THE parents of Warrington bomb victim Tim Parry have attacked Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams for snubbing their invitation to meet face-to-face.
In a Panorama documentary on Monday night, Tim's father Colin will say: ‘I wanted to look at the man, to hear his voice and to ask him directly about how he could be in league with an organisation like the IRA.
‘I feel that he would be extremely uncomfortable looking back at me, holding my gaze and him trying to tell me that the loss of Tim was merely the unfortunate by-product of a war against Britain.
‘The answer that we received was that to talk to us on film would be voyeurism at its worst.
I think this is an absolutely disgusting thing to say, to appear to make voyeurism a worse sin than the murder of my son.’
Striders setting the pace
AFTER 10 events in the Panasonic Athletics League at the Antrim Forum, Annadale Striders were comfortably ahead of Ballymena and Antrim, Lisburn and Sparta.
In the women's inter-club competition Lagan Valley and Lisburn were locked together, with Lisburn edging ahead in the overall placings.
Annadale started well as Jim Campbell took the 1500 metres in 3.47.37, just ahead of club mate Dermot Donnelly who won the B event in 3.47.43.
The 400 metre hurdles were close with Ian Neely just beating Darren Gallagher who hit the last hurdle.
Alison Moffitt of North Down broke her own Northern Ireland javelin record with a throw of 47.54 metres.
She later took the discus with 39.72 metres.
Adam Smith of Annadale set produced a 13.59 triple jump to come second to Micky McDonald of Ballymena and Antrim who recorded 13.76 metres.
John McAdorey, also Ballymena and Antrim, won the 100 metres with 11.19 while the womens' race went to Vivienne McGolderick who later added the 200.
The men's 400 metres went to Lisburn's Paul McBurney in 49.40 with Lagan Valley's Louise Hutchinson clocking 57.56 to win the women's race.
Her team mate Karen Bleakley won the B event.
Vicki Jamison, of Lagan Valley, had a double in 100 and 400 hurdles while Bobby Farren, of Sparta, lead all the way to win the 5000 metres in 14 minutes 11.87 with Noel McMonagle winning the B race.
Annadale had another double as Gary Gallagher and Ricky Dunn took the 110 hurdles.
There was good high jumping with Darragh Murphy, from North Down, clearing 1.97 metres in Division Two as Peter Hazlett from Annadale took the top event with 1.92.
The 800 was close as Eddie King, from Ballymena and Antrim, finished fast to beat Brian Tracey, of Annadale, in 1.52.65.
Eoin O'Neill from Annadale won the B race.
Pauline Quinn of Ballymena and Antrim took the women's race from Jill Bruce of Dromore who had earlier taken the 1500.
Annadale storm back
ANNADALE came from behind to beat Glasgow Western 2-1 at Blaris this afternoon, booking themselves a place in tomorrow's semi-finals against either Lisnagarvey or Ballynahinch.
Stephen Galway grabbed a superbly crafted winner with 11 minutes on the clock after a bizarre own-goal and cancelled out the Scot's opener.
Western forced three penalty corners in the opening half and, from their third award, Annadale keeper Drew Larmour saved well from Steven Menzies in the 14th minute.
Eleven minutes later Andrew McBride saw his set piece effort deflected past the post by a defender's stick.
But, within 60 seconds, the visitors opened the scoring when former International, Niall Sturrock, beat Larmour at the second attempt with a well placed lob after a poor clearance by Nicky Blease had produced the initial chance.
But Annadale levelled in the 41st minute when Chris Jackson sent John Stephens clear and his cross was turned into the net by a Western defender.
Eight minutes later Jackson was again involved in the winner when he slipped an early ball through to Andrew Smyth who found Stephens and Galway finished clinically from the pass which followed.
Dunmurry Rec 0 Drumaness Mills 3
Drumaness Mills have not conceded a goal this season and they again recorded a blank sheet when beating Dunmurry Rec 3-0 in the first round of the Steel & Sons Cup at Ashley Park.
Paul Reynolds held off the challenge of John McPherson to put Drumaness ahead seven minutes from half time and even though a Dunmurry effort was cleared off the line it was Drumaness who squandered the scoring chances in the first half.
Stevie Gallagher's shot was brilliantly saved by Andy Blackwood as Dunmurry came back in the second half but the visitors went two ahead through a penalty by Andy McMenamin and the cross from the right was turned in by Gareth Healey for the third with eight minutes left.
Ballymoney United 3 Dunmurry Young Men 2
BALLYMONEY progressed into the second round with a comfortable victory over Dunmurry.
Having been reduced to ten men after only 15 minutes, they continued to make chance after chance but went in at half time with only two goals of an advantage.
Neill knocked home from six yards after Moore delivered a fine cross for the opener, then shortly before half time McFeeley got the second with a neat lob from 18 yards.
From the 70th minute onwards it was all action.
Having most of the action Ballymoney lost their concentration and gave the ball away for McNaugh to finish from a tight angle.
The response was immediate.
McFeeley received inside the area, turned inside and drove home with his right foot.
But with only ten minutes remaining yet another slip-up handed Lawther the opportunity to make it 3-2 and set up an exciting finish which should never have been.
Dunluce up in the Ayr
THE crack Dunluce trio of Billy Moffitt, Jeremy Henry and Ian McClure are heading for the British Isles Championships in Ayr next summer.
Today at Blackrock they scored a 23-14 win over the Ballymena triple of Willy McCandless, Jack Robinson and Roy McCune in the IBA National Final.
Although this trio again blended well together it was the tremendous ability of McClure which sealed the ticket to Ayr.
The Irish selectors were out in force preparing to pick the Northern Ireland bowls team for the Commonwealth Games in Canada next year and no doubt the young Portrush man could feature in their plans.
For Ballymena it turned out to be a ‘Bad Day at Blackrock’.
They held them in the first half of the game and were only 12-10 down after 10 ends.
However the front end of the Ballymena triple failed to produce the same consistency in the second half of the game, otherwise it may well have been a different story.
But let's take nothing away from the Portrush champions — they are a very talented outfit.
And what a great day it was for 82-year-old George Mitchell of the Belmont Club.
George, playing at No. 3 to Brian Daly, turned in another five star performance when helping his rink to a rather one-sided 27-6 win over the Dunluce four skipped by Malcolm McMullan.
Once Belmont picked up an opening end count of five, Dunluce were in big trouble.
After 10 ends the score was 18-1 and the match was over as a contest.
No matter how hard the Provincial champions tried to eat into the massive margin the worse it became for them.
Yes, it was just one of those days when Belmont's name was on the cup right from the off.
And Colin Best has brought the Irish Singles title back to his club Willowfield after a 21-13 victory over Noel Weir from Rathfriland.
It was a solid performance by Best who outdrew the NIBA champion but it was also a gallant attempt by Weir, who plays more golf than bowls.
It was nip and tuck up to 7-7 before Best opened up a 12-9 lead.
He extended it to 17-10 and 19-13 before finishing Weir off with a double.
‘Colin played very well and I have no regrets’, said Weir after the game.
Meanwhile, in the Doubles final Ian McClure was heading for his second Irish title when he built up a 19-6 lead after 13 ends over James Talbot and Michael Nutt of Old Bleach.
McClure was in his usual brilliant form opening up a 7-1 lead after five ends and then extending that to 14-3 at the halfway stage.
In the Junior Singles final John Nolan of Blackrock looked almost certain to go through to the British Isles Championship when he led Belmont's Paul Daly 20-11.
Daly was attempting to also win a double championship after winning the fours title with his father earlier today but he didn't show the same consistency against Nolan as he did in yesterday's semi-final when he beat NIBA champion Martin McHugh from Carrickfergus 21-10.
Knock's Freda Elliott has beaten Eileen Bell (Saintfield) to win the Bangor Ladies Open tournament.
M Jardine and M Campbell (Banbridge) won the doubles with Pickie pair M Morgan and E Thompson runners-up.
Damien wins battle of VWs
AFTER a great Formula VW race at Kirkistown this afternoon Damien Doherty emerged as the winner.
Stephen Pyper pressured him all the way, while Alister McKerr the championship leader fought tooth and nail to take third having started in midfield after problems in practice.
David Pyper was also among those battling in front in the early stages but eventually dropped back and settled for fourth.
Tommy Reid could manage only fourth in the pre-85 Formula Ford race.
He led off the line and stayed in front for five of the 15 laps before driving into the pits to have a misfire cured.
He emerged in sixth spot and fought his way back to fourth at the finish.
Up front Lawrence Martin kept his cool, and his inherited lead under intense pressure from Lawrence Knox and Raymond Pyper.
Knox made a desperate bid to get in front at the last corner but Martin held his line and emerged the winner.
With only seven Peugeot 205's on the grid, the much-hoped-for ‘saloonatic’ battle was a bit sparsely populated.
However those who were present did their best to entertain and possibly tried a little too hard in some cases.
Joe Foley led for much of the distance, but once Belfast's Stephen Mely had fought his way clear of a rather physical confrontation with Michael Cullen he closed on Foley and moved ahead with two of the 15 laps left.
However, the incident involving Mely and Cullen had come to the attention of the stewards with the result that both were penalised.
Foley therefore became the official winner with Alan Dawson second, Mervyn Miller third and Cullen and Mely in fourth and fifth places.
David Apsley scored his second win in as many meetings with his Sylva Striker kit car.
Initially Roy Porter chased hard in his Westfield, but when the pair came round to lap the Metro class for the first time, Porter fell foul of the squabbling saloons and dropped back.
As expected, Lloyd Fowler was the start to finish leader of the Modsports Race.
Once an early challenge from George Crozier's Metro had been beaten off the former hot rod driver simply ran away with the race in his Westfield.
The only incident reported was when one of Fowler's teddy bear mascots fell out of the car at Debtors Dip.
Marshalls were happily able to restore it to its owner after the race in perfect health.
In the Metro race, Alan Souter won ahead of Mark Leathemand Peter Carvill.
Davies still lying third
BRITAIN'S Laura Davies hit two early birdies but was able to pick up only one shot on overnight leader Marie-Laure de Lorenzi in the third round of the Waterford Dairies English Open at Tytherington today.
De Lorenzi had led at seven under par after opening rounds of 67 and 70, three strokes clear of Sweden's Sofia Gronberg with Davies a further three strokes behind.
Davies, the holder, carded birdies at the second and third holes to move to three under but de Lorenzi, the Barcelona-based French golfer responded immediately.
De Lorenzi started her round with birdies at the first two holes then dropped a shot at the short third hole to stand at eight under.
It left the French golfer four strokes ahead of Gronberg, with Davies one stroke further behind, to be sharing third place with Annika Sorenstam from Sweden.
BRITAIN'S Nigel Short and Russia's Gary Kasparov finally begin their £1.6m battle for the world crown in London on Tuesday.
And with a Briton involved, the marathon two month battle is set to get massive television coverage.
Throughout next week BBC-2 and Channel 4 are covering the match which carries the biggest prize fund in chess history — £1m to the winner and £600,000 to the loser.
Terminology
But chess can be a pretty confusing game for non-players with some odd terminology.
So if you don't know the difference between a fork and a desperado, we hope our brief guide below will help you understand some of terms you are likely to hear in the coming weeks.
The game itself features 28-year-old Short against the cocky genius Kasparov, 30, who is rated the greatest chess player of all time.
Short was such a brilliant child player that he was paying tax on his winnings at 12 — although schoolwork came less easily and he only managed four O-levels.
The Lancashire lad has managed to live with the pressures of early success and on Tuesday will make his bid for the game's top prize against it's greatest ever player.
RANK: lines of squares across the board.
FILES: lines of squares down the board.
CAPTURE: the taking of an enemy's piece.
CHECK: an attack on the opponent's king that must be met immediately either by moving the king, capturing the threatening enemy piece or protecting the king with a piece or pawn.
CHECKMATE or MATE: when a player cannot get his king out of check, the king is checkmated and the game is over.
STALEMATE: when a king is not in check and when his side cannot make a legal move, the position is called a stalemate and the game is a draw.
DESPERADO: when a piece is trapped or doomed to capture or is blocking its own pieces it is deemed ‘desperado’ and runs amok, kamikaze style.
THE FORK: where one piece attacks two enemy pieces at the same time.
Only one piece will be able to move and the other will be captured.
GAMBIT: an opening which involves planned sacrifices.
SWINDLE: a lucky victory where a player in a lost position sets a last trap which his opponent falls into.
ENDGAME: the final phase of the game when most of the pieces have been removed from the board.
Some of the rules change at this stage.
GRANDMASTER DRAW: a short drawn game where neither player has made any real effort to fight and both are happy to settle for a draw.
TOP KARATE FIGHTERS GIVE BOSSES THE CHOP Although we are still members of the board, we want nothing to do with it…
ULSTER's top karate experts have given the sport's governing body the chop.
The province's four main tournament organisations have broken away from the controlling Northern Ireland Karate Board and have now formed a rival umbrella group of their own.
And 800 of the best fighters in Northern Ireland — including the holders of nine out of 11 Northern Ireland team titles — are to boycott this year's provincial championships in November.
They all belong to clubs affiliated to either the Ulster Karate Association, the Ulster Karate Federation, the Karate Union of Ireland or UK Karate do Wado kai.
Frustrated
The four groups have joined forces to form the Ulster Karate Council, and have set dates for unofficial provincial championships in October.
‘We have become disillusioned and frustrated with just about every aspect of NIKB life,’ said spokesman Terry Boyle, the chief instructor of the Ulster Karate Association.
‘Although we are all still members of the Board, we want nothing more to do with it.
Without Northern Ireland's finest and most successful competitors from our clubs, the Board's championships will be meaningless.’
Mr Boyle accused the NIKB of allowing standards of instruction and refereeing at tournaments to drop to a dangerously low standard.
‘In Northern Ireland now we now have junior Kyu grades used to assess black belt kata.
That's like O-level students marking University exam papers — it's crazy!’ he added.
However the Sports Council for Northern Ireland is still backing the Northern Ireland Karate Board.
‘The rival body the Ulster Karate Council is not recognised by the Sports Council.
It does not exist,’ said a spokesman.
Terry Boyle (right) of the Ulster Karate Association, joins Robert Hamilton and Oliver Redden in putting the boot into the Northern Ireland Karate Board.
Hillsborough's first Oyster Festival takes place next Saturday with an all-day extravaganza in aid of Pantridge Heart Charity at the
RVH.
The fun includes wine tasting, vintage car display, bouncy castles, pony rides, music and sumo wrestling.
Tickets, £2.50, are available from The Plough restaurant in Hillsborough.
by Future Ozbek at Earth Clothing.
FAR RIGHT: Frill fronted waistcoat, reduced to £72.50 and matching skirt £54.50.
Both by Future Ozbek at Earth Clothing.
‘I would rip him apart, limb from limb’, say father of victim
DEATH THREAT TO SEX FIEND
Six of the best from Derry
How can you pick three people from 12, when everyone of them is excellent.
You can't — you pick six instead, and that's just how it was at the Delacroix in Derry.
A firm decision was taken at the onset of the competition to have 12 finalist.
The Delacroix date put paid to that idea.
Through to the final go singers, Denise McGrory, Lorraine Walker, Clare McLoon and Sharon Nixon.
The boys did their bit, too.
Tascam made it with a bit of the old ‘Come All Ye’ and mouths fell open ‘aghast’when Mr Magic, Sam Woods, placed his assistant in a cabinet, broke it down into five separate pieces, and put her back together again, except that now her head replaced her knee-caps!
Confused?
So were the judges.
I hope he can find a good surgeon before the final…
FOR P1 SUNDAY, AUGUST 29, 1993 50p (60p Irish Republic) Printed and published by Belfast Telegraph Newspapers Ltd, at Royal Avenue, Belfast, BT1 1EB, Northern Ireland.
(Telephone 331133; Fax 248968).
Flower festival
THE first ever flower festival to be held in Monaghan is scheduled for St Macarten's Cathedral from October 1-3.
The event, organised by Monaghan Flower and Gardening Club is aimed at attracting hundreds of people from both sides of the border.
Cigar sensation!
BELGIUM, a country famous for luxury chocolates and gourmet food, now boasts the world's biggest after-dinner cigar.
The cigar is 20ft 10in long and weighs 873lb.
It was put on display last night in the northern Belgian town of Onkerzele and was rolled with 9,300 tobacco leaves and took 334 hours to make.
WINNERS
Clocking-in: the lucky winners in our Lunns/Tag Heuer competition.
Pictured with their new timepieces are (from left) Daniel McVicker, Heather McAlister, Alex Morrow from Lunn's Jewellers in Belfast; William Conway and Imelda McVeigh.
Our two other winners, who were unable to attend the prize-giving ceremony, were I Mainie from Antrim and Ms W Murphy of Donaghcloney, who have already received their watches.
Cheeky Channel Islanders try to snatch top tournament ‘Blank cheque’ bid to poach Milk Cup
SUCCESS STORY: Cherry Orchard captain Elton Kennedy celebrates winning this year's under-16 tournament with Natalie Caughey and Dairy Council chairman Gordon Kirkpatrick By NEIL MULHOLLAND
LOADSAMONEY businessmen from the Channel Islands have made an audacious bid to ‘poach’ Northern Ireland's top youth soccer tournament.
The all-star Northern Ireland Milk Cup tournament is the glamour event that attracts Europe's finest young footballers to Ulster.
It is of the most successful international sporting fixtures ever staged in Ulster and draws youth teams from Manchester United, Rangers and other top continental squads.
But it is now under threat from a consortium of millionaire promoters from Jersey who have offered a ‘blank cheque’ for the rights to stage future tournaments.
Approach
They want to move the whole competition — lock, stock and barrel — out of the province entirely and turn in into the Jersey Milk Cup.
A spokesman for the organising committee has confirmed to Sunday Life that a serious approach has been made from a entrepreneur in St Helier.
The outrageous buy-out proposal will be seriously discussed at the next committee meeting on September 6.
However it is almost certain that the offer will be rejected.
‘It may sound a crackpot idea to transfer the Northern Ireland Milk Cup to Jersey, but I can confirm that a serious approach has been made and it will be respected as such when we meet to discuss it,’ said spokesman Jim Sandford.
‘It would appear that money is no object to the people behind this offer,’ he added.
‘If the offer is accepted, it would be the end of the Milk Cup as we know it.’
However Mr Sandford stressed that every member of the organising committee was fully committed to the tournament which was launched in 1983.
‘We have spent 10 years of hard work building up the reputation of the Northern Ireland Milk Cup and we will not let go of it lightly,’ he said.
The man behind the take-over bid is understood to be a key figure in the Jersey tourist industry and has been trying unsuccessfully for years to get a Channel Island summer soccer tournament off the ground.
But top British and continental clubs were not simply interested because of the astonishing success of the Milk Cup in Northern Ireland.
So now the Channel Islands businessmen want to buy out what they cannot beat.
Shelling out on eggstravaganza
JIM JOHNSTON is a real egghead — and his house is a real Aladdin's Cave of eggstraordinary creations to prove it.
Fantastic carriages in silver and gilt, musical clocks, gramophones and thermometers have been painstakingly built around delicate eggshells in his Antrim home.
For Jim and his wife Joan are leading members of a growing band of enthusiasts for the hobby of ‘egg craft’.
The retired couple hatched the idea three years ago after seeing a demonstration on TV.
They contacted the Egg Crafters Guild and were put in touch with its president in Northern Ireland, Holywood woman Jean Dagnall.
The Johnstons have made more than 100 egg creations in the past three years and have travelled as far as Australia and American to pursue their hobby.
‘People think egg craft is very hard, but it is not,’ said Jim.
‘They look at the work and think ‘I could never do that.
The egg would break’.
But it is a very therapeutic pastime.’
The first stage is buying the eggs.
Jim uses duck, pigeon, hen, turkey and ostrich varieties.
The next stage is removing the white and yoke.
This is done by blowing through the egg leaving just the shell.
The eggs are then disinfected and left to dry.
‘It is all about using your imagination,’ John said.
‘The designs are all inside your head.’
IN THE final paragraph of his article on Ulster tennis (Sunday Life 15.8.93), John Flack poses two questions —
1.
‘Whether the juniors in the previous decade had the commitment’, and
2.
‘Whether the Ulster administration provided the right opportunities’.
The likely answer to the first is —‘Yes, probably,’ and to the second —‘No definitely not!’
I would ask of the game's administrators here in Ulster is — when the money was being made freely available to provide all kinds of sports and leisure facilities here, where was the Ulster Council of the Lawn Tennis Association?.
Funds
In the relatively affluent days of the 70s and early 80s leisure centres, squash courts and swimming pools sprang up all over the place, much of it made available through international funds.
Unfortunately local officials seemed unable to look beyond the confines of their own little scene and the opportunity to develop the game here was lost.
Talent
Don't be surprised therefore, if young peoples' interests have developed in the direction of other sports.
It has always been thus in Ulster tennis which has had an amazing ability over the years to lose its talent to other activities.
Even Peter Jackson, our one great player, became an extremely disillusioned man and vanished from the scene at too early an age.
Someone needs to take a long hard look at what has happened to tennis in Ulster over the last 20 years.
Lew.
Tennis talent badly served in province
Time travellers fly high
All aboard!
Visitors to the Heritage Plaza can enjoy a bird's eye view of the facilities in on of the centre's special ‘armoured’ cars.
New shopping centre mirrors town's history
PLAZA'S PAST PLEASURES
THE Heritage Plaza is an attractively finished shopping mall forming part of the popular Knight Ride complex right in the centre of Carrickfergus.
The Plaza boasts a total of seven shop units together with a restaurant, tourist information centre and Knight Ride gift shop.
All the shop units in the shopping mall have been designed in period style, reflecting the rich architectural history of the town.
Retailers
Letting agents Whelan Best believe that Heritage Plaza is ideally suited to a wide variety of retailers, including the owners of gift shops, bookshops, craft shops, antique and fashion and accessory outlets.
The shop units are available on very flexible lease terms with a generous rent free period.
Units range in size from c. 660 sq ft to c. 860 sq ft and are available immediately on attractive annual rentals with low service charge and minimal overheads.
A number of units are already under offer and excellent opportunities exist on the remaining units.
Carrickfergus has already proved itself to be a popular commuter town with a population of over 32,500.
And each year tens of thousands of visitors visit the town to see its historic castle and other Norman features.
Original
In fact Knight Ride has to be one of the most original and exciting shopping malls in Europe.
It's a place where history mingles with modern consumerism and where education as well as the weekly shopping chores are made fun and exciting.
Knight Ride, the only monorail themed ride in Ireland, is a great place to bring family or friends as part of a day out in Carrickfergus.
Present day ‘time travellers’ step into a specially designed car and are taken on an exciting trip through more than 1,000 years of Carrickfergus history.
Maritime
First visitors ride high above the shopping mall, weaving through sailing ships and shoals of fish, hearing all about the towns' maritime past.
Next you come to the dark ride where history takes on a life of its own and light, movement and sound come together to give you a realistic living picture of the town and its history.
Frequent promotional activities in the mall are essential to the success of any shopping centre, and Carrickfergus Heritage Plaza has a full programme of innovative promotional events planned ensuring a focal point of interest at the centre.
Leisure
If you are interested in joining in the success of this high quality leisure and retail development contact letting and managing agents Whelan Best on (0232) 233641.
HIGHWAY TO FINAL FAME
THE Highways in Larne was the venue packed to the seams with enthusiastic punters — they were not to be disappointed, yet another sensational semi-final.
In the end Mandi Skillen, above, Elaine Sheridan, right, and Tony Kalharachi, below, took top marks earning them a place in the final
Scientific search for sports stars Back to school for Ulster's Olympic hopefuls!
BY SUE CORBETT
NORTHERN Ireland's future sports champions have been hard at training — in the classroom!
For the province's future Olympic hopefuls have been brushing up on skills both on and off the sports fields.
The Dale Farm Olympic Youth Camp, held earlier this month in Antrim, dealt with topics that would have left old timers in sport shaking their head in disbelief.
Mental
Issues such as mental preparation, mental training, time management, stress control, psychology and sports nutrition were all scheduled into the timetable.
‘Times have changed, yes,’ admitted camp co-ordinator, Steve Martin of the Sports Council, a hockey gold medallist in the 1998 Olympics.
‘But what we have here is a tremendous opportunity for 140 of this country's potential champions to receive training and advice from the very best of experts.’
One of those experts — John Kremer, a university lecturer who is currently writing a book on ‘Psychology in Sport’— believes that mental training is as vital as physical training if talent is to excel.
‘Time management is crucial when young people have so many demands in the 1990s,’ he added.
‘Often the cream of talent drops out because of lack of knowledge about how to effectively use time.’
Healthy eating at camp is the order of the day for judo player Cathy O'Neill join Steve Martin (centre).
Sarah's in the hot seat
‘YOU should be a model’.
Eighteen year old Cover Girl finalist Sarah McKeown has heard the line frequently, but she modestly dismissed the comments as tipsy bar talk.
It's not hard to see why she attracted compliments.
At a slim 5ft 10ins, with long dark hair and blue eyes, the Dunmurry girl is naturally striking.
She's also enviably blessed with the ability to eat a lot, exercise a little and maintain her size 10 shape.
The Sunday Life photographic session brought a welcome opportunity to be pampered and to try different images.
Zakks stylist, Sharon Rainey, set to work on eliminating the last frizzy remnants of Sarah's grown out perm, using huge velcro rollers.
She then smoothed on Tigi Pure Gloss to give the resulting curls a healthy shine.
Style Academy Director Tracey Hall, who spotted Sarah's potential immediately, capitalised on her light tan to create a very natural look, with emphasis on dark eyes, and pale lips.
For the photographs, Sarah slipped into a frill fronted red jacket and slimline skirt from Future Ozbek at Earth, and a dramatic ruffled lycra body from Basement.
She really hit her stride, though in black flared pants and a red denim jacket from Propaganda.
‘This is a really fun, funky look,’ she said.
‘It gets you in the mood to party.’
CREDITS:
HAIR: Sharon Rainey from Zakks using Tigi Products
MAKE UP: Tracey Hall, The Style Academy
PHOTOGRAPHY: Fred Hoare
STYLING: Anna Mooney
THANKS TO: Stafford Salon, Belfast, who will host an exhibition of paintings by Belfast artists Donna McCarrigan and Fiona Connolly from this week.
STRIKE A POSE: Red denim jacket by Chipie, black flares by French Connection both at Propaganda, Ross's Court, Black body from Basement, Belfast.
CREDITS: HAIR: Sharon Rainey from Zakks using Tigi Products MAKE UP: Tracey Hall, The Style Academy PHOTOGRAPHY: Fred Hoare STYLING: Anna Mooney
THANKS TO: Stafford Salon, Belfast, who will host an exhibition of paintings by Belfast artists Donna McCarrigan and Fiona Connolly from this week.
Moonbeams try to book lunar holiday!
ULSTER spacers have been shy about signing up for inter-galactic travel.
For there isn't one name from Northern Ireland among a list of 500 people who have applied for a holiday which promises to be ‘out of this world’.
The register of adventurous travellers is currently being compiled by UK travel agents, Thomas Cook.
Their proposed Lunar Tours will be the first series of commercial space flights to the moon.
But before anyone starts packing their bags, no date has yet been set for the trips.
Lifetime
Vicki Burwell of Thomas Cook said: ‘I don't think anyone seriously believes that these flights will happen in our lifetime, yet people are so interested that they're putting their names down, just in case.’
The travel agents have even had to return cheques and cash that have been sent in as deposits to secure places on the proposed flights.
‘Although we have had bookings from people all over Britain, strangely no one has expressed any interest from Northern Ireland,’ she added.
Local Galatic holidaymakers are now being invited to sign up and receive a free certificate of registration and luggage labels in preparation for their travel.
Playground posers: schoolkids are latest fashion victims
BACK TO school is a far cry from back to basics for Ulster pupils this year.
For the playground has become a fashion showpiece for the province's trendy teens and juniors.
Schoolkids are the latest target in a sales ploy that has set tills ringing all over the country.
Tastes
The 1990s student — whether at primary or secondary school level — has more sophisticated tastes than ever.
What used to be considered basic back-to-school items — schoolbags, pencil cases, stationery, lunch boxes and the like — have now become fashion accessories in the classroom.
‘Youngsters these days are more conscious of current trends than ever before,’ said Desmond Taggart of Belfast's Leisureworld store.
‘They are really choosy about what they will and will not buy — or rather, have their parents buy for them!’ he added.
Top sellers this year include ANYTHING with a Jurassic Park logo for the primary school children.
And, for the older boys, sports bags complete with popular brand names like Reebok, Puma and Nike, are in vogue.
Stewarts and Crazy Prices supermarkets are cashing in on the schooltime purchases with a bigger than ever range of bags and stationery.
Again, Jurassic Park is among the biggest sellers.
Back-pack bags — many featuring Thunderbirds and Stingray characters — are another favourite.
Music continues to play a big part in playground conversations.
And trendsetters will almost certainly be talking about this week's U2 concert and the latest single from local band, Therapy.
Computer
Computer favourites are Jungle Strike, an air attack Mega-drive game, and Striker, a Nintendo football game.
Beethoven, the movie about the loveable dog, continues to top the video charts with local primary school children.
A round-up of what local schoolkids say is IN and OUT in the classroom is sure to shock ‘wrinklies’.
For playground style — in the form of designer labels — doesn't come cheap.
Today's street cred student will have a shopping list of pre-term purchases sure to shrink any parent's bank balance.
Popular with girls is the new Secret Rendezvous range illustrated with pictures of romantic couples in exotic settings.
Boys, however, will more likely opt for major sports brands and their files will feature photographs of models like Cindy Crawford and pin-ups like Rebekah Elmaloglou of TV's Home and Away.
IN
Back-packs
Levis
Mountain bikes
Platform heels
Timberland boots
Harley Davidson
Jurassic Park
DMs
Take That
U2
Cindy Crawford
OUT
Satchels
Graphic calculators
White socks with black trousers
Sticker collections
Thin ties
Gym pants
Tank tops
Filofaxes
Spikey haircuts
Watching Neighbours on the TV
Tight trousers.
Trippers see how the wind blows!
BANK holiday trippers are being asked to give their verdict on an energy source described as both a friend and an enemy of the environment.
They are asked to visit one of the 17 windfarms operating in England and Wales and assess whether they enhance or disturb the beauty of the countryside.
Windfarms are groups of 100ft high wind turbines set up in exposed areas to create electric power.
Their supporters say they supply an environmentally clean and safe power source, producing no pollutants.
Save
They claim some 10-20pc of Britain's electricity could be wind-generated in the long term and say every kilowatt of electricity produced in this way saves around a kilogram of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide being emitted from a coal-fired power station.
Many more applications to set up windfarms are expected following Government moves to encourage development of renewable energy sources.
But opponents say they are noisy and ugly.
The South Pennine Association said recently: ‘The turbines are threatening the spiritual retreat people find in the mountains.’
Former Downing Street press secretary Sir Bernard Ingham has agreed to become a vice-president of Country Guardian, a pressure group dedicated to doing away with windfarms.
QUEEN for a week!
Brunette beauty Pauline Bradley is this year's Queen of the Oul Lamas Fair.
The 18-year-old student at Ballycastle High School is a keen swimmer and keep fit fanatic.
Brave walker strides on
BRITISH globetrotter Ffyona Campbell is continuing her marathon walk across Africa despite being attacked near Rabat in Morocco.
Ffyona, 26, was left with a badly swollen and cut left eye.
Police are giving the Devon-born long-distance walker an escort for the last 170 miles to Tangier, which she hopes to reach by next Wednesday.
Beeb focus on Frost
SIR DAVID Frost's transition from anti-establishment figure to pillar of the broadcasting hierarchy is charted in a three-part series starting tonight.
BBC2's Frost In The Air looks back over his 30-year career.
He started off in 1962 fronting the satirical show That Was The Week That Was and later made headlines for his hard-hitting interview with impeached president Richard Nixon.
Royals board love boat
MOST of Europe's unmarried royals are setting off on a cruise on Norway's fjords next week, giving hopes for at least one blue-blooded romance.
They are attending 25th wedding anniversary festivities for King Harald.
Among the 14 young and single royals expected to join the celebrations are 29-year-old Prince Edward; Crown Prince Haakon, 20, and his sister Princess Martha Louise of Norway.
Great men, simple tastes
NO LOBSTER, truffles or caviar.
When world leaders sit down to dinner at home they prefer simple fare, according to the people who cook for them.
‘President Clinton likes lighter food than President Bush,’ said White House chef Pierre Chambrin yesterday at the annual meeting of top people's cooks in Paris.
30 cooks, nearly all men, were attending a sort of food summit in Paris called le Club des Chefs des Chefs, or Club of Chefs to the Chiefs, founded in 1977.
Golfing feat
GOLFING taxi driver Derek Funcks defied odds of several millions to one by hitting a hole in one…and then hitting another hole in one on the same round.
Derek, 28, of Childwall, Liverpool, said: ‘I was just dumbstruck.
I've been playing for ten years and never hit a hole in one before — now I've hit two.’
BIRTHDAYS:The Duke of Argyll, Keeper of the Great Seal of Scotland, 56; David Soul, singer/ actor, 49; Emlyn Hughes, footballer, 46; Windsor Davies, actor, 63; Ben Gazzara, actor, 63; John Shirley-Quirk, bass-baritone, 62.
ATHLETICS
ANNADALE emerged victorious after the fourth and final round of the Panasonic League at the Antrim Forum where they increased their lead over Ballymena and Antrim.
East Down won Division Two while Lisburn took the Women's Inter-club title although Lagan Valley beat them on the day.
The highlight of the women's events was the Northern Ireland javelin record throw of Alison Moffitt.
The North Down athlete produced 47.54 metres to improve her own record by half-a-metre.
She later took the discus with 39.72.
Vicki Jamison had a 14.72 and 62.71 hurdles double with Jane Hale ensuring full points for Lagan Valley.
The sprints went to Vivienne Goldrick of Lisburn in 12.57 and 25.45 with Clare O'Connor of East Down clocking 25.53 for close up second in the 200.
There were personal bests in the high jump for Elaine Murphy of Lagan Valley, who won at 1.62, with Carrie Donnelly of Lisburn second at 1.56.
Jill Bruce of Dromore won the 1500 from Pauline Quinn of Ballymena and Antrim, only for Pauline to reverse the placings in the 800.
Louise Hutchinson from Lagan Valley won a quick 400 in 57.56 with clubmate Karen Bleakley winning the B race in 60.05.
Annadale continued their domination of the men's 1500m with Jim Campbell and Dermot Donnelly who fought out a close finish with Campbell just gaining the verdict by six hundredths of a second in three minutes 47.37.
Sparta gained good points with Bobby Farren taking the 5000m in 14 minutes 11.87, Noel McMonagle taking the B race and Colin Roberts winning the Steeplechase.
Micky McDonald from Ballymena and Antrim won the triple jump with 13.76 with Annadale's Adam Smith setting a new youths' record with 13.59.
Paul McBurney from Lisburn had a double in the 200 and 400m, Gary Gallagher and Ricky Dunn gave Annadale maximum points in the high hurdles while Ian Neely from Ballymena and Antrim was best in the 400 hurdles.
Ballymena and Antrim had more good wins through John McAdorey in the 100m and Eddie King who finished very strongly to take the 800 in one minute 52.65.
The youthful East Down squad clinched promotion to the top division by finishing 100 points clear of North Down.
Results — Division 1: Annadale 1323.5; Ballymena and Antrim 1217; Lisburn 1155.5; RUC 1002; Sparta 949; Lagan Valley 878.
Division 2: East Down 1133; North Down 1033; Mid Ulster 810; Dromore 233.
Women's: Lisburn 870.5; Lagan Valley 752.5; Ballymena and Antrim 648.5; Sparta 372; North Down 171; East Down 166; RUC 149.5; Mid-Ulster 140; Dromore 107.
McClure at the double
IT WAS a good day at Blackrock yesterday for Ian McClure of Portrush, who lifted a super double in the IBA National Championship finals.
The talented provincial player guided his triple of Barry Moffatt and Jeremy Henry to a 23-14 win over the Ballymena trio of Billy McCandless, Jack Robinson and Roy McCune.
And he then skipped Ronnie Oliver to a 27-7 success over Old Bleach's James Talbot and Michael Nutt in the pairs final.
McClure played every shot in the book over the two days, and is quickly maturing into Ireland's finest young bowler.
But the star of the show had a tremendous supporting cast in Moffatt and Henry in the triples, and Oliver in the pairs.
While McClure basks in his double glory, spare a thought for Lisnagarvey's Noel Graham, who missed out at the semi-final stages in pairs and fours.
Colin Best recaptured the singles championship for the Willowfield club with a 21-13 win over Rathfriland's Noel Weir.
And the junior singles went to John Nolan of Blackrock with a 21-11 win over Belmont's Paul Daly.
But Paul didn't go home empty-handed, for earlier in the day he won the fours trophy when he led for his father Brian, who had a one-way ticket to next year's British Isles championships in Ayr with a 27-6 win over the Dunluce four skipped by Malcolm McMullan.
BOWLS
Results in yesterday's National Championships in Dublin: Junior Singles: P Daly (Belmont) 11; J Nolan (Blackrock) 21.
Open singles: C Best (Willowfield) 21; N Weir (Rathfriland) 13.
Pairs: J Talbot and M Nutt (Old Bleach) 7; R Oliver and I McClure (Portrush) 27.
Triples: B Moffatt, J Henry, I McClure (Portrush) 23; W McCandless, J Robinson and R McCune (Ballymena) 14.
Fours: P Daly, R Storrs, G Mitchell, B Daly (Belmont) 27; H McCallum, T Fulton, T Wilson, M McCullan (Dunluce) 6.
Lane outpaced by a Spanish flyer
BARRY Lane went into overdrive in Switzerland, but still could not keep up with speeding Spaniard Miguel Angel Jimenez.
Lane, delighted to be hitting top form again with his Ryder Cup debut less than three weeks away, shot 64 in the Canon European Masters third round for a 16 under par total of 200.
But Jimenez blasted a best-of-the-week 63 for a two-stroke lead going into the final day at Crans-Sur-Sierre.
His 198 aggregate is the lowest of the season so far.
The top two have left the rest trailing well behind.
Yorkshire's Howard Clark, Irishman Philip Walton and Swede Per-Ulrik Johansson are joint third on 13 under, five adrift of the Malaga golfer.
But none of them will be giving up hope of the £102,000 top prize — and nor will Nick Faldo on 12 under and Seve Ballesteros on 11 under.
Twelve months ago Jamie Spence trailed Colin Montgomerie by ten with a round to go, fired a 60 and won in a play-off.
Faldo just stayed in touch thanks to putts of 15 and 30 feet at the 14th and 16th for a round of 69, while Ballesteros felt he had been robbed when he came in with a 68.
Dungannon's Darren Clarke followed Friday's sizzling 66 with a 71 to go eight shots off the pace.
Lane realises that a third tour title would be the perfect confidence-booster for what he has been warned will be a baptism of fire.
‘From some of the things the boys have been telling me it's not going to be nice standing on the first tee at the Belfry,’ said Lane.
‘But it's where I want to be — I'm not frightened of it.’
The 33-year-old from Berkshire made his move by collecting seven birdies and an eagle three on the 569-yard 14th, where he struck a drive and three-iron to 15 feet.
That putt took him one in front, but Jimenez's response was superb.
He followed birdies on the 13th and 14th with a 50-foot eagle putt at the 520-yard 15th.
For good measure he pitched to under a yard on the 17th for his seventh birdie and the lowest round of his five-year tour career.
Johansson followed up his second day 64 with a 68, while Walton, second overnight, compiled a 70 with his newly-acquired old hickory-shafted putter.
Half-way leader Mats Lanner collapsed to a 77, and saw no fewer than 23 players go past him.
STILL IN TOUCH…
Nick Faldo is just six shots behind the leader on 12-under
BRITAIN'S Laura Davies turned on the style with a stunning course record 64 to storm into the lead after the third round of the Waterford Dairies English Open at Tytherington.
Defending champion Davies finished the day at nine-under-par to lead by one stroke from overnight leader Marie-Laure de Lorenzi, from France.
‘I've won twice already this year but I want to hold on to my record of winning in Europe at least once each year since turning professional in 1985,’ said the former British and US Open champion.
Davies didn't drop a shot as she carded six birdies and an eagle in her round, after starting the day six strokes behind the French golfer.
The highlight of the round was the eagle three at the 410-yard ninth, where Davies hit a wedge to within a yard of the hole.
Sprint ace in glory bid
DUNMORE'S National Sprint winner Ballyfolion Shy can take another step towards classic glory in the first round of the Respond Irish Derby at Shelbourne Park tomorrow night.
Heats 9-16 are run off at the Ringsend venue and it will be a major shock if Ballyfolion, a comfortable qualifier last week, does not oblige again.
The blue dog is quoted at 12-1 joint ante-post favourite along with the Carrick-bred bitch Lisglass Lass, Brendan Mullan's Newry hope Daleys Denis and Greenane Squire.
Daleys Dennis is also in action tomorrow, the first eight heats having been completed last night.
Ideally drawn in trap one, Daleys takes on Newry Pride (trap five), from neighbour Brendan Matthews' kennels.
Farloe Melody, bidding for his third appearance in the Derby final — he won it two years ago — has missed out in the trap draw for heat 15.
A wide runner, he loves the striped jacket (t6) but this time has to go from three.
However, it is not a particularly difficult race and the brindle who made his comeback in the Dundalk ‘525’ International after a period at stud, looks set to qualify safely.
Summerhill Gift, the ‘525’ track record holder, also has to run from the middle in heat 11 but again, he too should have enough ability to overcome this problem.
Graeme the star
COLLEGIANS 15 INSTONIANS 38
WINGER Graeme McCluskey made an instant impact on his senior debut for Instonians.
McCluskey, a summer recruit from Portadown, scored two tries as Instonians came from behind for a comfortable win.
But both sides have plenty of work to do to be confident of making an impression in the All Ireland League.
Two penalties from full back Stuart Laing — also making his debut — and a Peter Russell drop goal put Instonians in command midway through the first-half.
A Simon Aldred penalty kept Collegians in touch, before a sizzling solo try from scrum half Keith Black.
He sprinted through the defence from halfway after a quickly taken penalty, and Aldred's conversion put Collegians 10-9 ahead.
Instonians were back in front by half-time courtesy of McCluskey's first try, and eased clear after the interval.
Laing added a third penalty and McCluskey scored under the posts after a perfect scissors move in midfield.
Laing converted this try, and two penalty tries awarded as the Instonians scrum got on top.
Collegians grabbed a late consolation try from Michael Dorrity, but their lack of pace and bulk up front probably means they are facing a long hard season.
Doolin warning SHELSON SONG
DESPITE a memorable victory over Ukrainian side Karpaty Lvov in the European Cup Winners Cup on Wednesday, Shelbourne midfielder Paul Doolin is taking nothing for granted as his former club Derry City visit Tolka Park this afternoon.
Doolin says: ‘The result gave us a great boost.
It's the best Shelbourne have played since I joined them.’
He added, however: ‘We weren't happy with the way we started the season and although people will make us favourites to win this one after doing so well against Derry last season, all that means nothing.
‘Last season is gone — we had an advantage then but it might not be that way this time.
Derry have signed new players so we'll have to wait and see how it goes.’
Despite Doolin's diplomatic caution, however, City will go into this afternoon's match very much the underdogs.
Crushing
The hand of fate that has recently dealt the Brandywell club some crushing blows seems intent on turning the screw further.
With midfield ball winner John Sayers out of action for at least 10 weeks after fracturing a bone in his leg in last Sunday's disastrous home defeat by Cork, Derry were further rocked during a practice match on Thursday night when promising young forward Brian McCarron, promoted this season to the first squad, broke his leg.
And with close season signing from Limerick, Barry Ryan, also sidelined with a hamstring injury, Derry boss Roy Coyle hasn't his sorrows to seek at the moment.
There was, however, one piece of good news for the Coyle this week.
Twenty-seven year old Middlesbrough born midfielder Paul Lemon, who has played over 100 games for Sunderland, agreed to come to Derry on a short term contract and makes his League of Ireland debut this afternoon.
Shelbourne's vastly experienced outfit knew too much for Derry when the sides last met in last season's rousing FAI Cup semi-final replay at Brandywell.
Derry's achilles heel so far in the current campaign has been a lacklustre, inconstant midfield.
And with Mark Ennis still unable to recapture the goalscoring form he showed at St Pats, the problems for Derry in these key areas are acute.
Young golfers have it off to a ‘tee’
CITY of Derry's flourishing Pro-Am has attracted golfers from all over Britain and Ireland this weekend.
But within the ranks at the local club, an even more remarkable story is unfolding.
A concentration on under-age golf, begun in the mid-1980's by John Gallagher, has begun to yield phenomenal success for City of Derry.
With the last fortnight the club became the proud holders of the Irish Youths' (under-21) championship.
And next weekend they'll be attempting to win Ulster golf's prestigious under-age tournament, the Fred Daly trophy, for the third time in four years.
The victory at national level was achieved by the three man team of Michael Wilson, Noel Kehoe junior and Gareth Winston and was led by non-playing captain Noel Kehoe senior.
He told me this week: ‘It's the first time City of Derry have won a green pennant since the club was founded in 1912.’
Derry's emergence as a force in youth competition at national level was, it seems, almost inevitable given their concentration on under-age golf in recent times.
The Prehen club's record in the Fred Daly youth championship (under 18) is second to none since John Gallagher's squad first won it in 1986.
Maurice Allen then took charge of the under-age team and kept the success story going.
Now Noel Kehoe senior is preparing a new group of youngsters for another shot at the Fred Daly on September 12 when the first leg of the final against Clandeboye will commence at City of Derry.
The City of Derry line-up is Kevin Jones, Julian McFarland, Declan Martin, David Jones, Paul O'Donnell, Sean Quigg and Michael McGeady.
The reserves are Paul Doherty and Sammy Smallwoods.
Remarkably it's Derry fourth successive appearance in the final — they've won it twice in the last three years.
The Fred Daly success story almost certainly laid the foundation for that recent victory in the Irish youths' team championship.
And last season the club gained international recognition with Michael Wilson playing for Ireland boys.
Derry are now attempting to translate their under-age work into success at senior level.
Last year for instance Barton Shield skipper Colm McCarroll brought Wilson, Winston and Kehoe junior, the men who were subsequently to win the National youth title, into his line-up and Derry battled their way through to the quarter-finals before losing to Belvoir Park.
Proof indeed that the Prehen youth policy might soon yield rewards at a higher level.
Club captain Jim Wilson says that winning the Irish youth championship gave the club ‘a great boost.’
He added: ‘But how the Senior team performs is how any club is judged.
We would like to think we're on the right road to producing a successful senior line-up.’
AMERICAN FOOTBALL: Montana and Allen have point to prove in new season REJECTS READY TO BITE BACK By ALUN REES
THIS could be American football's year of the reject.
Joe Montana, cast off by the San Francisco 49ers, and Marcus Allen, surplus to requirements at the Los Angeles Raiders, could laugh all the way to Super Bowl XXVIII.
And if they steer the Kansas City Chiefs to the great gridiron showdown in the Georgia Dome, Atlanta, next January, they could meet the symbol of Philadelphia Eagles foolishness, Reggie White.
The Eagles have infuriated their fans by letting top quality players join the free-agency merry-go-round.
This season White, the finest defensive end alive, pursues his destructive destiny with the Green Bay Packers.
Back in January 1967, the Chiefs and the Packers met in the very first Super Bowl of all.
And they head into the 1993 campaign looking good enough to make it a re-match.
Montana is the man they call Joe Cool, but beneath the calm exterior burns a fierce will to win — a fire stoked by the 49ers' decision to part with the quarterback who lit the flames at Candlestick Park.
He may be 37.
He may have had injury problems.
But he is the smartest play-caller in football, and Kansas City will switch from ground-control offence to let his read-and-react style inspire them.
Statistically, there is not a lot left for him to prove.
He has won four Super Bowls, a mark equalled among quarterbacks only by Pittsburgh's Terry Bradshaw.
He has been a most valuable player a record three times.
Stroll
But to Montana every game is a challenge, and he would dearly love to prove that San Francisco have made a terrible mistake.
Time after time he has shown that nice guys can finish first.
He can do it again.
If he does, there will be lamentations from the success-glutted San Francisco fans.
Their No 1 quarterback, Steve Young, is injured.
So is back-up Steve Bono.
And how do you shout for a rookie called Elvis Grbac?
Kansas City start their campaign with a visit to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who show very few piratical tendencies.
Tampa Bay Doormats would be more like it.
It should be a stroll by the seaside.
But Montana, great professional that he is, will approach them as though they were the Dallas Cowboys.
And Allen — well, after the way the Raiders treated him, he will be ready to explode for his new team.
He was named most valuable player when the Raiders won Super Bowl XVIII.
A couple of big years followed but then owner Al Davis started bringing in a whole series of running backs handed star billing.
Napoleon McCallum, though, was rarely available because of naval duties.
Bo Jackson put baseball first.
There was Steve Smith, Roger Craig, Eric Dickerson.
And Davis wondered why Allen was getting narked.
Kansas City have been the nearly-men of the American Football Conference for a few seasons.
The craft, experience and hunger of Montana and Allen can take them all the way this time.
To hell…and back!
By GARY McDONALD
A LOCAL hack, filing copy from last month's Intercontinental Cup tournament in Poznan, frustratingly followed his name with the words ‘reporting from hell!’
That, he admitted on his return, summed up the gloom in the Irish camp as the national team failed to secure the top six finish they needed to win a place in next year's World Cup finals in Sydney.
Now the 11 strong Ulster contingent from that ill-fated Polish trip must drag themselves up by the bootlaces for an earlier-than-usual start to the domestic programme, as next weekend sees the opening round of matches, albeit in diluted form in the Harp Kirk Cup.
None of the big guns will be involved as Lisnagarvey, Banbridge and holders Holywood — each expected to reach the floodlit semi-finals of the competition — take time out to assist English national league side East Grinstead in their pre-season preparations.
The top three Ulster outfits face the English giants in a series of friendlies at Blaris and Olympia over next weekend.
The close season has seen perhaps less than normal player ‘wheeler-dealing’ between the top clubs, with the single most significant appointment being off the field.
Magic
The summer confirmation that Philip Anderson is to succeed Terry Gregg — the most successful coach in Irish hockey history — at Blaris will maintain the ‘Ireland Old Boy’ network between Ulster's three top clubs.
For Anderson, like his predecessor, weaved his mesmeric magic in the Ireland team of the late 1970s along with Norman Crawford and Mark Sinnamon, the respective coaches at Holywood and Banbridge.
On the playing front, Bann and Cookstown remain the only leading sides without a ‘plastic home’, though each should nonetheless be expected to make an impression of sorts.
Of the other leading contenders for honours, Instonians have boosted their squad with the return of Davy Wilson from the French League, where he figured for Amiens, while Irish U-18 Andrew McBride is back at Annadale slotting in for Vincent Devenney (working in the US).
At the opposite end of the table, Bangor may struggle again and their cause hasn't been helped by the loss to Cliftonville of ace striker Johnny Poole.
Kirk Cup fixtures for next weekend (times vary) are: Section A — Annadale v Mossley (Friday 6.30pm); South Antrim v Kilkeel.
Section B — Instonians v Down; East Antrim v Civil Service; Newry v RUC.
Section C — Cliftonville v Cookstown; Raphoe v Portadown.
Section D — Portrush v Ballynahinch.
Philip Anderson — new coach at Blaris
Irish boys go for gold
BOXING
By MICHEAL McGEARY
FOUR Irish boxers yesterday headed off in pursuit of European Championship glory.
And their prospects of striking gold have been enhanced considerably by the presence of the ‘A’ team, Nicholas Cruz and Harry Robinson.
Cruz, the tall, rangy Cuban, who masterminded Michael Carruth's gold and Wayne McCullough's silver medal in the Barcelona Olympics, is arguably the most respected coach in world boxing.
Add in Harry Robinson, whose name will forever be synonymous with Wayne McCullough's meteoric rise in the sport, and you realise this four-strong Irish side, three of them from Ulster, can at the very least get among the medals.
Nicholas Cruz though goes much further than that.
The man who tipped Wayne McCullough for Olympic gold well in advance of the Barcelona Olympics is convinced that flyweight Damaen Kelly can be the new McCullough.
Choosing his words with particular deliberation he said: ‘In terms of dedication and discipline he reminds me in every way of Wayne McCullough.
‘He's a great listener, a coach's dream.
You only have to tell him something or show him something once.
He's totally dedicated.’
In the world senior championships the young Holy Trinity protege boxed brilliantly to capture a bronze medal.
His progress only came to a halt when he had the misfortune to swop punches with one of the many irrepressible Cubans, the eventual gold medal winner.
Nicholas Cruz simply drools over the youngster who has made boxing an art form.
He said: ‘Inside the ring he impresses you with his style and his marvellous technique.
‘You sense right away that you're in the presence of a special talent.
He can fight or box, depending on the situation, and he's very hard to pin down.’
Antrim lightweight Mark Winters is another with genuine medal prospects.
He boxed magnificently in the world senior championships in Finland, and was beating a top Cuban until things went disastrously wrong in the last round.
Light welter Eamon Magee is an outstanding boxer, with tremendous confidence in his own ability.
Dubliner Paul Griffin heads to Turkey to defend the title he won two years ago in these same championships.
It's a chance for the gifted featherweight to erase the memory of the humiliation suffered in the Barcelona Olympics when he found himself barred from the sport for 12 months.
In the world seniors he fared little better, losing to a nondescript American, who then made his exit in the next round.
The biggest threat to the Irish is likely to come from Germany and the former Soviet Union.
The one consolation though is there will be no Cubans — except the one in the Irish corner!
MASTERMIND…
Cuban coach Nicholas Cruz who is confident of Irish successes at the European Championships next week Picture: DARREN KIDD
MOTORCYCLING: Harold Crooks' Kirkistown reflections Gamble pays off for Bell
MIXED FORTUNES
Sponsor wanted!
THE Coleraine club and local competitors again did us proud at the European Championship meeting at Kirkistown.
Robert Dunlop won the 125 race and Jeremy McWilliams produced a superb display on the Millar Grand Prix Yamaha.
One rider overlooked amidst the praise heaped on these two was Phelim Owens who also did well in the 125 event.
There was only disappointment though for Alan Patterson and Mark Coates.
Patterson was probably trying too hard and come unstuck, while Coates, who finished in ninth place, was the victim of engine trouble.
Having blown up his good engine in practice, Mark was forced to use his second motor in the race, and did very well to get as good a finish as he did.
Sensibly the 18-year-old Glengormley rider has taken it all in his youthful stride and will contest the final round in Italy.
Robert Dunlop's performance certainly lifted the Euro races onto a different level, and Jeremy McWilliams' full-blooded riding in the Superbike races saved them from becoming a nonentity.
If it had not been for Jeremy's displays of speed, power and massive wheelies, backed up by a courageous Robert Holden, these races would have been pretty flat beer.
Similarly, we depended on the efforts of our adopted Scottish twins, the two Ians, Simpson and Duffus, to provide the life in the Supersport races.
One black mark was the standard of the PA system on the day.
Patrons who pay ten pounds to see and hear what is going on deserved a better service than they got.
COLERAINE plumber Peter Bell was overcome when he won the 400 newcomers race at the Manx Grand Prix after arch rival Ian McVeighty ran out of fuel.
McVeighty gambled on going the complete four laps on one tankful of petrol, while Bell made one pit stop.
Bell's tactics rang true when McVeighty's machine ran dry at Governor's Bridge, half a mile from home.
Dungannon's Eddie Sinton finished fourth in the 600 newcomers race, won unexpectedly by Mark Flynn, after Belfast's Chris Richardson's motor stopped on the last lap when he was in an unassailable lead.
When he went out Richardson was 45 seconds ahead, having chopped over half a minute off the newcomers record set by Ian King last year.
In the junior race last year's newcomer winner, James Courtney from Dundrod, had to settle for second best, with Ballymoney's Phillip Read 11th.
On Sunday road and off-road competitors get the opportunity to put forward their ideas on how the sport could be improved in 1994.
The Ulster Centre motocross committee will have discussions with scramblers in La Mon House, Castlereagh at 1pm.
And an hour later in the House of Sport, the road race committee will hear the views of tarmac competitors.
THE Hillsborough club are still without an overall backer for their International Sunflower meeting at Kirkistown on October 9.
And that's despite the fact they have attracted the best short circuit entry of the year.
Confirmed entries have been received from Steve Hislop, Phillip McCallen, Joey Dunlop and Paul Brown on the Castrol Hondas.
The Loctite Fast Orange team of Rob McElnea, and new British 750 Champion Jamie Whitham, confirmed their intentions in almost the same breath as they withdrew from the Coleraine meeting.
Jeremy McWilliams is bringing the Millar Yamaha back again, to take on these Superbike runners, and in the 125s Robert Dunlop, Rob Orme, Jimmy Brown, Robin Appleyard and Chris Palmer have all signed up.
The sidecar entry is topped by Steve Webster, Barry Brindley and Steve Abbott.
UNLUCKY…
Engine problems for Mark Coates at Kirkistown last week Pictures: BRIAN THOMPSON
SPECTACULAR…
Jeremy McWilliams (No 20) turned on the style in the Superbike races at Kirkistown
I'll still be around for next World Cup: Nigel
GOLDEN OLDIE!
IT seems like only yesterday that Nigel Worthington set off from Ballymena to Notts County with the Ulster Young Player of the Year trophy and a Bass Irish Cup winners medal in his suitcase.
Now with 10 years in top flight football behind him, he looks forward to a 32nd birthday in November as Northern Ireland wind up their World Cup campaign.
Only a miracle can get us to the United States next summer now.
But whatever happens in our three remaining games against Latvia, Denmark and the Republic, Worthington is adamant it won't be the end of the World for him — or Northern Ireland.
The Sheffield Wednesday stalwart insisted last night: ‘I aim to be still playing at the top when the next World Cup qualifying bid starts in three years time.
‘I am determined to be involved for my country and my own career satisfaction.
‘But mainly because I believe this present Northern Ireland team is capable of hitting the glory trail again.’
Emergence
Worthington's optimism has been heightened by the emergence of a bright new star in Michael Hughes, the first true successor to Pat Jennings in Tommy Wright and a young colossus at the back in Gerry Taggart.
Tough away wins over Albania, Latvia and Lithuania marked their international coming-of-age, he believes.
Worthington stressed: ‘They are not world football powers by any means but they are among the most difficult places to go looking for results.
‘Better Northern Ireland teams have failed against the likes of Albania in the past.
The present side were expected to falter too but won all three games.
‘It wasn't enough to put us back in the World Cup contention.
‘But players never say never when there is still something to fight for.
‘We will go out to win our last three games both as a matter of pride and to further boost our international standing.
Every result counts in today's computer rankings.
‘Who knows what disasters may strike the more fancied teams in the group?
We have to keep battling away.
‘Northern Ireland may have faded as a football force since the break-up of the 1986 World Cup finals side — and the rebuilding process has been painful.
‘But I can't agree with the prophets of doom who say we will never qualify for the World Cup finals again.
‘We have one of Europe's most promising young players in Michael Hughes.
He is out on his own in terms of skill and becoming better for his experience in French football with Strasbourg.
‘Gerry Taggart would be a rock in any team and as long as Tommy Wright is in goal we always feel we have a chance against any odds.
Experience
‘You only have to look at the number of players with top clubs in the present squad — Arsenal's Steve Morrow is another example — and it's obvious there's hope for the future.
‘Players like myself and skipper Alan McDonald can play our part by lending our experience to the young players coming through to form the next World Cup side.
‘But I will stick around only as long as I am doing justice to myself and the team.
‘I have looked after myself so hopefully my body will repay me by keeping going for another few years.
‘I only have to look at my Northern Ireland room-mate Mal Donaghy for the perfect example.
He will be 36 next birthday and is still parading his class in the Premier League.’
Tommy Wright Gerry Taggart 
Michael Hughes — bright new star Nigel Worthington believes the developing Northern Ireland side is good enough to challenge in the next World Cup
Just the ticket for loyal NI fans
BUY a ticket to see Latvia on Wednesday and avoid the biggest black market ticket trade Belfast has ever seen.
Even with temporary seating on the Kop, Windsor won't be able to accommodate more than 15,000 for the visit of the Republic in November.
Four times as many will want to get in, making it a ticket tout's dream.
For once, however, the long-suffering regular fan will be able to buy his ticket at face value — and even sit in his usual seat.
I'm all for the IFA decision to guarantee Republic match tickets only to those fans who buy seats for the Latvia game on Wednesday.
The rest will have to take their chances in the biggest stampede to see a Northern Ireland game in eight years.
The IFA need the money and the team need your support.
So why shouldn't they seize the opportunity to boost the crowd on Wednesday?
And they can sweep aside any criticism by declaring: ‘We are only rewarding the loyalty of our truly dedicated fans — the ones who turn up for every match, however unattractive.’
For years those fans have suffered the frustration of supporting the team through thick and thin only to see the best seats at big matches filled by the detested ‘fur-coat brigade’.
It's good to see their interests being looked after at long last.
For those still tempted to dither, consider this.
The actual crowd figure for Wednesday's game is certain to fall well below the number of tickets sold.
Big business interests have been quietly buying up Latvia match tickets to ensure seats for their clients at the Republic game.
Dublin's notorious ticket touts have also been getting in on the act through Northern front men knowing there will be a market for the tickets at ten times the outlay.
But pay the bottom price of £10 for the Latvia match and you will only pay the same again to see the Republic.
GOLF: Ryder Cup selection method under fire as Gallacher springs a surprise Ulstermen so near yet so far SNUB FOR THE IRISH
IRISH hearts were broken when Ryder Cup team captain Bernard Gallacher announced his line-up this week.
Indeed he caused something of a turn-up when he named a Swede as one of his three wild card selections in the 12-man side to meet the United States at the Belfry at the end of the month.
It is not the first time Irish players have had to endure bitter disappointment.
Not so long ago Eamon Darcy was edged out of the top nine automatic spots, losing by a matter of a few points.
He finished 10th in the controversial pounds for points system.
Still Darcy was overlooked.
Indeed at the time it was felt he was snubbed.
Yet later he played a vital role in the famous win on American soil!
Spare a thought this year for Ronan Rafferty, finishing 11th in the qualifying table.
There was also a case for Bangor's David Feherty, a howling success in the last Ryder Cup match at Kiawah Island.
And we must not forget the grandstand finish to the Volvo German Open by Dungannon's Darren Clarke!
However, it is nice to see a first Swede, Joakim Haeggman, making history as one of the three wild cards, along with Spaniards Seve Ballesteros and Jose Maria Olazabal.
Who is to argue against the merits of the amazing Seve staying in the side?
He's a tremendous motivator, and his partnerships in Ryder Cup skirmishing with Olazabal are legendary.
It does suggest horses for courses, men with the metal for matchplay golf.
And it does extend the argument in the overall format used in selecting teams!
Is it healthy to have as many as four newcomers in the 12-man outfit?
Comparison
Three of the debut boys, England's Barry Lane, Constantina Rocca — the first Italian to make the Ryder Cup — and former Walker Cup golfer Peter Baker of England, made it through the automatic channel.
Haeggman is the fourth new face.
If there is a comparison to be drawn in recent times, and lessons are be learned, it's from the Walker Cup match last month in the States.
The team featured a bundle of inexperienced youngsters.
Arguments continue to rage on the Ryder Cup side, yet Gallacher's men are quite capable of winning back the trophy.
The whingeing and sour grapes will continue until a better system, if at all possible, can be created.
Perhaps the cash for points method is not the correct one — maybe points for top ten finalists, both from Europe and United States action might be better.
The growing trend now is for more and more European golfers, and especially the heavyweights, to concentrate on playing the US circuit.
Over 300 amateur golfers from across the United Kingdom and Ireland have signed up to play in next weekend's Bass-sponsored Heart of Down tournament over the Spa, Downpatrick and Ardglass courses.
The few remaining places are bookable by telephone through the Down District Council organisers on Downpatrick 612233.
CRICKET
Opener Dean Hodgson battled to an unbeaten century as Gloucestershire, facing a massive victory target of 432, frustrated Glamorgan's bowlers at Abergavenny.
Hodgson took 278 minutes to complete his hundred, facing 239 balls and hitting 13 fours and he was still there on 107 out of Gloucestershire's 208 for two at the close.
Glamorgan's innings had closed at 297, leaving Gloucestershire 50 minutes' batting before lunch.
They reached 38 in that period and the opening partnership blossomed to 85.
Chris Broad became Steve Watkin's 83rd victim of the season but Robert Dawson then battled grimly to add another 86 with Hodgson, who survived a run out appeal after a direct hit from Stephen James when on 48.
James was in action again when he failed to hold a Hodgson hook at 67 and at 98 the batsmen also offered a chance to Matthew Maynard at slip that was not accepted.
Dawson made 46 before falling to a well-judged catch by David Hemp and Simon Hinks joined Hodgson to raise the 200, but was caught behind for 19 off Watkin in the final over of the day.
MOTORSPORT
Juha Kankkunen recaptured the lead from compatriot Ari Vatanen in a hard-fought finish to yesterday's second leg of the three-day 1,000 Lakes Rally in Finland.
Kankkunen, driving a Toyota began the day ahead, but was overtaken by fellow Finn Vatanen, in a Subaru, just three stages before the night break.
However, Kankkunen, who heads the world championship standings, recovered to regain the lead in the next stage and ended the day 17 seconds ahead.
Third-placed Didier Auriol of France, who won last year's rally, is one minute 18 seconds behind Kankkunen.
Britain's Malcolm Wilson, who was in seventh position after the first day, went off the road during the 17th stage.
AFTER the midweek Arbroath avalanche, there wasn't a snowball's chance at sun-drenched Firhill of another crazy scoreline as Celtic picked up their first league win of the season, courtesy of Mark McNally.
McNally is an odd phenomenon.
Consistently lauded by his manager, Liam Brady, the 22-year-old central defender's winner was his second goal in two matches.
Last season, his rapport with the troubled Parkhead support was based more on his madcap defensive antics.
If victory was eked out at the back, the inspiration belonged to the evergreen Charlie Nicholas.
Thistle played it rough — sweeper Ray Farningham joined two other booked players, and in the 83rd minute was sent off for a professional foul on Nicholas.
And it was Charlie who set up the winner with a headed flick on for McNally to score from eight yards out.
It's double delight for Bangor
THE Bangor club set something of a record yesterday when their junior team won the NIBA Tyrell Tanks Division one championship with a victory over Lisnagarvey.
That means the Bangor club have lifted a double-double in league championship and cup competition this season.
The senior team won the Division One championship and beat Lisnagarvey in the NIBA Senior Cup final, while the ‘B’ team also won the Junior Cup title with a victory over Lisnagarvey.
‘I think it is a record’ said Maurice McKeown, a Bangor senior skip and this season's President of the NIBA.
‘I can't recall it ever happening in any association affiliated to the IBA before, although it may have happened some time ago,’ added the former Irish international player.
It has indeed been a brilliant season for the Ward Park club, with Alex Lightbody returning from the British Isles championships in Worthing in July with the singles title under his belt.
Meanwhile, Carrickfergus, winners of the CIS Irish Senior Cup last weekend against Old Bleach, came unstuck yesterday in their bid to grab the runners-up spot in the senior division, which has already been won by Bangor.
The Carrick men could only manage two and a half points from their top of the table clash with Lisnagarvey (85-79), but they still could be in with a chance when they meet Gilnahirk next week.
Incidentally Irish international lead Martin McHugh skipped in the game yesterday and earned a 17-17 draw with fellow Irish international John McCloughlin.
Robert the star turn
HAROLD CROOKS REPORTS
BALLYMONEY'S Robert Dunlop and Glengormley's Jeremy McWilliams were the stars of the show at yesterday's European Short Circuit Championship meeting, organised by the Coleraine club at Kirkistown.
Dunlop won the 125 race in style, and McWilliams did the double in the two Superbike races.
In the European championship 125 race Robert Dunlop scored maximum points and did his image a world of good when he beat the hot favourite Stefano Perugini, the unbeaten championship leader.
The 250 race saw Italian Guiseppe Fiorello beat two French riders Bernard Cazade and John Foray.
After his race Dunlop, although exhausted, said: ‘That was a really hard race.
It was very warm for Kirkistown and I lost concentration half way through, but luckily got it back together before the end.’
In a hectic sidecar race British crews filled the first three places with Kevin Webster winning from Kieron Kavanagh and David Hoskin.
McWilliams' two wins in the Superbike races were both top drawer performances.
He came from behind in both races to beat New Zealander Robert Holden.
Afterwards McWilliams said: ‘Before today I had only ridden a 250 machine round Kirkistown and I found the grand prix bike a hot handful.’
Scot Ian Simpson had a double in the Supersport races winning the 400 race from Iain Duffus and the 600 race from Alan Irwin.
Europe's best no match for Robert DUNLOP HITS GLORY TRAIL
BALLYMONEY'S Robert Dunlop covered himself in glory at yesterday's European Short Circuit meeting at Kirkistown with victory over Europe's best in the 125 race.
Glengormley's Jeremy McWilliam's gave the home fans a further treat with victories in both Superbike races.
Dunlop took over the lead in the 125 championship race on lap 13, which proved unlucky for Italian Ivan Cremonini, who had set the pace for eight laps.
The early pace-setter was series leader Stefano Perugini, who was passed by both Dunlop and Cremonini on lap five.
Once in front Dunlop never really looked like being beaten, although he gave his supporters plenty to worry about in the middle of the 30-lap race.
‘Once I got in front I settled into a rhythm and started to lose concentration.
But then I saw my pitman Liam Beckett giving frantic signals and this brought me back to my senses,’ he explained.
‘Tough race’
Having regained his edge Dunlop turned up the wick again, and went on to win by four seconds from Perugini with Gianluigi Scalvini third.
‘That was a tough race but good,’ said Dunlop.
‘It really was a long race, maybe too long for this circuit.
Covering one-and-a-half miles 30 times is hard work, but I'm not really complaining.’
Dunlop averaged 93.35mph with Cremonini setting the fastest lap at 94.77.
There was another superb performance from Dungannon's Phelim Owens who finished fourth, but there was disappointment for Mark Coates who had to be content with 10th place.
Local interest in the 250 race was lost when Antrim rider Alan Patterson, a favourite to repeat his first round win, crashed out on lap 11.
At the front of this race it was a two horse race between Italian Guiseppe Fiorello and Frenchman Bernard Cazade.
Fiorello led all the way with Cazade putting up a strong challenge in the early part of the race.
Completing the top three was championship leader Jean Foray, also from France.
The first Irish rider home was Eugene McManus in 12th place.
After the race Fiorello was flown home immediately.
His father died on Thursday but his family decided not to tell him until after yesterday's race.
Three British crews filled the first three places in the sidecar race.
Kevin Webster partnered by Gary Broadley beat Kieran Kavanagh and Belfast man Michael Finnegan by 11 seconds.
Third, after a terrific three-cornered fight, were David Hoskins and David James.
In the support races there were doubles for Jeremy McWilliams and Scot Ian Simpson.
McWilliams thrilled the crowd with the immense power and speed of the Millar Yamaha in his two victories over New Zealander Robert Holden.
Scottish visitor Ian Simpson did the double in the Supersport races.
In the 400 event he beat fellow Scot Iain Duffus and Adrian Archibald, and in the final 600 race Simpson was followed home by Alan Irwin and Duffus.
WRIGHT IS DYNAMITE
EVERTON became the latest side to get a taste of the Ian Wright magic — and they did not like it one little bit.
The Arsenal and England striker scored twice — his second goal one of pure genius — and left Everton manager Howard Kendall admitting: ‘We just could not cope with him.
‘You would love to have him in your side, wouldn't you?’ he added.
Wright's second strike — surely a candidate for goal of the season — saw him turn Everton defender Matthew Jackson first one way and then the other before lofting the ball over the head of Everton goalkeeper Neville Southall in the 78th minute.
Wright's first goal in the 49th minute followed a flick-on from Kevin Campbell, and Wright rifled the ball low into the net past Southall.
But before those two goals Arsenal had made heavy weather of things in a first-half that they dominated, with Wright sending a header and a shot over the Everton bar.
Southall made a series of fine saves in the first-half, the most notable a 20 yard drive from Arsenal defender Nigel Winterburn which took a wicked deflection causing Southall to dive smartly and push the ball away for a corner.
It all changed in Arsenal's favour when Paul Merson came on as substitute after the interval.
Merson immediately struck an Everton post and threatened to run riot behind the industrious Campbell and Wright as Arsenal finally found the inventiveness to go with their workmanlike play.
Everton, hit by injuries, also floundered in attack with Tony Cottee making little headway against the resolute Tony Adams.
The Goodison striker was finally substituted after 73 minutes.
Arsenal paraded the FA Cup and Coca Cola Cup around the stadium before the start of the match.
Wright's magnificent second goal was just the icing on the cake before a near 30,000 crowd, and proves that they will certainly be in with a shout when the title race really hots up.
DYNAMITE…
That's Arsenal's England striker Ian Wright who scored twice in yesterday's comfortable win over Everton
KICK-BOXING
TWO times World kick boxing champion, Billy Murray is set to attempt what no European exponent of the sport has accomplished by winning three World titles at three different weights.
Belfast-based Bill's quest begins against Dutchman John Nelso at La Mon House Hotel this afternoon.
Murray won his first professional welterweight title back in 1989 at the Ulster Hall, outpointing champion Richard Hill of America.
After two successful defences at welterweight, Murray moved up a weight division to Super Welterweight and took the vacant title in Switzerland by knocking out another American Eric Melton in just three rounds.
Now he is attempting to win a third title in the middleweight division but first he must win his European title fight against the tough Dutchman John Neslo today.
That would set him up for a world title shot at the end of this year in Belfast.
Keith Courtney from Dungannon has withdrawn from his British Title fight due to a cracked rib.
The fight will be rescheduled for the end of this year.
CANTONA IS THE MASTER
SOUTHAMPTON manager Ian Branfoot paid tribute to United after his team had been thrashed and said: ‘Put your money on them to win the title again.’
United, inspired by fit-again Eric Cantona are now unbeaten in 15 matches, and Southampton never looked like preventing them chalking up their eighth win in nine attempts against them.
The visitors were ahead after five minutes when Lee Sharpe volleyed home a centre from Denis Irwin, and Southampton were struggling from then on to get back into the match.
They made a spirited reply to earn an equaliser after 13 minutes when midfield player Neil Maddison turned a pass from Glenn Cockerill.
But United stepped up a gear and regained the lead four minutes later.
Maddison was at fault by losing possession on the edge of his own area and Cantona chipped a superb shot over goalkeeper Tim Flowers.
Flowers' opposite number Peter Schmeichel produced brilliant saves to keep out shots from Iain Dowie, the Northern Ireland international, and teenager Neal Bartlett.
In between a shot from Ken Monkou whistled over the bar from ten yards when an equaliser looked to be a certainty.
But any doubts about United's ability to hold on to three comfortable points were dismissed in the 49th minute when Irwin strode through a big gap in the Southampton defence to beat Flowers from ten yards.
Flowers made an excellent save from Roy Keane three minutes later as United threatened to record a big win.
But they fell away and Schmeichel turned a fierce shot from Micky Adams against the outside of a post, and substitute Nicky Banger sent a tremendous shot from long range past the post with the goalkeeper beaten.
Irwin and Paul Ince were booked for ungentlemanly conduct as the referee added nine minutes of injury time to a tepid second-half which was in contrast to the excitement of the first.
‘The game got out of hand in the last 10 or 15 minutes, unnecessarily.
We had the game won by then,’ said United manager Alex Ferguson.
Ince had earlier aggravated the shoulder injury he sustained at Villa Park on Monday, but is expected to be fit to face West Ham at Old Trafford on Wednesday.
THE MASTER…
Frenchman Eric Cantona who inspired Manchester United's win at Southampton
KILMARNOCK'S LATE SHOCK FOR RANGERS
KILMARNOCK arrived at Ibrox as sacrificial lambs, but left bursting with pride after recording a sensational victory.
A goal from former Rangers striker Bobby Williamson two minutes into injury time at the end of the contest handed the Glasgow side their first home defeat since March 1992.
‘It's a 90 minutes game,’ pointed out veteran George McCluskey.
‘We've come to the best club in the country and won.
We always thought we had a chance if we played well.’
‘Some of the youngsters were in awe of Ibrox, but once they settled down we went on to dominate the second-half.’
Ironically the champions had apparently weathered the storm after falling behind to a Mark Roberts diving header on the hour mark.
Twelve minutes later Steven Pressley grabbed a scrappy equaliser which seemed to end any prospect of an upset.
Even before kick-off Rangers got the afternoon off to an unexpected start.
Last week Walter Smith sprang a major surprise by giving striker Duncan Ferguson his debut in the Old Firm encounter.
This time the Rangers manager pulled another rabbit out of the hat by fielding England international full-back Gary Stevens after 15 months of injury.
Even so, most eyes were on the Kilmarnock defence which had proved unexpectedly resilient in their opening three games.
It was widely predicted that last season's First Division runners-up would melt in the white hot cauldron of Ibrox.
But, as at Pittodrie a fortnight ago, the Kilmarnock defence held firm, and even on the rare occasions when Rangers did find a route to goal, veteran goalkeeper Bobby Geddes was on hand to snuff out any danger.
His two first-half saves from Neil Murray and David Robertson were of the highest quality, but even Geddes required some assistance from the woodwork when Duncan Ferguson hammered a low left footer past him in the 50th minute.
Steve's blast stops the rot
ASTON Villa ended a run of three matches without a win with a second-half Steve Staunton goal against Tottenham at Villa Park.
But it needed a penalty from the Republic of Ireland international to settle the issue as Villa struggled to find a way through.
Three of the four previous league clashes between the clubs had ended goalless, and this game appeared to be heading the same way.
But then Villa skipper Kevin Richardson was brought down in the area by Dean Austin after bursting through, and Staunton converted a 71st minute spot kick.
Villa woke up after Staunton's strike, and only fine saves by Tottenham keeper Erik Thorstvedt prevented Dean Saunders and Guy Whittingham from adding to their tally.
England manager Graham Taylor was at the game but Spurs striker Teddy Sheringham, who has been touted as a possible candidate for a World Cup place against Poland, did little to enhance his chances.
Steve Sedgley had Tottenham's best chance in the 14th minute when he latched on to a Gordon Durie centre, but Villa goalkeeper Nigel Spink reacted quickly to block his attempted shot.
Stalemate!
BOTTOM of the table Swindon won their first Premiership point with a resolute display at lack-lustre Norwich.
John Gorman's men, who had conceded 10 goals in their previous two games, decided to pack the midfield and leave Andy Mutch on his own up front.
For most of the game they were able quite comfortably to hold the Norwich front line.
Only once did Norwich break their stranglehold, midway through the first-half, when John Polston moved up to rattle a post.
Whitton nips in
FORMER Sheffield Wednesday striker Steve Whitton had the last word — snatching an equaliser with only seconds to go for Ipswich at Bramall Lane.
Sheffield United looked to be heading for their third successive home win when substitute Simon Milton found space on the right.
He pumped the ball over to the far post where Whitton finished off, heading past Alan Kelly from eight yards.
Whitton almost broke the deadlock, rising to connect with a Frank Yallop cross, but his firm header was palmed over the top by Kelly.
United took the lead in the 25th minute, Norwegian international Jostein Flo grabbing his second goal in four days since his £400,000 move.
Whitton was the hero in the 67th minute, spectacularly clearing a Wirmola header from under his own bar, and capped an impressive display with his last ditch equaliser.
Heath injury mars Whites joy day
DISTILLERY'S turned on the style at Ballyskeagh yesterday, and the highlight of an impressive team display was the performance of goalkeeper Dave Collins.
But their joy could be dimmed by an injury that may keep inspiring skipper Seamus Heath out of action for two weeks.
Distillery boss Billy Hamilton fears the worst after Heath was assisted off in the second-half with a torn calf muscle.
The manager said: ‘We'll know on Tuesday night, but it doesn't look bright.
‘We were lucky to win by the score we did.
But the third goal was everything.
It was international class and it's a pity no television cameras recorded it.’
Midfielder Stephen Small got the goal with a splendid chip from the 18 yard line after being set up by Billy Totten.
Totten, peeved at being dropped to the bench, bounced into action late on too to set up the masterpiece.
Heath had been involved in the two goals that got the Whites off the hook after Coleraine made an impressive start.
Only a save by Collins from a Stewart McLean header, and a rebound by Gary McVie that bounced off defender Jeff Calvin, foiled Coleraine.
Then Philip Mitchell blasted Distillery in front from the spot when Heath was brought down.
And Seamus snapped a 25 yard drive into goal, aided by a deflection, to get a second in the 16th minute.
Distillery went to sleep for long spells.
And Coleraine missed a golden chance to get back into the game when Collins saved a Dave Nicholls penalty in the 48th minute.
Manager Billy Sinclair said: ‘We would have got into the match better if we'd scored from that penalty.
We've been knocking at the door in four defeats.
‘But we are not going to do anything until our finishing is more positive.’
DISTILLERY: Collins 8, Drake 7, Calvin 6, Kennedy 6, Brady 6, Small 7, Dykes 7, Heath 7, Baxter 6, Mitchell 6, Cleland 6.
Subs: Irwin 6, for Heath 65; Totten 7, for Cleland 76.
COLERAINE: O'Hare 6, Pilson 6, Elder 6, Cummings 6, McLean 7, Morrison 6, McIvor 6, Gaston 7, McVie 7, Nicholls 6, McLaughlin 6.
Subs — Cunningham 6 (for McIvor 14 mins), Deery 5 (for Gaston 69 mins).
Referee: George Douglas (Comber) 7 Billy Hamilton
Bank on Maxwell in big holiday race HOME AND DRY
WHEN it comes to getting a horse ready to win a race at his local track, they don't come any better than Jeremy Maxwell.
That's why I feel Jeremy may have the winning of the Cork Dry Gin Ulster Cesarewitch at Downpatrick on Monday's Bank Holiday card.
Bassetja is the name of the mare which carries the Maxwell hopes and those of the Ballee Racing Syndicate who sank their money into the investment earlier this year.
French-bred Bassetja had some useful form on the other side of the English Channel before coming to Ulster and that form has not been lost on the Turf Club handicapper who has given Bassetja a weight of nine stone 11 in the handicap on Monday.
Bassetja is rated at 62 after three runs on the Flat, the last one at Sligo where in heavy ground she finished fourth behind Shirwin who has won since at Wexford.
Bassetja generally runs well on the Downpatrick track and won there over hurdles at the May meeting.
Before her run at Sligo, Bassetja showed some encouraging Flat form when finishing third in a Ladies race at Down Royal's July meeting.
Bassetja led from half a mile out and looked at one stage like winning the race as the favourite Velma appeared to have it all to do.
But on the run to the post Bassetja was passed by Velma and the useful Top Generation, although she was only a length behind the runner-up at the finish.
To my mind, Bassetja could be another Boggy Peak who gave Maxwell victory in the Ulster Cesarewitch back in 1986.
The signs are similar for like Boggy Peak, Bassetja has been trained for the race and is the only member of Maxwell's string in serious work at the moment.
It's a tricky race however with Dermot Weld fancying his chances and that can't be good news for the rest of the trainers involved.
Weld has left three in at the four day stage with Steel Chimes looking the most probable runner.
Rich Life is engaged in the BJ Eastwood race as is Bassetja and I would think this is where the Weld horse will go following on his second place to Alibar's Pet at Wexford last Friday night.
St Donavint who won at Galway and Sligo is highly consistent and is difficult to oppose in the opening Rea's Bar and Restaurant Handicap Hurdle although Wexford winner Sensitive King won't be far away.
Kaitlin has run a lot of times over the course and the fact that the Michael Grassick stable is in form leads me to make him the choice in the Newcastle Maiden Hurdle.
Fairyhouse returns next Saturday with an all Flat card which is not, I'm sure, what punters might want at this famed National Hunt course.
However it seems that the Flat continues endlessly and the main race is the £10,000 Tolka Handicap which should see yet another onslaught from the highly successful Dermot Weld stable.
Ormsby from the Weld stable is joint top weight with Salmon Eile but 10st is a lot of poundage to carry and it may be best to rely on Loki who rather disappointed at the Curragh last Saturday but who should be given another chance if going to the post.
Strong Case heads the weights in the Dunnes Stores Ladies Fashion Race where National Hunt stars like Second Schedual and Bitofabanter are among the entries.
If Steel Chimes doesn't run at Downpatrick on Monday he may be worth following here.
Apart from Downpatrick there is a meeting at Roscommon on Monday with the odd starting time of 4.45pm.
Billy Rock who has Listowel in mind for his smart and successful chaser Joey Kelly runs the gelding on Monday and he will go again at the next Roscommon meeting a fortnight later before travelling to Listowel where he might be worth an investment in view of that Galway win in July.
Jeremy Maxwell — top tip for Downpatrick
Dermot Weld — man to fear
Billy Rock — Listowel in mind
Angry Coyle cracks whip
DERRY City face reigning champions Cork City in the Brandywell this afternoon with manager Roy Coyle demanding an improvement on Thursday's disappointing 1-1 draw with Monaghan.
The two sides are among a group of clubs setting the pace in the Bord Gais National League with four points apiece.
But Coyle was less than happy with two points dropped to Monaghan on Thursday night.
He refused to confirm that harsh words had been spoken in the dressing room afterwards but his post-match interview suggested as much.
Coyle's assessment was blunt.
‘Our midfield didn't contribute in the second half,’ he said.
But if the manager is planning midfield changes, his options appear to be limited.
One of Derry's pressing problems is that they don't possess a natural left-sided midfielder — hence the constant chopping and changing to try and find the right balance across the middle.
Adrian Doherty, who missed the Monaghan match because he felt a slight twinge in his knee, is likely to return to the team this afternoon.
Derry were the better side at Gortakeegan for the first minutes they squandered several chances to kill off newcomers Monaghan and paid the penalty when the home side clawed their way back to force an equaliser.
Coyle clearly won't be happy if his men again take their feet off the pedal.
He told me immediately after the Monaghan game: ‘If you talk about winning championships then you talk about consistency, you talk about commitment, you talk about ability — you must produce all those things over the full 90 minutes.
‘If you do it game after game you get rewards — there are no prizes in football for going asleep.’
Cork, under new manager Damian Richardson, scrambled a 1-0 win over Monaghan on the opening day of the championship and followed that up with a less than impressive 0-0 draw at Galway on Wednesday.
A repeat of that form would clearly make Derry favourites to pick up three crucial points.
Seasiders can reach Paris as Crowe flies
BANGOR new boy Michael Crowe has seen it all before.
He headed into Europe last season with a Glenavon side labelled no-hopers after a 1-1 home draw with Royal Antwerp in the Cup Winners Cup.
And he was a central figure on a night of high drama in Belgium as the Lurgan team almost pulled off one of biggest Euro shocks of all time, only losing on penalties after a 1-1 extra-time draw.
This time it's Bangor being written off after another 1-1 home result in the same competition against Apoel Nicosia.
The Seasiders set out for Cyprus today needing a win or a higher scoring draw than 1-1 in Wednesday's return game to secure a lucrative first round tie with Paris St Germain.
And they travel in hope with Crowe insisting: ‘That Glenavon performance proved what Irish League teams can achieve with fight and determination away from home in Europe.
‘We really upset those Belgians — and Apoel aren't anywhere near as good as Antwerp who went on to reach the final.
‘Last season's experience tells me Bangor can still win.
We're quietly confident despite the gloomy predictions.’
Portadown-based Crowe, a close season signing by Bangor, embarks on his third successive European mission wiser in more ways than one from the Antwerp experience.
He fell victim to one of the oldest tricks in the book, sent off as a crafty Belgian took a dive at his feet.
‘Antwerp were amateurs compared to the play-acting we saw from Apoel at Clandeboye,’ said Crowe.
‘It taught me a harsh lesson.
If I had stayed on the pitch who knows what might have happened.
And I missed the first game against Apoel because of the suspension I picked up.
‘Our players will have to keep their discipline because the Cypriots will be up to all the tricks.
But I still believe we can do it.’
21 end results from all of yesterday's NIBA and PGL matches BOWLS: Preview of the Irish championships…and all of yesterday's action GARVEY PAIR GO FOR GOLD
ALAN LEONARD aims to add another string to his bow when he plays in the Irish National Pairs championship finals in Blackrock, County Dublin next weekend.
Leonard, who plays more golf in the summer than bowls, partners Irish international senior skip and Lisnagarvey club mate Noel Graham in their bid to win the Irish pairs title for the first time since the brilliant Fisher and Ringland combination won it for the Lisburn club in 1970.
But as well as that Leonard has an even bigger incentive — to win an outdoor national title in the same year as he lifted the prestigious Irish Indoor Bowling Association crown at the Antrim Forum.
In the semi-final they meet James Talbot and Michael Nutt of the Old Bleach Club, who will be seeking to gain some compensation after they were in the Old Bleach side which lost this season's CIS Irish Senior Cup championship final to Carrickfergus by a mere five shots.
The only thing certain about this opening confrontation is that Talbot and Nutt will be most unlikely to lift two counts of seven against the NIBA champions, as they did in their final game in the PGL against the Murdocks from Ulster Transport at Willowfield.
This will be a real test for the Randalstown players, for Leonard and Graham are favourites in my book to win the championship.
And I am not overlooking the fact that the Provincials are more than well represented with Ronnie Oliver and Ian McClure of Portrush, who meet Edwin Downey and Gary Rutledge of St Brendan's.
And the championship couldn't have a better launch on Friday morning when Carrickfergus' Michael McHugh meets Paul Daly of Belmont in the opening U-25 singles semi-final.
McHugh, winner of the title three years ago when he was with Whitehead, will not have an easy passage.
The battling Daly turned in a power packed display to snatch the game against Myles Greenfield of Dunbarton in a PGL final thriller.
He also won the Bangor Open singles this season, and deserves a lot of respect from the former champion.
And the other semi-final has John Nolan on his own green against David Gaile of Westbrook — a tough one for Gaile.
The singles championship too looks good with Noel Weir of Rathfriland clashing with the experienced Noel O'Hara of Herbert Park in one semi-final, and Harry Elliott of Dunluce meeting Colin Best of Willowfield.
This is a match in which Best will be hoping to follow in the footsteps of the great Syd Thompson, who last won the title for his club in 1950.
Yes, they have it all to do at Blackrock next weekend.
Programme
MOTORCYCLING: Harold Crooks looks forward to an action-packed weekend FANS SPOILT FOR CHOICE
MOTORCYCLING fans here will be spoilt for choice next Saturday with four events being promoted on the same day.
Topping the bill is the final Ulster road race of the season, the Carrowdore ‘100’, and the Mourne Club's motocross, the fifth and final round of the Norman Watt Motorcycles Ulster championships, at Shague Hill, Dundrum.
In addition the opening round of the Mid-Antrim Club's, Enkalon sponsored mini trials series commences at Maxwells Quarry, Ballymena, with the Tully Trial.
And for followers of youth division motocross, there is the Cookstown club's Andrew Chambers Memorial Motocross, at Desertmartin, which this year is the seventh round of the ACU-Dunlop Youth British Championship.
The Carrowdore road races are the penultimate round of the Irish Championships in which Joey Dunlop leads the 600 class, and shares top spot with Brian Reid in the McBrides Fashions 250 series.
In the Supersport 600 championship Joey has 121 points to Derek Young's 106.
Young has Ian King breathing down his neck with 102.
The McBrides Fashions series is down to a two-horse points.
Robert Dunlop has an eight point lead over Denis McCullough in the 125 series.
Dunmurry's Derek Young tops the 750 championship with 138 points, but will come under severe pressure from Joey Dunlop and Ian King.
The leaders of the Norman Watt ‘A’ and ‘B’Ulster 125 and 750 Championships are unbeaten since the first round at Desertmartin.
Mark Farrelly's winning streak in the 125 series began at Desertmartin when he won the second race.
At Ballykelly, Killinchy and Temple he scored maximums, as did Alan Morrison in the 750 grade.
In the 125 class Farrelly has 143 points, Phillip Neill 126 and David Renshaw 84.
Phillip Neill also fills second place in the 750 championship, with 109 points to Morrison's 120.
Morrison and Farrelly should clinch the titles at the Mourne Club event at Dundrum, where three English Honda riders, Lindley Francis, Clive Morgan and Wayne Faulkner are due to make their Irish debut.
Today's senior championship contenders all started in the junior motocross events.
Their successors will be in action at Desertmartin on Friday and Saturday in the first youth Division British Championship event to be held here.
Racing commences at 11am on Friday and half an hour earlier on the Saturday.
The Tully Trial, the first round of the four-event mini-series commences at 11.30am.
Joey Dunlop
Gazza's a great lad
DON'T believe all you read about Gazza.
Ian Stewart got to know Paul Gascoigne well when he teamed up with the troubled Lazio and England star at Newcastle.
And he insists: ‘Paul is a nice lad, really.
He was a real practical joker, even before he became famous.
‘I remember him once putting Superglue in Willie McFaul's bath!
‘Gazza's daft but he's not a nutcase — though the things being written about him would put anyone mental.
‘It was a pleasure to play in the same side as a true football genius.
‘He entertains people.
The game would be boring without players like Gazza.’
Jack Charlton gave Stewart the chance to star alongside Gazza and Peter Beardsley when he signed him for Newcastle from QPR.
Walked out
But Stewart never had a chance to say thanks.
Big Jack walked out on Newcastle the next day.
‘I signed for Jack one day and read on Teletext that he had quit the next.
I couldn't believe it.
‘I could have been the only Irishman to play for both Billy Bingham and Jack Charlton,’ he said.
Stewart rates Gascoigne and Beardsley as the top class acts of the hundreds he appeared with at club level.
And he named his first son George Alex after his personal heroes, Best and Higgins.
But he lists his all-time favourite team-mate as Sammy McIlroy.
He said: ‘Sammy took me under his wing when I came into the Northern Ireland team.
He did his best to keep me right and we had some great times together, on and off the pitch.’
Gallagher sets his heart on title win Mark aims to make amends
THERE was never any danger of Mark Gallagher displaying his many skills Stateside this summer.
Twelve months ago Devenish lost to Derrygonnelly in the Fermanagh Championship, while top marksman Gallagher was working in Boston.
As Devenish prepare to face Kinawley in today's county final Gallagher has no difficulty recalling that fateful afternoon.
He said: ‘It was the biggest sickener I've ever had in the sport.
Going to the States this summer was never a consideration.
‘I was in Boston when the word came through that Derrygonnelly had beaten us in the championship.
I couldn't believe it until I actually rang home.’
Gallagher, a third year student at the University of Ulster at Jordanstown, first captured the sporting headlines two seasons ago with a stunning display in the championship, against Antrim at Casement Park.
He scored a goal and two points, and had a hand in two other goals.
This season he has shown remarkable consistency, conjuring up a combined total of 12 goals and 32 points.
The high point has to be the three goals he scored against Derrygonnelly in the semi-final, making him a marked man today.
His goal is to score 100 points before the season is over, which means he has five games in which to hit the century mark.
Earlier this season Devenish beat Kinawley 5-15 to 2-2 in the league, but immediately afterwards Jim Carty took over the managerial reins, and Kinawley were transformed virtually overnight.
Kinawley are now supremely fit, and they enhanced their championship credentials with victory over the double champions Enniskillen in the quarter-final, before overcoming Roslea at the semi-final stage.
Ironically the same Jim Carty was Devenish manager when they captured their sixth senior championship in 1985.
Two seasons ago he guided the club to the elusive league and championship double, but both in 1991 and 1992 success eluded him.
In fairness to the big Garrison farmer he was totally frustrated by players determined to play their football Stateside, and 12 months ago Brian Carty, Mark Gallagher and Paddy McGuinness were all absent.
Carty, who was briefly involved with the county senior side two seasons ago is the current county U-21 manager, and he will have a huge influence on today's confrontation.
Mark Gallagher — marked man today
Much ado about nothing!
FOR a number of weeks leading up to last Sunday's Dublin v Derry semi-final the name of Tommy Carr provided scope for hundreds of column inches in the sports pages of a section of the media.
The Dublin player's sending off for kicking Donegal midfielder Brian Murray in the National League final was of course deserved, and his six months ban in proportion to his offence.
But what happened?
The wheels within wheels began to turn, and efforts were made to have the sentence reduced.
Nothing untoward — or new — in that, of course.
Yet when Carr realised that everything was not going quite his way, he came out and declared that ‘the GAA had made an enemy in him.’
There is just one aspect of the whole situation that irritates.
If Tommy Carr played for say Carlow, or perhaps Sligo or maybe Fermanagh, would there have been the same fuss?
And was his name mentioned anywhere this week following Dublin's defeat?
I rest my case.
Mama Mia, what a catch!
MOST unfortunate angler of the week is Italian teenager Stephano Martinaro, a nephew of Baltimore charter skipper Nick Dent.
Fishing in deep water Stephano had a powerful run on his mackerel bait and fought a shark for over three quarters of an hour without moving it off the bottom.
With his arms like jelly he reluctantly handed his rod over to another angler and after a further tense 15 minutes the big shark was landed with the help of all eight anglers on board.
It was identified as a six gilled shark weighing 315lbs — more than double the current Irish record of 154lbs landed by Essex angler Andrew Bull in 1968.
Unfortunately Stephano cannot claim a new record for what was the second biggest fish ever landed in Irish waters on rod and line because he received assistance.
The Killala Bay SAC Smithwicks 1500 Open Boat competition has been won by Michael McVeigh from Donaghadee, who recorded 18 species over two days to win the John Walkin Perpetual Trophy and £500.
David Deane (Belmullet) was second, 16 species; 3, Eamon Power (Dublin), 16 species; 4, Alan Smallwood (Causeway Coast SAC), 14 species; 5, William Gay (Surfmasters Club, Belfast), 14 species.
Ten anglers from Raughley SAC Sligo and Lough Swilly SAC accompanied by Robert Donaldson, Enniskillen and Ian Eaglen, Carrickfergus, fished with Rathmullan skipper Malcolm Bowden over a new unfished wreck ‘The Justica.’
Norman Kee, Sligo, landed a fine specimen ling of 27lbs, but top catch fell to Robert Donaldson with a new Irish record Torsk of 10lb 9.6ozs.
Salmon fishing at Lough Cowey continues to attract many anglers, and Roy McCartney with a brace at 8lb 8ozs and 11lbs, and Paul Foster from Belfast, with a brace at 9lb and 10lb 8ozs did particularly well this week.
John Graham, Portadown had one of 9lbs; Billy McClean, Glengormley, had two at 7lb and 8lbs, and Sean McGrattan, Belfast also had two at 6lb and 10lb 8ozs.
Dromore angler Niall Cromie has broken his own record for a four hour ‘Keep All You Catch’ ticket at the Straid Fishery.
Niall landed 25 trout for 58lb 4ozs.
Bangor anglers Noel Blaney and his son Noel aged 10 did the double at the Bridgewater Fishery.
Noel (Snr) took the best fish, an 8lb 4ozs rainbow, and Noel (Jnr) topped the juniors with a trout of 3lb 4ozs.
Welcome on the mat
ULSTER'S newest rugby club will play its first league game on September 18.
Sheephaven Bay must make a 360 miles round trip for their opening fixture at Donaghadee.
But next Saturday they will roll out the red carpet for a home match with a David Irwin Ulster XV.
The generosity of Dermot McGlade of the Shandon Hotel at Marble Hill Strand — a great friend to the club — has made this big day possible.
Former Irish coach Jimmy Davidson, Willie Anderson, Nigel Carr, Philip Matthews and Trevor Ringland are just some of the big names taking part.
Ulster sides in control
ULSTER'S strangle-hold on the Schweppes All Ireland Cup was maintained in yesterday's semi-finals.
Brigade went to Dublin to beat Malahide by two wickets in a tense match.
Bready failed to make it an all North West final when they lost by four wickets to North Down, beaten Touche Ross Cup finalists earlier this month.
Brigade pegged Malahide back to 130 for 9 in their 50 overs, but were in trouble when they slumped to 6 for 2 in reply.
But they recovered well, and had almost five overs to spare when the winning runs were hit.
North Down were always in control at Magheramason, with captain Ian Carser hitting 55 and Robin Haire 48 as they timed to perfection their reply to Bready's 165 for 8.
There were just two balls remaining when seventh wicket pair Adrian Semple and Graham Benson saw North Down home.
Lisburn stayed on top of the Lombard & Ulster League with an exciting one wicket win in the final over against Bangor at Upritchard Park.
Woodvale eased their relegation fears with a thumping 10 wickets win over Instonians, but Lurgan lost by 15 runs to Downpatrick.
SNOOKER
LONDONDERRY's Terry Murphy maintained his unbeaten sequence with an impressive 5-1 win over the experienced Barry West in round six of the European Open.
Murphy, who has now qualified for Stage III of four world ranking tournaments in Blackpool, looked sharp throughout the match against a player whose grinding style often takes its toll on lesser experienced players.
West won the second frame on the black but that was all he managed against the Ulsterman.
Otherwise, however, the news from the Norbreck Castle Hotel in Blackpool was disappointing yesterday — two Portadown players losing out in the sixth round.
Declan Hughes won the first frame against Shaun Mellish.
But it was always a struggle and Mellish's greater professional matchplay experience showed when the match went to the ninth and decisive frame, the English player winning on the black.
Martin O'Neill only got to the eighth frame in his match against Mark Rowing.
O'Neill won the opener on the final ball but was then hit with breaks of 77, 60 and 56.
A break of 80 helped O'Neill to recover to 3-3 but a 50 sparked a two frame roll that swept Rowing to victory.
ENGLAND ON EDGE
GRAHAM Gooch's record-breaking feat was not enough to prevent England messing up a match-winning position in the sixth Cornhill Test yesterday.
Another buoyant capacity Oval crowd was hushed first by stout Australian late order resistance in the morning — and then by an all-too familiar England batting collapse late in the afternoon.
At the close of a topsy-turvy third day England were 287 runs ahead at 210 for five in their second innings.
Gooch's 79, his second 50 of the match, took him past David Gower's previous England Test run aggregate record mark of 8,231.
On 17, and level with Gower, Gooch off-drove Paul Reiffel for four on the stroke of lunch to earn himself a prolonged standing ovation.
Seconds later, when he marched off at the interval, Gooch got another ovation and handshakes all round from the Australians.
And at that stage England were 50 without loss, with Gooch and Mike Atherton seizing back the initiative with some memorable strokes after Ian Healy had spearheaded a gutsy rearguard action.
Healy, 39 overnight, finished unbeaten on 83 as Australia's 239 for eight was stretched to 303 — a first innings deficit of only 77.
Yet Australia's fightback with the bat did not seem to matter as Gooch and Atherton continued their remarkable run of success as an opening pair.
Atherton batted beautifully for 42 but then left kicking himself for slamming a wide ball from Reiffel straight to cover off the back foot.
But Graeme Hick arrived to help Gooch add a further 80 for the second wicket — Hick driving Tim May straight for six and also including five fours in his 36.
But when he clubbed May straight to David Boon at mid-wicket — the only fielder in the vicinity — England's control at 157 for one suddenly became crisis.
Four wickets fell for 29 runs in 10 overs and the next casualty was Matthew Maynard.
The gifted but erratic Glamorgan stroke-maker's Test future is on the line after he fell for a sucker punch from Hughes.
The big Aussie fast bowler had drawn sympathetic applause from the crowd by literally dragging himself wearily from the field at both lunch and tea — minutes after his team-mates had run up the steps.
But Hughes, at the end of a long, hard summer, somehow found reserves of stamina and strength to strike twice in successive balls.
Maynard flapped a hook straight to the man positioned at backward square leg for such a mistake.
And then Nasser Hussain was caught in the gully as a brute of a delivery flew from just short of a length to take the shoulder of his bat.
Three overs later came another, even more grievous blow.
Gooch, after batting for almost four hours and hitting 13 boundaries from 183 balls, edged a perfect leg-break from Shane Warne behind.
Gooch left the arena to his third standing ovation of the day and with England's new individual record mark pushed up to 8,293.
And it was so nearly 186 for six when, two balls later, new batsman Mark Ramprakash got off the mark with an edged single which flew past slip's left hand.
Australian wicketkeeper Ian Healy celebrates the dismissal of Graham Gooch for 79
CARRICK CUP KINGS!
CARRICKFERGUS are the champions.
Yes, the Kings of the Castle finally laid to rest the CIS Irish Senior Cup hoodoo which has haunted them since they came into bowls in 1947.
Yesterday it all came good for them with a thrilling five shot (78-73) victory over Old Bleach in the final at Jordanstown, a result that finally takes away the sour taste following their defeat by Bangor in last year's final.
And what a fitting end it was to this season's cup campaign.
Carrick were favourites after their semi-final victory over Cliftonville, but Old Bleach deserved a lot of credit, for they took the new champions to a nerve tingling finish.
The Randalstown club came ever so close to taking the title for the first time, and had they done so they arguably would have been the first second division club to win Ireland's blue riband team championship.
Alas, for them, it was not to be.
Although they battled strongly throughout the game they lost too many counts at crucial times.
Carrick finished ahead on two of the four rinks with James Caldwell shutting out Michael Nutt in a remarkable spell when the Old Bleach skip went from 10-6 up to 25-10 down, before he scored again and finally finished a cliff-hanging two ends with a 30-13 victory.
And for Caldwell's No 3 Dessie Hill, formerly with Castleton, it was a day to remember.
He had a brilliant game and deserved an Irish Cup medal in his first season with the club.
Carrick's other winner was Alistair Murphy who tore the heart out of the Old Bleach four skipped by George Adair.
Murphy trailed countless jacks for shots in his 30-13 victory.
Amidst the Carrick euphoria, spare a thought for Billy Patton, the Old Bleach skip.
It was his cool nerve that saw his club through a nervous semi-final against Coleraine.
Yesterday Patton had a magnificent game, as his 25-6 win over Chris Wallace suggests.
Meanwhile, Ballymoney recaptured the CIS Irish Junior Cup for the first time since 1983, with a comfortable victory over Ulster Transport at Carrickfergus.
Ballymoney won this one 103-57, finishing ahead on three of the four rinks.
FELL RUNNING
BALLYDRAIN Harriers Brian Ervine and Anne Sandford were in record breaking form in the eighth round of the Anderson Fell Running Championship in the Sperrin Mountains yesterday.
Ervine, who last week finished runner-up in the Irish championship, took the lead from the start with only Jim Brown of BARF prepared to give chase.
By the second of eight peaks Ervine was well clear but continued to keep his fast pace going for the full 14 mile distance and knocked over nine minutes off the course record clocking 2 hours 14 minutes 16 seconds.
Brown paid the price for his fast start as he was passed by Irish vets champion Billy McKay of Albertville.
But both had to give way to Larne AC's flying doctor Peter Howie who produced his best ever run by storming through in the closing stages to grab the runner up spot.
Anne Sandford was in a class of her own in the well supported Ladies category as she notched up her fourth win of the season in a record time of 3.19.51, finishing well clear of Lisburn's Kath Knell and Helen McKeeman of BARF.
GOLF
THREE round scores and aggregates at the Murphy's English Open at the Forest of Arden Hotel Golf and Country Club, near Coventry: 202:C Rocca (Italy) 70 68 64. 203:I Woosnam 71 67 65, J-M Canizares (Spain) 66 71 66. 207:J Haeggman (Swe) 70 69 68, J Hawkes (SA) 70 68 69. 208:H Clark 71 69 68, D Clarke 68 72 68, J Rivero (Spain) 69 69 70. 209:M Roe 69 73 67, S Richardson 67 72 70. 210:R Allenby (Aus) 72 70 68, R Rafferty 73 68 69, P-U Johansson (Swe) 68 73 69, P Curry 69 70 71, T Johnstone (Zim) 66 71 73. 211:P Mitchell 70 72 69, S Lyle 72 70 69, S McAllister 73 70 68, D Feherty 69 74 68, 211 R Goosen (SA) 74 67 70, F Nobilo (NZ) 69 72 70, P Broadhurst 69 73 69, G Evans 72 70 69, J Robson 69 72 70, V Fernandez (Arg) 69 71 71, G Brand jnr 71 69 71, D Gilford 70 70 71. 212:O Karlsson (Swe) 69 73 70, M Clayton (Aus) 73 70 69, A Bossert (Swi) 72 72 68, P Lawrie 70 74 68, J Parnevik (Swe) 72 69 71, G Turner (NZ) 71 70 71, P Fowler (Aus) 68 71 73. 213:P Fulke (Swe) 72 70 71, M James 69 73 71, M Besanceney (Fra) 71 72 70, P Way 68 75 70, C O'Connor jnr 70 72 71, G Orr 70 71 72, B Marchbank 70 69 74. 214:P Price 73 70 71, D Hospital (Spain) 75 68 71, P Affleck 71 73 70, S Little 74 70 70, W Westner (SA) 71 70 73, J-M Carriles (Spain) 68 72 74. 215:B Lane 69 75 71, E Romero (Arg) 71 73 71.
G Cali (Italy) 69 72 74. 216:J Berendt (Arg) 71 73 72, P Baker 74 65 77. 217 G J Brand 73 71 73, T Levet (Fra) 71 73 73, S Tinning (Den) 69 74 74, F Lindgren (Swe) 71 71 75, S Bowman (US) 71 71 75, D W Basson (SA) 70 71 76. 218:M Gates 72 72 74, R Winchester 68 76 74, C Cassells 70 73 75, R Willison 71 72 75. 220:I Garbutt 67 76 77, M Pinero (Spain) 73 70 77. 222:O Sellberg (Swe) 77 67 78.
BALLYCLARE golfer Stephen Hamill is in joint 11th place going into the final round of the £53,000 Divonne Open in France.
Hamill, who has dropped back to 34th place in the Challenge Tour order of merit following his recent two-week break, had a three-under par 68 in the third round to leave him with a tournament aggregate of 210, seven shots behind leader Frederick Larsson of Sweden.
Crisis for Strain
GLENTORAN 3 COLERAINE 2
ROBERT Strain, bitter at seeing Glentoran lose a commanding half-time lead, admitted it was crisis time at the Oval yet again.
He is now in the market for a goalkeeper and midfielder.
The moment of truth comes on Tuesday when they meet unstoppable Portadown in a quarter-final at Shamrock Park, Glentoran having only qualified on goal difference.
Strain said: ‘Coleraine deserved more than they got.
Dean Smyth is transfer-listed in goal and I don't have a Billy Caskey or Ray Morrison in midfield.
I am happy with the result but unhappy with the overall show.
‘We didn't have the game taken from us — we lost control ourselves.
We stood off the ball in some tackles.’
Coleraine manager Billy Sinclair said: ‘We might have lost by six goals but got our act together.
We gave ourselves a mountain to climb and didn't quite make it.
Some other teams might have quit at half-time — not us.’
Glentoran skipper Barney Bowers hotly disputed the penalty award that gave Coleraine's Mark McWalter their first goal.
Bowers said: ‘The ball hit me on the head — I didn't handle it.
A disgraceful decision, as I pointed out at the time.’
McWalter, a top class signing from Partick Thistle, is one to watch.
Apart from the penalty he worked like a beaver.
And so did Dave Nicholls who scored the second.
Glentoran's Neil Candlish, looking like his old explosive self, hit two in eight minutes and made a third for Damien Kelly with a superb cross, as the Glens swept into a three goal interval lead.
‘I might have had a hat-trick and I wanted that.
But it is two goals down with a lot more to come — and that is a promise,’ said Candlish.
GLENTORAN: Paterson 7, Neill 7, Bowers 7, G Smyth 7, M Smyth 7, Kelly 6, Mooney 6, McCloskey 6, McBride 6, Candlish 7, Hillis 6.
Subs: West 6, Telford 6.
COLERAINE: O'Hare 7, Bryson 6, Morrison 6, McCaul 6, McLean 7, McLaughlin 6, Cunningham 7, McWalter 7, Cook 6, Nicholls 7, Gaston 6.
Subs: McIvor 6, McVie 6.
Referee: Norman Cowie (Carryduff) 7.
SAFE KEEPING…
Coleraine keeper Davy O'Hare is all eyes as he collects a cross under pressure
KARTING
A RECORD number of drivers took part yesterday in the Kartparts and Dukes Transport Irish Kart Grand Prix.
In the fastest class for the 250cc Formula E machines the champion of two years ago, Colin Menary, from Bangor drove to .05 of a second off the lap record, and in so doing took won a fantastic final.
However, Ballyclare's Geoff McBride pushed him all the way, only losing out by a quarter of a machine's length at the chequered flag after having sat on Menary's rear bumper for the complete race.
Greyabbey's Dickie Curran came in one second behind in third with European championship contender John McAllister from Strabane coming in a well deserved fourth.
In the Junior Clubman class a three nation battle was set up at the very start between Hillsborough's Richard Lyons, Dublin's John Grandon and Glasgow's Craig Murray.
After two laps Grandon fell back slightly leaving Lyons and Murray to forge ahead with Murray seeming set for his first victory in the province.
However, defending champion Lyons was in top form and went on to take the chequered flag for the second year running.
The only visiting driver to do well was Cumbria's Andy Fairless who drove an excellent race to fend off the challenge from Berkshire's Peter Palmer.
British open champion Bob Blight had a demanding weekend's racing, as he was also racing in the 125 P and R. However his determination paid off with a third overall.
TRIATHLON
ULSTER'S triathlon juniors proved too much for their senior counterparts and stole the show at the Orbit Triathlon in Ballymoney yesterday.
Eighteen-year-old James Buchanan from Derry pulled back a two minute deficit from the 32-length swim to finish first after the 32km cycle, recording the fastest bike split of 48 minutes 23 seconds.
Buchanan's Triangles clubmate Mark Tosh pushed hard to try and catch him on the five-mile run but the Derry man won in a time of 1.28.52.
Tosh, also a junior, came home second in a time of 1.29.32 with Belfast's Gary Wilson a close third in 1.30.05.
In the women's race it was again a junior — 16-year-old Sinead Jennings from Letterkenny — who proved too strong for the senior opposition.
Jennings, who recently became the Irish Duathlon champion, fought back after exiting the pool one-and-a-half minutes behind Belfast's Grace Kerr.
She once again showed a maturity way beyond her 16 years and put in a fantastic bike of 53.16 and run of 32.48 to win in a time of 1.39.13.
Second woman home was Bernie Gribben in a time of 1.45.46.
Belfast man Ean McClure was the first veteran in 1.39.56.
In all 79 competitors completed the event but the day belonged to the juniors — four of whom were placed in the top ten.
HOCKEY
IRELAND beat the Scottish Under-21 ladies' team 3-2 at Blaris yesterday in their first match of the season in preparation for next year's World Cup.
Scotland, playing in their final match before going to Spain for next month's Junior World Cup finals, took the lead in the 12th minute through Alison Grant.
Fiona Manning equalised for Ireland but seven minutes into the second half Rhona Simpson fired Scotland back into the lead.
Eight minutes later Mary Logue equalised for Ireland and with twelve minutes remaining Sarah Kelleher saved Irish blushes when she scored from the spot.
Winger to sign on this week GLENS SNAP UP STEWART
By JIM GRACEY
FORMER Northern Ireland international star Ian Stewart is being lined up for a dramatic comeback with Glentoran.
Stewart (31) will join the Glens this week and has set himself a three week target to be ready for first team action.
The exciting winger, who used to set Windsor Park alight, is now back living in his native east Belfast after a seven-club English career.
Derry City boss Roy Coyle was also on his trail but Stewart said last night: ‘I couldn't turn down Glentoran.
I've supported them since I was a boy.’
Looking trim and fit, Stewart added: ‘I'm not quite ready for first team football.
I haven't kicked a ball since last season.
‘I told Glentoran manager Rob Strain that I intend to train hard for three weeks and maybe play a couple of reserve games.
‘If it works out, we will talk about a contract.’
Appetite
Stewart, signed by QPR at 14, shot to fame overnight with a sensational winning goal against West Germany at Windsor Park 10 years ago.
He went on to play alongside Paul Gascoigne and Peter Beardsley under Jack Charlton at Newcastle.
But his career took a downward turn as he moved from Portsmouth, to Millwall, Brentford, Aldershot and finally Colchester.
‘I'm a free agent and have regained my appetite for the game.
I'm looking forward to trying my luck in the Irish League,’ he said.
‘I am back in Belfast to stay.
I've sold my home in London and the eldest of my two children will be starting school here next month.’
A fully-fit and in-form Stewart would be another bonus for Glens boss Strain in his bid to build an attractive as well as successful Oval team.
Ian Stewart aims to be ready for the first team in three weeks
CYCLING
The spate of record breaking in Irish cycling continues, the latest being the 100 miles figures which were bettered by three riders in the NICF 100 miles Northern Ireland Championship at Cloghmills yesterday.
Over the past fortnight Tommy Evans has twice broken the 10, Graeme Obree and Chris Boardman the 25, and Joe Barr the End-to-End.
John Boone (South Derry Wheelers) retained his Northern Ireland 100 mile title in a record breaking ride on the Cloughmills-Coleraine-Kilrea course.
His 4.01.43 was 5.15 faster than Joe Barr existing Irish record of 4.7.58.
Robert Curry (Roe Valley), who was first home also broke the record with 4.02.52.
Jamie Hunter (Toyota North Down) finished with 4.04.31, but unluckily for him he started after the Roe Valley rider.
Curry led all the way, and at the half-distance was 49 seconds faster than Boone with Hunter at 2.32 and David Coulter (Old Bleach CC) at 3.18.
With just over 20 miles to go Curry led Boone by 1.10, but the less experienced Roe Valley rider was starting to slow, and as they came past the finish line with 16 miles remaining his lead was down to 48 seconds.
At the final turn into the tailwind, eight miles from the finish, Curry still led but only by 10 seconds, and from here on in Boone pulled ahead taking 1.29 out of Curry over the final miles.
Northern Ireland 100 miles championship, Cloughmills: 1, John Boone (South Derry Wheelers) 4.01.43; 2, R Curry (Roe Valley) 4.02.52; 3, J Hunter (Toyota N Down) 4.04.31; 4, D Coulter (Old Bleach) 4.14.17; 5, J McClean (Ballymena RC) 4.27.36; 6, J McConnell (Kings Moss) 4.28.13; 7, N Magee (Bann Wheelers) 4.35.26; 8, T Blaney (Ballymena) 4.37.34; 9, A Hughes (Kings Moss) 5.00.42; 10, H Mitchell (Movilla CC) 5.00.50.
Irish face Cuban showdown
ONE stark statistic sums up Ireland's poor performance in the Inter-Continental Cup programme in Poland, one which threatens to shatter their dream of joining the elite at next year's World Cup finals in Sydney.
Ireland prepared to face Cuba today (11.00 BST) with the unenviable record of being the only side not to have scored a goal in the 12-team tournament.
Ireland coach Cess Koppelaar put his players through a one-hour training stint yesterday morning, and placed a heavy emphasis on shooting practice.
But the Dutchman is smart enough to know that even though the practice session at the stadium went well, his strike-force still suffer from the age-old Irish problem.
‘The session was very helpful but, when the pressure is on, it is an entirely different situation for the players,’ Koppelaar said.
‘Ideally what we want is to score early on because the longer the match progresses, psychological factors in the players’ minds will surface.’
The famine simply must end today if Koppelaar's team are to hold down a crucial fourth slot in Pool A which would keep alive their chances of reaching hockey's premier event for only the third time.
The maximum points would be required from the Cuban clash and tomorrow's contest with Canada, if the pressure is to be lifted from Wednesday's final preliminary with Malasia.
Ireland have few problems defensively.
They have conceded only three goals — all from set-pieces — in opening defeats by Korea (0-1) and Spain (0-2), but the major deficiency lies at the other end of the pitch.
Lisnagarvey striker Daniel Clarke and skipper Marty Sloan both sat out yesterday's session.
However, while Clarke should be fit after the recurrence of a back problem, the Cookstown player's chances of featuring today are rated no higher than 50-50, following a hamstring injury, sustained on Friday.
Yesterday's results: Pool A: Korea 2, Cuba 1; Canada 2, Spain 3.
Placings: 1, Spain (played three) 6pts; 2, Korea,(played 3) 6pts; 3, Malasia (played 2) 4pts; 4, Ireland (played 2) 0pts; 5, Canada (played 3) 0pts; 6, Cuba (played 3) 0pts.
Pool B: India 3, South Africa 1; Poland 2, France 1.
Placings: 1, India (played 3) 6pts 5; 2, Poland (played 3) 4pts; 3, Belgium (played 2) 3pts; 4, Argentina (played 2) 2pts; 5, South Africa (played 2) 0pts; 6, France (played 2) 0pts.
PORTS TOP UP ON FIVE STAR
PORTADOWN 5 OMAGH TOWN 0
OMAGH TOWN had a man sent off for the third game in a row as they were outclassed at Shamrock Park.
Striker Barry Paton got his marching orders from Alan Snoddy for pushing Ports skipper Brian Strain to the floor after 71 minutes.
It was 2-0 at that stage, and while Omagh boss Paul Kee wasn't happy about the dismissal he had no complaints about the final result.
‘It was like men against boys,’ he said.
‘We had some players out there who are just not good enough, but we have no money to replace them.’
The Ports did a 5-0 demolition job on Ballyclare in midweek, perfect preparation for another emphatic victory yesterday.
Class
And they won as they pleased against Omagh, despite the absence of four first team regulars.
It ensures they finish top of their group and meet Glentoran in the Ulster Cup quarter-finals at Shamrock Park on Tuesday night.
Robert Casey, subject of much cross-channel transfer speculation, showed his class with a couple of well taken second-half goals which brought his tally to five in three games.
His Scottish partner up front, Trevor Smith, was in the thick of the action in the first half and opened the scoring on 31 minutes.
Only acrobatics from teenage keeper Declan Devine prevented Smith from completing a hat-trick before the break.
The second goal amazingly didn't come until the second half, courtesy of a goalkeeping lapse from Devine.
He fumbled a Barry Meehan cross from the left, and 18-year-old Paul Evans — starting against senior opposition for the first time — took advantage to prod the ball home.
The other goal was scored by stand-in left-back Peter Murray — a sign of the Ports' superiority in the second-half.
Manager Ronnie McFall was happy with this performance from a team missing the suspended Gregg Davidson and three injured players — Joey Cunningham, and new Scots Tony Shepherd and Joe McLeod.
Omagh gave a senior debut to 16-year-old Aidan Coyle, no relation to departed striker Liam.
In truth they all looked out of their depth, and have still to register a victory over the Ports since their elevation to senior status.
PORTADOWN: Keenan 7, Major 7, Murray 8, Gorman 7, Strain 7, Stewart 8, Evans 7, Russell 8, Casey 8, Smith 7, Meehan 7.
Sub: Fraser 6.
OMAGH: Devine 7, Doherty 7, Gilmore 6, Donnelly 6, Heron 6, Dunnion 6, Coyle 5, Patton 7, Beckett 5, O'Neill 6, Kavanagh 6.
Subs: O'Donnell 5, Scott 5.
Referee: Alan Snoddy (Carryduff) 8.
Trevor Smith — could have had hat-trick
Reds study Cook report
CLIFTONVILLE are ready to move in if the rift between Coleraine striker Derek Cook and manager Billy Sinclair isn't quickly healed.
The Reds were on Cook's trail last season and Solitude boss Frankie Parks will be watching the latest developments with interest.
Scottish striker Cook, Coleraine's top scorer with 19 goals last season, was angry at being substituted in the 3-2 defeat by Glentoran last Saturday and spoke his mind.
But Sinclair hit back: ‘Derek had it easy last year and his place was almost guaranteed.
‘But it's a different story this time around and he hasn't been doing the business for us.
‘Derek has to realise he has a fight on his hands and he will have to put in more effort.
‘I am not going to spend big money bringing players over from Scotland simply for them to go through the motions.’
Former skipper and caretaker manager David Keery could also be on the move if his contract dispute drags on much longer.
East Belfast-based midfielder Keery (28) has been holding out for a better deal than the one on offer.
But midfielder Brian Donaghy and central defender Graeme Philson — both out of contract since the start of the season — have compromised by signing one-month deals.
Sinclair will be delighted to see both players back in action.
Donaghy was one of his more consistent players in a struggling side last season while Philson was voted Young Player of the Year.
Philson has also been on trial with Spurs and is interesting Rangers and Manchester United.
Joy at last for Ireland
CEES Koppelaar last night banished speculation that he would quit the Ireland coaching job after failing to steer his squad to next year's World Cup finals in Sydney.
Ireland can finish in ninth place in the Inter-Continental Cup in Poland, provided they beat Canada today following yesterday's 2-1 win over France.
‘I have been disappointed with our results, but I would like to stay on and honour my contract which keeps me in the post until December 1994,’ said the Dutchman.
‘However, that depends how the Irish Hockey Union view the situation and I expect to be asked a few questions.
‘In Holland if coaches don't do well they get the sack, so I am philosophical about the matter.
‘I would still like to be in charge in Dublin in 1995 when we host the European championships.’
Ireland, at least, salvaged a measure of respectability in Poznan yesterday as they showed some of their traditional fighting spirit to beat the French.
Ireland missed a hatful of opportunities yesterday, as did the French, who were constantly foiled by a magnificent display of goalkeeping from Cork Harlequins player Ivan Bateman.
Former Banbridge player Robin Madeley paved the way with an opportunist goal in the 29th minute after a defender had squandered possession.
Following some heroics from Bateman, France levelled through Olivier Camus who drove in the equaliser in the 66th minute.
But Kirkwood, who was a particularly dejected figure after Monday's decisive 1-0 defeat by Canada, injected some pride back into Irish ranks in the dying seconds when he flicked home the winner.
HOCKEY
Inter-Continental Cup hockey in Poland: Results 9th to 12th place play-offs (second series): Ireland 2 (R Madeley, J Kirkwood) France 1 (O Camus); Cuba 1 (J Ojeda) Poland 0 
Jimmy Kirkwood Cees Koppelaar
Crues win at a canter
OMAGH TOWN 0 CRUSADERS 3 OMAGH TOWN'S cross border midweek raid for Bohemians pair Lee King and Joe Lawless, and Limerick's Noel King, failed to impress unbeaten Crusaders at St Julian's Road.
True to recent form Omagh conceded a first-half goal, and late in the game two more, as the Crues won a match which rarely rose above the mediocre.
No one was more surprised when Jim Gardiner opened the scoring just after the half-hour than Jim himself.
Omagh goalkeeper Declan Devine allowed his harmless looking cross from wide on the left to drift into the net.
Two goals in as many minutes — from substitute Roddy Collins and the impressive Michael Cash — sealed Omagh's fourth successive defeat.
Collins struck after 81 minutes, and Cash two minutes later.
There had been a fourth new name on the Omagh team sheet in the match day programme, that of Ray Duffy.
Omagh boss Paul Kee had been chasing the tall Limerick central defender for more than a fortnight.
But just before kick-off his opposite number Roy Walker announced he hoped to complete the signing of Duffy for Crusaders this week.
OMAGH TOWN: Devine 7, E Doherty 7, Gilmore 6, S Doherty 6, Donnelly 6, Dunnion 6, L King 7, N King 7, Lawless 6, Crilly 7, O'Donnell 7.
Subs: O'Neill 5, Beckett 5.
CRUSADERS: McKeown 7, Kenny 6, Cash 8, Dunlop 7, Lawlor 7, Murray 7, Livingstone 7, Gardiner 7, Lynch 6, Hunter 6, Burrows 6.
Subs: Collins 5, Mallon, not used.
Referee: Derek Taylor (Tandragee) 7.
Dons draw
VINNIE Jones returned for his first match of the season and celebrated his comeback after injury with the goal which earned Wimbledon a point.
Oldham had gone in front after six minutes when Nick Henry and Ian Olney combined superbly to leave Scottish U-21 midfielder Paul Bernard with a simple tap-in on the line.
But Wimbledon were soon back in business four minutes after the break.
A defence splitting cross from Dean Holdsworth picked out the unmarked Jones, and he  coolly blasted the equaliser from the edge of the box.
Les at the double!
LES Ferdinand gave England manager Graham Taylor a timely reminder with two goals in the rout of West Ham.
Two minutes after the interval he darted on to a long through ball and scored with a low shot.
Then, in the 71st minute, he took the ball clear of keeper Ludek Miklosko before netting again.
Darren Peacock headed Rangers in front from a Ray Wilkins corner after 12 minutes.
In the 53rd minute, he headed a Wilkins free-kick to Gary Penrice who turned and scored.
200th strike shatters Leeds IAN'S GOAL RUSH
IAN Rush scored his 200th league goal for Liverpool to prolong Leeds travel sickness, and maintain their dismal record at Anfield.
It is not since the days of rivalry between Bill Shankly and Don Revie that Leeds have won at Liverpool, and more recently every ground seems to hold menace for the Yorkshire side.
They have not won away for 24 games since they clinched the 1992 title, and there was never any prospect of them doing so yesterday once Ian Rush had struck after 24 minutes.
There was little to choose between the sides in the early part of the game, but it was Ronnie Wheelan and Rob Jones who unlocked the Leeds defence with a move down the right.
Jones then switched the ball inside for Don Hutchison to chip the ball through where it struck Rush and took a fortunate touch into the net.
Liverpool went further ahead five minutes before the interval with a penalty from Jan Molby, but their half-time advantage flattered them.
The penalty seemed harsh as Jones went down in a collision with John Lukic as they both raced for a 50-50 ball.
Jones won the race fractionally to poke the ball well wide of goal, but then went tumbling.
Darlington referee Robert Hart pointed to the spot and the Leeds fans chanted ‘cheat, cheat.’
But they could not distract Molby, who calmly tucked away his kick.
Leeds tried to force their way back in a second-half during which they dominated the game but were unable to find a way through a Liverpool defence in which Mark Wright and Rob Jones were outstanding.
Conceded
In an effort to pep up an attack, Wilkinson took off Rod Wallace in favour of youngster Noel Whelan.
The Leeds fans chanted: ‘What the hell is going on,’ and followed that up with cries of ‘Rocky, Rocky’in support of £2m signing David Rocastle, who once again sat in the stands, not even in the squad.
Liverpool were content to hang on to their lead but manager Graeme Souness conceded: ‘I said after Wednesday's defeat by Spurs that we would play worse and win, and that was the case today.
‘Up to now, including Wednesday, we have looked lively in all departments but today we weren't’.
And he added a special tribute to Rush.
‘He is the best goalscorer I've ever seen in my time in professional football, and anyone who has seen Liverpool over the years will agree he's a very special player.’
A dejected Leeds boss Howard Wilkinson said: ‘We did as we have been doing in every game.
‘We've played with a lot of spirit and commitment, but people defend that much better when they are winning.’
Liverpool's Ian Rush who scored his 200th league goal yesterday
Bright ends the gloom
MARK BRIGHT finally ended Sheffield Wednesday's barren start to the season with their first goal after 371 minutes of fruitless Premiership action.
Bright, drafted in for his first start following injuries to David Hirst and Paul Warhurst, put them in front, but Trevor Francis's men still had to settle for a point at Stamford Bridge.
Chelsea had the better chances — and it was an eventful day for substitute David Lee.
The 23-year-old was on as early as the eighth minute when Andy Myers hobbled off after taking a knock.
Lee produced Chelsea's equaliser after 34 minutes, was booked 10 minutes later for a foul — and sent off after 73 minutes for his second bookable offence, when he kicked the ball away.
Wednesday broke their duck after 12 minutes when Nigel Worthington crossed low, and Bright saw his first effort blocked by Dmitri Kharine, but made no mistake with the second.
Tony Cascarino had a close range effort blocked by Chris Woods after 21 minutes, but Chelsea finally drew level when Gavin Peacock chested the ball down for Lee to shoot past the England keeper.
Cascarino should have done better when he shot weakly on the turn, but was unlucky two minutes later when he struck the bar with a superb volley.
Peacock had the ball in the net after 65 minutes but the effort was disallowed.
Mark Bright
Tony Cascarino
Feherty fired up
BERNHARD Langer stands between Ulster's David Feherty and the victory which could spectacularly catapult him into the Ryder Cup.
Langer leads the Volvo German Open at Hubbelrath by two strokes from Feherty (69) and Midlander Peter Baker (71).
Down in 24th place in the Ryder Cup points table, Feherty could earn automatic selection by lifting the £108,330 first prize.
Victory would give him 314,328 cup points.
Baker is the man he is trying to displace and he already has 306,209 points.
Only if Baker drops to 19th today will Feherty go past him, but David says: ‘Even if Peter is still ahead of me I would like to think that winning would give me a good chance of a wild card.’
Bernard Gallacher names his three wild cards tomorrow.
Darren Clarke fired 71 for six under while Ronan Rafferty is one shot further back after a disappointing 74.
Wooden spoon looms
DEFEATS by England and Wales left Ireland facing the prospect of being left with the wooden spoon when the Women's Junior Home International Bowls Championship is concluded in Portrush today.
Ireland went down 68-94 to England in their opener and then lost out to a late rally that took Wales to a 92-82 win in their afternoon clash.
Ireland led 48-39 at the half-way point but had no answer to a late Welsh rally that gave then a 92-82 win.
Ireland now face defending champions Scotland this morning with the Scots looking for just a draw to retain their title.
Ireland 68 England 94: D McNally 17 L Whitehead 25; E Hastings 19 W Betanbeau 18; T Smyth 11 L Francis 23; L McKee 21 J Hawes 28.
Scotland 80 Wales 60: H Rankin 30 N Daniel 7; E McKenzie 20 R Larsen 15; F Steven 11 S Hawkins 20; A Brown 19 A Butten 18.
Ireland 82 Wales 92: Hastings 31 Daniel 15; McNally 20 Larson 20; McKee 16 Butten 31; Smyth 15 G Hawkins 26.
Scotland 97 England 74: Stephen 20 Francis 20; McKenzie 20 Betanbeau 23; Rankin 25 Hawes 22; Brown 32 Whitehead 9.
Ireland's young ones hit back
IRELAND'S bowlers bounced right back into contention in the Men's U-25 Home International Championships in Carlisle yesterday when they shrugged off an opening match defeat from England to beat Scotland and stay in contention for the title.
Ireland had crashed to a 145-90 defeat at the hands of the English losing out on all six rinks, and looked to have little chance when they took on the Scots, who had beaten defending champions Wales 130-100 in their opener.
But a vastly improved performance saw Ireland finish ahead on five of the six rinks to win 126-101 and the star of the show was Cookstown's Colm McHugh, who beat Paul Conlon 25-10.
Keith Taylor from Bangor added a 27-14 win over Simon Scott, Gary McElroy beat Andrew Forest 25-18, Clifford Dennison from Dunbarton edged out Willie Watson 19-17 and Portadown's Andrew Hughes beat Colin Mitchell 23-16.
Ireland's only defeat came from Glen Thompson from Willowfield who crashed 7-26 to Colin McNeil.
With Wales beating England 119-118 all four sides go into this morning's concluding round of matches with one win apiece.
Ireland 90 England 145: C McHugh 19 L Millar 25; G McIlroy 17 M Bantock 21; K Taylor 12 R Moses 27; C Dennison 15 N Jones 34; G Thompson 15 W Garnett 17; A Hughes 12 D Mayne 21.
Scotland 130 Wales 100: P Conlan 17 B Evans 12; A Forrest 27 D Kingdon 17; S Scott 18 R Wasson 23; W Watson 19 A Price 17; C McNeill 22 B Powell 16; C Mitchell 27 E Thomas 15.
Ireland 126 Scotland 101: M McHugh 25 Conlon 10; McIlroy 25 Forest 18; Taylor 27 Scott 14; Dennison 19 Watson 17; Thompson 7 McNeill 126; Hughes 23 Mitchell 16.
Wales 119 England 118: Powell 22 Garnett 12; Thomas 18 Mayne 16; Evans 22 Millar 25; Kingdon 18 Bantock 16; Wasson 22 Moses 18; Price 17 Jones 31.
Campbell spells out reasons for joining Linfield
JIM GRACEY REPORTS
GLENTORAN midfield star Raymond Campbell last night ended the longest guessing game in Irish football by declaring: ‘I'm ready to sign for Linfield.’
The 24-year-old Downpatrick based player meets Linfield manager Trevor Anderson for a further round of talks tonight.
But Campbell said: ‘It's not a case of him talking me into the move.
I've already made up my mind that I want to sign for the Blues.
We just have to iron out the contract details.
‘It's up to Linfield then whether they agree a price with Glentoran or go to a tribunal.’
Campbell's move to Glentoran's biggest rivals could create a new record fee between Irish League clubs — and a little bit of history.
He will be the first established player to cross town from The Oval to Windsor Park since Warren Feeney in 1978.
His price tag will almost certainly top the previous local record of £32,000 paid by Glenavon to Coleraine for Ray McCoy two years ago.
It could even beat the £35,000 top price paid by Linfield to Shelbourne for striker Gary Haylock this summer.
Campbell insisted: ‘The size of the fee won't bother me whatever it turns out to be.’
Then, for the first time, Campbell spelled out the reason behind his shock end-of-season transfer request to Glentoran.
He insisted: ‘There was no fall-out with Glentoran's new manager Rob Strain — or anyone else at The Oval.
‘I had three good seasons at the club winning every available medal in the Irish League.
‘I felt I needed a fresh challenge.
At the same time I wanted to further my career and win more medals.
I'm sure I will realise those ambitions at Linfield.
‘I knew very little about Irish League football when I came back from Nottingham Forest, except that Linfield and Glentoran were the top two clubs.
‘No disrespect to the rest — but I wouldn't want to go to a smaller club, however ambitious.
‘Linfield have the best stadium in the league and the most professional set-up.
Windsor Park is the perfect stage for me.
‘I scored one of the best goals of my career there in a Bass Irish Cup semi-final against Linfield.
‘I hope I don't upset Glentoran fans too much by joining their biggest rivals.
‘Glens supporters were always very good to me, even when I wasn't playing well.
‘Now I am looking forward to winning over the Linfield crowd.
I know how demanding they are and that they only expect the best.’
Tblisi in Euro TV row
LINFIELD could land in the middle of a diplomatic row over their European Cup return game against Dinamo Tblisi on Wednesday.
Angry Georgian television officials claim Linfield are preventing them showing the game by asking a 75,000 dollar fee (around £45,000) for the TV rights.
Now they have asked the Government of the newly independent former Soviet state to intervene.
Any official protest could carry the considerable clout of State President Eduard Shevardnadze, the powerful former Soviet Foreign Minister.
A keen football fan, he attended Dinamo's first leg 2-1 win and met with Linfield chairman David Campbell.
A Georgian TV source said: ‘We cannot possibly afford the money Linfield are asking.
Georgia isn't a rich country.
Our average weekly wage is less than £40 a week.’
Tbilisi arrive in Belfast tomorrow having failed to book hotel accommodation in advance.
BANGOR fly to Cyprus today with a complete 18-man first team squad even though only 16 players will be needed for the Cup Winners Cup second leg against Apoel Nicosia.
Players and officials lived up the club's friendly image by chipping in bonus money to ensure no-one would be left behind.
BOXING
Mike Tyson, the disgraced former world heavyweight champion, is set to make his comeback in Britain.
A story in today's People says that Tyson, serving six years in prison for rape, has signed a deal with British promoter Frank Warren.
‘Tyson will be enormous box office when he returns.
We'll have seen nothing like it before in boxing history.
‘Fights will be found for him in England and elsewhere in Europe,’ Warren is quoted as saying.
Tyson, meanwhile, has four years to serve of his sentence, but with his good prison behaviour, could be out of jail in a year and back in the ring within 18 months.
Talks are said to be underway for a Tyson warm-up fight in Britain, plus the prospect of a £50 million showdown with WBC champion Lennox Lewis.
DANGERMAN…
Aston Villa striker Dean Saunders outpaces Tottenham defender Gary Mabbutt in yesterday's FA Premiership game at Villa Park.
Villa won the match 1-0
EQUESTRIAN
IRISH International showjumpers dominated the first three places in the Silk Cut Speed Derby at Hickstead in Sussex yesterday.
Captain John Ledingham with Castlepollard beat his team mate Francie Connors on Balarus Diamond Express and went on to take third place with Garraun.
Ledingham's time was 92.00 ahead of Connors on 96.63 and himself on Garraun in third with a time of 98.54.
In the Silk Cup trophy class which had 36 starters the winner was William Funnell of Great Britain with Comex and Gerry Mullins from Ireland stayed in the Ribbons taking fourth for Ireland with Pallas Green.
Meanwhile, the Irish Junior Three Day Event Team has plummeted to fifth position after speed and endurance at the Coca Cola Junior European three-day event championship held at Loughanmore, Templepatrick this weekend.
The Irish team was lying second to Germany following Friday's dressage but a fall on cross country by Karen Connelly to incur 60 penalties and a refusal by Sasha Harrison which cost them 20 penalties sent them out of the reckoning.
The team championship now stands after speed and endurance — 1,(Germany) 164.40; 2,(Great Britain) 164.80; 3,(Italy) 169.40; 4,(France) 208.20; 5,(Ireland) 219.80; 6,(Spain) 412.40.
Caroline Spickhoff from Germany and Sweetgirl remains in first position in the junior individual championship.
Caroline was leading after dressage with a score of 41.60 and only incurred 6.40 penalties for time on cross country to take the lead with 48.00 just one point ahead of Marco Biasia from Italy on 49.
Junior Individual results after cross country — 1, Caroline Spickhoff (Germany) 48.00; 2, Marco Biasia 49.00; 3, Jullian Guillot (France) 49.60; 4, J Van Paepecke (Germany) 51.20; 5, Lucy Wiegersma (Great Britain) 51.40; 6, Lucia Vizzini (Italy) 51.60; 7, Karen Connolly (Ireland) 51.80.
Nicola Kirkpatrick retained the senior title and the Helen Morgan Cup in the Northern Ireland Side Saddle Championships on ‘Dettingen’.
The event was held for the first time at the new Purdysburn Hospital Equestrian Centre outside Belfast.
The championships, sponsored by Prentice Motors, marked the official opening of the Burn Equestrian Centre at the hospital.
Jane Hunter was runner up on Desert Fox with Julie Murdock on Tipperary Tina third and Fiona Morrow on Missy Poppet fourth.
The junior title went to the Kirkpatrick family also with Sara Kirkpatrick taking the Mystery Vision cup on Secret.
Julia Robinson, last year's winner, was second on Bugsby Malone and Susan McBrien on Mojo was third.
Woodside wins
ROBERT Woodside won the final round of the Northern Ireland hillclimb championship at Cairncastle on the Antrim coast yesterday to secure the title for the first time.
Denis Biggerstaff, the 1992 champion, needed to win the event with Woodside down the finishing order to retain the championship but it was Templepatrick driver Robert in his Pilbeam who set fastest time on his first run up the hill near Ballygalley.
Biggerstaff's Metro 6R4 suffered a puncture on his first run but even a courageous charge at the second attempt couldn't displace Woodside at the top of the list.
Woodside was fastest on 75.47 seconds with Biggerstaff less than two-tenths of a second slower.
Andrew Kittle took third place in his Ralt.
Result: 1 Robert Woodside (Pilbeam) 75.47; 2 Denis Biggerstaff (Metro 6R4) 75.68; 3 Andrew Kittle (Ralt) 76.19; 4 Fred Crawford (Metro 6R4) 77.22; 5 Ronnie Maybin (Delta) 77.57; 6 Robert Morgan (Metro 6R4) 77.76.
Dino Morelli qualified third fastest and Kevin McGarrity sixth for tomorrow's round of the British Vauxhall Lotus championship at Thruxton.
SNOOKER
Michael Duffy coasted to a 5-1 win over Vince McCluskey in the fourth round of the Nescafe Asian Open.
The Portadown player had to work in the first couple of frames but after that he stepped up a gear and dismissed the English player almost scornfully.
The former Northern Ireland champion won the first frame 71-45 but McCluskey took the second 57-37 and it seemed as though the Ulsterman was in for a tough fight.
However, the remaining four frames amazingly took less than 23 minutes.
Duffy went into a 3-1 lead at the break with 76 and 37 point wins.
After the break Duffy knocked in a 92 in less than 6 minutes and a quickfire 83, taking only 3 minutes 46 seconds, clinched the match.
Friendly: Newtownbreda Baptist 0 Kelvin OB 0.
ICE HOCKEY
Britain's unheralded side twice fought back from behind to snatch a deserved point against Poland in the first match of the Olympic qualifying tournament in Sheffield last night.
Alex Dampier's team, bidding to end 46 years of Olympic exile by claiming the final place in next February's Winter Games in Lillehammer, looked to have seen their dreams wrecked.
But in a frantic third period, Kevin Conway fired home in the third minute to equalise Wojciech Tkacz's first period opener.
And Patrick Scott threw Britain a crucial lifeline when he scored six minutes from time to cancel out Miroslav Tomasik's second goal for Poland two minutes earlier.
Dampier had warned on the eve of the tournament that home hopes would suffer if his players spent too much time in the penalty box.
And his fears were soon realised when Poland took advantage of a five-on-three power-play after Conway and Michael O'Connor were penalised for infringements, leaving Poland to score after just 13 minutes.
Britain were left to rue a string of squandered chances in the second period, when Polish goalminder Tomasz Jaworski produced a reminder of how his soccer counterpart had dashed England's World Cup qualifying hopes 20 years ago with a series of inspired saves.
Britain had beaten Poland 4-3 in the World Championships Pool B in Eindhoven earlier this year, and the loss of a point leaves them with a formidable task against tournament favourites Latvia and Slovakia next week, with only one team qualifying for Lillehammer.
Van Troost puts squeeze on
ANDRE Van Troost made an quick breakthrough after Somerset set Surrey an imposing victory target at The Oval.
Surrey needed 421 to win in a minimum of 120 overs — but the Dutch paceman struck with his fourth ball.
Opener Darren Bicknell, on two, fended off a snorter but the ball looped up and allowed the bowler to take an easy return catch.
Ray Alikhan (nine not out) and Andy Smith (14 not out) managed to survive to the close with the home side on 36 for one.
Earlier, stand in skipper Richard Harden took his score on to 132, his highest score of the season, before declaring at 344 for seven.
Harden, who hit 14 boundaries and faced 292 balls, shared a fourth wicket stand of 151 with Robbie Turner, who completed a season's best 70.
But it took him almost five hours and contained just four fours.
Joey Benjamin was the pick of the Surrey bowlers with four for 79 off 29 overs.
RUGBY
Neil Jenkins, the Wales fly-half, took his points tally to a record 60 in the Worthington Welsh Sevens — but still finished on the losing side in the final.
His Pontypridd side lost 24-14 to South Wales Police, who recorded their first ever victory in the tournament.
The ten-point margin reflected the Police's overall superiority and it gave them a deserved triumph in only their second appearance in the final.
It was Pontypridd's first appearance in the final but although Jenkins boosted his tournament score to 60 points with a try and two conversions, the Police were led to victory by much-travelled ex-Wales flanker, Richie Collins.
Collins was in his fifth final, having appeared twice each for Cardiff and Newport, and for the fourth time he was on the winning side.
A piece of magic from Collins settled the issue when he won a tackle and looped over a high pass for Chris Higgs to race clear for the Police's fourth try.
There was no way back for Pontypridd.
Galway ace is still going strong
GERRY DEFIES THE CRITICS
GAA: Micheal McGeary sets the scene for today's eagerly awaited All Ireland hurling final between Galway and Kilkenny at Croke Park, Dublin
GALWAY'S Gerry McInerney revels in defying the critics.
One of the game's great half backs, manager Jarlath Cloonan gambled by playing him centre half back against Tipperary in the All Ireland semi-final.
The critics claimed McInerney's defensive limitations would be exposed like never before by Tipperary.
But someone forgot to tell McInerney.
He played the proverbial blinder as Galway stormed to a famous victory.
In the process he proved himself one of the sport's great survivors.
Two of his former colleagues, Tony Keady and Pete Finnerty, have fallen victim to the passing years and can no longer command first team places.
But there is no shifting the swashbuckling McInerney.
Galway's All Ireland semi-final win is now history, and counts for little as they prepare to face defending champions Kilkenny.
Gerry said: ‘Victory over Tipperary was an outstanding reward for everyone involved with this team since the season began.
‘We've been criticised in various quarters, but we used it as motivation before we met and beat Tipperary last month.
‘We knew that criticism was unwarranted, and we've proved the knockers wrong, but we're still only halfway to finishing the job.’
Old scores may have been settled with victory over Tipperary, but he's quick to emphasise that Galway have won nothing yet.
The painful memory of last year's semi-final defeat by Kilkenny acts as another spur.
He said: ‘On that occasion the game was there for the taking.
‘We just made the wrong moves, and Pat Malone was injured.
He was a key player and was a dreadful loss.’
Today Gerry McInerney is again centre stage, and his clash with John Power promises to be just one of the highlights of an intriguing 70 minutes.
Gerry McInerney
Galway look to Cooney HAVE A GO JOE!
JOE COONEY is determined to jog a few memories this afternoon at Croke Park.
A few short years ago he stood unrivalled as the best player in the country, but a series of niggling injuries left him kicking his heels in frustration.
There were even doubts over his availability for last month's All Ireland semi-final, but he played and came through with flying colours.
He will again line out at left half forward, the position many observers regard as his best.
Galway without Cooney is as rare as Kilkenny without Carey.
Free from injury and in the mood, his vast array of skills make him one of the most feared attackers in the modern game.
Despite his high sporting profile he remains an unassuming, almost diffident character, a stark contrast with some of his more vociferous colleagues.
With Cooney actions always speak louder than words.
On big match days such as today Croke Park becomes his stage, and he gives full range to his many and varied skills.
Away from the madding crowds the Sarsfields clubman is to be found down on the 100 acre family farm in Ballyuan presiding over the sheep and cattle.
It was on those same rolling fields that the young Cooney first learned the basic skills of hurling, skills that he has nurtured and polished in the subsequent seasons.
The 28-year-old farmer has figured in no fewer than seven All Ireland finals, one minor, one U-21 and five senior, winning four medals in the process.
Not surprisingly Galway boss Jarlath Cloonan has given a vote of confidence to the side that shocked Tipperary at the semi-final stage.
This means that two of the county's best known hurlers, Tony Keady and Pete Finnery, are again being kept in reserve.
The defensive partners in Galway's biggest triumphs at the end of the 80s are resigned to being substitutes, but don't rule out the introduction of one or both.
In a changing of the old guard management brought in three new faces for the semi-final, and all three responded magnificently.
Murty Killilea and Padraig Kelly were outstanding in defence, with Joe McGrath proving his worth in attack.
In a sense it was inevitable that Kelly should cover himself in glory.
He was Man-of-the-match in the All Ireland club final, a central figure in Sarsfield's historic victory.
MARKED MAN…
Galway's Joe Cooney expects to be put under pressure against Kilkenny at Croke Park this afternoon
United effort!
KILKENNY'S Pat Dwyer is equally at home in Croke Park or Old Trafford.
Dwyer, a tower of strength in the full back berth, was in danger of missing today's All Ireland final until a visit to Old Trafford and a date with United physio Jim McGregor put him well on the way to recovery.
He missed Kilkenny's All Ireland semi-final win over Antrim last month after limping out of the Leinster final replay victory over Wexford.
For a number of weeks he was unable to train with his colleagues, but in the past fortnight he has been able to step up his training.
It was always touch and go whether he would be fit to take his place, and he only got the nod after coming through a trial game without any problems.
He said: ‘The selectors showed a lot of faith in me and gave me every chance to prove my fitness.
‘Now I don't know if I'm more delighted, or just simply relieved to have been selected.
‘The last few weeks have been difficult because I didn't know how I was fixed.
‘Words can't express how pleased I am.’
Pat Dwyer
Holders look the part
CHAMPS CAN RETAIN TITLE
ALL Ireland champions Kilkenny put their title on the line this afternoon against a Galway side desperately keen to revive the glory days of the late 80s.
The influence of Kilkenny and Galway hurling is reflected in the fact that they have qualified for three finals, minor, U-21 and senior.
Kilkenny could have been beaten in the Leinster championship but for a controversial penalty, awarded after John Power went down in the square.
Wexford too had chances to beat them, in the Leinster final and in the replay, but let them off the hook.
In fairness against Offaly they were short three players, with three again missing against Wexford.
There is, however, a tremendous camaraderie and resilience within the squad.
They are great survivors who simply never countenance defeat.
Both sides have an average age of 25.
The intensity and urgency of Galway's hurling in the semi-final win over Tipperary surprised most people.
There is though a real danger that Galway may have already played their All Ireland final, and that after their sterling endeavour against Tipperary they won't have sufficient left in the tank.
Seldom has a team been so fired up prior to a major match, due largely to the pompous comments of Tipperary manager Babs Keating, who should have known better.
Even the three debutants came in and played like never before.
Galway will still go in as underdogs — an unusual position for them — but one that should suit them down to the ground.
Attack
The fact they are playing Kilkenny won't make them feel intimidated or fazed in any way.
Tradition is no longer against them.
They have beaten all the top hurling powers at various stages in the last decade.
Attack is obviously Galway's biggest concern.
They won against Tipperary without ever putting away all the chances they created.
Pauric Kelly, Murt Killea and Joe McGrath are under pressure to again reproduce their heroics of the semi-final win.
Michael McGrath, Joe Cooney, Michael Coleman and Gerry McInerney represent a huge and rich vein of experience.
John Power of Kilkenny has wrought tremendous harm and damage on Wexford and Offaly from the middle of the field, alongside Michael Phelan, so there's a huge responsibility on the shoulders of Michael Coleman.
Galway's revival is no overnight success.
It's all down to hard work at every level of the sport, but anytime Kilkenny get to a final they expect to win.
The champions have tremendous belief in their own ability, and while it's premature to compare them with the great Kilkenny sides they look well enough equipped to retain their title.
MIDFIELD ACE…
Galway will need to curb the skills of Kilkenny's Michael Phelan this afternoon
Masters event a winner
BOWLS
WHOEVER wins the qualifying game between Belfast's Alan McMullan and the Provincial's Ian McClure can expect a tough battle in the opening quarter-final of the Flogas Causeway Coast Masters in Ballymoney on October 9-10.
The prize awaiting the winner of that one is a first round battle with former world indoor singles champion John Price of Wales.
And McMullan owes McClure one after losing his last two games against him in the Irish indoor singles championship.
The Masters qualifier will be played on the morning of the opening day.
And with such a high class field picking an overall winner is a task in itself.
The draw has produced some cracking games, with Neil Booth of County Antrim running up against reigning world indoor singles champion Richard Corsie in the quarter-final.
John Bell (England) takes on former UK champion Stephen Rees, while reigning outdoor world singles champion Tony Allcock clashes with Scotland's Angus Blair.
The beauty about the Causeway Coast Masters, which will more than fill the gap left by the sudden demise of the Bushmills Irish Masters two years ago, is that each game is of the 21 shot duration, and not three sets of seven up.
The 21 shots format was used when Coatbridge hosted the world indoor singles championship, before television put the pressure on for a change.
The quarter-finals will be played off in two sessions — two games at 2pm, and another two at 6pm.
Then the semi-finals will commence at 2pm on the Sunday, with the final scheduled for a 6pm start.
The runner-up will receive £800, beaten semi-finalists £400 each, beaten quarter-finalists £200, and the beaten qualifier £100.
ATHLETICS
Uphill task for runners
A 14-strong Northern Ireland team bid for major honours today in the world mountain running championships high in the French Alps.
North Belfast's Neill Carty, the current leader in the Northern Ireland fell running championship, spearheads the six-man senior team over a gruelling seven and a half miles course which peaks at a height of 2,300 feet.
Carty is backed up by Lisburn's Adrian Philpott, Northern Ireland's most consistent finisher in the world series, and by the outstanding veteran performer Jim Patterson of Duncairn Olympic.
His outing today marks a remarkable sixth appearance for the province in the World trophy races.
Brian Ervine (Ballydrain), last year's Northern Ireland champion, brings a wealth of experience to the side, and although sidelined for much of the season due to a thigh injury, will be operating at full throttle in France.
Newcastle, the hot-bed for local fell running, supplies Edinburgh-based Richard Rodgers who has performed many times for Northern Ireland and Willowfield's George Morris — making his debut at this level — completes the senior mens' team.
The women's squad is led by Comber woman Stephanie Pruzine, Northern Ireland's top finisher in last year's race in Italy, and former Belfast Marathon champion, Bangor housewife and mother of four, Roma McConville.
Mary Havern, from Newry, races in her third world trophy event while newcomer Anne Sandford has made a superb transition from the world of cycling to top class fell running.
The junior U20 squad is made up of 16 year old Ballygowan student Neil Jackson (Ballydrain), Padraig Mallon (18) from Newry, Dean Fisher (Ballydrain) and Paul Curran (North Down).
On the track and field scene, didn't the province do well in last weekend's All-Ireland League finals in Tullamore with victory by the Lisburn women and third placings for the young Lagan Valley women and understrength Annadale men.
GERRY CARSON
Jonny bounces back and ponders future
MOTORSPORT
A GREAT deal was expected of Jonny Kane when he moved to England earlier this year to join the Swift team in the British Formula Ford championship.
The young Irish champion had made a big impression on his regular cross-channel trips last season, and a place with Swift or Van Diemen had been earmarked for him ever since he stunned the British series regulars by winning the opening round of the 1992 championship.
After that he could easily have stepped straight into at least two teams, but he decided to wait until after he had completed his business studies course.
This also allowed him to carry off the Irish championship…
But those who expected him to make a significant impact on the British championship were soon to be disappointed.
He joined a Swift factory that was fielding a five-strong team, and immediately found himself struggling to get on the pace.
His team-mates — notably Guy Smith, Justin Keen and Jonathan Clues — were winning races and battling for the title.
It was five races into the championship before it was discovered Jonny had been driving with a broken chassis, which made it impossible to get his car to handle properly.
By then though he was well down the pecking order at Swift whose attention, not unnaturally, was focused on the drivers chasing the British title.
A decision a few weeks ago to change engine suppliers almost instantly brought a revival in Jonny's fortunes.
With an Auriga fitted to the back of his Swift he was right on the pace at Brands Hatch, qualifying up the grid, only to have his hopes dashed when he was adjudged to have left the pits against a red light during practice.
He was relegated to the back of the grid, but fought his way through to finish in the top 10.
Then last weekend at Thruxton he showed his true potential when he finished second behind Australian Russ Ingall's Van Diemen, and ahead of all the other Swift drivers.
‘The past few weeks have been more encouraging,’ says his father, former saloon racer Andrew Kane.
‘The first part of the year was a disaster, but at least now we know the reasons for it.
‘We aren't sure what Jonny will do next year.
He could stay in Formula Ford for another year, or possibly move up to Vauxhall Lotus.
‘If he stayed on and won the Ford championship he would be in a strong position to join one of the top Vauxhall Lotus teams.
He'll certainly have to think about it very carefully.’
Jonny Kane
Just for the record
IN terms of All Ireland senior hurling titles Cork lead the way with 27, followed by Kilkenny and Tipperary on 24 apiece.
The big three's domination is such that their nearest rivals Limerick don't even make it into double figures.
They have seven, one ahead of Dublin, with Wexford five, Galway four, Waterford and Offaly two.
Clare, Kerry, Laois and London have one apiece.
Galway's first success came in 1923, and they then added a further three in the 80s, 1980, 1987, 1988.
IRISH trainer Michael Kauntze could well have saved next Saturday's Coalite St Leger with his decision — or that of his owner — to supplement at a cost of £25,000 the dual Oaks runner-up Royal Ballerina.
With only 11 declared at the latest acceptance stage, the Doncaster Classic looked somewhat below par.
But now that Royal Ballerina is in, we may have a race of truly Classic proportions.
Michael had originally intended to run Royal Ballerina in the Prix Vermeille at Longchamp the day after the St Leger and now Kauntze is hoping for dry conditions at Doncaster for what he regards as an easier race.
‘I know that Royal Ballerina will stay the trip and the only thing which is likely to beat her is the ground if there is a cut in it,’ he said.
Harsh words
Royal Ballerina was only just touched off by Intrepidity in the English Oaks and then was runner-up again in the Irish version when Weymss Bright triumphed.
She's the sort of filly who deserves a big race win for she has been knocking on the door all season.
Kauntze had some harsh words to say about the St Leger entry system and it seems as if this will be renewed for next year.
With entries closing on March 3 it is impossible, Kauntze says, to gauge at that early date whether or not a horse will stay the mile and three-quarters of the St Leger.
Stable jockey Warren O'Connor hopes to be fit to ride Royal Ballerina following his ankle operation in July and if that's the case then the Kauntze filly should be worth supporting.
O'Connor, however, is fighting against time.
Meanwhile Henry Cecil's Armiger appears to be back to form and will be supported for the Leger.
The horse has had a disappointing season after having won the Racing Post Stakes as a two-year-old and looking like a ‘good thing’ for even one of the Derbys.
Nothing has gone right for Armiger or Tenby — remember him — and although Commander in Chief won two Derbys, the fact that Cecil's more exposed two-year-olds failed to blossom must have been a great disappointment to him.
Armiger flopped in the Great Voltigeur at York behind Bob's Return who is on course for the St Leger and this winner of the Sandown Classic Trial in April would be my choice in the absence of Royal Ballerina, whom I still think is good enough to win a Classic for the likeable Kauntze.
Next Saturday sees the Irish Champion Stakes at Leopardstown but what a difference from last year when the much vaunted head to head between the Derby winners Dr Devious and St Jovite helped give the race no end of publicity.
This time you would scarcely know it is on!
At the moment it looks as though Ezzoud, who won the Juddmonte International at York will take his chance and after that shock win over Sabrehill he must be fancied.
Market Booster represents Dermot Weld and is on course for the Arc.
Lord of the Field, a winner at the Curragh, is an English entry but to be honest it all looks a bit thin on the ground — a bit like the St Leger.
Maybe everyone is saving their horses for the Arc.
German racing as I've mentioned before in this column appears to be all the rage and there is a big meeting at Baden Baden today with John Oxx featured.
George Augustus who lost his last race in Germany in the stewards room is down for the Grosser Preis Von Baden and would have to be supported.
Rated
In case you hadn't noticed, Ulster's John Reid is having a barnstorming season and he could end up in the top four in the championship with over 100 winners.
But more than that, John has become rated as the man for the big occasion.
Last week's win on Richard Hannon's Swing Low at Goodwood was vintage stuff from the Dromore man and his weekend excursions to the Continent usually bring back the bacon.
He's at Baden Baden today and should remain on the winning trail.
Michael Kauntze — trainer to the rescue
John Reid — having a barnstorming season
Donaghadee club sweep the boards
ANGLING
DONAGHADEE Sea Angling Club members are having quite a season fishing the big boat competitions on the west coast.
Club members contested the two-day international festival at Belmullet which attracted over 196 anglers from all over Europe.
Once again the Donaghadee lads swept the boards, landing the top two places overall.
For a change, Michael McVeigh had to be content with the runners-up spot, losing out on weight to his clubmate Mike Berry.
Donaghadee's Gerry Bell won the prize for the best out of state angler, making it a hat-trick for the local club.
Best lady angler was Mary Gavin Hughes, Newport, while ten-year-old Clinton McAndrew, Belmullet, had a specimen tub gurnard of 5.83lbs.
Garrison game angler Patsy Mulrone landed an excellent brown trout of 8.85lbs during the recent qualifying heats of the Melvin Open.
The big fish took a traditional mallard and claret size 10 fished on the top dropper of an intermediate line on the school house drift, and took 20 minutes to land.
Belfast's William Sargeant and Coleraine's Brian Wallace shared the top honours at the Straid Fishery this week.
William took a rainbow of 8lb 12ozs on a white sleech and floating line, and Brian had one of 8lb 110zs on an ace of spades and sinking line.
A brown sedge and floating line took a nice trout of 8lb 3ozs for Billy Stewart, Carrickfergus, while, Martin Coard, Belfast took a good brace at 7lb 12ozs and 6lb 8ozs on a Black Buzzer.
Other big fish were taken by Ryan Houston, Waringstown 7lb 2ozs; Tom Adair, Banbridge 7lbs; Ernie Cullen, Belfast 5lb 9ozs, and Geoff Ramsey, Ballyeaston 6lb 5ozs.
Anglers throughout the province were saddened earlier this week to hear of the tragic deaths of international game anglers Winston and Billy McConville.
To their families and close friends in Tandragee and Lurgan I extend the sincere sympathies of all those involved in our sport.
VIC THOMAS
Ladies gear up for World Cup fiesta
PHILIP ALLEN
THE countdown to the ladies World Cup starts here, with 10 months to go.
Ireland, the oldest hockey playing country in the world, host the tournament in their centenary year.
A new national stadium is being built, and many of the competing countries are expected in Ireland before next July to see and play on the pitch.
Ireland are expected to be seeded 12th of the 12 countries.
To facilitate the World Cup, the domestic season begins earlier than usual, with a league programme next Saturday, and will be completed by March 31.
The first league game of the season pits Pegasus against Portadown, with both sides eager to loosen Randalstown's grip on the silverware.
Portadown have lost Adele Sloan, who is pregnant, but Susie Kinley is back and Violet McBride will hope to go out on top in her last season.
Pegasus's Irish international Laura Brown is off to Newcastle University but they have recruited Kim Mills and Sharon Rowe from Victorians and Cathy Mitchell from North Down.
Randalstown also report little change in personnel, having lost the pregnant Carol Burns, but added Ballymoney's flying winger Sonia Innis.
Collegians had a great season last time out, but coach Brian Carruth's entire forward line is pregnant which means early chances for some of the Second XI who won the All Ireland Costley Cup.
Ards have lost former captain Helen Johnston, but Sandra Boomer and Jenny Magill have joined from Queen's.
North Down have also lost players.
Sheila Newell is pregnant, goalkeeper Anne Hill has stepped down, Cathy Mitchell has gone to Pegasus and Irish international Caroline Craig has decided to play qualifying hockey.
It looks like a long hard season for Civil Service, who have lost Steffi Magowan and Alex Battey to university across the water, and newly promoted Knock.
The winners of the August World Cup draw are: 1 Phyllis Richardson, Portadown; 2 John Ryan, Dublin 6; 3 Gareth Stephenson, Saintfield; 4 Tom Mooney, Harolds Cross; 5 Heather Allison, Belfast; 6 Miss J E Bell, Banbridge; 7 Ann O'Neill, Dublin 11; 8 M O'Brien-Busteed, Douglas, Co Cork; 9 Mary T Murphy, Dublin 4; 10 Julian Girdham, Rathfarnham.
Violet McBride
Dallas double in doubt
NOT too many are betting against the Dallas Cowboys retaining the National Football Conference title and then making it two Super Bowls in a row.
But there are too many question marks to make the side attractive.
No one knows yet what effect the loss of defensive mastermind Dave Wannstedt to the top job at Chicago will have, let alone the hold-out staged by running back supreme Emmitt Smith.
There are fitness worries concerning quarterback Troy Aikman after back surgery, and in the toughest division in the league — the NFC East — even this team of many talents might struggle for a repeat.
The central division is also tough.
It may take Wannstedt a while to lick Chicago into shape, but both the Minnesota Vikings and the Packers came along strongly last season.
Green Bay went into a feeding frenzy in the free-agency market, and came up with some star names.
Apart from White, the 17 million dollar man, they snatched Miami receiver Mark Clayton and Pittsburgh tackle Tunch Ilkin.
They also got hold of nose tackle Bill Mass from Kansas City — not exactly a reject, but he went.
And it could be that he will be battling his old team-mates for the big prize come the New Year.
RUGBY: Focus on two ex-internationals still very much involved in the sport Gordon aims to beat injury jinx at North
BACK HOME!
GORDON Hamilton remains hopeful of a return to competitive rugby — but he won't make any hasty decisions.
Now back with North after a spell with Ballymena he is keen to resume his playing career, injury permitting, but he won't allow his heart to rule his head.
Capped 10 times by Ireland the former Ulster captain was forced to take a back seat just before Christmas because of a recurring back injury.
He hasn't played a competitive game since, but turned out with an Ulster XV in the unlikely setting of Sheephaven Bay yesterday to mark the local club's introduction into the Ulster League.
Reflecting on the way ahead he said: ‘I'll have a couple of low-key junior games with North and see how it goes.
‘Obviously I would love to get back playing All Ireland League rugby again, but I've no intention of returning unless I'm convinced I'm fully fit and in a position to make a decent contribution.
‘The appetite is certainly there and I'm keen enough, but I don't way to come back and let myself down.
‘Obviously I would love to get back to where I was before the injury, but it's very much a case of taking one game at a time.’
He underwent a minor operation on his elbow during the summer, but that didn't prevent him from fulfilling a fitness programme with the new season in mind.
He is resigned to missing out on any serious rugby during this month, but by early October he should know what the season holds for him.
Analyzing his changed playing surroundings he said: ‘Going back to North was not a case simply of transferring allegiance from Ballymena, it was more an acceptance that my involvement in serious rugby would be limited.
‘I realised if I wanted to get back to where I had been, it was perhaps better going back to North and starting off there again.’
His increased workload in the family shipping business was also another consideration is his move back to Ormeau.
He is delighted with the way in which the players have responded to new coach Stewart McKinney, and is hopeful that better times are on the way.
Typically though he refuses to make any outrageous predictions, except to offer the view that it will take time to get the club back up and running.
He's convinced though they are heading the right way.
Change
At this stage it seems likely the Ormeau side will be banking on last year's squad.
There is still a question mark over the availability of the multi-talented Neil Doak, who played scrum half in the cup final two seasons ago.
He may again head to South Africa in pursuit of his cricketing career.
A change of heart though would certainly offer new coach Stewart McKinney greater options behind the scrum.
Neil Doak
Gordon Hamilton — comeback trail
Dad lost out in sporting tug-of-war PAT IN SADDLE FOR WORLD CUP GET on your bike!
Pat McGibbon, Northern Ireland's World Cup newcomer, wouldn't hear of it.
Maybe his Dad was an Irish international racing cyclist.
But he'd still much rather have a new pair of football boots at Christmas.
Pat McGibbon senior now reckons his wee lad was probably something of a visionary.
For Pat junior has grown up to be a hunky, muscular, six foot two.
Definitely not the sort of specimen you find tackling the Tour de France.
‘There is, mind you,’ muses Mr McGibbon, ‘Spain's Miguel Indurain, who has won that race.
He's well over six feet.
‘But then he's thin and spindly, bit of a freak, really.
The top riders are usually five foot eightish, and lightly built.’
He gave in gracefully in the sporting tug-of-war in his Lurgan household.
Of course, Mr McGibbon would have been delighted if his son had turned into another Stephen Roche.
But he'll be just as overwhelmed if he becomes Manchester United's first regular centre back from Ulster since Jackie Blanchflower's time.
‘I just packed in the cycling eight years back,’ says Pat senior, a contemporary of local stars such as Davy Kane and Maurice Foster.
‘I knew I would still be on the road.
But in a car, as the driver, taking young Pat to training sessions and matches all over the country.
‘I didn't do it grudgingly, I'd resigned myself to the fact that football was his burning passion.
‘He made that very clear to everybody.
‘Like when the time came at school to plan his future after he left.
Pat told the Careers Officer: ‘I'm going on to become a professional footballer’.’
Physiotherapy was chosen as first reserve occupation.
McGibbon got the A levels needed for a place at University before he left Portadown for Old Trafford last summer.
Singlemindedness again.
Even on his summer hols, the youngster, 20 tomorrow, didn't let up.
Training
When they took him to Florida, he wasn't so bothered about Mickey Mouse.
‘Somewhere to train, Dad, we've got to find somewhere, that's the first thing he said once we landed there,’ Mr McGibbon recalls.
‘He'd packed his gear, of course, in his case.
Well, I found him a stretch of grass, but, whew, it was hot, 100 degrees.
‘But out he went, training and practising his skills, every day.’
The surname was Jennings last time Northern Ireland had someone addressed as ‘Big Pat’ in their squad.
But McGibbon senior insists: ‘Our Pat is only on the bottom rung of the ladder.
‘We're all chuffed about Billy Bingham calling him up.
But he's a long way to go before I'd consider him a success.
‘He's been lucky so far.
Some great people have helped him.
First there was Dessie ‘Bunker’ Maginnis at Lurgan United.
He has launched so many football careers in our area.
‘Jimmy McAlinden was a fine influence as well and we owe a big debt to Ronnie McFall who brought Pat along so carefully.
‘And he's in the best of care at Old Trafford.
They look after their lads so well.
‘They've just decided Pat can now take care of himself in the outside world.
‘So he has left his landlady, Mrs Gosling, and moved into a flat with another reserve.
‘His mum worries about him coping with the ironing, and the cooking.
‘But our fellow won't starve.
And he hasn't changed a bit.
He's still the same lad we reared.’
So cyclist's son to become big wheel in football?
Hopefully.
Ronnie McFall Pat McGibbon
Seconds out for Paterson
PETER TAGGART
AFTER a break of a decade, Alan Paterson is back in a management hot-seat at the Oval.
And, ironically, both opportunities to manage Glentoran Seconds have been presented by first team boss Robert Strain.
Alan explains: ‘I got my first chance of management about 10 years ago when Ronnie McFall was in charge at the Oval.
‘Robert had just taken over the Seconds, but was called back to play in the first team.
‘The Seconds needs a manager and as the senior professional I took the job on for four or five weeks.’
This time around it looks like being a more permanent fixture, despite him being called up Strain-style for the firsts in recent weeks.
‘That was an emergency after Dean Smyth's transfer request, but I don't think I'll be getting many opportunities with a quality keeper like John Grace the current first choice,’ says Alan.
And the 39-year-old sales rep for sports equipment firm Spalding adds: ‘My playing days at senior level are numbered and managing the seconds is an ideal way to stay involved with the club.’
Robert, reserves boss at the Oval for the previous six years, will be a hard act to follow, winning the league four times, including last season.
But he has faith in his replacement.
‘He'll be up to it, don't worry.
That's why I appointed him,’ says Strain.
Bag man Derek goes for ton…
ONLY Billy Bingham has more international appearances to his credit of those gathering for Wednesday's international with Latvia than this man.
He'll be on duty for his country for the 86th time…and that's one more than Chelsea defender Mal Donaghy, of the current batch our highest capped player.
Step forward Northern Ireland kit man Derek McKinley, pictured here at his Dunmurry home with just some of the items he has responsibility for at each international.
Derek has been involved with the international side since the tragic death of Bobby McGregor, serving under two physios, Jim McGregor and the current occupant, John McVea.
‘I've thoroughly enjoyed every minute of it,’ said Derek, now hoping to hit the magical ‘ton’.
His first game was the 1-0 victory over Israel which earned qualification for the '82 World Cup in Spain, to date the highlight of Derek's international career.
Picture: FRED HOARE
CYCLING
Tommy Evans (Banbridge CC) won the Ulster 10 mile championship beating Cormac McCann (Phoenix CC) by eight seconds in the Team Trainor Solicitors promotion at Nutts Corner.
McCann started fast, and at the turn he was 10 seconds up on the Banbridge man.
Davy McCall of the promoting club was third at this stage in 9.54, while fourth fastest was Scott Hamilton (Banbridge) in 10.00, leading the juniors.
Evans' 100 inch fixed gear was too small for him on the way out, but he kept it turning on the harder return leg to edge ahead of the Phoenix rider repeating his eight second win over him at Newtownards last week.
David McCann (Phoenix CC), who had been sixth at the turn in 10.10 came back quicker to take the bronze in 22.39.
Hamilton faded somewhat finishing sixth fastest, but was an easy winner of the junior title in 23.07, ahead of Ryan Lyttle (Team Devlin) 24.46 and Paul McConaghie (Team Route) 26.01.
Irish under-16 10 miles TT champion John Grant took the under-age gold with 23.39.
Kirk Sloan (Ards CC) took silver, and new Irish under-15 champion Denis Cormican (Phoenix) the bronze.
Irish 25-mile ladies champion Claire Moore gave Trainor Solicitors a home win in the ladies championship after Aishling Baird (Phoenix CC) had led her to the turn, but lost over a minute on the run back.
Mary Stewart (Phoenix) was third.
Ulster 10 miles time trial championship, Nutts Corner: 1, Tommy Evans (Banbridge CC) 21.32; 2, C McCann (Phoenix CC) 21.46; 3, D McCann (Phoenix CC) 22.39; 4, D McCall (Team Trainor) 22.55; 5, I Proctor (Belvoir CC) 23.01; 6, S Hamilton (Banbridge CC) 23.07; 7, I Chivers (Fuel Services) 23.10; 8, M Hutton (Phoenix CC) 23.16; 9, M Smyth (O'Rourkes) 23.27; 10 (equal), V Tubridy (O'Rourkes) and J Grant (Banbridge CC) 23.29.
Junior Championship: 1, Scott Hamilton (Banbridge CC) 23.07; 2, R Lyttle (Team Devlin) 24.46; 3, P McConaghie (Team Route) 26.01.
Ladies Championship: 1, Claire Moore (Team Trainor Solicitors) 25.37; 2, A Baird (Phoenix CC) 26.38; 3, M Stewart (Phoenix CC) 27.36.
Veterans: 1, Phil Holland (Maryland CC) 24.46; 2, T Burns (Donegal Whs) 25.16; 3, G McGrath (Ards CC) 25.29.
WORLD CUP GROUP THREE No secret for our success: Doolin
PAUL Doolin last night revealed the secret behind this week's astonishing League of Ireland successes in Europe.
A extra day's training a week and a sharper competitive edge through playing in a League with promotion and relegation helped Shelbourne and Cork achieve Euro glory.
Former Portadown and Derry City midfielder Doolin starred in Shelbourne's tremendous Cup Winners Cup victory over Karpaty Lvov from the Ukraine.
He said: ‘I gather there has been a lot of soul-searching up north over the defeats for Linfield and Bangor — though Linfield now have a lifeline.
‘Irish League fans shouldn't worry too much that their clubs have fallen behind those in the League of Ireland.
‘Linfield were drawn against a better team than the one we defeated — and I know from playing in Cyprus with Shamrock Rovers a few years back that Bangor were up against it, too.
‘The big difference in the League of Ireland is that we can train on Saturdays as well as two nights a week — because our matches are played on Sunday.
‘It wouldn't be fair to ask Irish League lads to train an extra night.
They are part-timers with work and family commitments.
‘But promotion and relegation coming in will help them develop a more competitive style of play.’
Paul Doolin
RUGBY
DUNGANNON'S Ulster scrum-half Ashley Blair could miss his side's All-Ireland League opener in a fortnight after being carried off during yesterday's 36-6 friendly victory over Highfield at Stevenson Park.
He suffered badly damaged ankle ligaments, ironically as he was about to retire after feeling a twinge in a troublesome hamstring.
‘I got the ankle twisted in a tackle, and it's badly swollen,’ said Blair, who was last night on crutches.
‘But I won't know how bad the damage is until I see the physio tomorrow, and then I may have an idea if I have a chance of playing in the first league game.’
And with Johnny Boyd also suffering a hand injury, the cost of victory over the Cork side may be just too high to stomach.
Dungannon's star performer yesterday was Ireland U-21 scrum-half Andrew Gallagher, who scored two tries, playing on the wing.
He would have been a natural replacement for Blair, but in another cruel twist, Gallagher, a university student in Northampton, has committed himself to the English club this season and will not be available to Dungannon for the league.
Mark saves Gers
A MARK Hateley goal five minutes from time prevented champions Rangers from crashing to a second successive embarrassing league defeat.
Last Saturday Kilmarnock humbled them at Ibrox, and basement boys Dundee looked like following up with another sensation at Dens Park yesterday.
But in a barnstorming finish the former England international striker pounced to give Rangers a deserved draw.
The Rangers defence failed to deal with cross balls all day, and it was inevitable the home side should use that route successfully in taking the lead after just 12 minutes.
Gary McKeown slanted over an inviting ball, but it was criminal negligence for the visitors to allow Gary Paterson the time and space to chest the ball down before burying it in the net.
Billy Dodds then had two gilt-edged chances to seal the points, but steered a header wide of the target, then another straight at Maxwell.
The visitors celebrated those let-offs in style.
They took command late in the game, and a heroic display by Paul Mathers was needed to give his side even a share of the points.
Dusan Vrto kicked off the line from Ian Ferguson's shot, while Mathers saved from Hateley and Trevor Steven.
Mathers even got a hand to Duncan Ferguson's drive five minutes from time, but when the ball hit the post Hateley bundled in the rebound.
Paatelainen heaps misery on sad Celts DEADLY DONS
SUBSTITUTE Mixu Paatelainen earned Aberdeen their first victory at Parkhead under manager Willie Miller as Celtic's lack of fire power again proved costly.
A delighted Miller declared: ‘Maybe the nearly men aren't nearly men any more.
We got one goal and could have had another.’
For Celtic, who have still to record their first home league win of the season, manager Liam Brady was disappointed, saying yesterday's performance ‘was not up to our recent standard.’
It was a deserved win for the Dons, whose threat was evident as early as the fifth minute when Scott Booth outpaced Mike Galloway on the right to send in a cross which narrowly evaded the outstretched Duncan Shearer.
And in the 15th minute, after Paatelainen had replaced the injured Lee Richardson, Alex McLeish headed a Robert Connor corner narrowly over.
Pat Bonner saved from both Shearer and Joe Miller, before Frank McAvennie ghosted past Brian Irvine and McLeish in the 27th minute to shoot narrowly past Theo Snelders left hand post.
Celtic's whirlwind start to the second half saw Peter Grant and Charlie Nicholas go close, and a Pat McGinley effort from a narrow angle rebound off the post.
However, Aberdeen were rewarded for their pace on the counter-attack in the 55th minute when Connor's corner was badly cleared by McAvennie.
Shearer returned the ball into the six-yard box for Paatelainen to blast home.
There could have been further scoring but for the woodwork which firstly denied Joe Miller after he had beaten Dariusz Wdowczyk and John Collins.
Celtic substitute Andy Payton also hit the post in the 76th minute.
He turned well in the box before hitting the outside of the post, but Aberdeen held on to go level with Motherwell and Hearts at the top of the table.
BLANKETY BLANK…
Celtic striker Charlie Nicholas was blotted out at Parkhead yesterday as Aberdeen proved they are genuine title contenders
Hope for Carrick B
COMRADES 1 CARRICK RANGERS 3
CARRICK won a tale of two halves to stay in contention for a Gold Cup quarter-final place.
They must now get a result against free scoring Glenavon next Saturday and rely on Bangor having an off day at Comrades.
Manager Kenny Shiels, watching his side win for the first time since the opening day of the season, feels that it's not an impossible dream.
‘I think we can beat Glenavon but will have to keep our fingers crossed that the other game goes the right way for us,’ he said.
Sammy Smyth, who almost signed for Comrades after playing a number of pre-season friendlies, put Carrick ahead in the second minute before Brian Robson edged them further in front on the stroke of half-time.
Substitute Dean Gordon gave Comrades a tonic when he scored within a minute of coming on at the start of the second half, but David Montgomery got Carrick's third two minutes from the end, with Wesley Hanna being sent off for protesting just a little too vociferously.
BALLYCLARE COMRADES: Cathcart 6, Johnston 6, Wilson 6, Muldoon 5, Hanna 5, Crawford 6, Leckey 5, Patterson 7, Braniff 6, Armstrong 5, Tomelty 6.
Sub: Gordon 7.
CARRICK RANGERS: Moore 6, Breslin 6, McAuley 7, Pyper 6, Stitt 7, Coulter 7, Smyth 6, McDermott 7, Shiels 7, Robson 7, Montgomery 7.
Subs: Press 6, Martin 6.
Referee: Norman Loughins (Carryduff) 7.