

Fruitiness of ‘snoozing’ pineapples
SCIENTISTS have found a way to put ripe pineapples ‘to sleep’ so they are ready for eating when they go on sale.
The technology — developed by Geest — ensures that no oxygen, which causes the ripening as well as the rotting process, reaches the fruit during shipping.
Unlike bananas, which continue to ripen after picking, pineapples have been previously transported under-ripe to withstand damage during shipping.
Rot
But they do not grow any sweeter and simply begin to rot.
Geest launched its new product, which is peeled, cored, trimmed and packed in a special container, on the Scottish market yesterday after three years' work on the process.
The new Necta pineapple, grown in Costa Rica, will be launched nationwide in March.
Other tropical fruits such as mangoes and papaya could be next for the treatment.
Hospital's Star Wars skill simplifies surgery
THE Star Wars technology of lasers is being applied increasingly in hospital theatres.
As well as treatment of port wine stains, other lasers can be used to remove tattoos or in surgery.
At Tyrone County Hospital in Omagh surgeons have been using an advanced laser — the only one of its kind in Northern Ireland — to perform tonsillectomies and sinus surgery.
Consultant ENT surgeon Mr S Kaluskar has carried out 220 tonsil, 58 sinus, and several larynx operations since the machine was installed in 1991.
Techniques
He said: ‘The vast majority of patients suffered much less pain than with conventional surgery.
They also recovered more quickly and left the hospital on the day following the operation.
‘Tonsillectomies can performed much more quickly — two or three minutes compared to 25-30 minutes using conventional techniques.
Since the introduction of the laser more operations have been performed bringing down the surgery waiting list.’
The hospital is running two training workshops on laser surgery later this week for ENT surgeons from throughout the United Kingdom and the Republic.
A helping hand to the elderly
IN A competitive market manufacturers are designing appliances to meet the needs of the elderly and disabled.
In October, Zanussi will be launching the Amie, a washing machine designed particularly for the elderly, disabled and visually impaired.
The controls on the Amie are simple, large and easy to turn with programmes marked at regular intervals.
Braille
Stark black controls and print against a white finish help the visually impaired to identify the controls.
A braille option is also supplied and is easily fitted if required.
Surprisingly, consumer reaction to the Amie has been strong among the general public.
It's ultramodern graphics and high contrast black and white contrast appeal to some younger customers with an artistic bent and its simplicity in use is welcomed by those who like to lead a less complicated life.
Young married couples setting up home have the daunting task of choosing all the major electrical equipment at once.
As this is an important decision it's recommended that sufficient time is allowed to mull over details says Belfast electrical retailer Paul Gilmore.
Expense
The cost of the most essential items alone will be well over £1,000.
As the appliances will be used for quite a few years, perhaps under changing circumstances as couples have children, it's important to look ahead and not just buy the cheapest model to save a few pounds.
To help out couples with the expense of setting up home Gilmore's have a special discount scheme.
Tough windows for the home
RESEARCH shows that as many as a third of all break-ins happen after entry has been gained through glass — often simply smashed with the nearest thing that comes to hand.
GE Plastics has introduced a strong new alternative to glass for home use — Lexan Margarde, which is said to be very effective.
Telephone Belfast 0232 682895 for your local contact.
I find many people are looking for serviceable fabrics and colours they will not tire from quickly.
Tones
Therefore, earth tones are very much a favourite combining terracotta and golds with rich spice colours.
A lot of these themes are inspired from Indian art, textiles and architecture.
What to look for in a conservatory
NO matter what the reason for building one, there can be no doubt that the addition of a conservatory will increase the value of a home and provide a room with a difference.
It therefore pays to select carefully, warns Charlie Woods, manager of BDG Conservatories.
It is also desirable that the sun should shine in the new room.
However a south facing conservatory will become stiflingly hot if not properly ventilated.
While high level opening windows are fine to air the room, an opening roof vent is even more efficient.
It is worth considering incorporating thermally controlled roof vents.
No longer is the conservatory a room which is used only in summer and for that reason double glazing is generally standard nowadays.
In particularly sunny locations, tinted glass may be desirable as it cuts down both glare and heat.
Strong
Glare can also be caused by very light coloured ceramic floor tiles and it is worth keeping this in mind when choosing from the wide range of floor coverings available.
The most common materials used in the framework of a conservatory are aluminium, timber and PVCU.
Each of these have their advantages and disadvantages.
Aluminium provides a very strong structure but may not perform as well thermally as PVCU while wood requires more maintenance than either.
Lighting can create atmosphere as well as fulfilling a practical purpose and in many dwellings the fluorescent strip has been replaced by more subtle means of ceiling and wall lighting.
A ceiling fan can help ventilation but can also incorporate lighting and be decorative.
To be comfortable year round, the conservatory will require some form of heating.
A quick response heating system may be most satisfactory or indeed radiators backed up with electric convectors.
‘Designer look’ out of Oxfam bin-bags
THE clothes may arrive in black plastic bin-bags, but they're certainly not rubbish.
Oxfam's Autumn Fashion Collection was launched today in its 20 shops throughout Northern Ireland, with designer looks at down-to-earth prices.
Talented trendspotters in Oxfam's 27,000-strong shop volunteer-force have been amassing stocks of women's and men's wear to meet demand.
Sales
Sales totalled nearly £700,000 last year, holding steady, despite seven of the charity's shops being hit by bombings in Belfast and provincial towns.
Bomb damage at the Dublin Road offices has made a serious dent in plans for Oxfam Week (September 25-October 3).
Computer damage has wiped lists of volunteer collectors and more contacts are needed urgently.
Helpers should contact Belfast 230220.
By Jane Bell
Fragrance to hang on your walls…
A NEW idea of adding fragrance to your room without the hassle of placing containers is finding favour with homeowners this autumn.
‘Fragrant Frames’ now means those obvious-looking room fresheners and sprays can be dispensed with and in their place goes an elegant addition to any wall.
Six attractive pot pourri designs have been captured under glass and the fragrance has been added to the absorbent wooden frame which holds a fragrance more effectively than some pot pourri.
Memories of woodland walks and beachcomber days are evoked by the artfully arranged naturally coloured seed heads, shells and fruit.
The fragrance can be revitalised time after time with oils supplied (£2.99.)
Retailing at £29.99, call 0892 517000 for your nearest stockist.
Ray of hope on port wine stains
A NEW laser treatment which could help hundreds of Ulster people suffering from disfiguring birthmarks was unveiled today at the Ulster Hospital in Dundonald.
The pulsed dye laser is used to remove port wine stains which affect three in every 1,000 people.
Already there are 160 people on the waiting list for treatment at the Ulster Hospital and more are being referred weekly.
The laser equipment can be used on both adults and children and according to consultant dermatologist Dr Grace Allen, is a major advance on treatment previously available in the province.
‘For many years doctors were not able to offer any treatment.
Patients were told they would just have to live with the birthmarks.
Disadvantage
‘Later the Argon laser was developed and one was installed in this hospital.
It had one major disadvantage.
It could produce scarring and for that reason we could not use it on babies' delicate skin.’
‘It is our hope that when the service is fully operational all children born with these birthmarks will receive treatment before they reach school age.
‘That is the most traumatic period for both the children and their parents, as the children can often be subjected to jibes and name-calling,’ Dr Allen added.
The £70,000 for the laser was raised locally by the Disfigurement Guidance Centre, which has installed five similar ones in other regions of the UK.
The Ulster Hospital will foot the annual £100,000 annual running costs.
Dr Allen describes the new facility as ‘very exciting’.
She adds: ‘I first became interested in this work when a young boy was referred to me.
He used to wear a Halloween mask to hide his birthmark when he played with his wee friends.
Now there is treatment which can help such children.’
Hi-tech help: Dr Grace Allen treats a patient in the laser unit at Dundonald Hospital.
Picture by Robert Ingram.
Professor backs new baby-feed
A LEADING Belfast paediatrician is recommending a new baby-feed that claims to be the next-best thing to mothers' milk.
Professor John Dodge is a supporter of mothers breast-feeding their babies.
Lowest
However, Ulster has one of the lowest rates of breast-feeding in Europe, he says.
‘For years, new mothers have been told ‘breast is best’,’ said Professor Dodge, of the Nuffield Department of Child Health at Queen's University.
‘But for a variety of reasons, some of them historical, the province has the lowest incidence of breast-feeding in the UK, and probably in Europe.’
Milupa, maker of the newly-introduced Aptamil with Milupan — recommended by the professor — claims it contains the same fatty acids that occur naturally in breast milk and which are crucial to the development of the baby's brain.
‘Standard’
‘Breast milk still provides the gold standard by which infant feeds are measured, because human milk is uniquely formulated to provide the nutritional needs of the baby,’ said Professor Dodge.
‘However, with the most recent figures showing less than 40pc of even full-term infants being breast-fed at six weeks, human milk is the standard that milk-manufacturers need to aim at.’
Professor Dodge said the advent of full-scale female employment in Ulster during World War II had led to a decline in breast-feeding in the generations since.
The Welfare Food Scheme of 1940 offered free or cheap National Dried Milk for mothers and children.
Patterns
By the mid-'60s only one mother in four was breast-feeding.
According to the Office of Population, Censuses and Surveys, there has been little change in breast-feeding patterns in the last decade.
Gave up
In 1990, 63pc of mothers breast-fed, compared to 64pc in 1985 and 65pc in 1980.
Also in 1990, 15pc of mothers gave up in the first week, and 38pc by the sixth, compared with 14pc in the first week and 39pc by week six in 1985.
Professor Dodge: ‘Breast is best.’