

Developers expose music hall's bare bones
ONE OF Belfast's most famous landmarks, the Grosvenor Hall, has been demolished.
The Grosvenor opened its doors in the 1920s as a focal point for preachers, and it was the sound of music that made it famous.
Features
Among its most famous guests were Don Williams, Johnny Cash, Joan Baez, The Everly Brothers, Judy Collins, Tom Paxton, Kenny Rogers, Mary O'Hara and the legendary spiritual singer Paul Robson.
For a time the 1,600 seater hall was also a home to a Saturday night film show, where the features were watched on a CinemaScope screen.
However, the entertainers did not have it all their own way, as preachers such as Donald Soper, Will Sangster and Leslie Weatherhead also spoke there.
The Methodist Church, which owned the hall, decided four years ago that it was no longer financially feasible to keep it running.
Plans have been drawn up for commercial offices and a smaller centre for church events.
Grov-cap Knock down: Demolition men move into Belfast's Grosvenor Hall, where many an international star trod the boards.
The Everlys
Joan Baez Kenny Rogers Johnny Cash
By Ian McTear
Touchy subject
ACTRESS Siobhan Redmond has revealed that she nearly quit showbusiness to run a mobile massage parlour.
‘I had daft wee notions about setting up a mobile massage unit going round theatres at matinees getting people's shoulders out of their ears and calling it Feels on Wheels,’ said the Glasgow-born actress.
Red-haired Siobhan starred as Don Henderson's cheeky sidekick in TV's Bullman and is about to appear as a detective sergeant in the BBC1 police drama Between the Lines.
Dad's honour
ACTOR Bill Pertwee, known to millions of Dad's Army fans as the officious Air Raid Warden Hodges, hosts a 25th birthday tribute to the BBC TV comedy tonight.
Pertwee, whose catch phrase was ‘put that light out’, will be joined by Jimmy Perry, co-writer of the series, at London's Imperial War Museum.
Those expected to attend include broadcaster Freddie Trueman.
Redgrave bid
ACTRESS Vanessa Redgrave has arrived in Macedonia to try to organise a series of concerts in aid of the child victims of the war in former Yugoslavia.
She met several leading actors and musicians as well as representatives of the Soros foundation which is financing the concerts.
She told Macedonian radio: ‘My colleagues are willing to join me in concerts in several cities in former Yugoslavia.’
Dry, wry and slow burning
LOOKING like he is appearing in some designer-conscious jeans advert, Nicholas Cage steps out of a big white gas guzzler on a sun-baked road in Wyoming.
A guitar gently reverberates.
This is blue-sky country where they play their music in that western way, the women are sultry, the men drawl from beneath crew-cuts — and shocking things go on behind the blinds and the white picket fences.
This is Red Rock West (QFT), a beguiling and modest little thriller which delves into the dark and murky emotions lurking underneath the sleepy face of a tiny American town — and it is as good a film noir as has been on show this year.
Directed and co-written (with brother Rick) by John Dahl, Red Rock West deals with symbolic characters (Texans wear big hats and string ties), innuendo, telling imagery and notions.
All of it assumes an understanding on the part of the viewer.
Red Rock West is a slow-burn thriller, wry and dry, implausible and quietly confident about itself.
It benefits greatly from David (Blue Velvet) Lynch regulars Cage and Dennis Hopper.
Roughneck
Cage is at his slovenly best as a decent, honest, out-of-work roughneck named Michael while Hopper twitches with ruthless bravado as grinning psycho Lyle — as quick to buy you a drink as put a bullet in your forehead.
Michael drifts into Red Rock where the bar owner mistakes him for Lyle, the hit-man from Texas he has hired to kill his wife.
Michael succumbs to the temptation of 5,000 dollars but is surprised when his intended victim (Lara Flynn Boyle) offers to double his money if he will kill her husband.
Accident
Michael hightails it out of town, 10,000 dollars better off, only to be turned back after a road accident.
Then he discovers the bar owner doubles up as the town sheriff and that gunman Lyle has just given him a lift.
The tension fizzles out towards the end but Dahl's exploration of human greed, emotional betrayal and hair-trigger violence is very involving and handsome to look at.
By Brian Hunter
DUBLIN
Added meaning for Lady in Red
THE hit song Lady in Red has taken on a new meaning for Chris de Burgh as his wife, Diane, makes a full recovery after a horrific riding accident in mid-July.
De Burgh wrote Lady in Red for Diane six years ago and it became a No 1 across the world.
‘Now I sing it and listen to the words again and appreciate more than ever what I was feeling at the time,’ he told friends.
Diane 37 broke her neck in a fall from a horse and it was feared she might never walk again.
But the mother-of-three is now recovering at her home in Dalkey near Dublin and expects to have to wear a lightweight cast for only another five weeks.
Jacko in shopping row
MICHAEL Jackson lay low in his hotel room preparing for his final concert in Taiwan today, while newspapers, consumer groups and politicians fumed at the superstar's offstage shopping style.
The anger was triggered by a clash between photographers and bodyguards outside a toy store that had been cleared of shoppers so that Jackson could go on a shopping spree.
Jingle ‘star’
DANIEL O'Donnell is to be featured in the new Downtown Radio jingle being introduced this autumn.
It will be played at least twice a day by the commercial station.
‘He's mentioned among some famous names, but Danny boy is just as celebrated, that's why he's in there,’ said Downtown controller John Rosborough today.
The jingle was made in America by the Dallas Singers.
It will be introduced on the airwaves in the next couple of weeks.
By Eddie McIlwaine
Jon
OUTRAGEOUS journalist Jon Ronson, winner of the Periodical Publishers Association Columnist of the Year award for his work in ‘Time Out’, makes his television debut in a new six-part series of comedy investigations.
Tonight, in Get Good Ratings With Sex (BBC2, 6.50pm), he embarks on a hilarious and increasingly frenzied mission to chase the ratings by getting sex into the programme.
ross
IN THE LAST of the series, presenter Jonathan Ross, introduces a final mind-expanding miscellany of Fantastic Facts!
(UTV, 7pm) including: from the USA —‘Bag Shag’ the best way to retrieve your balls after a hard round of golf and Athos the Upside Down Man who supports his entire body weight on one rigid digit.
Jonathan also reports on supermarket till number 13 at the Widnes branch of Asda, which has amazing fertility properties.
Carol
A MODEL housewife slowly goes to pieces as one disaster follows another in Carol and Company: Diary Of A Really, Really Mad Housewife (BBC1, 11.05pm), a one-act comedy starring Carol Burnett.
Roy Shephard
Top volume Whitney gets fan jail
WHITNEY Houston was the weapon in a war of noise waged by a Teesside woman against her neighbour, a court has heard.
Floorboards vibrated and door handles shook as the star's hit song I Will Always Love You blasted out from Helen Stephens' home, Teesside County Court was told.
On one occasion workmen using a sledgehammer across the street warbled along with the star after hearing Helen's tape.
Next door neighbour Susan Hanley told Judge Peter Fox QC the noise was like ‘a psychological form of torture’.
Helen (20) was yesterday locked up for seven days for what the judge described as a ‘nasty campaign of noise and harassment’.
Helen's tearful mother Anne Stephens said today: ‘Whether you believe it or anyone else believes it my daughter is innocent and she's been sent to prison for a week for something she hasn't done.’
Mrs Stephens, who is considering appealing against the ruling, added: ‘Helen is a nice quiet girl and she wouldn't do anything like this.’
Complaints
Referring to complaining neighbours the Hanleys she said: ‘I just don't know how they can sleep at night next door because I couldn't, knowing that I'd done that to someone.’
Judge Fox told Helen she had ‘attacked’ her next door neighbours with loud and repeated playings of Whitney's hit song from the film The Bodyguard.
Helen, of Moulton Grove, Fairfield, Stockton, burst into tears and had to be supported by relatives after being told she was going to a young offenders institution.
Last night court bailiffs took Helen by taxi to Low Newton Remand Centre to start her sentence.
After the case distraught Mrs Stephens, who was herself fined £200, condemned neighbour Mrs Hanley.
She said: ‘I hope that woman next door sleeps soundly in her bed tonight because my daughter won't.’
A stunned Mrs Hanley said as she left court: ‘We never wanted anybody to go to prison over this.’
And Mr Hanley said: ‘All I wanted to do was to protect my family.
This was a deliberate campaign against us.’
Whitney Houston: Noisy
Duran Duran
UK tour postponed
DURAN Duran's comeback tour, due to open in Britain last night, has been postponed because lead singer Simon le Bon has lost his voice.
Le Bon (34), married to supermodel Yasmin le Bon, is under doctor's orders to rest his acutely inflamed vocal chords for at least three weeks following a heavy touring schedule in the United States recently.
A spokeswoman for EMI Records, said: ‘He has been advised by his doctor not to sing for at least three weeks so the British tour has had to be postponed.
‘But it will definitely be rescheduled for the New Year and fans who have already bought tickets will find they are still valid or they can have their money back if they prefer.’
Duran Duran, the New Romantic band who had a string of hits including Girls on Film and Rio, were to have played seven British dates on their first tour for five years.
A concert was scheduled for Sheffield last night, followed by others in Brighton, Bournemouth, Birmingham, Cardiff, Manchester and London's Wembley Arena.
Lost voice: Simon Le Bon
WHEN Joe Brolly lines out with Derry in the All Ireland final, his two greatest fans will literally be singing his praises.
For the duo in question are his parents, Anne and Francie Brolly, whose musical fame has spread far beyond the confines of their native Dungiven.
But world-travelled Francie, who is heavily involved with the St. Canice GFC in his home town, is now only too delighted to adopt a ‘parochial stance’ as football fever rages all around him.
Gifted
‘Since the semi-final everything just revolves round football,’ says Francie, ‘And when we were asked to write a couple of songs to mark Derry's feat in reaching the final, we were only too happy to oblige.’
Now ‘Sam is on his way’ and ‘The champions of Ireland's 32’, both from the pen of the gifted Francie, are set to prove big hits — just as the Derry team themselves have.
Like her husband, Anne is equally enthusiastic about Derry.
And she too has a ‘sporting background’ in that she is one of about 500 people at the last count who were in the same class in the Primate Dixon PS in Coalisland as snooker superstar Denis Taylor!
Expectation
‘As long as the reds and whites pot the Cup in Dublin on Sunday week, that's all that matters,’ smiles Anne.
The couple's new record will be available from Friday with Eddie Crozier undertaking the marketing and will certainly help to keep the fans in tune as the sense of expectation throughout the county mounts with each passing day.