

CBI warnings on equality at work
COMPANIES were urged today to do more to provide equal opportunities at work.
The Confederation of British Industry issued new guidelines to firms, stressing that discrimination in the workplace was unlawful, unacceptable and wasteful.
Howard Davies, CBI director general, said: ‘Employers should seek to extend staff development as well as recruitment to all sectors of the community.
‘Those who fail to do so undervalue or deny themselves a diverse range of talent and experience.’
He said there were ‘glaring examples’ of under-representation of some groups of workers, such as people of Pakistani and Bangladeshi origin, women, disabled people, and redundant executives aged over 40.
‘The CBI is firmly committed to equal opportunities in the workplace and is taking the message to the smaller firms, where the majority of new jobs will be created,’ added Mr Davies.
ULSTER
Short study courses on offer
TEENAGERS facing the last two years of compulsory schooling will be able to study new ‘short courses’ as an alternative to full GCSE ones.
The Northern Ireland Curriculum Council today launched four consultation reports for short courses in art and design, technology and design, drama and music.
UNITED STATES ‘Million jobs’ Clinton
UNITED States Labour Secretary Robert Reich today said that the Clinton administration had created one million new jobs, but admitted their quality is not as high as he would like.
AUSTRALIA Threat over gays
AN Australian morals campaigner whose small party holds the balance of power in the New South Wales Parliament today threatened to block all legislation unless the state government abandoned planned gay rights laws.
The Rev Fred Nile, of the Uniting Church, leader of the religious-based Call to Australia Party, is against amendments planned by the State Government that would outlaw the vilification of homosexuals.
Building sector ‘still struggling’
‘UNREALISTIC’ bids for building contracts are holding back recovery in the construction industry, it was claimed today.
According to the quarterly survey of the Construction Employers' Federation, there has been a 12pc increase in the number of firms reporting lower tender prices, and that the building sector in Ulster is still struggling to climb out of recession.
—Business Telegraph
Ferry storm
OIL giant Shell has plunged into controversy over a ferry crossing promotion.
Filling stations on the mainland are all offering free travel with every 12 litres of petrol, but the company is not running the offer in Northern Ireland because they say people are not interested.
Laser boost
HUNDREDS of Ulster people are to benefit from new laser equipment used to remove disfiguring birthmarks.
The treatment for ‘port wine’ stains is available at the Ulster Hospital in Dundonald, and already there are 160 people on the waiting list.
Early slip in early trading
THE market's early lead was reversed as investors digested the flood of company results this morning.
The FTSE, which moved ahead almost five points in early dealing, fell sharply soon afterwards to be 7.9 down at 3051.1 after the end of the first hour's trading.
Conglomerate Williams Holdings disappointed the City with the interim dividend unchanged.
The shares lost 9p to 324p.
Cable & Wireless dipped 3p to 866p after its Mercury operation launched a new mobile phone service.
BT fell 4p to 423p over competition worries while Vodafone lost 10p to 500p.
The drugs groups were generally firmer following half-year results from Fisons.
The disappointingly modest rise in profits and the maintained dividend left the group 8p weaker at 169p.
Fisons, which reported a strong rise in drug sales, balancing poorer performances in its other operations, inspired Wellcome to firm 3p to 747p, Glaxo and SmithKline Beecham a penny better at 459p.
The insurance sector was also showing healthy gains following its sharp return to profit.
Commercial Union pushed 7p ahead to 600p, Sun Alliance added 3p to 368p, Royal Insurance went a penny better to 309p while Guardian Royal gained 2p to 215p. after reporting interim profits in line with the City's forecasts.
A warning from Iceland Group that the UK food market was becoming increasingly competitive despite substantially higher profits at the half-way stage left the company 4p down at 226p.
Music group Thorn fell 14p to 969p following yesterday's broker downgrade.
Rank Organisation, the leisure group, advanced 8p to 782p after the success of its scrip dividend take-up.
Pensioners muster in battle over VAT
HUNDREDS of Belfast pensioners are taking to the streets to win a better deal from the Government.
They will be staging a rally in the city centre on September 17 to mark the European Year of Older People.
Senior citizens from all over Belfast will hear Harry Munday, general secretary of the British Pensioners Association, and other speakers highlight issues of particular interest to the elderly.
A spokesman said: ‘These include Government plans to charge VAT on coal, gas and electricity bills — a move which could hit the pockets of millions of older people throughout the UK, including many of the 100,000 pensioners in Northern Ireland, who are already struggling to survive on low pensions and reduced income.’
The rally will also be addressed by Amanda Allaway, chairwoman of the Ulster Youth Committee of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions.
The organisers will use the day of action to launch Maximising Mobility — a report on the importance of transport and mobility in enabling older people to live fuller lives.
By Nigel Gould
Car giants rev up to join top league with new merger
RENAULT is to merge with Sweden's Volvo by January 1, 1994, creating the world's sixth biggest car manufacturer, it has been announced.
The new Renault/Volvo operating company will be 65pc owned directly and indirectly by the French state and 35pc by Volvo, Renault said in a statement released at a joint news conference in Paris.
The new car firm will keep the Renault and Volvo product lines and names separate, it said.
Strategic
The two companies already have a strategic partnership but Renault said the merger would produce additional savings of more than 30 billion francs (£3.4 billion) by the year 2000.
Under the merger terms, a French-based holding company known as RVC will be set up with a French-appointed chairman.
That company, 51pc owned by Renault and 49pc by Volvo, will hold 35pc of the Paris-based Renault/Volvo operating company, which will control the two firms' car, truck and financial subsidiaries.
The French state will have a 46.36pc direct stake in the Renault/ Volvo operating company and Volvo will have a 17.85pc direct stake, the statement said.
The Government plans to privatise France's direct stake when market conditions permit.
The Renault/Volvo supervisory board is likely to be chaired by Volvo chairman Pehr Gyllenhammar.
The management board is likely to be chaired by Renault chairman Louis Schweitzer, Renault said.
Reid's ‘Leger’ call
ULSTER'S John Reid has been snapped up to ride Royal Ballerina in the Coalite St. Leger, final classic of the season at Doncaster on Saturday.
Royal Ballerina, who was runner-up in the English and Irish Oaks, is trained at Ashburn by Michael Kauntze, whose stable jockey Warren O'Connor is not fit enough to ride following an ankle operation.
Italian win
For Reid, winner of the Derby last year on dr Devious, this is another big race chance in what has been his best ever season.
Yesterday he kept up his high strike rate on the continent when winning on Spaghetti Western for John Dunlop in Italy.
Wall Street brake on share dealings
THE market was in a lethargic mood with a number of the major international investors in the US away from the action because of the American public holiday.
Trading was thin with little major company news to inspire investors.
By late morning, the FTSE was down 5.7 at 3051.6.
A handful of FTSE stocks fell sharply as they began the new account without the benefit of a dividend payment.
These included Burmah Castrol down 23p to 772p, Bowater 6p off at 483p, Hanson 3p weaker at 248p, MB-Caradon 5p down at 331p, Reed Elsevier 5p easier at 716p.
Cable & Wireless firmed 4p to 869p on reports that its Mercury subsidiary is planning to launch a mass-market mobile phone operation.
BT fell in response to the reports, losing 3p to 427p.
Vodafone, which could also be badly hit by such a move, lost 4p to 510p.
Reed was also an early casualty, down 4p to 717p following confirmation that it has bought Robert Maxwell's Official Airline Guides for 417m dollars (£275m).
Paper and packaging group Bunzl added a penny to 145p after the group pushed profits strongly ahead in the first six months of the year.
Suter, whose interests span car parts to haircare products, was heavily in demand after the group more than tripled profits in the first half.
The higher profits and improved interim dividend payout lifted it 4p to 184p.
The insurance giants were being snapped up in response to the strong turnround in their fortunes.
Commercial Union advanced 7p to 595p, Sun Alliance added 4p to 368p, Legal & General went 6p better to 473p, Guardian Royal firmed 2p to 215p, General Accident climbed 8p to 677p and BAT Industries which owns Eagle Star, firmed 3p to 451p.
The sale by Whitbread of 15 of its hotels boosted the brewing group 5p to 546p.
UNITED KINGDOM
Confidence dented
CONFIDENCE in Britain's growing economic upturn suffered a slight dent today as official figures showed a fall in credit business in July.
But officials said that, despite the small drop in net lending to consumers, the overall trend continued to show an increase.
In the three months to July, net lending to consumers rose to £535m from £444m in the previous three months.
Rosy economic ‘runes’ show more green shoots sprouting
ECONOMIC indicators threw a rosy tint on the prospects for recovery today with polls showing businessmen more confident and consumers taking on more credit, while a leading pundit predicts a further 1pc interest rate cut this year.
An Institute of Directors survey published today showed 63pc of company directors were more optimistic about the economy now than six months ago.
The figure compared with 55pc in June.
Confidence was further boosted by a poll for credit information organisation, Infolink, which reported rises in July for loans to buy new cars, houses and shop goods.
New demand
Part of the revived demand for credit could be linked to greater job security among consumers, and a third survey out today from the Industrial Relations Services indicates that, while pay rises look set to stay low, firms are shedding fewer jobs.
Meanwhile, the chief economist at the National Westminster Bank, David Kern, believes interest rates will drop by a full 1pc before the end of the year as recovery continues ‘at an uneven pace’.
Infolink chairman Dr Brian Bailey said its survey on credit levels showed ‘that confidence is continuing to gain momentum’ and the general trend showed rising demand for credit.
The sample of 800,000 credit searches showed a 14.7pc rise in credit inquiries in the year to July for new car loans; finance houses reported a 9.2pc increase with a 7.4pc rise in the retail sector and inquiries for home loans were up 4.3pc.
Wall Street break sees Footsie drift
WITH Wall Street closed for a public holiday, dealing was extremely thin, allowing the FTSE to drift.
By the end of the first hour of trading, the 100-index had fallen 5.2 to 3052.1.
A handful of FTSE stocks fell sharply as they began the new account without the benefit of a dividend payment.
These included Burmah Castrol down 22p to 773p, Bowater 6p off at 483p, Hanson 3p weaker at 248p, MB-Caradon also 3p down at 334p, Reed Elsevier 3p easier at 717p and Royal Insurance 1p adrift at 310p.
Cable & Wireless firmed a penny to 866p on reports that its Mercury subsidiary is planning to launch a mass-market mobile phone operation.
BT fell in response to the reports, losing 3p to 426p.
Vodafone, which could also be badly hit by such a move, lost 10p to 504p.
Reed was also an early casualty, down 4p to 717p following confirmation that it has bought Robert Maxwell's Official Airline Guides for 417m dollars (£275m).
Lucas lost 4p to 159p in response to the announcement that it has agreed to buy Dowty Fuel Systems for £18.9m from TI Group.
TI firmed a penny to 355p.
Land Securities bucked the market trend, up 7p to 665p over reports that the property sector is on the edge of a strong recovery and a major revaluation.
Other groups in the sector were similarly inspired.
Frogmore Estates edged ahead 2p to 463p, British Land went 3p better to 383p while MEPC advanced 8p to 495p.
Drinks and confectionery giant Cadbury Schweppes jumped 5p to 479p ahead of results out later this week.
Industrial group BTR was also better before its figures are published, advancing 2p to 401p.
Racal scoop
ELECTRONICS group Racal has won orders worth more than £15m to supply high definition colour monitors for NATO aircraft and for Royal Navy frigates.
Accord on China deals
TEXTILES group Coats Viyella has agreed two more joint venture deals in China worth a total of £16m.
It has taken a 50pc stake in a yarn spinning mill and a 60pc stake in a scheme to produce industrial wool yarn for export.
Outgoing shipyard chief unveils profits
HARLAND and Wolff boss John Parker today performed one of his last official functions as chairman and chief executive of the Belfast shipyard.
Mr Parker, who announced his resignation last week, unveiled pre-tax profits of £2.3m for the first six months of 1993.
While confirming that the results showed ‘a marked improvement over the results for the corresponding period in 1992’, Mr Parker warned that the Yard was still sailing through choppy waters.
‘Trading conditions have been and will remain tough for the immediate future until global recessionary pressures abate.’
‘Improvement’
‘This underlines the need for us to continue to place emphasis on our drive for constant improvement in each of our businesses and on the continued importance of careful cash-management.’
Shareholders' funds at the half-year stage stood at £34.3m, equivalent to a book value per share of £2.17.
Mr Parker confirmed that the Yard's ship-owning subsidiary, Trassey Shipping, had secured a long-term charter with a Belgian company, Cobam, which will enable H & W to go ahead with its plans to build a 162,000-tonne Capesize bulk carrier.
Orders
This vessel will be delivered in early 1995.
Meanwhile, negotiations with other major shipowners and charterers are expected to result in further orders, said the chairman.
Harland's ship-repair subsidiary had an ‘exceptionally busy’ half-year, the highlight of which was the £3m, 14-day refurbishment of the P & O cruise ship Sea Princess.
It is hoped other refurbishment work will follow.
By Yvette Shapiro, Business Editor
hdg stands
THE market continued to drift during the Wall Street holiday, with few investors prepared to put their hands in their pockets.
By lunchtime, the 100-index was down 4.2 at 3053.1.
Trading was thin with little major company news to inspire investors.
A handful of FTSE stocks fell sharply as they began the new account without the benefit of a dividend payment.
These included Burmah Castrol down 22p to 773p, Bowater 6p off at 483p, Hanson 3p weaker at 248p, MB-Caradon 5p down at 331p, Reed Elsevier 5p easier at 716p.
Liberty the group which owns the flagship store in Regent Street dipped 5p to 575p after its interim results came out, but the shares recovered quickly to stand at its opening 580p price.
The high take-up of leisure group Rank's scrip dividend alternative to its cash payment which the City believes could save the group £90m, boosted the stock 14p to 773p.
Cable & Wireless firmed 4p to 869p on reports that its Mercury subsidiary is planning to launch a mass-market mobile phone operation.
BT fell in response to the reports, losing 2p to 427p.
Vodafone, which could also be badly hit by such a move, lost 4p to 510p.
Reed was also an early casualty, down 5p to 716p following confirmation that it has bought Robert Maxwell's Official Airline Guides for 417m dollars (£275m).
Paper and packaging group Bunzl added a penny to 144p after the group pushed profits strongly ahead in the first six months of the year.
Suter, whose interests span car parts to haircare products, was heavily in demand after the group more than tripled profits in the first half.
The higher profits and improved interim dividend payout lifted it 4p to 184p.
The sale by Whitbread of 15 of its hotels boosted the brewing group 11p to 552p.
Shell sails into fare bias row
SHELL forecourts have sailed into a ‘discrimination’ row over ferry crossings.
The oil company is in deep water for not taking part in a half-price fare offer — because they say people in Northern Ireland aren't interested.
Shell filling stations in England, Scotland and Wales all run the promotion, which offers free travel with every 12 litres of petrol.
Twelve vouchers get you a free foot-passenger return ticket on any Stena Sealink crossing.
Demand
Thirty vouchers entitle you to half-price travel for a car and five people across the Irish Sea or the English Channel.
But Shell says, because many of the promotions are run in conjunction with British Rail, there would be no demand here.
And they're giving away toy cars to customers, instead.
Now motorists are threatening to give Shell pumps a wide berth.
Excuse
Robin Boyd, from Cormorant Park in Belfast, said: ‘I certainly won't be going into a Shell garage — unless I'm running on empty.
‘To say people here wouldn't be interested in half-price ferry travel is a very feeble excuse.
I feel we're being discriminated against.
‘My son lives in England and he saved up the vouchers to buy the ticket and posted it to me.
It means a saving of about £100.
‘Yet, they say we wouldn't be interested in it here.
Gap
‘Haven't these people ever heard of Larne harbour?’
A Shell spokeswoman said that, after a Heritage wine glass promotion finished in August, there was a six-week gap with no offer.
‘We didn't go in on the free travel promotion because many of the deals involved British Rail and we don't have it here,’ she said.
‘In the meantime, we have the Classic Cars promotion until another national one begins at the end of the month and we'll be participating in that.’
By Martin Hill
Mediocrity rules in dull market
CAUTIOUS trading statements and mediocre results from a large number of companies today kept investors secured on the sidelines.
After a brief period soon after trading opened the FTSE dived from its near five point gain to be 14.5 points down at 3044.6.
Conglomerate Williams Holdings disappointed the City with the interim dividend unchanged.
The shares lost 9p to 324p.
Cable & Wireless fell 23p to 846p after its Mercury operation launched a new mobile phone service.
BT fell 4p to 423p over competition worries while Vodafone lost 11p to 499p.
The drugs groups were mixed following half-year results from Fisons.
The disappointingly modest rise in profits and the maintained dividend left the group 7p weaker at 170p.
Fisons, which reported a strong rise in drug sales, balancing poorer performances in its other operations, inspired Wellcome at first before it lost 10p to 734p.
Glaxo shed 2p to 618p, Zeneca went 3p better to 756p and SmithKline Beecham dipped 3p to 455p.
AAF Industries was a major casualty, plummeting 49p to 79p after issuing its second profits warning in two months.
Also outside the FTSE, Adscene, the publishing and printing group, was heavily in demand as it reported a sparkling full-year performance.
The shares jumped 12p to 187p. surged 19p to 330p following an impressive performance at the half-year stage.
Petrol station chain Frost Group was stable at 225p after reporting strongly improved half-year figures.
The announcement that Banque Nationale de Paris has sold its entire stake of 6.16 million shares in merchant bank group Kleinwort Benson sent the group a penny lower to 497p.
The shares — representing 4.68pc of Kleinwort's equity — were placed with institutional investors through brokers Cazenove and Smith New Court Securities.
AA repairs its image
SIMON Dyer, director general of the AA, was in Belfast the other day to muster his troops and to present a European quality of service certificate to the local squad.
He took time out to talk to me about how an organisation with a celebrated history was coping with the challenges of the modern motoring world.
I suspect he was still smarting about last year's Which? report which put the AA slowest at reaching stranded motorists.
He had a stout and interesting defence.
‘What members really want is to be got going again and not just towed off to a garage.
We judge ourselves by the time from call-out to getting the problem fixed which is an average of 63 minutes,’ he said.
But isn't it getting more difficult to repair cars on the roadside with the growing complexity of modern engineering?
‘It is a swings and roundabout situation.
Electronics are simpler and more reliable.
For example, electronic ignition is a lot simpler than struggling with an old distributor.
‘We are making a big effort to repair more cars on the roadside.
It means training in electronics and diagnostics for our staff, and it means carrying more spare parts,’ he said.
With the recent mushrooming of the AA's commercial interests was it not in danger of becoming a big shop rather than a service organisation?
‘Around 60pc of our income comes from membership and 40pc from other things.
We have 15,000 employees and 7,000 of these are in membership services, with 5,500 in insurance.
‘The insurance and financial services are profitable and without our commercial activities the subscription would have to be much higher,’ he said.
That word ‘insurance’ prompted me to put in a plea on behalf of the premium-battered Ulster motorist.
Couldn't the AA, with the muscle of more than seven million members, not do something about it?
‘There is a tendency for some insurance companies to ‘cherry pick’ and not take the bad risk.
If a company is on the AA panel then you will get a quote,’ he said.
A fair point, I suppose.
But just a little disappointing from the head of an organisation which is expected to champion the motorist.
Bargain offer
Despite the closure of their Belfast office, the RAC still has a presence in Chichester Street with their insurance services office.
And this week they are offering RAC starter membership, worth £35, free to anyone taking out a motor insurance policy.
Simon Dyer: ‘The AA's coping with the challenges of the modern world.’