

THE cricket season it would appear is back to front with the excellent weather coming late in the summer and the two principal magazines which cover the sport, only hitting the news-stands in the last couple of weeks.
The bi-annual Ulster Cricketer(£2), jointly edited as usual by Clarence Hiles and Colin Berkley and the Irish Cricket Annual (£4) edited by John Elder, are nevertheless interesting reads despite the lateness.
Both maintain their high quality of articles, comments and statistics, with a host of special contributors.
Let's take the Irish Cricket Annual first.
It is invaluable as a record source and has been enhanced with some excellent photographs from the likes of Billy McLeod and Harold Ford who also contribute to the Ulster Cricketer.
The last article written by the late Sean Pender for the Irish Times, looking at the career of ICU President Alfie Linehan, is reproduced in full.
It traces Alfie's career on the field with Downpatrick and Ireland and his rise to the top of officialdom's tree, highlighting the impact he made for essential change in promoting the game and in the need for better communication.
In his foreword to this the fourth edition, John rightly describes Sean as ‘a friend of Irish cricket and cricketers.’
Never was a truer word spoken and Sean's absence has been noticeable in the dearth of cricket coverage in the south since his death.
Clarence Hiles in the Ulster Cricketer, reiterates the esteem in which Sean was held by describing him as the doyen of Irish cricket writers ‘who tackled all the main issues, in the caring thoughtful manner which made him so popular with both players and officials alike.’
The Irish annual covers every aspect of the game throughout Ireland and provides an in-depth look at the ICC Trophy in Kenya next February.
Ireland have just named their panel of 16 and a study of the 20 nations who will be in Nairobi, bidding for three places in the World Cup proper the following year, emphatically illustrates the mountainous task confronting the Irish.
The Ulster Cricketer obviously, concentrates mostly on affairs within the NCU and North-West Unions, and manages to maintain the high standard which accompanied its initial launch.
Never afraid to speak its mind and dish out criticism, it contains an article by North-West's Billy Anderson who vents his feelings about the lack of North-West representation at international level.
He suggests that this has come about by the make-up of the international selectors, two of them coming from Belfast, two from Dublin and only one from the North-West and Munster.
During the last 30 years, he claims, too few North-West boys have been one-cap wonders to ‘keep the natives happy.’
Billy names the players he believes have suffered and urges a change in the selection committee currently made up of one representative from the six teams in the inter-pro championships.
An off-beat piece by Holywood's Simon Burrowes will appeal to cricket romantics.
An aficionado of cricket literature, Simon retraces the days of writer supreme Neville Cardus when secretary of Shrewsbury School.
So taken by the Cardus pictures in words, Simon took it upon himself to visit the famous school and ‘the most beautiful playing fields in the world.’
For Simon, it was like stepping back in time to the turn of the century.
A piece on Brigade's Roy Torrens who this season became an international selector and Bill Frindall's analysis of Irish-born England Test players, are other stories certain to hold the attention of cricket followers.
The Ulster Cricketer is published by Universities Press, Universities Road, Belfast BT6 9HF while the Irish Cricket Annual is done by Belfast Litho Printers, Holywood, Co.
Down.
Brian perks up for final
SPONSORSHIP, yes — professionalism, no.
That in a nutshell is the view of Derry's seasoned midfielder Brian McGilligan as the countdown begins in earnest to Sunday week's All Ireland final.
As speculation mounts that players in general— and those from the successful counties in particular — should be more generously compensated for the effort they put in there is a growing fear that the amateur ethos may come under threat.
But McGilligan, who has made more than his fair share of sacrifices in a long and distinguished career in the Derry jersey, frowns on the impinging mercenary attitudes.
Enjoyment
‘I don't think that professionalism as such should have a place within the playing side of the Association,’ states the Dungiven clubman, ‘We play for pure enjoyment and recreation and if along the way we manage to pick up a few honours, then that's great.
But to be paid for playing — well, that's something that I don't think would be to the overall benefit of the games.’
But McGilligan is adamant that players should be treated fairly when it comes to matters such as travel, meals gear etc.
‘I think the better the players are treated in these respects, the more enthusiastic is their response to the challenges before them,’ points out McGilligan, ‘Let's face it, the whole sport has become more professional off the field — and it's good to see it — so I don't think too many people would begrudge players a few wee perks.’
And he goes on: ‘No one is expecting to make big money — all players would ask is to be treated reasonably in line with what they achieve.’
Sponsorship on a big scale, he concedes, is a welcome innovation.
Intensity
‘Look at the intensity of the preparations for major matches,’ he says, ‘The expenses could not be met without sponsorship but it is also good to see this kind of money being used right down the line.
Under-age sides are entitled to their share of the cake and it's encouraging to see a spread of this cash to help underwrite various competitions.’
McGilligan's views will meet with general approval and reflect the mood in the Derry camp just now as they prepare to meet Dublin on Sunday week.
Heartening
County Board officials are leaving no stone unturned in their efforts to ensure that everything possible is done to facilitate the preparations for the big game.
‘Yes, nothing is being left to chance,’ says McGilligan, ‘It's very heartening to see this approach.’
Smyth in two-fold Cup aim
FORMER Armagh captain Jimmy Smyth has a two-fold ambition which he hopes to see fulfilled within the next ten days.
The Lurgan schoolteacher is keeping his fingers crossed that his club Clan na gael will lift the Armagh senior county football title and that Derry will emerge triumphant in the All Ireland final.
The Clans meet Maghery in Sunday's decider at the Athletic Grounds (3.30) and their potent mixture of youth and experience will test the Lough shore side who will again look to the mesmeric skills of the Robinson brothers, Jim and Dixie.
The Francis Street men have steadily forged their way through a hazardous campaign but Maghery, too, have been impressive.
Admiration
And no one has greater admiration for their ability than Jimmy Smyth.
‘There is a hunger and commitment within this Maghery side and Clans will need to be at their best, I reckon,’ he points out.
If the Lurgan Blues collect the McKillop Cup, it will serve as a tasty aperitif for Sunday week's big match at Croke Park.
And now, sixteen years after leading a gallant Armagh side against all-powerful Dublin, Jimmy is ready to acclaim an Ulster hat-trick of ‘Sam’ successes.
But his optimism is tinged with realism.
‘If anyone had told me when we were getting ready to meet Dublin — more in hope than confidence, it must be admitted — that in the early Nineties two Ulster teams would win the All Ireland and another would be in the final I would have laughed at them,’ says Jimmy.
And he goes on: ‘I think the stock of Ulster football has never been higher.
Not only have Down and Donegal shown the way over the past couple of years but they have helped to generate tremendous interest in gaelic football.
Now Derry are ready to follow in their footsteps and we are all right behind them.’
Rescue deal gets you home
EVER thought what would happen if your bike broke down in Donegal, Dingle, or Dorset, let alone much closer to home?
If it's a simple puncture, your tubeless repair kit may get you back on the road again, but if it's a major rip, or any other sort of fault, the machine's likely to end up on a trailer.
The worry of a breakdown is always at the back of most riders' minds and when travelling on the continent the wise take out special cover.
But it is when riding in the British Isles — both parts of this island, England Scotland and Wales — that most of us are most vulnerable.
Dealer
Now the Hurst Motorcycle Centre in Belfast has come forward with Hurst Rescue, a 24-hour rescue service for bikes, to cover this area.
To the best of my knowledge, and there may be someone out there who knows better, it is the first time in the UK that a bike dealer has offered this service.
For an annual fee of £35, the scheme covers any make of machine.
The bike has to be roadworthy and under 20 years old.
For faults which occur repeatedly, the scheme may not apply if the owner has not taken reasonable steps to have them fixed.
Sounds fair.
The rescue service works like this: You are given a reference number and a free phone number when you register.
Repair
When stuck at the roadside you ring the free phone and a mechanic will be sent out to try to get you going again.
But if it's a more serious fault the machine will be taken to a workshop.
If that involves an overnight stay the scheme will pick up the bill for accommodation.
If there's no workshop near the scene capable of carrying out the repair within a reasonable time, 24 hours for example, then the bike and rider will be brought home or to a destination of the owner's choice.
The scheme is administered by Hambro Legal Protection.
I sometimes believe that  motorcyclists are often overlooked so it's good to see us being taken care of in this manner.
Helmets off to Hursts.
Now to new models.
Quite a few are waiting to be unveiled at the bike shows this autumn.
Most interest will be on Kawasaki's new 900, its challenger to Honda's all conquering FireBlade.
Emphasis
Suzuki, the indications are, will also launch a 900 along with a new 750.
The 900 group, originally the domain of Kawasaki with the Z900 and then the GPZ900R, introduced in 1984 and still in production, seems set to become the premier sports class.
That doesn't mean that bikes like ZZR1100 will disappear, just that more emphasis will be placed on its sports touring capabilities.
Yamaha has a new sports 600 — no word of a 900 — and Honda is bringing out an economy priced 500 twin.
Autumn launch: BMW is breaking with tradition by going outside the factory for a 650 Rotax engine with chain-drive instead of shaft for its new trail bike.
A business approach to fashion The long and short of a day at the office
NOTHING characterised the late 1980s so much as the short skirt.
Welcomed by women of almost all ages as comfortable and a declaration of female sexuality, the short skirt suit with power dressing shoulder-padded jacket was simply the best for oozing confidence at the office.
But fashion, as always, changed and the short skirt fell — literally — from favour and started skimming the ankles.
While some women have carried on wearing short at the office, the eye has quickly adapted, and a look that was once considered sharp suddenly looked old fashioned.
But fashion has moved on again — short can once again look good.
Already re-invented by top international designers, the short skirt will undoubtedly be picked up by the high street stores, and once again start to look new.
Confused?
Don't be.
While there are few hard and fast rules about what is precisely right to wear at the office this season, there are some pointers to keep you heading in the right direction.
SHOULDERS — the line is softer, but not as rounded as last season.
Some are lightly padded simply because it is more flattering to most women, and also gives a better line to the garment.
The only rule here is not to go for exaggerated styles.
SKIRTS — above the knee is fine, thigh-high is not.
They are feminine and flattering, for greater confidence when you walk.
Long skirts are important, but purely straight is out and impossible to walk in anyway.
Stretchy long tube skirts are an alternative, but they too are impractical: if you sit for most of the day you will undoubtedly get knee-bagging, and they are not flattering to most posteriors.
Long skirts with splits look good — choose one with a slit at the back or a discreet side slit, and when trying it on in the changing room, look at yourself sitting down.
It may look good when you are standing, but if you reveal acres of thigh when sitting at a business meeting, you'll never be taken seriously.
TROUSERS — a viable alternative to the skirt for office wear.
No longer frowned on by even the most traditional institutions, they can look chic and incredibly efficient.
The wide-cut style still reigns supreme over slimmer styles, and are easier to wear.
Keep the overall silhouette slim with a tailored or belted jacket and soften up the whole effect with a feminine frilled blouse or floaty scarf around the neck.
DRESSES — long consigned to the back of the wardrobe in favour of suits and separates, the dress made a welcome return in delicate floaty fabrics and shapes.
It smartens up this autumn, looking tailored and trim at just above the knee, or lean and layered for longer lengths.
Look out too for sumptuous soft knitted dresses this autumn.
The dress is particularly ideal for trans-seasonal wear, and also for dressing up with accessories for socialising after work.
SHIRTS AND BLOUSES — in crisp white cotton with big collars and turn-back cuffs, or softer with waterfall necklines and frilled at the wrist, an essential item for the autumn office wardrobe and is a perfect foil to more masculine tailoring.
As more women strive for senior and management positions, the question of clothing has to be tackled in order to compete in a male-dominated environment.
Although many women have the confidence to wear softer clothes rather than masculine suits in order to be taken seriously, the wider choice can bring confusion about exactly what to wear, not only at the office but more importantly at a job interview.
Research shows that interviewers will make a visual impression which influences their decision within the first 45 seconds.
While some of this is a question of chemistry, it is the style in which you dress which says most about your personality and the way you operate.
Looking like you just stepped out of a fashion magazine is not essential, but being dressed in tune with current trends is as important as being aware of current events.
SHARP polyester/ viscose mix jacket (£34.99) is softened by wearing a lace body under it.
(£9.99).
From C&A.
THE Wool Pack — Soft and elegant cardigan dress, £69.99 from Empire.
Ring direct on 0345 200 400.
SOFTLY tailored trouser suit with belted jacket and wide-legged trouser in dark grey melange.
About £240 from Marella.
Stockists include Classic, Enniskillen; The Dresser, Warrenpoint, and Pizazz, Newtownards.
SOFTLY tailored crepe trouser suit for office chic.
Belted jacket with buttoned patch pockets, £39.99, with easily worn matching wide legged trousers, £27.99.
Add a lace top for a touch of glamour, scoop neck, long sleeved top, £24.99.
All from Dorothy
Perkins.
SPLIT Level — Sophisticated tailoring, new neutral tones from Great Universal.
Belted suit and long slim line pencil skirt with split, in raspberry, teal and black, £69.99.
Freephone 0800 269396.
By Sally Bain
Fans go wild for Jacko as Asian tour nears end
POLICE battled to hold back about 200 shrieking fans as Michael Jackson arrived in Japan today on the final leg of his ill-starred Dangerous Asian concert tour.
Despite bad publicity surrounding child abuse allegations which has dogged him on previous stops in Thailand, Singapore and Taiwan, Jackson's Japanese fans made clear that, for them, their idol could do no wrong.
A handful of teenage girls in the crowd outside Fukuoka airport in western Japan wept hysterically as the pop superstar walked to a waiting bus, clad in his trademark black fedora, dark glasses and a black and red jacket with a Peter Pan emblem on the back.
Links
Jackson, who is to give two sell-out concerts at the gigantic Fukuoka Dome on Friday and Saturday, left town almost as fast as he entered it.
The bus he boarded headed off on the 2 hour trip to Nagasaki, where he was to visit a Dutch theme park which commemorates early Dutch trading links with feudal Japan.
Not to be denied, at least a dozen fans hailed waiting taxis and set off in pursuit.
A hard core of supporters, mostly teenage girls, gathered at the airport early in the day to show their support for the singer.
‘We all believe in him,’ said the 18-year-old chairwoman of the Michael Jackson Support Organisation from Chiba, near Tokyo.
‘The fact that he was stabbed in the back by a child really hurt us.’
Los Angeles police are investigating statements by a 13-year-old boy that Jackson abused him during a four-month relationship.
Jackson has denied the allegations.
Michael Jackson: Enthusiastic reception.
An Ideal view of progress on home front
THE Ideal Home Exhibition opened its designer doors in Belfast today to reveal not just one, but three, showhouses inside.
For the first time, organisers have put two other fully-furnished houses on show alongside the 2,200 sq ft Dream Family Home.
Debut
About 100,000 people are expected to attend the 11-day annual event in the King's Hall, Balmoral.
This year, more than 200 exhibitors are taking part, with some making their Northern Ireland debut at the show.
Other new features in the 1993 extravaganza include an Ideal Garden Show, a mini-exhibition offering goods ranging from plants and shrubs to furniture and novelties.
Exhibition director David Robinson said today: ‘Everyone's expectations of the exhibition are different.
‘Ideas’
‘Some come for ideas and to see the latest in innovation.
Others come for the pure entertainment offered through the range of special events.’
The show will be open from today until Friday, September 17, from 2-10pm.
It will close at 8pm on Saturday, September 18.
It will not open on Sunday, September 12.
By Gail Walker
Carnival fun
I AM writing in reply to‘Wide Awake’.
The letter has caused some concern in the Lower Ormeau area of Belfast as it would appear that outsiders were coming into the area after dark and running a carnival, during the week of our community festival and didn't even invite us.
Further they were partying far into the night every night after most of us had retired to our weary bed.
Very strange indeed.
Seriously, Wide Awake's begrudging attitude towards the Lower Ormeau's attempts to boost its morale is as shameful as it is wrong.
Wide Awake couldn't even be bothered to find out what was going on before penning their vitriolic little missive.
Lower Ormeau Community Festival Committee organised a week long series of events, most of which were during the day.
None lasted until 3.30am.
On the Saturday and Sunday nights an open air concert and disco finished at 2am.
Because of the location these events could barely be heard on the Lower Ormeau Road never mind two miles away.
I don't know who or what Wide Awake heard during that week but it certainly didn't originate in the Lower Ormeau.
Our community festival was overjoyed and appreciated by the vast majority of residents of the Lower Ormeau and we hope will be back next year bigger and better than ever.
MICHAEL GOODMAN
Community Development Officer LORAG
ARIES: Mar 21 to Apr 20
You'll quickly find ways to solve problems as you'll be feeling most enterprising.
Excitement surrounds your love life if you are fancy free.
You may find yourself away from home having fun this evening.
TAURUS: Apr 21 to May 21
You'll find it hard to turn off today and work colleagues will not be any help.
You could find yourself socialising with them later on.
This evening is the best time for visiting.
GEMINI: Jun 22 to Jul 22
A good day for travelling long or short distances, but you should take care where finances are concerned.
You could find yourself spending more than your allowance for the day's entertainments.
CANCER: Jun 22 to July 22
You are in an optimistic and generous mood today and other people will be flocking around you.
Try not to splash out too much in a bid to spoil those around you.
Romance is well starred.
LEO: Jul 23 to Aug 22
A new relationship formed today will be very important to you now and in the future.
This is a great day for weddings and engagements.
If attending a wedding or party of close friends, you should have the time of your life.
VIRGO: Aug 23 to Sep 23
Try not to draw attention to yourself today — you are not in the best of moods and arguments could ensue.
Care should be taken when dealing with loved ones as a rift could form if you are too argumentative.
Forgive and forget if possible.
LIBRA: Sep 24 to Oct 23
Time to come out from under a cloud and enjoy yourself.
If you can mix business with pleasure, so much better.
There are some good opportunities for advancement if only you can grab them quickly.
SCORPIO: Oct 24 to Nov 21
You could be hoping to receive a favour or two from those around you.
But do not push your luck too far.
Those who give can also take -so be careful.
This evening is a good time for friendships and romance, but do not be too intense.
SAGITTARIUS: Nov 22 to Dec 21
An ideal day for any sort of travel, but especially good for short trips and visits.
Keep on the move wherever possible as there is much to be gained from flitting here and there.
The opposite sex will figure in the evening's entertainments.
CAPRICORN: Dec 22 to Jan 20
There could be a call from someone you haven't heard from in some time.
Try to make time to see them if they come calling later in the day.
You could learn something to your advantage.
AQUARIUS: Jan 21 to Feb 19
You are feeling pretty good about yourself and this could result in your forming a new friendship with someone attracted to you.
Do not try to go it alone today — everything you do will be enhanced by the company of another.
PISCES: Feb 20 to Mar 20
As a romantic you will be glad to hear that today is a great time for making moves in this area.
Try to get out and about whenever possible, making new friends and contacts.
This evening is a time for partying and meeting new people away from your home base.
Starline number 0891 332 765 776.
End the limbo: Maginnis Maginnis' way ahead
KEN Maginnis, the dapper, extrovert former schoolmaster and UDR major, may sound at times like the voice of moderate unionism.
But he is uncompromising in his attitude to Irish nationalism and future political talks.
He regards nationalism as ‘a debilitating political philosophy’, which was proved last year to have nothing to offer unionists.
Consequently, he wants the Government to delay no longer, but to begin to devolve real responsibility to the people of Northern Ireland.
‘They can't go on governing us in limbo, as if they were neutral and Dublin was a benign and interested party,’ he says, grey moustache bristling.
‘We made the effort last year, but the talks would have broken down before they started, except for the Ulster Unionists.’
Signal
Even so, he would not disregard Dublin's input —‘everyone listens, I listen, but the Government should not delay progress in any area where it is possible.
For instance, devolution in health, education and environmental matters should be looked at.’
Did the talks achieve anything?
‘We're still waiting for a signal from the SDLP and Dublin.
They have got a tangible programme from us for a devolved administration with something for all dimensions of the problem.
We can't implement it unilaterally, but if we had reciprocation it could be negotiated upon.’
At the same time, Maginnis — a leading member of the Unionist delegation — does not hide his frustration with the conduct of the talks.
The Irish Government could not act without consulting the SDLP and the SDLP delegates had to refer everything, he says, back to John Hume.
Much of his criticism of the talks process is centred on Hume, whom he regards as ‘the antithesis of reconciliation’.
The SDLP leader was not in touch with practical reality, nor was he someone who showed he could be negotiated with.
Maginnis sidesteps a question about whether the SDLP was interested in an internal settlement —‘We talk to other members of the SDLP and find them looking forward to participation.
Some of them have played a big part at local council level and it doesn't turn nationalists into unionists.
But their hands are tied.’
Limits
Few unionists are interested in domination, he insists, but there are limits to political accommodation.
Although nationalists could express themselves freely in cultural terms, their aspiration for a united Ireland would have to wait for the ballot box to decide.
‘In terms of day-to-day government, you can't and shouldn't be torn apart by two vested interests,’ says Maginnis, a convinced devolutionist.
‘I don't think the political aspiration has to be accommodated to create a common allegiance and acceptance for the police.
I think the vast majority of Catholics do accept them.’
Was there disappointment when the Unionists went down to Dublin?
‘We'd been told for years how generous they would be, but when we challenged them, they had nothing for us.
If Articles 2 and 3 were dropped, the commitment to no change in Ulster's status in the Anglo-Irish Agreement might mean something.
It doesn't, but we weren't going to let our opposition to the territorial claim prevent us from talking.’
Maybe Dublin was wary of making an offer to Jim Molyneaux, when Ian Paisley could repudiate it?
‘If there was an agreement tomorrow, Paisley would come on board.
He would come saying ‘I'm opposed to it’, as he did with Europe.
He wants to live in perpetual opposition and one would accord him that privilege.’
He laughs, appreciating a well-turned phrase.
Paisley holds no terrors for Maginnis, who contrasts the meticulous preparation of the Ulster Unionist team during the talks with the more casual DUP approach.
‘For six months before the talks our team met at my house on Sundays, preparing papers.
I've read about the Unionist delegation being bamboozled at Sunningdale, but this is a new generation of Unionists, which the SDLP didn't expect.
‘They tried to tell the Irish delegation that we didn't have the power to negotiate without Jim Molyneaux, but it didn't work.
We met them face to face and he gave his full backing.
It was the SDLP delegation which was powerless without John Hume.’
Plan
He alleges that Hume produced his plan for a six-man executive — three elected and one each representing London, Dublin and the European Community — without consultation.
The other members of the SDLP delegation, Maginnis says, were ‘horrified’.
Maginnis would like to see Sir Patrick Mayhew fulfil his promise to give the talks ‘direction and focus’ by presenting his own ideas for the future.
‘At present the Government's mind-set appears to be that nothing can be done without a smile of approval from Dublin, which never comes.
London has got to stop being so dependent on Dublin and get on with dealing with the problems of Northern Ireland — only five per cent of which are constitutional.’
There would be no point, he thinks, in simply resuming the talks where they left off.
That would raise unjustified hopes and there had been no reciprocation.
Whenever Jim Molyneaux decides to retire, Ken Maginnis's hat will be in the ring.
‘Quite honestly, no politician worth his salt says there is a political job he would not do.’
Prominent
But, at 55, he is not in any hurry.
The leader is in good health and, in Maginnis's opinion, should stay to see through the current phase — at least until the Government agrees to a select committee for Northern Ireland, whether or not there is any devolution.
In the meantime, Maginnis will continue to play a prominent part in the party's regeneration.
There is a new self-confidence in unionism, since its talks representatives showed they could face down the opposition, and he is determined to build upon it.
‘We're still waiting for a signal from the SDLP and Dublin.
They have got a tangible programme from us for a devolved administration with something for all dimensions of the problem.
We can't implement it unilaterally, but if we had reciprocation it could be negotiated upon.’
Ken Maginnis: Wants the Government to begin devolving responsibility to Northern Ireland
Day one of challenge for world chess crown
NIGEL Short was today launching his fight to wrest the world chess crown from champion Garry Kasparov in the regal setting of the newly-refurbished Savoy Theatre in London.
Kasparov, the 30-year-old from Russia whose title seems impregnable, is hot favourite at 2/9 and William Hill has already taken a £6,000 bet on him.
Draw
It quotes 28-year-old Short at 9/2 and 8/1 against the match ending in a draw.
If the 24-game series did end in a draw, Kasparov would keep his title.
Ladbrokes quotes Kasparov at 1/6 to keep the title and Short 3/ 1.
The championship has attracted enormous international interest.
Nearly 1,000 correspondents from around the world have been accredited to cover the match and among them the betting is that Kasparov will win.
Among the journalists is Nigel Short's father, who is covering for a local newspaper in Manchester, the challenger's home territory.
Restored
The match is the first major running event at the Savoy Theatre since its refurbishment after a fire destroyed its Grade II listed interior in 1990.
The theatre, built in 1881 by impresario Richard D'Oyly Carte to stage the works of Gilbert and Sullivan, was the first in the West End to be lit by electric lights.
Its interior has now been beautifully restored.
Herbert gets new partner
JOHNNY Herbert will have a new team-mate at the Italian Grand Prix this weekend.
Pedro Lamy, the Portuguese F3000 driver, is likely to be named tomorrow as Team Castrol Lotus's replacement for the injured Italian Alessandro Zanardi.
Zanardi, who partners Johnny Herbert, is still recovering from his huge practice shunt at Spa-Francorchamps in practice for the Belgian Grand Prix and is not expected to be given the go-ahead to race.
A team-spokesman said: ‘Zanardi has made a fantastic recovery, far better than was expected of him, and it would be a shame if he was to miss his home Grand Prix.
‘But there is a huge difference between making a recovery, and being able to drive a Formula One car at 200mph.’
Lamy, who has been seeking a drive in Formula One for this year's Portuguese Grand Prix at Estroil next month, tested for Lotus at Silverstone last week.
Beaten again: Martina Navratilova lost in two straight sets at Flushing Meadow yesterday but she in not definite about retiring from the game.
WINDSOR Park should be close to capacity for tomorrow night's World Cup qualifier against Latvia.
The Irish Football Association's scheme to sell tickets in a double package with those for November's big match at home to the Republic has paid off and now a five-figure attendance is expected.
In usual circumstances the Latvian match would have probably only have attracted around 5,000 loyal Northern Ireland supporters.
‘We have been very busy this week and hopefully the attendance will get close to Windsor's 10,500 capacity,’ said William Campbell of the IFA.
The scheme guarantees people who buy tickets for the game against Latvia the same number for the Republic game which, of course, is in much greater demand.
Manager Billy Bingham hopes those fans will see Northern Ireland record their third Group Three win in a row.
Wins in Lithuania and Latvia were the first time Northern Ireland recorded two consecutive victories in World Cup matches.
The 2-1 in Latvia came courtesy of first half goals from Jim Magilton and Gerry Taggart.
Concern
Bingham, in charge of his 116th international and scheduled to retire in December, said: ‘I'm going all out for a win.
I'll be disappointed if we don't make it but we must be cautious too.’
There is still concern over skipper Alan McDonald's twisted ankle as Bingham follows his policy of delaying the team announcement until match day.
Favourite for a recall is Nottingham Forest's 24-year old right winger Kingsley Black.
Latvia were due to arrive in Belfast this afternoon and training at Windsor Park tonight.
They are currently sixth in the seven-team group with five points from their 11 matches, tonight being their last in the qualifying series.
Meanwhile, as England prepare for their vital qualifier against Poland at Wembley, Paul Ince has promised he will not allow the threat of injuries and suspension to blunt his competitive edge.
The fiery midfielder with the short fuse intends to continue with his terrier-like tackling for Manchester United and England.
‘A big part of my game is to get a foot in and let others know I'm around,’ explained Ince.
‘I don't want to change that.
I believe I have calmed down a bit but there are still times when I will get booked.’
Suspension cost Ince an England cap in the humiliating defeat by Norway in June because he had been booked previously against the same opponents and also against Poland.
Unlucky
Now, shoulder and back injuries put his place at risk for tomorrow's Wembley World Cup clash against Poland.
But Ince insists he is fit and is hoping to get the nod from manager Graham Taylor for his 10th full cap.
He shares Taylor's view that England will win and go on to qualify for the USA finals.
‘With the Wembley crowd behind us we can do it,’ he said.
‘We have played well there so far and were a bit unlucky not to beat Norway and Holland.’
Support Spring
PUNTERS can clean up with Spring in the feature Worthington Best Bitter Park Hill Stakes at Doncaster tomorrow.
John Dunlop's filly has yet to find the target this season but her four-and-three-quarter lengths fourth to Only Royale in the Aston Upthorpe Yorkshire Oaks last month suggested that her turn was just around the corner.
Challenging strongly under Richard Quinn at the two furlong pole, Spring briefly looked set to collect the prestigious Group One prize, but failed to quicken.
The extra two furlongs on Town Moor should suit stamina-packed Spring admirably and she is fancied to confirm York form with the disappointing Rainbow Lake.
King's Signet, impressive winner of the ultra-competitive Stewards Cup at Goodwood, holds all the aces in the Doncaster Bloodstock Sales Scarbrough Stakes.
Heavily-backed to follow up in a Listed event at Newmarket last month, King's Signet was exposed for pace in the closing stages by Stack Rock and Garah.
However, tomorrow's five furlong contest lacks quality, and John Gosden's sprinter is entitled to return to winning ways.
The two main handicaps on the programme look brain-teasers and punters are advised to keep investments to a minimum.
Lochsong was a snip at the weights in last year's Tote-Portland Handicap but no horse stands out this time.
Only a small interest is recommended on Lochsong's stablemate Poker Chip.
An encouraging fifth at York at the beginning of the month, she appears to be approaching her peak and was successful at this meeting last year, registering a shock win in the Flying Childers Stakes.
Finding the winner of the Harcros Timber & Building Supplies Stayers Championship Final (Handicap) is an even tougher task than reading the race name.
There is a host of possibilities and the tentative selection is Sarawat, a comfortable winner of the Ebor at York last month.
He was probably feeling the effects of that gruelling contest when a below-par third at Sandown three days later.
By Burnaby
ADRIAN Doherty's comeback bid with Derry City is over.
The former Manchester United player has decided to quit the game at the age of 20 despite overcoming a knee injury which threatened a once-promising cross-channel career.
Doherty, from Strabane, had joined Derry on a one-month contract after being released at Old Trafford, the intention being to see how things worked out at the Brandywell.
‘I had hoped that joining Derry would have given me some hunger back for the game but it just hasn't happened,’ said Doherty.
‘Derry City and Roy Coyle have been very fair to me and the knee is no problem now.’
Doherty plans to return to Manchester to look for a job.
Meanwhile, Derry City have signed former Liverpool Reserves and Tranmere Rovers left-sided midfielder Michael Smyth.
The 20-year-old arrives tomorrow and should have his debut in the League Cup second round tie at home to Monaghan.
Air check available
THE spotlight is on the quality of Ulster's air — in a new Belfast Telegraph Bulletin.
Northern Ireland people will now be able to check up on the levels of ozone, nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide from data compiled in monitoring stations throughout the province.
Tbilisi's appeal is confirmed
DINAMO Tbilisi, as expected, have lodged their appeal against UEFA's decision to disqualify them from the European Cup (writes Lyle Jackson).
That means their preliminary round opponents Linfield must wait until Thursday night before knowing for sure that they will play FC Copenhagen in the first round at Windsor Park next Wednesday.
UEFA's appeals committee will hear Tbilisi deny that they tried to bribe the referee and linesmen before the first leg in Georgia three weeks ago.
They admit arranging for 5,000 dollars to be handed over in envelopes but say they were merely responding to UEFA instructions to cover the officials' expenses.
However, it is extremely unlikely UEFA will alter last Friday's shock decision which gave Linfield an unexpected European reprieve after losing 3-2 to Tbilisi on aggregate.
The appeals committee rarely disagrees with decisions of the control and disciplinary committee and in several cases it has actually increased the punishment.
FC Copenhagen, drawn to play Dinamo or Linfield, have made arrangements for either eventuality.
Benne Johannsen, manager of the Danish champions, travelled to Georgia with Linfield for the first leg and he's not too keen on going back.
‘I prefer having to play Linfield.
I do not want to go back to the foreign environment of Tbilisi,’ he said.
‘It looks as if we will be playing in Belfast.’
Tbilisi are gambling a lot of money on the outcome of the appeal.
They have to pay for the four officials, the clubs's own lawyers and witnesses for the hearing in Geneva.
But the stakes are high with a six-figure bonanza in television rights, advertising and UEFA payments in the balance.
‘It is not so bad for us because we would be at home in the first leg,’ said Blues chairman David Campbell.
‘Poor Copenhagen don't know where they are going yet and I think that is why UEFA brought forward their meeting.
We have been told to expect a fax with the final decision at around midnight on Thursday.’
HOCKEY
Italy beckons
THE Ireland women's hockey squad will travel to Italy for a weekend training camp in November as part of the build-up to next year's World Cup finals in Dublin.
Although precise details have still to be firmed up, Terry Gregg's panel are likely to face the Italians in two friendly internationals.
It has also been agreed that Italy will pay a reciprocal visit to Dublin in April when they will take part in a Four Nations competition to replace the Home International championships, following England's decision to pull the plug on the domestic series last season.
Wales have also confirmed that they will be taking part and Ireland's other opponents have still to be determined.
OLYMPICS
Ulster backs Manchester
NORTHERN Ireland sport is throwing its weight behind Manchester's bid to host the Olympic Games in 2000.
Six sporting bodies pledged their backing to Dick Palmer, general secretary of the British Olympic Association, and Peter Knowles, Manchester 2000 Sport Liaison, who visited the House of Sport at Upper Malone today.
The message of support was signed by Don Allen of the Sports Council for Northern Ireland; Billy Stewart, the Northern Ireland Commonwealth Games Council; Ewart Bell, Institute of Coaching; Joan McCloy, Council of Physical Recreation; Mary Peters, former chairman of the Ulster Games Foundation; and Ian Bamford of the Ulster Sports and Recreation Trust.
In an affirmation of support to Palmer and Knowles they: ‘Wholeheartedly and unreservedly support Manchester's bid’ and ‘strongly urge International Olympic Committee members to decide in its favour.’
The Ulster representatives feel that Manchester is capable of staging a games of ‘unparalleled quality’ which would be of lasting benefit to world sport.
Manchester has strong support, including that of Prime Minister John Major, but Sydney, Australia, remains favourite to be given the 2000 Games.
The decision will be taken by the International Olympic Committee on Thursday September 23.
Go solo with Plan 82
MANY readers have made enquiries about Treble Chance entries that cover more than the popular 16-match total.
They do not want multiple entries of the same plan but an entry that goes beyond 16 games as a single column plan.
Belfast Telegraph Plan 82 could fit the bill because it covers 20 selections with a fine guarantee of at least seven 1-1 draws together if eight of your 20 selections end as 1-1 draws.
If your eighth selection is a score draw you would have quite a useful dividend to come, depending, of course, upon the number of drawn games in any given week.
Although the plan offers an extremely good guarantee on so high a number of matches it is really only suitable for syndicates using Littlewoods and Vernons although it is ideal on Zetters as a single entry.
To make the entry first decide on your 20 matches and enter them all in one line in one column of the Treble Chance (to the right of the fixtures).
Then write alongside: ‘Belfast Telegraph Plan 82 = 3,292 lines at (add the stake)’.
The cost on Littlewoods is £43.89 which, as I have stated, will suit a large scale syndicate; £14.96 on Vernons which would suit a smaller group entry and £3.66 on Zetters.
Checking charts for Belfast Telegraph Plan 82 are available if you write to me enclosing a stamped addressed envelope.
When you have the chart, write down the results of your 20 matches onto a slip of paper and slide it along the chart, counting the points gained in each line as you go.
A number of readers have asked for more advice on entries that cover matches in pairs and trios.
Here is one to cover 11 selections and cuts the number of lines from a full perm of 8 from 11 (165) to a mere 39!
First decide on just two matches that appear to have outstanding draw chances and mark them X in the first column of the Treble Chance (to the right of the fixtures).
Then bracket the two into a pair.
Next, enter nine other matches in a second column on the coupon and bracket them into three trios with a thick, dividing line underneath each set of three selections.
Complete the entry by writing alongside: ‘Perm any 1 pair and any 2 trios = 3 lines One pair and 2 from each trio = 27 lines Three trios for any 8 from 9 = 9 lines Total: 39 lines at 1 1/3p = 52p staked.’
No checking chart is needed.
You just follow each set of instructions in turn.
With the first section, take your one pair in the first column and link it with any two brackets of three from the second column to give you your best eight selections.
In the second set of instructions, take the one pair and perm it with the two highest scoring selections in each of the three trios and in the third section, perm a straight 8 from 9 among your second column trio matches.
Permfax is always ready to advise on pools problems, large or small, but only if a stamped addressed envelope is enclosed for his reply.
Address your letter to Permfax, c/o Belfast Telegraph, 124 Royal Avenue, Belfast BT1 1EB.
Use first class post to avoid delay.
Beaten Martina will carry on
MARTINA Navratilova's bitter disappointment at the US Open left a bad taste in her mouth, but the winner of 18 Grand Slam titles still craves for more.
After Helena Sukova eliminated the four-times champion with a 7-5 6-4 fourth round victory at Flushing Meadow last night, the issue of retirement was once again raised with the soon-to-be 37-year-old Navratilova.
‘It makes me want to say, forget it, I don't want it any more, or say, next year is definitely my last year.
But it also makes me want to work harder,’ Navratilova said.
‘All those thoughts are going through my mind.
The problem is they are going through my mind on the court.’
Navratilova, who said she would definitely return to the circuit next year, said it would probably be her mental attitude rather than her physical ability that determines her future.
‘I still want to be out there,’ said Navratilova, who has won four tournaments this year.
‘I still want the opportunity to be out there and have one more chance at the title.’
She was adamant that winning at Flushing Meadow this year had been within her grasp.
‘I am so disappointed because I had the chance.
I have the game and haven't been able to produce it.’
But Navratilova knew she had been outplayed by Sukova, a player she had beaten in 25 of 29 earlier meetings.
‘She played great,’ Navratilova said.
‘When you get down to the end of a tournament, the people that hit the great shots win and she hit some great shots.’
Sukova said she hoped the competitive end was not near for Navratilova.
‘I think she is a great player and she really puts a lot in the game on the court and off.
I hope she is still around for quite a few more years.’
Sukova's triumph earned her a quarter-final against Bulgarian Katerina Maleeva, who eliminated her younger sister, Magdalena, 6-2 6-3.
Navratilova's exit marked the first time no American woman had reached the quarter-finals of the US Open since women began playing in the tournament in 1887.
A spellbinding night of yarns
A SPELLBOUNDING evening of storytelling comes to Londonderry on Monday.
At 8pm in the Central Library the Foyle Yarnspinners will be joined by their friends from Belfast for a night of gripping stories.
Harry Scott (81), from Jordanstown has been telling stories all his life.
He is a veteran of the Scouting movement and has a keen interest in Irish traditional tales, which he tells with gusto.
Mealda Hall's lifetime experiences have led to her meeting a host of colourful characters and her stories are always worth a listen.
Joining in the evening of fun and excitement will be Liz Weir who presents BBC Radio Ulster's ‘The Gift of the Gab’.
She is a founder of the Yardspinners.
And Matt Camplisson, a recently retired bus inspector, will also be there with his keen sense of humour.
Admission for the evening is free and everyone is welcome.
Course record falls in Pro-Am contest
THE Coca Cola Pro-Am, staged at Prehen, was another huge success being blessed with fine weather and the course in excellent condition.
The large crowd bore witness to its popularity although the course record of 68 set by Des Ballintine in 1984 was broken on the tough Prehen course.
Only one competitor finished under par at the end of 54 holes, the experienced David Jones (Knockbracken), with rounds of 73-68-70 got it two under par and victory by three shots from the player who set the place alight with his record breaking round on Sunday Gary Chambers (Dundalk).
Chambers started the day at six over par eight shots off the lead but finished at only one over with birdies at one three and six, an eagle at seven another two birdies at eight and nine to go out in 30.
His only blemish on the front nine was at the second hole dropping shots at 14 and 15 brought it to four under but a good birdie at 16 and a level par finish gave him a 66 and the course record by two shots.
In third place Karl O'Donnell (Newlands), who had been leading overnight at two under slipped to a 75 on Sunday to finish two over par, his early rounds had been 70 and 70.
Team Event The format for this event was a Professional and three amateurs with best two scores at each hole to count.
The event was dominated not by the man but by a team of ladies all from the City of Derry, they were Ann Wallace, Claire Hughes and Vivienne Houston and their professional from Cill Dara was Gerry Burke.
Setting a blistering pace of 91pts on day one, on day two it was 92pts easing off slightly on Sunday it was for them a modest 89pts to give them a grand total of 272pts, 16pts clear of the teams in second and third places on 256pts they were Karl O'Donnell (Newlands), C Burke, V Burke, C McKeone.
Leslie Robinson (Co Sligo), Harry McAlary (Moyola), J Craig (Moyola), P Joyce (Moyola).
Senior Cup
The Senior Final between the up and coming Michael Wilson and his opponent the more experienced Colm McCarroll ended as predicted in victory for McCarroll.
It was a thrilling encounter with Colm going two up quite early in the round and getting pegged back to all square.
Again Colm went two up at the tenth but Michael got it back to one at the 12 a birdie at the 14 brought the lead back to two up.
Good play from Wilson at the 15 and a birdie 3 at the 16 brought the match all square once again.
Both players missed the 17 fairway to the right with Wilson lying in the more favourable position it looked like he at last might take the lead but using all his experience McCarroll succeeded on the green for a half.
Both players played indifferent shots to green at the 18th, Wilson ended up 35 feet short of pin whilst McCarroll was on the apron of green at the back.
It looked odds on to go to extra holes but unfortunate for Michael he three putted, Colm got down in two won 1up.
Thursday Society
The Society's first winner of the new season was the irrepressible Robbie Kennelly (9), he played the front nine in a modest 16pts after a blank at the ninth despite another blank at the tenth Robbie covered the last eight holes in a blistering 22pts with birdies at 11 and 7 for a grand total of 38pts.
In second place beaten only on BOT Brian Stanford (12), who also found the back nine to his liking, coming home in 20pts in his total of 38pts.
Bert Whoriskey in third place also on 38pts missed his opportunity with an unfortunate six at the last.
Best last nine prize went to Danny Quigley (20) with 22pts.
Newtownstewart
Saturday's Fourball Betterball ended in victory for the partnership of Alwyn Boardman (8), and Ian McFarland (14), who carded an excellent 47pts to win by three shots from the pairing in second place Paul Fletcher (16), and Niall Robinson (9), who returned a from 44pts.
Newtownstewart Club members are reminded that Jim Brady's President's Day will be held on Saturday September 18.
Time sheet already displayed in Clubhouse.
Strabane
Saturday's Monthly Medal ended in a convincing victory for Carl Henderson when he returned a fine 68 net.
Sunday's Open Stableford Competition was in aid of St Vincent De Paul.
The winner Martin Finlay (20), returned a fine 40pts to win on BOT from the man in second place John Patton (9), also returned 40pts.
Third spot was taken by David Friel (12), who returned 39pts.
Whats On City of Derry Saturday 11 — Professional Prize (Stableford); Sunday 12 — First leg Final (Fred Daly Shield), City of Derry versus Clandeboye.
Newtownstewart Saturday 11 — Mort Appel Putter, Past Captains Day; Sunday 12 — Dunhill Masters.
Follow through: Phelam O'Neill practices his swing as he waits to tee-off in the Coca-Cola Pro-Am Golf tournament held at the City of Derry Golf Club
NEWCASTLE
Cross-border trade summit
NEWCASTLE in Co Down is to be the venue for a major cross-border trade conference and exhibition next month.
The two-day event is being organised by the Down Economic Development Agency in conjunction with the Irish Border Region Association.
The chairman of the agency, Councillor Malachi Curran, revealed yesterday: ‘The aim is to promote cross-border contacts and to provide sourcing information.
‘It has been estimated that the economies of the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, could, to mutual advantage, create between them 80,000 jobs within the island of Ireland through import substitution by encouraging inter-regional trade co-operation.’
TOOMEBRIDGE
Vintage rally
THE proceeds of a vintage vehicle rally being held in Toomebridge this Saturday are going to the Cardiac Unit of the Waveney Hospital, Ballymena.
There will be vintage tractors, stationary engines, motorbikes and cars on display from 1.00pm.
Air quality bulletins for the ‘Tele’
ULSTER people will be able to breathe more easily with the help of the Belfast Telegraph's new Air Quality Bulletin.
The information on the levels of the three main air pollutants — ozone, nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide, will be published on a weekly basis starting next Monday.
It will be based on data collected from monitoring stations throughout the province.
Ozone
Both ozone and nitrogen dioxide can cause breathing problems for people with lung complaints, while sulphur dioxide dissolves in water to form acid rain.
The bulletin will include a summary for the last 24 hours, the worst level in the week and the latest 24 hour forecast.
The latest forecast for the province describes the air quality in all three categories as ‘very good’.
The ozone level in Belfast was recorded at 35 parts per billion while in rural parts of the province the level was 46.
The sulphur dioxide level in Belfast was 32 parts per billion while the nitrogen dioxide level was 48.
By Ian McTear
Top ten performance from identical twins
IDENTICAL twins Gareth and Jonathan Boreland did it their way — and brilliantly — in the GCSE examinations.
Between them the 16-year-old schoolboys wrote their way to 20 straight As between them.
And straight into the history books at Royal Belfast Academical Institution.
Twins have never pulled off a double like this before at the school.
Gareth and Jonathan had 10 As each which had their headmaster Michael Ridley purring with delight.
And just to show that even identical twins can be a bit different Gareth reserved one of his As for biology while Jonathan got one for history.
They studied the same subjects for the other nine GCSE subjects.
Between them Gareth and Jonathan were also top of the class at RBAI in seven subjects as well.
‘Five other boys had 10 As at RBAI this year,’ said Mr Ridley.
‘But identical twins?
This is a first.’
‘We're not bookworms,’ said Jonathan.
‘We are outdoor types in the school scout troop and the mountaineering club.’
The twins, sons of a doctor at Stranmillis, have each won the Duke of Edinburgh Silver Award.
And in the Lower Sixth at RBAI the boys have chosen the same subjects — maths, physics and chemistry.
Double booked: Twins Gareth (left) and Jonathan Boreland aged 16 who between them gained Grade A in 20 GCSEs.
Picture by Rick Hewitt.
By Eddie McIlwaine
Province's travel agents reply to Which? criticism
ULSTER travel agents offer a wider range of holidays and fairer advice than do many mainland operators, it was claimed today.
The chairman of the Northern Ireland Association of British Travel Agents, Ailbe McMurray, defended the record of local firms after Holiday Which magazine attacked some British agents' performance.
Limited
The Which? survey found many were providing a limited holiday-selection and biased information, thanks to a virtual stranglehold by the major tour operators.
Thomson, Airtours and Owners Abroad control more than half the entire British package-holiday market and all own or have links with chains of high street travel agents.
The magazine claimed that in 37pc of the multiple travel agents visited researchers were spontaneously offered only holidays from the linked company, with no other choice.
However, independent agents were much less likely to plug the three main tour-operators.
Mr McMurray said he did not believe the findings related to Northern Ireland, because none of the three firms had significant links with the province.
‘We don't have Thomson and although Airtours have bought Aspro they don't actually have any travel agents here,’ he said.
‘Owners Abroad have a link with Thomas Cook, but it does not in any way cause these sort of problems.
‘Generally people here can expect more-balanced advice on the best holiday for them and a wider choice than from many mainland agents.’
In a public survey, almost three out of four people thought that travel agents should give independent advice regardless of their financial links with any one operator, but only just over half, 54pc, thought this happened in practice.
Holiday Which? says it is concerned that consumers are being kept in the dark about the links between travel agents and the tour operators.
Links
None of the Lunn Poly or Thomas Cook branches had any signs informing customers of their links with tour operators.
The Office of Fair Trading is investigating claims that the big tour-operators and their chain of travel agents are using their muscle to restrict customer choice and tighten their grip on the market.
By Gail Walker
Blind pursuit
DAREDEVIL blind pensioner Joe Collier (74) is making plans to perform a charity bungee jump at a secret location outside his home area to beat local councils which blocked his spectacular leap.
District authorities in Devon banned the jump in the county because of fears over the type of crane to be used, said Mr Collier, who has been blind for 22 years.
BELFAST Ormeau Road, 8.30pm.
Modern Art, by Hugh Anderson, Rosses Court.
Gamblers Anonymous, 18 Donegall Street, 8pm.
Stop Smoking Clinic, Ulster Cancer Foundation, Eglantine Avenue, 7pm to 9pm.
AIDS Helpline, telephone 326117 7.30pm to 10pm.
Senior citizens old time dancing, Island Day Centre, Newtownards Road, 2pm to 4pm.
Mothers and toddlers group, Morton Community Centre, 8-10 Lorne Street, Lisburn Road, 10am-1pm.
Junior Morton Menaces (5-7 year olds) same venue, 2pm-3.30pm.
Gamblers Anonymous Meeting, York Road Community Centre, 8 pm.
Jack Crabtree Exhibition, One Oxford Street, 10am — 4pm.
Belfast Zoo Annual Conservation Centre — talk on the world campaign for bears, Ark Restaurant, 7.15pm.
Opera Northern Ireland West Side Story, Klondyke Building, Ormeau Road, 7.30pm.
Belfast branch meeting, British Diabetic Association, Central Hall, Rosemary Street, 7.30pm — Dr K Nelson on the Prevention of Diabetic Complications.
Retirement Association of Northern Ireland, Cregagh and Castlereagh Branch, Cregagh Library, 2.15pm.
Belfast Floral Art Society, St John's Church Hall, Malone Road, 8pm.
Yarnspinning, with John Campbell, Linen Hall Library, 8pm.
Sinclair Seamen's Church, open 2pm — 5pm.
Aqua Fit Class, 11am — noon, Robinson Centre.
MAGHERAFELT
Blood Transfusion Service, College of Further Education, 2pm — 4.30pm, 6pm — 8pm.
NEWCASTLE
Blood Transfusion Service, St John's Hall, 2.30pm — 4.30pm, 6pm — 8pm.
BANGOR
Pickie Family Fun park.
LURGAN
Breast Care and Mastectomy Support Service, Lurgan Day Hospital, 7.30pm.
CULLYBACKEY
Aerobic Exercise, community centre, Tober Park, 9pm to 10pm.
CRAIGAVON
Lough Neagh Discovery Centre, Oxford Island, Lurgan exit off M1, junction 10, open 10am to 7pm.
DERRIAGHY
Multiple Sclerosis Therapy Centre, Unit 65, Dunmurry Industrial Estate, The Cutts, 10am to 5pm.
Tel Belfast 622936.
DONAGHADEE
Pensioners Club for local senior citizens and disabled people, Donaghadee Community Workforce, Manor Street, 10 am to 2pm.
DOWNPATRICK
St Patrick Heritage Centre, Down Museum, 11am to 5pm.
LARNE
Mother and Toddler Group, The Can, Christian Community Centre, Victoria Road, 10am to noon.
OMAGH
Ulster American Folk Park exhibitions.
Open 11am to 6.30pm.
GLENAVY
Jewels of the Pacific Tapestry Exhibition, Ballance House, 2pm — 5pm.
Ulster History Park, Cullion, 11-6pm.
Details for inclusion in this column must be received in writing three days before publication.
Please state clearly the date, time, and location of the event.
Lee set for City take-over
FRANCIS Lee told crisis club Manchester City's supporters and shareholders today: ‘I'm ready to help bring back the good times to Maine Road but only with your backing.’
The one time City and England striker, now a millionaire businessman, put the pressure on chairman Peter Swales by revealing that he and two colleagues were prepared to put substantial funds into the club in return for a seat on the board.
Lee, 49, said there was no chance of him working alongside Swales but insisted: ‘This is not a takeover bid or a hostile intervention.
‘I am asking for a mandate from the supporters and shareholders to put me on the board.’
Lee, who played in City's great 1968 championship-winning side and became a cult hero during his spell at Maine Road between 1967-73, went on: ‘If it is the wish of the shareholders and supporters I am available.
‘If this offer is not accepted no one can ever say that I did not try to help my club.
Let's make Manchester City great again.’
Appropriate
Lee, speaking at a news conference at an hotel near his Wilmslow home, said that so far he had not made contact with Swales.
But he added: ‘It's up to Mr Swales to do what he thinks is appropriately best for the club…with Mr Swales at the club I don't think I'd be there.’.
He said that the £8 million he was reported to be investing in City was ‘purely conjecture’.
Swales, the target for much of the fans anger over the past few weeks, is likely to resist Lee's offer.
He has said repeatedly that the club is not for sale.
Since Swales took over at Maine Road 20 years ago, City have won only the League Cup and more than a dozen managers have come and gone, including Peter Reid who was sacked last month.
Francis Lee: ready to help Manchester City — but current chairman Swales is not part of the equation.
MAGHERA
Gymkhana cash
SNOOKER
Irish face the ‘Isle’
THE Northern Ireland snooker international team will face the Isle of Man when the Home International series begins in Blackpool on Tuesday September 21.
Northern Ireland has never won the Home Internationals before but team manager Jim McGrory feels that this year's selection is good enough to achieve success for the first time.
John Tallon from Parkside Snooker Club in Lurgan is making his debut along with Kieran McLinden, Paddy Doherty, Julian Logue, Andy Sharpe, Kieran Erwin, Patrick Wallace and Barry McNamee.
The Drumgore 64 competition commenced yesterday with two shock defeats.
The Northern Ireland number 7 seed Paddy Doherty made his exit in the hands of a 3-2 defeat by Colin McCullough from the QE1 Club in Belfast.
And Gary McDonald, the number 12 seed, was beaten 3-2 by Tony Tennyson from Crumlin.
The highest break so far is 98 by Alan McNeill from Bangor who went down 3-1 to Andy Sharpe.
Young Darren Toland Martin Murray 3-0.
Minors make it two
Kilkenny 1-17Galway 1-12
IT was double joy for Kilkenny yesterday as their Minors won the All Ireland final by also beating Galway in a lively and entertaining decider.
The Kilkenny full forward line of Brendan Dalton, David Buggy and Ollie O'Connor posed big problems for the Galway defence but the Connacht side fought spiritedly until the end.
Kevin Grogan and Sean Healy helped to give the young ‘Cats’ the midfield cream but their forwards were forced to work hard for their scores.
Darragh Coen, the Galway captain, led his attack with vigour and Sean Corcoran and Declan Walsh were unfortunate not to hit the target more often.
Oliver Canning and Shane Walsh tried hard at midfield for Galway but Kilkenny's superior stickwork here told its own story.
James records winning sound for Derry team
When the Derry team members take their place in Croke Park on September 19 for the All Ireland GAA final, chances are the song drifting down from the terraces will have been penned by Maghera man James Devlin.
James, who's cousins Fergal and Damian McCusker are key players in the Derry team, was so inspired by his native county's success in the semi-final that he sat down and wrote ‘Ooh Aah G-A-A.’
Fans
It may never win an award, but with lyrics like these, the fans don't care:
‘Ooh, Aah, the G-A-A, They play it in Cork and Kerry There is a version down in Dublin town, But the real thing is up in Derry.’
And just to make sure neighbouring county, and last year's All Ireland champions, Donegal, get the message, James has added a verse specially for them:
‘Donegal is a grand wee place, All ceol and crac and laughter.
They brought Sam here, Put him up for a year.
Oh he was well looked after.
They said ‘What the bet he won't go yet.
He hasn't yet out grown us’.
But they took a dive between half three and five.
On a rainy day in Clones’ James has recorded the song with the three other members of his band ‘Devlin’and the first cut has already sold out.
He is confident that the song will become the anthem for the new All Ireland Champions on September 19.
And who will that be?
‘Derry of course.’
By Suzanne Rodgers
Emerson crowned champion
‘HARD to believe, isn't it?
After last year when I lost the championship by one point on the last round I never imagined I would end up winning it this time with two rounds to spare.’
Stephen Emerson, the new Maxol Northern Ireland rally champion, was still slightly bemused today in the aftermath of the celebrations which followed his second place finish on the Lakelands Rally in Fermanagh.
Victory went to James Leckey, who led from start to finish, but Emerson's solid second place allied to the retirement of his two main championship rivals, was enough to take the Belfast driver clear at the top of the table.
Just a couple of weeks ago Emerson was down the in the dumps and considering pulling out of the Maxol series.
His Opel Manta had been heavily damaged during the Burmah Rally and couldn't be repaired in time for the Mourne Stages.
Emerson admitted then he felt like quitting for the rest of the season.
But he didn't and in a Manta hired from Tony Kearns he finished second behind Kenny McKinstry.
On Saturday he was back in his own Opel and despite struggling for grip in the slippery Fermanagh forests he played safe to finish 35 seconds behind the Ford Escort Cosworth of Leckey.
It was Leckey's first NI championship win of the season and came too late to threaten Emerson's position.
Garth McCartney and Philip Young were the only drivers who could challenge Emerson but they both went out on the second stage, McCartney retiring with broken throttle linkage and Young crashing.
After that Emerson was able to ease his way through the stages, ignoring the charging Leckey who twice had differentials fail on his Escort but still stayed ahead.
Lionel Kerr finished third in his G3 Escort with the Toyota of Ken Graham fourth and cross-channel visitor Jon Joannides fifth in his Sierra Cosworth.
Meanwhile at Kirkistown young Portadown driver Peter Duke won the NI Formula Ford championship for the first time.
Like Emerson he finished second in his Swift but that was good enough to take him clear of his main rivals with one round remaining.
The race was dominated by 1992 champion Bryan McMonagle who qualified on pole position, led from start to finish and set fastest lap along the way.
But Duke, from Portadown, slotted into second and stayed there to secure the points he needed to beat off the challenge of Tommy Reid, McMonagle and Chris Paul.
TENNIS
Irish end up bottom
THE Ireland senior tennis team collected the wooden spoon in the Home International quadrangular series which ended in Glasgow yesterday but the under 18 and under 14 sides finished in the runners-up position behind England.
Ulster youngsters Claire Curran and Zara Wolseley helped Ireland to a 3-3 draw against Wales in the under 18 event yesterday, leaving their team four points ahead of Scotland in second place.
Curran had a 6-4 6-2 win over Claire Bennett while Wolseley beat Sarah Kirkby 6-4 6-3.
The Belfast pair then joined forces to beat the same opponents 6-4 6-0 in the doubles.
The under 14s, meanwhile, beat Wales 5-1 yesterday but the seniors, including Ulster's Ken Rowe, who lost 6-4 5-7 6-0 to Shaun Leleu, went down 4-1 to the same opponents to finish the weekend series without a win to their credit.
On Friday Ireland were whitewashed 5-0 by England and, on Saturday, they slumped to a 4-2 defeat against Scotland which left them needing to beat Wales yesterday to avoid bottom place.
Striders retain title
ANNADALE Striders turned up trumps once again in the Panasonic Track and Field League at Antrim on Saturday and Lisburn AC took the ladies title.
Striders finished overall winners of the four series event by 106 points from Ballymena and Antrim and the ladies of Lisburn were narrow 18 points winners from Lagan Valley.
Athlete of the meeting on Saturday was Strider Jim Campbell who clocked 3.47.37 to take the 1,500 metres from team-mate Dermot Donnelly (3.47.42).
Jim won his club £100 making it a financial clean sweep for Annadale as the previous cash winners were all Striders…
Mark Allen, Gary Lough and Ian Craig.
There was a new NI record for North Down's Alison Moffitt, who hurled the javelin 47.54 metres and she later made it a double by throwing the discus 39.72 metres.
Annadale teenager Adam Smith set a new NI youths' triple jump record with 13.59 metres, but he had to be content with second place, victory going to Ballymena's Mickey McDonald who jumped 13.76.
Ballymena's Eddie King had a good victory in the 800 metres, clocking 1.52.76 to defeat Annadale's GB U-23 international Brian Treacy and there were good wins for Sparta through Bobby Farren (5,000m 14.11.8), Colm Roberts (chase, 9.37.2) and Damien Crawford (javelin, 63.28m).
Lisburn's Paul McBurney remained unbeaten in the league and on Saturday he won the 200m in 22.1 and the one lap event with 49.4.
In the ladies events Vivienne McGoldrick clocked 12.57 and 25.45 to take the sprint double for Lisburn and young Vicki Jamison had similar success in both hurdles for Lagan Valley, being timed at 14.72 and 62.71.
The men's second division was won by East Down from North Down and Mid Ulster.
Jim Campbell: Athlete of meeting
Lee to unveil City take-over
FRANCIS Lee, the former England striker now a millionaire businessman, was today preparing to unveil an audacious bid to take control of Manchester City.
Lee, one of Maine Road's legendary players, claims the backing of three multi-millionaire associates in an attempt to prise the club away from chairman Peter Swales.
Reports say they will bid £8 million to buy out Swales, chairman for 20 years but now the subject of a concerted hate campaign by supporters following the sacking of manager Peter Reid.
Lee, 49, who built up a paper recycling business which he sold for more than £8 million and has since developed several other companies, says he wants to make Manchester City the top club in the country.
Quoted in today's Daily Mirror, Lee says: ‘Most of all, if we do take over we are going to listen to the fans.
They are the most important people of all.
This is their club.
‘My three associates and myself are willing to put big money into the club to get the best players for the team.
‘But other things are equally important.
The most vital thing is that the club is run from top to bottom just like a winning team.
‘I want to return to the nice friendly atmosphere we used to have at this club with Joe Mercer and Malcolm Allison in charge and chairman Albert Alexander, who left everyone to get on with their job.
Happy family
‘It should be one big happy family.
I have some big ideas which I will reveal in good time.
But right now we have to complete our plans for the club and plan for the future.’
Lee's intervention is expected to be warmly welcomed by City fans who idolised him during his playing days.
Swales's reign at Maine Road has been short on success.
Despite appointing a succession of managers his only return has been one League Cup triumph.
He had to be protected by police at City's last home game after the popular Reid was sacked and replaced by Oxford manager Brian Horton.
New general manager John Maddock, who was brought in by Swales and made the sacking of Reid virtually his first act, has also been the target of supporters' anger.
Francis Lee: £8m bid to buy City
Peter Swales: hate campaign
French aces hold breath
Anxious Marseille
UEFA were today deciding whether to kick European Cup holders Marseille out of this season's competition amid allegations they attempted to bribe league opponents
Valenciennes in May.
UEFA's executive committee members gathered at a hotel near Zurich airport today shortly after FIFA officials met with the president of the French Football Federation (FFF), Jean Fournet-Fayard, who is also a member of UEFA's executive.
FIFA are anxious that the allegations of match-fixing, currently being investigated by a French magistrate, are cleared up quickly and have set a September 23 deadline alongside a threat to suspend the national team.
The FFF, who last year won the bidding to host the 1998 World Cup finals, have promised to meet the deadline.
But there was a setback on Saturday when the French National League's (FNL) disciplinary committee failed to make any ruling at a nine-hour meeting in Paris because they said they did not have enough evidence.
FIFA president Joao Havelange, who issued the ultimatum to the FFF last week, and general secretary Sepp Blatter agreed to Fournet-Fayard's request for a meeting before they joined the UEFA executive as observers.
Three Valenciennes players have accused the French champions of offering them a 250,000 francs (£33,000) bribe to lose a key game on May 20, a few days before their European Cup final against AC Milan.
They named Marseille general secretary Jean-Pierre Bernes and midfielder Jean-Jacques Eydelie, who admitted in July that he paid a bribe to three players.
All five have been placed under investigation.
Bernes, who has since resigned, denies the allegations and made a counter-claim that Valenciennes trainer Boro Primorac had approached Marseille to secure a result that would help them avoid relegation.
Marseille are due to play AEK Athens in their opening European Cup tie on September 15.
Cees stands by players
By Graham Hamilton
HOCKEY
IRISH coach Cees Koppelaar is standing by the panel of players who missed out on World Cup qualification for the game against old rivals England next month.
The Dutchman is taking just 15 players to Milton Keynes for the game which is being televised live on BBC Grandstand, the one missing out being Lisnagarvey's Peter Richardson.
That means Newry's Errol Lutton, who got a late call to Poland after Ger Burns had to withdraw through injury, keeps his place, a further chance to establish himself as a regular in the international set-up.
Richardson's Garvey colleague Dan Clarke will win his 50th cap in the game, and will be hoping that the Irish can improve on the 4-1 defeat at the hands of England when they last met in the Centenary Trophy staged in Dublin in June.
The Irish were disappointed at finishing ninth in the Inter-Continental Cup in Poland last month, but now have turned their attention to getting things right in time for the 1995 European championships being hosted in Dublin.
The English too have had recent disappointments, including defeat against the Australians.
Their panel won't be named until after the Junior World Cup which starts in Terrassa, Spain, next month.
IRELAND — I Bateman, R Geddis, P Hollway, C Hade, A Dowd, E Lutton, G Sterritt, J Kirkwood, M Sloan (capt), R Johnson, D Clarke, R Madeley, D McAnulty, R Taylor, A Dunne.
Back Shortfall
THE career of David Loder, who started off last season with just two winners, has really taken off in 1993 and the Newmarket trainer looks set to reach his half-century this month.
Shortfall should add another to the score with a first success in the EBF Filbert Maiden Fillies' Stakes at Leicester tomorrow.
The Last Tycoon filly, out of a half-sister to Royal Gait, acquitted herself well on the Midlands track on her only start last month, gamely chasing home easy winner Ballerina after being switched, finishing two lengths second.
She was well ahead of third-placed Brentwood and further improvement is sure to come.
Artistic Reef, successful at Lingfield last time, could follow up in the Prestwold Conditions Stakes.
Responsible for giving trainer Grant Eden a broken heel after throwing him off on the gallops, Artistic Reef made up for it with a game neck victory over favourite Palacegate Episode.
Plagued with leg trouble this season, the four-year-old is more than capable of winning another small sprint.
In the spring he finished fourth, just one and a half lengths away from Paris House in the Group Three Palace House Stakes at Newmarket.
As autumn descends flat races begin to swell alarmingly, but Tinsashe may be able to show the way home in the Stag Handicap after two fine victories at Folkestone and Ripon.
Willie Jarvis's three-year-old has won his last two races by a total of six and a half lengths and is still well weighted for further success.
The powerful combination of Richard Hannon and Pat Eddery is worth supporting in the Swan Handicap, where Hopeful Bid attempts to supplement a recent victory at Yarmouth.
Hopeful Bid looked as if he would win easily but was taken on by the Clive Brittain-trained Braveboy inside the final furlong.
He did well to hold off the challenge, battling bravely to last home by a short head.
Al Senafi has proved difficult to place this season, having finished in the frame on all his five starts.
However, he has his easiest task to date at Lingfield and can gain a confidence-boosting victory in the Marsh Green Maiden.
By Burnaby
Schwantz now favourite for world 500cc motorcycle championship Champion in horror accident in Italy
RAINEY ‘CRITICAL’
WORLD 500cc motorcycle champion Wayne Rainey is critical in hospital after crashing badly in the Italian Grand Prix at Misano.
‘Wayne is in a critical condition, he is seriously ill,’ said Yamaha-Roberts team physiotherapist Dean Miller from the Cesena hospital where the American is being treated.
Miller said Rainey would clearly not race again this season, which means the world crown will go to another American, Suzuki rider Kevin Schwantz.
Rainey, seeking his fourth straight world title, slid off the Santamonica circuit after leading for the first third of a race run in dry, sunny conditions.
He landed heavily on gravel by the track.
Injuries
The 32-year-old Californian was flown by helicopter to hospital with chest and back injuries and suspected fractures to one or more vertebrae.
Miller said last night: ‘It is not clear whether any vertebrae are broken.
We are in a holding situation for 24-48 hours while more tests are carried out.’
Schwantz, a Texan who has never captured the title, picked up 16 points for third place on Sunday and now leads Rainey by five points with just two races left this season.
He has a 63-point advantage over third-placed Australian Michael Doohan and with just 25 points available for a win cannot now be caught if Rainey does not race again.
The US Grand Prix will be held next Sunday and the season ends in Spain on September 26.
Rainey's Italian team-mate Luca Cadalora won today's event, holding off a late charge by Doohan while Schwantz settled for third after throttling back because of problems with his front tyre.
Schwantz said: ‘I was upset when I saw Rainey come off.
There are still two races to go and anything can happen.’
James Whitham clinched the HEAT Super Cup title at Brands Hatch with two races still to come.
The dominant force in British 750 bike racing in 1993 added the Super Cup series to his British Superbike Championship with two runaway wins on the 2.6 mile Grand Prix track.
Whitham, 26, from Huddersfield, left the opposition well behind on his Yahama, winning the first 36-mile race by almost five seconds and the second by a crushing 10 seconds.
Delighted
‘It's what we've been working for all season,’ said the delighted Whitham, who now has his sights set on the international scene for 1994, either in Superbikes or the 500cc Grand Prix series.
Teammate Rob McElnea is on course to secure second place in the Super Cup points at Mallory Park in two weeks time after fourth and fifth places today.
Scotland's Jim Moodie kept alive his hopes of deposing McElnea when he finished second and fourth, but his British-built Crighton Norton had no answer to the speed of the best Japanese machines.
LEICESTER: 2.15 SHORTFALL (NAP), 2.45 Celestial Dance, 3.15 Hopeful Bid, 3.45 Tinsashe, 4.15 Wellwotdouthink, 4.45 Golden Ball, 5.15 Artistic Reef.
LINGFIELD: 2.00 Asking For Aces, 2.30 Sie Amato, 3.00 Fair Court, 3.30 Confronter, 4.00 Times Zando, 4.30 Al Senafi, 5.00 Pocket Piece.
Stars secrets unveiled
As from today, Teri King will be our new regular star-gazer.
By way of introduction, today we find out more about the former model who is behind the secrets of the stars — and her remarkable success rate in predicting what will be…
IMAGINE correctly predicting the first four horses in the Derby, and then not winning a penny.
Astrologer Teri King remembers the experience ruefully.
‘I used to do horses by astrology,’ she says.
‘We had quite a bit of success.
‘It was very time-consuming — you had to look at the jockey, horse and trainer's charts.
It would take ages, and then someone like Willy Carson would pull out at the last minute.
‘One paper asked me to pick the Derby winner and I picked the first four.
The winner was at 66-1.
But I didn't bet because I don't like going into betting shops.
Satellite
‘There was another time, in the 2,000 Guineas, when I predicted a horse would win.
It came second.
And then there was a steward's inquiry and the winning horse was disqualified.
‘I knew it wouldn't win — there was no aspect in his charts that showed he would.’
Teri (43), has written stars for a number of newspapers, and is the author of Love Sex and Astrology.
She is also preparing individual books of each star sign's future next year.
She has appeared on programmes such as This Morning and Pebble Mill, and has started doing daily stars for satellite breakfast show UK Living.
‘I stopped doing the horse charts after my partner died.
He was the one who would ring up jockeys and find out their time of birth and so on.
After he'd had a heart attack, we got him back to good health.
He was having treatment which cleaned out the veins.
‘He rang me up and said he was feeling lousy and could I look up his chart.
I said to him, look at it this way, everyone has a will and you should make sure you have one made.
He died shortly afterwards.’
Studying
Teri's interest in astrology was first fired as a 16-year-old, when whiling away boring hours in the dressing room as a young model.
Teri was a high fashion catwalk model for 10 years, and spent the time between shows talking to and watching her fellow models.
‘When I was 16 and modelling, I got very interested because I used to see a lot of Geminis and Libras who had a lot in common,’ says Teri.
‘I started reading books on astrology.
Then I started studying it and doing charts for friends.
One day I bumped into Patric Walker in a Fleet Street boozer and he was very helpful.
He said I really ought to go for it.
‘Astrology is a science, and art comes into it when you come to interpret a chart.
You have to know how to read a chart properly.
‘As a child, I wasn't interested in it.
But I was always a good reader of people.
I could always tell who was worth talking to and who wasn't.
Cuttings
‘I'm a true Gemini — I speak quickly and wave my arms around a lot.
I have some Capricorn, which keeps my feet on the ground.
My Capricorn side says slow down, shut up.
‘In 1991, I predicted the result of the General Election — everybody thought that Labour would win.
I also predicted the Princess Diana and Prince Charles scandals, Liz Taylor's marriage, Boris Becker's engagement and Tatum O'Neal and John MacEnroe's split.
‘I've got the cuttings to prove it.
‘At the time, the Yorks were a bouncy young couple, but I predicted that they would split.
I haven't done any world predictions recently, but I have said that Diana and Charles won't divorce — it's just not in Diana's chart.’
The problem with being an astrologer is that everyone is always pestering you to find out what's to happen in the next few days.
Teri has given up going to New Year's Eve parties after she had to lock herself in the kitchen with loads of middle aged ladies hammering on the door.
But she does do them for her family and friends.
She is married to Kenny, her second husband, and has a 20-year-old daughter, sons of 18 and 16 — and three black cats.
‘I do look at my own chart.
If it's bad, being a little rebel, I think oh well, I'll make the best of it.
If it's doom and gloom for a long time, I put it away and forget about it.
‘When my youngest son was born, we clocked him in to the second.
He is very prone to accidents.
I warn him, and he puts a skull and crossbones in his diary on those dates, and is extra careful.
‘One Christmas, when he was about five, I was in bed with flu.
I said to Kenny, my husband, ‘Watch him’.
But he fell asleep, and he stood on a chair, fell off and broke his arm.
I was furious.
Restless
‘There was a time recently when a friend of mine said she was in love and could I look up the man in question's chart and tell her the truth?
His chart showed he had no earth — no practical common sense.
She said she had heaps of common sense and they'd be able to cope.
‘After a month she said she couldn't cope with it — she had so much to do and had to make all the decisions.’
Although astrology takes up most of her time — when she is filming for breakfast television she is picked up at 5am — she likes cooking and reading.
But she doesn't watch much television as she is too restless.
And, when she retires, she will finally get over her hatred of betting shops and indulge her uncanny ability to pick racing winners.
‘I'm going to sit there with my Sporting Life and make lots of money,’ she laughs.
Ruling on Dynamo's appeal now brought forward to Thursday
DINAMO Tbilisi's appeal against their European Cup disqualification will be heard on Thursday — when they finally get around to making one.
The deadline for lodging the appeal is midnight tonight but UEFA have so far heard nothing from the Georgian club.
UEFA discipline spokesman Gordon Savic said today: ‘There has been no official communication from Dinamo Tbilisi regarding an appeal.
‘Of course they still have time and may be using that to prepare their case.’
Despite the brinkmanship it's virtually certain that Tbilisi will go ahead with the appeal — and lodge it before the deadline.
Georgian federation president Nukri Kakilashvili said on Saturday the club would be contesting the allegations that officials bribed the referee and linesmen prior to the first leg game between Tbilisi and Linfield in Georgia nearly three weeks ago.
Mr Kakilashvili said six lawyers would represent the club who had ‘God and the truth on their side.’
Linfield are of course awaiting the outcome; they will play FC Copenhagen in Belfast next Wednesday should a Tbilisi appeal against expulsion for attempted bribery of match officials fail.
Arrangements
Normally the appeals committee, based in Geneva, sits on Saturday but Copenhagen are anxious to sort out travelling arrangements for Belfast and Thursday afternoon is the new time.
Mr Savic said: ‘UEFA would like to get this matter cleared up as quickly as possible, for the benefit of all parties.’
Linfield manager Trevor Anderson is confident that any appeal by Tbilisi will fail — and he's surprised at the leniency of the original sentence.
‘If they're guilty they should be banned indefinitely,’ he said.
Anderson meanwhile is furious at weekend newspaper reports suggesting he had a physical bust-up with Ards manager Paul Malone at Castlereagh Park.
‘I wasn't involved in any such thing and I'd like to make that absolutely clear.
‘I was very angry when I saw my name mentioned in connection with an incident that had absolutely nothing to do with me.’
Malone fined himself for a lack of discipline on Saturday as Ards lost 2-0 to the Blues.
But he could be facing further punishment from the Irish Football Association after making comments about the referee following the game.
AN injury to star striker Gianluca Vialli has rocked UEFA Cup holders Juventus following their disastrous start to the new Italian season.
Juventus lost 2-1 at AS Roma yesterday after missing two penalties, one by Vialli, who suffered a stress fracture of his left foot in the process.
The injury is likely to keep him sidelined for two months.
Charlton's men in ‘expectant’ mood
THE Republic of Ireland expect to have a full strength team out on Wednesday, they expect to beat Lithuania and they expect to be in the USA for next summer's World Cup finals.
To say confidence is high among supporters in Dublin this week would be putting it mildly.
The question is no longer‘will they get to America?’
Now it's ‘how far can they go in the finals?
Could they actually win the World Cup.’
The injury niggles involving Tony Cascarino, Andy Townsend, Packie Bonner and Terry Phelan should be cleared up by 2.45 on Wednesday afternoon when a capacity Lansdowne Road will urge the Republic towards another giant step to Group Three qualification.
After Lithuania, Spain come to Dublin and, the way the group is shaping up, the Spaniards may not be able to settle for a point as they did in Belfast last year.
Finally, the Republic complete their programme against Northern Ireland at Windsor in November.
Republic manager Jack Charltin isn't worried about injuries, but he is concerned about complacency.
‘Lithuania are a side who can cause us problems and we have to be careful.
‘We have to keep the pressure on Spain and Denmark.
Anything less than a win could leave the door open for them.
‘I won't be happy until we have actually qualified.
A win against Lithuania is an absolute must.’
The squad officially reported for duty at noon today before their first training session at the AUL complex, Clonshaugh.
Charlton will name his side after tomorrow's training session.
Lithuania, fifth in the group with seven points from 11 games, are due to arrive in Dublin tomorrow lunchtime, a few hours before the FIFA deadline.
By Lyle Jackson
Quality check for the kitchen
GENERALLY speaking, you get what you pay for in a kitchen.
The quality of the cabinet and its fittings is vital.
If you have seen kitchens where the doors refuse to hang correctly, where shelves cannot be adjusted or where drawers refuse to open the chances are it's because ‘savings’ have been made and lower quality materials have been used.
All of these faults can occur within two years of the kitchen being installed and the cost of mending the damage is often more than it would be to replace all the cabinets — so it's better to check.
Price
Start your examination with the cabinets.
With one or two very expensive exceptions, this will be made of high density particle board (chipboard).
There are several grades of particle board and the higher the density, the higher the quality and the price of the furniture made from it.
Look first at the holes drilled into the side of the cabinets for shelf supports.
Are the edges clean or are there chips where the surface coating has chipped off?
Drawers
The former is an indicator of quality materials and good manufacturing processes.
Next have a good look around the drawers.
Pull the drawer out as far as you can.
Put your hand, palm up, into the drawer and run your finger around the top of the cabinet.
On some brands you will find a top fitted but on most you will find there is a rail that fixes the units to the worktop.
Moisture
Run your finger along the furthest edge of the rail.
If it's rough, the manufacturer has cut corners by not sealing the back edge.
It saves a few pence but it is a weak point that could allow moisture to penetrate.
Now for the drawer itself.
Is it of a one-piece nylon construction that will be easy to clean, solid wood — usually beech — or one of the increasingly common metal sided drawers with a solid base?
All three types are good but try to avoid the cheaper plastic-sided drawers with a thin hardboard base.
Questions
Hand finishing is another indicator that craft qualities are important.
Don't be afraid to ask awkward questions.
A good retailer will relish the chance to show you how good they and their products are.
DUBLIN
Golden oldie rugby bash
A 90-YEAR-OLD three-quarter from Japan is expected to be the oldest player on view in an international Golden Oldies rugby festival in Dublin later this month.
Star search begins for an ‘all-American’ boy
A LITTLE boy with stars in his eyes is being sought by the Lyric Theatre to appear in an Arthur Millar play.
And he must be able to put on an American accent.
The boy, aged between seven and ten years, is wanted to play the part of Bert in All My Sons, which opens on October 7 for a three week run.
Theatre administrator Patricia McBride is calling on expert help to get the boy's drawl exactly right.
Celebrated voice coach Brendan Gunn, who gave film star Mickey Rourke lessons for the film A Prayer For The Dying, is being drafted in.
‘Bert, who in the play is around ten, has a brief but important and dramatic role about a tragedy that befalls an American family,’ said Patricia.
The play will be produced by Roland Jaquarello, former artistic director at the Lyric, who is now a freelance in London.
By Eddie McIlwaine
Heritage tours
THIS year, for the first time, the city has been included in the celebration of European Heritage Day — an annual event held in 20 countries across Europe to celebrate national heritage.
This year's event will be held this Saturday and Sunday and will be marked in Derry by walking tours of the inner city organised by the North West Archaeological and Historical Society.
The tours will begin each day at 2pm from the Tourist Information Office at Bishop Street.
Places can be reserved by contacting (0504) 267284.
Gail's delight at Euro invite
A DERRY schoolgirl is one of only 10 schoolchildren from throughout the UK, selected to attend a debate on European issues in Belgium.
Seventeen year old Gail Muldoon is an ‘A’ level student at St Mary's Secondary School in Creggan, studying History, English and Theatre Studies.
She will attend the Young People's Euro-Debate in Brussels from November 3 to 7.
The initiative, which is organised by the King Baudouin Foundation aims to bring together students aged between 15 and 25 from all over Europe.
Participate
While together they will participate in a varied programme of events and will be given the opportunity to get involved in live debates with European decision makers.
Gail, who is from Moss Park in the Galliagh area of the city, will get to know other UK delegates at a preliminary meeting in London on September 18.
She said, today: ‘I am delighted to have an opportunity to meet my European peers and to participate in the debates and the entire programme.’
The Headmistress at St Mary's, Geraldine Keegan said she was delighted that her school had been selected to provide a delegate for the Brussels event.
She said: ‘Considering that there are many thousands of schools and other organisations from which a delegate could have been chosen, it is certainly a great honour that St Mary's is one of only 10 schools in the UK to be included.’
NIRs lammed over carpark charge
I WISH to add my experiences to the complaints which you have published about the poor service provided by Northern Ireland Railways.
I arrived at Belfast Central Station to collect a passenger from the Dublin train, due to arrive at 17.25, and with parking restrictions around the station, used the NIR car park, expecting a ten-minute wait.
Staff in the information office told me that the train had been delayed until 18.15.
At 18.20, I again checked with the information office, to be told that the train was due soon.
On mentioning that I was not happy to pay for a second hour of parking, for the privilege of waiting for their delayed train, I was told ‘That's no problem.
The car park attendant knows that the Dublin train is delayed, and will not charge you.
Just mention the delay to him.’
The train eventually arrived at 18.25, one hour late.
The passenger whom I picked up informed me that, throughout the journey, no information regarding delays was given to the passengers on the train.
Imagine my disgust when I told the car park attendant of the delays, only to be informed that I must pay for two hours parking, as ‘That is what is on the computer.’
He then called a security guard (who wore no uniform, and looked like the type of character I would want a security guard to protect me from).
Both refused to listen or to call the information office.
They refused to open the gate, and became aggressive, so I was forced to pay for the extra hours parking.
I would have sent my complaint to NIR management, but the obvious lack of concern by NIR staff seems to stem from top management.
Perhaps that is the luxury of being on the pay-roll of a monopoly subsidised by the Government?
I would strongly advise the Government to reconsider providing money to upgrade this service, unless they also upgrade the quality of management and staff, and actually make a serious attempt to run a railway.
EX-NIR CUSTOMER
Belfast 17.
Gerry's champing at the bit to get back on the box
THOUSANDS of Ulster folk spend the best part of Friday night with him…
TV's Gerry Kelly returns next week for the fifth season of his chat and entertainment show, Kelly.
The amiable Downpatrick man will beam into living-rooms every Friday throughout the autumn from September 17.
And UTV's Gerry will be using a satellite dish to do interviews from across the province live on the show.
He said: ‘I'm really looking forward to getting back to the hot-seat for the new series.
Successful
‘The new shows will include many of the successful ingredients of previous series, including the top names in showbusiness and music.
‘But we also aim to include some interesting surprise items and human interest stories, too.’
The show will be broadcast from the £4m studio at Havelock House, specially re-decorated for the new series.
It is capable of seating a 100-plus audience.
Kelly will also have new titles and title music.
By Martin Hill
Gerry Kelly: returning to the screen
Townsend fit ready to lead
SKIPPER Andy Townsend has been passed fit to lead the Republic of Ireland in their World Cup game against Lithuania in Dublin tomorrow.
The 30-year-old midfielder had been troubled by a hamstring injury but will be all right to play.
Townsend, who has only just returned to Premiership action for new club Aston Villa, said: ‘It has been a slight worry but I'm in no pain and after today's training I know I'll definitely play.’
One change
Townsend leads a team which shows only one change from the side that beat Lithuania 1-0 in Vilnius in June and that is only because centre half Paul McGrath is suspended.
Blackburn's Kevin Moran replaces him to win his 68th cap and striker Tony Cascarino is almost certain to be on the substitutes' bench after also testing an injured hamstring this afternoon.
For Moran it is another chapter in his long career as he equals David O'Leary's record of 23 World Cup appearances.
He also joins O'Leary as the Republic's third most-capped player on 68.
Charlton warned: ‘It will be a tough match for us.
That's what we are prepared for because when I saw Lithuania play the Danes a couple of weeks ago they made them work hard for everything they got.
‘Everybody's saying our game against Spain next month is the big one but we've got to win this one first and get the job done.’
Charlton's only worry on the injury front now concerns centre-half Alan Kernaghan who has a slight thigh strain but will start the match.
With McGrath banned and David O'Leary injured there is no familiar centre-half cover and Charlton has pencilled in £3.75 million Manchester United midfielder Roy Keane as an emergency defender if things go wrong.
Republic team: Bonner (Celtic), Irwin (Man Utd), Kernaghan (Middlesbrough), Moran (Blackburn), Phelan (Man City), Houghton (Aston Villa), Townsend (Aston Villa, capt), Keane (Man Utd), Staunton (Aston Villa), Quinn (Man City), Aldridge (Tranmere).
DES Walker has been dropped by Graham Taylor for the first time in 36 games as the England manager fights for World Cup survival against Poland tomorrow.
Manchester United's Gary Pallister is teamed with Tony Adams in the centre of defence as mistake-plagued Walker pays the penalty for an alarming dip in form over the past year.
England team: Seaman, Jones, Pearce, Sharpe, Pallister, Adams, Platt, Gascoigne, Wright, Ferdinand, Ince. the Republic tomorrow.
Speed with safety
ROAD REPORT: Honda Prelude VTEC
THE Prelude VTEC is quite a car.
It has arguably the best-performing four-cylinder engine that you can get and more safety features than any of its rivals.
This is much more than another pretty Japanese coupe for it bristles with tomorrow's technology.
Not only does it go faster but it is also more controllable and better-protected.
At its heart is Honda's latest application of variable valve timing, a system which extracts 185PS from just 2,157cc.
Others need turbos or six-cylinders to produce similar output.
The bald figures of 0-60mph in 7.1 seconds and 140mph are impressive enough.
But they do less than justice to this remarkable donkey.
It revs cleanly to an amazing 7,500rpm with a racy zing.
Each gear seems to go on forever, making for decisive overtaking.
Yet there is remarkable depth, too, with strong pulling power at lower speeds up hills.
Wolf or sheep, take your choice.
If you tread lightly you can achieve nearly 26mpg urban and 41mpg at 56mph.
Efficient use of power does not have to waste fuel.
Its brilliant engine alone makes the VTEC stand out.
But Honda has also applied wizardry to the Prelude's handling with its four-wheel steer.
There is no wheel-wrestling at roundabouts and it can nip into tight parking spots with ease.
And it is less likely to slide on tight bends.
Backed by anti-lock brakes, this makes the Prelude well-geared to keeping out of trouble.
But should the worst happen there are side-impact bars and front air bags to protect the occupants.
Despite all its potency this is a car which always leaves the driver firmly in control.
Around town it feels almost tame, on the open road it can be unleased with confidence that it will not put a foot wrong.
As with most coupes there is not a lot of room in the back, even kids find it tight.
But such is the price of vanity, at least the boot is of reasonable proportions.
As befits a £21,000 morsel, equipment is lavish with air-conditioning, electric windows, mirrors and sunroof, central locking, cruise control and a good sound system.
Men of '58 tribute
THE Derry side that reached the All Ireland final in 1958 will be guests of honour at a banquet in Dublin to be held in conjunction with their county's bid to claim the Sam Maguire Cup for the first time.
The achievement of the men of '58 — they played superbly to reach the final only to lose to Dublin — is still recalled proudly in Derry.
And many of the names are of the household variety — Jim McKeever, Phil Stuart, Hugh Francis Gribben, Sean O'Connell and the rest.
They were players who carved out their own special niche but were denied the ultimate honour.
Now further recognition of their feats is to be paid in style and already arrangements are at an advanced stage.
‘All the players from the side are living and well, thank God,’ reports Derry PRO Bernie Mullan, ‘Hugh Francis Gribben is perhaps the man furthest removed as he now lives in Meath where he is a land steward.’
A few of the players such as Jim McKeever and Phil Stuart reside in Belfast but all are expected to be in Dublin not only to be feted but to cheer on the present day Oak Leaf county heroes.
‘It promises to be an occasion full of nostalgia,’ adds Bernie Mullan, ‘We want to do these men proud.
They set the tone thirty-five years ago and it would be wonderful if our present team could capture ‘Sam’ now.’