

Asthma cases on increase
THE incidence of asthma among adults in Ulster is rising, it was revealed today.
Dr Jane Wilde, director of the Health Promotion Agency, said greater air pollution may be to blame.
She urged health authorities to carry out urgent research into the problem.
A national survey showed there was a similar problem in Britain, particularly among the 46–52 year old age group.
The survey conducted by the Health Promotion Research Trust also found: the proportion of men and women classified as overweight or obese has risen to 53pc and 57pc proportionately.
Ulster people are also getting fatter.
Diets have changed with a modest increase in consumption of cereals and brown bread and a marked fall in the amount of high fat foods and butter eaten.
People here are also adopting a healthier diet.
Like their counterparts in Britain more middle-aged smokers are kicking the habit through fear of illness or current ill-health.
More people are drinking here and on the mainland.
More people are taking part in sports.
Here people accept the importance of regular exercise but it is not clear if they are translating the message into action.
Test drive — the Nissan Sunny A car you'll warm to…
NISSAN might not be the marque that springs to mind when it comes to performance hatchbacks, but look out for the nifty little Sunny SR.
It's one of that new breed of cars — the ‘warm hatchback’.
Put simply, cars like this, the Citroen ZX Furio and others, are a way of giving customers ‘hot hatch’ style performance without the insurance penalties.
And the Nissan Sunny SR is one of the best of the breed.
It's part of a huge array of Sunny models: hatches, saloons, estates, and even a costly GTiR version which is ready for rallying.
The SR, which comes in three-door hatchback form, is a sort of under-stated GTi.
From the outside, it has a few of the GTi dressings like upgraded wheel trims, spoilers at the front and rear and so on.
But, largely, it looks like most other Sunny hatchbacks.
It costs £11, here, which places it well below most so-called fully fledged GTi cars.
It's priced similarly to cars like the Toyota Corolla GXi and Renault's Clio RSi.
Equipment
For that price, as I've said, you get a sporty looking car but, unlike the Clio at , it comes with a fair amount of space, both for passengers inside, where it's particularly roomy, and in the boot.So buyers don't have to make any space sacrifices.
Equipment, as it tends to do on most Nissans, runs to a high standard.
The SR comes complete with power steering, electric windows, mirrors and sunroof, remote control boot release and ‘plip’ central locking with a built-in alarm system; one which takes a bit of getting used to, in fact.
But what of the car's performance capabilities?
In short, they're very impressive.
While the range-topping GTi Sunny uses a 2. litre power unit, the SR employs a 1.
litre 16-valve engine.
Working through a crisp five-speed gearbox, that gives the hatchback a claimed top speed of mph and a 0– mph rating of 11. seconds.
That sprint time might not sound very impressive, but the Sunny performs a lot better in reality, or on the road.
In effect, the car uses its bhp very well indeed.
You don't need to pump up the revs to get it to move swiftly and smoothly up through the gears, and it isn't a noisy performer by any stretch of the imagination.
It's a very good cruiser, too, moving along effortlessly at motorway limit speeds and above.
40.
Stance
The power and its delivery will be ample for all but the most fanatical power freak.
What impresses more about this Nissan is its handling ability.
Unlike some hatchbacks one could mention, this seems to be solidly built with a first-class chassis.
It has a reassuring wide stance on the road.
All of that gives it a very encouraging sure-footedness once you try to throw it around a corner or two, or test it on poor road conditions.
It takes most things in its stride, and it's a very easy car to drive.
The suspension is the same as that used in the Sunny GTi, which makes it firm without being too hard.
On the stopping front, there are no ABS brakes, but the ventilated discs at the front seemed capable enough in my spell with the Nissan.
So what you get with this package is a roomy hatchback with plenty of power on tap, great fun to drive, and better than average handling abilities.
You're not paying above the odds for the car, or the insurance premium for that matter.
And you get Nissan's three-year warranty cover to boot.
A package like that isn't all that easy to come by these days.
Nissan Sunny SR — a leader among ‘warm hatchbacks’.
p/36/01.
Mondeo goes automatic
FORD has expanded the Mondeo range once again by adding turbo diesel and automatic transmission models.
Under the bonnet of the new Mondeo diesels is a 1.
litre turbocharged engine, a revamped version of the Ford diesel unit which has been around for a few years.
Power output has been increased from to
PS thanks to an intercooler system.
The new unit has a claimed top speed of mph and can reach mph in 12. seconds, which sounds like respectable performance.
Economy of miles per gallon is apparently possible, but an average of mpg or so could be realistic.
The diesel engine will be available on most Mondeo models, according to Ford.
Meanwhile, the Mondeo becomes the first Ford to use a new electronically-controlled four-speed automatic transmission system.
The system has been specially developed for front drive cars like the Mondeo.
According to the official blurb, it means more consistent and comfortable shifting with improved performance and fuel economy.
The automatic set-up comes with a choice of ‘Sport’ or ‘Economy’buttons.
Both the turbo diesels and automatic Mondeos should be available in dealerships shortly.
Ford Mondeo — now with turbo diesel engines and automatic transmission available.
p/36/ 02.
Show apartments on view
THIS Sunday sees the opening of two show apartments at ‘Craigtara’, My Lady's Mile in Holywood.
An exclusive development of superbly appointed apartments in one of Holywood's leading addresses, the location is ideal, combining quietness and convenience.
These attractive, period-style apartments have been sympathetically designed to complement the existing residences on ‘The Mile’, with careful consideration given to layout and architectural detail.
Each residence enjoys high insulation qualities in addition to PVC double glazing.
Gas fired central heating is installed as well and you can also enjoy the traditional benefit of an open fire.
Each apartment has been provided with a private entrance and parking, with visitor parking also included in the scheme, while the creation of a management company will provide an invaluable service in day to day maintenance.
The accommodation itself is of generous proportions with an imposing lounge and dining area, master bedroom with shower room ensuite, guest bedroom, kitchen and bathroom.
Craigtara will be open this Sunday between 2.30pm and 4pm where a Halifax Property Services representative will show you round both a ground and first floor show apartment.
Diesel gets the BMW treatment Test drive — BMW
IT took a long time for BMW to overcome what was probably a touch of snobbery about diesel cars and come up with some of its own.
The company might not have liked the idea very much, but rising sales figures for diesels made it just about inevitable.
And, in true BMW style, when the engineers did it, they did it rather well!
The Germans have added both and
Series diesels to their range.
They're already selling well, and there's no doubt they raise the benchmark when it comes to the refinement of diesel engines.
I've been sampling the turbo diesel version of the
Series saloon — the
TD.
There are a lot of cheaper diesels around, so the BMW ranks as expensive at a price tag of £19,000.
But it does have one big thing going for it.
For the many who maybe haven't considered a diesel before now, here's your chance to buy a car which doesn't behave like one either, except in terms of the all-important fuel economy.
From the outside, it looks like any other
Series saloon, with only a discreet TD badge at the back to give the game away.
Indoors, obviously, things are just the same as any other BMW.
The newer
Series body offers plenty of space and comfort and the usual high level of equipment.
Equipment
My
TD came with electric windows, mirrors and sunroof, a trip computer, central locking and a good Blaupunkt stereo.
Mind you, you have to pay for your sound equipment over and above the list price.
On the comfort front, multi-adjustable front seats and light power steering make it an easy and pleasant car to drive.
But then, we all know about the virtues of BMW motoring.
Most potential buyers, or devotees of BMW petrol cars, will be curious about how this piece of German engineering adapts to diesel power.
The first thing to say is that BMW hasn't left anything to chance.
It's gone for a big six-cylinder, turbocharged 2. litre diesel engine under the bonnet.
It turns out a healthy bhp (or bhp with an intercooler in the up-market TDS models).
The blend of executive car and diesel engine works extremely well.
The six-cylinder lay-out, of course, makes for smooth engine performance and that, combined with plenty of sound-proofing measures, means that the BMW diesel is a lot quieter and a lot more refined than any other diesel I've driven — without exception.
It's not an exaggeration to say that, out on the open road, it's impossible to detect the difference between this and a or petrol-powered BMW.
The performance through the five-speed manual gearbox is impressive, and higher speed cruising is effortless and remarkably quiet.
But, of course, there are still little giveaway signs.
Diesel technology may have come a long way, but even a BMW lets out a puff or two of blue smoke when starting from cold, and takes a minute or two to settle into its stride.
Starting, though, isn't a problem thanks to the good old glow-plug system.
The only other downside I noticed was that the car tended to be a little ponderous in lower gears around town.
You have to get out of first and second gear quickly to get the best out of the 325.
Below that, it sounds more like a traditional diesel, and it does lack response at times, but it only takes a bit of getting used to.
The real benefit, of course, comes at the filling station.
This isn't an expensive BMW to run.
Fill it up with diesel, and it should reward you with a return of comfortably over miles per gallon on average.
At best, mpg is possible, according to BMW's own promotional figures.
And that's a whole lot better than you could expect from any petrol-engined BMW in this bracket.
It's clearly one of the very best diesel cars around.
It may not be cheap, but it offers the best of diesel driving for those, perhaps, who might not have considered making the switch before.
And, according to BMW dealers, there are plenty of existing owners who are already keen to make the move.
Economy with refinement — the turbo diesel BMW
Series.
p/35/
'94: the year of living luxuriously
WITHOUT going as far as opponents Ford, Vauxhall has said that airbags will be available as standard or as an option on most of its cars for 1994.
Airbags are already standard on every Cavalier and Calibra, while half of the Astra range has one fitted.
The same airbag system will be offered as an option from now on in new Corsas.
Meanwhile, as part of the model year package of improvements, a new bhp 16-valve 1.
litre engine becomes available for the Vauxhall Astra.
On the Vauxhall Cavalier range, there's a new 1.
litre economy engine, similar to the Corsa's Eco unit, which produces close to miles per gallon at a constant mph.
Most of Vauxhall's changes come on the Cavalier and Calibra ranges.
Apart from the new Cavalier engine, there's a brand new mph V version of the sporty Calibra, available in manual or automatic, and using the Merseyside-built V
Vauxhall engine, fitted to considerable acclaim in the Cavalier already.
The same engine is fitted to a new version of the Cavalier Diplomat.
Joining the V power unit are refinements like air conditioning and leather trim indoors.
A number of former special editions, the Diamond and Cesaro, become permanent models on the Astra range, but most of the other changes are relatively minor.
The new 1.8i engine is worth a second glance, it seems.
Designed to rival warm hatch cars like the Citroen ZX Furio or Nissan Sunny SR, the unit is capable of a 8. second 0–60 mph sprint.
It comes fitted to four Astra models — the CD, Cesaro, Diamond and GSi.
Diamond, by the way, is a luxury specification Astra, while the Cesaro has a sporty emphasis.
Another Astra change is the upgrading of specification on the 1.
litre turbo diesel, which gains refinements like electric windows to bring it up to CD level, mirroring a demand for refinement from diesel buyers these days.
The entry level Calibra (with eight-valve 2.0i engine) receives a dressing up, with alloy wheels, leather steering wheel and a few other touches added.
Vauxhall Astra Diamond — one of a package of improvements from Vauxhall.
Revamp for Vento as VW launches range
TEN new models are due to be introduced by Volkswagen for the model year.
Eight new Golf and two Vento versions will be added to what's already a comprehensive range.
With price in mind, three Golf L models join the line-up at less than £10,000.
They comprise a 1.
litre in three or five-door format and a new 1.9L Diesel.
Further up the range come Golf CL and GL diesel models, using the same Umwelt engine producing bhp.
The forthcoming launch of the bhp Golf TDi will complete the wide-ranging diesel line-up.
The Golf Driver also returns in the new Golf shape.
It uses the familiar 1.
litre petrol engine, and comes in three or five-door versions.
Prices for the sporty looking Driver for will start at £12, for the three-door.
The most glamorous newcomer to the Golf range is the revamped GTi 16-valve with a new bhp engine under the bonnet.
Equipment now includes anti-lock brakes with traction control, central locking and an RDS sound system, while prices run from £16, for the three-door.
The VW Vento range gets a new entry level model, the Vento L with a 1.
litre engine and costing £11,198.
Equipment looks good with central locking and power steering included.
Also new for is a range-topping automatic version of the Vento VR priced at a competitive £20,
— not bad for a V 2. litre engine.
All Vento models get a colour-coded grille and re-designed wheels.
Also on specification, all
Golfs will come with a dust and pollen filter fitted as standard, along with a Sony radio cassette with a detachable security front panel.
Top hot hatch — the version of the VW Golf GTi 16V. p/35/ ends
It looks pretty good without any extra frills, but the Honda Prelude is now available with a range of sporting accessories.
Honda's own
HS accessories can be added to either version of the Prelude — the 2. litre, 2. litre or 2. litre VTEC.
Lowered suspension kits give a more aggressive look and better sporting handling, while alloy wheels are also on sale to go along with the suspension system.
Also available is a body styling kit, comprising a front spoiler, rear apron and side skirts together with a rear boot spoiler.