

Alternative Walter
DOES BBC Radio Ulster presenter Walter Love have an identity problem?
At first sight it would seem he has, for here he is seen wearing a UTV hat, sporting a BBC badge, and standing beside Belfast Community Radio's 96.7 sign.
But it was all in a good cause.
The presenter of Love 40 was among several other celebrities who took part in the BCR ‘Jail and Bail’ roadshow for charity in CastleCourt.
And it was all very well worthwhile, for the event raised £12,000 for the NSPCC — then it was back to his proper corporate identity for Walter.
Walter Love: All in a good cause
Top Irish writers set for literary festival in Derry
SOME of the biggest names in Irish literature are to gather in Londonderry next month for a five-day ‘Languages of Ireland’ literary festival.
Organised as part of Octoberfest 93 — a month-long arts festival — those attending will include controversial novelist Edna O'Brien, Roddy Doyle of ‘The Commitments’ and ‘The Snapper’fame, travel writer Nik Cohn and Bernard MacLaverty.
Around 30 writers will be in Derry during the five days and will be involved in a series of readings, workshops and discussions.
‘Languages of Ireland’, which runs from October 12 to 16, takes as its theme the centenary of the founding of the Gaelic league and is a celebration of the rich diversity that currently exist in Irish writing.
Discussion
Another highlight of the festival is the panel discussion ‘The Language of Contemporary Journalism’.
Chaired by Barry Cowan of the BBC, the panel will include Nell McCafferty and Owen Bowcott (The Guardian).
They will examine the social importance of journalists' work over the last 25 years, particularly with regards to the Troubles.
The ultimate revenge of the gentle sex
DIRECTOR Michael Winner talks exclusively about his new movie, ‘Dirty Weekend’, in a set location report in Film '93 with Barry Norman (BBC1 11.35pm).
‘The film shows a woman throwing all inhibitions away, taking the law into her own hands and enjoying it, having fun,’ says Winner.
Starring Lia Williams, it tells the story of a woman living alone, continually pestered by ‘Peeping Toms’ and obscene 'phone calls.
Eventually, she decided to seek revenge.
Barry also reviews the latest releases, including the film of Tina Turner's life story, ‘What's Love Got To Do With It’, while Peter Greenaway's ‘The Baby of Macon’ examines the exploitation by the Church of a miracle child.
Frank views
OF THE world's leading entertainers, one name stands above all the rest — the incomparable Frank Sinatra.
The legendary performer's past and present are unmasked to reveal the politicians, mobsters and movie star who parade through his life.
His fortunes and foes, loves and losses are uncovered as the compelling mini-series, Sinatra (UTV 10.40pm) continues.
Played by Philip Casnoff, Sinatra emerges as a powerful yet controversial figure.
As a youngster, he sings for pennies in his parents' saloon.
Determined to let nothing stand in the way of his lifelong dream to follow in Bing Crosby's footsteps, he breaks free from his domineering mother's (Olympia Dukakis) grasp, and the legend begins.
Shopping success
IN 1930 at the height of the great depression, in an attempt to cheer up the citizens and stimulate trade and industry, many towns throughout Northern Ireland organised shopping weeks which took the form of festivals.
Lisburn Shopping Week 1930 (BBC1 10.35pm) a short, originally silent, film was made for the local picture house and has been preserved by the Lisburn Museum…
For this showing two popular tunes of that year and narration by Michael Baguley bring back to life an era of wonderful charabancs, crammed with cheerful dark-eyed young ladies in cloche hats and young men in large caps.
State subsidy
PANORAMA (BBC1 9.30pm) asks: Should the taxpayer foot the bill for the thousands of single mothers who live alone but have several babies and expect the State to pay for them?
Kitting out THE controversial subjects of the issue of replica kits and stewarding at soccer matches are examined in Standing Room Only (BBC2 6.55pm).
Sales of replica kits are up a staggering 30pc this season as the designers hit the button in creative styles.
Whitney fan hiding
WHITNEY Houston fan Helen Stephens was in hiding today after being released from jail.
Helen, who was sent to prison for annoying neighbours by playing the star's biggest hit at full volume, was freed yesterday.
The 20-year-old was collected from the prison in Durham by relatives who drove her to a secret destination.
She had been jailed for seven days.
The family's home in Stockton appeared deserted with all the curtains drawn and no-one was answering the door.
ARIES Mar 21-Apr 20
If you have been holding off before making changes, now is the time for making some new beginnings.
If there are any changes you wish to make concerning a relative, go right ahead and make them.
Don't be too extravagant this evening.
TAURUS Apr 21-May 20
You could become impatient and aggressive this morning so be careful when handling work colleagues or friends.
A falling out now would not be a good idea.
You should be able to influence others this afternoon with your ideas.
GEMINI May 21-Jun 21
Financial  matters may have been put on hold for some time past, now is the time to get things moving again.
Be prepared to take advantage of offers that come your way, especially if they concern a friend or relative.
CANCER Jun 22-Jul 23
You usually like to keep things at the status quo, but today you could be willing to make a few changes.
It is hard to imagine you getting through the day without upsetting someone close to you, possibly a lover or a relative.
LEO Jul 24-Aug 23
Look forward to your future with optimism, even though you may have been feeling held back for some time.
You are on the right track so follow your nose.
Friends could need some help and advice from you this evening.
VIRGO Aug 24-Sep 23
Although you have been unwilling to do anything about your feelings of dissatisfaction, today is the time for less talk and more action on your part.
Stop whingeing and get on with your life, there is so much to look forward to.
LIBRA Sep 24-Oct 22
There is no longer any need for you to stick your head in the sand regarding financial matters, come out and take a look at the world around you.
You could be opening up the way to new prosperity.
Romance is likely this evening for the fancy free.
SCORPIO Oct 23-Nov 22
You have increased confidence and flexibility today, so now is the time to enter into discussions with the more difficult members of your family or work colleagues.
Tread carefully with romantic partners this evening, they are feeling upset.
SAGITTARIUS Nov 23-Dec 22
You are normally an all action sort, but today you are not at your explosive best.
You could be spending a lot of time in serious thought, much to the consternation of those around you.
Set their minds at rest with a party this evening.
CAPRICORN Dec 23-Jan 20
The emphasis appears to be on friendship and contacts today, so make the most of it.
If you need favours granted in any area, seek out the right people for the job.
Try to cooperate with lovers and partners this evening.
AQUARIUS Jan 21-Feb 19
An ambitious day this, one where you will want to get as much as you can from the day, and from those around you.
Try not to push other people too hard, you won't get the best from them that way.
Be a little more persuasive.
PISCES Feb 20-Mar 20
This is a time for using your creativity to its fullest extent.
You should be able to solve some problems that have been bothering you for some time, especially those connected with your work.
Changes taking place around you will eventually work out to y our benefit.
Your starline numbers 766, Gemini 0891 332 767, Cancer 0891 332 768, Leo 0891 332 769, Virgo 0891 332 770, Libra 0891 332 771, Scorpio 0891 332 772, Sagittarius 0891 332, 773, Capricorn 0891 332 774, Aquarius 0891 332 775, Pisces 0891 332 776.
FILM actress Roma Downey, who played Jackie Kennedy in a television mini-series, today bought a site in Donegal where she plans to build a dream cottage.
‘I want my own little piece of heaven at home in Ireland,’ said Miss Downey.
The two-acre site is at Greencastle — just down the road from where John Hume has a house.
It is less than an hour's drive across the border from where Roma was born in Londonderry.
Miss Downey, who now lives in a Los Angeles suburb, has already talked to architects and plans to start building in the spring.
‘I get homesick all the time,’ she said after a short visit home to see her brother Lawrence, a joiner in Derry.
‘So my own cottage on the Donegal shore where I can slip away when I'm not filming is the answer.
‘I'll even have my own private stretch of beach.’
Miss Downey is being tipped to star in a Hollywood remake of The Quiet Man, in the role made famous by Maureen O'Hara.
UTV plans to screen a documentary Roma — a Leading Lady on September 27 on her lifestyle.
It will include an interview with film star Stewart Granger with whom Roma once appeared in a play on Broadway.
It was filmed just before he died.
Roma Downey: Tipped for Quiet Man remake By Eddie McIlwaine
Big noise made at QUB
TEENAGERS looking over Queen's University today found that research there helped put a ferocious roar into Steven Spielberg's Jurassic Park dinosaurs.
It resulted in the ear-splitting sounds being contained on two compact discs, with the soundtrack and film synchronised by a complex timecode system.
The technique was developed by Stephen Smyth, now managing director of Belfast-based Audio Processing Technology, while a researcher at Queens.
Later, it was taken up by the communications industry and developed into worldwide markets.
Future
The link with the scary world of Spielberg was revealed to potential future students who visited the first of the university's two open days.
Also in their Focus On Queens brochure, which chronicles achievements from the campus, is high-flyer graduate Anne-Marie Ward of Belfast.
She became a pilot and now flies jumbo jets between Bali, Hawaii and Los Angeles.
Fresh start: The new intake at Queens University take a look around the Great Hall during a special Open Day
Taking over
TEEN sensation Take That are 8–1 favourites to be number one in the Christmas pop charts.
Second favourite is a duet by Elton John and Kiki Dee — and hard-pressed pop star Michael Jackson is fourth at 16–1.
Pensioner Joan
Britain's most glamorous pensioner actress Joan Collins went out to dinner last night — without the aid of a bus pass.
Joan Collins (60) stepped from a gleaming limousine for a literary dinner at west London's swish Berkeley Hotel looking every inch the Hollywood star.
The former Dynasty star Joan jetted in from the south of France where she is working on her latest book, My Secrets, in which she discloses the health and beauty tips which keep her looking so young.
Standing out
COMICS Ben Elton and Lenny Henry — once seen as alternative, now mainstream stalwarts — are taking to the road next month in a series of solo stand-up dates.
Henry, married to funny girl Dawn French, starts his tour on October 15 in Manchester and takes in 27 other dates.
Elton, soon to be seen starring in the BBC adaptation of his novel Stark, has lined up an even more punishing schedule with 36 gigs kicking off in Worthing on October 11.
Don's return
AMERICAN Pie star Don McLean arrives in Britain next month for a 20-date tour including a concert at London's Royal Festival Hall.
McLean, hailed as America's ‘poet laureate’, kicks off in Birmingham on October 25.
Recently he played an outdoor show for 6,000 bikers in America and when he struck the opening chords of Vincent they turned tearful and sang along.
Amis and wife part
NOVELIST Martin Amis, 44-year-old son of writer Kingsley Amis, has parted from his wealthy American wife Antonia Phillips after ten years of marriage, today's Daily Mail reported.
Rival families
LES Dennis returns with the nation's favourite family game show with more families from around the country becoming friendly rivals as they battle to win Family Fortunes (UTV, 7pm).
Over one million pounds has been given away since the series began and audience figures last year topped 14 million.
Les Dennis has been presenting ITV's top game show for seven years and was just 14 years old when he started out on a career in show business.
Picture this
ARMAGH'S first photographic competition organised by the city's arts committee attracted 170 entries from photographers across the province.
Michael Maguire of Craigavon took first prize in the black and white section.
K D Murray of Dromore came second.
James Finnegan of Armagh took the top award in the colour section and Henry Irwin, also of Armagh, took second prize.
The special award went to K D Murray with his picture ‘Ecclesiastical Fog’.
WHAT'S On in the North West tonight.
Rocking Chair Bar — The Knights.
Longfield Inn, Eglinton — Sing-a-long in lounge.
Strand Tavern — Impact downstairs, free disco upstairs.
Doherty's Bar and Legends — Table Quiz and Paul's Music Party.
The Dungloe Bar — The McCloskey Brothers (from Glasgow).
Waterloo Bar and Nightclub — Music by Splitz and Play your Cards Right with Martin.
Abercorn Bar — The Grandpa Jones Country and Western Show, Star Attraction, Joe McNamee (Steel Guitar), music by The Gamblers.
Sperrinview, Feeny — Seamus Moore, The Bamboo Man.
Strabane: The Bentley Nightclub, Buttery Tavern — Disco.
Donegal: Nero's Nightclub, Letterkenny — Disco Mania.
Cinema's: Made in America (12) in Orchard Cinema One at 7 and 9pm.
The Assassin (18) in Orchard Cinema Two at 9pm.
In the Line of Fire (15) in Letterkenny Screen One at 8pm.
Sliver (18) in Letterkenny Screen Two at 8pm.
Made in America (15) in Letterkenny Screen Three at 8pm.
Beach Cinema, Moville — Dennis (PG).
Items for the daily What's On column are inserted free of charge and can be phoned through to Ken on (0504) 41131, fax (0504) 311273 or left at the offices of the Belfast Telegraph, 37 Glendermott Road, Waterside, up to 5pm on the day before publication.
Curtain up in a grand old Belfast tradition
THE show will go on again at Belfast's Grand Opera House before Christmas, as it approaches its centenary.
A new era begins for the bomb-damaged Ulster landmark when the curtain goes up on Jack and the Beanstalk in December, starring Jimmy Cricket and May McFetridge.
There wouldn't have been an Opera House at all if it hadn't been for Joseph F Warden, the actor manager who settled in Belfast in 1864 with his actress wife Jenny Bellair.
He brought with him from England a legendary reputation as an actor manager and his dream was to build the most modern theatre ever seen in Belfast.
The first performance staged was a production of the pantomime Bluebeard on December 23 1895.
The Opera House specialised in drama for nine years — and then went downmarket.
In a bid to bring in larger audiences its name was changed to the Palace of Varieties and it went over to non-stop vaudeville and variety for three years.
Programme
One yellowed programme of the Palace of Varieties era still in existence, will be framed and have pride of place in the foyer, if Michael Barnes has his way.
Will Fyffe, Wee Georgie Wood and Mai Bacon appeared at annual pantomimes before the Second World War and the Carl Rosa Opera and stars like Sybil Thorndike, Harry Lauder and the Pavlova Ballet played there.
During the war the Savoy Players were the resident drama group, and were at the theatre for the duration of the black-out.
In 1944, the Players got a three-week holiday when Irving Berlin brought an all-soldier musical, This Is The Army, to town.
And when the lights went on again in Belfast in 1945 General Eisenhower, later President, was a guest in the Royal Box.
Lean times
The Opera House has had other lean times.
In the Sixties it was converted into a cinema by Rank Odeon, because audiences for drama and good music were drifting away.
But the Arts Council stepped in to buy the place in 1976 and re-opened it as a traditional theatre with Frank Carson in pantomime in December 1980.
It was the target of an IRA bomb in December 1991, just before the pantomime and was reopened yet again the following spring.
Now the good times are set to roll again.
The next big event will be the centenary in 1995.
But Michael Barnes is keeping his plans for that celebration time secret — the most important thing right now is getting the Opera House all lit up again for Jack and the Beanstalk.
Singers appeal
Calling all budding singers in the North West.
New voices are required to join the chorus for the annual Two Cathedral's Festival taking place in mid-October.
This year's production is Elgar's ‘The Dream of Gerontius,’ featuring world renowned soloists and the Ulster Orchestra under Philip Ledger.
The next rehearsal is tonight in the Foyle Arts Centre, Lawrence Hill at 7.30pm and anyone who would like to get involved, is invited to attend.
Further information is available from the administrator at (0504) 266657.
Growing up with Joseph
THE cigar-puffing media boss, Michael Grade, was in town recently to promote Channel Four's new season of schools' programmes.
And during his flying visit to Belfast, Mr Grade took time out to chew the fat about the old days.
He has fond memories of Irish tenor Joseph Locke, the subject of the film Hear My Song which will be screened on Channel Four this Autumn.
‘I'm delighted that the channel was involved with this film.
It brings back a lot of memories for me.
I grew up around Joseph Locke.
‘My father, Leslie, was his agent and I remember my father screaming down the phone at Joseph, usually about money!
It was lovely to meet him again when the film was made.’
Michael also recalled an encounter with the late but little lamented media magnate, Robert Maxwell.
A few years ago, Michael was asked by the BBC to take part in a series which featured famous people returning to their first jobs.
For Mr Grade, this meant a return to the sports desk at the Daily Mirror where he started his career as a trainee football writer in 1960, aged 17.
‘They sent me out to do a match report and while I was sitting at a desk typing it up, Captain Bob appeared in the office, attracted by the presence of television cameras.
‘He strode up to me, clamped a heavy hand on my shoulder and boomed: ‘Michael, welcome back to the Daily Mirror.’
Quick as a flash, Michael replied: ‘Bob, I'm glad to see you, too.
I need you to sign my expenses.’
Maxwell's broad grin was instantly replaced with a dark scowl as he barked: ‘Things have changed around here since your days!’
Michael Grade: Encounter with Maxwell.
Best sellers
PAPERBACK
1
The Bridges of Madison County by Robert James Waller (Mandarin, £3.99).
2
The Firm by John Grisham (Arrow, £4.99).
3
The Secret History by Donna Tartt (Penguin, £5.99).
4
The Queen and I by Sue Townsend (Mandarin, £4.99).
5
Wild Swans by June Chang (Flamingo, £7.99).
6
The Men and the Girls by Joanna Trollope (Black Swan, £5.99).
7
Fever Pitch by Nick Hornby (Gollancz, £4.99).
8
An Evil Cradling by Brian Keenan (Vintage, £6.99).
9
The Master by Brian McMahon (Poolbeg, £5.99).
10
The Porcupine by Julian Barnes (Picador, £4.99).
HARDBACK
1
Without Remorse by Tom Clancy (Harper Collins, £15.99).
2
Complicity by Iain Banks (Little Brown, £15.99).
3
The Marriage of Cadmus and Harmony by Roberto Calasso,(Jonathon Cape, £19.99).
4
The Shining Ones by David Eddings (Harper Collins, £14.99).
5
The House of Doctor Dee by Peter Ackroyd (Hamish Hamilton, £14.99).
6
Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha by Roddy Doyle (Secker and Warburg, £9.99).
7
Adrian Mole: The Wilderness Years by Sue Townsend (Methuen, £8.99).
8
Some Other Rainbow by John McCarthy/ Jill Morrell (Bantam, £14.99).
9
Storm From The East by Robert Marshall (BBC, £17.99).
10
Codebreakers: Inside Story of Bletchley Park by Hansley and Stripp (Oxford University Press, £17.95).
Hack this for a chiller
GRIT your teeth and bolt the door — the latest novel from Iain Banks is about to hit the bookshops.
Banks — in Belfast last week to give a reading from ‘Complicity’(Little Brown, £15.99)— has once again struck gold with a psychological thriller that draws the reader in from the first grisly murder on page one.
The story centres on the world of Cameron Colley, a hack from the P J O'Rourke school of journalism, who fills in time between big stories with a sniff of this, a swig of that, a bit of the other…
As he follows up a security leak about a number of suspicious deaths in the nuclear industry, around him a more macabre series of murders are taking place.
Cameron plays with the big boys, but underneath his brash exterior there lurks a little boy, haunted by an event in his childhood.
Between the sheets with his friend's wife, or desperately trying to beat his latest computer game, Cameron is horrified to realise he — cool Colley — is suspect number one in the hunt for a serial killer.
‘They can't really think I'm a murderer, can they?
I'm a journalist; cynical and hard-bitten — but I'm not a…murderer, for Christ's sake.’
I read it at one sitting, and it scared me stupid.
Great stuff.
Rare sighting of a famed knight star
There's nothing quite like a good Guinness — as Sir Alec is about to prove in the TV drama A Foreign Field
SIR Alec Guinness is probably the world's best known actor, yet he claims to be the only one who can walk down a street unrecognised.
Yet despite his fame, despite the feeling that he is always in the public eye, he is making only his third TV appearance in a decade in A Foreign Field (Sunday, BBC1, 9.05pm).
The screenplay for this film was written specially for Sir Alec by Roy Clarke, best known for his comedy series, Last of the Summer Wine and Keeping up Appearances.
Nostalgic
It brings together a remarkable cast including Lauren Bacall, Jeanne Moreau, Leo McKern (Rumpole of the Bailey), and Geraldine Chaplin, daughter of Charlie, and is a nostalgic comedy about a group of British and American war veterans returning to the scene of the Normandy landings in World War II.
The two Britishers, Cyril (McKern) and Amos (Alec Guinness) are making a pilgrimage to the battlefields that scarred their lives, and meet up with a group of Americans: D-Day veteran Waldo (John Randolph), his daughter Beverley (Geraldine Chaplin) and an enigmatic widow Lisa (Lauren Bacall).
Initial suspicion and mistrust turn to friendship as events draw the group together.
Memories, mingled with joy and sadness, come flooding back when they visit Angelique (Jeanne Moreau) the former lover of both Cyril and Waldo, and the graves of those friends they lost half a century before.
Surprisingly, Sir Alec has only five words of dialogue in the entire 90-minute film, though he appears in almost every scene.
Amos, the part he plays, has been left with the intelligence of an eight-year-old by his war injuries.
Handbag
Life with Maggie Thatcher was not all sweetness and light, as will be revealed by Kenneth Baker in Maggie's Minister (Saturday, BBC 2, 6.50pm).
Among the revelations will be of the time Cecil Parkinson swore at her in a Cabinet meeting, Kenneth Clarke telling how she used her femininity as a weapon in meetings, and Norman Tebbit and Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten talking about the horrors concealed in that famous handbag.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer, Kenneth Clarke tells the programme how she once asked: ‘Why do I have to do everything in this Government?’ and no-one had the nerve to give her the obvious answer — she didn't have to do everything.
Malcolm Rifkind, the Defence Secretary, recalls the time she said to him, ‘I haven't much time today, only enough time to explode and have my way.’
Legendary
The life of one of the world's leading, and most intriguing, entertainers, the legendary Frank Sinatra, is chronicled in a biographical drama Sinatra (Sunday, ITV; 8.15pm).
Spanning 50 years of his life, Sinatra begins with the frustrations of his early years in the 1920s and 30s, when he was told he had no talent and would never make it as a professional singer.
Phillip Casnoff plays Sinatra.
Poignant return: Jeanne Moreau, Alec Guinness, John Randolph, Leo McKern and Lauren Bacall in the nostalgic BBC1 comedy, A Foreign Field By Norman Jenkinson
‘Land of the Roe’ looks at Limavady
A NEW book outlining the social and economic history of the Limavady area is to be published later this month.
The book, entitled ‘The Land of the Roe’, has been written by local school teacher Mr Samuel Mitchell and has been produced in association with Limavady Borough Council mainly as a resource for schools and colleges in the council area.
The whole of the present Limavady District is considered in the broad sweep of topics examined, including introductory chapters on geology, landscape and administrative divisions.
Particular attention is given to the history of settlement and development of the area, set against the background of events which shaped Ireland as a whole.
Distinctive features of ‘The Land of the Roe’ include the 24 maps specially drawn by the author for this publication; the use of primary data from the 1831 Census of Population to complement the detailed social and economic history derived from the Ordnance Memoirs of Ireland 1831–35; and the inclusion in the Appendix of all of the original and processed data on which the population maps are based.
The book will be published on September 22 and will be available from local bookshops, newsagents and the Dogleap Countryside Centre in the Roe Valley Country Park, price £3.50.
A festival of plays
A MAJOR dance and drama festival comes to Londonderry next week.
Six plays will be performed by Irish companies during the five day Armada Festival.
It claims to be the only touring theatre festival.
The Playhouse, in Derry, is being used as the main stage for the performances each night.
Community venues will also host the plays but final details have still to be confirmed.
The week long festival begins on September 13 and will be performed simultaneously at venues in Dublin and Belfast.
The companies will move to different cities and venues during the five day extravaganza.
Three of the six theatre companies selected to take part in this year's festival come from Northern Ireland.
Coleraine's Decidedly Average Theatre Company is putting on a devised comedy called ‘All Wired Up’.
The Scarecrow Theatre Company from Belfast is performing the Paul McVeigh play ‘The Man from the North.’
It explores the relationship between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.
It deals with the usual problems of politics, violence and vengeance.
Their production was the only professional Irish theatre at this year's Edinburgh Fringe Festival.
And the third Northern Irish company is also from Belfast.
The Hoi Polloi Community Dance Company will perform two dance pieces to music written by one of the company.
The Armada Festival, which also visited Derry last year, promotes contact between different theatre companies.
Liffey theme
MORE than 30 works by world-renowned Irish artist Louis Le Brocquy have gone on show at The Bell Gallery, Belfast.
All in watercolour, they illustrate a specific theme, ‘the Liffey from source to sea.’
Dublin-born Le Brocquy, who is 77 this autumn now lives in the south if France.
The exhibition, at 13 Adelaide Park will run from 9am to 6pm each day until September 22.
Opera House champion bet
OPERA House who is one of the favourites for the Prix de L'Arc de Triomphe at Longchamp at the beginning of next month should stay on course for a Paris success by winning the Guinness Irish Champion Stakes at Leopardstown tomorrow.
The race has cut up badly with virtually no other opposition from England although the Irish team is a strong one, but Opera House, who is trained by Michael Stoute looks to have the credentials to take this one in style and give a rejuvenated Michael Roberts another big race success.
It was only yesterday that Stoute finally decided to send Opera House to Leopardstown instead of Goodwood in the hope that the opposition would break up enough for Opera House not to have a hard race before Paris.
Winner of the Eclipse Stakes when ridden by Michael Kinane and the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes, Opera House is heading for the ‘Horse of the Year’ award and although the going may be softer than he would like tomorrow he still looks the obvious choice.
Muhtarram whom reports state has never looked better represents John Gosden and will be ridden by Willie Carson.
Muhtarram is also on a ‘high’ and would appear to be a big danger to Opera House although Dermot Weld reports that Market Booster who also goes for the Arc ‘could not be in better form.’
Market Booster who won her last outing when taking the Bayerisches Zuchtrennen at Munich at the beginning of August in soft ground will be ridden by big race specialist Kinane and it will be no surprise if she were to win.
However, the form points to Opera House.
Opera House, Peace Role.
CINEMAS
Jurassic Park
THE dinosaur movie to cap them all.
Sam Neill, Laura Dern, Richard Attenborough (PG)— Cineworld, Curzon, MGM, Yorkgate.
In The Line Of Fire
A MAVERICK secret service agent discovers an assassin is tracking the US President.
Clint Eastwood, John Malkovich (15)— Cineworld, Curzon, MGM, Strand, Yorkgate.
Sliver
A YOUNG divorcee faces a date with murder when she moves into a high-rise flat from which a lookalike blonde fell to her death.
Sharon Stone (18)— Cineworld, Curzon, MGM, Strand, Yorkgate.
Much Ado About Nothing
KENNETH Branagh in his own lusty adaptation of the bard's comedy.
With Emma Thompson (PG)— MGM.
Made In America
A BEAUTIFUL young black woman discovers her real father is her mum's loud boyfriend.
Ted Danson, Whoopi Goldberg, Nia Long (12)— Cineworld, Curzon, MGM, Yorkgate.
Hot Shots!
Part Deux
WELL-KNOWN scenes pinched from other films and sent up something rotten.
Charlie Sheen (12)— Cineworld, Curzon, MGM, Strand, Yorkgate.
Dennis
THE blond urchin wreaks destruction on the neighbours.
Jason Gamble, Walter Matthau (PG)— Cineworld, Curzon, MGM, Strand, Yorkgate.
The Last Action Hero
A VIOLENT gun-toting movie character is joined on screen by his biggest teenage fan, who teaches his idol how to be nice.
Arnold Schwarzenegger (15) MGM.
The Firm
A GIFTED young lawyer is lured to a luxurious legal practice that serves the Mafia.
Tom Cruise, Gene Hackman (15)— Cineworld, Curzon, MGM, Strand, Yorkgate.
The Old Lady Who Walked In The Sea
AN ageing French woman ekes out a privileged life pulling off jewel heists with a decrepit sidekick.
Jeanne Moreau (18)— MGM.
Mon Pere Ce Heros
A DIVORCED dad watches his daughter become a wilful teenager.
Gerard Depardieu (PG)— QFT
Was Molly ever really alive alive-oh?
LEGENDARY Molly Malone, heroine of the song Cockles and Mussels, never existed, an academic is claiming.
Genealogist and part-time lecturer at Dublin's University College, Sean Murphy, says someone decided that Molly was a real person who was buried in St John's graveyard in the Liberties area of Dublin.
The legend was embellished further when a visiting American academic suggested Molly could have died from typhoid contracted from eating infected cockles and mussels from Dublin Bay.
Dubliners were told in 1988 that Molly's birth and baptismal records had been discovered in the registers of St John's Church.
A Mary Malone who lived from 1663 to 1699 was the woman who became Dublin's favourite daughter, it was claimed.
Composer
But Mr Murphy says there is nothing to show that Mary, who was a Church of Ireland member, was the Molly of the song.
Cockles and Mussels was written in the 1870s or 1880s by Scots composer James Yorkton, he claims.
The rediscovery of Molly led to Dublin Corporations' decision to commission a sculpture of the heroine during the Dublin Millenium celebrations in 1988.
Jeanne Rynhart, who immortalised the Dublin heroine in a sculpture depicting her as a 17th Century prostitute, said Molly would always live in the city's folk memory.
It really did not matter if there was a Molly Malone wheeling her barrow ‘through streets broad and narrow’, she said.
‘The thing is her song is more or less the Dublin anthem, she is a link to the past, to our parents and our grandparents.’
LONDON
McCartney's video nasty
A VIDEO nasty, showing Falkland islanders clubbing beached whales to death will greet Paul McCartney fans tonight before his show at Earls Court Arena, London.
Whitney fan is freed
POP fan Helen Stevens, jailed for infuriating her neighbours by blasting out Whitney Houston's chart-topper I Will Always Love You, was enjoying her freedom today.
The 20-year-old beauty consultant was released yesterday after five days behind bars for breaking an injunction banning her from pumping up the volume.
The Stevens family now plan to end the row with their neighbours by selling their house in Moulton Grove, Stockton, Cleveland, and moving.
Safe viewing
CONTESTANTS in television's biggest new game show — Happy Families — were vetted by doctors for their health and safety.
Sarah Greene and Andrew O'Connor host the BBC1 show starting later this month, which puts contestants of all ages through their paces.
Andrew said: ‘Everybody had to go through a medical before the show and if they were not up to it, they did not go in — we had to be very careful because of their health and safety.’
Diamond memories
THE Dominican College, Portstewart has just produced a Diamond Jubilee Magazine, which is appropriately enough called Cliff Hanger because of the location of the school.
Included in the contents are news, views and history, and I was particularly struck by an item which reported comments by pupils of the lower sixth on the school's ‘formal’ ball.
Here are some of them.
‘As far as I can remember, the helium balloons matched my dress.’
Sandwiches
‘Lady Jane's got sick of the sight of fussy Duffy,’
‘It was an experience.’
‘Loved the chewy nut and astrobelt sandwiches.
They would beat the chicken any day.’
‘A taxi would have come in handy at the end of the night — the fields were a bit mucky.’
‘What formal?.
Where was it held?’
It ends, PS.
A large amount of black and white turkey feathers were left in O'Neills.
Will the owner please come forward?
Sounds like it was quite a night.
Happy return for File
THE Belfast Telegraph's new-look Saturday edition with two bumper magazine sections has brought about some changes to your weekend reading.
But good news for birthday boys and girls — the popular Birthday File will still appear from time to time.
If you would like to send birthday greetings to a junior member of the family, send a photograph and a letter — telling us all about the child and the date of their birthday — to: Paul Acheson, The Birthday File, Belfast Telegraph, 124 Royal Avenue, Belfast BT1 1EB.
And look out for the first Birthday File coming up soon!
Cometh the hour
WHY does BBC Northern Ireland insist on showing almost an hour's ‘highlights’ of meaningless Northern Ireland matches?
Wednesday night's game against Latvia was a case in point.
It proves that all the internationals at Windsor Park get the marathon treatment on Sportsnight whether they're thrillers or — more often than not — deadly dull.
It's just so lazy and unimaginative — the editors couldn't be bothered juggling the various matches around and giving the Northern Ireland game what it's worth.
So we're left with absolutely riveting ‘highlights’ such as players spitting and balls being brilliantly retrieved from behind advertising hoardings.
What we need is a siren which wakes you up when the Northern Ireland highlights are over.
Without wishing to sound unpatriotic, I think most fans here would rather see much more of a really meaningful England game in front of a packed Wembley and much less of a meaningless match at a near-empty Windsor.
‘zzzzz’ East Belfast I couldn't agree more…60 minutes was far too much for such a dull, drab game.
The frightening thing is, we'd have got an hour's highlights even if we'd lost…
Julie Walters: ‘Wide-eyed and legless’
INSIGHT INTO ME
MANY people have contacted our office since the showing of the moving film ‘Wide-Eyed and Legless’(on BBC on Sunday last), saying that their friends and relatives received an insight into the illness Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME) which they had not appreciated before.
One of the difficulties in making the diagnosis of ME — which is a post viral syndrome with a multiplicity of symptoms — is that sufferers do not necessarily present with the same symptoms; however the film showed most graphically how the entire family is affected by such a misunderstood illness.
He have an office in Belfast where we have literature on many aspects of ME.
We offer support through a network of local contacts.
Through our national and local newsletter we can update on current research, advice on managing the illness and give medical information.
We also update the statutory bodies on aspects of the illness and its management.
Anyone wishing information about the Association or the illness may initially contact our office: ME Association, 28 Bedford Street, Belfast BT2 7FE, telephone 0232 439831.
Dorothy Stevenson, Chairperson, NI Regional Committee, M.E. Association.
28 Bedford Street, Belfast BT2 7FE.
Happiness is a warm puppy…
HOLLYWOOD star Mia Farrow launched an amazing quest for happiness during filming in Ireland, it can be revealed today.
As her bitter public war of words with former lover Woody Allen rages on, Mia asked aides to find a pet for herself and her five children who stayed with her in Co.
Wicklow.
Eventually they located a little terrier at an animal welfare clinic in Dublin.
But officials refused to hand over the dog until they vetted Mia in person to ensure she was suitable to have custody of the dog.
And, after the star visited the clinic and played with the pet on the floor, she was allowed to have it.
Mia has now flown back to America with the one-year-old dog, which she has named Tip because it came from Co Tipperary.
Mia launched her search for a doggy companion after setting up temporary home in Ireland during the filming of ‘Widow's Peak’ on location.
An aide contacted Marie O'Byrne, honorary secretary of the North Dublin Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals at her clinic in Drumcondra, Dublin.
‘He inquired if I had a dog available,’ said Marie.
‘I asked if it was for himself or his mother.
I put him though the hoops because there are all sorts of people looking for a dog for the wrong reason.
‘Eventually he told me who it was for.
‘I told him I'd still like to meet her, because I wanted to make sure that everything was above board.
I wasn't about to take somebody's word on the phone about who wanted the dog.’
Mia was driven to the Drumcondra clinic, where she instantly fell in love with rough, red-haired little Tip.
‘She is a very sweet natured little thing, very non-aggressive, and Mia liked her from the very start,’ said Marie.
A spokesman for the actress said: ‘It is no exaggeration to say that Mia and the kids have fallen totally in love with Tip.
‘They are enchanted by him, and that is why they made special arrangements to bring him home to the United States.’
UNA STUBBS, the star of TV shows ‘Till Death Us Do Part’ and ‘Give Us a Clue’has admitted having a secret affair with pop singer Cliff Richard — 30 years ago.
The 54-year-old actress admits her relationship began when they worked together on the movie ‘Wonderful Life’ in 1963.
At the time she was married to ‘Onedin Line’ actor Peter Gilmore.
Actress hurt in terror film
BY STEPHEN GORDON
AN Ulster actress was injured during a terrorist shoot out scene in a new TV film, it has been revealed.
Liz Kennedy was hit in face by flying debris when a special effect went wrong during filming of the BBC's £850,000 political thriller ‘Love Lies Bleeding’.
Explosive
Up to 30 actors were involved in the fierce gun battle scene which is set in south Armagh but actually shot in Millisle, Co Down.
For the sequence — one of the most dramatic in the film which will be screened later this month — some of the actors had tiny explosive charges strapped to their chests.
It is a special effect used in thousands of films and TV dramas — the charges trigger a flash to create a realistic gun shot effect.
But this time it went wrong and Ms Kennedy, who plays a republican activist in the drama, had to receive treatment for an eye injury.
A BBC spokesman, said: ‘During the filming of a sequence which involved special effects, an actress was hit in the face by a small piece of debris.
She suffered a minor face injury.
‘Every precaution is taken to prevent this sort of thing happening.’
The film, produced by Robert Cooper of ‘Truly, Madly, Deeply’ fame, is highly topical given the current speculation about an IRA cease-fire.
The screenplay, by local writer Ronan Bennett, includes a scenario in which the British Government agrees to talks with Sinn Fein leaders.
Controversy
Bennett — who co-wrote a book with Paul Hill, one of the Guildford Four — is no stranger to controversy.
Almost 20 years ago he was convicted of murdering an RUC officer but the conviction was overturned on appeal.
Last week at a Press preview of ‘Love Lies Bleeding’ in London he told journalists he believed the Government should talk to Sinn Fein.
See preview on page 39.