

Cruiser makes top price at Belfast auction
WHILE by no means a rare item, a 14-foot cabin cruiser, complete with 40hp engine isn't the sort of thing that turns up all that often in a Belfast auction room.
When one came under the hammer in Morgan's — the boat belonged to a fisherman who no longer required it — it drew strong bidding and sold for £2,000.
A pair of Japanese satsuma garden seats were snapped up for £290 while an upright overstrung piano in a mahogany case went at £250.
A mahogany double drop leaf dining table with four matching dining chairs sold for £230; a mahogany D-end patent leaf dining table and four matching chairs made £160 with a similar price being paid for a cast iron circular garden table.
Among other lots were: set of four Queen Anne style dining chairs, £155; reeded and inlaid mahogany twin pedestal dining table, £150; mahogany and glazed two-door china display cabinet, £125; carved walnut chest, £105; set three water colour drawings, ‘Children’ signed Muriel McKinley, £100.
At Anderson's a Georgian inlaid mahogany chest on chest went for the princely price of £1,300 while A Victorian 4 foot 6 inc bed with raised back made £1,100 and a Georgian inlaid mahogany serpentine front library table realised £1,050.
Furniture lots were out in force.
A Victorian carved oak court cabinet made £850; a set of 12 Victorian style balloon back came under the hammer at £800; a mahogany cased grandfather clock made £500 and a Georgian inlaid walnut five drawer chest, £425.
A Victorian mahogany single bed with walnut ends sold for £420; an Edwardian inlaid mahogany wardrobe and dressing table, £360; Victorian brass telescopic oil lamp stand, £340.
An Edwardian inlaid marble wood revolving bookcase sold for £310; an Italian style settee and chair at £300; a Victorian nest of four lacquered tables, £260 and a stripped pine two-door bookcase at £250.
An oil, ‘Beach scene’, by Gladys Macabe went for £250 while a watercolour, ‘village scene’, by Olive Henry made £100.
Other lots of interest included: mahogany four door cocktail cabinet, £230; Georgian mahogany hanging corner cupboard £200; mahogany cased grandmother clock, £180; pair Carltonware vases, £180; pair oil lamp bowls and burners, £180; 18ct gold cluster ring, £175; late Victorian mahogany stick stand, £150; Victorian lacquered tray on stand, £120; Edwardian mahogany two door bookcase, £120; set six Georgian silver forks, £120; Victorian brass oil lamp, £110; Georgian silver cream jug, £110.
In Ross's rooms an L Stannard painting sold for £340; while a beechwood table and chairs made £250.
A solid mahogany fire surround went at £225; a pair of good wingback chairs realised £160; an antique mahogany elbow chair at £110.
An 18ct diamond gold solitaire ring realised £100 while a lady's 9ct gold wristwatch made £90.
At Gibson & Dodds auction a Kingwood ormolu-mounted Vernis Martin display cabinet, went at £1,300.
A walnut davenport desk sold for £900 while a Victorian roll-backed settee, made £320 and an Edwardian mahogany mirror-backed sideboard, £150.
A Victorian hand painted pottery oil-lamp, without a shade, attracted some enthusiastic bidding at Bloomfields to sell at £510.
A small engineer's lathe made £320; a workbench fitted with a saw, sander and planer sold for £195 and a three-piece suite, £290.
Other lots; modern dining-table and four chairs, £210; nine carat gold Albert chain, £380; 18 carat gold pocket-watch, £175; silver pocket-watch, £60; part art deco dinner service, £115; mahogany dining-table, £130; TOL tea table, £100; pine kitchen cupboard, £150; three kitchen cupboards dated 1920, £140; set of six oak chairs, £140; small writing-bureau (wormed), £95; water-colour by M Brennan, £90; small water-colour, G W Morrison, £152; Edwardian dressing-table, £95.
Furniture items were strong at Hillhall Auctions, where a Victorian mahogany bed made £640; a pine grandfather clock, £290; a pine dresser £245; an Edwardian bed, £135 and a Victorian mahogany chest, £100.
Bangor Auctions' first sale in their new premises produced a wide range of lots and some energetic bidding.
A Victorian cab-legged spoon-backed chair went at £300 and a cab-legged gossip chair, £320.
Two marble top wash-stands made £235; a pair Victorian chimney pots, £110 and an oak and marble sideboard, £300.
An inlaid piano-stool, went for £125 while two bedroom mirrors made £140.
Among other lots were; captain's chair, £90; oak pot cupboard with vanity mirror, £75; set of six Queen Anne chairs, £150; table to match, £80; mahogany Serpentine desk with ball and claw feet, £140; leather suite and couch, £470; pair GW Morrison water-colours, £380; selection of silver and gold jewellery, 20 lots, £445.
Soccer saving deal for fans
A DUBLIN building society has invested confidence in the national soccer team reaching next year's World Cup finals in the United States by launching a special account for fans to save for the air fare.
Technically Ireland have still to secure two points from their remaining two qualifying games for the American finals, but bookmakers are already rating them an 8–1 on shot to make the trip following their 2–0 win over Lithuania in Dublin this week.
Up to 20,000 supporters are expected to follow their favourites across the Atlantic for the finals.
The Irish Permanent building society's soccer account offers customers the chance of winning a package holiday for two to the United States to watch the Republic play.
New partnership deal for Lotus
BRITISH Formula One team Lotus went a step further in their revival plans today by announcing a technical partnership with Mugen-Honda for a supply of V10 Grand Prix racing engines in 1994 and 1995.
Lotus managing director Peter Collins said: ‘Lotus has made significant progress in 1993 and Mugen-Honda has a wealth of knowledge and experience with the V10 concept, which is currently the optimal configuration.’
The Mugen-Honda V10 engine, currently used by Footwork, is an evolution of the Honda power-unit which helped McLaren to claim the world championships in 1989 and 1990.
Fair trading probe into Times
THE Independent has announced that it is calling on the Office of Fair Trading to investigate The Times for unfair competition.
And the OFT said it would consider The Independent's submission before deciding whether to launch an investigation under the Competition Act.
The Independent claims the 15p cut which slashed The Times cover price to 30p is a case of ‘predatory pricing,’ banned under the Companies Act.
Deputy editor Matthew Symonds said the only way the move could be economic was if one of The Times's rivals was forced out of business.
The newspaper would need to boost circulation by 60pc just to break even.
Extra
The Times claims its circulation has soared by 20pc since it launched the circulation war on Monday.
Circulation bosses at The Independent and The Daily Telegraph believe the rise is around 30pc, about 95,000 extra copies.
Both papers claim The Times move has dented their sales by no more than 2pc.
It has been suggested that The Times can only bear the cost of its price cut with the aid of subsidies from other parts of Rupert Murdoch's empire.
Telegraph proprietor Conrad Black has estimated the price cut will cost £1.5m a month.
The Independent is perceived as the most vulnerable competitor and editor Andreas Whittam Smith has accused Mr Murdoch of attempting to ‘destroy us by unfair means’.
The Times said The Independent's move was ‘absurd’ and undermined by its own declared circulation figures since the price cut.
Deputy Editor John Bryant said: ‘It is absurd that any newspaper should ask the Office of Fair Trading to raise the price of another newspaper, particularly at a time when all the qualities are losing circulation.
‘The Independent claims it has lost just 2pc, which not only undermines their submission to the OFT, but also indicates we may be expanding the market and attracting a number of lapsed broadsheet readers back to the fold.’
Times deputy circulation manager Bob Thompson said sales had risen by about 20pc and they had taken readers mainly from The Independent and The Daily Telegraph, as well as expanding the quality newspaper market.
The Independent, still at 45p, has put on sales this week, but circulation manager Brian Hutt said they were not as high as he would have normally expected in a week when many people were returning from holiday.
Housing confidence
CONFIDENCE in the housing market stands at a 15-month high, according to a Gallup report published today.
The market is continuing to show a ‘slow but steady’ improvement, with people more optimistic about the property scene in August than in July.
Monster rumbled
THE terrifying Jurassic Park dinosaurs were much noisier in the film than they would have been in real life, a scientist said today.
The cry of a Tyrannosaurus Rex was more like the sound made by a human stomach full of wind after a bad night in a cheap restaurant, not the fierce cry of Steven Spielberg movie monster, said Matsumi Suzuki, a Japanese expert.
Privatised ‘chaos’
UNION leaders are to meet the Government next week to try to reach a deal on the ‘costly chaos’ of workers moving from public employers to private contractors.
The unions complained that thousands of workers had lost their jobs or had their pay cut after their jobs were transferred to the private sector.
Results fail to impress
ANOTHER flood of company results again sent the market sliding with no substantial news to entice in investors.
Sentiment was also depressed by Chancellor Kenneth Clarke refusing to rule out tax rises in the November Budget.
After the first hour of dealing, the FTSE had slipped 10.1 to 3025.3.
The fall at drinks and confectionery group Cadbury Schweppes was limited to just 2p to 468p as it announced the much-expected cash call to fund further acquisitions in the US.
The City was not too deterred by the rights issue which was offset by strong interim figures and an improved dividend payout.
Glaxo was a major winner in an otherwise depressed sector as its full-year results provided welcome comfort for investors.
The stock shot ahead 25p to 625p.
Other pharmaceuticals were left out of the party with all of them drifting lower.
Zeneca lost 2p to 747p, SmithKline Beecham 14p to 431p and Wellcome 1p to 729p.
Half-year results from British Gas left the group a penny weaker at 329p although RTZ, the world's biggest mining group, added 4p to 721p as it produced profits in line with the City's expectations.
Great Universal Stores, the Burberry's clothes group and mail order specialist, was a star performer, shooting ahead 28p to £21.30 following impressive results from Coats Viyella and in particular from its Jaegar and Viyella shops.
Coats, which pushed profits strongly ahead in its first six months, climbed 4p to 260p.
Cable & Wireless continued to be affected by worries over its new London phone service.
The move which is likely to herald a price war left the group 14p lower at 834p while BT slipped 4p to 418p and Vodafone lost 11p to 474p.
Bank note printer De La Rue lost 4p to 675p on news that it is to be ousted from the 100-index.
Hints on VAT rise spark new Tory rift
CHANCELLOR Kenneth Clarke today waded into a fresh Tory rift over public spending after delivering a broad hint that his November Budget will bring rises in indirect taxes.
And the signals suggested Mr Clarke may opt to extend the scope of VAT to newspapers, food, children's clothing, and could also tinker with tax allowances to pull in extra revenue.
Mr Clarke threw down the gauntlet to a trio of Cabinet colleagues in the vanguard of demands for deeper spending cuts instead of higher taxes to tackle the projected £50 billion deficit.
Protests
His remarks, in a Daily Telegraph interview, triggered protests from right-wing Tory MPs and pitched the Cabinet into more controversy as it met for the first time since the summer break.
But he was strongly supported by Transport Secretary John MacGregor.
Mr MacGregor said the Cabinet had agreed a clear spending totals in the summer ‘and we are sticking to those.’
Mr Clarke effectively slapped down the Cabinet dissenters — John Redwood, Peter Lilley and Michael Portillo — who have been calling for the already-tight £254 billion spending target to be cut.
Anxiety
The Chancellor also caused further anxiety by strongly backing the VAT levy on domestic fuel and power.
In a clear hint that tax rises may be necessary, the Chancellor said he believed ‘there is no way’ in which recovery alone would tackle the deficit.
He said: ‘I think its important, when you have a recovery, you don't want forms of taxation which might damage it or hit the cash flow of companies.’
Despite the fears of some Tory MPs, the prospect of a rise in direct taxes in the November 30 package is largely discounted.
But Mr Clarke indicated he preferred to raise taxes on spending — such as widening VAT — rather than putting up income tax.
The Chancellor also signalled he did not favour an early cut in interest rates and argued that the decision to impose VAT on fuel had been ‘logical’ and would not be reversed.
Right-wing MP Sir George Gardiner warned there was ‘still very considerable anxiety’ among Conservatives that Mr Clarke would opt for increases in income tax.
Another MP William Powell said he was disappointed Mr Clarke was still committed to the VAT policy.
MARKETHILL CATTLE trade remained firm at Markethill livestock sales, despite the recent reduction in factory prices for finished cattle.
Beef and store cattle and fat cows maintained their recent prices, with dairy stock selling in a brighter trade.
Top price in the dairy section was £1,340 for a calved Friesian heifer from W J Kirkland, Dungannon.
H Coulter, Loughgilly, sold a calved heifer at £1,300.
W Kirkland sold three more heifers at £1,180, £1,135 and £1,100 each.
F J Henning, Loughgilly, sold a calved heifer at £1,100.
In all, 14 lots sold in excess of £1,000 each.
An entry of 30 lots in the suckler ring sold in a very good trade, with prices seeing a marked improvement over the last three to four weeks.
Top price of £990 was paid for a Whitehead cow and heifer calf from J J Murphy, Caledon.
The 100 fat cows sold in an excellent trade, with heavy-fleshed cows clearing readily from £100 to £105.50 per 100k, with a top of £106.50 for 580k at £618.
Cow/heifers sold up to £112.30 for 610k at £685, with a main trade from £108 per 100k.
Second-quality cows cleared from £88 to £97 per 100k, with poor cows in excellent demand from £75 to £85 per 100k.
A large entry of bulls sold in a very strong trade to reach £1,270 for 1,070k.
Main trade was from £104 per 100k.
Friesian bulls made from £98 to £103.50 per 100k for 860k at £890.
A slightly smaller entry of bullocks sold well to a large attendance of buyers, with lightweight bullocks peaking at 139.33 for a 300kg Charolais at £418 going to J McAnallen, Armagh.
Store bullocks peaked at 131.50 for a 400kg Charolais at £516 going to E Rice, Armagh.
Heavy bullocks sold to a top of 125.33 for a 750kg Limousin at £940 going to Miss M E Burns, Markethill.
A similar entry of heifers cleared well, with lightweight heifers peaking at 150 for a 270kg at £405 going to R Leader, Crumlin.
Store heifers sold to a top of 129.33 for a 450kg heifer at £582 going to E Rice, Markethill.
Heavy heifers sold to a top of 127.27 for a 550kg Limousin at £700 going to W Martin, Mullaghbrack.
Calves sold well in a steady trade, with continental bulls peaking at £248, while heifer calves sold to a top of £200.
Friesian bulls cleared to a top of £128 back to £80.
The 1,037 fat lambs at Markethill cleared in a steady trade, with good-quality lambs selling without difficulty.
However, plainer stock was again slow to clear.
Lightweight lambs cleared up to 175p for 21.5k at £37.50 from P Kelly, Markethill.
Suitable middleweight lambs sold readily from 164p to 173p per kilo, with several choice lots from 178p to a top of 182p for 22.5k at £41 from J Russell, Poyntzpass.
Heavy lambs sold from £36 to £40.40 for 23k from J Porter, Poyntzpass.
Good-quality lambs cleared from 158p to 164p, with plainer lots from 150p.
Fat ewes were in good demand from £23 to £28.50, with seconds from £14 to £21.50 each.
Breeding hoggets reached £69 each, with several lots from £58 each.
Store lambs cleared from £25 to £29.70 each.
SAINTFIELD
AT Saintfield Mart, bullocks sold to £1,025 paid to M Kirk for a 660k Charolais at £155.30.
Medium-weight Friesians claimed a top price going to S Greenfield for a 330kg lot at £450 and £136.33; finishing cattle topped at £725 paid to A Doherty for a 500kg Limousin.
Heifers: K Croskery, £460 for a 330kg Simmental; beef types claimed to £129.80 paid to a local farmer for a 490 kkg at £635.
Sucklers hit a high of £818 going to M Mackin for a Limousin heifer and bull calf.
Dropped calves made £270 paid twice for a Limousin bull and a Simmental bull.
Friesians cleared at £265, while fat cows made £109.65 for M Mairs for a 570 kg Friesian and to £108 to A Doherty for a Simmental.
Sheep, with more than 1,000 on offer, sold to £39.50 for a pen of Charollais at 25 kg.
R Gilmore received £36.50 for a pen of 22 kg.
Fat ewes and rams at £30; ewes at £29.70.
A Bingham sold 33 C/B at £80 each and 30 at £78 each.
Rental order puts Jag staff on mettle
JAGUAR car workers are to put in nine hours' overtime each week to complete the biggest single car order in the company's history.
The order, announced yesterday, is for 500 luxury XJ6 saloons worth £17m and comes from Budget Rent a Car, one of the world's leading car rental companies.
The 3,000 shop floor staff are working against the clock to ensure the cars join its fleet in 10 US key cities in early November.
Breakthrough
The 25 million dollar (about £16m) order was described by Jaguar's North American president Michael Dale today as ‘a major breakthrough’ into the US rental market.
Mr Dale said it would also provide Jaguar with a unique opportunity to reach people who might buy one of its cars.
The order coincides with growing Jaguar sales in the US.
In the first eight months of the year they were 36pc above the same period in 1992.
High-tech trade links operational
The ERNACT Economic database, offering companies access to details of businesses registered within Londonderry and Denmark, was launched yesterday.
One of the aims of the database project is to increase trade via import and export with Denmark and important information for each company, including products, production processes used and number of employees, will be held.
Agencies who will carry the database in the North West are IDB, LEDU, Londonderry Chamber of Commerce, NORIBIC, North West Institute of Further and Higher Education and North West Marketing.
Speaking at the launch councillor John Kerr, chairman of the Board of Management of ERNACT, said: ‘An economic database of this kind is new to the region.
‘Business people can now access the database for a range of information regarding companies and products.
‘This obviously offers a great potential for sourcing products locally and for pursuing joint ventures either at home or abroad.’
As a result of the establishment of the database, the local business community will be able to use it to search for customers/ suppliers and, planners will have a comprehensive database to assist in the formulation and execution of regional economic development policy.
Achievement
Commenting on the success of the database, John Keanie, Town Clerk and Chief Executive of Derry City Council, said: ‘The launch of the ERNACT economic database is a tangible result for the members of the ERNACT team and is an important step towards reducing the peripherality of the North West region.
‘The achievement has important implications for the region as it enables us to look at economic development in a European context.
‘The project, through the transfer of knowledge, has fostered a spirit of co-operation between participating partners and offers substantial opportunities for the future development of the network.’
The ERNACT team aim to develop their database further by increasing the number of companies registered and expanding this registration to include other regions both nationally and internationally.
De Lorean owners flocking in
OWNERS of De Loreans from abroad were arriving in Northern Ireland today for the start of a celebration to mark the 10th anniversary of the Ulster-built car's official fan club.
Owners from Australia, the United States and Holland already in the province were joined by others from Germany, Switzerland and Great Britain.
Cult
Most of the overseas owners brought their distinctive stainless-steel cars — which achieved cult status after featuring in Steven Spielberg's ‘Back to the Future’ film trilogy — to join Ulster owners for the biggest gathering of the cars in the province since the Dunmurry factory closed.
About 200 owners are expected to take part in Euro Expo '93 at the site of the original factory to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the De Lorean Owners' Association, a worldwide body with more than 2,000 members.
The highlight of the event will be tomorrow, when they will get the chance to drive their cars around the original test-track and be taken on a tour of the factory.
Atmosphere
Today they were simply soaking up the atmosphere and enjoying a tour of the province's most popular sites, including a shopping trip to Belfast city centre and a visit to the Giant's Causeway.
Members of the public are invited to visit the Expo and see the cars tomorrow.
Anyone interested should go to the Montupet factory at Dunmurry at 3.30pm.
Admission is £1 for adults and 50p for children.
Star attraction: The gull-winged doors of the De Lorean car make a perfect shelter from the rain for Marianne Brockwell (left), from Western Australia, and Till Verkerk, from the Netherlands.
Their husbands brought their cars to the rally which is being held at the former car-plant at Dunmurry this weekend.
Stocks bright on rate cut chance
Stocks made a bright start, encouraged by the scent of cheaper money.
The German half point rate cut yesterday has set off speculation on a rate cut in the UK despite Chancellor Kenneth Clarke dampening speculation.
The FTSE-100 index improved by 7.7 points to 3038.7.
However trading was subdued with better than expected trade figures showing a £3.3bn visible trade deficit having little effect.
The City also wants to take it easier after yesterday's barrage of trading statements from blue chip companies.
Ratners caught a few eyes after being pegged to losses of £27m.
It eased p to 34p on the news with investors also awaiting confirmation of a planned name change to Signet.
The move is being discussed at today's annual meeting.
SmithKline Beecham was a notable faller against the general trend.
The drugs giant has been rocked by talk that it could be expelled from the FTSE because of the way it pays dividends.
And last night SmithKline heard that its Tagamet asthma drug failed to get full approval in the US.
Glaxo, by contrast, was able to gain 14p to 642p amid upgrading following yesterday's results.
it sweetened news of losses with an improved interim dividend.
Quarry and mining group Bardon slipped 1p to 48p on its heavy halfway losses though builder Allen added 4p to 120p on an upbeat trading statement.
News of a 4.7pc rise in air traffic figures failed to set BAA flying and it dipped 2p to 816p.
British Airways was unchanged at 364p.
A sizeable computer system contract with Credit Suisse excited investors in electronics firm Rolfe & Nolan which jumped 12p to 235p.
Ratners still firmly in red
JEWELLERY group Ratners has remained firmly in the red, losing £26.9m in the six months to July 31, figures today showed.
Ratners, no longer run by flamboyant founder Gerald Ratner but by James McAdam, said ‘recovery in consumer confidence is still somewhat variable’.
Operating losses were cut to £11.6m from £18.8m and group sales actually improved by a tenth to £399m, helped by favourable exchange rates.
But Ratners was held back by another heavy interest bill and the costs of reorganising the group.
At the interim stage last year, before Gerald Ratner quit as chairman in November, the group lost £27.7m.
Britain's biggest jewellery group is on the brink of changing its name to Signet.
Chairman James McAdam said that of the current 140 Ratners shops, no more than 60 will exist by this time next year.
Crisis-hit firm calls in expert after job cuts
A LISBURN engineering firm has called in a ‘company doctor’ after shedding 90 staff, it was revealed today.
Bemac Engineering, which supplies sheet metal parts to the telecommunications and computer industry, ran into problems when the recession hit its major markets.
The company grew during the 1980s on the back of the boom in the computer sector.
But when industry giants like IBM and Digital suffered a slump in demand and began cutting production towards the end of last year, Bemac saw its market contract dramatically.
A spokesman for the Industrial Development Board confirmed today that the company had been offered £576,000 in grants last year, before the recession in the computer supplies market became apparent.
Investment
An initial £5,000 grant has already been paid, as well as some of the larger amount, but this has not been specified.
However, the extent of the IDB's investment would depend on the size of the company's own investment, since the board simply ‘tops up’ the amount which a client firm invests.
Bemac's workforce has fallen from 215 to 140 in the past year and now the firm has appointed a consultant to advise on the restructuring of the company.
Derry firm's trade mission
A LONDONDERRY electrics company is one of 20 Ulster firms to take part in a trade fair in Scandinavia.
Hi-volt Capacitors, which manufactures high voltage equipment, will accompany 19 other businesses from all over the province, on the Industrial Development Board trade mission to the four main markets in Scandinavia.
The mission members are exploring business opportunities in Sweden, Norway, Finland and Denmark until September 17.
This is the first IDB mission to target all four countries and is one of the largest ever from Northern Ireland to Scandinavia.
The mission began on September 6 with a series of business meetings at Gothenburg in Sweden.
Enable
Alan Hingston, Executive Director of IDB's Marketing Development Division, said: ‘Scandinavia has long been one of IDB's target regions and business for Northern Ireland companies has developed steadily over the past decade.
‘Our programme of missions has enabled a number of companies to develop significant business in these very competitive markets.
‘The decision to include all four centres — previously we have concentrated on two on an annual basis — is designed to enable companies to explore and maximise opportunities throughout the region over the 10 day period.’
It is the first time that Hivolt Capacitors has taken part in such a trade mission.
An IDB trade mission to Finland, Norway and Sweden in September 1991 produced orders worth £1.4m for the 18 participating companies.
UTV reports increased profits for the half-year
ULSTER Television has reported increased pre-tax profits of £1.96m for the first six months of 1993, up 10pc on the same period last year.
Turnover fell 2.5pc to £13.19m.
The interim dividend has been set at 6.25pc, up from 4.25p in 1992.
Chairman John McGuckian said UTV had increased its market share of total ITV revenue and enjoyed the highest share of viewing in the Independent Television network.
He added that negotiations were due to start shortly with advertisers who have annual agreements with the station.
‘We believe the level of budgets will reflect the improving prospects for the UK economy next year,’ said Mr McGuckian.
The Dublin-based liquid petroleum gas company, Flogas, has reported full year pre-tax profits of IR£6.52m, down from IR£7.16m in the previous year.
Group turnover was also down, at IR£48.10m.
By Yvette Shapiro
Ness moves to Securicor
COMMANDER George Ness, head of Scotland Yard's Flying Squad and tactical firearms unit, retires next week and takes up a new post with Securicor — whose cash delivery vans have been the target of the armed robbers his detectives risk their lives hunting down.
Mr Ness, 53, awarded the Queen's Police Medal three years ago, leaves the Metropolitan Police after 34 years in the service.
Company plea to creditors
I WOULD like your readers to know that I am aware of their letters to Sunday Life and their concern about money owing to them by my former company C H Enterprises.
I would like to apologise to everyone concerned and reassure them that I am doing everything to resolve the matter of refunds.
I would ask those concerned if they could be patient and given time I will refund all money owing to them including any interest that would have accrued had their money been in a bank.
Once again I apologise and assure everyone that I am doing my best to see this problem through.
Sam Cowan,
Former Director,
C.H. Enterprises, Portadown.
Delorean dream machines go on parade
DREAM MACHINE: one of the Belfast-built car
ULSTER's roads will gleam with the sparkle of dozens of silver ‘time machines’ this week.
Delorean car enthusiasts from all over the world are set to converge on the province on Thursday for their annual reunion.
And many of them will be bringing with them their own silver dream machines — immortalised by Steven Spielberg's ‘Back to the Future’ movie.
The Delorean Owners Association appropriately choose Northern Ireland as the venue for their 10th anniversary convention.
The annual event which brings together many of the 2,000 worldwide members of the association is usually held in America.
One of the most spectacular sights promised during the four day event is a rally along the Antrim coast.
Dozens of the cars will wind their way around the scenic coastline on Friday.
Members of the public will have their chance to closely inspect the silver machines at the Montupet factory on Saturday.
The afternoon kicks off with a tour of the former Delorean complex including a trip around the original test track.
‘We have enthusiasts travelling from America, France and even as far as Australia,’ said local association member Robert Lamrock from Belfast.
‘Saturday promises to be a great day for the public and will give children a chance to see the cars which were made famous for them through the Back to the Future film.’
ABOVE: Intensive training enables sniffer dogs to detect drugs or explosives in the most unlikely places.
Goldie, a five-year-old labrador, gives a police traffic cone the once over.
LEFT: The speed and power of alsatians like Troy make them ideal for security patrols and public order control.
TOP LEFT: The kennels at the RUC Dog Section behind Stormont Castle can cater for up to 27 animals at a time.
High protein cereal mixes supplement meat to ensure every dog is kept in tip top condition.
Union demands ballot paper change
By NEIL MULHOLLAND
CONCERNED: NIPSA boss Jim McCusker
ULSTER'S biggest civil servant union has demanded changes to election ballot papers, warning that voters' lives could be at risk.
The Northern Ireland Public Service Alliance has called on the government to remove identifying numbers from voting forms to ensure that voters cannot be traced.
As revealed last week in Sunday Life, a retired MI6 officer has made startling claims that MI5 has identified Sinn Fein supporters by trawling through ballot papers.
In a letter to Pat Bradley, the province's chief electoral officer, NIPSA general secretary Jim McCusker said his members were seriously concerned by the risk to members of the public.
‘It is a denial of every citizen's fundamental right to a secret ballot if it is possible to link voters to a particular party,’ he said.
‘If information on a person's political allegiance gained from ballot papers fell into the hands of unscrupulous individuals such as paramilitaries, then that person's life could be at risk.’
Mr McCusker said his union wanted identifying numbers removed from voting papers to ensure the anonymity of each voter.
The union leader told Sunday Life that Mr Bradley had passed his letter on to the appropriate department of the Northern Ireland Office which drafts electoral law here.
As reported in last week's Sunday Life, James Rusbridger, a retired senior official in the counter espionage agency MI6 and cousin of spy-catcher Peter Wright, claimed it was ‘quite common practice’ for MI5 officers to trawl through ballot papers after elections in Northern Ireland.
By matching Sinn Fein votes with counterfoil stubs, he said, they were able to identify the party's voters from the electoral register.
Ballot papers and counterfoils are stored for 12 months after every election in a secure government storeroom before being destroyed.