

‘Emphasis is on self discipline’
The teachers
Mrs Hilary Millar — senior teacher and head of junior school, 26 years at Glenlola.
‘There are no school rules as such at Glenlola, and no bells ringing at the end of classes.
The emphasis is very much on self discipline and the girls seem to appreciate the responsibility this place on them.
‘There is no feeling of militarisation and this helps the girls see the teachers more as sympathetic friends, here to help if they have a problem.
‘We find that girls are usually very pleased to get into this school and are happy to work and do well.’
Mrs Maxine Ferguson — English teacher, 10 years at Glenlola.
‘A lot of time is taken to nurture contact between senior girls and the junior school.
Our house system means that girls get to compete against each other in a healthy way.
‘I used to envisage difficulties when I came to socialise in the Bangor area and would meet pupils.
There is absolutely no problem — pupil/teacher relationships are more like friendships.
‘After school activities get a tremendous response.
Because of cut backs, they rely on the goodwill of staff.
I have never once heard a staff member say that wouldn't stay after the school day for some activity or other.
We also have tremendous parent support.’
Maxine Ferguson: Relationship with pupils more like friendship.
THE majority community is sick and tired of hearing how a nationalist area was saturated with the security forces who departed a short time before loyalist paramilitaries entered to commit murder.
You just can't win.
If the security forces are thick on the ground and loyalist gunmen commit murder it is the result of collusion.
If the security forces are not present and loyalist gunmen commit murder it is still the result of collusion.
REALIST Co.
Antrim.
No laughing matter Mary Kelly and family hit the Manhattan in Belfast's Bradbury Place
ANY parent will tell you that eating out with children under three years old is not the most relaxing experience in the world.
The general aim is to pick something that won't take long, get them fed quickly and get them out without their inflicting any major damage.
American style restaurants usually cater well for children so The Manhattan in Bradbury Place looked an ideal spot and they did have a kiddies' menu.
Alas, they had no high chairs for nine month old Daniel, and it was with a sinking heart that I picked up the menu, while trying to hold the baby and prevent toddler Michael from pulling off the tablecloth.
Minders
It was written in sub Gone with the Wind style, was longer than the American Civil War and took almost as long again to identify what sort of food was actually on offer from amongst the jokey prose.
Here for example, is the description of Cajun mushrooms: ‘Lowsa mercy, Miss Scarlett, dem a sho are mighty tasty.’
And the ‘Smokin chicken’ began thus, ‘Ain't nobody here but us chickens…’
I sho was not amused, no suh.
Fortunately I had heavy duty minders in the form of my sister, Karen, mum and aunt, who were able to keep the kids in line while I translated the menu and discovered it came down to largely burgers, chicken, steaks and ‘flipper friendly’ fish.
Mum found the ‘American express menu’, which was considerably shorter than the Gettysburg address I was deciphering and extremely cheap — the most expensive item being smoked baby back ribs in barbecue sauce at £2.50.
One of life's gourmets, she chose the fish, chips and mushy peas for £1, and decided they were ‘okay for that sort of money’, which wasn't exactly reaching for superlatives.
Karen had a cheeseburger and lived to regret opting for it to be well done, as it turned up dry as a bone inside a bap as wrinkled as Sid James' face.
Michael was happy enough with his ‘batburger’, but preferred the chips on Karen's plate to the mountain on his own.
Aunt Margaret and I had the aforementioned ‘smokin chicken’ £5.95 which turned out to be a huge half-bird smothered in a nasty synthetic tasting sauce, which I scraped off and replaced with the ketchup on the table.
Cheesecake
My aunt thought hers was ‘delicious, apart from the sauce’ and the portion was so huge she brought the rest home for sandwiches.
Daniel seemed to enjoy his baked potato with mushroom sauce and also managed a few chips, eaten in his usual style — squashed up between his fingers.
From the dessert menu, the kids had ‘superhero sundaes’ which turned out to be merely ice-cream, while we adults between us tackled American cheesecake which was flavourless, and rather chewy fudge brownies — not recommended for those with dentures.
Yessir it was cheap, but frankly, Scarlett, we ain't fixin to be back.
THERE has been a dramatic four-fold increase in the number of patients being treated by chemotherapy at Belvoir Park Hospital, Ulster's regional cancer unit.
Around 27 in-patients are receiving this treatment in the hospital each week compared to six or seven only two years ago.
New drugs and new work practices have combined to produce the increased workload.
The new drugs mean that treatment can now be offered to patients suffering from different types of the disease.
Previously chemotherapy was most commonly used to treat men suffering from testicular cancer.
Doctors now find that chemotherapy — an injection of a powerful cocktail of drugs — can be successful in cases of bowel and abdominal cancer.
But there have been two other significant developments which have boosted the treatment rate at Belvoir.
The first was the creation of a single chemotherapy in-patient unit.
The 14-bed Ward 5B is now used exclusively for this type of treatment.
The second advance was the training of nurses to administer the drugs.
Previously this was done exclusively by doctors.
Dr Seamus McAleer, one of six consultants using the unit, explains: ‘The number of patients being treated by chemotherapy has increased steadily as new and better drugs have become available.
There are also a lot more things we can do to make this treatment more tolerable.
Patients used to be quite sick after chemotherapy.
Now that is less common.
‘The creation of a single unit for in-patient treatment was a great help.
Previously patients were admitted to whichever ward had free beds.
That was disruptive to them.
‘Now we operate a hotel-type reservation list.
Patients are admitted regularly — every two or three weeks — for treatment.
We can draw up a full list of patients so that every bed is filled every night.
That means we make best use of our resources and offer help to more and more patients.’
Sister Margaret Murphy was one of the first nurses in Ulster to train in administering chemotherapy.
She and another nurse went to the Royal Marsden Hospital in London to learn the latest techniques in erecting and inserting drips.
‘We now have 19 nurses trained in these techniques at Belvoir,’ she said.
‘With more people administering the drugs more patients can be treated.’
It is specialised work.
The drugs used are highly toxic and those in charge have to learn the dangers both to themselves and to patients.
The medical professionals say the new system has been very beneficial to patients.
They have the same consultant and same nursing team treating them every time they are admitted.
The system has also allowed the hospital to develop fringe benefits.
Staff Nurse Edna Wilson has taken a diploma in aromatherapy — massage with exotic oils.
‘The aim is to reduce anxiety and help patients relax.
Obviously they undergo considerable trauma when the disease is diagnosed and they are admitted to hospital.
‘The benefit of massage is that it allows patients to talk to someone on a one to one basis.
I have no research to prove that it is an effective relaxation technique, but everyone who has experienced it asks for it when they come back for more treatment.’
Another nurse has been trained in reflexology — foot massage.
Patients Norman Cowden and Eric Mann agree the new unit is a good idea.
40.0 Says Norman: ‘The staff are brilliant.
They do everything to put me at ease.
It is great to see the same faces each time I come back.
I am now on my fourth course of treatment.’
Nightline that offers a lifeline
IN the third of our Night-Town series DAVID WALMSLEY speaks to a Samaritan volunteer about her work with the lonely and desperate.
Her name has been changed.
BEHIND the regeneration of Northern Ireland's second city lies an unsolved desperation.
Young Londonderry men are committing suicide at a higher rate than almost any other group of people in the United Kingdom.
Unemployment and other social problems have added to the difficulties.
Dragged
And the cries for help are often not heard until headlines are briefly filled with the story of another body being dragged from the River Foyle.
But the Samaritans — who provide a 24 hour service — do know the pain that goes on and they are trying to help.
The volunteer we spoke to works a night time shift once a month.
She asked for her name not to be used because she wanted to protect her relationship with regular callers.
The fragility of those relationships underlines the essential work done by the charity.
The volunteer, whom we shall call Mary, said the biggest asset of the Samaritans is their ear.
‘We don't lecture people or tell them what they must do.
We are a listening service — where people can talk,’ she said.
‘There is not an answering service at the other end of the line.
There is a real human being listening.’
Volunteers working the night-time shift know the number of calls will increase as darkness falls.
Mary said the shift, which lasts from 11pm until 9am, is always the busiest in any 24 hour period.
She said people seemed to get more lonely and depressed if they were on their own at night.
The Samaritans help a range of people but are ultimately trying to help those close to killing themselves.
Mary said: ‘At the end of the day the Samaritans is a suicidal agency.’
From her experience Derry is a tragic place for many young men.
‘Derry has a very high rate of unemployment.
It is traditionally a matriarchal city where women work and men don't.
‘And Northern Ireland has the highest rate of suicide in young men between the ages of 16 and 25.
‘Peer pressure about not talking may have something to do with it.’
Tolerant
She said there could be heavy demands made on Samaritan volunteers, especially because they are critically understaffed at the moment.
‘You need a tolerant partner.
It can be very stressful, especially as we are so short staffed.
You need to give a good deal of commitment.’
If you are interested in becoming a Samaritan their office is at 16 Clarendon Street.
Their telephone number is 265511.
It is the same address and telephone number if you want to speak in complete confidence to someone about your fears or problems.
I caught my son sniffing aerosols
I CAUGHT my boy of 14 sniffing aerosols a year ago and he promised he would never do it again.
It nearly cracked me up and he could see what it did to me.
Two days ago my neighbour told me she saw him with a crowd down an entry.
She didn't know whether or not he was sniffing but when I searched his room I found empty aerosols.
Now he's admitted it but says it was only that night.
I don't know whether he is telling the truth.
Opportunity
His Dad has grounded him and he has stayed in his room.
What can I do?
I'm terrified to let him out, but I can't keep him in for ever.
No, you can't, and punishment alone will not solve the problem.
He needs the opportunity to talk about his feelings at the moment, what he was hoping to gain from the sniffing.
He might have been using it to make him feel good and as a means to escape boredom or because he feels under pressure to join a group who were sniffing.
Possibly he might be angry or resentful about someone's attitude to him.
There are many reasons youngsters sniff and it is important you hear this.
He needs to know that he will be listened to and taken seriously.
Making any change will require an effort from yourselves as parents and from him.
All the indicators show that parental support helps young people come through solvent abuse quicker.
So try to get him to a point where he is agreeable to discussing the problem openly with you or else to go for some form of counselling.
At PAC we have a lot of contacts for help.
Confidential help for parents, the Parents Advice Centre, Room 1, Bryson House, 28, Bedford Street, Belfast, BT2 7FE, tel (0232) 238800.
For Londonderry.
tel,(0504) 266663 or call at 18, Great James Street.
My daughter is so bossy
I CAN hardly believe my three-year-old is so bossy.
She tells her friends what to do and now some of them won't play with her.
The child next door is shy and lets my wee girl order him around.
It's embarrassing to listen to.
I'm always apologising for her.
What can I do to get her to allow others to have a say?
Your young daughter's bossy attitude in later life may be channelled into quite acceptable leadership qualities.
That possibility will be of little consolation to you now, when you hear and see her dictating to her friends.
She needs to learn a more acceptable means of getting people to do things.
When you see her being bossy, you can intervene in a way that lets her see that the other children need a chance to say what they want to do.
If there is an incident when friends walk away because she has been ordering them around, explain to her why that happened.
Gradually she might begin to connect the consequences of her attitude.
As she is only three you will need a lot of patience and persistence to get the message across, but do keep trying, otherwise her bossiness could leave her on the wrong side of the fence from her friends.
The key decisions in setting up home
SETTING up home can be a very expensive business.
Whether you intend starting married life in a rented flat, your own home, or in a spare room at your parents', good financial planning is essential.
There is so much conflicting advice at the moment regarding mortgages with recent worries over once favoured endowment mortgages.
Probably the best advice is to sit down and list all income as well as all expenditure — including variables like possible car maintenance bills, treats, clothes, savings for holidays — and then honestly look at what is left.
Mortgage companies will usually lend around three times the salary of the main earner plus that of the spouse, but people's expenses vary and you are the only person who knows exactly what you can afford.
Fixed
Armed with this information, talk to a lot of different lending companies and see who can offer the best deal.
Remember that they want your custom, although at times it might not seem that way!
It should be possible to agree a fixed rate repayment for a couple of years, and many companies offer special rates for first time buyers.
Having looked at all the options, sit down together and decide what to go for.
Choosing a home is probably one of the most important decisions of your life and it isn't one to be rushed into lightly.
Some couples prefer to start married life in rented accommodation and it does have its advantages.
Colour
The painting and decorating are already done.
Someone else is responsible if the roof suddenly caves in and you don't have the added pressures of house hunting/buying on top of planning a wedding.
On the minus side, rented houses and flats tend to have strange colour schemes, ie, a mismatch of all the odd bits and pieces from the landlords other houses.
Green carpet, purple curtains and pink walls are not unheard of!
Where money is particularly tight, some couples will start married life in a spare room at the home of one set of parents — usually the brides.
This being the case, the couple have to work hard to establish themselves as a new adult unit.
For the bride, particularly if they are using her old bedroom, this probably means throwing out her posters of Mel Gibson et al, consigning her huge collection of cuddly toys to the attic and getting rid of the pink frilly duvet.
Bright
Re-decorating one bedroom should be fun and is much less of a task than taking on a whole house.
It is a good opportunity for the couple to combine their tastes and talents.
But do remember that the house still belongs to the parents and even if you do love black walls painted with silver moons and stars, bright red carpet and eerie holograms, but remember they have to live there after you are long gone.
Perfect setting: The beautiful St Patrick's Church in Pennyburn, which provides a perfect setting for many happy couples on their ‘big day.’
Take the pictures seriously
THEIR wedding day is often the most important in any couples life, but too often they go through it in such a haze of excitement and happiness that they forget much of what has gone on.
This is where a good photographer, plus a gifted amateur, come in.
A professional photographer will capture the chain of events, from the bride leaving her home to the cutting of the cake.
He or she will also know local churches well and should have worked out in advance the best setting for family photographs, special effects and romantic pictures.
They don't come cheap, but it is better to have a small, professional album, than to rely on great-uncle Archie and his dodgy instamatic.
Like every dog, he can also have his day.
But it is better to let him mingle among the guests and take the candid shots which add to the colour and fun of the day.
You could even have these put together in a special album which will add to your happy memories in the days and years to come.
Adding that special sparkle
IT is said that every bride is beautiful and this is mostly true.
But most women would prefer not to trust to that special ‘glow of happiness’ to give them sparkle on their special day.
Even if you don't normally wear make-up, you will probably need some on your wedding day as white or even ivory reflects on the skin and could leave you with a washed-out look.
Most brides prefer the over-all tan provided by the sunbed and this is particularly good if the couple are nipping off to sunny climes for their reception.
Make-up
A reputable salon will suggest a course of sunbed sessions which should have the bride looking healthy and tanned in time for her wedding day.
It is also worth going along to a beauty salon a month or so in advance to have your make-up done.
Remember to wear something approaching the colour of your wedding dress so that you can judge the likely effect on the big day.
If you are not used to make-up you may feel a little‘painted’, but remember that the make-up has to last all day and right into the evening.
However, don't allow yourself to be talked into a look with which you are not comfortable.
If the beautician tries to insist, find another beautician.
Hairstyle
A few months before the wedding is also a good time to start a nail and skincare regime, particularly if you bite your nails or have problem skin.
Again a good beautician is essential.
Choosing a hairstyle can be the biggest nightmare for a bride, but as a general rule it is as well not to experiment with anything too outrageous or different.
The best person to give advice is your regular hairdresser.
If you haven't got one, get one now.
He/she will have had time to get to know your hair, what suits you, how well it responds to mousse and gel and when it should be cut or styled.
Stunning
It is also well to remember the morning after.
Your gelled and moussed-up creation might look stunning on the day, but how will it be when you wake up next morning.
You don't want to spend the first morning of your honeymoon trying to re-do it yourself, so it is probably as well to stick to something simple.
Happy couple: Pictured after their wedding in the Church of the Immaculate Conception, Gobnascale, are Mr Declan McConomy of Glenmore Park, Altnagelvin and Miss Michaela Grant of Popular Road.
The reception was held in the Redcastle Hotel.
Being ill changed me, says Dr Daly
STROKE victim Bishop Edward Daly told the Belfast Telegraph: ‘I just wake up in the mornings now and say ‘Thank you God, for another day’.’
Bishop Daly was speaking during his first interview since suffering the stroke seven months ago.
He is now back at work in his Londonderry office.
‘I have been stimulated by the experience.
It has given me time to sort out my priorities,’ said Bishop Daly (59).
And he added: ‘I'm not complaining.
It was an unexpected rest and it has taught me many things, like patience.’
Concern
The Bishop of Derry goes into his office every morning but says his workload has been cut very drastically.
‘Everybody seems to think I was doing too much.
Maybe I just enjoyed my work too much.
But I am feeling better and my main concern is just to get well again.’
In his official capacity, Bishop Daly has attended a number of recent public functions and officiated at funerals for two priests.
‘I'm usually excused early from functions and so on.
People have been very kind.
My speech is fine in the mornings but deteriorates as the day goes on.
I am going to speech therapy,’ he explained.
‘My ability to concentrate is limited and I have to avoid stressful situations, which is why, for example, I have not given media interviews.
‘It may take well over a year but I would hope to make a 95pc recovery.
Recovery
‘I had been visiting hospitals every week for 37 years but you get a different perspective after something like this.
The people in Altnagelvin have been marvellous.
‘I am making a slow but steady recovery.
I want to ease myself back in between now and Christmas.’
And on retirement?
‘It's much too early to think about things like that,’ he said.
Bishop Daly: ‘I thank God every day.’
Focus on mental health awareness
EMINENT psychiatrist Professor Anthony Clare was due in Londonderry today to open the Area Mental Health Unit's new Mental Health Awareness programme.
The programme, which will be staged at the Foyle Arts Centre, Lawrence Hill, will provide an opportunity to project mental illness and mental health services in a much more positive light.
Professor Clare was also expected to deliver a public lecture entitled ‘The Stigmata of Mental Illness’ later tonight.
The new programme, which will run over a two week period, will focus on a wide range of mental health issues.
It will be targeted at the local population with specific events/ workshops for schools, service users and carers.
The main focus of the programme will be an exhibition providing information on mental illness and an historical view of how patients were cared for throughout history right up to the recent changes in local provision.
Confusion over schizophrenia
I READ with interest the article (September 3) about ‘The germs link to schizophrenia’.
Professor Murray's study was interesting, however, I must point out that the report has made the common error of calling schizophrenia a split personality.
I am sure no-one will think that Professor Murray has called it that, but it is only fair to those who suffer from schizophrenia that the difference between schizophrenia and split personalities is pointed out.
The two disorders are frequently mislabelled in the popular Press.
Perhaps the confusion originally came about since the name ‘schizophrenia’ comes from the Greek root schizo, which means ‘splitting away from’.
A split in the personality, wherein two or more fairly separate and coherent systems of being exist alternatively in the same person, is different from the split between cognition and affect that is said to produce the schizophrenic's behaviour.
Schizophrenia is classified as a functional psychosis and split personality as a dissociative hysterical neurosis, as different as tonsillitis and appendicitis.
I point out the difference as many people with mental health problems are now being cared for in the community and I feel that the community needs to understand these people rather than doubly stigmatise them by thinking that they have two illnesses rather than one.
ROSETTA MOORE Dunluskin Gardens, Carrickfergus.
A signal to smokers
I REFER to the comments made by an anonymous smoker who mistakenly tried to justify smokers as paying more tax indirectly due to higher Government levy on cigarettes.
Smokers take more days off work which reduces our competitiveness with world counterparts.
Secondly, the unknown effects of passive smoking on the non-smoking population has yet to be fully realised.
As well as being a dirty habit which encourages bad health, bad breath and bad manners, I could never sit and listen to an addict justify his addiction.
Maybe the smoker will realise how disgusting his habit is when he hopefully decides to kick it once and for all and stop relying on the NHS as a safety net.
NO SYMPATHY Belfast.
DAE ‘is not new to province’
THE Northern Health and Social Services Board is delighted to see the Royal Victoria Hospital introducing new medical techniques as highlighted in your article ‘Treatment Service Boost for the Royal Victoria’(September 3).
The Royal is to be congratulated on introducing Direct Access Endoscopy,(DAE), however your readers may be interested to know that Northern Board patients have enjoyed the benefit of DAE for some time.
DAE was introduced at the Mid-Ulster Hospital in February 1991 and at Whiteabbey Hospital in April 1992.
DAE services are also planned for the new Antrim Hospital which is due to open in March 1994.
Dr J D WATSON Director of Public Health.
Parents rights in sex education
THE whole question of sex education in school has arisen in recent years and has become a matter of real importance.
Those people who are involved in promoting sex education should have high moral standards and be approved of by parents as should their lesson plans and schemes of work.
If the sex education play ‘Yours Truly’, which has been commissioned by the Health Promotion Agency of Northern Ireland and targets 13–15 year-olds in our schools, does not meet the above criteria then I hope parents will use the rights enshrined in the Education Act and the Parents Charter to protect their children from others who have plans for them.
RITA BRENNAN Doneyshiel Road, Rasharkin, Ballymena.
LIKE thousands of other my family was indirectly but irrevocably affected by the unrest of the early 1970s.
To find employment my father moved to Peterborough and although I have since lived at Rathcoole for a period I have found my childhood friends difficult to trace.
In March 1968 we lived at Westway Crescent, Ballgomartin and I attended Springhill school.
I am now trying to contact Harris Crothers who lived at 6 Westway Parade and who had a brother named Alastair.
I would be grateful if any readers have any information regarding the Crothers family.
ROY CLARKE 55 Hayes Walk, Elton, Peterborough, Cambs.
PE8 6RY.
Where are the young ones?
AS a Crusaders supporter for many years I'm concerned at the lack of a youth policy at Seaview.
Several first team members are over 30 years of age.
And with the exception of Davy Mallon, none of the reserve team could make the step up to the senior squad if we had a few injuries.
I was also dismayed we allowed young Simon Houston, an exciting talented goalkeeper, to leave us for Distillery.
Surely a youth team is required at all clubs.
Let's hope the Crues have one sooner than later.
Concerned Crues Fan Yes, let's go back to the good old days when young, inexperienced Crusaders were getting stuffed every week.
The headmaster
Girls ‘free to achieve’
THE fact that Glenlola is a single-sex school enhances the education of its 930 girls, according to headmaster Richard Finlay.
‘From our point of view, it would seem that girls adapt extremely well to post primary education.
‘That's not to say anything against boys, but there are indicators that given opportunities in a single sex environment, girls tend to have fewer inhibitions.
‘Traditionally, certain subjects have been dominated by males.
That problem doesn't happen here — the girls enter freely into all aspects of school life.
This builds up confidence in their own abilities.’
Welcomes
Richard Finlay became headmaster in 1992.
For him, education comes first, but he welcomes the new atmosphere of access to information about schools which means that Glenlola's achievements are public knowledge.
‘Before the 1989 reform order, Glenlola, like a large number of schools, had a low public awareness level.
Schools got on with the business of education.
‘In our case, I think people were looking further afield for education without realising that they had a very good facility close to home.
‘Now information that a school used to retain for its own purposes is becoming part of the public domain.
Topped
But although pleased that the school topped the Sunday Times poll locally, Richard Finlay still has reservations about the merits of performance indicator ‘charts’.
‘They are not a total reflection of how a school is providing education for pupils.
Indicators should go through as many aspects of school life as possible, not a select few.
We at Glenlola know we've got warts — but in one or two areas we achieve extremely highly.’
Already, the effects of top ranking have translated into healthy demand for places at Glenlola.
This year it was the most over-subscribed grammar school in the South Eastern Board area with around 211 girls vying for 145 places.
‘Unfortunately we have had to disappoint a large number of capable girls, causing the governors a great deal of anguish.
But that should not be taken as a serious disappointment.
The choice of schools in the province is extensive.’
Mr Finlay also regards the standard of local primary education instrumental in the success of Glenlola.
‘A grammar or secondary school is only as good as the quality of primary education and the girls who are coming into the school.
‘We also have a very low turn over of staff, so teachers get a chance to know pupils extremely well.
‘We must be doing something right — if you look at our attendance record, it is exceptional.
The girls really do want to come to school.’
THE WIFE of a man wounded in an INLA murder bid in Belfast six days ago says he is ‘absolutely devastated’ to be targeted by terrorists for a second time.
Gerry Drumgoole managed to escape death at his Hazelfield Street home on Monday afternoon but has lost his spleen and suffered other internal injuries.
The attack came less than three months after Sunday Life reported that a police file containing his address had been lost in a nationalist part of north Belfast.
The details were recorded by a constable at a road stop as Mr Drumgoole was travelling home with his wife Jacqueline.
She said yesterday that despite the loss of the form with their new address on it, there were no security measures on the house.
‘Gerry is disabled from a terrorist explosion two years ago.
He lost a leg and still may lose an arm from that attack.
‘All he does is sit at the front window looking out or just sits on the bench on a sunny day like Monday.
‘The windows are double glazed.
There's no special glass and the door is an ordinary door.
‘Reporters and cameramen have seen inside.
There is no security apparatus.
‘For the INLA to suggest Gerry is a leading member of anything is wrong.
‘He can only drive a specially-adapted car and that would stand out like a sore thumb if he was moving about doing something related to terrorism’, Mrs Drumgoole said.
Since the 1991 explosion the Drumgooles and their three young children have moved to two different houses.
The document lost by the RUC contained their present address where Mr Drumgoole was shot on Monday.
Now the family may consider moving from the Shankill completely.
‘Even when he lost his leg Gerry was chirpy.
This second attack has just devastated him.
He never thought he would be targeted again’, his wife said.
Lawyers acting for the 31 year-old double terror victim have recently entered into negotiations with Northern Ireland Office lawyers to settle a compensation case arising out of the first attack on him in which he lost a leg and suffered serious damage to an arm.
In Monday's attack Mr. Drumgoole was wounded twice and picked part of one bullet from a flesh wound to the arm.
The second bullet entered his stomach and damaged vital organs.
His three year-old daughter Jade narrowly escaped death when bullets were fired through the front door.
By STEPHEN GORDON
THE MARCH of time in Ulster has transformed the British soldier, as these pictures reveal.
Almost 25 years after the troops were first deployed in the province their equipment, combat gear, training and role in the conflict has changed dramatically.
The tin-hatted soldiers who were sent into to quell riots on the troubled streets of Londonderry and Belfast must look enviously at the gear provided for the modern soldier.
For the troops who were sent here in the summer of 1969 were ill-prepared for urban conflict.
‘In the early years training was haphazard.
For a start, few were absolutely certain what to train for,’ recalled one former officer.
Sent into to keep the peace between warring communities the first soldiers had no more legal powers than the ordinary citizen until the Special Powers Act gave them power to stop and question, search and arrest without a warrant.
Most noticeably the troops were poorly equipped to deal with riots.
Their standard British Army issue tin helmets were not fitted with any kind of visor to protect against stones and other missiles.
And when the first visors were introduced they made the heavy hats flop down over the troops' faces.
Lighter glass-reinforced helmets, with better ballistic and shock protection, were later developed.
Riot shields were issued in 1970 but they were clumsy, metal shields which were later replaced by perspex versions.
And the early soldiers had to endure heavy, badly fitting World War II style combat clothes until the mid-1970s.
‘Today's fatigues are lighter but warmer, showerproof and give a limited protection against flames also.
They are a lot more comfortable,’ said an Army spokesman.
Communications were also a nightmare for first soldiers in Ulster — their primitive radio sets were a disaster in built-up areas.
Helicopters were used to provide an airborne relay station but if they were shot down or ran out of fuel, soldiers on the ground often had to resort to the GPO telephone system.
Over the years the Army turned to off-the-shelf civilian radio equipment to provide essential communications.
Army training has also changed dramatically as a result of the Ulster conflict.
A standard Northern Ireland training package has been in operation for some time including intensive urban and rural patrolling, riot control techniques, shooting at fleeting targets, powers of arrest, orders for opening fire, bomb and weapon recognition.
‘Soldiers now go to Northern Ireland well-prepared and trained,’ said one senior officer.
You can't afford to be cheap and cheerful when it comes to your handbag…
The status symbol that says a lot about you
TOP of your list of accessory priorities this season should be investing in a truly wonderful handbag.
You can afford to be cheap and cheerful when it comes to just about every other accessory, but a bag says more about you than all the rest put together.
Handbags were once the source of derision and scorn — the butt of jokes about the Queen and Margaret Thatcher — but today they are a happening item.
And handbag designers don't come much younger, prettier or more stylish than Anya Hindmarch.
She started her business six years ago when just 19.
She was studying in Florence at the time when she spotted a trend among Florentine women for a drawstring leather duffel bag.
She sold 500 bags through a special offer in Harpers and Queen, and her own business was born.
Crazy
Her much coveted designs marry fun with function and superb quality and are sold throughout the world.
She has just opened her own shop in London.
Even Vivienne Westwood now has a handbag range — wonderful and crazy designs which are not all entirely impractical.
The ultimate handbag for this season is small.
Big may well be beautiful for casual weekends, but for day, business or evening use, small is the only thing to carry.
It symbolises power and control, and also looks a great deal more chic.
If you must have a larger design for practical reasons, then it must still be a boxy shape, not slouchy or scruffy.
Status
Handbags have reached such status symbol heights that many high street chains offer interpretations of such classics as Chanel's Kelly bag, Prada's quilted nylon and gilt bag, and Gucci's print bag.
All have been hugely popular.
Buying the real thing is a true investment.
And traditional handbag makers are injecting more fun and fashion into their designs to appeal to a wider audience, while maintaining the quality which makes them so distinctive.
Launer, which carries the Royal Warrant, offers far more than just the style for which the Queen is famous.
Smaller designs in a myriad of colours are launched this season, all with the twisted rope emblem which epitomises its pedigree.
Mulberry is the one company to have successfully transcended the difference between city and country — probably because they are all true classics.
Walk down the high street of any of Europe's capitals and you are bound to spot many a well-dressed woman carrying her Mulberry.
New hand-held bags are introduced this season, double handled or single, with or without shoulder straps.
Texture is particularly emphasised, with leather mixed with heavy wool velour for one design.
Clutch
Mulberry heralds the return of the clutch bag, first designed by the company's owner Roger Saul in 1973.
This autumn there is an envelope clutch with handstrap in rich colours of ruby, emerald and sapphire.
Whether you want to be ultra-feminine and coy with a tiny dinky bag, or to use a chic leather box to give out vibes of power and control, or perhaps just want to splash out on serious quality in a crazy colour the handbag is the lifestyle message of the season.
ABOVE: Frosted blue and pink leather bag with diamante clip.
£140 by Anya Hindmarch.
ABOVE: The new ‘Tetbury’ Scotchgrain and leather bag from Mulberry. £165.
LEFT: The distinctive twisted rope detail on Launer handbags reflects the pedigree.
The bag is £250 and the wallets £69.
RIGHT: Stylish blanket check fabric bags trimmed with leather in a variety of sizes at very competitive prices.
From £27.
By Tula.
LEFT: Delicious and dinky bags in a myriad of colours.
£170 from Launer.
THE WAY THEY WERE
Today's soldier wears lightweight, shrapnel-proof helmet and visor, modern light fatigues which are warm, showerproof and offer limited flame resistance.
He carries a state of the art radio and SA 80 rifle.
Throughout the campaign troops have been issued with various flak jackets which give a degree of protection against low velocity rounds.
Recently the army have purchased new, heavier US flak jackets to give protection against the Barrett Light 50 used by the IRA sniper known as Goldfinger.
The first soldiers who arrived in Ulster in 1969 were poorly equipped and prepared — their steel hats did not have a protective visor, their heavy fatigues were
WW2 issue, MoD radios were useless in built-up areas.
Metal riot shields were introduced in 1970.