

Experts' warning over sunbeds
Extra report
Sunbed scare…
Could this machine damage your health?
THE two go hand in hand half an hour in the gym and half an hour on the sunbed.
They seem the ideal solution to starting off that tan before a holiday abroad or showing off that newly honed bod.
But should health clubs and gyms really keep and actively promote machines that can potentially do us harm?
That's the question being raised by Health and Fitness magazine after speaking to dermatologists who, while admitting they may do less harm than actual sunlight, stress they can cause a lot of harm.
Tanning beds were introduced to reduce the risk of burning.
Harmful
Manufacturers say they are safer because they use UVA rays and block the harmful UVB burning rays.
But as Robin Graham-Brown, a spokesman for the British Association of Dermatology, explains: ‘Actually some solaria do emit UVB rays, and UVA rays are not without risk.
‘People don't realise that both types of UV rays are ionising radiation.
‘These are the same types of rays as nuclear Gamma and X-rays and both are capable of seriously damaging the skin's DNA.’
Although dermatologist Dr John Hawk, from St John's Institute of Dermatology in London, admits: ‘If tanning has to be done, sunbeds may be less damaging than actual sunlight.
‘And people who tan easily will probably do themselves less harm.’
Still he recommends no more than 10 exposures a course, and no more than two courses a year.
Among the problems association with sunbeds are skin cancer and premature ageing.
‘Wrinkled’
You can even get warts from equipment which hasn't been properly disinfected.
Says Dr Graham-Brown: ‘The brown belles of today are probably the wrinkled prunes of tomorrow.’
So why do health clubs keep these machines.
According to one manufacturer: ‘Profit.
With a rate of fast return the tanning bed is the single most profitable investment a club can make.’
Risk is ‘million to one’
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
ONE of the youngest potential victims of Chester's tuberculosis scare was among the first to be tested for the disease yesterday.
Tiny Andrew Morrison, who was born nine weeks early at the Countess of Chester Hospital, is among 481 children treated by a junior doctor who has since been found to be suffering from TB.
Hospital staff are stressing the tests are ‘purely precautionary’ and say the chances of anyone catching the disease are a million to one.
Andrew's parents Charles and Denise, from Barnton, Northwich, who brought him home from hospital last week, were alarmed to be called back so soon.
‘We did feel concerned at first, but we have since been reassured that the chances of Andrew catching TB are extremely remote,’ said Mr Morrison.
Out of 481 children called in, just over 100 have already been tested.
They will now face a six week wait for the results of the tests.
A further 210 families have made appointments and a special helpline set up to deal with inquiries from worried parents has so far received 137 calls.
‘We have had an extremely encouraging response, so far,’ said Paul Barrow, chief executive at the Countess of Chester.
‘We want to be reassuring the risk of anyone catching this is infinitesimal.
‘We have sent letters to everyone we believe has been in contact with the doctor but if anyone else feels they would like to have a test to put their mind at rest they should contact us.’
Any parents who do not respond to the call-up will be contacted again.
More than 500 staff and 450 GPs who are believed to have come into contact with the man are being tested separately.
The doctor, who has not been identified, is expected to make a full recovery.
Two helplines will be running all next week.
The numbers are  and .
Denise Morrison with baby Andrew after his test yesterday Picture: PETER PRICE