

Dodd's tonic
COMEDIAN Ken Dodd will put a smile on the faces of patients and staff when he visits the Royal Liverpool University Hospital next Wednesday to open the Women's Royal Voluntary Service tea bar, which has undergone a £40,000 facelift.
TOMORROW'S WORLD: In New York
(BBC 1, 7.30pm) THE Big Apple's the location for a special programme where inventions are even wackier than here in the UK.
PETER GRANT's plea to our soap writers: Can we have a laugh, please?
Merseyside, host of the Festival of Comedy and birthplace of so many comedians and top sitcoms, is a naturally funny place so where are the Brookie bluffers, the wise-cracking wags?
Over on EastEnders (17.65 million) the misery lingers on and on.
The morose Mitchells wins the wet blanket award.
Droning Dot and nurdish Nigel do have the odd laugh, but there's never been a character who you could call easy going and game for a laugh.
BELLS ARE RINGING FOR SAM AND DIANE
CHEERS The final episode
Sunday, Channel 4, 9.00pm THE LAST order bell rings tonight for Cheers…but will there also be wedding bells ringing for Sam and Diane?
After 11 years, 175 episodes and 26 Emmy awards Boston's most famous bar is closing and it is our turn to watch this specially extended final episode.
More than 150 million Americans tuned in to watch the episode in the States last month making Cheers — which earned £200 million in worldwide sales — the most-watched TV show in history.
Over the years some famous visitors have dropped in to Cheers: Emma Thompson, Roger Reed and John Cleese, who won an Emmy for his 1987 appearance as marriage counsellor Simon Finch-Royce.
The Righteous Brothers popped in for a swifty, as did Twin Peaks star Sherilyn Fenn.
Others to share a Cheers beer mat include former senator Gary Hart, Christopher Lloyd of Back to the Future and, in the final episode, Tom Berenger.
The show's makers NBC decided to scrap Cheers when Ted Danson, who plays the leading character barman Sam Malone, announced he was quitting to make movies.
Cheers is based on a real bar in Boston — The Bull and Finch — where the cast gathered to watch the final episode.
In the final show Diane (Shelley Long) returns after a six year absence from the series to declare once and for all her love for Sam (Ted Danson).
The feeling is mutual, but is he ready to run off to California with her?
Hollywood heart-throb Tom Berenger guests as the new love in the life of Rebecca (by Kirstie Alley).
This is the night we British fans also learn whether Woody's (Woody Harrelson) political career takes off, and will find out what Norm (George Wendt) loves most in the world.
Whatever happens it's time to raise one last glass to Cheers and the end of a decade of vintage comedy.
CHEERS: The final episode sees Sammy reunited with his old sparring partner Diane!
THE HEIGHTS OF PASSION
FOUR films and a pop song have been made from the classic novel Wuthering Heights.
What next tea towels?
Place-mats?
Still, Emily Bronte's sweeping romance with its powerful lead roles of Heathcliff and Cathy is a natural magnet for the movie business.
The latest version got off to a controversial start when it was decided to cast stunning French actress Juliette Binoche in this most English of dramas.
Ralph Fiennes takes the hunky Heathcliff role in a story of love, passion and vengeance set in the wilds of Yorkshire.
The movie is out on video today from Paramount Pictures and we have five £70 copies of it to give away.
They will go to the senders of the first postcards out of the hat telling me the name of any one of the leading actors in the original 1939 film.
Doomed Ralph Fiennes as Heathcliff and Juliette Binoche as Cathy
Love's labours lost in a mystery plot Nightmare scenario…
Jeff Bridges and Nancy Travis.
THE VANISHING (15) A MAN drives into a petrol station with his girlfriend.
She goes into the loo…and he never sees her again.
Because such a scenario is plausible the sort of nightmare we've all contemplated at some time or another this movie makes for far more frightening entertainment than the most graphic of shock horrors.
Keifer Sutherland plays the boyfriend, and after three years he's still obsessed with the search for his lost love.
Not because he can't live without her (he has a new life, new partner and new home) but because he has to know what happened.
Enter Jeff Bridges, family man, scientist…and the warped mind that carried out the abduction.
He confesses his initial involvement to Sutherland, but will not say what happened after the petrol station unless Keifer agrees to go through the same process, starting with the taking of a sleeping draught.
Now if this all sounds rather familiar to some, it's because this is a remake of a Dutch film of five years ago.
As with so many recent American hits (Three Men and a Baby, Scent of a Woman and Sommersby to name but three) Hollywood has simply stolen a good Euro idea and churned it out.
In this case, they've done a pretty good job, though Jeff Bridges gives the part of the kidnapper an unnecessary weirdness.
This is supposed to be just a very ordinary, lost-in-the-crowd guy with an unsuspected psychopathic leaning.
But the way Bridges plays him he'd be the first sicko picked out of an identity parade.
Weakness
The other weakness is the ending, which has suffered from Hollywood's perception of the tastes of the American box office.
You can give U.S. audiences as many sick slashings and graphically exploding heads as you like, but they won't stand for going away depressed.
All of which rather spoils the dramatic point of the rest of the film.
Nevertheless, those unfamiliar with the original Dutch version (which is most people) may find this a satisfying way to while away an evening.
Street star Lynne ‘poorly’ after collapse
By Echo reporter CORONATION Street actress Lynne Perrie was said to be ‘poorly’ today in the hospital where she was taken after collapsing during filming earlier this week.
The condition of the 60 year-old actress, who is believed to have suffered a severe asthma attack, worsened since yesterday.
A spokeswoman at Hope Hospital in Salford said: ‘She has had a restless night and is poorly this morning.’
Miss Perrie has played the part of Ivy Brennan in the top-rated series for 17 years.
She spoke recently of the strain of the six days a week work schedule that she said had left her shattered.
She has suffered ill health with cancer of the womb, leading to a hysterectomy, and also a heart problem.
Lynne Perrie…restless night
Rod is Merseyside's gloomiest Jock, fun fan Christine reveals to the Echo
SAY HELLO TO THE CRYING SCOTSMAN
By Paddy Shennan
MISERY GUTS Rod Mackay never looks on the bright side of life he doesn't believe there is one!
The gloomy Scotsman, of Menlove Avenue, Calderstones, Liverpool, says he was doomed to be depressed from the day he was born…67 years ago.
And he has now made it to the finals of our fun competition to find the Most Miserable Man on Merseyside after being nominated by step-daughter Christine Johnson and wife, Margaret.
‘He drives mum and I daft with his eccentric ways and eternal gloom,’ said Christine, 31.
Judge for yourself here's six of the best from our glum friend: On Radio Merseyside's Billy Butler and Wally Scott: ‘All that pair do is laugh.
They've had it too soft, that's their trouble.’
On Victor Meldrew: ‘I was saying ‘I don't believe it!’ long before that old fool was invented.’
On his birthday: ‘Another milestone on the way to the big brown box.’
On paying 50p for a cup of coffee: ‘You must be joking!
That's 10 shillings half a quid.
Coffee used to be twopence.
The world's going mad.’
Explaining his ‘lined, gaunt face and bald head’: ‘That comes from a lifetime of worry.’
After Christine and Margaret have been shopping: ‘Did you hire a lorry for that lot?
You won't be happy until we're knocking on the workhouse door.’
Rod confessed: ‘It's all true.
I have been a pessimist and defeatist all my life and I'm not going to change now!’
But, he did manage to add cheerfully: ‘I'm delighted to have been nominated!’
Rod Mackay…delighted to be nominated
Ray, 12 set to star in TV play
KIRKBY schoolboy Ray Williams has landed a ‘perfick’ part acting with Darling Buds of May star David Jason.
Ray, 12, from West Vale, won an audition to get his first big acting role playing Jason's young son in a new BBC play, The Bullion Boys.
The pupil at All Saints High School in Kirby, said: ‘I'm made up.
I think David Jason is boss.’
Ray's only other acting experience has been with his school plays.
But he has been learning the ropes since February with Liverpool Playhouse workshop.
He plays David Jason's son Kenny in the play set in Liverpool during the war and concerning a group of dockers who try to hide gold bullion from the Germans.
Ray will be shooting the film in London next month and later in Liverpool's dockland.
Mum Jean Williams said: ‘We're all really pleased.
He's a really bubbly and outgoing boy who loves acting.’
Perfick parts…for young Ray Williams and David Jason (right)
Pipe them aboard
THE new Wirral-based theatre company, Desperate Measures, are on red alert.
For next month they perform the comedy Sub-Mariners on board a battleship.
The Falklands veteran vessel, HMS Plymouth, permanently berthed at Wallasey docks, is to be turned into a floating studio theatre especially for the production.
‘You could call it a return to drama for the Plymouth,’ say the organisers.
During the Falklands campaign, the ship was badly holed by an Exocet.
But she survived to take her place in history as the location for the signing of the surrender by the Argentinians.
Sub-Mariners the Naval equivalent of M.A.S.H.
depicts the tensions of life 800 feet beneath the waves in a nuclear submarine.
The setting of the officers' mess on board HMS Plymouth has been chosen by the actors to give an authentic feel to the show.
At the dramatic moment in the play of ‘red alert’, the warship's REAL alert lights will come on all around the audience.
The play, by Tom McClenaghan, former writer-in-residence at London's Royal court, previews on July 2 with further performances on July 8, 9 and 10.
As a bonus, ticket holders will be able to tour Plymouth before the 8pm performances, and to go on board HMS Onyx, moored alongside.
Out of this world
I FIND television good for winding down because I Red Dwarf is one of my favourites and Craig Charles is a really funny bloke.
The programme is very innovative and interesting but funny at the same time.
It's really good for sitting down with a meal and just forgetting about work.
The humour is clever — daft but not really slap-stick — and the writers obviously put a lot of time into making sure it works.
Another favourite is The Bill which is usually starting when I get in from training.
I quite like the way the programme tends to finish but leaves a few questions unanswered.
That way they leave things to your imagination.
Obviously, because I'm a sportsman, I keep up with all the sports programmes.
I try to watch Match of the Day I'm a keen Liverpool supporter so it's especially important when my team plays.
I'm very keen on all aspects of sport, not just athletics.
I really enjoy watching boxing and try to get to see a few sports programmes every week.
And for obvious reasons if there is an athletics programme on I make sure I watch it.
It's a really good way to keep an eye on other sprinters and suss out the competition.
I'm not the kind of person who spends all their free time glued to the telly.
My life is very full with my studies at Sheffield University, my athletic career and generally enjoying the student social life.
But after a tough training session and several lectures during the day it's great to wind down in front of the TV and not have to worry about anything.
RED DWARF: off-beat humour from outer space
1
In what classic film is the last line: ‘Nobody's perfect’ heard?
2
What make of car were Imps and Huskies?
3
Who sang Walking In The Air in the film The Snowman?
4
Where were the 1956 Olympic Games held?
5
Who was known as The Butcher of Lyons?
6
What were first painted on London's streets in June 1958?
7
In which county is Weymouth?
8
Ronald Searle created an infamous girls' school called what?
9
1991 was the bicentenary of the death of which Austrian composer?
10
Which Asian country was beset with civil war in 1971?
1, Some Like It Hot.
2, Hillman. 3, Aled Jones.
4, Melbourne.
5, Klaus Barbie.
6, Yellow parking lines.
7, Dorset.
8, St Trinian's. 9, Mozart.
10, Pakistan.
LADY CHATTERLEY
Sunday, BBC1, 9.35pm LADY CHATTERLEY has taken to walking in the woods in episode two of this lavish adaptation of D H Lawrence's love story.
And we all know where that is going to lead…
She discovers Mellors' domain where initially, although attracted to each other, their meeting are uneasy affairs.
Meanwhile Sir Clifford has engaged a nurse, Mrs Bolton…who just happens to be the village gossip.
Freed of the responsibility of nursing her husband Lady Chatterley spends more time with the gamekeeper and eventually they both give in to their desire.
But it looks like Mrs Bolton realises what's going on.
Sean Bean as Mellors
Tarrant tickler
THE MAIN EVENT
Tonight, BBC1, 6.15pm CHRIS Tarrant brings more fun and frolics from the living rooms of the Great British Public.
This week the BBC Outside Broadcast Units are in Edinburgh and Berkshire.
As always each team, a mix of GBP members and celebrities, chases points in the battle to win a luxury weekend break prize and a possible place in the grand final.
Love's labours lost in a mystery plot Nightmare scenario…
Jeff Bridges and Nancy Travis.
THE VANISHING (15)
A MAN drives into a petrol station with his girlfriend.
She goes into the loo…and he never sees her again.
Because such a scenario is plausible the sort of nightmare we've all contemplated at some time or another this movie makes for far more frightening entertainment than the most graphic of shock horrors.
Keifer Sutherland plays the boyfriend, and after three years he's still obsessed with the search for his lost love.
Not because he can't live without her (he has a new life, new partner and new home) but because he has to know what happened.
Enter Jeff Bridges, family man, scientist…and the warped mind that carried out the abduction.
He confesses his initial involvement to Sutherland, but will not say what happened after the petrol station unless Keifer agrees to go through the same process, starting with the taking of a sleeping draught.
Now if this all sounds rather familiar to some, it's because this is a remake of a Dutch film of five years ago.
As with so many recent American hits (Three Men and a Baby, Scent of a Woman and Sommersby to name but three) Hollywood has simply stolen a good Euro idea and churned it out.
In this case, they've done a pretty good job, though Jeff Bridges gives the part of the kidnapper an unnecessary weirdness.
This is supposed to be just a very ordinary, lost-in-the-crowd guy with an unsuspected psychopathic leaning.
But the way Bridges plays him he'd be the first sicko picked out of an identity parade.
Weakness
The other weakness is the ending, which has suffered from Hollywood's perception of the tastes of the American box office.
You can give U.S. audiences as many sick slashings and graphically exploding heads as you like, but they won't stand for going away depressed.
All of which rather spoils the dramatic point of the rest of the film.
Nevertheless, those unfamiliar with the original Dutch version (which is most people) may find this a satisfying way to while away an evening.
GEOFF
MATTHEWS
Spotlight on '40s at 50th show
Chairman Roland Williams announced a competition for the best '40s-style stand to help broaden the interest of the event for a family day out and to attract people from outside the farming community.
Fashion show
A CHOIR is raising money to fund a trip to Reutlingen, twin town of Ellesmere Port and Neston.
This evening, Hadlow Green Singers are holding a fashion show in Willaston Memorial Hall (7.30pm).
IF EVER there was need for proof of the quality of Welsh publishing these days, three recently published colourful hardbacks, superbly illustrated from Wales University Press provide ample evidence.
Rolling stones
STONE products produced by the Border Hardcore and Rockery Stone Company, of Middletown, Welshpool, are enhancing display stands at the Paris Air Show.
Powys Transport delivered two lorry loads of materials to the show, which opens tomorrow.
Spotlight on 40's at 50th show
STALLHOLDERS at Saturday's Golden Jubilee Aberystwyth Show have been asked to join in the spirit of the occasion.
Chairman Roland Williams announced a competition for the best 40's style stand to help broaden the interest of the event for a family day out and to attract people from outside the farming community.
The showfield at Tanycastell Park, Rhydyfelin, will have a '50 Years of Farming in Ceredigion' theme with displays and exhibits of farming techniques.
The show has become a mecca for top breeders of cattle and sheep and the Welsh Black classes attract entries from all parts of Wales.
LANDOWNERS in Cumbria looking to earn extra cash from quarrying are being urged to identify sites with the county council.
‘A minerals and waste local plan is about to be prepared and it will form the basis for the control and location of quarries and landfill sites in the county for the next 20 years,’ said CLA regional secretary Jolyon Dodgson.
The plan would identify sites where such operations would be acceptable and it would become difficult for sites not identified to gain planning permission.
But he advised caution beyond the point of planning permission, because new environmental legislation makes it essential to seek expert advice.
A Flea in Her Ear THEATR CLWYD
Review by Penny Kiley
HALFWAY through the play you will have seen a walking table, several fast opening doors, the rapid interchanging of numerous couples, and a hotel foyer that is busier than Piccadilly Circus and has more familiar faces than your family tree.
Dot to quit EastEnders
EASTENDERS busybody Dot Cotton is to leave the hit TV soap after eight years, it was revealed last night.
Actress June Brown, 65, had been rumoured to be unhappy with some storylines and upset when market stall holder Pete Beale played by Peter Dean was axed.
But friends believe she had had enough of the relentless pressure of the twice-weekly programme.
Last night, she said she would be taking a play to the Edinburgh Festival and directing for the first time.
June Brown
Fast but not furious
Industrial Concert
LIVERPOOL CATHEDRAL
Review by Diane Massey
THE acoustics at the Anglican Cathedral have often given rise to speculation about its suitability for Philharmonic concerts.
But it is not entirely wrong, just different.
In short, it can really add to a piece so it depends very much on how you handle the music.
Anyway, if you always want to hear a piece of music played in a certain way, you might as well sit at home in the lounge and listen to your favourite, definitive CD recording.
But this is not what live music is all about.
Live music is all about incident, accident and previously unconsidered possibilities.
So I held my breath when conductor En Shao took the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra through the fastest fourth movement of Tchaikovsky's 4th symphony I have ever heard, wondering what he would do with the resonations.
The answer was he usually ignored them, which meant of course that some entries were obscured and the whole was not as clean as it may have been but it was certainly speedy.
En Shao went for brilliant incisiveness rather than dramatic dialogue.
It was exhilarating stuff from the RLPO strings and brass, but some of the weight of the piece went foundering.
En Shao appeared in Liverpool two years ago, shortly before he was due to take up position of principal conductor of the Ulster Orchestra where he is now installed.
In that time, he has really matured and gained the confidence to achieve great subtleties.
If I grumble about the last movement of the Tchaikovsky, I certainly would not complain about the delicacy of the pizzicato of the third movement.
And Stravinsky's Wind Symphony, which opened this industrial concert (repeated tonight) is a raspingly erudite, tight piece of writing for wind instrument its bitter sweet sadness falling sonorously in the cathedral.
Poulenc's Organ Concerto fared really well, the sure hand of the soloist Ian Tracey providing an atmospheric foil for the orchestra.
It was well worth paying extra for a front seat to hear how these wonderful sound textures connect and separate in this unique venue.
Choir performs
THE Tudor Consort of Nantwich, a chamber choir specialising in sacred and secular music, will be performing at the Festival in Liverpool's Anglican Cathedral on June 17 at 8pm.
An address will be given by Children's Society director Ian Sparks.
Secure free parking will be available at the Cathedral.
A Hard Edge to Eastern art show
Bashir Makhoul
BLUECOAT
Review by Adrian Henri
BASHIR Makhoul's paintings at the Bluecoat are, superficially, in the style known in the 60s as Hard Edge: strongly-patterned abstracts in flat areas of contrasting colours.
Yet this isn't the whole story.
The colours in the earlier works are there for powerfully symbolic reasons; the design of the later ones recalls, say, the mosaics of the Alhambra in Granada.
Makhoul's own history reflects these elements: Palestinian, born in Israel, studied art there and in England, where he's now living.
Paintings like El-Hejara not only feature stylised Eastern calligraphy, but their colours black, red, green and white are those of the Palestinian flag, and their use in Israel is punishable by law.
Images
This undertone of political symbolism is less overt in the more recent paintings, which effect a happy marriage between Western abstraction and Eastern ornamentation.
Traditionally, these patterns repeat to infinity; Makhoul sometimes underlines this by not filling in some areas completely, as if the picture could be carried on indefinitely.
He also sets the images at a slight angle from horizontal with the edge of the canvas, apparently so that we won't be lulled by the repetitive patterning.
In a new departure, Change, somewhat forlorn rows of clay pots confront enlarged versions of coins of the Ottoman Empire.
As with all his work, it is a synthesis of two elements, two traditions, that give the work its emotional force.
RLPO.
Review by Diane Massey.
THE conductor En Shao was just 12 when Red Guards invaded the family home in Tian Jin, China, and smashed up the piano.
Then they made a bonfire of his father's music and his collection of imported Deutsche Gramophon records.
Ordinary folk of the revolution should not have those things it had been decided.
Somehow En Shao's musical career survived.
He is now principal conductor of the Ulster Orchestra and last night made his second Liverpool appearance with the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra.
The Phil was playing in Liverpool Cathedral while work continues on renovating the Philharmonic Hall.
And this venue worked wonderfully for the most successful part of this concert the Poulenc Organ Concerto.
Ian Tracey was the confident soloist, clearly in charge of each fluctuating mood which overlays Poulenc's masterpiece of textures.
Sometimes the work sounds downright eerie.
There is one section in which the organ tunnels the very depths of its range while basses and cellos played pizzicato above.
En Shao presided well over this strange remoteness and used the best of the atmospheric cathedral acoustic.
The organ contributes for approximately half the orchestra in this work, which appropriately gave the RLPO's wind section a deserved break.
They had opened the concert with Stravinsky's Wind Symphonies, written in homage to Debussy and sometimes cutting, sometimes introspective, with delicate wistful flute playing for what looks like a very difficult part from Colin Chambers.
The second half brought Tchaikovsky's 4th symphony, where I fear the fourth movement was a little too fast, certainly on its opening, although a conductor can well afford to accelerate the pace towards the conclusion.
An inspired pizzicato movement showed the Philharmonic strings off to fine advantage.
The players gave En Shao his required speed, demonstrating what fine form they are in despite the financial problems which have clouded the organisation of late.
A lesser orchestra would have been in danger of simply falling apart.
The concert is repeated tonight.
Raving on about busts, buttocks and bathing suits
Raving Beauties
LIVERPOOL PLAYHOUSE
Review by Malcolm Handley
D H LAWRENCE, the so-called high priest of love, said the human soul needs beauty more than bread.
Fortunately, he ate his last slice long before the advent of pub beauty contests.
If ever an event set authors and psychologists an unanswerable quandary, it is the so-called beauty business who exploits who, who is most degraded and who really cares?
Dave Simpson's crushingly honest expos of the bust, buttock and bathing costume business may not answer all the questions but it certainly poses a few important ones.
With all the subtlety of a pub singer he prises away the so-called glamour and reveals a hard world full of sadness, unfulfilled dreams and barren values.
In doing so he reveals the most frequently denied value of humour a defence against the world's cruel pressures.
The plot of Raving Beauties is almost as scant as the girls' costumes.
A love-struck swain, intent on sating his unrequited love, enters a beauty contest in which the target of his amour is also a contestant.
Shaved, shorn and bewigged, Simon Lay struts his forbidden stuff and upstages some of the girls but the deed is far more convincing than the intention.
Still, it makes for some interesting innuendo as he admits he has something the other girls haven't.
Duggie Brown is excruciatingly convincing as the sleazy, no-talent compere whose best reward is to grope all and sundry.
But it is the sad worldliness of the backstage banter which makes this play so interesting.
Julie Riley and Paula Wilcox are excellent as the hard-bitten contestant regulars.
Diane Whiteley is superb as the good little girlfriend who is egged on to display her wares by her pathetic lover.
And Caroline Strong gives a full account of the innocence and sadness of a loser who eventually wins.
But the message is that there must be a better way of choosing a nice girl than this.
It reflects the sleaze and tackiness of a world which refuses to die.
Maria raises museum's Blue Peter flag
SCHOOLGIRL Maria Hogan has helped a Liverpool museum win a place in the finals of a national competition.
She told BBC's Blue Peter about the Maritime Museum, at Liverpool's Albert Dock.
Programme makers are searching for the best children's museum in Britain.
Maria, 12, who lives at Highfield Road South, Rock Ferry, Birkenhead, said: ‘I nominated the museum because it has a lot of exhibits which visitors can handle which makes it more interesting.’
Her nomination was selected from 18,000 entries to win the 11–15-year-old category.
Maria won an IBM computer and yesterday met Blue Peter presenter Diane Louise Jordan for filming of a future episode.
The Maritime Museum is fighting it out for the title with the National Fishing Heritage Museum in Grimsby and the Museum of Childhood in Edinburgh.
Neighbours (BBC1, 1.30/5.35pm)
POOR Beth endures male chauvinism at its ugliest when she starts work for Doug.
Home and Away (ITV 1.45/6pm) ALF'S stubborn approach is one of the reasons the brakes are put on Blake's return home.
Emmerdale (ITV, 7pm) TURNER tries to regain some street cred but his feeble attempts just aren't worth it.
As for Jack he is making Leonard re-evaluate his whole position.
EastEnders (BBC 1, 7.30pm) NIGEL faces yet another let down in his life.
How much can one man take?
And what's cooking for Ian, Hattie and Steve it might soon be their financial books.
Stars pay £6,500 to see dinosaur thriller
FILM NIGHT IS MONSTER CHARITY HIT
By Echo reporter
FILM stars, Washington celebrities, the curious and well-to-do attended the world premiere of Steven Spielberg's dinosaur thriller Jurassic Park last night.
Stars Jeff Goldblum, Laura Dern and Sam Neill were joined by ex-heavyweight boxing champion Muhammad Ali, former Washington Post editor Ben Bradlee, Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala and several members of Congress.
Top ticket price at Washington's Uptown Theatre was £6,500, the lowest £150, while about 300 inner-city youngsters went free as proceeds boosted a children's charity.
Senator Tom Harkin said: ‘That was a fun, scary movie.
The only thing that would have made it better was if it was in 3-D.’
The film is adapted from a Michael Crichton novel about a fantasy theme park built by a wealthy industrialist featuring real dinosaurs.
The monsters are cloned from genetic material extracted by scientists from insects trapped millions of years ago.
But while the biggest names from Hollywood and Washington watched the extravaganza, a handful of activists gathered outside to protest against genetically engineered animals and foods.
The demonstration was organised by the Foundation on Economic Trends, a group headed by ecology writer Jeremy Rifkin.
24 years ago
TED HEATH became Prime Minister in the year which heralded the arrival of The Goodies.
Tim Brooke-Taylor, Graeme Garden and Bill Oddie specialised in visual humour and did a lot of their own stunts.
One of the top sit-coms was ‘On the Buses’ which ran for sixty episodes.
‘A Question of Sport’ was born this year with Henry Cooper and Cliff Morgan as the captains.
And as we all know the show remains a firm favourite.
The major new documentary series of the year was Granada's widely acclaimed ‘Disappearing World’ in which Brian Moser set off in search of native tribes in the remotest parts of the world.
Geoffrey Bayldon was accidentally transported from the 11th century to the 20th as the wizard Catweazle, while vandals in Australia tried to kill Skippy the bush kangaroo at Watarah National Park.
No bottle and no sauce
SAD, disappointed and deeply frustrated: Lady Chatterley and I had plenty in common by the end of Sunday's opening episode.
The most notorious tale in English literature made an agonizingly slow start (at least for those of us in the seedier section of the viewing public).
The only saucy scene came when Sir Clifford (James Wilby) had his bed sores tended.
It's going to be a bum deal all through for poor Cliffy.
All he could produce was a stiff upper lip, while young Lady C cast meaningful looks at sturdy gamekeeper Mellors.
Joely Richardson seems perfect as the loyal but frustrated lady of the manor, while archetypal ‘bit of rough’ Sean Bean could out-squint a King Cobra.
Ken Russell's production is certainly easy on the eye, but fans are expecting a bit more than a well-turned ankle.
Penny Kiley discovers some unusual Fab Four tracks one of which is barking mad Exotic Beatles but are they in the wrong groove?…
Edmundo Ros (left), Derek Enright (above) and William Shatner.
City's riots through the lens
AMERICAN photographer Roland Charles is at the Blackie Arts Centre this evening to give an audio-visual presentation called Los Angeles Revolts.
Mr Charles' visit to Liverpool coincides with the opening of the exhibition A Day In The Life Of Black Los Angeles, which is showing at Liverpool's Blackie and Open Eye galleries.
Mr Charles, director of Los Angeles' Black Gallery, was joint curator of the exhibition, which brings together pictures by 10 photographers.
The aim of the exhibition, he says, is ‘to counteract the general media, how black people are represented, which emphasise the negative issues.
Other people are not represented.’
As part of his visit, organised by Liverpool Anti Racist Community Arts Association, Mr Charles will be taking photographs of Liverpool.
After a week here he says: ‘I like the visual landscape of the city.
I've seen some stately architecture and some of the major buildings along the river.
From a touristy perspective I've enjoyed the landscape.
‘But there are some things that disturb me.
‘Black people, although they've been here such a long time, haven't assimilated into the business community, or education, as they have in America.
I'm just very surprised.’
But Mr Charles added: ‘I'm a photographer, not a sociologist.
I don't have the answers.
I can only articulate what I observe.’
He is still deciding the kind of pictures he wants to take of Liverpool.
David Ashworth
Gareth Johnstone safe and well last night