

Court hearing to start again
THE trial of Speke man Gary Grugel was halted yesterday, and a retrial is to take place next month before a new jury.
Grugel, 40, of East Millwood Road, Speke, has pleaded not guilty at Liverpool Crown Court to 10 offences involving blackmail, attempting to pervert the course of justice, wounding with intent and assault.
Police hunt for street attacker
POLICE are appealing for witnesses to an unprovoked attack on a 20 year-old man.
The victim suffered cuts and bruises when he was assaulted by a man in Raven Meols Lane, Formby, Sefton.
The incident occurred shortly after 10pm on Tuesday night.
A police spokesman at Formby said: ‘We would like to appeal to three young men seen in the area at the time to come forward because we believe they probably witnessed the incident.’
The attacker is described as aged about 22, of thin build with dark curly hair, a dark moustache and a large nose.
He wore a green and blue fleece coat, blue jeans and brown training shoes.
Anyone who can help should telephone , extension 3045 in strict confidence.
Parkside women in chain protest
By Carmel Brown Daily Post Staff
TWO women yesterday chained themselves inside an office at Parkside Colliery as the campaign to maintain Lancashire's last pit became more desperate.
The women, both members of Women Against Pit Closures, moved into the cabin at the Newton-le-Willows pithead in the early hours of the morning.
And they have vowed to maintain their position until a decision has been made to reverse the closure of the pit.
But their ‘sisters’ at the pit camp were last night concerned for the safety of the pair, who are not being named.
And anxieties were heightened when two security guards and a dog were sent into the cabin.
Their mobile phone link had failed after just one call, and when darkness finally fell, they were no longer able to signal that they were well.
‘The women are occupying the cabin indefinitely to ensure that the plight of the pit remains in the public domain,’ said a spokeswoman late last night.
‘But we are a bit concerned that they have been barricaded in by the Coal Board, so even if they want to, they cannot get out.
‘And there are also two security guards and a dog in there with two more on duty outside.’
British Coal were last night unavailable for comment.
A march in support of Parkside from Wirral, Lancaster and Burnley to the pithead has been called by the Support Group.
The two day march begins on June 18 and will be led by Arthur Scargill and his wife, Ann.
Two pit protesters maintain their defiant protest against the closure of Parkside Colliery
Benetton ad with a private view…
ITALIAN clothing company Benetton published photographs of 58 sex organs yesterday in the latest of its shock advertisements.
Adults' and children's private parts of various shades of skin colour were displayed in a centrefold in the French left-wing newspaper Liberation.
The advert, turned down by Italian newspapers, raised eyebrows among readers and triggered angry commentaries on French radio.
France's advertising standards authority had no immediate comment on whether it broke the law.
Benetton's past publicity stunts have included images of a dying Aids sufferer, a victim of a Mafia shooting and a new-born baby with blood and the umbilical cord.
Company chairman Luciano Benetton appeared naked in newspapers around the world earlier this year with the caption ‘I want my clothes back’ in a charity stunt.
The company claims its publicity campaigns aim to raise awareness of social and environmental issues.
Critics dismiss them as devoid of social message.
‘This ad is decidedly crude but it is not vulgar,’ a spokeswoman said from Benetton's Italian headquarters.
‘It is a means of breaking a taboo of sex.’
The Benetton spokeswoman said photographer Olivero Toscani did not see the faces of the people whose genitals appeared in the advertisement.
Titanic yields up treasures
DIVERS exploring the wreck of the Titanic brought up china plates with a pattern not found before aboard the ill-fated ship, it was announced yesterday.
They were recovered in the first salvage expedition to the wreck since 1987.
Arnie Geller, president of the New York-based salvage firm scouring the ship, said the dive by a submersible also recovered five suitcases whose contents are believed to have been retrieved from safes before the ship sank on April 15, 1912.
The salvage operation is taking place 400 miles off the coast of Newfoundland in North Atlantic waters over 12,400 feet deep.
‘The valises were placed by the submersible in large baskets at the bottom of the ocean,’ Mr Geller said.
‘These will be retrieved when they are full.’
During the 1987 expedition a suitcase containing jewellery, gold coins and bank notes was recovered, among other artefacts believed to be worth about £38m.
‘Historians in our expedition were quite surprised about the pattern in the china plates recovered today,’ Mr Geller said.
‘They are from the first-class dining room.’
Daughter's life leaves legacy of hope
FATHER'S BOOK IS LABOUR OF LOVE FOR SUFFERING FAMILIES
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
THE father of a young cancer victim has written a book which he hopes will offer comfort and help to the parents of children suffering from brain tumours.
Roy Grainger's daughter died of a tumour the day before her seventh birthday last November.
Since then he has been busy working on a medical book about brain tumours in a bid to increase public awareness and raise vital funds for research.
He also hopes to answer many of the questions asked by bewildered families when their relative is diagnosed.
And a cancer specialist in Nottingham is so impressed with Mr Grainger's efforts that he has asked to visit Liverpool to spend a day with the family.
Mr Grainger, of Roehampton Drive, Crosby, said: ‘I hope to raise vital money for research into this wicked disease.
‘Great strides have been made with other forms of cancer.
This is great but brain cancer tends to be left behind.’
The Graingers began a worldwide hunt for a cure when Helen's diagnosis was made three and a half years ago.
They flew their daughter to Mexico and San Francisco in search of treatment.
A pioneering surgeon in America operated and removed 99pc of the tumour, but then more tumours were discovered on Helen's spine.
She died on November 1 surrounded by her relatives at Alder Hey Children's Hospital.
‘I decided to write this book in order to collate all the information about brain tumours, much of which is what myself and my wife Linda found when Helen was diagnosed.
‘I have written it using medical terms and layman's terms in brackets so people will be able to understand it.
‘I firmly believe that the more information people have, the easier things are.
‘I have support from the medical profession, and the book is going off to be edited by a panel of doctors this week.
‘We are desperate to raise funds for research and are in the process of setting up the British Brain Tumour Association.
‘We have applied for charitable status and we have come up with a slogan, Only Together We Can Win.’
He added: ‘People probably think something like this will never happen to them.
That's what we thought until Helen was diagnosed.
‘By making a donation for research, people are investing in their family's future.’
Anyone who would like to contact Roy or Linda Grainger can write to them at 9, Roehampton Drive, Crosby.
Roy Grainger researches brain cancer, which struck his daughter Helen, right
Get in running for TV prize
WHAT would you say to the chance of winning a top of the range portable TV with remote control and Champion Sport Vouchers worth £20 each?
Read on to find out more!
The Liverpool Echo has teamed up with friendly bankers TSB, who are giving away these fantastic prizes to celebrate D-Day for thousands of schools athletes who take part in their local TSB English Schools Track and Field County finals on Saturday.
The road to the County finals is tough with a number of elimination stages from school sports days through to district finals.
For every athlete who reaches the County finals, it is a potential stepping stone to the National Championships.
Many of today's athletic superstars, such as Linford Christie, Colin Jackson, Roger Black, Sally Gunnell and Liz McColgan came up through the ranks of schools athletics.
TSB invite readers to attend Saturday's local County finals, which take place at the Bebington Oval, to cheer on Merseyside's budding Christies and Gunnells as they fight for a place in the Merseyside team.
There will be a free prize draw on the day with the chance to win a TSB sports bag and other goodies.
In the meantime, why not take part in our special competition and you could win a Panasonic 15-inch Portable TV with remote control and a £20 Champion Sport Voucher to be spent on clothing or equipment at any Champion Sport outlet across the UK.
Five runners-up will each receive a £20 Champion Sport voucher.
Simply study the face of the youngster featured.
The photograph was taken in 1987 and shows and up and coming local athlete who went on to compete in the Olympic Games.
Is it: A) Curtis Robb B) Dave Grindley C) Steve Smith Send your answer to: TSB Competition, Liverpool Echo, Old Hall Street, Liverpool L69 3EB, remembering to include your own name and address and telephone number if possible.
Normal Echo competition rules apply.
Also note that TSB Group employees and their families are ineligible as well as anyone connected with the competition.
A POLICE cash crisis arising from the £650,000 cost of the Warrington bombings appears to have been resolved.
Cheshire's Chief Constable David Graham had warned that manpower would be reduced and cuts made to police station opening hours if the money was not found.
Reserves
The results could have been disastrous for the force which has already had to freeze recruitment of officers during 1993 to keep within a tight budget.
But at a meeting of Cheshire's Police Committee yesterday, councillors made a unanimous decision to find half of the money out of the county council's reserves.
The decision still has to be ratified by the Finance and Management Services Committee.
It is expected that the Home Office will come up with the other half of the sum.
The investigations into the two IRA attacks on February 26 and March 20 necessitated the setting up of two major incident rooms within Warrington Police Station as well as the setting up of a special HQ for CID costing £35,000.
Snipers attack as civilians rescued
BRITISH peacekeeping troops faced sniper fire yesterday as they evacuated 181 Croat civilians from an 800 year-old monastery outside Travnik.
Sniper bullets whizzed overhead as a British army chaplain Carson Nicholson buried seven Croats in grey blankets next to the twin-towered monastery in Guca Gora.
Shots slammed into the walls inside the courtyard where the civilians cried and threw themselves on the ground.
British Warrior armoured fighting vehicles forming a ring round the monastery returned fire with cannon.
The civilians apparently including young Croat soldiers who had abandoned their uniforms were offered the choice of leaving or staying by a UN aid worker.
Armoured
A representative of the mainly-Muslim Bosnian army, which seized the village in fierce fighting over the last five days, said they would not be harmed if they stayed.
The Croats, including women and children, chose to leave.
British troops shepherded them out of the monastery buildings into 19 Warrior armoured vehicles.
‘I've sent up every Warrior I can find.
We're going to do it in one move,’ said the battalion commander Lt Col Alastair Duncan.
The troops gathered the Croats in the Franciscan monastery on Tuesday after Muslims overran the area and took up position on all sides.
They then kept guard all night until the evacuation could be negotiated.
Meanwhile, another bloody escalation of the Balkan war came a step closer yesterday as the Bosnian Croat leader Mate Boban asked neighbouring Croatia to intervene to stop Muslims allegedly killing thousands of his people.
Boban accused Muslims of mass murder and mass expulsions of Croats during the savage fighting in and around Travnik.
Waiting for rescue A woman and her baby
Plunge death riddle solved
By Carmel Brown Daily Post Staff
THE BODY of a teenager, which has laid in a mortuary for ten days, was finally identified yesterday.
Liverpool University student Christopher Powell plunged more than 100ft to his death from a Scottish road bridge over the Inverness Firth.
But the riddle of his identity was only solved after Scottish police issued a nationwide appeal for help.
A university spokesman said last night he could not comment on speculation that Mr Powell, who was studying for a BSc in applied biology, had been anxious about sitting his first year exams.
Mr Powell, 18, moved from his Sheffield home into Derby and Rathbone Hall, Green Lane, Mossley Hill, Liverpool, in October.
It is understood he left Liverpool on May 27, shortly before his exams were due to begin.
And his mother, anxious when she could not make contact with him, reported him missing nine days later.
It is believed he may have been going to visit relatives in Caithness in the far north of Scotland when the tragedy happened.
The Inverness-based Northern Constabulary made repeated appeals for information to help identify the 5ft 8ins teenager whose details were circulated to every police force in Britain.
Fellow undergraduates and tutors at the University were last night said to be stunned by the news of his death.
‘This is a completely tragic death which has shocked his fellow students and members of staff here,’ said a university spokesman last night.
‘The examination season is now under way and Christopher would certainly have been sitting them.
‘But I cannot comment on any suggestion that he was worried about his exams in any way.’
Kennedy theory's a cut above
FOR those who can't get enough of the John
Kennedy assassination story we have a little bit more for you.
The new wide screen cut of Oliver Stone's JFK is being released on video, and it includes an additional 17 minutes of footage never before shown.
JFK: The Director's Cut still starring Kevin Costner, of course runs now for a weighty 200 minutes and includes whole scenes axed from the cinema version.
A better bet for non-conspiracy theorists is the wide screen version of Thelma And Louise, the exhilarating and moving story of two women who hit the road for a hell-raising weekend.
Also newly-released in ‘letter-box’ versions are Battle Of The Bulge and Superman.
All bar Thelma, an MGM release, come from Warner and all except JFK priced at £13.99 cost £12.99.
But that won't matter if you strike lucky in our latest competition to give away three sets of all four films a total of 10 hours of top-class viewing.
The prizes will go to the senders of the first postcards out of the hat revealing who played Superman and who played Thelma and Louise.
Costner: investigating the controversial assassination
Chiefs hit out at school report
By Ray Kelly
EDUCATION leaders have rallied to the defence of a school blasted by government inspectors.
Knowsley assistant education director Brian Lord confirmed the report on the former Huyton CE St Michael's Junior School was the worst he had ever seen.
Bad marks were scored in all subjects, except PE, and teachers were rapped for poor performance.
Criticised
Governors were blasted over the weak financial plan for the voluntary aided Rupert Road school.
But Her Majesty's Inspectorate was heavily criticised, in turn, for conducting the intensive exercise just before the 193-pupil school was due to close, last June.
It has now joined with the infants to form a new school.
The inspectors spoke of poor marks especially in English and mathematics.
They said teachers were poor in assessing National Curriculum progress and had low expectations of the pupils.
Teachers were criticised for allowing bad behaviour.
The inspectors said that when pupils did reach the expectations of their teachers, they were often still substandard.
Mr Lord told members of the education committee last night: ‘This is the worst report I have seen.
‘Everyone agreed this was a rather daft time to conduct the inspection, when staff cannot be expected to be enthusiastic.
‘Things were being let slide because it was due to close.’
On-the-ball police plan
YOUNG footballers are being invited to compete in a five-a-side tournament organised by police at Warrington.
Cheshire Constabulary Youth 5-a-side competition is open to teams of seven including substitutes in age groups from under-10s to under-16s.
The competition runs for a week starting on July 12 with all matches being played at Victoria Park, Warrington.
All teams must be registered by June 20.
Entry forms and information can be had from Sgt Sarah Hill at the Community Affairs Department, Arpley Street Police Station, Warrington.
For a real smoothie
TODAY'S mans need to look fit, smooth-skinned and perfectly groomed wherever he is.
But, when he's on the move, it can be difficult.
A close wet-shave is not really possible, say if he's thousands of feet up in the air and he wants to stay sweet with fellow plane passengers.
But a dry shave doesn't always give him the results he wants.
Clinique, though, say their new Electric Shave Primer is just the job.
The cool, oil-free lotion, they say, instantly lifts beard hairs while protecting the skin against irritation.
Even the most sensitive-skinned people should be able to use it.
It costs £8.50 from most main department stores.
Probation for mother who killed baby
A TEENAGE mother who stabbed her daughter to death after giving birth because she was too terrified to seek help, walked free from a court yesterday.
A judge took pity on Nicola Lee, 19, after hearing she will be haunted by the tragedy for the rest of her life.
She sobbed ‘thank-you’ as she was put on probation for three years after admitting the infanticide.
The court heard she plunged a knife 10 times into her daughter after giving birth in the bathroom of her home.
Trainee motor mechanic Lee was too afraid of her father's anger to tell her family she was pregnant by her 17-year-old boyfriend.
She locked herself in the bathroom for 40 minutes while her mother banged on the door, John Evans, prosecuting, told Newcastle Crown Court.
The body was found later in a laundry basket.
David Robson QC, defending, said Lee was a ‘decent, caring, sensitive’ girl whose mind was disturbed at the time.
She felt ‘isolated and panic stricken’ as her time approached.
Call to end pub ban on young
POLICE are being asked to act to stop landlords banning 18 to 21-year-olds from their pubs.
An increasing number of pubs in the Northwich area are barring the younger drinkers on Friday and Saturday nights, in a bid to cut down on trouble.
But the problem has now transferred to the town centre, where crowds of young people, sometimes in excess of 150, are gathering at weekends.
County Tory leader, Councillor Simon Cussons, says he has had complaints from youngsters who feel they are being hounded out of the pubs.
‘They live to get to 18 so they can vote and be an adult member of society, and suddenly they find that they can't drink in local hostelries until they are 21,’ he said.
Disgruntled Mark Owen, 18, a student, of Castle, Northwich, said: ‘It is really annoying.
It is always the teenagers who get picked on.’
Pub landlords say cutting down on young drinkers stops trouble.
Coun Cussons has asked the police to step in to remedy the situation, but Cheshire's Chief Constable, David Graham, says there is little they can do to persuade landlords to let younger drinkers back in.
‘It is completely up to them.
I know of one pub where the licensee gave out cards to the people he wanted to let in,’ said Coun Cussins.
BMA in new call for ban
AN INDEPENDENT inquiry must be set up by the government to examine the risks of brain injury in boxing, doctors' leaders said today.
Ministers should also consider ways of improving sports facilities for youngsters living in inner cities, they claimed.
The calls came as the British Medical Association in a new report stepped up its demands for a total ban on boxing.
Details of recent deaths and horrific injuries suffered by boxers are catalogued in the report the second from the BMA report on the subject in almost 10 years.
Drawing on the results of 11 surveys, The Boxing Debate concludes there is no evidence to suggest boxing is any safer today than it was a decade ago when the BMA first called for a ban.
Doctors claim their major concern over boxing is the brain damage suffered over long periods.
This is known as the punch drunk syndrome, where victims suffer slurred speech, poor balance and memory loss and dementia years after they have stopped boxing.
Today's report dismisses claims that boxing could be made safer with head guards or shorter rounds.
Evidence suggests the changes have a minimal effect and in some cases might even cause more damage, the report says.
Town put on alert after rats invasion
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
AN INVASION of rats has hit Frodsham and pest control experts fear it could be a permanent problem.
Householders and shopowners in the town have been put on standby because of the influx of vermin from nearby marshlands.
The alert was raised after dozens of the large rodents were spotted on Main Street and by the railway line.
Environmental health officers have been called in and are now treating the problem.
Frodsham hotelier George Harrison, who runs the Queens Head, is one who has complained to Vale Royal Council about rats on the railway behind his business.
He said: ‘They are coming off the railway line and I am worried about it.
‘They are not the kind of thing we want in this town and certainly not near my hotel.’
Frodsham councillor Frank Pennington also fears the town is being overrun by rats.
He said: ‘In the last three months they have been breeding and there are lots of them all over the place.
‘I have seen some myself on Main Street around the bins and even on window sills.
It is disgusting.’
He said there was a similar problem in the town 12 years ago with rats coming from the marshlands.
Environmental health officer Richard Hallows called on the public to report any rat sightings to the Pest Control Unit on .
M6 delays ahead
HOLD-UPS are expected on the M6 from this weekend because of work to widen the road.
As part of the £52.5m scheme a farm bridge will be demolished to make room for a fourth lane between junction 20 at Lymm and Junction 21a for the M62.
This weekend the southbound carriageway will be closed and a contraflow will restrict the motorway to two lanes in each direction for three quarters of a mile.
A hotline  will provide traffic information.
Fun plan for city parks
RECREATION chiefs are being urged to make more use of Liverpool's ‘green treasure troves’ its 150 parks and recreation grounds.
Families want the city council to stage more public events in its open spaces, says Liberal Democrat Councillor Beatrice Fraenkel, who had an ‘amazing’ response after calling for family entertainment.
Stars from Brookside will receive a cheque for the Save Broadgreen campaign fund tomorrow.
Paul Byatt (Mike Dixon) and Kirk Smith (Keith Rooney) will accept £500 from the Royal Naval Association at a gala night in the Royal Naval Club, Bowring Park Road.
Church school: Plans for a joint voluntary-aided £1m primary school under the trusteeship of the Catholic and Church of England authorities in Croxteth Park, Liverpool, have been approved by city councillors.
Knife ordeal: Two men escaped with £90 after threatening a 21-year-old cafe worker at knife-point at the Alpine Cafe in Southport's Pleasureland.
Golf project: An extension plan for changing rooms and toilets at the Royal Liverpool Golf Club in Hoylake have been submitted to Wirral Council.
Homesplan: Permission is being sought to build two houses at the former St Stephen's vicarage in Reservoir Road, Prenton.
Heart boy air dash
A BOY suffering from a serious heart condition was airlifted from North Wales to a specialist cardiac unit yesterday morning.
The six-year-old was flown from Bodelwyddan's Glan Clywd Hospital to Liverpool's Alder Hey Hospital.
A Wessex helicopter from RAF Valley, Anglesey was requested to take the child on the 15-minute flight.
Accompanied by a medical team, the aircraft touched down shortly before noon on a specially-constructed landing site at the rear of the children's hospital.
Last night, the child's condition was unknown.
Swap M-way cash urges Labour MP
By Daily Post Correspondent
THE motorway link between the M56, M6 and M62 should be scrapped and the money spent on upgrading railways, a Cheshire MP claims.
Warrington South MP Mike Hall has slammed the Government's rail privatisation policy as ‘the politics of the madhouse.’
It could be disastrous for the North West generally and for Warrington in particular, he said.
Labour MP Mr Hall said the motorway link which is being fought tooth-and-nail by action groups in Cheshire and south Manchester was completely unnecessary.
He said it cost a vast amount to build each new mile of motorway.
Instead of building an unnecessary motorway link between the M56, M6 and M62 the money should instead should be spent on up-grading the west coast main line.
Mr Hall said the Government was dismantling the rail network to let off to the private sector.
‘The French state-owned SNCF railway will be able to bid to operate routes in Britain, but BR will not be allowed to bid.
This is the politics of the madhouse.
‘The west coast main line connects the North West with Glasgow, London and eventually the Channel Tunnel and mainland Europe.
‘At the moment this line is in a very poor state of repair.
If high speed trains are to continue to run on it, then £800m needs to be spent on upgrading this route, but the Government is refusing to make the necessary investment.
Instead they intend privatising it.’
Ten are held in city drug swoops
By Caroline Storah crime reporter
A MAJOR heroin dealing ring was believed smashed today after police made a series of early-morning raids in Liverpool.
The ECHO was there as 55 officers, some carrying sledgehammers, launched their ‘smash and grab’ raids on homes in the Everton and Kirkdale areas.
Ten people, including a women and some teenagers, were arrested and drugs and cash were seized.
The police operation codenamed Lightbulb was targeted at drug pushers who have built up trade worth hundreds of thousands of pounds and who attract dealers from all over the North-west.
Dog-handlers were on standby to tackle pit bull terriers kept at several of the addresses.
A police surgeon was also on standby for any emergencies.
The swoops followed four months of intense undercover work centred on the Scotland Road area.
Complaints
Police have received scores of complaints about dealers openly plying their trade in front of small children on street corners.
Plainclothes officers posed as buyers and round-the-clock surveillance was kept up at several addresses.
They bought heroin which they reported was top quality and thought to come from Holland.
It was so good it was attracting outsider drug buyers from North Wales, Cheshire and Cumbria, say police.
The drama unfolded at 7am when officers gathered for an operation briefing at Stanley Road police station, Kirkdale.
Officers from A division led the raids assisted by colleagues from the Drugs Squad and C division.
At 8am a convoy of vans and unmarked police cars swept out heading for the addresses.
All were raided at precisely 8.15 am.
Inspector Phil Barr, in charge of Operation Lightbulb, told the ECHO at the scene: ‘We believe this was a well-organised, 24-hour-a day drugs dealing ring.
‘We have had a number of complaints from residents about people openly dealing in the streets.
They are rightly fed up of people carrying out their business so blatantly.
‘Many months have been spent gathering information and recording activities.
Today is the culmination of all that work.
Seized
‘The drugs have been attracting people from all over the North-west into the area and they are not wanted.’
Clothing, cheque books and freezer bags and other items were also seized and taken away for examination.
The people arrested were taken to separate police stations across Merseyside where they were held for questioning.
Turn to Page Four.
From Page One.
Barrage tide turns
THE SUCCESS of the Mersey Barrage project depended upon one thing above all else political will.
Only if the government of the day was prepared to fund an idea which could have secured a new source of energy, and helped revitalise a region, would the barrage dream have become a reality.
Instead the plans are being left to gather dust.
All the effort and all the investment made so far has effectively gone to waste.
How typical it is of British government that the barrage dream should be allowed to dribble on and then left to fizzle out.
No-one seems to have had the courage to make a clear decision on the project.
Instead it is ‘left in abeyance’ where dreams are filed away until they have been forgotten.
The news will be welcomed by those environmentalists and river users who had objected to the barrage plan.
But surely they too would have preferred a decision to an indefinite postponement.
Those private firms who also invested time and money in the project will surely think long and hard before getting involved in such ‘joint ventures’ again.
The barrage could have been a symbol of determination and hope for the Merseyside region.
Instead it is a symbol of government indecision and drift.
Risks in the ring
Judge jails telephone kiosk robbers
By Lynda Roughley Daily Post Correspondent
A GANG involved in theft attacks on telephone kiosks has been jailed by Liverpool Crown Court.
Sentencing two men and a 22-year-old mother, Judge Denis Clark said that they had been ‘nasty, despicable, vandalistic’ offences and the message had to go out that people who attacked phone boxes would lose their liberty.
Stephen Jones, 34, a welder of Stopgate Lane, Fazakerley, and Paul Miller, 33, of Ashbank Road, Norris Green, were both jailed for six months.
Miller's niece Eileen Lackey, of Rydal Street, Everton, was sentenced to four months.
All three pleaded guilty to conspiring to steal.
Judge Clark said that he was not reducing her sentence because she was a woman but because she was ten years younger than the other two and had two children depending on her.
Prosecuting counsel Mr David Williams told the court that British Telecom had been plagued by thefts and in May last year officers from the regional crime squad began keeping observations on the trio.
On June 12, they went to London where Jones used a portable electric drill to remove the cash box from a kiosk.
They left after stealing £125 and causing £200 worth of damage.
They were arrested three weeks later in Liverpool when they were again seen to remove the cash box from a kiosk.
Author's widow to open hospital unit
A NEW unit specialising in epilepsy will be opened at Alder Hey Hospital this week.
The EEG unit electro-encephalogram unit is one of the most advanced in a British children's hospital.
It is expected, in its first year, to assess more than 1,500 patients.
Dr Richard Appleton, consultant neurologist at Alder Hey, said: ‘The combination of the new unit and the appointment of the country's first full-time specialist nurse in epilepsy will give the Mersey area some of the best facilities in the country.’
Liccy Dahl, widow of children's author Roald Dahl, will officially open the EEG unit on Thursday.
The Roald Dahl Foundation has provided funds to pay for a paediatric epilepsy nurse at the unit.
By Paul Byrne, chief reporter
THUGS attacked and robbed a young cancer victim as he played on his new mountain bike.
Seven-year-old leukaemia sufferer Paul Hindle was dragged off his pride and joy when the gang pounced as he played with his pals.
Brave Paul, pictured, has only recently been able to use the bike as he battles against the illness.
The distinctive orange, yellow and black bike was a Christmas present for the youngster, but he has been so weak because of chemotherapy treatment that he has been able unable to ride it.
His heartbroken mum, Colette, said: ‘Paul is so upset.
He came back to the house crying his eyes out.’
Paul, of Crocus Street, Kirkdale, was diagnosed as having leukaemia a year ago.
He has been in and out of hospital since, and will be back in Alder Hey again for more treatment next week.
Mrs Hindle said: ‘He was so pleased with his bike and he has been itching to get outside and play on it.
‘Now this happens.’
Police say Paul was attacked in Commercial Road on Sunday by three 16-year-old boys.
Anyone with information can contact Merseyside Police on .
Shark kills swimmer
A MAN taking a morning dive near a tourist town north of Sydney was killed today in Australia's second fatal shark attack in five days.
His wife was rescued uninjured but suffering from shock, and rescuers later recovered a human leg with a flipper attached.
Lightning toll: Eight people, including three women, were killed when lightning destroyed a rice husking mill in northern Bangladesh last night.
Five other workers were injured.
Pig horror: New Zealand farmer Kenneth Johnson bled to death after being gored in the groin by one of his pigs while feeding them in a paddock on his small farm at Halkett in the South Island province of Canterbury.
Wedded gloom: Japan gained a new crown princess today in a solemn wedding ceremony when Western-educated former diplomat Masako Owada, 29, married Crown Prince Naruhito, 33, heir to the world's oldest monarchy.
FIREMEN and police turned up at a house in Bracknell, Herts, with sirens blaring after Nibbles the hamster became trapped under the bath.
Broken romance led to hanging at aunt's home
AN unemployed man killed himself after his girlfriend moved back in with her husband, a Liverpool inquest was told.
Philip Banks, 31, hanged himself in his aunt Hilda Barrett's home in Oakhill Road, Old Swan, on February 11 this year.
She revealed that he had not been taking anti-depressant tablets prescribed by a doctor.
Her evidence was read out by Coroner Roy Barter, who said: ‘I think it was the broken romance that was the cause of his death.
‘The woman involved was a married woman with a family and she and Philip had lived together for a couple of months but she decided to go back to her husband in September.’
Detective Sergeant Cedric Jones said Mr Banks hanged himself from a hifi speaker bracket on his bedroom wall.
Mr Barter recorded a verdict of death by hanging.
Spotlight put on future of city clinic
By Philippa Bellis Health Reporter
THE future of a Liverpool clinic, saved from the axe, will come under the microscope next month.
Patients fear Hartington Road Family Health Clinic may still be under threat even though councillors rejected an application to turn it into a drug detoxification centre.
Campaign
Councillors turned down North Mersey Community NHS Trust's application after a fiercely-fought campaign by Hartington Clinic Users Group (HUG).
The Trust agreed to let HUG come up with their own feasibility study on how the clinic could be better used.
The study will be presented at the end of July.
Hilary Rowland, Chief Executive of the Trust said: ‘Most people would recognise that the building is under-used at present and costing us money.
We need to make sure it is well used.
‘If HUG's proposals have any massive revenue consequences we would need to look to Liverpool Health Authority.
But we might be able to do something by internal reshuffling at the clinic.
We have a lot of estate across the city and have to ensure it is well used.’
She added: ‘If a GP wanted to move in there we would be more than happy to discuss and explore that with them.
We could then develop services around that practice.’
BRITISH TROOPS FOIL GUN CARNAGE
SECOND round matches in the Liverpool Business Houses and Merseyside Tournaments for societies from industry and business must be completed by the end of this month.
Fixtures:
Business Houses: Grange ‘A’ v Lucas Aerospace or Littlewoods ‘B’; Edinburgh Park ‘A’or ‘B’v Hough Green or Plessey Mitres ‘B’; Netherton v Ford ‘C’; Manlin v Comsport; Quarry Green ‘B’v Queen of Martyrs; Plessey Mitres ‘A’v Sefton Sports; Huyton Quarry ‘B’or Quarry Green ‘A’v Wimpey; Taveners ‘A’or Littlewoods ‘A’v Vauxhall ‘A’.
Merseyside: Seagulls v Ford ‘B’; Manlin v Sefton Sports; Quarry Green ‘A’ v Huyton Quarry ‘B’; Plessey Mitres ‘B’or Postal Services v Comsport; Ford ‘D’v Plessey Mitres ‘A’; Edinburgh Park ‘B’v Quarry Green ‘B’; Netherton v Vauxhall ‘B’; Wimpey v Royal Insurance.
Link ends with sub's departure
CAMMELL Laird's traditional link with the Royal Navy is set to end in six weeks' time, when the last Laird-built vessel will leave the Birkenhead yard.
The 2,400-tonne HM Submarine Unicorn is scheduled to set sail for Plymouth on Wednesday, July 21 four weeks after her official commissioning.
The Royal Navy says it will be a routine departure for them, although it is not known yet how Cammell Laird will mark the event.
Shipbuilding for the Royal Navy has been going on at Lairds since the 1830s.
No date
An official closure date for the yard has not been announced, but the majority of the 500 workers are expected to have left towards the end of July, with the bulk going after this month's commissioning ceremony.
Local clergy are hoping to hold a special commemorative service to mark the shutdown.
Weather out this brouhaha
PLENTY of barmy things going on for the next few days, as the Festival of Comedy gets underway.
Among the cast of clowns is the Brouhaha theatre group and poet Jegsy Dodd.
Brouhaha not to be confused with the Merseyside-inspired Brouhaha Festival being held in Budapest this year are staging a play about that most British of talking-points, the weather.
Which explains why actors Greta Stoddart, Allison Cologna and Catherine Marmier are hanging out to dry.
Theatre
They can be seen at Unity Theatre on Saturday with their show, Whatever the Weather.
Meanwhile, Jegsy, who appears with comic John Hegley at the Everyman next Thursday has been up to his neck in work at the seaside.
Lending a helping hand is that little creature Hoggle, from the Terry Jones film, Labyrinth.
Education chief raps ‘ill-timed’ inspection
BLACK MARK FOR SCHOOL REPORT
By Ray Kelly
EDUCATION leaders have rallied to the defence of a school blasted by government inspectors.
Knowsley assistant education director Brian Lord confirmed the report on the former Huyton CE (St Michael's) Junior School was the worst he had ever seen.
Bad marks were scored in all subjects, except PE, and teachers were rapped for poor performance.
Governors were criticised over the weak financial plan for the voluntary aided Rupert Road school.
Criticised
But Her Majesty's Inspectorate was heavily criticised, in turn, for conducting the intensive exercise just before the 193-pupil school was due to close, last June.
It has now joined with the infants to form a new school.
The inspectors criticised poor marks especially in English and Mathematics.
They said teachers were poor in assessing National Curriculum progress and had low expectations of the pupils.
Teachers were criticised for allowing bad behaviour in some classrooms.
The inspectors said that when pupils did reach the expectations of their teachers, they were often still substandard.
‘Weaknesses in the management and leadership of the school are serious obstacles to progress,’ was one criticism, another was management of the budget.
The school's crucial development plan was written on a single side of notepaper.
Mr Lord told members of the education committee last night: ‘This is the worst report I have seen.
‘Everyone agreed this was a rather daft time to conduct the inspection, when staff cannot be expected to be enthusiastic.
‘Things were being let slide because it was due to close in five weeks time.’
The school was chosen for inspection at random.
PARKING TICKET SHOCK FOR ALAN
Driver expresses ‘grave’ concern over £720 fine
WHEN Alan Fennah opened his mail he came out with the classic One Foot In The Grave line: ‘I do not believe it!’
He was looking at a fine for parking too long on a meter at the Pier Head and it was for the staggering sum of £720.
Alan, who works for BT in the city centre, explained: ‘I could not get into my normal parking spot and was in a rush for a meeting at work, so I used a meter at the Pier Head.
‘The meeting went on longer than I expected, and when I got back to the car there was a ticket on it.
Letter
‘I should have paid it, but I forgot and heard nothing for ages.
The car is not registered in my name, so I suppose that is why I did not receive a reminder.
‘Next thing I knew was the letter to say I had been fined £720.
People don't get fined anything like that for mugging an old lady.’
Alan from Upton, Wirral, has now written to the court in the hope they will cut the fine.
He is not the first to suffer Kenneth Orme of Walton was fined £700 for failing to show a 50p ‘pay and display’ ticket.
These amazing cases come soon after Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke urged magistrates to use more discretion when imposing penalties under the new Criminal Justice Act.
But after Kenneth Orme's case, Vera Hughes, chairman of Liverpool magistrates, said: ‘We don't like it, but that is the law.
Magistrates can only use their discretion within the law.’
Husband accused of wife murder
By Harry Dean
A MAN was due to go on trial at Liverpool Crown Court later today accused of murdering his pregnant wife.
Edward Gilfoyle is charged with murdering Paula Gilfoyle, 32, who was found hanged in the garage of their semi-detached home in Grafton Drive, Upton, on June 4, last year.
She was two weeks away from giving birth to their first child.
Gilfoyle, 32, a hospital technician, has pleaded not guilty.
Twelve days before her death Mrs Gilfoyle had started maternity leave from the Champion Spark Plug factory, where she had worked for 17 years.
Rodney Klevan QC is appearing for the prosecution and Gilfoyle is defended by David Turner QC.
The trial could last up to five weeks.
Peru villagers fear return of dead Lancashire ‘witch’
REVENGE TERROR OF VAMPIRE SARAH
VILLAGERS in Peru are living in terror that they are about to be haunted by a vampire…from Blackburn.
Sarah Helen was buried there 76 years ago, but today the locals are afraid she is coming back to terrorise them.
In the town of Pisco, 125 miles south of the capital Lima, sales of crucifixes and wooden stakes are booming.
Doors and chimneys are festooned with garlands of garlic.
Radio stations are planning live transmissions from midnight from the tiny graveyard where her body lies buried.
And police have been mobilised to keep order among hundreds of sightseers.
Legend has it that Sarah Helen was put to death in her home town of Blackburn for practising witchcraft, locked alive inside a lead coffin.
Before she died in June, 1913, so the story goes, she swore to rise again in 80 years to take her revenge.
Scared local authorities refused to accept her body for burial.
No one else in Britain would bury her either, and her relatives reportedly tried for four years to find a country which would offer her a resting place.
They were turned away everywhere, until they reached Peru.
Now many of the locals in Pisco are frightened.
Gravedigger Jose Molina said: ‘What scares me is that I think I'll be her first victim.’
Local hospital administrator, Carlos Castro, reported that pregnant women were afraid Sarah Helen would reincarnate as a vampire in their babies.
But not everyone is unhappy.
Looking on the bright side, mayor Edgar Nunez pointed out that tourism had jumped 60%.
Hotels and stores are doing a brisk trade in vampire kits.
For £1.60 customers receive a crucifix, a mallet and wooden stake, a string of garlic and a booklet containing the legend.
Women start pit protest
TWO women were occupying a building at the doomed Parkside Colliery, St Helens, this afternoon in protest over the closure of the pit.
Merseyside East Euro MP Terry Wynn sent a message of support to the women members of Women against Pit Closures.
Murder charge
Peter Turton, 28, was further remanded in custody by Bootle magistrates today charged with murdering his mother in Crosby.
Plane drama
A pilot and his passenger landed in the middle of a road in Clacton, Essex, today, when their plane lost power shortly after take-off.
Lynne worse
The condition of Coronation Street star Lynne Perrie worsened today after her collapse during filming.
Page 2 Sailor killed
A Scottish naval rating has died during a training exercise on an army firing range in County Down.
Royal opening
The Prince of Wales opened a £750,000 visitors' centre at Princetown, Dartmoor.
Travel latest
A signals failure at Walton may cause delays on the Kirkby line, and there may be jams on the M53.
Up 12.3 at 2237.0 SE-100 up 15.6 at 2860.0 Down to 1.5174 dollars Up to 2.4764 marks
THE Princess of Wales today took command of her new regiment already nicknamed ‘Squidgy's Own’.
And as she attended the first parade of the Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment, she joked: ‘It has to be said that for a 31-year-old woman to have 2,500 men under her command is quite a feat but I am sure I will rise to the occasion.’
The new regiment was formed through the merger of the Queen's and the Royal Hampshires in September last year only months after the publication of an alleged telephone conversation between the princess and her friend James Gilbey in which the nickname Squidgy was used.
The princess was in Canterbury for the first full parade of her troops, also known as ‘Di's Guys’.
Builder ‘was victim of protection racket’
By Lynda Roughley
A SPEKE man set up a protection racket and demanded thousands of pounds from a building firm, it was alleged.
On one of the several occasions that Gary Grugel became aggressive and threatening, he nearly dropped half a paving slab on a victim's head, Liverpool Crown Court was told.
Grugel, 40, of East Millwood Road, Speke, has pleaded not guilty to 10 offences involving blackmail, attempting to pervert the course of justice, wounding with intent and assault.
Mark Brown, prosecuting, claimed Grugel ‘by the use of intimidation and threats of serious physical violence, sought to operate a protection racket’.
He told the jury that Joseph Marland owned a building company and bought the Ramsfield Road site in Speke.
Assaulted
While Mr Marland was on holiday, Grugel spoke to his son-in-law Gary Johns, who had been left in charge.
He claimed Mr Marland had agreed he should look after the site and demanded money.
Mr Johns said he knew nothing of this but the next day Grugel again asked for money and became aggressive.
Mr Brown alleged that Grugel twice asked plasterer Peter McCabe for some plaster boards and when he threatened to tell the police, Grugel assaulted him, causing a one inch laceration above his left eyebrow.
Grugel threatened to break Mr McCabe's legs, the court heard.
When Mr Marland returned from holiday, he and Mr Johns went to the police but then decided not to pursue a complaint.
They gave Grugel £1,000.
Grugel wanted more money and during the next few weeks made further threats.
Plan to search wreck of the Titanic
A NEW search of the wreck of the Titanic has been launched.
The company formed to explore the sunken liner said it was carrying out the search with the French Institute for the Research and Exploitation of the Sea.
The Titanic sank about 400 miles south off Newfoundland in April 1912 on its maiden voyage from Southampton to New York.
Jewels
More than 1,500 lives were lost in the accident, which occurred when the supposedly unsinkable ship hit an iceberg.
A 1987 expedition to the wreck resulted in the recovery of more than 1,800 objects including artifacts, coins and jewels valued at more than £34m.
The exploration company said artifacts recovered from the new expedition will be housed in a permanent museum and exhibited around the world.
Retribution
BODIES of 23 peacekeepers shot in weekend battles with Somali gunmen in Mogadishu were flown home to Pakistan as the UN honed plans to hit back at the killers ‘within days.’
Whale hunt
THE first Norwegian whalers have put to sea to hunt commercially for the first time since 1987 in defiance of a global moratorium.
Still talking
ISRAEL, the Palestinians and the governments of Jordan, Syria and Lebanon have accepted an American offer to resume Middle East peace talks on June 15 after a month long recess, the State Department said.
Killer plague
AN OUTBREAK of bubonic plague in north-western Uganda has killed 33 people in a week.
Kidnap trial man taunted police
A MAN accused of kidnap and murder played a ‘catch me if you can’ game with police, a court heard today.
Michael Sams, 51, pleaded guilty to kidnapping and imprisoning estate agent Stephanie Slater in January last year.
But he has denied murdering Leeds teenager Julie Dart in July, 1991.
Richard Wakerley QC, prosecuting, told the jury at Nottingham Crown Court that Sams was a cunning man.
Caught
He wanted to prove to himself and to others this sort of crime could be successfully committed.
‘In the end, he lost.
In many respects you will find it a chilling and remarkable story.’
Mr Wakerley said Sams, a tool repairer of Barrel Hill Road, Sutton on Trent, Notts, took pleasure in the execution of his plans.
But those plans went wrong and Sams killed Miss Dart, he told the jury.
Miss Dart's body was found in a field beside the A1 near Grantham, Lincs, a week after she vanished from Chapeltown, Leeds.
Peer of the prison cell has time on his hands
THE Marquess of Blandford was today waking up to his first full day in London's Pentonville Prison, facing all but nine hours of it ‘banged up’.
But there is one consolation for the 37-year-old peer after assessment on the induction wing he is likely to be spared the indignity of slopping out.
As a civil case prisoner, there is a good chance he will be allocated to the jail's C wing, where the cells have their own lavatories and wash basins.
He can also choose whether to work.
But jobs on offer cleaning, gardening, helping in the kitchen or the tailoring workshop seem unlikely to appeal to his aristocratic tastes.
The Marquess's treatment at the hands of his fellow inmates will depend very much on his own attitude.
‘It really is down to him how he manages in prison,’ said one prison source.
The heir to the £100m Blenheim estate is set to serve 112 days for failing to pay more than £10,000 in maintenance to his estranged wife Becky, and now also faces new charges of attacking police sent to arrest him yesterday.
Marquess of Blandford
…jail term
Tricksters use baby to dupe woman, 89
POLICE were today hunting three people who tricked their way into a pensioner's house and stole £220 using a baby as a decoy.
A woman clutching the infant called at the terraced house in Albany Road, Prescot, with another woman and a man.
She asked if she could use the toilet, claiming their car had broken down.
But minutes after the trio left, the 89-year-old woman discovered that her purse had been taken from a bedroom.
The three called on the victim, who lives alone, shortly before 9pm on Monday.
Accomplice
While the man and one of the women stayed talking to the householder, the other woman, still clutching the child was directed to the toilet.
The woman with the baby is described as white, in her 30s and had brown, tidy collar length hair.
Her female accomplice was younger with long, very fair hair and wore a blue dress.
The man was around 5ft 4in and had fair coloured hair.
The gang told the woman they were heading towards Widnes in a blue car.
New remand on murder charge
A MAN charged with the murder of Huyton student Sean Whelan, has reappeared before magistrates.
Stephen Douras, 30, of Salerno Drive, Huyton, is charged with murdering the 25 year-old musician, from Adswood Road, Huyton, on May 15.
He is also charged with assault causing actual bodily harm to Alan Wilson and Gary Johnson on Sunday May 9, after which Mr Whelan was taken to Walton Hospital, where he died six days later.
Douras was remanded into police custody and is due to reappear before magistrates on July 7 for committal.
GAMBLER LIKED ‘FLASH’ STYLE
Ex-union boss stole cash to impress his friends
By Jules Stenson, local government reporter
SHAMED union official Tony Gavin was today starting a three-month jail sentence for a string of thefts.
He stole up to £4,200 from a welfare fund set up to help grieving families of Liverpool City Council workers.
He admitted eight theft charges at Liverpool Crown Court, but denied a further 10 theft and deception offences and not guilty verdicts were recorded.
Police say Gavin lavished the cash on a ‘flash’ lifestyle.
A keen gambler, he ran up a huge Vodaphone bill phoning 0898 racelines and hired coaches to go racing.
He spent a fortune on taxis.
The father-of-three was caught after four of the 800 workers who paid into the City Council Life Insurance Welfare Scheme died in a short space of time.
Their widows should have collected £2,750 to help with funeral expenses, but there was no money in the fund.
Gavin of Briar Drive, Huyton, used delaying tactics, but his world fell apart when a relative ‘created havoc’ at the Nalgo offices.
He was suspended from his £18,000-a-year union job and later sacked.
Detective Sergeant Peter Van Schaick, who led the police investigation, said: ‘He was trying to be the man about town.
‘Gavin wanted to be everyone's favourite person.
He was carrying this money around and trying to be flash.
He had the Vodaphone to boost his image.’
Det Sgt Van Schaick said the fund, largely used by council bin men who were members of the GMB union, was ‘very disorganised’.
‘He should not have been put in charge of the fund.
He was a pretty ineffective sort of person,’ he added.
Massive
‘It is very sad.
It is bad enough when a relative dies, but these people were faced with a massive funeral bill and there was no money in the fund.’
Nalgo branch secretary Judy Cotter said a tiny fraction of the money stolen by Gavin was from his union.
She said he worked for the fund on a voluntary basis, adding: ‘It had nothing to do with Nalgo.
We have very strict financial regulations.’
Tony Gavin
Decision makers conference ‘palpable nonsense’
MP SNUBS INVITE TO GOOD HEALTH TALKS
By Mark Davies Political Correspondent
HEALTH chiefs on Merseyside have received a stinging rebuff from Walton Labour MP Peter Kilfoyle.
Mr Kilfoyle has been invited to a conference on the area's health services next month.
But in a furious reply to Mersey Regional Health Authority chairman Professor Alisdair Breckenridge, the MP turned down the invitation.
The event aimed at launching a strategy for improving health in the region is being held at the Britannia Adelphi Hotel on July 7.
In his letter to Mr Kilfoyle, Professor Breckenridge said ‘decision makers’ from Merseyside and Cheshire will be involved.
But Mr Kilfoyle told the health boss: ‘Your colleagues if not yourself will be well aware of my opposition to what the Regional Health Authority is doing on behalf of the most despised government in living memory.
‘The inference that Cheshire and Merseyside ‘decision makers’ might influence your strategy is palpable nonsense.
‘The Regional and District Health Authority has shown contempt for the views of anyone who did not approve of your agenda for the health service on Merseyside.
‘Why on earth should I and people like me who actually want to put the needs of the people of the Mersey Region before the demands of a bankrupt ideology believe for an instant that your Regional Health Authority is in the slightest bit interested in our views?’
A spokesman for Mersey Regional Health Authority said: ‘The whole purpose of the Health of the Nation conference is to bring together industrialists, employers, local authorities and other people who can influence health in terms of things like housing, sewers, living conditions and employment conditions.’
Technician denies killing mother-to-be Paula
HUSBAND ACCUSED OF WIFE MURDER
By Paul Byrne, crime reporter A MAN appeared at Liverpool Crown Court today charged with the murder of his pregnant wife.
Eddie Gilfoyle, 32, has denied the murder of his wife Paula, 32, who was found hanged at their home in Upton, Wirral.
Gilfoyle sat in the dock dressed in a white shirt, dark blue tie, and grey cardigan.
He listened closely as his defence barrister, David Turner, QC, and prosecutor Rodney Klevan, QC, engaged in legal discussion this morning.
The judge, Mr Justice Charles McCullough, made an order that the Press could not report any of the legal discussions which took place in the absence of a jury.
Birth
Paula Gilfoyle was found dead at the couple's home in Grafton Drive on June 4 last year two weeks before she was due to give birth to their first child.
She worked at Champion Spark Plugs in Upton.
Her husband is a hospital technician.
This afternoon the judge adjourned the case until tomorrow morning.
Detectives are clueless
FORGET Glover and Gibson, Jasper Carrott and Robert Powell are the new Lethal Weapons of the war on crime.
As detectives Bob Louis and David Briggs they work purely on hunch, gut feeling and inspiration and they get it wrong every time!
Still, everybody loves a trier…and these two are very, VERY trying.
The Detectives, which pulled in bumper viewing figures when it was shown on BBC earlier this year, was a revelation for Jasper whose stand-up routines of recent years if I can be frank were dire.
The six programmes of the series are out now on video from PMI and we have three sets of the two tapes to give away.
Senders of the first postcards out of the hat telling me who had a hit record with Watching The Detectives will take the prizes.
Carrott
Car appeal after raid
POLICE have appealed for help after a car stolen from Wrexham was later used as a getaway car by burglars who raided a newsagent's shop at Mynydd Isa.
A silver Rover 216, registration number F333 KLG, was seen outside the Mr News shop at The Square, Mynydd Isa, when burglars broke in by removing glass from the front door.
They got away with cigarettes valued at £200.
Police say that the car was later found abandoned at Queensferry.
They appeal to anyone who may have seen it should get in touch.
Hotel opposed
A SCHEME to convert the listed Talacre Abbey, near Gronant, into a hotel, arts, crafts and antiques centre should be refused, say Delyn planners.
The Borough planning committee will be told today that the applicants have not completed proposals to improve the access to the Abbey from the main coast road, the A548.
Food go-ahead
DESPITE local protests, planners say a hot food take-away should get the go-ahead in Wrexham Street, Mold.
Mold Town Council has opposed the plan.
Nearly 170 people have signed a protest petition and local Coun Ken Corbett says it will be too close to newly-built flats for the elderly.
But planners will tell Delyn Borough planning committee today that, providing agreement can be reached on opening hours and a fume extraction system, it should be allowed.
Theft probe
POLICE are investigating the theft of jewellery and cash from a house at Mount Pleasant Road in Buckley.
Plan appeals
DELYN Borough's planning department received 42 appeals against its decisions last year the highest of any district in Clwyd.
But the council was ruled to have made the correct decision in 71pc of the appeal inquiries which followed.
Building falls
BECAUSE of the recession's adverse effect on the building industry, Delyn Borough planning department received 857 planning applications during 1992/93, a 20pc fall on the previous year.
Store aids charity trust
MARKS and Spencer is helping Wrexham Maelor Groundwork Trust, a charity promoting environmental improvements in areas scarred by industry.
Through the sale of the store's charity Christmas cards and Government funding, the Trust will get £1,000 to fund volunteers.
Flint Castle set to benefit from new marketing plans
Naish calls for tough line with New Age Travellers
A PLEA for the new Home Secretary to get tough with New Age Travellers has been made by NFU president David Naish.
He has told Mr Michael Howard that those living in rural areas must be protected by the full weight of the law from the menace of illegal encampment.
Calling for urgent legislation to protect farmland and other rural property from mass invasion Mr Naish said: ‘In many cases, these convoys bring disorder, damage and distress into peaceful rural communities.
‘Illegal encampments can involve farmers in costly clean up operations, cause damage to crops and land and put the welfare of animals at risk.’
In March, the then Home Secretary had promised new powers would be granted to police to check travellers' convoys, impound vehicles and turn travellers away from a site if they knew in advance that a gathering was to take place.
‘That legislation has yet to be introduced to Parliament,’ said Mr Naish adding that delays could give rise to further problems and he had urged Mr Howard to get it onto the statute books as urgently as possible.
The FUW has issued a guide on methods of dealing with New Age Travellers.
It advises checking with the industry's own early warning system and taking precautions to restrict access to lanes which may be attractive to travellers.
‘You can block your entrances provided you don't obstruct a right-of-way, and provided you take ‘reasonable care’ to avoid causing injury to trespassers.
‘Tree stumps, farm machinery and manure in gateways are acceptable.
‘If a ditch is dug but not on the highway warning signs should be posted.’
Farmers are advised not to stop travellers and vehicles on the road or they risk committing a serious traffic offence.
And the FUW also advises against allowing one or two vehicles on to farm land for several days or it may be interpreted by travellers as ‘acquiescence’ to their trespass and may result in them being joined by many more travellers.
PM's day of disaster
IT IS now not just a question of how long can John Major survive, but whether the Tory Government can stay its term.
Yesterday was to have been the day on which the Prime Minister would restore his credibility and breathe new life back into his party.
Instead, it turned out to be a day of disaster.
He knew he was to face an onslaught from the Opposition over his handling of the economy.
No doubt, he felt he could take that in his stride.
What he did not know until late on was that his former Chancellor was to make a statement on his resignation.
And, even then, he could not have foreseen how ferocious this would be, particularly over his style of Premiership, a matter over which he was already vulnerable.
Nothing John Smith as leader of the Opposition attack could have said would have been as damaging as the bitter words of Norman Lamont, speaking with all the knowledge and authority of a former key member of the Government.
Mr Smith, of course, latched on to this development.
But his part in the proceedings had been made almost irrelevant.
Some Tory loyalist backbenchers said last night that this episode could not be compared to the attack on Mrs Thatcher by the then Sir Geoffrey Howe, which is acknowledged to have cost her the keys to No. 10.
It is argued that the Lamont onslaught had all the hallmarks of an embittered man seeking revenge, particularly as he chose the day when he knew the Prime Minister would be on the defensive, and needing all the support he could summon.
It is true that Sir Geoffrey's condemnation was more measured.
But, to a Prime Minister already in deep trouble, yesterday's swingeing criticism, while probably not immediately fatal, is going to leave a suppurating wound.
It is also ironic that the reshuffle which led to the departure of Mr Lamont has never achieved its aim of winning confidence for the Government.
All the signs are that it made virtually no impact at all.
It seems to bear out Mr Lamont's criticism of important decisions too often taken for short-term publicity.
One person who could gain out of yesterday's events is Kenneth Clarke.
As the new Chancellor, he was already in a position of considerable influence.
Alongside a weakened Prime Minister, he could well become the most powerful figure in the Cabinet.
Shops ‘no’ to death sentence
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
NEWSAGENTS have rejected a move which would see the federation campaign for the restoration of capital punishment.
The motion was put to the annual conference of the National Federation of Retail Newsagents meeting in Llandudno.
However, it was withdrawn after several speakers said that such a call would have little impact on Parliament and might have an adverse affect on the reputation of the federation.
But delegates reacted favourable to calls for tougher sentencing, with proper life terms.
Birmingham newsagent, Daniel Clarke, said the main problem was the sinister influence of drugs on young people who committed crimes when ‘out of their minds’.
Bringing back capital punishment would do nothing if the drug problem was not solved.
Newsagent, John Ellis, said he did not believe such a call would have much influence on Parliament.
‘Today people are brought up to know their rights but not their responsibilities,’ said Mr Ellis.
Funding bid saves infants' centre
By Emyr Williams Daily Post Correspondent
CENTRES in Gwynedd which assess the needs of preschool children have been saved from closure.
Education officials have been told they must find £50,000 to keep them open for another year.
At Gwynedd Education Committee, Coun Jill Knight called for funding for the units which serve the special needs of young children, leading to their integration into mainstream schooling.
It was a matter of concern, she said, that no money was included in the council's 1993/94 budget to continue the six units, at Bangor, Deganwy, Caernarfon, Llangefni, Pwllheli and Blaenau Ffestiniog, beyond August.
She said: ‘We are guilty of failing to provide for what is clearly a statutory service and I am truly appalled that we slipped up so badly and made such a serious mistake.
‘These units are enormously helpful to parents and we must pull out all the stops to find the money to keep the units open.
‘We must assist these children and I am told there are already 30 children on the waiting list for assessment.’
Committee chairman, Coun Handel Morgan, said the funding had been earmarked in the education committee estimates but was deleted by the policy committee and full county council.
The committee decided that the units should remain open for another year and that the director of education be instructed to find the £50,000 needed, possibly from reserves.
Germans on police mission
TWO officers from the German police at Dusseldorf will be visiting North Wales today to learn about policing methods in the region as part of an international exchange scheme.
Rider killed in TT crash
A COMPETITOR was killed in the Isle of Man TT races, which have already been marred by the deaths of nine fans.
Steve Harding, 36, a single man from Cambridge, crashed his Yamaha machine during yesterday's Supersport 600 event.
He is the 166th competitor to die in the history of the TT races.
Attack terror
A TEENAGE horsewoman fought off a man who attacked her on Wimbledon Common yesterday almost a year after young mother Rachel Nickell was stabbed to death in the same area.
The attacker went up to the woman as she rode around an area of the south London Common known as the arena, blocking her path when she tried to leave and twice attempting to pull her from her horse.
Actress better
CORONATION Street star Lynne Perrie was said to be improving in the hospital where she is undergoing tests following her collapse two days ago.
The 62 year-old actress, who plays Ivy Brennan, was described last night as ‘comfortable and stable’ in Salford's Hope Hospital.
Prince on track
PRINCE Michael of Kent has attacked plans to build a car park on an historic aviation site and the birthplace of British motor sport.
The Queen's cousin made a public plea to construction giant Trafalgar House not to demolish the last hangar at Brooklands in Weybridge, Surrey.
Dean: Divorce
Perrie: Better
Arson tragedy families in High Court hearing
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
FAMILIES of victims of the Hove arson tragedy take their fight for justice to the High Court next week.
The High Court will hold a judicial review to see if the inquest verdicts can be overturned.
And yesterday they said they were still optimistic that some good would come from their campaign including a change in the law.
Five people including some from North Wales died in the blaze, said to have been started as a prank in Palmeira Drive, in April last year.
There was no fire escape, and guests at the birthday party were trapped as the flames spread.
Adrian Johns, 31, formerly of Llandudno and 33-year-old former Denbigh man, Anthony Jones, were unable to escape.
They died in the smoke and flames.
Colwyn Bay nurse, Mabel Roberts, who was only at the party by chance, died after jumping more than 40ft from the flat.
Lee Homburg, brother of Adrian Johns, survived after jumping, but suffered serious burns.
But when the inquest was held in Brighton last summer, the families of the victims walked out, claiming the hearing had been a ‘whitewash.’
They subsequently won the right to start moves to have the inquest verdict quashed and to have a judicial review.
One of their main contentions is that a vital witness, property millionaire, Nicholas Hoogstraten, should called.
Their case is that as a previous owner of the flat he was responsible for having a fire escape put in.
Yesterday Adrian and Lee's father, Dennis Johns of Llandudno, said: ‘This is just another stage which we hope will lead to a new inquest.
‘It has been an awful long time just getting to this stage, but it will be worth it if we can succeed.’
Checking
He said one of their main hopes was to tighten up the law on fire precautions in flats.
‘Landlords should be made to put their house in order before they rent these places out.
But then again, the councils should be doing their job and checking everything is in order.’
The families engaged barrister Geoffrey Robertson QC, who represented British soldiers' families after the Gulf War ‘friendly fire’ incident.
The blazing house in Hove where three people from North Wales died as fire swept through the building
Doug McAvoy accused Government of ‘ignorance’
John Patten plan for ‘Mum's Army’ of teachers
‘Bury power lines’ demand for Snowdonia
By Emyr Williams Daily Post Correspondent
PLANNERS are forcing North Wales's only supplier of electricity to go underground, claiming that electricity poles are unsightly.
Manweb wants to erect low voltage lines on wooden posts at Nantmor, near Beddgelert, agreeing at the same time to dismantle the existing line.
The company claims that placing lines underground could lead to a poorer service in rural areas, particularly when faults occur.
But at yesterday's meeting of the Snowdonia National Park's northern area planning committee, members accepted an officer's recommendation that the application be declined, and that Manweb be asked to place the cables underground.
Planning officer Phil O'Sullivan said: ‘As planners, we maintain that the proposal would be unsightly, failing to enhance the appearance of the area.’
But Manweb's special projects manager, Ian Basford, argues that placing the cable underground would be too costly.
‘In the Gwynedd district, we are developing and refurbishing well over 300 km of line per year in order to improve the quality of supply to our customers, and it is essential that our costs are kept to a minimum,’ said Mr Basford.
‘Putting a line underground can be 20 times more expensive than refurbishing overhead lines.
‘The effect would be an increase in costs to our customers and, in the case of those living in the national parks, a possible deterioration in supply quality, due to a reduction in refurbishment.
‘Fault location and repair takes much longer with underground cables, and this could result in customers being without supply for longer periods.’
Plane lands on roadway
A PILOT and his passenger were forced to land in the middle of a road yesterday when their plane lost power shortly after take-off.
The Tiger Moth was brought down next to the airfield in West Road, Clacton, Essex, blocking the road and spilling fuel.
Clacton Aeroclub members raised the alarm when they realised the pilot was in difficulty, but no-one was hurt, said police.
Paul Llewelyn Jones
Guard ‘executed by ex-schoolmate’
AN ARMED robber ‘executed’ a security guard because he recognised him as a former schoolmate, a court was told yesterday.
Ian Foster, 26, was killed with a shot to the back of the head as he collected £5,000 from a town hall.
Anthony Morris, QC, told Manchester Crown Court that Mr Foster died because he had the ‘misfortune’ to have been at the same secondary school as the gunman and had known him well for four years.
He said Alan Steadman, 27, came up behind Mr Foster as he was about to leave the town hall in Farnworth, Greater Manchester, and shot him in the back of the head with a stolen Colt .45.
The security man died almost instantly.
Mr Morris said: ‘Steadman knew that Mr Foster would recognise him and therefore, the Crown say, decided to kill him.
It really had all the hallmarks almost of an execution.’
Steadman, of Clare Court, Little Hulton, Greater Manchester, denies murder and robbery, together with Rodney Smith, 27, of Wildbrook Road, Little Hulton, who the Crown alleges planned the robbery with him and was the getaway driver on a stolen 1000cc motor cycle.
Steadman's brother Gary, 33, denies handling £530 from the robbery.
After Mr Foster was gunned down, his fellow security guard reversed their van into the motorcycle, ridden by Smith.
But he was able to remount, leaving Steadman to escape on foot with the box containing the money.
The trial continues today.
Decisions ‘swayed by chapel and Freemasons’
By Tom Bodden Welsh Affairs Correspondent
OLD boy networks, Freemasonry and chapel membership were believed to hold undue sway in the decisions of some Welsh councils, MPs were told yesterday.
The accusations have been made to MPs investigating planning practices and housing in rural Wales.
Welsh Affairs Committee of MPs chairman, Gareth Wardell, who made the allegations, yesterday quizzed Welsh Ombudsman Elwyn Moseley, who investigates complaints against councils, about any evidence to support the claims.
He agreed that, in many areas, the way councils operated gave rise to such allegations.
Mr Moseley said there were examples of planning committee decisions to flout development guidelines for houses in the countryside which were unexplained fully in official records.
But, to prove any impropriety beyond that was often difficult, he said.
The committee has been concerned by the high numbers of planning applications granted by six Welsh councils in defiance of published development plans.
One problem encountered by the Ombudsman had been the extent of canvassing and lobbying of individual councillors by applicants for planning permission in a ‘clandestine’ process to influence decision makers.
In the last three years, the Ombudsman had judged 13 complaints in which decisions to allow development were ‘perverse, arbitrary or inconsistent.’
Mr Moseley said aspects of council practice needed strengthening, including the advertisement of departure consents; submission of clear reports on all aspects of decisions; and the discouraging of canvassing or lobbying of individual councillors.
Heart boy flown to hospital
A CHILD suffering from a serious heart condition had to be airlifted from North Wales to a specialist cardiac unit yesterday.
The six-year-old boy was flown by RAF helicopter from Bodelwyddan's Glan Clywd Hospital to Liverpool's Alder Hey Hospital.
The flight took 15 minutes.
The helicopter, from Valley, Anglesey, touched down shortly before noon on a specially-constructed landing site at the rear of the children's hospital.
The child's condition was unavailable last night.
Woman kidnap victim's terror ordeal in ‘coffin’
By Mervyn Tunbridge and David Fothergill
A JURY sat spellbound yesterday as they heard the ‘chilling’ account of estate agent Stephanie Slater's terrifying eight-day kidnap ordeal at the hands of alleged killer Michael Sams.
Sams said to have played a ‘catch me if you can’ game with the police had planned the perfect crime, the court was told.
After threatening Miss Slater with a knife, he took her to the converted pub in Newark, Nottinghamshire, he used as a workshop for his tool repair business.
There she was squeezed chained, blindfolded and gagged into a coffin-shaped box, which was then slid into a wheelie-bin lying on its side, Richard Wakerley, QC, prosecuting, told Nottingham Crown Court.
A chain linking her handcuffs was tied to a bar above her, and Sams warned there were boulders over her head.
If she pulled they would come crashing down on top of her, said Mr Wakerley.
He also told Miss Slater, then 25, that he had set up an electrical circuit to the box and if she moved she would be electrocuted.
In addition, he rigged up an infra-red device to detect any movement in the premises and stop any possible bid for freedom, said Mr Wakerley.
‘You may think it is doubtful that any words can express what he did to that young girl,’ he told the jury of eight women and four men.
Sams, 51, of Barrel Hill Road, Sutton on Trent, Notts, admits kidnapping Miss Slater in January, 1992, unlawfully imprisoning her and demanding £175,000 with menaces from her then employers, Shipways Estate Agents, of Birmingham.
But he denies murdering Leeds teenager Julie Dart in July, 1991, kidnapping her, two charges of demanding £140,000 with menaces from Leeds police, and demanding £200,000 with menaces from British Rail.
Paying tribute to Miss Slater, Mr Wakerley said she had the ‘ability and courage’ to keep her head realising ‘quite literally that her life was in his hands.’
Mr Wakerley said Sams' first ransom plot involving Julie Dart went wrong and he killed her.
The unemployed 18 year-old had turned to prostitution and was seen soliciting in the Chapeltown area of Leeds on July 9, 1991.
A farmer found her naked body 10 days later in a field beside the A1 near Grantham, Lincs.
She had been struck on the back of the head and strangled, said Mr Wakerley.
There was no sexual motive she was the innocent victim of Sams' campaign to commit the perfect crime, he alleged.
Miss Slater was lured to a property in Turnberry Road, Birmingham, she thought she was showing to a bona fide customer.
But she ended up being forced into the bath, having a noose placed around her neck, being blindfolded, gagged, and threatened with a knife and a chisel.
Her screams were not heard and in a struggle she cut her hand on the knife.
Then came her horrifying eight-day ordeal, during which Sams wrote to her employers demanding £175,000 ransom.
Kevin Watts, from the firm, set out with the money a week later, following instructions left by Michael Sams in various locations.
The money was left on the parapet of a bridge carrying the track over an old dismantled railway line the Dove Valley Trail.
Waiting below was Michael Sams, who had left a tray on the bridge parapet for the money.
Attached to it was a sash cord, linked to a rope hanging down to the track.
When Sams tugged the rope, down came the money and he rode off with it on his scooter, leaving £2,500 in his haste to get away.
Mr Wakerley told the jury that Sams kidnapped Julie Dart by pretending to be a client.
He took her to his Newark workshop and kept the teenager who suffered from claustrophobia tied, gagged and blindfolded in a wooden box, alleged Mr Wakerley.
Sams, meanwhile, contacted the police demanding £140,000 ransom.
But his plans went wrong.
Mr Wakerley suggested Miss Dart might have tried to escape, or she may have screamed, or she possibly saw Sams undisguised and had to be killed.
The trial was adjourned until today.
Stephanie Slater after her kidnap ordeal
The house where Miss Slater was kidnapped
Gun-killing suspect in identity row arrested
A 16-YEAR-OLD murder suspect at the centre of a row over publication of his identity was yesterday arrested by police.
The teenager, who absconded while on remand, was traced to an address in Highbury, north London, and was being held at a west London police station, said Scotland Yard.
The youth is accused of the shotgun killing of legal clerk Amaranath Bandaratilleke at a newsagent's shop in Hammersmith, west London, on February 22.
The 32-year-old man was shot in the stomach after being robbed of just 26p.
The 16-year-old had appeared in court on March 2 accused of murder, but escaped from a social services hostel last week.
The Crown Prosecution Service is studying newspapers which published his name and picture to determine whether they committed any offence under the Children and Young Persons Act, because the suspect is under 18.
Stephanie Slater after her kidnap ordeal
The house where Miss Slater was kidnapped
TV set raid on hotel
A MAN must carry out 80 hours community service after a court heard yesterday how fingerprints linked him to a break-in at a Llandudno hotel in which seven televisions were stolen.
Jeffrey Hughes, 33, unemployed, of Augusta Street, Llandudno, must also pay £450 compensation.
He admitted burglary and shoplifting.
Karen Dixon, prosecuting, said the sets were taken from the Wave Crest hotel.
Five, worth £851, were still missing.
Pubs, houses and shops were flooded last night when torrential rain lashed parts of North Wales.
Particularly badly hit was Flint where the local authority had to be called out to help fire crews place sandbags at a number of properties.
The cellar of one pub in the town, the Tradesmen's Arms was flooded while drains in many streets overflowed.
Connah's Quay was also affected with the Englefield Avenue suffering badly.
Former town crier sets himself alight
FIREBALL HORROR
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
CHESTER'S ex-town crier yesterday turned himself into a human fireball outside the office of his former girlfriend.
Mike Chittenden staggered in flames into a neighbouring office, where terrified workers doused the flames and administered first aid.
Moments before he set himself on fire, Mr Chittenden phoned the Daily Post's office in Chester, asking staff there to go to the United Friendly offices in Chester's St Werburgh Street.
Mr Chittenden made no reference to his intentions during the call, and refused to explain why he wanted someone to go there.
Sounding calm, he simply said: ‘Get up there now and you will get the scoop of your life.’
Daily Post staff immediately contacted the United Friendly offices and the emergency services.
Mr Chittenden had already doused himself in a flammable liquid and set himself alight.
He did not go into the United Friendly office, where ex-girlfriend, Sandra Sturgiss, was working.
Continued on Page 3 Continued from Page 1 Staff at a neighbouring office smelt petrol and opened the door to see Mr Chittenden go up in flames.
He staggered into their office, ablaze from the waist upwards.
Office worker Bryan Johnson tore off his own shirt to smother the flames.
Fellow worker Hazel Goff, who has St John Ambulance training, then administered first aid, cutting away the burnt clothing.
Mr Johnson said: ‘To be honest, I thought he was going to get hold of one of us.
‘I used my shirt to put out the flames.’
Insp Steve Clapham, of Chester Police said: ‘He's poured some substance on himself and set fire to it.
‘It would appear to be over a former girlfriend.’
Mr Chittenden was rushed to the Countess of Chester Hospital with a police escort.
He was later transferred to the burns unit at Whiston Hospital, Merseyside.
Last night, he was said to be in a comfortable condition.
Mr Chittenden resigned from his post as Chester's town crier last year.
Council leader Richard Short said: ‘He did a good job for us when he was town crier and he just seems to have got himself dreadfully mixed up.
It's a terrible shame.’
Outside the offices, Mr Chittenden left a red envelope addressed to his former girlfriend.
Mr Johnson said that on a previous occasion, Mr Chittenden had asked him to deliver flowers to her in her office.
001 008 02
Mike Chittenden in his days as Chester town crier
Terrorists won't beat me, vows bomb-blast man
Tourist hurt in Cairo will continue trip
By Daily Post Correspondent
A WOUNDED North Wales holidaymaker said yesterday: ‘Terrorists won't beat me.’
British Aerospace worker Leonard Phillips, injured in a terrorist bomb attack on a tourist bus in Egypt, defiantly carried on with his holiday yesterday after leaving hospital in Cairo.
An Egyptian was killed and five Britons injured in the blast after a nail bomb was dropped from a bridge onto their tour bus in Cairo.
Sightseeing
Mr Phillips, 61, of Penyffordd, Mostyn, underwent surgery to have a nail removed from his chest.
His wife, Agnes, was also treated for shock.
The couple were on a sightseeing trip to the Pyramids at Giza.
Mr Phillips, recently promoted to quality manager at Number Two site of Corporate Jets in Broughton, has a daughter and son.
His son, also Leonard, of Crud-y-Gwynt, Mynydd Isa, near Mold, used to work at BAe as an electrician, although he has now moved to Vauxhall.
Yesterday Mr Phillips told a travel company he would continue his holiday.
Anneka Patel, of Cypriana Holidays, said yesterday: ‘He will be back on the cruise ship tonight and arriving back into Cyprus tomorrow morning to continue his holiday.
‘As far as he is concerned he's fine.
He is in slight shock, but he wishes to carry on his holiday and as far as he is concerned he believes the terrorists won't beat him.’
Friends in ice search
FRIENDS of an Anglesey man missing in Alaska since last week are continuing to search for him.
Thomas Hargreaves, 39, whose parents live at Llangoed, has not been seen since last Thursday, when he set off on a hike through a forest towards a glacier, close to south east Alaskan town of Juneau.
His bicycle was found close to the start of a forest trail.
State troopers called off a search earlier this week.
Said its co-ordinator Chuck Lamica: ‘The weather here has improved, and his friends are still out there looking for him.’
Alcoholic Linda Ann McMullen, who was beaten and suffocated to death
Lisa Burgess pictured being led into Mold Crown Court yesterday
Cash appeal for Asian centre
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
HERITAGE Minister Peter Brooke is being asked to give financial backing to plans for a multi-cultural centre in Chester.
The Asian and Bangladeshi Project won the tender for the disused Egerton Street school against huge competition two weeks ago.
But they now have to find the £330,000 to pay for the building.
They are appealing for aid from the Home Office, Cheshire County Council and Chester city council.
The organisation wants to turn the disused school into a community centre offering religious, educational and leisure facilities.
County property manager Ian Gould said there was no pressure on the group to come up with the money immediately.
He said: ‘It is not a time limited offer but we will be sending the contracts out and expecting a response to them.’
Project spokesman Shamsuddin Ahmed said: ‘We had written to the Home Office Minister, Peter Lloyd, asking for support and he has now passed on the letter to the Heritage Minister, Peter Brooke.
‘We are hoping to hear from him soon to see if there is money available to support us.
‘We are also in the process of asking the county council and city council for support.’
He added: ‘There is a need for this kind of facility in Chester for the Asian community and also the whole city.’
‘Squidgy's Own’ in Princess salute
A smiling Princess of Wales meets ‘Di's Guys’ THE Princess of Wales yesterday took command of her new regiment already nicknamed ‘Squidgy's Own’.
And as she attended the first parade of the Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment, she joked: ‘It has to be said that for a 31-year-old woman to have 2,500 men under her command is quite a feat but I am sure I will rise to the occasion.’
The new regiment was formed through the merger of the Queen's and the Royal Hampshires in September last year only months after the publication of an alleged telephone conversation between the princess and her friend, James Gilbey.
The new regiment earned its army nickname through the term of endearment used throughout the intimate conversation by the man who was said to be Mr Gilbey.
The Princess was in Canterbury for the first full parade of her troops, also known as ‘Di's Guys’, since their formation.
In sweltering heat she walked around the edge of the vast parade ground pausing to chat to some of the 600 troops gathered in her honour.
Smiling Princess of Wales meets ‘Di's Guys’.
Patient spending up
CHESTER Health Authority has increased spending on patients by two per cent.
The health authority plans to spend £66.5m on hospital and community services in 1993/94.
This averages out at £369 per person 2pc up on last year.
£50.6m is to be spent on hospital care, with £6.5m going on community care and £8.2m on spending by GP fundholders.
The health authority has 35 contracts in place with hospital centres throughout the Cheshire, Wirral, Merseyside and Manchester area.
The figures are in Chester Health Authority's latest update report.
NFU call for schools research
RESEARCH to establish what sources schools use to get information about farming has been commissioned by the NFU.
The MORI survey will also seek to establish what future needs are likely to be.
This was revealed when the NFU announced the appointment of Jill Clay, a former schools inspector with the Inner London Education Authority, to help ensure that children have a balanced understanding about farming, food and the environment.
During 12 months with the union she will liaise with teachers and local education authorities across the country to assess what information schools require about farming when teaching the national curriculum.
She will also advise the NFU on future strategy in schools and establish a database of individual farmers undertaking school liaison work.
While with ILEA Ms Clay, once the deputy head of a Midland school, led a team of advisers providing support for the health education curriculum on over 1,200 education establishments.
Town alerted as rats invasion has experts worried
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
AN INVASION of rats has hit Frodsham and pest control experts fear it could be a permanent problem.
Householders and shopowners in the town have been warned of an influx of vermin from nearby marshlands.
The alert was raised after dozens of the rats were spotted on Main Street and by the railway line.
Environmental health officers have been called in and are now treating the problem.
Frodsham hotelier George Harrison, who runs the Queens Head, has complained to Vale Royal Council about rats on the railway behind his business.
He said: ‘They are coming off the railway line and I am worried about it.
‘They are not the kind of thing we want in this town and certainly not near my hotel.’
Frodsham councillor Frank Pennington also fears the town is being overrun by the rats.
He said: ‘In the last three months they have been breeding and there are lots of them all over the place.
‘I have seen some myself on Main Street around the bins and even on window sills.
It is disgusting.’
He said there was a similar problem in the town 12 years ago with rats coming from the marshlands.
Environmental health officer Richard Hallows admitted yesterday they were facing a problem and called on the public to help them.
He said: ‘There are rats in Frodsham.
It is a limited ongoing infestation on some parts of council land and railway land adjacent to Main Street.
‘It is an area that potentially could have a minor infestation for a long time.
‘As fast as we are reducing the population arriving from the marshland and canal they are expanding.’
He called on the public to report any rat sightings to the Pest Control Unit on .
He added: ‘That is the only way we can clear the town of the problem but at the moment it is a bit of an uphill battle.’
Frank Pennington
Jobs saved as fertiliser firm wins on dumping
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
FERTILISER manufacturer Kemira was celebrating yesterday, having almost won their battle to save over 100 jobs.
Earlier this year, the Ince based agricultural chemical firm, warned that jobs were under threat if the European Commission did not take action to prevent cheap Russian fertilisers being dumped onto the UK market, making competition virtually impossible.
Yesterday, the EC announced that Kemira and the other British fertiliser manufacturers had won their case against the Russians.
Although Kemira is not completely home and dry, the EC will find it virtually impossible not to find a solution to the problems it has recognised.
‘We understand they have found in favour of us and the other UK producers,’ said a spokesman for Kemira.
‘Russian and Lithuania have been dumping cheap products on the UK market, and our understanding is that the Commission has now found that they have caused material damage to the UK industry.
We now expect that the Commission will find a remedy under the GATT laws.’
Kemira is not seeking a complete ban of imports from the East.
They want a floor price so they can compete on equal terms.
Euro MP for Cheshire West, Lyndon Harrison, who has fought for Kemira, says he is delighted with the result.
‘This is brilliant,’ he said.
‘It defends some hundreds of jobs and it's a good example of how European action can produce results.
‘Russia has its own problems and the EC will be seeking a remedy which won't harm them.
‘What we don't want to see is our own producers being undercut.’
Barry Higgs, chairman of the British Fertiliser Manufacturers Association said: ‘We are delighted the Commission appears to have agreed with everything we were protesting about.
It should be a source of relief to all UK fertiliser manufacturers including Kemira.
It is a very significant step in achieving what we want.
‘The EC decided that our profitability and employment was threatened.
Now we hope the EC will do something to resolve the problem.
It may take the form of some sort of duty tax which will bring the price of the imports up to that of our suppliers.’
A technical report is expected to be released by the EC next week.
Riding school appeal lost
AN APPEAL against a decision by Ynys Mn Borough Council to refuse planning permission for the change of use of a building at Brackendene, Llanfair NB to a riding school has been dismissed by a Welsh Office inspector.
Lost appeal
WELSH Office inspector Richard Lewis has dismissed an appeal against Arfon Borough Council's refusal to give outline planning permission for a bungalow to be built on land at Tyddyn Canol, Pentir near Bangor.
Shop plan
THE North Wales Wildlife Trust wants to run a shop and information centre at Holyhead's Breakwater Country Park.
Welsh tea
A WELSH tea is the variation on the coffee afternoon theme offered by the Bangor Group of the Arthritis and Rheumatism Council for Research (ARC) tomorrow at Friends' Meeting House, Bangor.
Wylfa visits
OVER the last two weeks 623 people, including a group from France, have visited Wylfa Nuclear Power Station in Anglesey.
Police plea
POLICE have appealed for help after a car stolen from Wrexham was later used as the getaway car by burglars who raided a newsagents shop at Mynydd Isa.
A silver Rover 216, registration number F333 KLG, was seen outside the Mr News shop in The Square, Mynydd Isa, when burglars broke and stole cigarettes valued at £200.
Appeal tally
DELYN Borough's planning department received 42 appeals against its decisions last year the highest of any district in Clwyd.
But the council was ruled to have made the correct decision in 71pc of the inquiries.
Golden boy Jackson gets GP flier
COLIN JACKSON made a flying start to his Grand Prix season in Rome's Olympic Stadium last night.
The 26-year-old Welsh ace won the Golden Gala sprint hurdles title with the fastest time in the world this year 13.11secs.
Jackson left all three Barcelona Olympic medallists Mark McKoy, Tony Dees and Jack Pierce in his slipstream.
Then he revealed a double target for the World Championships in August.
In addition to seeking a long-overdue first global hurdles title, Jackson wants to qualify for the 100 metres and compete alongside his great pal, Linford Christie.
That is the reason behind his decision to run the distance at this weekend's British Championships at Crystal Palace.
He said: ‘I feel I've reached the stage of my career when I could take on another event seriously.
‘I've run 10.29secs with no special training and I'd like to bring that down to around 10.19secs this year.
Determined
‘It would still be nothing special but when Linford retires in a couple of years there is going to be a big opening in the 100.
‘It wouldn't interfere with the hurdles at the World Championships because there is a gap between the two events.
If anything, it should help me with my leg speed.’
Jackson, narrowly beaten by McCoy in the Indoor Championships after coming a poor seventh in the Olympics, is determined to prove his worth at the highest level.
Olympic champion Sally Gunnell, having her first individual race of the season, also made a bright start over 400 metres hurdles.
Her 54.64secs victory was comfortably inside the time set last month by American rival, Sandra Farmer Patrick.
Gunnell, running a controlled race, came through strongly into the final bend and pulled away in the straight to win by half a second.
David Grindley's bid for a European Cup 400 metres place ahead of Roger Black met with limited success.
The powerful 20-year-old from Wigan, who set a new British record of 44.47secs in Barcelona and went one better than Black by reaching the final, was second in 45.44secs to Barcelona bronze medallist, Kenyan Samson Kitur.
COLIN JACKSON
100m target
Bargain hunters abound
PRIVATE investors have turned bargain hunters, according to telephone stockbroker Sharelink.
Its May list of the most popular buys has Hartstone Group, the hosiery and leather goods company whose shares have plummeted after a series of profits warnings, in fourth spot.
Simon Engineering, which also warned about profits, was another newcomer to Sharelink's chart at No 3.
Ratners, the jewellery chain attempting to re-establish its former prominence, jumped to first place from seventh in April, while BT slipped from the top slot to No 7.
MP fires newshot in Army jobs fight
A NORTH-WEST MP is to quiz a new minister over plans to move Army jobs to Scotland.
Chester MP Gyles Brandreth has asked for an urgent meeting with new armed forces minister, Jeremy Hanley.
Mr Brandreth has been campaigning for the Army's new pay and personnel centre to be located in Chester and he led two delegations from the city to see Mr Hanley's predecessor, Archie Hamilton.
Mr Brandreth said: ‘Mr Hanley only arrived at his desk this week, but I have asked to see him as a matter of urgency because I want him to reconsider the whole question of the location of the Army's pay and personnel centre.
‘I accept the need for a unified centre but I don't accept that Glasgow offers the best answer, either for the Army or for the taxpayer.
‘In terms of location, either Chester or Stockport would have been preferable.
Both are more central and more accessible.’
Chester City Council, together with private-sector businesses, had put together a bid for the centralised centre which would have cost the Government nothing.
The city council is now asking for the House of Commons public accounts committee to look into the matter.
Mr Brandreth added: ‘In terms of quality of personnel, the present team at Queen's Park have a superb record that can't be rivalled anywhere else in the country.
I believe the Army should be building on the team they have here, not relocating to Glasgow.’
If the Glasgow move does go ahead, it will mean the loss of 180 jobs in Chester.
Graham Parry, branch secretary of the Civil and Public Servants Association at Chester, said the union was to have a national meeting next week to decide on a united response to the MoD proposals.
Gyles Brandreth: Plea
Pope honours Bishop's mass
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
A MESSAGE of congratulations from the Pope will be read at a mass in Birkenhead today to mark Bishop Joseph Gray's 50 years in the priesthood.
The 73-year-old Bishop was ordained in February, 1969, shortly before the silver jubilee of his becoming a priest.
Among those attending the mass at Our Lady's Church, Cavendish Street, Birkenhead, will be 20 bishops from England and Ireland and Wirral's mayor and mayoress Coun and Mrs Peter Corcoran.
Representatives from diocesan organisations and each of the 117 parishes of the diocese will be present.
The address will be given by the Rt Rev Leo McCartie, Bishop of Northampton.
At the end of the mass the Pope's congratulations and blessing will be read out.
Bishop Gray, a native of County Cavan, Ireland, was ordained to the priesthood in the Cathedral of SS Patrick and Felim, Cavan in June 1943.
After various appointment in the Birmingham area he was consecrated auxiliary Bishop of Liverpool in 1969 with responsibility for the pastoral care of five deaneries — Wigan, Chorley, Leigh, Ashton and Leyland.
In September 1980 he was transferred to become Bishop of Shrewsbury.
He was the episcopal representative of the international commission for English in the Liturgy from 1976 to 1984.
The Bishop was also president of the Liturgy Commission during the same period.
‘Once in 500 years’ rainstorm devastates town
By Daily Post Correspondent
THE heatwave came to a dramatic end yesterday with an incredible downpour of rain in South-west England.
Parts of the North West were also battered by storms.
The Helston area of Cornwall was hit by 3.6 inches of rain in just two hours.
Up to five inches fell in the 12 hours to 10am.
Around 40 homes were flooded by four feet of water, and some residents had to be rescued from first-floor windows.
A National Rivers Authority spokesman said the ‘phenomenal’ downpour was equivalent to more than twice the usual June rainfall for the area.
‘It was as though the clouds stopped over Helston and dumped everything they had on the town.’
Kerrier District Council's chief services officer, John Cadman, said the ‘incredibly intense’ storm lasted for six hours, causing extensive damage to the ground floors of businesses and homes.
Fire engines from the Royal Naval Air Station at Culdrose helped pump out homes and 40 personnel from the base joined council workers in a huge clean-up operation.
The nearby fishing village of Porthleven was also badly hit, with a 14ft-deep hole opening up in the back garden of one house.
The Meteorological Office said calculations from local records put such rain in the ‘very rare event’ category, something which might only happen there once in 500 years.
Forecasters said the weather was set to remain sultry and oppressive today, with temperatures in the 70s but little sun.
Meanwhile, in London, motorists fumed as the M4 the main artery to Heathrow and the West was shut when concrete joints buckled in the heat.
One hundred and fifty temporary workers are being taken on at Europe's biggest ice cream factory Birds Eye Walls in Gloucester to cope with increased demand.
‘I believe that what we have heard and seen this afternoon is nothing less than the beginning of the end of your premiership.’
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown to John Major in the Commons.
Plan for prison ‘may be axed’
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
PLANS to build a controversial new jail could be scrapped because of Government cost cutting, says an MP.
Liverpool Walton MP Peter Kilfoyle claims senior Whitehall sources have told him work on Fazakerley jail will be shelved for the foreseeable future when swingeing public spending cuts are made this autumn.
And he has written to Home Secretary Michael Howard demanding to know if plans for the category B inmate jail will be put on ice for a second time.
Prisons Minister Peter Lloyd caused uproar in February when he announced the Home Office was resurrecting plans to build the 600-inmate jail just yards from Fazakerley Hospital.
Opponents tried to block the proposal when evidence was unearthed that an ancient village could lie beneath the original site earmarked for the jail.
But the Home Office retaliated by announcing new plans to move the prison 150 yards closer to the hospital.
Now Mr Kilfoyle believes from senior Home Office sources that the £100m needed to build the prison will not be available in the foreseeable future.
Mr Kilfoyle said: ‘I have been told by senior Home Office ministers that we have powerful friends on our side in the form of the Government's latest round of expenditure cuts.
‘It would seem the £100m needed to build the jail would be a ripe contender for the cuts and it won't go ahead for the next financial year at least.’
A Prison Office spokesman denied the allegations, claiming: ‘It was made clear in the autumn statement last year that there would be no construction work on the jail until 1995/6.
‘There is no reason to doubt that money will be available at this stage and the public inquiry is still going ahead as planned.’
This has been scheduled for October 26.
Law chief to review sex abuser's sentence
THE ATTORNEY General Sir Nicholas Lyell is to review the sentence of a sex offender who was spared jail after a judge said his eight-year-old victim was ‘not entirely an angel.’
Judge Ian Starforth Hill QC gave Karl Gambrill two years probation at Winchester Crown Court on Tuesday for attempted unlawful intercourse.
Sir Nicholas has 28 days to decide whether to refer the sentence to the Court of Appeal.
Gambrill, now 21, of Southampton, had pleaded guilty to the charge.
Judge Hill has been criticised for his handling of another alleged child sex case, it was disclosed later.
He presided over a pre-trial review when it was decided not to go ahead with a case against a babysitter accused of assaulting seven children.
During the review, the judge said: ‘These are frightfully shy children, totally unlikely to be able to persuade a jury that anything happened, even if it did, and secondly, there is no corroboration and thirdly, no damage that I can see, fortunately, was done to the children.’
The case was taken up by BBC1's That's Life! in March.
Presenter Esther Rantzen, commenting yesterday, said: ‘One has to ask whether he should continue to try such cases.’
Of the latest case, she said: ‘It is bad enough when justice is made a mockery of with light sentences, or when abusers are set free.
‘But even worse is that children who are victims of crime are made to feel guilty and to blame.’
TV clash led to bombing threats
A FORMER naval officer was yesterday found guilty of threatening to blow up the BBC.
Brian Davies, 64, who had been angry at his treatment on the Kilroy TV discussion show, was also convicted of threatening a similar attack on the Broadcasting Complaints Commission.
He sent letters to the Home Secretary, Prime Minister and TV authorities during a year-long campaign to get to court and ‘expose corruption’.
The retired management consultant, of Kingsmead Avenue, Worcester Park, Surrey, thanked the jury for its verdicts, reached after just 30 minutes following a three-day trial at Southwark Crown Court.
Davies, who had been jailed for similar offences eight years ago, will be sentenced next month.
The court heard he became upset following his appearance as a member of the audience on Robert Kilroy-Silk's programme in December 1991 the day after the IRA attacked British Rail property in London.
He clashed with the former Labour MP on air, arguing the bombing was ‘justified’ in law because it had been ‘reasonable in all the circumstances’.
His complaint to the BCC about his treatment in front of the cameras was rejected.
He then began his letter writing campaign.
The court heard that Davies was jailed for nine months in 1985 for threatening to damage by fire Department of Heath and Social Security offices.
Thief ‘blew £85 on a good time’
A NEW Brighton man stole a winning betting slip from lodgings and collected the money from the betting office, Wirral magistrates heard yesterday.
When questioned William Black, 46, of Rowson Street, admitted his involvement and said he spent the money on ‘drink and having a good time’.
Black pleaded guilty to the theft and obtaining £85 by deception from Wagers bookmakers.
He was conditionally discharged for twelve months and had to pay £15 compensation.
War likely ‘express’ teachers
By Peter Archer Daily Post Correspondent
ANGRY teachers were last night set to take on Education Secretary John Patten over plans to mobilise a ‘Mum's Army’ to teach young children.
Mr Patten unveiled proposals to recruit parents, A new one-year ‘express’ course will allow the nursery and infant teachers to teach without a degree.
Teachers' unions attacked the plans as undervaluing the skills and work of early years teachers, and creating a two-tier profession.
The Patten plan, detailed in a Government draft circular, risks further heightening confrontation with teachers already boycotting national curriculum tests.
Radical reform of initial teacher training will also mean all primary school student teachers must spend far more time in the classroom and less in colleges and universities.
New emphasis will be given to training teachers in maintaining order and discipline in class.
Priority will be given to teaching English particularly reading arithmetic and science, and administering the Government's controversial national curriculum tests and assessments.
Funds taken from colleges and universities where cutbacks will now be inevitable will go to the schools training teachers.
Other key reforms include: More three-year Bachelor of Education (BEd) degrees.
Six-subject BEds to prepare primary teachers across a wide curriculum range.
Specialist subject courses for teachers of older primary pupils.
Mr Patten said the Government was proposing tough new standards for the knowledge and skills new primary teachers needed and opening up new routes into teaching.’
The National Union of Teachers accused Mr Patten of trying to get teachers ‘on the cheap’.
‘The Government assumes that because a child is young, less well-qualified teachers are needed,’ said NUT general secretary Doug McAvoy.
‘It merely demonstrates the Government's ignorance.’
Other teaching unions said they might well boycott the plan.
Doug McAvoy
John Patten
Military funeral for plane victim
THE funeral of Flight Lieutenant Stephen McNally, who was killed when the RAF Hercules on which he was travelling crashed in the Scottish Highlands, takes place next week.
He will be buried with full military honours at Frankby Cemetery, Wirral, following a service at Our Lady and St Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Seacombe, Wallasey, on Tuesday afternoon.
Fl Lt McNally was one of nine members of the RAF crew killed when the plane, went down during a low-level training exercise in the Grampians two weeks ago.
Tories go for safety first at conference
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
A TIGHT security cordon is being thrown around the Welsh Tory Party conference which opens in Llangollen tomorrow.
Special arrangements involving both North Wales police and a private security firm will be in place to try to prevent the sort of terrorist bomb attack which devastated the Tory conference in Brighton nine years ago.
Several Cabinet ministers will address the two-day gathering which is being held at the Royal International Pavilion in Llangollen for the first time.
They will include new Welsh Secretary John Redwood, Agriculture Secretary Gillian Shephard, President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine, Citizens' Charter Minister William Waldegrave and Tory Party chairman Norman Fowler.
John Major's aides are refusing to say whether he will attend.
Conservative Central Office has ordered special security screening measures to prevent firearms or bombs being smuggled into the £3m pavilion.
All 700 delegates, journalists and back-up staff will have to carry passes bearing their photographs.
But while details of the police operation are being kept under wraps, it is thought likely that armed officers will be on standby.
Arrests in drugs raid
TWO men were arrested following a raid by North Wales Police drug squad yesterday afternoon,, at a house in Derby Road, Wrexham.
One of them, the 22 year-old occupier, has been charged with supplying cannabis and possession with intent to supply and has been bailed to Wrexham Magistrate's Court on July 14.
The second man, 20, has been charged with possession of cannabis and Ecstasy and has been bailed to Court on July 7.
Walk to promote whale aid bid
DOZENS of people are expected to join a sponsored five-mile walk at the weekend to campaign for an end to the killing of whales.
The event is organised by Greenpeace in a bid to stop whaling and campaign against Norwegians who have announced they intend to resume commercial whaling this summer.
Sefton and Southport branches of Greenpeace have organised the walk, at Freshfield train station in Formby, on Sunday.
A Greenpeace spokeswoman said: ‘There are more than 210 walks happening throughout the UK.
‘In 1986, when the International Whaling Commission banned all commercial whaling worldwide, it seemed at long last the whales were saved.
‘However, since the ban was introduced, some 14,000 whales have been slaughtered.
This year alone, 1,000 whales will be killed by Japan and Norway.
‘By taking part in one of the local ‘Walks for the Whales’ people will be raising vital funds to help Greenpeace save the whales.’
Anyone who would like to take part can telephone any of the following numbers for information:,,.
Bodybuilder arrested then freed in steroids mix-up
By Carmel Brown Daily Post Staff
A MERSEYSIDE man was one of four members of the British bodybuilding team arrested in New Zealand yesterday.
They were all later released after police dropped charges that they illegally imported anabolic steroids into the country.
The four, including Kenneth Prescott from St Helens, Merseyside, declared the drugs to customs yesterday after flying into Auckland for the world amateur bodybuilding championship which takes place on Saturday.
Police charged them with importing 11 prescription only medicines but later withdrew the charges when the four appeared before the Otahuhu District Court.
The New Zealand Press Association reported police dropped the charges because the team had openly declared the performance enhancing drugs, making it difficult to prove they intended to commit an offence.
The court heard that Mr Prescott, 28, and his teammates Bernard Bryan, Colin Osbourne Wright and Jacqueline Watson used the drugs only for short periods of time for training in the run-up to a major event.
And they had declared them because they were accustomed to being allowed to use the drugs when they travelled in Europe.
Mr Prescott was selected for the British team last September after being awarded second place in the Mr Universe contest.
Last night Tony Sullivan, a friend of Mr Prescott and the North West area representative of the national Amateur Bodybuilding Association, said it would be impossible for anyone to compete at his level without using drugs to boost their performance.
Abuse claims youth ‘expelled from school’
A TEENAGER who claims he was horse whipped and treated like a slave by his foster parents was expelled from school for disruptive behaviour, Mold Crown Court heard.
His real mother complained to social services that he had disappeared from home and might have been glue sniffing or taking drugs, it was alleged at Mold Crown Court.
Paul Llewelyn Jones, 19, of Holyhead, denies ever taking drugs.
His foster father, Norman Roberts, 59, of Ysgubor Escob, Gwalchmai, Anglesey, denies cruelty by wilful ill treatment and assault.
His wife Evelyn, 59, denies wilful neglect and their son Ian, 34, accused of helping administer the beatings denies common assault.
Defending barrister Thomas Teague told Mr Jones yesterday: ‘You used to steal things from your foster parents and you used to give them to other children at school.
You were bullied at both your schools.’
Mr Jones denies he had lied, stolen or been bullied.
Mr Teague said Mr Jones was expelled from school, has a record for dishonestly handling stolen goods, criminal damage, taking a motorcycle and stealing.
He said the whip which Mr Jones claimed he had been beaten with was not bought until after Mr Jones had left the Roberts's.
He said when Mr Jones was taken to hospital to have his injuries looked at and photographed, he did not take the opportunity to be taken straight out of the Roberts' home.
The case continues.
Paul Llewellyn Jones
Villagers raise protest voices at quarry plans
By Emyr Williams Daily Post Correspondent
PLANS for a sand and gravel quarry at Capel Bangor, near Aberystwyth, have upset local people.
And when members of Dyfed County Council's planning and environment committee carried out a site inspection yesterday morning, they realised the strength of opposition to the proposal by Western Aggregates Ltd.
Following the site inspection, members retired to the Village Hall at Capel Bangor to hear representations from the local community.
And the message came over loud and clear, from more than 100 people, that they were opposed to the development.
County planning officer, Dave Bown, explained in a report to councillors that supplies of construction material to the Aberystwyth area come from Hendre Quarry, Ystrad Meurig and Glan Rhyd Ty Noeth, near Capel Bangor, but Glan Rhyd Ty Noeth is almost exhausted.
‘If it is not replaced by another source of sand and gravel, various difficulties may result for Aberystwyth, including the possibility of increased costs for the construction industry and house purchasers,’ said Mr Bown.
Local market demand is for 50,000 tonnes a year of sand and gravel, said Mr Bown.
Upon completion of working, the applicants propose that the 15-acre site be restored as a lake and nature conservation area, he said.
Consultations with various bodies have revealed that Welsh Water and the county highway authority do not object, but the National Rivers Authority want more time to consider the proposal, in view of proximity to the river.
Views expressed by local people at yesterday's public meeting included comments that Cwm Rheidol would be ruined for ever just for the sake of a short-term quarry, while another resident claimed that the village deserved a break after putting up with such a quarry for about 20 years.
But supporting the application, Glyn Jones claimed the development would be of benefit to the area.
‘The quarry would be of tremendous benefit to the building industry,’ said Mr Jones.
‘And we have to remember that many young people locally depend on the building trade for work.’
The committee deferred a decision on the application, and the matter will be further considered at a later date.
New box of tricks stirs interest
SCIENCE lessons have perked up at a junior school since youngsters discovered the secrets of a special science activities box.
The box brainchild of Unilever research workers Christine and David Gorman has given science a new slant for pupils at Ladymount School, Pensby, Wirral.
It aims to stimulate children's curiosity with a series of elementary exercises.
One of the teachers, Jen Tirebuck, said: ‘It develops their curiosity about science and encourages them to raise questions and seek their own answers.’
David Gorman is involved in Partners, a project run by the Education Business Partnership, in which industrialists are paired with teachers to produce curriculum material.
He commented: ‘Infants like to learn through experience, which is why these activities boxes are so good.’
Mrs Tirebuck observed: ‘Teachers are often expected to have an in-depth knowledge of science, so we are grateful for the help.’
Celebration
POWYS Fire Brigade is represented at the 50th anniversary celebrations of Fire Service Benevolent Fund in London today.
The delegation will take part in a ceremony in the Guildhall attended by the Queen.
Lisa Burgess pictured being led into Mold Crown Court yesterday
Evenson Major
JOHN Major is an even money chance to lead the Conservatives into the next General Election with bookmakers William Hill who are offering odds of 8–11 that he will be out of office by then.
Tragic boy's father faces court wait
Waiting little Rhys Daniels in his mother's arms outside the High Court yesterday
By John Ashton Daily Post Correspondent
THE father of a two-year-old boy suffering from a rare genetic disorder must wait to learn whether he has won his High Court battle over the controversial closure of a London hospital's bone marrow transplant unit.
Computer technician Barry Daniels, of Epping, Essex, yesterday asked two judges to rule that the shutdown of the unit at Westminster Children's Hospital, where his son Rhys was to receive a potentially life-saving operation, was unlawful because proper consultation procedures were not followed.
His hopes of victory rose after a health authority QC appeared to concede, in answer to the judges' questions, that regulations requiring consultations to take place had not been properly complied with.
But it remained unclear after the day-long hearing whether the court would be prepared to grant 34-year-old Mr Daniels' request for an order that the unit should be reassembled at another London hospital, or at least declare that the action taken by the North West Thames and Riverside health authorities was unlawful.
Lord Justice Kennedy, sitting with Mr Justice Macpherson, said: ‘This is a matter which we need to look at before we make our decision.
We will seek to give our judgment quickly.’
He said the court was conscious that any delay would not affect Rhys, who suffers from Batten's disease, an inherited metabolic disorder which causes blindness, dementia and death usually by the age of seven.
The court had heard that Rhys had now been accepted for a transplant operation at a Bristol hospital and the search was on for a suitable bone marrow donor.
Alan Meyer, solicitor for the Daniels family, said later he was optimistic of victory.
During the hearing, Patrick Milmo QC, for the family, said Rhys was the victim of maladministration in the running of London's health services.
Waiting Rhys Daniels in his mother's arms outside court
Norman Lamont: Savage
By David Rose Daily Post Political Editor
JOHN Major's premiership was in intensive care last night after Norman Lamont floored him with a potentially fatal knock-out blow.
And last night Tory MPs were openly warning that, unless he managed a spectacular recovery, and got a grip, Mr Major would be forced like Lady Thatcher before him to make way for a new leader.
Some Tories even forecast that Mr Major would quit voluntarily rather than face the humiliation of a Tory leadership challenge.
Mr Lamont got his revenge for being dumped as Chancellor by attacking Major's style of government.
Mr Major, he said, listened too much to the pollsters and party managers, and reacted rather than helped shape events.
‘We give the impression of being in office, but not in power.’
And he warned: ‘Unless this approach is changed, the Government will not survive and will not deserve to.’
Mr Lamont delivered his punch from the same seat from which Lord Howe, in his resignation speech in 1990, fatally wounded Lady Thatcher.
Within weeks, Mr Major had replaced her in Downing Street.
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown summed up the mood by telling Mr Major: ‘What you have seen this afternoon is nothing less than the beginning of the end of your premiership.
‘If you had turned round, you would have seen your fate indelibly written on the faces of the people behind you.
‘I don't know when you will go.
It may take weeks, or it may be months.
But people will look back and say this speech started the process.’
In his reply, Mr Major ducked answering Mr Lamont's central attack against his style of government, and his limp and lacklustre speech plunged the Tories into gloom.
To add to Mr Major's troubles, new Chancellor Kenneth Clarke the probable heir apparent upstaged him, while Labour leader John Smith twisted the knife more deeply with a performance that even Tory MPs privately praised.
Mr Smith mocked Mr Major that he knew of the ‘menace of the men in grey suits.
After all, he was the beneficiary of their deadly manoeuvres against his predecessor.
While it took ten years for them to move against her, after only 12 months they have him in their sights.
‘But, if I were he, I would worry most if they sought to reassure me.
Most of all, I would worry if they sought Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 to demonstrate their solidarity with a man in a spot of bother by giving him a present perhaps a watch inscribed ‘don't let the buggers get you down’ after all, it appears to be a coded message that it's time for an early and a swift departure.’
The executive of the 1922 Committee of Tory MPs will meet tonight to discuss the deepening crisis and Mr Major's failure to halt the slide in the Government's unpopularity.
Tory MPs have reported that rank and file members are openly questioning whether Mr Major should remain as Prime Minister.
Mr Major will himself face party activists when he addresses the Welsh Tory Conference in Llangollen tomorrow.
Tory MPs will be hoping for a fighting speech that shows Mr Major recognises the gravity of the crisis now threatening to engulf him.
Opening a debate on public spending, the Prime Minister tried to mend fences with the Tory Right by vowing that Britain would not join a single European currency in the next seven years, and ruled out any return to Europe's Exchange Rate Mechanism in this Parliament.
But he could not recover from the wound inflicted by the man once so close to him.
Mr Major managed only one swipe at his tormentor: ‘I believe history will look favourably on your economic and financial skills,’ he told him.
‘But a strong government needs political skills as well when leading a democratic society and, in particular, handling a lively House of Commons with a small majority.’
Comment Page 20
Former town crier in fireball horror
CHESTER'S ex-town crier yesterday turned himself into a human fireball outside the office of his former girlfriend.
Mike Chittenden staggered in flames into a neighbouring office where terrified workers doused the flames.
Moments before, Mr Chittenden called the Daily Post's office in Chester asking staff to go to the United Friendly offices in Chester's St Werburgh Street.
Mr Chittenden made no reference to his intentions.
Sounding calm, he simply said: ‘Get up there now, and you will get the scoop of your life.’
Daily Post staff immediately contacted the United Friendly offices, the fire brigade and police.
Mr Chittenden had already doused himself in a flammable liquid and set himself alight.
He did not go into the United Friendly office, where ex-girlfriend Sandra Sturgiss, was working, but staggered into a neighbouring office, ablaze from the waist upwards.
Office worker Bryan Johnson tore off his own shirt to smother the flames.
Fellow worker Hazel Goff, who has St John's Ambulance training, then administered first aid.
Mr Chittenden was rushed to the Countess of Chester Hospital by ambulance.
He was later transferred to the burns unit at Whiston Hospital, Merseyside.
Last night, he was said to be in a comfortable condition.
Mr Chittenden resigned from the post of Chester's town crier last year.
Jet sale protest by MP
By Daily Post Correspondent
LABOUR'S Barry Jones protested in the Commons last night at British Aerospace's decision to sell Corporate Jets, of Broughton.
In a debate called by Labour on the Government's economic record, Mr Jones (Alyn and Deeside) said his 600 constituents working for the firm were ‘perplexed’ at the move.
BAe had sold the workforce, in effect, and the finest aircraft of its type in the world to a US competitor, he protested.
Demand
He demanded Government guarantees over jobs.
The sale was ‘symptomatic of what is wrong with Britain's industrial policy’, he said.
‘My constituents want to know whether President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine knew that BAe were going to sell Corporate Jets.
They want to know if the Prime Minister knew.’
Wife murder trial ready to start
HOSPITAL technician Eddie Gilfoyle is expected to face trial at Liverpool Crown Court today, accused of murdering his pregnant wife.
The trial had been scheduled to start yesterday but was adjourned following legal discussions.
Gilfoyle, 33, has denied murdering his wife Paula, 33, who was found in the garage at their semi-detached home in Grafton Drive, Upton, Wirral, on June 4 last year.
Paula, who had worked as an assembler at Champion Spark Plugs, Upton, was due to give birth to their first child two weeks after she died.
Builders busy
MORE evidence of an upturn in the housing market came yesterday with home builders reporting more than 16,400 new starts in April up 17pc on the same month last year.
In the three months to the end of April, housing starts rose 16pc compared with the same period in 1992.
The figures, released by the Department of Environment, support optimism among mortgage lenders that a housing recovery is under way.
However, the upturn remains fragile and is not expected to strengthen until next year.
Driver banned
PETER Anthony George, 41, of Amberley Close, Moreton, was fined £315 and banned from driving for three years by Wirral magistrates.
He was drink- driving without a licence or insurance.
Tide turns on cowboy tippers
By David Hope
THE NEWLY formed North Liverpool Business Association is turning the tide against cowboy tippers who by night increase the environmental blight of the north city docklands area.
Businessmen are banding together to bring to book those who illegally dump wagon loads of waste, and the Merseyside Development Corporation have backed the initiative with the introduction of video cameras to monitor the twilight activity.
NLBA coordinator Diana Rowland lists areas of vacant land ‘poisoned’ with dumped toxic wastes and railway arches stuffed with discarded tyres.
One businessman had to take a week off work after scrap dealers used a nearby plot to burn insulation from copper cable.
‘The smoke, full of PCBs and cyanide, drifted through his office and triggered off his chest condition,’ she said.
The association has taken heart from a recent prosecution which saw one offender fined £20,000.
Now a further prosecution is pending after a local businessman agreed to act as a prosecution witness.
Yet in some areas illegal tips are now two storeys high and still rising.
Funded by the Merseyside Development Corporation the NLBA is a sister organisation to the city's Parliament Street Industrialists Association which two years ago celebrated a 73pc reduction in crime after they coordinated to defeat criminal activity.
Diana has targeted 600 local businesses as recruits to the NLBA with the aim to create a thriving business community.
Norman's lament for the man ‘who will not survive’
PREMIER John Major sat squirming in the Commons yesterday as the man he dismissed as Chancellor put a bomb under him and lit the fuse.
Norman Lamont, out of government and now just plain old MP for Kingston, Surrey, accused the Prime Minister of ‘short-termism’ and listening too much to the opinion polls.
He warned: ‘In politics you should decide what is right and then decide the presentation not the other way around.
‘Unless this approach is changed, the Government will not survive and will not deserve to.’
In a dramatic personal speech, Mr Lamont disclosed that on Black Wednesday the Prime Minister wrote to him saying he was not resigning ‘and I should not do so either’.
It was a shattering indictment of the day-to-day nuts-and-bolts operation of the Government.
Labour MPs clearly relished the discomfiture which Mr Lamont was visiting on the man he helped to power as his campaign manager in the leadership struggle and who now had dismissed him.
Speaking in measured tones from the fourth row back where sacked ministers traditionally have their say, he addressed a crowded chamber in an electric atmosphere.
Every so often his remarks contained a savage and wounding bite which the Government front bench listened to with increasing nervousness.
His banter and barbed comments were not lost on MPs.
In one bitter-sweet passage he said: ‘I wish the Prime Minister well and hope his changes will produce whatever advantage for him and the Government that he intended.’
Running through the entire statement was a thread of derision bordering on contempt for John Major.
Throughout he fiercely defended his own actions and was at pains to explain why he did not quit as many had said he should immediately after Black Wednesday.
He said bluntly that membership of the exchange rate mechanism was the policy of the whole Government and ‘I was implementing the policy of the Government.’
Mr Lamont was scathing about the way the Government conducted its business.
He said: ‘There is something wrong with the way we make our decisions.
The Government listens too much to the pollsters and the party managers.
‘The trouble is that they are not even very good at politics, and they are entering too much into policy decisions.
‘As a result, there is too much short-termism, too much reacting to events, not enough shaping of events.
We give the impression of being in office but not in power.’
Blast alert a toil terminal
POLICE were early today investigating an explosion at an oil terminal at North Shields, Tyne and Wear.
The explosion came less than 24 hours after an explosion and fire at a gas holder in nearby Gateshead.
Police, forensic and bomb squad officers are still searching for clues to the cause of that blast.
There was no fire at the Esso site and no reported casualties.
The terminal was the target of a bomb in April, on the day before the IRA's massive bomb attack on the City of London.
Adventurer killed by single shot
A FORMER soldier and adventurer, shot by robbers in Brazil, died of a single bullet wound to the left side of his head, an inquest heard.
Patrick Furse, 27, was alone on an around-the-world trip when he was killed by thieves who tried to take his camera and cash.
He will be cremated tomorrow after a private funeral service.
East Clwyd coroner, David Jones, said Foreign Office officials had told him Mr Furse, of Nerquis Hall, Nercwys, near Mold, had been involved in an incident at Parati on May 30.
He was pronounced dead at 4pm the following day.
After the body was flown home, pathologist Dr Donald Wayte conducted a post mortem at Ysbyty Gwynedd, Bangor.
The coroner said he understood that one man had been arrested following inquiries and another man was still being sought.
Police sergeant Leslie Wild said that the body had been identified as Mr Furse's brother, Richard.
A certificate was issued so that the funeral arrangements could be made and the inquest was adjourned to a date to be fixed.
THE body of a teenager, which has lain in a mortuary for ten days, was finally identified yesterday.
Workers pay more to charities
WORKERS at Shell's Thornton Research Centre increased donations to charity in the second year of a GAYE (Give as you Earn) scheme.
During 1991, when the scheme was launched at the Stanlow site, £3,335 was donated.
Last year donations totalled £5,200 through additional subscriptions.
A committee decides how money is distributed but members can choose charities they want to support.
Service for society CHESHIRE people who have any connection with the outreach work of the Children's Society are invited to a festival Service of Thanksgiving next week.
The Tudor Consort of Nantwich, a chamber choir specialising in sacred and secular music, will be performing at the Festival in Liverpool's Anglican Cathedral on June 17. (8pm).
Acid scare holds up freight train
A CHEMICAL alert was sparked yesterday following an acid leak at Bank Quay Railway Station, Warrington.
The scare began just after 5am when someone smelt acid as a freight train pulled into the station.
The rail tanker, which had been on route from Ince to Sellafield, was quickly moved into sidings while fire crews and specialists from Kemira, who were transporting the nitric acid, were called in.
‘When we got there at about 5.13am we were faced with an 100-tonne tanker with acid vapour issuing from the side,’ said a spokesman for Cheshire Fire Brigade.
The source of the leak was eventually traced to a vent which had been left open, and firemen hosed down the affected areas.
Roger Chesher at Kemira said the leak had not put anyone in any danger.
‘This was just a small leak from a valve on the side of the tanker,’ he said.
‘The valves are set according to the weather conditions, and the setting it was on was just enough to cause the tanker to leak slightly.
‘The valve is a routine piece of safety equipment and basically it did what it was supposed to do.’
A spokesman for British Rail said: ‘No trains or passengers were affected by this incident.
‘The train was delayed for 224 minutes and left just after 9am eventually.’
England stunned by defeat in US
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
ENGLAND'S dramatic demise as a footballing world power hit rock-bottom this morning when they were beaten 2–0 by the United States.
The comprehensive defeat marked their lowest point in the game since America defeated them in a World Cup match 43 years ago.
Manager Graham Taylor, already facing a barrage of criticism for his team selections and match strategies, was visibly shocked.
The result will now unleash furious demands for his resignation.
After the match in Boston, Massachusetts, Mr Taylor said: ‘It was always a match over which I never had any control.
‘As far as I am concerned, the position remains the same.
It is all down to what we have to do in our coming matches.
We have to concentrate on our own results and performances.’
The defeat comes just eight days after England lost by the same score to Norway in a vital World Cup qualifying match in Oslo.
Mr Taylor has constantly refused to bow to public pressure and select certain players, sticking instead to his guns a policy that may now lead directly to his downfall.
The previous defeat by the United States came in 1950 when a powerful England side were beaten 1–0 in Bela Horizonte, Brazil.
It had been hoped that three good performances in the so-called US ‘93 Cup would give Mr Taylor and his team some much-needed breathing space.
This morning's result appears instead to have suffocated him.
Graham Taylor: I never had any control
Major left reeling after savage attack by Lamont
Norman Lamont: merciless criticism
By David Rose Daily Post Political Editor
JOHN Major's premiership was in intensive care last night after Norman Lamont floored him with a potentially fatal knock-out blow.
And last night Tory MPs were openly warning that, unless he managed a spectacular recovery, and got a grip, Mr Major would be forced like Lady Thatcher before him to make way for a new leader.
Some Tories even forecast that Mr Major would quit voluntarily rather than face the humiliation of a Tory leadership challenge.
Mr Lamont got his revenge for being dumped as Chancellor by attacking Major's style of government.
Mr Major, he said, listened too much to the pollsters and party managers, and reacted rather than helped shape events.
‘We give the impression of being in office, but not in power.’
And he warned: ‘Unless this approach is changed, the Government will not survive and will not deserve to.’
Mr Lamont delivered his punch from the same seat from which Lord Howe, in his resignation speech in 1990, fatally wounded Lady Thatcher.
Within weeks, Mr Major had replaced her in Downing Street.
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown summed up the mood by telling Mr Major: ‘What you have seen this afternoon is nothing less than the beginning of the end of your premiership.
‘If you had turned round, you would have seen your fate indelibly written on the faces of the people behind you.
‘I don't know when you will go.
It may take weeks, or it may be months.
But people will look back and say this speech started the process.’
In his reply, Mr Major ducked answering Mr Lamont's central attack against his style of government, and his limp and lacklustre speech plunged the Tories into gloom.
To add to Mr Major's troubles, new Chancellor Kenneth Clarke the probable heir apparent upstaged him, while Labour leader John Smith twisted the knife more deeply with a performance that even Tory MPs privately praised.
Mr Smith mocked Mr Major that he knew of the ‘menace of the men in grey suits.
After all, he was the beneficiary of their deadly manoeuvres against his predecessor.
While it took ten years for them to move against her, after only 12 months they have him in their sights.
‘But, if I were he, I would worry most if they sought to reassure me.
Most of all, I would worry if they sought Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 to demonstrate their solidarity with a man in a spot of bother by giving him a present perhaps a watch inscribed ‘don't let the buggers get you down’ after all, it appears to be a coded message that it's time for an early and a swift departure.’
The executive of the 1922 Committee of Tory MPs will meet tonight to discuss the deepening crisis and Mr Major's failure to halt the slide in the Government's unpopularity.
Tory MPs have reported that rank and file members are openly questioning whether Mr Major should remain as Prime Minister.
Mr Major will himself face party activists when he addresses the Welsh Tory Conference in Llangollen tomorrow.
Tory MPs will be hoping for a fighting speech that shows Mr Major recognises the gravity of the crisis now threatening to engulf him.
Opening a debate on public spending, the Prime Minister tried to mend fences with the Tory Right by vowing that Britain would not join a single European currency in the next seven years, and ruled out any return to Europe's Exchange Rate Mechanism in this Parliament.
But he could not recover from the wound inflicted by the man once so close to him.
Mr Major managed only one swipe at his tormentor: ‘I believe history will look favourably on your economic and financial skills,’ he told him.
‘But a strong government needs political skills as well when leading a democratic society and, in particular, handling a lively House of Commons with a small majority.’
Comment Page 20
Murder charge women ‘tried to fake sex attack’
By Daily Post Correspondent
AN ALCOHOLIC died after being kicked and stamped on and having soil and vegetation stuffed in her mouth, a jury was told yesterday.
The women accused of murdering Linda Ann McMullen, 30, then tried an elaborate charade to suggest that she had been the victim of a sex attack by a man, it was alleged at Mold Crown Court.
A bottle used on the body of Mrs McMullen was found hidden behind bushes, said John Griffith-Williams QC, prosecuting.
Some hours after the alleged attack, Sharon McLean ran out of the Peace Gardens in Holt Street, near Wrexham police station, and pretended that she had just discovered the body, the jury was told.
But it emerged that Mrs McMullen, who lived with her mother and brother at Derby Road in Brynteg, Wrexham, had been the victim of a vicious attack.
McLean, 43, of no fixed abode, and Lisa Burgess, 21, who lived in a caravan near the Plas Madoc Housing Estate at Acrefair, both deny murder on Thursday, July 9, last year.
McLean was described by the prosecution as a divorced alcoholic who was a friend of the dead woman.
Burgess, 21, said to be known as The Hippie, also had a drink problem.
The jury heard allegations Mrs McMullen had accused McLean of stealing £60 and of sleeping with her boyfriend, Peter Hackett.
Opening the case, Mr Griffith-Williams said that a post mortem examination showed that Mrs McMullen had died of asphyxia due to blows to the nose and mouth and the introduction of soil and vegetation into her mouth, some of which she had swallowed.
The injuries to the head, consistent with about 15 blows, would have caused her to lose consciousness which made her helpless to resist the acts which caused her death, he said.
Fingermarks
There were fingermarks on her neck and attempts had been made to strangle her.
Her nose was broken and swollen, there was diffuse bruising to the whole of the skull, a broken rib and a large number of bruises to both arms and legs.
Home Office pathologist Dr Donald Wayte estimated that Mrs McMullen had died at 6.30pm but it was at 9.45pm that McLean claimed she had just found the body.
The bottle had been used to make it look like a sexual attack.
‘The prosecution say such actions demonstrate just how deliberate the behaviour of the defendants was,’ he said.
That evening the two defendants had been in the Peace Gardens with Mrs McMullen, her mother, Annie Williams, and brother, Terence Morton.
Mrs Williams had left before any violence took place and Mr Morton, who was not well enough to give evidence, left as the attack started.
In an interview, Mclean claimed Burgess had jumped on Mrs McMullen's head and McLean said she had kicked her and jumped on her stomach.
She was not sure if she had kicked her in the throat.
She claimed Burgess had used the bottle.
McLean said she also helped rub mud in her face.
Burgess admitted that she had kicked Mrs McMullen.
Initially, she claimed that when she left the gardens, Mrs McMullen was laughing and joking with McLean.
The case continues.
Major left reeling after merciless attack by Lamont
Norman Lamont: Savage criticism of PM
Bodybuilders arrested in airport steroid chaos
Four held then freed to compete
By Carmel Brown Daily Post Staff
A MERSEYSIDE man was one of four members of the British bodybuilding team arrested in New Zealand yesterday.
They were all later released after police dropped charges that they illegally imported anabolic steroids into the country.
The four, including Kenneth Prescott from St Helens, declared the drugs to customs yesterday after flying into Auckland for the world amateur bodybuilding championship which takes place on Saturday.
Police charged them with importing 11 prescription only medicines but later withdrew the charges when the four appeared before the Otahuhu District Court.
The New Zealand Press Association reported police dropped the charges because the team had openly declared the performance-enhancing drugs, making it difficult to prove they intended to commit an offence.
The court heard that Mr Prescott, 28, and his teammates Bernard Bryan, Colin Osbourne Wright and Jaqueline Watson used the drugs only for short periods of time for training in the run-up to a major event, as is common.
And they had declared them because they were accustomed to being allowed to use the drugs when they travelled in Europe.
Mr Prescott, was selected for the British team last September after being awarded second place in the Mr Universe contest.
Last night Tony Sullivan, a friend of Mr Prescott and the North West area representative of the national Amateur Bodybuilding Association, said it would be impossible for anyone to compete at his level without using drugs to boost their performance.
‘Kenny has been competing since the junior level and he has done so very successfully,’ said Mr Sullivan.
‘But, like in any other sport these days, anabolic steroids are common place.
‘In this country it is not illegal to use them because they are a prescription drug, it is only illegal to transfer them to somebody else.’
The four are still expected to take part in the World Amateur Bodybuilding Championship.
Ken Prescott very successful
Jail plan may be shelved in cut backs, says city MP
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
PLANS to build a controversial new jail could be scrapped due to Government cost-cutting, says a Labour MP.
Walton MP Peter Kilfoyle claims senior Whitehall sources have told him work on Fazakerley Jail will be shelved for the foreseeable future when swingeing public spending cuts are made this autumn.
He has written to Home Secretary, Michael Howard, demanding to know if plans for the category B inmate jail will be put on ice for a second time.
Prisons Minister Peter Lloyd caused uproar in February when he announced the Home Office was resurrecting plans to build the 600-inmate jail just yards from Fazakerley Hospital.
Opponents tried to block the proposal when evidence was unearthed that an ancient village could lie beneath the original site earmarked for the jail.
But the Home Office retaliated by announcing new plans to move the prison 150 yards closer to the hospital.
Now Mr Kilfoyle believes from senior Home Office sources that the £100m needed to build the prison will not be available in the foreseeable future.
Mr Kilfoyle said: ‘I have been told by senior Home Office ministers that we have powerful friends on our side in the form of the Government's latest round of expenditure cuts.
‘It would seem the £100m needed to build the jail would be a ripe contender for the cuts and it won't go ahead for the next financial year at least.’
A Prison Office spokesman denied the allegations, claiming: ‘It was made clear in the autumn statement last year that there would be no construction work on the jail until 1995/6.
‘There is no reason to doubt that money will be available at this stage and the public inquiry is still going ahead as planned.’
Earlier this month, the Department of Environment set a date for the public inquiry to commence on October 26 at a venue to be fixed in Liverpool.
John Davies, secretary of the No Fazakerley Prison Action Committee, is confident protesters will win the public inquiry, which is scheduled to last for five days.
He said: ‘We know our arguments against the jail are very, very, strong and theirs are very weak.
‘If we can force them to pull out through lack of money then that is their excuse, but we don't care as long as they go somewhere else.’
Move to end alarm nuisance
HOME owners with rogue alarms could find council officials marching in to switch them off.
Health officers in Macclesfield are to be empowered to go into houses and switch off noisy burglar alarms.
Concerned about the increasing number of complaints from neighbours of alarms sounding off for several hours the council has pledged to help end the menace.
SURGEON'S TRIBUTE TO ‘REMARKABLE STRENGTH’ OF CARING PARENTS
Medics meet to ease plight of battling Leah
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
SURGEONS will meet in France next week in an attempt to find a cure for a little girl who faces death ten times daily.
Tiny Leah Horby, who is almost two, suffers from an extremely rare condition for which surgeons have so far found no cure.
Hers is a one-in-a-million case which results in her turning blue and stopping breathing whenever she becomes excited or agitated.
Minutes
The episodes can happen at any time and nurses at the Countess of Chester Hospital, where she is a patient, have a matter of minutes to resuscitate Leah through a tube inserted into her neck.
Neurosurgeon Paul May, who has treated Leah throughout her illness, said: ‘Leah's is a very, very rare and unusual case.
I have never seen one like it.
‘If she wasn't watched over 24 hours a day, she would die.
‘I am travelling to Marseilles next week, when I will meet with American neurosurgeons to discuss Leah's case.
‘We have no cure at present, we just have to watch and wait.
‘She was referred to me because of increasing episodes of stopping breathing.’
A scan showed Leah had a tumour in the central core of her brain, wrapped around her breathing centres.
In December, Mr May operated, but was only able to remove 70pc of the tumour, as to remove anymore would have stopped her breathing completely.
The remaining tumour is benign, but the damage to her brain is still causing her to stop breathing between 10 and 15 times a day.
Mr May has praised Leah's parents Christine, 28, and Kevin, 33, of Rossmore, Ellesmere Port, who, he says, have shown remarkable strength.
‘She has amazing parents — very caring, very accepting and very pragmatic,’ he said.
The Horbys themselves say they have to make the most of what they have with Leah.
‘Because it is so rare, we don't really know what the outlook is, so we have to look on the bright side,’ said Mrs Horby.
‘We are brave, we do bring her home when we can.
The first time she stopped breathing I panicked, but we know how to resuscitate her.’
The couple would like to care for Leah at home fulltime, but have been told they would be unlikely to receive funding for a night nurse to look after her while they slept.
Instead, they are allowed to take her home occasionally and make daily pilgrimages to the hospital, with son Gary, six, to see their daughter.
Future
‘I'm normally there from 10am until 9pm,’ said Mrs Horby.
‘Leah is a happy child, even though the attacks hurt her and she can't move her right side.
‘She has play therapy at Moston Lodge and she can paint little pictures.
‘We would like to have her at home.
We know how to revive her and I believe we could care for her ourselves if we have help during the night.
‘We don't know what the future is, but we won't give up hope.’
Leah Horby, who suffers from a brain illness, with her mother, Christine Picture: CLIFF BRETT
Volunteers' path project
A SERIES of events are being held in Chester to mark UK Volunteers week.
The highlight is on June 8 when the Chester Conservation Volunteers will be constructing a footpath at Backford Hall.
More details are available on .
Teacher Sue Lyonette with, from left, Jacqueline Wrench, Tom Reilly, Nicola Walton and Thomas Halton Picture: BARRY FARRELL
Papal blessing for Bishop's jubilee
A MESSAGE of congratulations and blessing from the Pope will be read at a mass in Birkenhead tomorrow to mark Bishop Joseph Gray's 50 years in the priesthood.
The 73-year-old Bishop was installed in February, 1969, shortly before the silver jubilee of his becoming a priest.
Among those attending the mass at Our Lady's Church, Cavendish Street, Birkenhead, will be 20 bishops from England and Ireland and Wirral's Mayor and Mayoress Coun and Mrs Peter Corcoran.
The address will be given by the Rt Rev Leo McCartie, Bishop of Northampton.
At the end of the mass, the Pope's congratulations will be read out.
Bishop Gray, a native of County Cavan, Ireland, was ordained to the priesthood in June, 1943.
After various appointment in the Birmingham area he was consecrated auxiliary Bishop of Liverpool in 1969.
In September, 1980 he became Bishop of the Shrewsbury diocese, which includes Birkenhead.
He was the episcopal representative of the international commission for English in the Liturgy from 1976 to 1984 and president of the Liturgy Commission during the same period.
He has been a member of the episcopal committee to liaise with the Major Religious Superiors since 1984 and is the present chairman of the committee for consecrated life.
The bishop's hobbies include reading and walking and since his student days he has had a great interest in church and choral music.
Bishop Joseph Gray
PAULA Wilcox and Rachael Lindsay star as mother and daughter rivals in Raving Beauties, which opens at the Playhouse tonight.
Dave Simpson's adult comedy, set in a beauty contest, returns to Liverpool after a successful run last year.
Paula last appeared at the Playhouse as Shirley Valentine in a production which later ran in the West End.
Brookside actress Rachael is making her Playhouse debut, while comedian Duggie Brown plays the compere.
Picture: MARTIN BIRCHALL
Mobile lab helping girls with careers
SCHOOLGIRLS are being told that the door is open to them to pursue careers in the once traditionally male dominated fields of science and engineering.
A mobile laboratory in a converted bus is touring North Wales as part of the Women into Science and Engineering programme sponsored by Nottingham Polytechnic.
The school visits, organised by the Clwyd Education Business Partnership, are backed by local firms BICC Cables, Veryard Consulting Engineers, Warwick International, Sharp, Wrexham Lager and British Gas.
Dr Heather Henderson, 29, a polymer technologist with BICC Cables' Wrexham Technology Centre, and colleague Mrs Barbara Groombridge, talked to girls to encourage them to think more positively about a career in science and engineering.
‘I would like to encourage girls to go into science because I have found it one of the most rewarding careers,’ said Dr Henderson.
‘More and more women are considering this type of career because it does offer equal opportunities.
I personally find I have great fun.
‘But I think any career is only what you make it.
You have got to know what you want to do, and to go for it.’
The WISE bus roadshow was at Groves High School, Wrexham for three days.
Barbara Groombridge and Groves High pupils
Jobs saved as fertiliser firm wins dumping ‘war’
FERTILISER manufacturer Kemira were celebrating yesterday, having almost won their battle to save over 100 jobs.
Earlier this year, the Ince-based agricultural chemical firm, warned that jobs were under threat if the European Commission did not take action to prevent cheap Russian fertilisers being dumped on to the UK market, making competition virtually impossible.
Yesterday the EC announced that Kemira and the other British fertiliser manufacturers had won their case against the Russians.
Although Kemira is not completely home and dry, the EC will find it virtually impossible not to find a solution to the problems it has recognised.
‘We understand they have found in favour of us and the other UK producers,’ said a spokesman for Kemira.
‘Russian and Lithuania have been dumping cheap products on the UK market and our understanding is that the Commission has now found that they have caused material damage to the UK industry.
‘We now expect that the Commission will find a remedy under the GATT laws.’
Kemira is not seeking a complete ban of imports from the East.
They want a floor price so they can compete on equal terms.
Euro MP for Cheshire West, Lyndon Harrison, who has fought for Kemira, says he is delighted with the result.
‘This is brilliant,’ he said.
‘It defends some hundreds of jobs, and it's a good example of how European action can produce results.
‘Russia has its own problems, and the EC will be seeking a remedy which won't harm them.
‘What we don't want to see is our own producers being undercut.’
Barry Higgs, chairman of the British Fertiliser Manufacturers Association, said: ‘We are delighted the Commission appears to have agreed with everything we were protesting about.
‘It should be a source of relief to all UK fertiliser manufacturers, including Kemira.
It is a very significant step in achieving what we want.
‘The EC decided that our profitability and employment was threatened.
‘Now we hope the EC will do something to resolve the problem.
It may take the form of some sort of duty tax which will bring the price of the imports up to that of our suppliers.’
It is expected that a technical report will be released by the EC next week.
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
Balloon race cash to aid sick Bosnian
By Peter McBride Daily Post Correspondent
A SICK Bosnian boy took a step closer to fleeing to Britain for specialist treatment after a fund-raising balloon race was a soar-away success.
Five-year-old Boris Primorac suffers from a rare blood disorder which means he cannot run around like other children, without severe bruising.
After hearing of the youngster's plight, charity group Help International's local representative, Mike Whiting, of Woolton, Liverpool, set about raising £5,000 to pay for both the boy's flight to Britain and medical treatment.
The balloon race at the recent Liverpool Show boosted the appeal by £1,500.
It followed food donations by Merseysiders which helped a 108-tonne convoy to Bosnia last month.
‘I'd like to thank everyone who gave money or food,’ said the charity's regional representative, Peter Tompsett, yesterday.
‘The need is very great but this help really makes a difference to families in this tragic country,’
Doctors in Bosnia are baffled by the mystery illness.
Truce after ‘invasion’ sparks cocklers' battle
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
AN UNEASY truce was holding yesterday after fights erupted between cockle pickers on a West Wales beach.
The fighting between pickers from Deeside, Cheshire and the North West and local men was sparked off after a large contingent invaded the Ferryside beach, near Camarthen.
The 40-strong group who had travelled almost 200 miles started loading bags of cockles, which can fetch up to £12 a time, on to a lorry.
They took 30 tonnes.
Sixty angry local pickers, who collect by hand, vowed to defend a 30-acre mudbank from the ‘invaders’ who had arrived in convoy with lorries, Land-Rovers and dredges.
The two sides reached a stand-off at low tide on Tuesday but tempers flared and punches were thrown.
One witness claimed a shotgun was brandished before police arrived at the scene.
Yesterday, as the group of cockle pickers went about their business, police said there had been no further incidents.
But one local cockle collector said the tension was like ‘a timebomb’.
The sudden interest in the beach has been caused by a bumper cockle harvest which, according to experts, happens every five to 10 years.
Villagers who have used the flats for centuries claimed the rival pickers were wiping out the beds.
Many Welsh cockle beds are licensed but anyone can harvest the Ferryside bed.
One of the local pickers, Evan Roberts, said they could not stand by and watch the rival pickers take their living away.
He said: ‘They are destroying are livelihood.
Local folk have been picking here for generations and always made sure that the beds were not overfished.
We want the cockles here year after year but these people are ready to make a fast buck by cleaning the place out.’
Selwyn Jones, who runs a nearby cockle processing plant, said he had expected a confrontation.
‘Word travelled fast that Ferryside had a good bed and this army wasted no time in coming down to get it.
The men are worried that their future harvests are being jeopardised.’
One of the visiting cocklers at work on the beach yesterday Picture: PHIL REES
2 accused of murder
TWO people will appear before Huyton magistrates this morning accused of murdering pensioner Jack Goult.
A 22-year-man and a 26 year-old woman were charged with the killing early today.
Mr Goult, 80, was found in his home in Woolfall Heath Avenue, Huyton last Saturday afternoon.
Soccer club sale secrecy as hopes of a deal fade
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
CHESTER City FC officials drew a veil of secrecy around negotiations for the sale of the club last night as hopes of a deal faded.
A deadline for the deal was set for today.
Yesterday, the club's board of directors issued a statement aimed at silencing widespread speculation.
Hopes of an imminent sale were quashed by the statement's first line, which said: ‘There will be no change in the running of the club until further notice.’
It continued: ‘All statements about the future running of the club are to be made by chairman, Ray Crofts, only.
‘In an effort to prevent further speculation about any possible new future ownership of the club, no further comment will be made by the club until an agreement with the new owners is actually signed.
‘It is not possible at this moment to give a precise date as to when and if any such agreement will be signed and until such time your co-operation in directing enquiries direct to Ray Crofts would be appreciated.’
The statement comes after weeks of uncertainty, with deadlines being set for a deal, only for the dates to come and go, with no sale even close.
Gary Corbett and Geoff Lloyd, the directors of non-league Altrincham who were hoping to buy Chester, were unavailable for comment on the latest developments last night.
Earlier in the day, Mr Corbett had said he hoped progress was being made on signing a deal.
‘We're hoping to get some sort of fail-safe mechanism written in so we can take control of the club and sort out the legal matters after that,’ he said.
Mr Crofts said: ‘As a football club we've got to progress.
We can't be in limbo, waiting for people to decide what to do.’
There had been concern that while negotiations ground on the playing side of the club was suffering.
To counter this, Mr Crofts announced yesterday that manager Graham Barrow would sign two players today.
Ray Crofts
Meetings point way to a centre for community
Townhall destroyed in blaze set to be rebuilt
By David Greenwood Daily Post Staff
ONE of Angelsey's oldest town halls is set to rise from the ashes of a fire which destroyed it.
A scheme is under way to rebuild Llangefni Town Hall to include a store and areas which can be used by the community.
Ynys Mon Borough Council, which is responsible for the hall, has confirmed that it has had separate meetings with representatives of Llangefni Town Council and Bangor Market Company.
The borough's director of housing and property, John Arthur Jones, said the talks centred on the needs of each side, as well as a programme for the renovation of the hall.
He said the first floor of the building would provide facilities for the town council, as well as including a stage and auditorium for public performances, with full access for the disabled.
Methods
Meanwhile, Bangor Market Company has confirmed that Iceland Frozen Foods is interested in the project.
Mr Jones said: ‘A number of leasing and capital financing options were discussed, along with several alternative methods of arranging the co-ordination and management of the project.’
Mr Jones will now urge borough councillors to appoint architects to oversee the scheme.
‘Because of the status of the hall as a listed building, and the need for close consultation between all parties concerned, it would be inadvisable to involve more than one architect on such a sensitive project,’ he said in a report to members.
He said that loss adjusters who acted for the council's insurers after November's fire, would be attending a meeting to discuss the claim as soon as the sketches are ready.
But he warned: ‘Although the precise amount will need to be determined, it is clear that there will be a substantial difference between the total cost of refurbishment and the amount which can be recovered through the council's insurance polices.
‘The funding of the difference will need to be carefully considered to ensure the best long-term advantage.’
Flashback the scene as firemen fought the blaze
Council officer accused of murdering aunt, 87
A COUNCIL planning officer appeared in court yesterday accused of murdering his elderly aunt.
The body of 87-year-old Mrs Grace Matilda Edwards, known as Mattie, was found at her home in Mwrog Street, Ruthin, on Monday night.
Bevan Julian Beavis Roberts, 55, who lived opposite her in Mwrog Street, made a four-minute appearance before Dyffryn Clwyd Magistrates at Denbigh.
He arrived at the Courthouse handcuffed to a police officer and wearing a red North Wales Police tracksuit.
By the time he appeared in court he had changed to a grey suit, grey shirt and green tie.
In response to the charge and his name and address he merely nodded and did not speak throughout the hearing.
The details of the case were outlined by prosecuting solicitor, Huw Evans, who applied for a remand in custody until next Monday.
Roberts' solicitor, John Grey-Lloyd, did not oppose the application but said he reserved the right to apply for bail at the next hearing.
The Bench remanded Roberts in custody, chairman R.Gwynn Hughes said one of the reasons being the gravity of the offence.
Roberts, a father-of-two, is a senior planner with Rhuddlan Borough Council and formerly worked for Denbighshire County Council.
West Clwyd Coroner, Bryan Lewis yesterday opened an inquest into Mrs Edwards' death and after evidence of identification adjourned the hearing to a date to be fixed.
Arrangements for the funeral have not yet been made but the service will almost certainly be at Llanfwrog Parish Church where she was a faithful member throughout her life.
She suffered from arthritis and was largely confined to her home.
Planning officer Bevan Roberts, accused of murder, at court yesterday.
Picture: JEFF PITT
Accused denies robbery plots
By Lynda Roughley Daily Post Correspondent
A MAN was involved in a series of robberies on Merseyside, including an armed bank raid in which guns were fired, it was alleged yesterday.
In the dock at Liverpool Crown Court is James Walker, formerly of Edinburgh Towers, Everton, who denies conspiring to commit robberies in April and May last year.
Prosecuting counsel, Henry Globe, said that another man, Thomas White, had already pleaded guilty to his involvement.
He alleged that if the men had not been arrested they would have continued carrying out robberies.
He told the jury that the first raid occurred on April 3 at Sattherthwaite's confectioners in Crosby when they threatened two women employees with a screwdriver and demanded cash.
They told the women to go into a back room but they ran upstairs and shouted through a window for people in the street to call the police.
The men then ran off with £513 and escaped in a waiting car, an Austin Allegro.
Four weeks later a security officer was attacked as he was leaving a betting shop in Scotland Road with £2,000.
Two men escaped with his case but a security device activated and it was later abandoned, as was the same Allegro car after the case began emitting red dye.
On May 21 a social security employee was attacked as she was about to deposit £300 in Lloyd's Bank, Derby Road, Huyton.
When she tried to hang on to the cash one man punched her in the face and they both escaped.
Mr Globe said that a week later a woman customer was seized in a National Westminster Bank in West Derby Road, by White who was armed with a gun.
He held her so tightly she could hardly breathe and he held a gun to her head and told the cashier to hand over money.
His masked accomplice allegedly Walker, was also armed with a gun and shots, probably blank, were fired at the ceiling before they ran out empty-handed.
The case continues.
Chemical alert as acid leaks from train
A CHEMICAL alert was sparked yesterday after an acid leak at Bank Quay Railway Station, Warrington.
The scare began just after 5am when someone smelt acid as a freight train pulled into the station.
The rail tanker, which had been on route from Ince to Sellafield, was quickly moved into sidings while fire crews and specialists from Kemira, who were transporting the nitric acid, were called in.
The source of the leak was eventually traced to a vent which had been left open, and firemen hosed down the affected areas.
Roger Chesher, at Kemira, said the leak had not put anyone in any danger.
‘This was just a small leak from a valve on the side of the tanker,’ he said.
A spokesman for British Rail said: ‘No trains or passengers were affected by this incident.’
Special seaside treat for youngsters
Liverpool Lord Mayor Coun Michael Black sees off children from the Alice Elliott School, Childwall Picture: EDDIE BARFORD
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
HUNDREDS of children enjoyed a sunny day out by the sea yesterday, thanks to the kindness of 300 drivers who gave their time to transport the youngsters.
The Liverpool Motorists' Annual Outing for Handicapped Children took youngsters from 10 Liverpool special schools on a day trip to Southport.
A convoy of cars stretching for miles was escorted by Merseyside Police outriders.
The children were taken to Pleasureland and the Marine Lake and enjoyed a packed lunch in specially erected marquees in the resort's Princes Park.
The event is paid for each year by donations from businesses, individuals and organisations, with the motorists giving up their time to drive the children to and from Southport.
The annual outing is organised by a committee under the chairmanship of John Moores junior, whose father started the event many years ago.
Mr Moores, who accompanied the children, said: ‘It was a marvellous day the sun shone and there was a real sense of occasion.
‘I was very impressed with the efficiency of the motorists and all the helpers, it was splendid.’
Liverpool Lord Mayor Coun Michael Black sees off children from the Alice Elliott School, Childwall Picture: EDDIE BARFORD
Detectives reveal face of cafe terror raider
POLICE last night released this photo-fit picture of a man who threatened two female cafe workers with a knife before robbing a till.
The man burst into the Alpine Cafe in Marine Drive, Southport, and vaulted over the counter to snatch £90 in cash.
He escaped with an accomplice.
The women were uninjured, but shocked.
The men are described as white, aged 18 to 19, and are both about five feet eight inches in height.
One wore a sweatshirt and jeans, while the other wore jeans and an orange and grey t-shirt.
The robbery occurred at 6.10pm on Tuesday, and anyone who can help police should telephone Southport CID on , extension 3085 in confidence.
Shark attack kills newly-wed diver
By Daily Post Correspondent
A NEWLY-WED was eaten by a great white shark in sight of his terrified wife, just 15 days after the couple were married.
The shark, which attacked the man as he swam in a bay north of Sydney on his honeymoon, rammed the fishing boat that netted it yesterday and disgorged John Ford was grabbed by the 16ft shark as he was diving east of Byron Bay, 370 miles north of Sydney, police said.
Deborah Ford told ambulance officers she saw the shark take her husband, John.
The 31-year-old victim's wife, who had been drifting on an anchor line 10ft below their charter boat, was uninjured.
Police have called in professional shark hunters in a bid to kill the great white.
Searchers later found the wet-suited torso, an ambulance service spokesman said.
The attack came only five days after another great white killed 34-year-old British-born mother of five Terri Cartwright, who had been on a diving excursion off the island of Tasmania.
Fishermen later trapped the man's killer, but the shark thrashed violently inside the netting and dragged the boat four miles out to sea.
It rammed the boat several times and disgorged human remains before tearing its way free.
Scientists theorised that both attacks were cases of sharks mistaking divers in wet suits for seals.
Seals make up a large part of the diet of the great white shark the beast which terrified movie-goers in Jaws and is regarded as the most dangerous shark species.
Later, experts were divided over whether two horrific attacks in just five days meant more could be expected.
Marine researcher John Fairfax said attacks may become more frequent, because fishing is depleting food stocks.
‘The creatures are starving because their food chain is diminishing,’ he said.
But marine biologist and shark specialist Richard Fitzpatrick, of Oceanworld marine park, Sydney, said the two attacks were coincidental and not part of an emerging trend.
He dismissed reports that overfishing was causing sharks to seek other prey.
‘Divers with scuba gear look to sharks like an old or wounded seal, which is the shark's preferred victim.’
More than 100 people have been killed by sharks in Australian waters this century.
Deborah Ford, 29, said later that her husband had pushed her from the path of the shark.
‘They've only been married 15 days.
It's really quite tragic,’ Mrs Ford's father, Kevin Holn, told Channel Seven television, confirming that the couple had been on honeymoon.
Victim John Ford with wife Debbie on their wedding day
Beach truce after ‘war’ between rival cocklers
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
AN UNEASY truce was holding yesterday after fights erupted between feuding cocklers on a West Wales beach.
The battle against ‘invaders’ from North Wales and the North West of England was sparked off after they arrived at Ferryside beach, near Camarthen.
The 40-strong group started loading bags of cockles, which can fetch up to £12 a time, on to a lorry.
They took about 30 tonnes.
Sixty angry local pickers, who collect by hand, vowed to defend a 30-acre mudbank from the outsiders who had arrived in convoy with lorries, Land Rovers and dredges.
Tempers flared and punches were thrown.
One witness claimed a shotgun had been brandished before police arrived at the scene.
Yesterday, as the group of pickers went about their business, police said there had been no further incidents.
One local cockle collector said the tension was like a ‘time-bomb’.
Christopher Mossman, from Flint, Clwyd, who organised the trip to Carmarthen, said: ‘The people in the village are fine but we have had some bad threats from people from Llanelli and Pen-clawdd.
‘When we first came, 25 lads surrounded us and threatened to tip our vehicles over and slash our tyres.’
‘The different groups are keeping very much to themselves,’ said a police spokesman.
The sudden interest in the beach has been caused by a bumper cockle harvest which, according to experts, happens every five to 10 years.
Villagers who have used the flats for centuries claimed the rival pickers were wiping out the beds.
Many Welsh cockle beds are licenced but anyone can harvest the Ferryside bed.
Selwyn Jones, who runs a nearby cockle processing plant, said he had expected a confrontation.
‘Word travelled fast that Ferryside had a good bed and this army wasted no time in coming down to get it.
The men are worried that their future harvests are being jeopardised.’
Yesterday, a spokesman for the South Wales Sea Fisheries Committee said it was unlikely the picking would exhaust the beds because there were so many cockles this year.
Christopher Mossman: ‘There were threats’
Two local cocklers at work yesterday, with ‘invaders’ in the background
Ten in court on drug charges
TEN people are due to appear before magistrates today, accused of drug-related offences.
The charges follow early morning raids yesterday in the Everton and Kirkdale districts of Liverpool.
All the accused, nine men and a woman, are charged with conspiracy to supply heroin and will appear before the city's magistrates court.
Police treat incident as a crime
Fears of terrorist plot in huge gas depot blast
By Brian Unwin Daily Post Correspondent
POLICE, forensic and bomb squad officers were continuing to search for clues last night at a gas depot hit by an explosion and fire which had all the hallmarks of a terrorist attack.
But with no claim of responsibility for the blast at Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, just before midnight on Tuesday and no trace of a bomb, inquiry chiefs are publicly keeping an open mind about its cause.
But Det Chief Supt Barry Stewart, head of Northumbria CID, said: ‘We are treating the incident as a crime but I would not like to say what the nature of the crime is at this stage.’
Devastating
He said the blast, which tore a hole in the side of an 80ft gas tank, was similar to other terrorist incidents around Britain, including an IRA explosion at an Esso oil terminal at nearby North Shields.
Parallels with that attack seven weeks ago 24 hours before the devastating Bishopsgate blast in the City of London included the ‘location’ and the ‘nature of the damage’, he told a news conference.
Yesterday's drama came a year and a day after the North Yorkshire shootings in which Special Constable Glenn Goodman was killed and PC Sandy Kelly badly wounded by a hail of bullets fired by on-the-run IRA terrorist Paul Magee.
It happened only a mile from the Metrocentre shopping complex where on May 9 last year several IRA incendiary devices were planted in stores, some going off but causing only minimal damage.
The anniversary of that incident was ‘celebrated’ on May 9 last month when firebombs went off in the shopping mall of The Galleries shopping centre at Bristol, at the opposite end of the country.
The blast brought terror to hundreds of residents near the gas depot forcing the occupants from 250 houses across six streets to be evacuated to community centres.
Pensioners, some in their 80s, were shaken by a loud explosion and saw 30ft flames burst from the storage tank.
About 100 firefighters tackled the blaze whose heat damaged windows of nearby houses.
However, the half-full 1.7 million cubic foot capacity storage tank was not badly damaged.
British Gas Northern ruled out any chance of the explosion being an accident.
A spokesman said: ‘We don't believe it was caused by a normal operational failure.’
Later this was reconfirmed by its regional chairman, James Marris, who told a news conference: ‘It is clear there was some external source.’
One problem hampering the incident investigators is that they cannot immediately examine the section of the tank which was holed as it has now sunk to below ground level.
Blast drama a fireman silhouetted against the flames during the fight to contain the blaze
Double protest against burners
GREEN campaigners fighting a chemical company's plans for a waste incinerator are now preparing to do battle with another similar development.
Members of Halton Friends of the Earth have been urging people in Runcorn to call for a public inquiry into ICI's plan for an incinerator there.
Now they are urging Widnes people to do the same after North West Water said the town was the best of 50 possible sites for a sludge incinerator.
FoE campaigner Viv Mountford said: ‘We have always said that if ICI build an incinerator it could attract other ‘dirty industry’ and now already North West Water have come up with a scheme to burn sewage sludge in Widnes.
‘It would be a shame to ruin all the work that has been done to try to improve Halton's image.’
A spokeswoman for North West Water said the incinerator was only part of the functions at the proposed sludge treatment plant.
‘We will not be burning toxic waste, we will be burning sludge.
‘We will meet the emission standards which apply in Germany, a lot higher than those in the UK.’
ICI has said that its £40m environmental improvement programme will reduce emissions from the Runcorn plant by as much as 90pc.
New year joy for Park Food
By Val Woan
By Val Woan WIRRAL-based Park Food the country's leading packer of Christmas hampers has unwrapped record profits of more than £10m for last year.
Company boss Peter Johnson revealed that pre-tax profits are up by a third and also forecast a cracker of a year ahead.
Figures released today reported that in the year ending March 31 profits before tax were £10.3m compared with £7.7m in 1992.
On the Stock Exchange the dividend per share was raised from 3.2p to 6p and earnings per share rose from 10.21p to 13.29p.
Sales of the continuing mail order and packaging operations increased by 6.9% to £116.1m.
Mr Johnson, who is also chairman of Tranmere Rovers Football Club, said: ‘The results of our refocusing are clearly shown in the increased profit, dividends and earnings per share.
‘Providing quality value and service to a value-conscious consumer will enable us to maintain our position as market leader.’
Baby units rely on charity cash, says shock survey
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
UP TO 90pc of essential equipment in Merseyside's special care baby units is provided by charity, a survey has claimed.
A nationwide survey, conducted by a charity which supplies baby life support systems to hospitals, claims Merseyside relies more heavily on donations than any other region in Britain.
And at Warrington District General Hospital it says the level of donations for essential equipment have reached a staggering 100pc.
Liz Leaning, spokesman for the Baby Life Support Systems charity (BLISS), said: ‘We sent out a survey to all the 207 hospitals with special care baby units and were shocked by the results.
‘Charity donations are keeping everything going, but we still need statutory resources.
‘We have a situation now where charity is providing the basic equipment when they should be providing the extras.’
But Hugh Lamont, spokesman for Mersey Regional Health Authority, denied that the units were heavily dependent on charity.
He said: ‘It is totally wrong to suggest that up to 90pc of all equipment in special baby care units is provided by charity.
‘We are very grateful for the donations we receive from charitable organisations like BLISS, but in the last two to three years there has been an additional £800,000 investment in special baby care units from Mersey region.’
Ronnie Kehoe, ward manager of a special baby care unit at Liverpool's Maternity Hospital, said 75pc of specialist equipment on the ward had been donated by charity.
She said: ‘We are heavily reliant on charity.
Until an audit was done at the unit we didn't realise quite how much, but we do require donations for us to be here.
‘Some of the equipment we have been donated is lifesaving and we would be in a very difficult situation without it.’
Phil Barrett, directorate manager of women's and children's health at Warrington District General Hospital, said people's generosity meant that nearly 100pc of the special baby care unit's equipment was donated.
She said: ‘We do have a large level of donation to the unit because people want to give the money to us.
‘If we hadn't got such a large trust fund available to us we would be able to get equipment through our budget.’
The BLISS survey, compiled in spring this year, also found examples of understaffing and under-resourcing on wards.
MURDER CHARGES:
Jayne Naylor, 26, of Wimborne Road, Huyton, and Gary Blower, 22, of Chillerton Road, West Derby, Liverpool, both charged with murdering John Alfred Goult, 80, at his home in Woolfall Heath Avenue, Huyton, on Friday, and remanded in custody by Huyton magistrates until June 17.
Reporting restrictions not lifted.
CULT ARRESTS:
More than 50 adults arrested and 140 children taken in for questioning after raids across France on outlawed Children of God sect which preaches free love for all ages.
IRA BLAME:
IRA terrorists probably caused explosions on successive nights on Tyneside, police said today.
See Page 4 ROVER DEAL: Rover Cars has won £9.4m order to supply 900 of its 200 series cars to pest control company Rentokil.
Germans fight back
WORLD champions Germany fought back from 3–0 down for a 3–3 US Cup draw with Brazil in Washington.
Juergen Klinsmann headed home the equaliser in injury time after Brazil had raced ahead through a Thomas Helmer own goal, a Careca penalty and Luisinho's third.
Klinsmann pulled a goal back in the 66th minute and Andreas Moeller scored the second 10 minutes from time.
Tackle tips:
A steady trickle of bait running into a swim will attract and keep fish feeding in one place.
Pleasure anglers on the River Ribble and Dane have enjoyed success by putting mashed stale bread into a fine meshed bag, weighting it with a large stone and throwing into the water at the head of the swim.
Remember to tie a strong rope to the bag so it can be retrieved at the end of the day or to refill.
JAIL CAMPAIGN HOPES DASHED
By Mark Davies, political correspondent
HOPES that a plan to build a jail next to a Merseyside hospital could be scrapped because of government spending cuts, have been dashed.
Whitehall sources say Treasury officials are searching for ways to save money, with spending cuts a likely option.
And some sources believe the proposal for a £75m prison at Fazakerley is one option now in the firing line.
Treasury Chief Secretary Michael Portillo is currently reviewing spending by the health, education, social security and defence departments on behalf of new Chancellor Kenneth Clarke.
But when he works his way round to the Home Office budget, campaigners against the Fazakerley jail could find themselves with a powerful new ally.
Mr Portillo has constantly stressed the grim state of the government's balance sheet.
And wielding the axe on the prison plan would be one way of saving money which would not provoke a public out-cry unlike some of his other targets in the health and social security budgets.
But a Home Office spokesman denied the allegations, claiming: ‘It was made clear in the autumn statement last year that there would be no construction work on the jail until 1995/6.
‘There is no reason to doubt that money will not be available at that stage, and the public inquiry is still going ahead as planned.’
Earlier this month, the Environment Department set a date for the public inquiry to start on October 26 at a venue to be fixed in Liverpool.
John Davies, secretary of the No Fazakerley Prison Action Committee, is confident protesters will win the public inquiry, which is scheduled to last for five days.
He said: ‘We know our arguments against the jail are very strong and theirs are very weak.’
Penalty for bookworms
LIBRARY users who failed to return books have been penalised.
Magistrates in Bootle heard that library staff had attempted to retrieve some books for more than a year.
Lucy Blunt of Hawthorne Road, Bootle, was fined £8 for failing to return five books.
She was ordered to pay £15 in library fines, £31.90 compensation and £25 costs.
Robert Dummett of Bedford Road, Bootle, was also fined £8 for not returning five books, ordered to pay £25 in library fines, £45 compensation and £25 costs.
Men raise hefty sum
BODYBUILDING brothers Tony, Charlie and Joe Suku put their weight behind a fund-raising challenge to equip a Liverpool sports centre.
They teamed up with other users of the gym at Croxteth Sports Centre to buy a £200 Olympic weight-lifting bar.
Fitness fanatics come from all parts of Liverpool to use the well-equipped weight room at Croxteth sports centre, and users aim to form a cooperative to buy even more gear.
Members held raffles and donated cash until they had enough for the Olympic bar.
New poster on racism
MULTI-LINGUAL posters are being put up around Lancashire in the fight against racism in the county.
Printed in seven languages, the posters are being distributed in shops, community centres and police stations.
They should increase awareness of where victims can get help and support.
County Council Leader Cllr Louise Ellman said: ‘The council is pleased to support the Racial Equality Councils in their efforts to halt the menace of these attacks on vulnerable members of our community.’
US planes go to Somalia
GIANT US attack aircraft were heading towards Somalia to help UN forces resist Somali gunmen threatening to wreck peacekeeping operations.
But after the weekend killing of 23 Pakistani UN troops, a new Somali-language radio station called on the 18,000-strong multinational peace-keeping force to go.
Ivan deal: Ivan Boesky, the Wall Street dealer convicted of insider trading, agreed to accept nearly £14m and £120,000 a year for life to settle a fight with his ex-wife over her £66m fortune.
Woody fight Woody Allen was back in court in New York, two days after losing a custody battle with Mia Farrow.
Farrow is trying to get Allen's adoption of two children declared void.
Clinton denial: Hillary Clinton dismissed as ‘nonsense’ rumours that she has the final say on all of her husband's high-level government appointments.
Drug charge: English teacher Sandra Gregory, 27, from Halifax, West Yorkshire, charged with heroin smuggling in Thailand, said she would plead guilty.
Actress dies: Actress Alexis Smith, who played opposite Clark Gable and Errol Flynn, and appeared for six years in TV soap Dallas, has died in Los Angeles, aged 72.
Sam's split: Actor Ted Danson's wife has filed for divorce.
Danson, who played bachelor bartender Sam in TV's Cheers, has been linked to actress Whoopi Goldberg.
Looting spree: Tens of thousands of ice hockey fans went on a looting spree in Montreal after their team, the Canadians, won the sport's greatest prize, the Stanley Cup.
Bosnia offer: France, Turkey and the Netherlands told Nato allies they would offer warplanes to protect Moslem ‘safe areas’ in Bosnia.
AXE FIND:
Axe, sledgehammer and petrol can found in woods in Coppull, Lancashire, by police investigating murders of Liverpool couple Gary Pettitt and Jean Larkin.
Piece of blue polythene sheeting used to carry coals also discovered close to scene of fire where human remains found.
Police appealed to shopkeepers in area who might have sold items to two men with Liverpool accents in week before and after April 27 when couple disappeared.
JAIL ATTACK:
Prison officer seriously injured when he was attacked by loyalist inmates at Ulster's top security Maze Prison.
Body found hanged in garage
MAN ACCUSED OF KILLING WIFE
By Harry Dean
A MAN went on trial in Liverpool today accused of murdering his pregnant wife.
The case at Liverpool Crown Court was due to open yesterday but was adjourned because of legal argument between defence barrister David Turner QC and prosecutor Rodney Klevan QC.
Judge Mr Justice Charles McCullough made an order that the media could not report any of the legal discussions, which took place in the absence of a jury.
The accused, Eddie Gilfoyle, 32, listened attentively to the lengthy discussions.
He sat in the dock dressed in a white shirt, dark blue tie and grey cardigan.
Gilfoyle has denied murdering his wife Paula, 33, who was found hanged in the garage of their semi- detached home in Upton, Wirral, on June 4 last year.
Two weeks later she was due to give birth to their first child.
A few weeks earlier she had taken maternity leave from the Champion Spark Plugs factory in Upton.
Eddie Gilfoyle worked as a hospital technician at Murrayfield Hospital at Thingwall, Wirral.
The trial is expected to last more than a month.
John Major…his political survival hangs in the balance after yesterday's Commons onslaught by ex-Chancellor Lamont
CITY PUB LANDLADY MURDERED
VITAL CLUES FOUND IN WOODLANDS
Police make big breakthrough in hunt for brutal killers of young city couple
By Caroline Storah, crime reporter
AN axe, sledgehammer and a petrol can have been recovered from the scene of a woodlands fire by detectives hunting the brutal killers of Liverpool couple Gary Pettitt and Jean Larkin.
Blue polythene sheeting, believed to have been used to carry coal to stoke up the massive blaze, was also found at the secluded site at Coppull near Chorley.
Police believe the items are a major breakthrough in the six-week-old inquiry.
Phone call
They are thought to have been bought locally by two men with Liverpool-sounding accents at the time the couple disappeared.
Gary, 25, and Jean, 24, are believed to have met their deaths in the woods after being lured to Chorley by a phone call to their flat in Jericho Farm Walk, Aigburth.
The newly-bought axe was buried in deep undergrowth close to where the fire was lit.
It had the words USA Hickory written on it.
The 7lb sledgehammer was found nearby.
Detective Superintendent Jack Leyland, leading the investigation, today appealed for help from shopkeepers in the area who may have sold the items.
He believes they were bought from a camping or hardware store in the week leading up to April 27.
He said: ‘We feel we are getting closer to finding what happened in Gary and Jean's last hours.
‘We believe the items are a vital breakthrough in the hunt for the young couple's murderers.’
Detectives are linking Gary's and Jean's disappearance to the discovery of ecstasy tablets worth £100,000 in the North East.
Anyone with information is asked to contact the police incident room in Leyland on .
The axe found by detectives at the scene of a woodlands fire
Angry Tories savage Lamont speech
By Mark Davies political correspondent JOHN Major was today planning a fight back as senior Tories prepared to turn on Norman Lamont after his fierce Commons resignation speech.
Party chairman Sir Norman Fowler ripped into Mr Lamont with a stunning attack on the sacked Chancellor's ‘nasty’ speech.
The Prime Minister aimed to reassert his authority as he prepared late changes to a big speech to be delivered to Welsh Tories tomorrow.
He is set to tackle Mr Lamont's criticisms head on and reject his claim that policies are presented for 36 hours of good publicity.
But Downing Street sources said it was ‘business as usual’ at the Premier's office.
Mr Major was reported to be resolute after Mr Lamont's attack.
Stormy
Trade President Michael Heseltine aimed to play down the impact of that speech.
But Mr Major was expected to face stormy Commons scenes as he came under more pressure during Prime Minister's question time this afternoon.
Labour leader John Smith said Mr Lamont's speech in which he accused the government of seeming to be in office but not in power had ‘gravely undermined’ Mr Major's credibility.
But Sir Norman and Mr Heseltine rallied around the Prime Minister, saying his survival had not been threatened by the bitter speech yesterday.
Sir Norman said: ‘I am not going take any criticism from Mr Lamont on that particular area.
‘The party stood by him.
What he has not done is remotely stand by the Prime Minister.’
Police seal off the Lion Tavern this afternoon
City raid
Armed police were hunting two men this afternoon after a Securicor van was held-up outside Abbey National in Broad Lane, Norris Green.
Roof drama
A man aged 21 was threatening to jump 80 feet to his death from the roof of a Liverpool church in Derby Lane, Old Swan, late this afternoon.
Fish case
A man who left his tropical fish ‘home alone’ when he moved out was today cleared by Berkshire magistrates of abandoning them.
Travel latest
Commuters can expect delays on the Northern Lane service tonight due to a technical problems at Sandhills and an incident at Moorfields.
There was traffic congestion when the Milk Race passed through city centre.
Up 0.4 at 2241.2 SE-100 down 4.6 at 2862.3 Down to 1.5128 dollars Down to 2.4760 marks
Fighting back
THIS Government is creating killing fields in this green and unpleasant land: i.e. VAT on heating, removal of pension payments from sub post offices and worse.
To make the young and pensioners pay for prescriptions is equal to having Claymore mines for us to step on.
They are trying to exterminate the old.
Shall we pensioners form an aged assassination squad to fight back, to seek out and eliminate the callous people who create the cry be: ‘The only good Tory is a dead one?’
Enrol now.
K. Morgan, Skelmersdale.
Price of greatness I AM sorry to say we are living in an age of mediocrity.
In sport, just look at football; in music, just watch Top of the Pops; in literature, there is no outstanding current writer or poet.
In politics, the Conservative and Labour parties need I say more; in the media, just watch an average night's television.
The reason too much easy money and not enough dedication and genuine love for one's chosen work.
True greatness is dearly bought.
Colin Richman, Maghull.
Show Geoff some charity I WOULD like to draw to the attention of all regular shoppers and visitors to Liverpool, who have heard the lovely voice of Geoff Caddick who does lots of charity work for the Newborn Baby Appeal, to the fact that he has been harassed by certain local business people who wish to move him on.
We need more people like him to bring pleasure and a happy friendly atmosphere to everyone visiting Liverpool, and to raise cash not only to the Newborn Baby Appeal, but to any other charity he chooses.
So come on, leave Geoff to do his good work for the benefit of the community.
I would love to hear the opinion of other readers on this subject.
Miss Angela Ashe, Aintree.
Chilling picture of lost children
IF you ever thought your kid was a little monster think again.
Inside Story's look at the Aycliffe Secure Unit showed just how dangerous Britain's most wicked youngsters really are.
Stephen, a softly spoken Mike Tyson lookalike, had kicked someone into a coma, Michelle was serving an indefinite life sentence for torching her victim, Tony tried to blow up his father and Lizzie was in for armed robbery.
They all had hardluck stories of abuse, neglect, even plain indifference from parents.
The unit seemed to have some effect.
The kids appeared to have calmed under the care of the staff.
I hope the effects continue once they're back on the streets.
Business park plan of protests
DEVELOPERS have dropped plans for a giant business park after fierce protests from villagers.
Knutsford-based Bushwing wanted to build a business park as part of an industrial estate in Lach Dennis, near Northwich.
It was to have formed part of a site with Yorkshire-based Morrisons supermarket storage centre and general industrial area.
Developers believe that the Morrisons site will create 600 jobs by 1997 with 500 more on the other areas.
But protestors objected and set up the Heart of Cheshire Action Group to fight the plans.
They are angry because the site is a greenfield open space.
Yesterday Bushwing managing director David Walker confirmed they had withdrawn the business park part of the plan.
That reduces the site from 225 acres to 132.
‘We are aware of the local feeling and have come to the view that we should not fight for the additional land requirement,’ Mr Walker said.
But he said the number of jobs created would not be affected as they were not included in the predictions.
The Action Group will stage a protest against the supermarket storage centre at the site tomorrow.
Alert for boyfriend after pub killing
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
A TODDLER was found safe and well last night as a nationwide murder hunt continued for his mother's killer.
Pub licensee Denise Johnstone was found strangled in the living quarters of the Lion Tavern in Moorfields, Liverpool city centre.
Detectives have launched a massive manhunt and are anxious to speak to her on-off boyfriend David Ashworth.
He disappeared with the couple's 20-month-old son, Gareth Johnstone but, in a dramatic twist, the blond-haired youngster was later found abandoned, and unharmed, at a citizen's advice centre near Glasgow.
He had a note in his coat pocket giving his name.
It was just 40 minutes after his mother's body was discovered.
Merseyside Police say they now want to speak to amateur footballer Mr Ashworth.
Detectives fear the 31year-old is a danger to himself and the public and last night took the unusual step of releasing photographs of him.
They are concerned about his mental state and warned he should not be approached.
The man leading the inquiry, Det Supt Stan Fletcher, said: ‘Anyone who can abandon his own child, as he has done, may become violent, either to others or, particularly, to himself.’
Police forces from Lancashire, Manchester and Strathclyde are co-operating on the investigation.
Several potential witnesses have already called the incident room at Cheapside.
Mrs Johnstone, 35, was discovered by police who forced their way into her locked pub shortly after 11am yesterday.
The alarm was raised by a cook who arrived for work as normal but Mrs Johnstone failed to open up for lunch-time business.
There was no sign of Gareth and fears began to grow for his safety.
Unknown to Merseyside Police, the Samaritans received a telephone call about midday from a man believed to be Mr Ashworth saying he had abandoned his son at a citizen's advice bureau in Brandon Street, Hamilton, near Glasgow.
He told the startled operator his ‘wife’ was dead and he could no longer cope.
Police found blue-eyed Gareth in a baby buggy, together with a PVC holdall with clothes, bottles and baby wipes.
Continued on Page 4 Continued from Page 1 Chief Insp Phil McDonald said: ‘It is obvious that someone cares dearly for the child as clothing and provisions were left with him and he appears to be well cared for and in good health.’
The child is being cared for by foster parents in Scotland until his fate is decided.
A post-mortem revealed Mrs Johnstone had died from strangulation.
She was last seen alive on Tuesday evening after calling time at the pub she managed for Warrington-based Walker's Brewery,
It was her second spell at the pub, having run a tenancy for several years with her estranged husband, Steve.
Two years ago the couple, who never had children, took over as tenants of the Midland Hotel, opposite Central Station, Liverpool, before separating.
Several months ago she was enticed back to the Lion in partnership with Mr Ashworth.
Her friend Marie Newall, licensee of Yates Wine Bar, said: ‘She was a lovely person, well liked by her regulars and respected by the brewery.
‘When I last saw her, she was making plans for the pub.
It had gone down hill before she took over and she wanted to turn it around again.’
Mr Ashworth is described as slim with short dark straight hair, a moustache and red and blue flower tattoos on both arms.
He is originally from the Manchester area but has no current fixed address.
Anyone with information can contact the incident room on .