

A winner: The Ford Modeo Ghia by Arthur Johnson
I HAVE just had the Ford Mondeo for a full week's test and the longer the week went on the more I liked the car.
Ford knew they had to come up with a winner in the Mondeo and I think they have done just that.
The company came in for quite a bit of stick with their new version of the Escort and if the Mondeo had not been well received they could have been in real trouble.
But I reckon they have got it just right with the Mondeo.
It has a smooth, elegant style that will take it happily forward, with the odd changes here and there, through to the end of the decade.
Ford say this is the first of a new generation of cars.
I must say I am looking forward to seeing the new babies.
Safety comes high on the list of requirements for the Mondeo and features standard fittings such as an airbag, seatbelt grabbers and pre-tensioners, a rigid safety cell, front or four wheel drive, ABS anti-lock brakes, electronic traction control system, a plastic fuel tank, automatic fuel cut-off and quick clear heated windscreen with heated washer jets.
This is a very safe car, but it is also a car which is great fun to drive.
Its engine and gearbox are silky smooth.
Power assisted steering make it very easy to handle and the independent rear suspension on the saloons produced a high quality of road holding and comfort.
And when it comes to comfort the Mondeo is also top of the class with features including an air filter system, air conditioning, cruise control, electric windows and seats, heated front seats, sunroof, and rear wash-wipe.
In the past Ford has been criticised for lack of security on certain models, but they have certainly got their act together with this time.
The Mondeo has a visible identification number, a shielded double locking system, antitheft alarm with starter motor disabling and, audio system security and tailgate/ boot lid immobilising.
The model I had on test was the five door two litre Ghia, which is right at the top of the saloon range, selling for £17,450.
However, the family starts at £11,200 for the 1.6 four or five door and the two litre Ghia estate costs £18,450.
The test care had a top speed of 129 mph and 0 to 60 mph time of just over nine seconds.
It consumed 25 mpg around town, 46 mpg at 56 mph and 32 mpg at 75 mph.
If it is in your price range make sure you look at a Mondeo, you will not be wasting your time.
Pioneer drop-in centre appeals for help
By Philippa Bellis, AN APPEAL has been launched for volunteers to help run the country's first major support centre for people with diseases of the nervous system.
The Glaxo Neurological Centre, currently taking shape off London Road, Liverpool city centre, will open later this summer for people with illnesses like multiple sclerosis, and Parkinson's disease.
The centre, supported by Mersey Regional Health Authority, has been made possible by a £1m donation from pharmaceutical giants Glaxo Holdings plc and £250,000 from Liverpool City Challenge.
Excellence
Sufferers and their families will be able to drop into the centre for advice, support, and training.
Newly-appointed manager Maureen Kelly said the building should be open in July and would be a centre of excellence.
People with Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, motor neurone disease, multiple sclerosis, stroke and other less well known illnesses such as the inherited degenerative disease Friedreich's ataxia will all be able to use the centre.
Volunteers are needed for a range of work from running the library to organising functions and events.
Contact Mrs Kelly at Mersey Regional headquarters, Hamilton House, Pall Mall, Liverpool L3 6AL, or phone  ext 2233.
Baby car seats alert
ALMOST 11,000 baby car seats are being recalled amid fears lap belt guides could break.
Seat makers Klippan urged parents who have bought the seats since November 1 to contact the company.
The seats affected are the Klippan Carrytot baby car seat, the Boots Carryseat and the Mothercare ABC Baby Travel Seat.
Timex talks Executives and union leaders, including Gavin Laird, general secretary of the AEUW, have held a second meeting in a bid to end the bitter four-month Timex Dundee dispute.
But a union spokesman said: ‘No decisions or agreements were concluded other than to meet again.’
Appeal to dead baby's mother POLICE investigating the death of a new-born baby boy are concerned for the welfare of the child's mother and have urged her to come forward.
The boy's body was discovered by children playing at an adventure park on the Isle of Man.
Police said the child was born within the past few days.
Tower opens The Duke of Edinburgh will today officially open the seven-storey Northern and Shell Tower in London's Docklands, where some of the raunchiest top-shelf magazines in the country are published.
The multi-million pound building will be opened at a celebrity lunch for 250 people.
Royals in focus A £1.8M four-part ITV documentary about the Royal Family was announced yesterday.
The Windsors will look at the last four monarchs and their families and take a detailed look at their changing fortunes up to the present day.
Laird: Talks
Duke: Opening
YOUNGSTERS at a Wirral junior school have discovered the secrets of a special science activities box.
The box the idea of Unilever research workers Christine and David Gorman has given science a new slant for pupils at Ladymount School, Pensby.
It aims to stimulate children's curiosity with a series of elementary practical exercises.
Teacher Jen Tirebuck said: ‘It is a very practical way for children to explore science.’
David Gorman is involved in Partners, a project run by the Education Business Partnership in which industrialists are paired with teachers to produce curriculum material.
He said: ‘Science lends itself to learning through play.’
Boxing clever…teacher Sue Lyonette with pupils at Ladymount School
The Land Rover Defender 90 Soft Top
Go on the attack with the Defender
THE appeal of what have become known as ‘leisure vehicles’ just seems to grow and grow.
The latest in the field are a soft top and station wagon Defender 90 models from Land Rover.
Features on the four-wheel drive soft top version include a cotton weave hood with roll up windows, a side hinged tailgate with swing-away spare wheel, front nudge bar and twin side runners.
Alloy wheels, CD player, twin driving lamps, tow pack and a front mounted winch are available as options.
The rugged vehicle will be on sale in time for August delivery, and will cost £15,995.
Fourtrak The seven seater Defender County Station Wagon is available with both petrol and diesel engines.
The two models cost £16,495 and £15,887.
Another new four wheel drive vehicle to be launched before August is the new Daihatsu Fourtrak, although the company is being rather sheepish over details of the machine.
However, I do know that it features a new, wider stance and a longer body than the present model along with wider wheel-arches and new wheels and grille.
It will be powered by the proven 2.8 litre turbo diesel engine.
Oo, la, la!
What a guide IF YOU are thinking of a driving holiday in France this year it is well worth being able to parle a little motoring Francaise and the AA, along the National Tyre and Autocare have come up with ways of helping to make yourself understood.
They have both just published a list of handy phrases including such things as ‘My car has broken down’; ‘Can you tell me where the nearest garage is?’ and ‘Where can I get help?’
The AA's free booklet, Motoring on the Continent also contains a mileage chart giving distances between 16 ports and 20 major European destinations; a list of toll charges; a tale of motoring requirements in 12 countries and a guide to speed limits.
The AA document is available from the organisation's shops or by calling freephone .
In addition to their list of French phrases and advice, National Tyre and Autocare is offering free holiday safety checks at all of their branches.