

Coup for TV film
BY ANY standards, the success of the film Hedd Wyn in becoming the first Welsh language film to be nominated for the prestigious Royal Television Society award was a significant breakthrough for the burgeoning industry.
To have won the best single play award was a major coup, due not just to the craft of the makers but at least partly to the strength of the story of the Trawsfynydd shepherd bard who became a reluctant soldier and died in battle before knowing he had achieved his life's ambition of winning the National Eisteddfod chair at the Birkenhead festival in 1917.
The film, which starred Huw Garmon in the title role, does not concentrate too heavily on the Black Chair episode, but rather on the character of the man who became a legend throughout Wales in the months after his death.
The Eisteddfod ceremony in which the chair he won was draped in a black cloth has remained part of the Welsh bardic ethos ever since.
It makes one wonder how many other true stories that seem commonplace memories of Welsh life would, with the right mix of film-makers' skill, also become best sellers.
Opportunity
Hedd Wyn, made by Pendefig, has already had a screening in Welsh on S4C to celebrate the channel's tenth anniversary last November.
Now the Paul Turner-directed film is to be screened on the channel again tomorrow week at 7.45pm and this time non-Welsh speakers will have the opportunity to see what all the fuss is about there will be sub-titles.
The RTS recognition was its second major award for it also won the Celtic Film and Television Festivals main accolade, the Spirit of the Festival Award, last month.
S4C chief executive Geraint Stanley Jones said the award may possibly be the highest ever achieved by a Welsh language production.
‘In a year which has seen more investment than ever in drama on S4C, it is wonderful not only to have audience acclaim in Wales but critical acclaim of professional peers in the RTS.’ he said.
‘Success in television must at the end of the day be measured in terms of programme standards, and to achieve so much this year augurs well for the future.’
Alan Llwyd, who has himself won both the chair and crown of the National Eisteddfod twice in three years, worked on the screen adaptation of research he carried out for a blockbusting book on Hedd Wyn's life.
Drama of a fashion
THE HOUSE OF ELLIOT, BBC1, 7.05pm.: Beatrice, played by Stella Gonet, is nervous about running the House of Elliot fashion business on her own now that her sister Evangeline (Louise Lombard) works for French designers.
But will her husband Jack be able to help?
He wants to, but his attempts are thwarted by an old enemy who could harm his wife's business.
SEW-SEW: Stella Gonet and Louise Lombard
Break-in blues
HEARTBEAT, ITV, 8.00pm: Sergeant Blaketon (Derek Fowlds) makes it clear to PC Nick Owen (Nick Berry) that he wants a local burglar caught before the Assistant Chief Constable makes his scheduled visit.
As Nick sets to work his wife Jate (Niamh Cusack) discovers that someone has committed a far more serious offence — but the witness won't talk.
Nick Berry and
Niamh Cusack
Debi says it with flowers to Noel
By Will Rolston RADIO CITY'S Debi Jones said it with flowers to TV presenter Noel Edmonds on Merseyside today.
Noel was in Liverpool publicising his ECHO- backed August bank holiday weekend ‘Garden Party’ at Haydock.
In the meantime, Radio City Gold morning show host Debi Jones gave Noel an uncomfortable hour.
Song
She said: ‘He was convinced I was going to do something terrible to him.
‘He kept saying: ‘What's under your chair?
I don't trust this woman,’ and ‘What are you going to do’?’
But her plan to make him sing the Neil Diamond song Nobody Brings Me Flowers live on air fell through.
‘We did give him this massive bouquet, though,’ said Debi.
Gotcha…
Debi presents a bouquet to Noel.
Picture:MARTIN BIRCHALL
Post cameraman for second year
DAILY Post staff once again have featured prominently in the North West Newspaper Awards, sponsored by BNFL.
Photographer Martin Birchall won the Photographer of the Year title for the second year in succession with his portfolio of news, features and sports pictures.
Picture Editor Stephen Shakeshaft took second place in this category.
Reporter David Banks, who is based in our Chester office, was runner-up in the News Reporter of the Year section.
Exclusive
His portfolio included exclusive stories from the family of former mercenary Ted Skinner, from Blacon, Chester, who was killed in Bosnia.
Daily Post Editor Keith Ely said last night: ‘These awards are a great achievement on the part of those involved and continue the paper's winning record.’
Earlier this year, in the British Telecom Welsh Press Awards, the Daily Post was voted Newspaper of The Year.
The paper was also highly commended in the UK Press Gazette Regional Newspaper Awards.
Journalists on our sister paper, the Liverpool Echo, also won awards yesterday.
Rachel Halliwell was first and Peter Grant second in the Feature Writer of the Year category.
Amanda Little of the Carlisle Evening News and Star was voted Sportswriter of the Year.
Peter Spencer, of the Manchester Evening News, was named News Reporter of the Year.
The Stockport Gazette and the Westmorland Gazette were jointly awarded the Weekly Newspaper of the Year title.
There was no presentation this year for the Daily Newspaper of the Year a title which the Daily Post won last year.
Martin Birchall
Craft festival
A CRAFT festival opens at 1.30pm today at St Luke's Church, Dunham Hill.
The exhibition features work by local crafts-people and continues tomorrow and Sunday.
In concert
A MIXED programme of French and English music will be presented at St Helen's Church, Northwich at 7.30pm today.
The concert, by the Philidor Wind Quartet with Andrew Millinchip playing the organ, has been organised by Northwich Society of the Arts.
Dead funny
La Plante back on form with macabre tale of comic
DARK and dangerous Johnny Lazar is a brilliant alternative comedian but a pain in the butt.
Seeing his hippy mother and young sister commit suicide left him plagued by demons, which inspire and haunt him.
Lazar was the clown with the frown in Comics, the two-parter which marked a return to form for Lynda La Plante.
Not quite up to Prime Suspect, but an improvement after Civvies and Seekers.
Johnny has screwed up in the States and is trying to make a fresh start in London.
But he witnesses a gangland slaying and, for the rest of the four hours, he relaunched his career, slept with his manager's girlfriend and stayed one step ahead of the mob.
The storyline was always going to stand or fall by the performance of Tim Guinee as Lazar.
Happily, he pulled it off.
But it was clear Johnny wasn't going to see the credits roll when he announced: ‘I wanted to ride the mountain.’
Fifteen minutes and one Harley Davidson later, the funny man was dead funny.
His death inspired crook Delroy (Lennie James) to dish the dirt on the gangsters: redemption and a tidy ending.
No shortages of cliches, but La Plante showed again that cliches can still make good viewing if handled correctly.
ARMY OF DARKNESS (15)
Two heads are better than one for Bruce Campbell.
THIS is acknowledged horror/ suspense king Sam Raimi's first film since Darkman, which starred Liam Neeson as a mutilated anti-hero on a rampage of revenge.
Writer/director Raimi continues that gruesome trend here, with Bruce Campbell slicing off part of his right arm with a chainsaw in the opening moments as he is attacked by a force of darkness.
Transposed in time to medieval days, where two cultures are fighting a losing battle against the undead, he becomes an unwilling hero.
This is the third in Raimi's Evil Dead series, which has so far been acclaimed by ghouls and horror fans.
Ash, as our hero is called, has a sardonic way with words.
But his vocabulary is strictly limited and his fighting skills with said chainsaw, now attached by bolts to his handless arm, inventive.
He stirs a band of brave knights to tackle the rising army of the dead, who are in pursuit of an ancient book of runes and magic spells.
Presumably Ash's biting oneliners such as‘give me some honey, baby’ as he kisses heroine Embeth Davidtz, are meant to be side-splittingly funny.
They are not even vaguely amusing.
Although there is a huge element of tongue-in-cheek wackiness about the script, it lacks the sophistication or the intelligence needed to carry it off.
The production notes describe the film as a bizarre conflict of man versus demon.
However, it is artistically total tosh and merely a vehicle for an imagination nowhere close to reaching puberty.
LEW BAXTER
A Bill sticker
THE BILL
Tonight ITV, 8pm DS GREIG fronts an undercover operation where the aim is to nab a burglar who has been running riot pulling off dozens of break-ins around a local housing estate.
WPC Ackland is hot on his trail — but for some reason never manages to catch him in the act.
Then a couple of pensioners are robbed of their video, camera and watches bringing the case to a head.
The only problem is that it now takes a baffling turn.
The evidence points directly to the man they are after
…but they know that he was miles away at the time.
Shakespeare tour spot
THE Royal Shakespeare Company has put Ellesmere Port on to this year's national tour.
The company will present seven performances five evenings and two matinees at the town's Epic Leisure Centre from October 4.
Festival start
A THREE day flower festival opened at St Tegfan's Church, Llandegfan, Anglesey, yesterday.
TV take-overs must be resisted, says HTV chief
By Tom Bodden Welsh Affairs Correspondent
HTV CHAIRMAN Louis Sherwood yesterday warned of the dire consequences of changes to ITV ownership rules which could put the company under the threat of a take-over.
Speaking to shareholders at the company's annual meeting, Mr Sherwood told them to resist the advances of a predator.
‘Unhealthy concentrations of ownership should be avoided, as Parliament has previously determined,’ he declared.
Midlands group Central and London-based Carlton are among those believed to be interested in expansion, on the grounds it could result in savings of up to £100m in the ITV network.
But Mr Sherwood said: ‘This figure seems wildly exaggerated.’
A Carlton take-over of HTV would need to generate combined savings of £20m a year, he said.
‘It is a figment of the imagination by those who want to dominate ITV, who care nothing for our regional character and who seek to shift control of our operations from Cardiff and Bristol to London or Birmingham.
‘ITV can and should enjoy the economies of scale but we are demonstrating here at HTV it should be done by working partnerships between companies.’
HTV, which runs the independent franchise in Wales and the West, made a pre-tax loss of £2.1m last year.
Shareholders are receiving no dividends as HTV copes with a £20.5m bill this year for its franchise licence to broadcast.
But Mr Sherwood said the company was heading back to profit after hundreds of job losses in recent years.
‘We are determined to return to profitability during 1993 and I am pleased to say that overall our plans to achieve this appear to be well on course,’ he said.
Advertising sales in the first six months of the year were on target.
Companies like HTV, Yorkshire, and Anglia had been forced to bid in the market place to keep their licences and in the wake of tight cost controls were becoming the most efficient in the network, he said.
‘It would be a sorry paradox if any relaxation in the ownership rules encouraged the less efficient licensees to acquire the more efficient.’
Shareholders in the group would be denied the financial rewards of the painful, but necessary restructuring, he warned.
In recent months, HTV has ‘privatised’ its high cost in-house broadcasting operations into lease and hire operations.
The outside broadcast fleet, a studio at its Cardiff headquarters and other technical and support services are now run by outside companies.
Advertising sales had been combined with those of Grampian, Scottish, West country and S4C.
Programmes are being made in co-operation with Meridian and West country while Central TV Enterprises markets programmes overseas and Granada provides night-time services.
Mr Sherwood said other co-operative initiatives were in the pipeline.
Now I'm in the same bracket as Maradona!
WHAT CAN I say?
The Hand of Gooch has taken over from the Hand of God Maradona's — in sporting legend.
Maradona's punch helped his side to the World Cup.
Mine helped to lose a Test match.
Even now I can't really believe it.
I played down a ball from Merv Hughes.
It bounced up and I turned to see the ball hovering above my stumps.
It was not a situation I have ever contemplated encountering.
I knew the rule well enough, but in that split second it never entered my head.
I just reacted on the spur of the moment.
Instinctively, my hand came off the bat and I knocked the ball away.
If I'd had time to think, I would have used my bat, but when I saw the ball, it was just about to start its downward path.
I had to react in a split second, so I was a bit hurt to see the papers on Tuesday morning suggesting that my actions in that one second cost England the Test match.
But it's a case of when you're down, anything goes.
If one of the other mainline batsmen had chipped in with even a 50 or 60, England would probably have saved the match.
The fact that not one made it past 25 in the second innings made all the difference.
That ‘handled the ball’ is only the second I've seen.
The first was only 18 months ago when we took on the New Zealand Emerging Players XI.
Left-hander Justin Vaughan played forward to a delivery from Graeme Hick.
When he saw the ball trickling back towards his stumps, he used his left hand to sweep the ball away.
That was only the third time it had happened in New Zealand.
Now I'm the fifth victim in Test cricket.
It seems strange that you can defend your wicket with your bat, pads and any part of your body except your hand, if it has been taken off the bat.
The reverse happens with catches.
If you are hit on the glove when the hand is not on the bat it's not out.
It's history now.
And that's where it belongs — in the history books!
£11,130 bill for young people's show
NEXT autumn's Mid Wales Youth Theatre production at the Wyeside Arts Centre, Builth Wells, involving a large number of young people in the 14 to 25 age group, is expected to cost £11,130.
Theatr Powys will provide £4,390 of this.
Applications for grant aid are being made to various bodies, including The Development Board for Rural Wales.
Butchers told to take care INFORMAL letters have been sent to butchers by Montgomeryshire District Council's public health department drawing attention to the need for protective equipment in shops.
In all, 32 butchers' shops have been visited and 12 were found to have no such equipment.
FUW's man JOHN Phillips, of Cwmbach, near Builth Wells, has been elected a new vice-president of the Farmers' Union of Wales.
Lady Chatterley nude scenes defended by TV watchdog boss
SCENES of ‘full frontal nudity’ shown on the BBC drama Lady Chatterley were defended today by the acting chairwoman of the Broadcasting Standards Council.
Dame Jocelyn Barrow told MPs on the National Heritage Select Committee that the first part of the series, shown last Sunday, was screened after the 9pm watershed.
She also defended the portrayal of the controversial D H Lawrence story as a ‘well-known bit of literature,’ as she answered questions on the BBC's future.
Labour's Joe Ashton had asked: ‘There were scenes of full frontal nudity…is the BBC setting standards or just trying to attract viewers?’
Headlines
Mr Ashton provoked laughter when he said he had watched the programme because it was set in his constituency, and he had been to school with the father of Sean Bean, one of the stars.
He asked whether the BBC ‘insert a bit of gratuitous sex or violence’ to grab newspaper headlines and boost viewing figures.
Dame Jocelyn said she believed the corporation took a national perspective of what people wanted but admitted: ‘A couple of times, yes, we have overstepped the mark.’
Lord Rees-Mogg, past chairman of the council, argued there was a case for putting the watershed back to 10pm or later, as in France and Germany.
Big star who was down to earth
THE Daily Post's chief photographer Stephen Shakeshaft remembered Les Dawson with affection during the times he worked with him.
He said: ‘I went into Southport Theatre on a hot and humid July evening to photograph Les Dawson and saw this character stripped to with waist wearing a pair of underpants, women's tights and high heeled shoes.
‘He said ‘Come in’ and offered me a beer.
As I sat down he put on his make-up, an enormous bra and a sundress.
‘He then said ‘I won't be a moment’ and disappeared for his warm up then he walked back into the changing room, stripped off to the waist again, carried on his conversation and continued drinking his beer.’
He added: ‘Despite his fame he didn't have any big star hang ups and he was very down to earth.’
Ken Dodd last night played tribute to his friend and fellow comedian.
He said: ‘It is a great national loss and a great tragedy.
We have lost the man who I looked up to and the greatest British droll comedian this country ever had.
‘I had known Les for over 25 years as a friend and we appeared many times on stage together.
‘He was a very warm hearted and generous man who was never spiteful and never had a bad word to say about anybody.’
LES as photographed by Stephen Shakeshaft