

YOU must be joking…
I said when I was told the Echo had seconded me to a new day job, a comic career move.
Fun Fortnight had claimed another victim and I was forced to be game for a laugh and work in a joke shop.
But being funny all day can take its toll on us all.
Some days you just don't feel like chuckling.
‘You can't sell a joke item and have a gloomy face,’ said my shop assistant Jenny Ferguson of the Ace Place in Dale Street.
Hoisting up a huge inflatable carrot, shop boss Neville Boyars revealed it was not going to be a laugh-a-minute experience.
‘You have to walk up and down a lot,’ smiled Neville.
‘Be a real salesman.
‘I like to think of the shelves as being traditional: eye-catching with items on display in glass cases.
A bit like a jewellers’ shop.’
So is that a 24 carat carrot?
Then using all the panache of Basil Fawlty I displayed a carefully laid out tray of hooters for a party-goer.
‘Would you like to pick your own nose, Sir,’ I asked one serious looking shopper.
Yes the old ones are the best jokes that is.
Even during the quiet moments you cannot fail to be amused by the range of items on offer from edible underwear to garlic chewing gum.
‘I used to carry out some of the jokes on my family,’ says Jenny after serving one customer with a packet of exploding cigarettes.’
Requests
Neville who oversees the zany stock-takes once a week keeps a watchful eye on the joke, gag novelty market.
There's always a demand for jokes and it goes right across the board,’ says Neville.’
‘All age groups and especially girls coming in for hen party gimmicks naughty, rude practical jokes they are certainly selling well.
‘We do have some strange requests one man came in and said can I have a Veronica Lake wig!’ laughed part-time assistant May Orritt.
May, sporting an Elvis Presley head-piece nodded to Jenny who had decided to don the best selling Scousers wig set comprising curly wig and moustache straight out of the Harry Enfield's series.
They don't always dress up of course but I soon got in the habit by trying on a Tommy Cooper-styled fez.
‘The banana nose and attachment glasses line haven't gone too well,’ sighed Neville in rare serious moment, but the new range of masks are going well at £39 a time it's clear people still want to have a laugh.
For Jenny it's a labour of love:
Impression
‘I do enjoy my job serving the customers because of the way some of them ask sheepishly for a jokey item,’ says Jenny.
‘We try and make it as painless as possible.
‘Some men bring their kids in and it's like a trip down memory lane they look at the smoke bombs or whoopee cushions.
I get the impression the jokes are really for THEM.’
Still pleased as punch from selling an exploding lager can, I went on to boost sales of an elephant's trunk nose design and a Woody Allen mask but I didn't ask what the young man wanted THAT for.
This is all strictly confidential…
Although no-one brought anything back to be replaced, it can happen it just isn't funny if a trick lighter fails to squirt water after all.
And you even get a tea break without a floating plastic fly in the cup or a plate of rubber biscuits.
But working at Ace Place proved that this joke business is no nine-to-five job.
Even the clocks are wacky not only up the wall but completely off the wall!
One design replaces the numbers from 1 to
12 with One -ish, two ish, three ish.
Utterly outland ish!
After I clocked off, I shook hands with them all but there was no electric current up their impish sleeves.
‘You must come back for our Christmas party,’ they said in unison as they waved me off.
‘We're having it at the end of January…’
Flying Scots
SCOTLAND'S amateur golfers scored a comfortable 10–7 success in their international against France at Downfield.
New boss DUNFERMLINE have appointed former player Bert Paton as their manager.
Paton will have as his assistant Dick Campbell, who is a former manager of Cowdenbeath.
Kelly move FIRST Division Wolves have signed Newcastle and Eire striker David Kelly for £750,000.
Coach quits AMERICAN Kevin Cadle has resigned as England men's basketball coach following the team's failure to qualify for the 1993 European Championship finals.
Cork capped DERBYSHIRE pace bowler Dominic Cork was awarded his county cap before the start of yesterday's championship match against Yorkshire at Chesterfield.
Opening time for anglers
THIS week's Echo fishery reports are an indication of what might be happening when the new coarse fishing season starts next Wednesday.
CANALS
BRIDGEWATER CANAL: Bound to be the most popular regional fishery.
Runcorn opened on June 1 and has been terrific with small fish all along and bream at Astmoor and S Bends.
Warrington opens on June 16 and the most popular lengths will be Grappenhall for carp and bream, Oughtrington for bream, Lymm village and Red Lane.
LEEDS-LIVERPOOL: Bream shoal over 100 metres with fish to 5lb spotted on Wango Lane.
Tench to 3lb taking caster at Blue Anchor but problems could be looming with algae bloom at Burscough end.
SANKEY-ST HELENS CANAL: Lymm waters expected to produce big tench and bream with sweetcorn and bread best pleasure baits.
Newton waters expected to be bang on form with loads of small fish, good tench on pole and caster.
SHROPSHIRE UNION CANAL: Fishing in recent weeks has been patchy but Welsh arm opens on June 16 and tench should show at Frankton and Chirk.
TRENT & MERSEY CANAL: Matchmen will be anxious to get on the canal around Northwich but small fish will provide most of the sport with squatts and punch bread doing best.
Likely to be some carp at Middlewich.
LAKES
BIRKENHEAD LOWER LAKE: Warmer weather has improved catch rate of tench and skimmers on punch bread and caster.
BURTON MERE: Will be busy during the first week.
Lots more carp in general lake with tench, crucians, bream and large catfish.
The main carp lake was dredged in October but is now ready for fishing and has been stocked with fish to 36lb.
GREY MIST MERE: Tench and carp will provide first returns with sweetcorn, caster and bread likely to be tops.
Pike fishermen will be eager to get among the 20 pounders.
LYMM DAM: Bream, skimmers and small roach are bound to provide lively fishing for first few weeks.
Pole and punch bread will result in plenty of bites.
MORETON MERE: Top Wirral lake producing roach to 2lb on 5 metre pole line and bronze maggot hookbait.
Sweetcorn giving few tench and bream.
NEWSHAM PARK LAKE: Improved fishing at Liverpool for tench and roach.
RIVERS
RIVER CROSSENS: Good fishery but often slow for the first week or so until fish located.
Bream, carp and roach, on pole fished bronze maggot.
RIVER DANE: Chub will be the main quarry on all sections.
Large bread baits, bunches of maggots or casters, will work.
Watch out for flood water next week.
RIVER DEE: High water levels but when normal, Chester end usually best early morning or during night for large roach and bread in Eccleston area.
Farndon & Holt will give catches of small chub and dace while the streamier waters on the higher reaches to Bangor best of all with chub, dace and few grayling.
RIVER RIBBLE: High levels may cause a problem for the first few days.
Plenty of fish movement and everything looks set for active start.
Chub and roach on Preston waters.
Mainly chub to 3lb around Ribchester with increasing number of barbel.
Bread baits on leger tackle will produce chub to 4lb at Clitheroe.
RIVER WEAVER: Usually a good starter and busy for the first few days.
Hartford Meadows is a banker for large tench on double caster, bream will show at Hulse's Island and there should be small fish everywhere.
Winsford Flash will be tried for bream while large roach often take caster and hemp on the Red Lion and Aerosol.
Emma top dog
The dog and bone!
IT'S a woof life being on the old dog and bone all day…
When we heard on the grapevine that one of our four-legged friends was setting up her own fan club, it certainly gave us paws for thought.
What a barking mad idea!
It had to be a shaggy dog story, but we decided to contact the pooch ourselves to see if the tale was genuine.
What else would you expect from hardened newshounds?
‘Woof, woof, woof,’ replied Emma.
Now we know why the eight-year-old cross Lhasa Apso, of Edinburgh Road, Wallasey, has already been crowned Britain's most talented dog by a national canine organisation.
And now there's no restraining her…
‘Emma gets bookings for children's parties and is such a hit that she's decided to set up her own fan club,’ says proud owner Janis McLeod.
The potty pet, who has appeared on BBC 1's That's Life and recently won a magazine competition to find the country's best dog with children, has a dazzling repertoire of tricks.
Apart from answering the phone, she can dance, pray, collect the mail and the Echo and push a shopping trolley.
She also cheers up children with special visits to hospitals.
And the new fan club?
Emma will be able to tell you all about that herself with a little help from her owner if you ring her on .
No doubt what Emma's favourite paper is…
Call of the wild 
Emma takes a quick call from a canine friend
Cyclist on the charity cash trail in 74-mile ride to work
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
A WOMAN will cycle 74 miles from her home to her office next week to highlight National Bike to Work Day.
Pam Ashton will take the Trans Pennine Trail, a route she is helping to establish, which stretches from Southport to Hornsea on the east coast.
Her ride, which will raise money for charity, will start at 6am from home in Cressington Park, Liverpool, and end mid-afternoon at her office in Barnsley.
‘It's probably the furthest anyone will do,’ said Mrs Ashton, 46.
‘I'm pretty fit and I do like cycling but I expect I'll be shattered by the time I get to the end.
Luckily the last few miles are downhill into Barnsley.’
Mrs Ashton, a mother of two grown-up sons, works as Trans Pennine Trail officer and is based in Barnsley.
‘I spend about two days a week at my office in Barnsley and the rest of the time is spent travelling around Pennines at meetings,’ she said.
Mrs Ashton is responsible for getting the trail established by the local authorities between Southport and Hornsea.
‘Some stretches, particularly through the Mersey Forest, are well under way,’ she said.
‘Only 3pc of the population cycle in built-up areas but there is a huge demand for safe off-road facilities.’
The 74-mile cycle takes place on Wednesday and Mrs Ashton will be raising funds for the British Diabetic Association.
Anyone who would like to sponsor her should telephone .
Pam Ashton training for her 74-mile charity ride to work Picture: RICHARD WILLIAMS
Butterfly gala at country park
A BUTTERFLY ‘gala’ is being held in Rivacre Valley Country Park, Ellesmere Port, this weekend.
(11m-3pm).
The valley is the habitat of at least 21 species of the insect, which has been highlighted this month by a travelling exhibition.
Youngsters will be able to help make a butterfly mural, models, kites and a butterfly theatre.
More details are available from Countryside Ranger Jeff Clarke on .
A cause for celebration A GRANT from Cheshire Celebration is helping to fund an arts and environment event today at Reaseheath College, Nantwich.
(9.30am).
More details are available from Margaret Williamson, Cheshire Wildlife Trust 
Nursery fete
ORGANISERS of a fete today are raising funds for children attending a Great Sutton day nursery.
The fete is at Elim day nursery, in Alvanley Road.
Blue with red face in JFK insult
WE can today exclusively reveal a link between the assassination of John F Kennedy 30 years ago and…an Everton supporter.
A film company has enlisted our help in finding a man who was arrested at Goodison Park the day after the President was gunned down in Dallas.
A minute's silence was to be observed before the Blues kicked off against Stoke City at Goodison Park the following day Saturday November 23 1963.
As a newspaper later reported: ‘The 41,000 people stood in silent tribute…then a cry of ‘Long Live Kruschev’ shattered the calm.
The man who shouted, Communist James Downey, 24, appeared before magistrate Mr A. N England in Liverpool.
‘Constable David Owen said: ‘The crowd remained silent after Downey shouted but when the tribute ended they began punching him round the neck, back and body and began pushing him towards us.’’
Downey admitted shouting but said it was on the spur of the moment and he meant no disrespect to anybody.
The magistrate said the words were neither abusive or insulting but could have led to a breach of the peace.
Downey, a labourer of Deanscales Road, West Derby, said: ‘I was upset by Mr Kennedy's death.
I just shouted on an impulse and was very sorry later.’
Paul O'Dell, of London-based Bamboo Films, would like to hear from Mr Downey and anyone else who can remember the incident including ex-Everton players!
Give us at call or drop us a line if you can say: ‘I was there!’
Country park will host butterfly gala
A BUTTERFLY gala is being held in Rivacre Valley Country Park this weekend.
The valley is the habitat of at least 21 species of the insect, which has been highlighted this month by a travelling exhibition.
Youngsters will be able to help make a butterfly mural, models, kites and a butterfly theatre.
More details on .
Duke to visit
Wirral school
THE Duke of Westminster will visit Avalon School in Caldy Road, West Kirby, next Wednesday.
He will open a new school hall and plant two oaks to replace trees lost to make way for the new development.
Rose queen
A ROSE queen festival and June fair will be held tomorrow in the church hall and grounds of St Luke's Church in Wallasey.
Rock'n'Roll LEASOWE Recreation Centre will be the venue for a Rock'n'Roll festival on June 27.
The show will feature The Mersey Specials, Karl Terry and The Cruisers and The Chris Cotton Band.
Time for tea
AFTERNOON tea will be served at the walled garden in Wallasey Central Park next Wednesday to raise funds for St John's Hospice in Mount Road, Bebington.
Best trainee
A BIRKENHEAD apprentice car technician has been named as the best third year trainee by the Shell-owned nation-wide motoring centre chain, Superdrive.
Paul Groves, of Ashlea Road, Pensby, is based at the company's Argyle Street South centre.
Report by PETER GRANT
Serious stuff at joke shop
PICK YOUR NOSE…
Peter chooses his selection GAG-MASTER Neville Boyer demonstrates some of the props from the shop Today's the last day of Fun Fortnight in the
Echo.
Hoped you enjoyed it!
Tee off in the garden!
LOOKING for a three bedroom bungalow in the Woolton area?
Then check out this semi detached property in Haileybury Road.
Whitegates say that the bungalow has gas fired central heating, and the rear garden (with patio) backs on to the local golf course.
Accommodation: hall, lounge with gas fire and patio doors, kitchen, three bedrooms and bathroom/ w.c.
Detached garage PRICE: £75,500
Maths tests counted out
MORE than half a million children have been spared three hours of national curriculum maths tests today.
But many of the 14-year-old pupils had to sit tests drawn up by their own teachers who are boycotting the controversial national tests.
Sutch help: Screaming Lord Sutch is going to stand in the forthcoming Christchurch by-election as the ‘Monster Raving Loony Save John Major’ candidate.
Royal probe: The royals are coming under the TV microscope again in a four-part £1.8m ITV documentary The Windsors.
Tea line: TV chef Glyn Christian launched a new BR tea service today but was an hour late…because of a signal failure.
Music death: Singer-songwriter Arthur Alexander, whose classics were among the first songs cut by the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, has died in Nashville, aged 53.
Icy end: Christopher Dean is divorcing fellow ice skater Isabelle Duchesnay because he says she is demanding he spend too much time helping her career.
Car joy: Prince Charles presented a £54,000 hi-tech van to disabled man who then took him for a spin.
RAF fear: The RAF is bracing itself for compulsory redundancies after the news that 2,200 jobs must go.
Big Bill A Labour peer has put forward 400 amendments to the Maastrich Treaty Bill to try and slow its progress through the Lords Star better: Coronation Street star Lynne Perrie, 62, who plays Ivy Brennan, is improving in a Salford hospital after collapsing four days ago.
Video centre: Japan's video game maker Sega plans to bring hi-tech game centres to Bournemouth and London.
They plan to open 10 more in Europe and the US.
Resort show goes on, pledge tourism chiefs
TOURISM officials yesterday paid a morale-boosting visit to hoteliers in flood-hit Llandudno yesterday and pledged that they would play their part in helping the town's recovery.
They also appealed to holidaymakers not to be put off the resort by the disaster.
The group, which included Wales Tourist Board chairman Tony Lewis and chief executive Paul Loveluck, were in North Wales for a board meeting in St Asaph.
But on hearing of the situation in Llandudno they decided to assess the situation for themselves.
Mr Lewis said they had great sympathy for the flood victims.
He said hoteliers had been shocked at the speed with which the flood struck.
‘We care greatly about the tourist industry because it is such a conspicuous jewel in our crown.
‘They are depressed about it and it is now a question of loss adjustors and insurance.
But the hoteliers and staff have shown a great team spirit.
Staff have stripped to the waist and passed stores out to safety, things like that.’
He said the Wales Tourist Board's record after the Towyn floods proved that they could offer material help.
‘That proved that we could certainly be in the business of assisting recovery and restoration.
But at this particular time we are here to support and assist in communication.’
He said it was important that holidaymakers should not be put off Llandudno.
‘The hoteliers have coped.
The show goes on.’
Up to 60 Clwyd firemen worked round the clock to help their Gwynedd colleagues on rescue work.
Twelve appliances were sent to Gwynedd from Clwyd but Clwyd fire chief Ken Hayton says fire cover was not endangered.
Although Clwyd was not hit as badly as Gwynedd, there was widespread flooding, including pensioners' flats in Cae Brachty, Mold.
A bus ploughs on to Llandudno and deeper water
IT'S Father's Week in your Echo and every day we will be talking to famous sons and daughters about the favourite man in their lives their dad.
Today we meet young comedienne Lois Waters and her dad Denny, and tomorrow Chris Boardman talks about the man who spurred him on to Olympic fame.
Doctor's orders
OLYMPIC cycling gold medallist Chris Boardman will open a new GPs' surgery which will hold tranquilliser and sports injury clinics in Glover's Lane, Netherton, Liverpool, on Monday.
Fragrant event
CHESHIRE Landscape Trust will be saying it with flowers when it invites the public to a special meeting to air its views.
Tidy on remand
INMATES of Risley remand centre have been invited to take part in the first recycling scheme of its kind in the country.
Bottle bins and cages for newspapers and cardboard have been positioned all over the centre and the scheme will be inaugurated at 2pm on June 17.
Jubilee mass
THE special mass marking the golden jubilee of Bishop Joseph Gray's ordination to the priesthood will be held in Birkenhead next Friday, not yesterday, as indicated in yesterday's Daily Post.
Everton back in Europe!
By Ian Hargraves
HIGHTOWN Ladies' hockey players are not the only Merseyside team looking forward to European competition next season.
Everton's victory in the final of the national women's water polo cup at Sheffield means that a second gallant band of amateurs face the bitter-sweet task of trying to afford a serious Continental challenge.
And just to put them in the right mood, they have now been invited to take part in an international competition at Market Drayton next weekend (June 19–20) involving the United States junior team, Eire and Great Britain juniors.
The Everton side are unusual by any standards.
For a start their club, who were originally based at the old St Margaret's baths, now have their headquarters in West Derby and do most of their training in Speke.
Coached by City sports administrator Gordon Dacre, the squad contains four of his daughters, one of whom, Kathryn, is only 12 and another, Helen, 14, as well as a mother of two in her mid thirties in Helen Nicholson.
Three members of the squad, captain Joanne Lunt, Helen Sartain and Linzi Green are full internationals preparing for Britain's challenge in the European Championships this summer, while another five are members of the Great Britain junior squad.
Everton can also point to a strong international element in Leena Chagla, an Indian doctor who works at the Royal and keeps goal for them, as well as two German girls, Sylke Klaus and Gabi Von Voight.
‘Unfortunately they couldn't afford to fly over from Germany for the final in Coventry,’ says Joanne Lunt,’but they have played in most of our other big games.
‘I played for their club when I was touring in Germany, and they volunteered to come over and help us whenever they could.
We did miss them in the final, but the other girls responded magnificently, so we got through by 12–11 in the end.’
Joanne, who is looking for a job after taking a course in leisure and recreation management, spends much of her time playing water polo, with the accent heavily on marksmanship.
Both she and Hilary Sartain are attacking players, who scored 37 of Everton's 40 goals in the Cup competition, including 11 out of 12 in the final.
‘We shall be making every effort to compete in the Europa Cup in October, though that will undoubtedly involve a lot of fund raising, because there is little chance of getting any financial help elsewhere.
‘It's important we get as much experience as we can.
We have a very young team, most of whom are still in their teens and could become a really powerful side if only we can afford to stay together.’
SPLASH HIT…
Everton's water polo team get in trim for Europe
Second swimmer dies in shark attack
A SHARK killed a
61-year-old swimmer off a Hong
Kong beach today, the second fatal shark attack there this month.
Police said the man was swimming despite warnings.
They added that dawn and dusk were the times sharks were especially likely to attack.
Today's accident took place at 7.30am.
‘If people want to go swimming in early evening or early morning we would advise them to go to a swimming pool,’ a spokesman said.
Killer spotted
A great white shark, believed to have killed a 31-year-old scuba diver on his honeymoon in Australia, was spotted today.
Police said a helicopter crew saw the shark about 300 yards offshore of Hastings
Point, 75 miles south of Brisbane.
However, shark hunting boats in the area subsequently failed to find it.
The sixteen and a half foot long great white shark matched the description of one that killed diver John Ford on Wednesday off the resort town of Byron
Bay.
It was later tackled by fisherman but battled its way free.
The attack was the second within days in Australian waters.
On Saturday, British born Therese Cartwright, 34, was killed by a 12ft great white shark.
Chasing title at beach
HOYLAKE beach will provide the setting for the final round of the British sand yachting championship this weekend.
Members of the British sand yachting team will be competing in craft capable of reaching speeds of 80mph.
Racing starts at 10–30am today and tomorrow and will continue throughout most of the afternoon.
Boardman pedals to drugs rescue
CHRIS Boardman, Wirral's Olympic cycling gold medallist, is providing the muscle to drive a new anti-drugs campaign in the district.
On Monday, he will help launch a poster featuring his moment of triumph in the Barcelona Olympics and the legend ‘Pedalling Against Drugs.’
The poster is a joint initiative between Wirral Drug Prevention Team and the Mersey Regional Health Authority and will include a freephone regional health number for information and advice on drugs and HIV issues.
Five thousand of the posters have been printed for distribution to organisations and individuals across the area.
The venture follows earlier schemes involving local sports personalities in promoting the anti-drugs message.
Snooker ace John Parrott and soccer stars from Tranmere Rovers were featured in previous poster campaigns.
Lions skipper Gavin is looking to lift spirits
Battle of Hastings
Gavin Hastings…relying on fellow backs
Don't miss first reports of the Test action in tomorrow's Echo
GAVIN HASTINGS leads the British Lions into the first Test against New Zealand's All Blacks tomorrow determined to give British sports fans something to cheer.
After the English cricket and soccer debacles of the past week, Hastings' side hope to make up for the misery by catching the All Blacks cold New Zealand have not played a Test for 10 months and face the Lions with a new team.
This is the moment of truth for the Lions the six build-up provincial games can be forgotten.
Hastings is relying on his fellow backs to win it.
‘Without question our backs are superior to New Zealand's.
We are more dangerous and potent than them and, given the right ball, there is a lot of finishing power and talent in the backs.’
Hastings has been a Colossus on tour, while wings Rory Underwood and Ieuan Evans and centre Jeremy Guscott are playing some of the best rugby of their lives.
The All Blacks have solid, experienced backs, but all New Zealand acknowledges that not one has the sheer pace of the Lions' wings or Guscott.
‘We will be judged on our performances in the Test matches,’ added Hastings.
‘It's a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.
Almost all of us will never be back on another Lions’ tour of New Zealand and if we manage a series win it would be an awesome achievement.
‘It is important for us to have the six players who were involved in the Test series against Australia four years ago, plus Peter Winterbottom, who actually played all four Tests here in 1983.
‘There is a step-up to a Test match compared with provincial games.
We have done well in our provincial fixtures, with notable exceptions against the Maoris in the first half and in the defeat by Otago.
‘But even compared with our best, we need to raise our game in the Test.
If we play at the level we have produced against the provinces we are not going to win.’
Though the Lions' backs have the credentials and Winterbottom and Dean Richards have been in the heat of a Lions Test scrum, there are six forwards who will be experiencing a Lions Test for the first time.
There is a huge responsibility on Martin Bayfield and Andy Reed, first capped by Scotland last January, to provide line-out ball in their duel against Robin Brooke and Ian Jones.
When it comes to schools…this one's a cracker!
by Rachel Halliwell
THE children at Mother Theresa School think it's the funniest school on Merseyside.
We went along with to investigate armed with a pile of Fun Fortnight T-shirts to see if the youngsters could make us laugh.
But dear oh dear, headmistress Shirley Cunningham greeted us at the school gates with the world's oldest joke.
‘What is black, white and read all over?
THE ECHO!’
Don't call us Mrs Cunningham.
Get back to the blackboard!
But the children did much better.
Says Mrs Cunningham: ‘Once they get in the playground the children seem to reel off the jokes non-stop.
‘They are a lovely bunch of youngsters who enjoy a giggle with their friends.
‘They always seem to be cheerful and full of beans…
I don't think you'll find a more fun school in the whole of Merseyside!’
We met 30 of the school's young jokers and had to admit that the children and staff at Mother Theresa's are a very funny lot.
Here are just a few of their crackers: BRIAN VANHARITY, 10.
What is the difference between Everton Football Club and Mickey Mouse?
Mickey Mouse stayed in Europe longer!
JAMES McCMAHON, 6.
What's black and white and blue all over?
A cold zebra!
LINDSEY JORDAN, 10.
What did the robot say to the petrol pump?
Take your finger out of your ear when I'm talking to you!
DAVID DUNPHY, 9.
What do you call a dinosaur with only one eye?
A do-you-think-he-saw-us!
STACEY SMITH, 6.
What did the big chimney say to the little chimney?
You're far too young to smoke!
LEAH FORAN, 10.
What did the hat say to the scarf?
You hang around here and I'll go on a head!
PHILIP ROGERS, 7.
There was an English man, and Irish man and a Scotsman on a plane and the Scotsman dropped his watch out of the window.
The Scotsman waited until the plane landed a few minutes later, held out his hand and caught it.
‘How did you do that?’ the others asked.
The Scotsman replied: ‘Easy, it was five minutes slow!’
Gallagher's scope for the future
David Bassett
REVOLUTIONARY new surgery has put a second Runcorn player on the road to an early return to action.
Central defender Mick Gallagher underwent scope surgery on the snapped cruciate ligament in his knee a fortnight ago, and Canal Street physio Jimmy Graham said today: ‘He could be back in action in late September or October.’
Gallagher, who was injured in February and was originally expected to be sidelined for up to a year, follows striker Nigel Shaw as a beneficiary of the new operation, which involves the small insertion of laser equipment in the side of the knee to minimise surgery.
Shaw was facing the prospect of having to retire from football, after he suffered a serious cruciate injury in only his second game for Conference side Runcorn at the beginning of last season.
But he underwent surgery in the middle of February and after a problem-free rehabilitation spell is expected to join pre-season training.
‘It is a new lease of life for Nigel, and he is raring to go,’ said Graham.
Gallagher's speedy recovery has delighted Graham.
‘You wouldn't think he had done anywhere near as much damage to the knee,’ he said.
‘The stitches are out and he is not even having to use crutches.
‘There is obviously long-term rehabilitation for Mick, but he is on the way back.’
Lancs hit by fickle finger of fate
LANCASHIRE were given a Lord's injury scare yesterday when Mike Watkinson broke a finger in the Championship match against Essex.
Watkinson was struck during his innings of 27 and was sent to hospital for a precautionary X-ray Lancashire taking no chances ahead of next month's Benson and Hedges final.
He reported a clean break to his little finger, but was ready to field when Essex began their reply to Lancashire's 321 all out.
He's been advised to protect the finger and his left hand and will miss the Sunday League game against Essex at Old Trafford.
Nervous
Lancashire were given plenty of time to reflect on a day of missed opportunities today, after heavy overnight rain delayed the start.
They collapsed from 200–2 after Nick Speak (99) and Neil Fairbrother (53) belted 141 for the third wicket, with Essex paceman Steve Andrew grabbing a career best 7–47.
Essex are likely to fine Neil Foster for his moments of madness yesterday.
The former England paceman kicked two stumps out of the ground, as the Lancashire batsmen rode their luck.
Foster apologised and replaced the stumps immediately, but Essex secretary Peter Edwards confirmed today: ‘We will be taking some action.
I expect we will issue a statement on Monday.’
A funny old game
RON Atkinson got it wrong during England's humiliation in the USA: the result DOES matter.
It matters to every soccer supporter in the country.
And Graham Taylor's argument that we played a reserve team is as leaky as his defence.
We should be able to field five, even 10, teams capable of beating the USA at our own national sport.
YOU must be joking…
I said when I was told the Echo had seconded me to a new day job, a comic career move.
Fun Fortnight had claimed another victim and I was forced to be game for a laugh and work in a joke shop.
But being funny all day can take its toll on us all.
Some days you just don't feel like chuckling.
Scenes from Super Mario…
Samantha Mathis befriends a diddy dino (left), while Bob Hoskins and John Leguizamo are enveloped by friendly fungus!
Dynamic duo Bob Hoskins and John Leguizamo as the Mario brothers tread warily in the sinister city of Dinohatten.
Continued from previous page Although on screen he came to public notice in The Long Good Friday in 1979, he has also played in such diverse material as Mona Lisa (with Liverpool's Cathy Tyson) and Who Framed Roger Rabbit.
Super Mario Bros directed by husband and wife team Rocky Morton and Annabel Jankel opens nationwide next month and looks like being a big attraction with young audiences.
Hoskins says that he's never been a dab hand at the Mario video games despite tutoring from his seven-year-old son, Jack.
‘I can't figure out which buttons to push but it might be that he's rather more intelligent,’ admits Dad.
In fact, Hoskins says that at first the film role didn't appeal to him.
Legendary
That's until he found out that Roland Joffe was involved as producer, and that the legendary Dennis Hopper whose career goes back to James Dean's Rebel Without a Cause was cast as the tyrannical leader of the reptiles.
‘I thought: ‘Is he still alive?
Then I must work with him.’
‘Then when I met John Leguizamo, we clicked so well that they used to call us Laurel and Hardy.
A Cockney and a Columbian, I ask you.
‘John is a stand-up comedian with the timing of a 90-year-old vaudeville artist.
He does a stunning club act.’
Not that Hoskins is a stranger to such surroundings.
Early in his career he toured with Ken Campbell's Roadshow, and still says that his times with the former Liverpool Everyman director are among the most memorable.
‘We were living out of a hat dramatising dirty jokes.
And then, in the middle of that, you'd go off and play Richard III.
‘Not that not being Olivier ever got to me.
I always enjoyed reading Shakespeare more than seeing it.’
Bob's real heroes were mainly comedians…people like Liverpool's Jimmy James (the Bootle Chipster) and Max Miller.
‘I remember how ‘Monsewer’ Eddie Gray used to do a sketch about diving into a letterbox, while one of the funniest people was a taxi driver I knew who used to put a mask on and squirt people with a water pistol.
‘Really silly things like that appeal to me.’
And right now he's working on a ‘silent’ movie with Eric Sykes called The Big Freeze.
Greatest
‘Eric is one of the greatest influences on my life,’ says Bob.
‘The last person who played his ‘mate’ in a film was Tommy Cooper.
So I would have paid to take part in it.
‘It's called silent because there are not verbal ‘gags’, but there is talking.
They had trouble keeping me and Eric quiet.’
The rest of the cast includes Mary Mills, Donald Pleasence and Spike Milligan (as Adolph Hitler!).
Oh, and he nearly forget to tell me about his role as ‘mate’ to Eric.
Try to believe it when I say they are PLUMBERS.
‘Well perhaps I am being typecast after all,’ says Super Mario Hoskins.
Ford in Rainhill hotseat
DAVE BIRKETT has resigned as captain of Rainhill, so Ray Ford takes over for tomorrow's Bromborough Paints Merseyside Competition game at Ainsdale.
Leaders Birkenhead St. Mary's expect to be at full strength for their local derby at Bromborough Pool.
Second-placed Sutton also have their strongest side for the home match with Wavertree, who have Ian Morley back, although he is not fit to bowl.
Aigburth, who are third, welcome Prescot and Odyessy.
Chris Hacket is available and all-rounder Dave Knight comes in.
Brothers
Phil Green resumes in the Irby bowling attack at home to Liverpool Nalgo.
Fixtures Saturday: Aigburth v Prescot and Odyessy, Ainsdale v Rainhill, Bromborough Pool v Birkenhead St. Mary's, Irby v Liverpool Nalgo, St. Mary's College O.B.
v Port Sunlight, Sutton v Wavertree, Wirral v Caldy.
Sunday: Village Cup Mellor v Port Sunlight, Mawdesley v Caldy.
Old Parkonians figure in the Cheshire Cup first round at Tatten Hall, on Sunday.
The side includes the four Hitchell brothers Mike, Chris, Nick and Tim.
Malcolm Cockbain of Birkenhead St. Mary's has replaced Ian Morley in the Merseyside Competition side to meet the Liverpool Competition in the President's Trophy on Sunday.
Merseyside Competition: P Mercer (Rainhill), D Newman, P Green, P Coles (Irby), J Ford, L Roberts, M Cockbain (Birkenhead St. Mary's), K Brookman (St. Mary's College), C Wadkin (Wavertree), C Hackett, N Ingram (Aigburth).
Lions tamed in Christchurch
THE Lions have played seven Tests in Christchurch, venue for tomorrow's series opener against New Zealand and won only once, in 1977.
Their record is: 1930: Lost 13–10.
Carl Aarvold, later a judge, scored two Lions' tries and Doug Prentice, later secretary of the Rugby Union, converted them.
But the All Blacks managed a now-illegal ‘goal from a mark’ as the difference.
1950: Lost 8–0.
Pat Crowley and Roy Roper scored the All Blacks' tries.
1959: Lost 22–8.
Ralph Caulton claimed a couple of tries for NZ.
Irish centre David Hewitt scored for the Lions.
1966: Lost 19–6.
The great Waka Nathan touched down twice for the All Blacks.
Dai Watkins and Ronnie Lamont scored tries for the Lions.
1971: Lost 22–12.
This was the only defeat by the Lions team that swept through New Zealand to win the series 2–1.
New Zealand scored five tries, with some great All Blacks registering.
On the scoreboard Bob Burgess, Bryan Williams, Ian Kirkpatrick and Sid Going.
Gerald Davies crossed twice for the Lions.
1977: Won 13–9.
The All Blacks failed to field a specialist kicker.
Bryan Williams was given the job and his three penalties from a succession of shots were not enough.
Phil Bennett matched those penalties and the difference was J J Williams' try.
The Lions lost the series 3–1. 1983: Lost 16–12.
The result hinged on a totally illegal try by Mark Shaw, which contained two, possibly three, infringements.
Allan Hewson kicked the goals for NZ and Ollie Campbell did his best for the Lions with four kicks.
But the Lions had their chances and went steadily downhill from this first-Test defeat to a 4–0 whitewash.
It's Echo Karaoke
FANCY a night in the limelight?
Now's the time to dust off your song sheets and oil your vocal chords as the great Echo Karaoke Challenge gets underway.
The competition was a big hit last year when talented songsters from all over Merseyside took pubs and clubs by storm with their versions of old and new favourites.
Now we're on the talent trail again in the build-up to the grand final in September at Liverpool's Kiss nightclub, and we want to hear from any pub or club that wants to hold an Echo Karaoke Night.
All you have to do is ring the Karaoke hotline on…
Dawn of new era
A NEW era has dawned with the official launch of the British Horseracing Board which ended more than 200 years of Jockey Club rule.
Created to bring all racing's interests under one authority, the BHB has now assumed overall responsibility for the sport.
Its establishment, under chairman Lord Hartington, leaves the Jockey Club, which has run racing since 1752, with an administrative role responsible for licensing, discipline, integrity and security.
Among the Board's principal aims is to provide the leadership that can negotiate a further reduction in betting tax to help put racing on a firm financial footing.
Marquis magic
THE Marquis continued his rich vein of form yesterday when 11/8 shot Rainbow Lake's success at Newbury made it three winning naps in a row.
It was the highlight of another winning day for the Echo's top tipster, who gave FOUR winners, a second and a third at Hamilton, where the place pot paid £193.30 to a £1 stake.
With one of the season's biggest betting events, Royal Ascot, starting on Tuesday, you simply can't afford to be without the Echo.
FIRST with the racecards and FIRST with the big winners.
TEAM TALK
FORMER skipper Gareth Evans replaces Phil Davies in the BIRKENHEAD PARK side against ST.
HELENS RECS, who also make one change with Neil Aconley returning for David Eccles.
Matthew Doggert and Gerry Byrom take over from John Pearce and Richard Scanlon for FORMBY'S home match against SOUTHPORT.
The visitors recall medium pacer Martin Howie after completing a college course and Paul Johnson also returns.
Tim McKittrick steps down while Tommy Caunce is unavailable.
HIGHTOWN make three changes tomorrow.
Rob King is absent so Norman Gwyther steps in, while John Rigby and Michael Cooke replace Chris Williams and Dave Kinsella.
Opponents OXTON are unchanged.
Andrew Miller is the only HUYTON player to have topped 50 so far this season, so captain Archie Moore will be looking for more support from other batsmen against CHESTER BOUGHTON HALL.
The bottom club have Nigel Ogden and Martin Ruane returning for Joe Bird and Ian Robson.
High-flying Hall are unchanged.
LIVERPOOL, unbeaten in the last five, are unchanged at home to BOOTLE, who include Owen McCann, recovered from a broken finger, for unavailable Tony Molloy.
Champions NESTON travel to NORTHERN after picking up four wins out of five while NEW BRIGHTON skipper Tim Watkins' keeps faith with the side that drew with Liverpool last week for the trip to ORMSKIRK.
It's same again for SEFTON as they visit WALLASEY, where skipper Mark Anderson is hoping to return after a back injury.
Alistair Campbell will be chasing the 25 runs he needs to reach 500 for the season with club delighted by his contribution on and off the field.
Said Anderson: ‘He has been a great fillip to us not just with his excellent performances on the field, but throughout the club.
His coaching and help at nets has been of benefit to all our players.’
YOU can get a fuller forecast of what the stars have in store for YOU today by calling Russell's Horoscope Hotline for YOUR Star sign.
Each call costs 36p a minute cheap rate, and 48p at other times.
Don't base long term decisions on how you feel Tuesday for passing fads and fancies give you a false impression of what you want to achieve in times to come.
Any assessments or conclusions concerning colleagues or neighbours are likely to go wrong.
Enjoy spending time at home.
If you have to go out to earn a living or live up to commitments and promises you should aim to get back as soon as possible.
There's never a dull moment Tuesday, but far from letting the rush and push get you down you actually revel in it and enjoy all the excitement and exhilaration.
Push ahead with a cash or career plan.
You're not often disorganised so when you have to backtrack or retrace your steps to do or get something you've forgotten you won't be best pleased.
Just grit your teeth and get things straight.
It's high time you either changed your own personal world of beliefs and ethics or got to work on reforming your community or neighbourhood.
You've all the enthusiasm needed to campaign for a cause or idea that's near and dear to your heart.
You are at your best unravelling the strands of a mystery and getting to the bottom of why people have been behaving strangely.
Any plan or project that exercises your mind and gives you food for thought is good for you now.
Tuesday looks like an oasis in a desert of work and effort so make sure you plunge headlong into its refreshing and revitalising waters.
It doesn't matter if you don't work wonders for just one day this week!
Tuesday's relaxed and informal atmosphere puts you at your ease and gives you the time to think through your current life direction and emphasis.
Despite the congenial air of unhurried calm you are more than usually assertive and ambitious now.
Where do you get all your energy from?
When other sunsigner's get up and go has got up and gone you're still going strong, so take pity on a pooped pal or po-fagged partner and ease up a little Tuesday.
Knuckle down to any jobs you've been promising all and sundry to do, but have secretly been avoiding like the plague.
You have a self-disciplined and energetic approach to life now that should help you get even the most arduous and onerous tasks done.
A personal problem you thought would be a bed of nails and nothing but a whole heap of hassles and troubles will actually be your big chance to show off your brilliant brain, sensitive nature and warm hearted generosity.
You come out of a tight spot smelling of roses.
Without making a song and dance about it your quiet air of self-assured confidence makes you a natural leader, so don't be surprised to find yourself elected unofficial spokesperson for a group of trusting friends, workmates or neighbours.
A hectic, but enjoyable annum ahead brings masses of new openings and opportunities to explore and exploit.
Don't get so bogged down in the trivia of life you haven't the time or inclination to branch out and see what's on offer.
Your world is set to change for the better.
Ric George reports Stuart Barlow's Everton career may be over.
The Blues' striker has failed to agree new terms with manager Howard Kendall which could signal his departure from Goodison Park.
Barlow was a regular member of Everton's squad last season and his pace caused problems to Premier League defences, with Wimbledon reported to be particularly impressed by his talent.
He and Kendall will meet for further discussions but if they are not fruitful, the player will become a free agent when his contract expires at the end of the month, although any transfer will command a fee.
Kendall, who is still hopeful that Tony Cottee will pledge his future with the Blues, said today: ‘We have offered Stuart Barlow increased terms.
‘But he has not accepted them and it's within his rights to do that.
‘We will be having more talks and will take the matter from there.
‘If there is no agreement then he will be free to talk to other clubs.’
Meanwhile, Besiktas hopes of signing Ronny Rosenthal have been dashed on the day Galatasaray renewed their interest in Pat Nevin.
Newly-crowned Turkish champions Galatasaray, who pipped Besiktas to League and Cup honours last season, spoke to Nevin during his Everton career, but lost out when the Scottish international moved to Tranmere Rovers last year.
However, following a successful campaign under German coach Karl-Heinz Feldkamp, who brought the Istanbul outfit its first title since 1988, the wealthy and ambitious club wants to reinforce for a European Cup assault next term.
And Nevin is back on the wanted list after enjoying an excellent season at Prenton Park, in which he carried his goal scoring form for Rovers into international competition.
However, it remains to be seen how firm Galatasaray's interest is and whether Nevin would want to uproot for what would be a journey, albeit a lucrative one, into the unknown.
If such a move is unlikely for Nevin, then it is a definite non-starter for Rosenthal.
I understand Turkey holds no attraction for the out-of-contract striker, who has refused to sign a one-year deal at Anfield.
Besiktas, who finished runners-up to city rivals Galatasaray in League and Cup, had hoped to lure the Israeli to boost their firepower for next season.
Boss Gordon Milne, who is offloading Polish international keeper Jaroslaw Bako and Serb winger Mitar Mrkela, has room for foreign imports and wants a striker to partner South African star Fani Madida.
But Rosenthal will not be rushed into a transfer and I believe he is hoping for a cross-Channel move.
Ronny Rosenthal.
Pat Nevin.
Stuart Barlow…refused a new deal.
How the Echo brought you first news of the Turkish interest in Rosenthal yesterday.
MISSING LINKS…
IT'S not a question you get asked every day but do look like Gary Lineker?
Chester's Gateway Theatre is looking for a mild-mannered all round good-egg who bears a striking resemblance to the former Everton striker.
The forthcoming production of An Evening With Gary Lineker requires an on-stage lookalike at the end of every performance.
‘It is a small but absolutely essential appearance,’ says a Gateway luvvie.
If you're the man and are available from July 24 to August 28, send a snap of yourself and details to Maria Linger, Stage Manager, Gateway Theatre, Hamilton Place, Chester CH1 2BH.
The theatre is also hoping somebody could lend them a video of the 1990 World Cup Semi-Final between England and West Germany.
Bowl us a googly
LET'S talk cricket.
To see out Fun Fortnight, Waves has a prize to bowl you over.
Make us laugh with your favourite gag or anecdote about cricket (or sport in general).
England under Graham Taylor are a joke already so any further lines are welcome.
The winners of the top ten snippets will each receive a SIGNED copy of GOWER: THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY as read by David Gower on special double cassette packs.
David, the most prolific scorer of runs in English Test Cricket, is a man who enjoys life.
There's a cracking section called YOU MUST BE JOKING with all the wit of the willow.
Write to: Making Waves, Liverpool Echo (Fun Fortnight) PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool, L69 3EB.
Send your entries by Thursday morning.
Winners will be announced on June 19.
Over and out…
Island's feast of cycling
By Ken Matthews 006-000 02
THE scene is set for what promises to be the best Isle of Man International Cycling Week for many years from June 20–27.
An extended programme takes in the British Professional Road Race Championship on Sunday, June 27, over 115 miles.
The event takes in one lap of the famous TT course and 12 laps of a seven miles circuit, coming down each time along the promenade.
But all eyes will be on the opening event on the morning of Sunday, June 20, when over 200 entrants have applied for the Mountain Time Trial over one lap of the TT course against the watch.
The best 120 will be in the International event, where Olympic champion Chris Boardman (North Wirral Velo-Kodak) renews battle with Scottish wonder man Graeme Obree.
Obree went within 10 seconds of beating Boardman in last weekend's 25 miles championship, despite having to dismount to adjust his rear wheel.
All the foreign teams are in the mountain trial and the 80 who could not make the main event are in an overflow, starting 0631 hours!
A packed week of time trials, road races, round the houses races, mountain bike events and social occasions comes to a big day on Friday, June 25, when five separate road races are run over closed roads on the TT course.
Highlight is the Manx International over three laps (113 miles), which goes back Am/Pro for the first time since it started in 1936.
A women's race over one lap looks set for a local victory by British champion Marie Purvis, of Manx Viking Wheelers, who loves the mountain course.
Purvis defends her national 25 miles championship at Andover tomorrow.
The long run…
PUTTING their best feet forward are the marathon men and women from Liverpool Victoria Friendly Society.
The team of seven ran from Liverpool's Albert Dock to London in just two days, raising more than £5,000 for the British Sports Association for Disabled People.
Cheering them off on their 230 miles' journey was TV's ‘Mr Blobby’ and Mr John Lambeth, secretary and chief executive of LVFS.
The team comprised Angie Charkiewicz, Pam Hayward, Peter Bridle, Paul Collier, Roger Clinch, Richard Porter and Peter Drury.
Sex education What about Us?
Sex Education for Children with Disabilities Here's a booklet that could be very helpful to parents of disabled children who so often are viewed as not having sexual feelings and who, as a result, have sometimes had little or no sex education.
Available from: The Secretary, The Home & School Council, 40 Sunningdale Mount, Ecclesall, Sheffield, S11 9HA, price £2 (inc. p&p).
It's the final day of our second ‘Three Day Test’ the ultimate cricket quiz.
Once again, you have an opportunity to go for a perfect ton, providing you have produced the goods during the first two days play.
Alternatively, you can go for a personal best with a view to improving your average next week.
Run values are in brackets.
Answers next Thursday.
THE VENUES 1.
Which venue has seen both of history's only innings of over 1,000 runs?(6) 2.
Which ground staged the first Test in this country?(6) 3.
Where did Geoff Boycott record his century of centuries?(2) 4.
On which ground did Jim Laker take his record 19 Australian wickets in 1956?(2) 5.
In which city is the St. Lawrence Ground, Kent's home?(2) 6.
Where did Gary Sobers hit his world Test record 365 not out?(4)
TEST CRICKET IN THE EIGHTIES 1.
Whose highest Test score was 208 against India in 1982?(2) 2.
In 1987, Nottinghamshire provided England with both openers in a Test name them.
(3) 3.
In 1986 who became the first Gloucestershire player since 1966 to play for England?(6) 4.
Which West Indian pace bowler took 323 wickets in the period in Test matches and played County Cricket with Hampshire?(1) 5.
Which Englishman scored 732 runs in the 1985 Ashes series?(2) 6.
And which current tourist scored 839 runs in the 1989 Ashes series for Australia?(2)
PRIZE QUESTION IF you can answer ‘Venues’ question one at the top of this column, you could win ‘The Who's Who of Lancashire’published by Breedon Books.
We have two more copies to give away, drawing from our postbag after Wednesday's final post.
Send your entry to: Cricket Quiz, Liverpool Echo, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool L69 3EB.
Ace Phil on cue
PHIL WINROW, pictured below, is aiming to be a long range snooker star.
The 16-year-old from Walton is already at the head of the cue in Merseyside, winning the North of England National Association of Boys Club's title.
And last Saturday he finished runner-up in the national finals at Birmingham.
But for Phil every practice session is an away day.
A member of the Orrell Park Community Centre which doesn't own a snooker table he has to travel to the Red Rum Snooker Club in Croxteth to practice.
‘The Red Rum have been very good to us,’ said youth worker Dave Carr.
WINNER
The winner of our Britain's model soldiers competition is Robert Webster, of Southport.
His prize is a set of six Royal Marine Light Infantry figures.
Angela a Big Mac treat
WHAT a lot we've got!
Thousands of people are taking advantage of the ECHO'S super Big Mac offer.
You can get TWO Big Macs for just £2 a saving of £1.74 if you use the special coupon in your ECHO.
MacDonald's hostess Angela Donalis from the city's Lord Street premises is stocking up for the huge demand which is expected this weekend.
Feeling hungry?
Turn to Page 20 for full details of this super ECHO offer…
The long run…
PUTTING their best feet forward are the marathon men and women from Liverpool Victoria Friendly Society.
The team of seven ran from Liverpool's Albert Dock to London in just two days, raising more than £5,000 for the British Sports Association for Disabled People.
Cheering them off on their 230 miles' journey was TV's ‘Mr Blobby’ and Mr John Lambeth, secretary and chief executive of LVFS.
The team comprised Angie Charkiewicz, Pam Hayward, Peter Bridle, Paul Collier, Roger Clinch, Richard Porter and Peter Drury.
‘Play it again’ to England failures
ENGLAND are ready to give nearly all their Old Trafford failures another chance.
Captain Graham Gooch insisted within minutes of Australia's first Test victory that wholesale changes were not on the agenda.
And when the squad for Lord's is announced on Sunday, a couple of different faces could be the extent of England's tinkering.
Gooch, who batted magnificently in both innings at Old Trafford, was responsible for 198 of his side's 542 runs.
The other members of England's top six Mike Atherton, Mike Gatting, Robin Smith, Graeme Hick and Alec Stewart managed just 187 between them.
Difficult
Despite those revealing figures, however, all five will probably survive.
Atherton and Gatting appear the most vulnerable and there are strong arguments for introducing at least one left-hander in a bid to make life more difficult for leg-spinner Shane Warne.
But while Hugh Morris, David Gower and Graham Thorpe will warrant consideration, the selectors are likely to give their top order another opportunity.
Chairman Ted Dexter hinted as much, saying: ‘It is now up to the rest of the team to learn from Gooch's example.’
Target
A line has to be drawn somewhere, however, following England's sixth consecutive Test defeat.
Phil Tufnell and Chris Lewis are hovering near it, while Phillip DeFreitas has possibly dropped below it.
Left-arm spinner Phil Tufnell managed just three wickets on a wicket giving him assistance.
The most glaring Old Trafford comparison, though, features Lewis and Merv Hughes.
While Hughes (8 for 151) bowled as though his career depended on dragging some life out of slow track, Lewis looked so ineffective.
Derbyshire's Devon Malcolm is favourite for a recall on a Lord's wicket which is expected to be quicker and bouncier than Old Trafford.
Possible squad: Gooch, Atherton, Gatting, Smith, Hick, Stewart, Lewis, Ilott, Caddick, Such, Tufnell, Malcolm.
Fashion buy-out for £35m
TEXTILES giant Coats Viyella today ran up a £35m bill.
It acquired the Dutch firm Berghaus International Fashion.
Berghaus is a distributor of women's coats and jackets which are sold in western Europe and Russia.
It also supplies Marks & Spencer and operates the brand names Berghaus, Damo and Polar Bear.
Existing management will continue to run the firm.
In 1992 it made pre-tax profits of £4.6m on sales of £80m.
The deal is expected to be completed by July 1.
Souffle on the rise
LEMON Souffle, racing in the colours made famous last season by Lyric Fantasy, was a six lengths scorer in the Sikkens Masterstroke Conditions Stakes at Newbury.
And after watching her beat two previous winners with staggering ease, owner Lord Carnarvon said: ‘She's very exciting, really a bit special, the best filly out so far.’
But Lemon Souffle will not be attempting to follow up Lyric Fantasy's Queen Mary Stakes victory of last year.
Instead she runs in the Cherry Hinton Stakes at Newmarket's July meeting and, with luck, next season's 1,000 Guineas.
Ladbrokes quote her at 40–1 for the first Classic of 1994.
The funniest bunch on Merseyside
DURING Fun Fortnight we've had jokes on everything from cows to coughs, doctors to dentists, and everyone has given us a good laugh.
But there have been three outstanding efforts which we are proud to present once again in our great Fun Fortnight Laughter Awards.
The best children's joke is a joint effort from pals Gary Lunt age five from Anfield and five year-old Sam Tierney from Tuebrook.
What do frogs drink?
CROAKA-COLA!
(OK, so you've heard it, but it's the way these five year olds tell ‘em!)
The winner of the best adult joke is Mrs May Jones from Prescot, and a T-shirt is on its way to her for this the Echo office favourite.
Two cows are standing in a field and one says: ‘Moo.’
The other one turns round and says: ‘Oi!
I was going to say that!’
And finally the winner of the funniest celebrity joke is Radio Merseyside's Wally Scott.
The following gem lands him a Fun Fortnight T-Shirt, and just to stop the pair of them falling out, we'll give Billy a T-shirt too.
There's a funeral procession going down the road with hundreds of people following the hearse.
At the front of the mourners is a fella with a huge rottweiler.
I said to him: ‘I've never seen such a big funeral.
Who's died.’
He says: ‘It's my mother-in-law.
But I feel terrible because the dog killed her.’
I said: ‘Any chance of borrowing the dog?’
He said: ‘Get to the back of the queue!’
Yacht race
AROUND 50 yachts are expected to set sail from the Mersey this evening in Tranmere Sailing Club's Annual IOM Race from Rock Ferry to Douglas.
The race has an earlier than normal start time with the Wirral Mayor due to fire the cannon to set the fleet on its way at 5p.m.
The leaders should reach the island by midmorning tomorrow.
Other events this weekend include Hoylake Sailing Club's Conway Race and an Optimist Open Meeting at West Kirby on Saturday while a team race between Royal Mersey and Royal Anglesey at Rock Ferry is scheduled for Sunday.
Beauty girl heads for Jamaica
Lucky Susan nails her dream job
By Jane Croft
SUSAN Finley had to be as tough as nails to secure a top job aboard a luxury cruise liner.
For the 23-year-old Liverpool woman had to beat off strong competition for the post from dozens of other candidates from around the world.
Susan, who is one of a handful of British people who specialise in caring for women's fingernails and fingernail extensions, is leaving her current Liverpool job to take up her new post aboard the American liner Majesty of the Seas.
She will travel to Mexico and Jamaica while manicuring the fingernails of the rich and famous.
‘I'm really excited about it and will be travelling for nine months,’ she said.
Susan, from West Derby, started off as a trainee beautician aged 17 at the Finishing Touches Salon in Castle Street.
Helping hand…
Susan (right) at work on a classy manicure.
Picture: RICHARD WILLIAMS
GASP…shock…horror…
Grid Lock!
There were some poor lost souls last week at the Ordnance Survey office in Chester.
A team of master map-makers had reason to call at the Land Registery centre in Birkenhead but they couldn't find it.
After asking for help from passers-by, they were eventually pointed in the right direction.
Perhaps they should have used an A-Z.
SO that's their secret…
According to a sticker in the window of Sam's Bar in the city centre, passers-by have this sobering thought to contend with as our soccer lions (sic) fight it out in America:
KALIBER: THE OFFICIAL BEER OF THE ENGLAND FOOTBALL TEAM.
A MAGHULL school got a mixed report after an investigation by inspectors.
Maricourt RC High School was given good marks in some areas, but was told it must do better in others.
Pupils received a pat on the back for satisfactory learning and community work but heads have been told to review some management and teaching methods.
Sonic Zafonic scares off rivals
TRAINERS have shunned the chance to take on the brilliant miler Zafonic at Royal Ascot next week.
Just five horses stand their ground for the £145,000-added St James's Palace Stakes, first day feature at the showpiece meeting.
But one of those is the French-trained 2,000 Guineas winner's likely pacemaker Wharf and another, Needle Gun, may be switched to the King Edward VII Stakes on the same card.
The other two acceptors are Kingmambo, the only horse to have beaten Zafonic, and the John Dunlop-trained Ventiquattrofogli.
Richard Hannon's team is certainly in flying form for the Royal meeting.
Lemon Souffle was the highlight of a splendid Newbury treble for the Marlborough-based trainer, completed by Darecliff and Reprehend.
Least fancied challenger
Hannon saddled three of the first four home in the Kennett Maiden, and Reprehend, at 14–1, was the least fancied of his trio.
With such strength among his juveniles, Hannon is predictably not joining the exodus from the Coventry Stakes caused by the presence of the Peter Chapple-Hyam-trained hotpot Stonehatch.
He saddles Wajiba Riva in the Coventry and warned: ‘Stonehatch will have a bit more to beat than he did when winning at York.’
John Balding, who broke a 23-month drought at Edinburgh last Saturday, has now recorded four winners in the space of five days.
Miss Siham and Rain Splash were his latest successes, winning the Stonefield Selling Handicap and P & O Containers Scottish Handicap at Hamilton Park.
John Dunlop
…challenge
Riding centre refused
FARMER Alan Sharpe has lost his battle for planning consent for a horse riding centre.
The Department of the Environment has ruled that the centre, on a one-and-a-half acre site at Woolston, near Warrington, would be inappropriate in the Green Belt.
The decision, following a public inquiry in February, clears the way for a controversial gipsy transit camp.
Lacotte a red hot prospect
by Captain Becher 002-000 03
SHEIKH Mohammed can afford to send his enormous band of brood mares to any stallion in the world.
Yet racing's most powerful owner treasures one bloodline above every other available to him.
In fact, his support of Irish-based Sadler's Wells is rapidly nearing monopoly proportions.
This covering season he has sent no fewer than 19 of his matrons to the 1984 Eclipse hero.
In the past week or so the Sheikh has won the Coronation Cup with Opera House and the Oaks with Intrepidity.
Both are by Sadler's Wells.
Lacotte is yet another product, and he should continue the family's fantastic run by taking tomorrow's Cadogan Maiden Stakes at York.
The John Gosden-trained three-year-old has not been seen in public so far this term, but has certainly been sparkling on the Newmarket gallops in preparation for his reappearance.
Students of form will already have been alerted to Lacotte's potential following an eyecatching second to Lord President on the July Course last summer.
Sweet Mignonette's background is anything but blueblooded.
But since the mare has won five of her last six races, that probably means little to trainer Mary Reveley.
The five-year-old daughter of Tina's Pet has collected at Leicester, Beverley (twice), Redcar and Doncaster since the start of the season and can improve her record still further by taking the £15,000 Crawley Warren Handicap.
Sweet Mignonette's regular partner Kevin Darley may initiate a double with Make A Note in the EBF Gwen Murless Stakes.
The Richard Hannon-trained youngster made a promising debut when an unlucky short-head runner-up to Tamar's Brigade at Lingfield last month.
Given normal improvement and less trouble in running this time Make A Note looks sure to go close.
Washout
LAST night's meeting at Southwell was abandoned after just one race when the course became waterlogged following torrential rain.
Living history lessons
CHILDREN went back 300 years in time when they arrived at Speke Hall.
The ‘living history’ was organised by members of the Young National Trust Theatre Company.
Pupils of Bleak Hill school, St Helens, and Birkenhead High School, performed Virtues and Vanities.
Set in 1680, it ended with a dance around the hall's famous Adam and Eve trees.
Join hands…dancing school children join the actors Tea break…
Quaker Madeline Blakeney relaxes
Irrepressible and irreplaceable By Rachel Halliwell
THE DEATH one of the country's favourite funnymen, Les Dawson, yesterday marked the end of a comedy era.
There was never anything sophisticated or subtle about the doleful northerner but boy, could he make you laugh.
His was gritty northern comedy at it's best.
No other comic ever quite managed to match Dawson's end-of-the-pier style although many tried.
It was his dead-pan delivery that turned even the daftest joke into a side-splitter.
And his own unique brand of droll self-mockery had his audiences in stitches.
Today's comics are more lean, aggressive characters who rely heavily on sarcasm and politics for their laughs.
With Dawson it was his bulk which undoubtedly contributed to his premature death along with his broad, rubber face that became his trademark and made him an ideal pantomime dame in true bawdy music hall tradition.
The comics of his generation are now resigned to the fact that the king of mother-in-law jokes will never be replaced.
Fellow comic Ken Dodd, 65, said: ‘Les was a national monument the greatest British droll comedian ever.’
Club comic
And funny girl Pauline Daniels, 37, added: ‘He was the epitome of the northern club comic and stuck with it through and through.
‘No-one will ever replace him we really are talking the end of an era.
‘All the comics of his background have gone now.
It is very, very sad.’
Said Faith Brown, 49: ‘People have always tried to take off Les's dead-pan style, but never came near.
‘That style became his gimmick you don't come across comedians who would even dare to behave like Les these days.
If someone else even tried, it probably wouldn't be half as funny as when Les did it.
‘I remember the first time I met Les very well.
It was after my first London show and the club staff said he wanted to meet me.
‘I was bowled over because the guy was like a God to me.
He went over the top saying things like, ‘Faith, I've seen some acts in my time but none compared to you.’
‘I was on cloud nine.
Then, after going on like that for a few minutes he took my hand and said, ‘Faith you were absolutely rubbish!’ with that famous dead-pan expression.
‘It was so funny everyone just fell about laughing.’
DAMON LOOKS FOR DRY RUN HOME IN CANADA
DAMON HILL is aiming for his elusive first Grand Prix win in the Canadian Grand Prix this weekend.
The 32-year-old Londoner, second behind the brilliant street-driving genius of Ayrton Senna in Monaco, knows he has a better chance of glory in Montreal.
He drove here last year and he likes the track, which is expected to suit his Renault V10-powered Canon Williams car.
He said: ‘This is a nice place.
It is a pleasant venue and a good city.
I like the atmosphere and I feel good.
‘It is the sort of place I know I can do well at, but it is also an unusual sort of circuit too.
‘It has no quick corners.
But I enjoyed myself here last year with Brabham when I knew I was not competitive.
‘Hopefully this year will be very different.
I want to push for a win if I can.’
Hill's confidence has grown throughout this his first full season as a front-line racer in Formula One since he replaced Nigel Mansell in the Williams team.
But to win, he knows he has to beat first his team-mate Alain Prost who is keen to return to winning ways and regain the leadership of the championship and also overcome the tremendous challenge of Ayrton Senna.
Even in a less competitive car like the underpowered Marlboro McLaren Ford MP4/8, Senna is a threat, as Hill recognises.
Damon Hill
…victory hopes
Doddy tribute to Les
KEN DODD today led the showbiz world in paying tribute to Les Dawson.
Comic Les, 59, collapsed and died yesterday, apparently of a heart attack, shortly after arriving at a Manchester BUPA hospital for a check-up.
A flood of tributes was headed by Doddy, who said: ‘We have lost a great national monument of mirth.
‘I looked up to Les.
I rated him as the best British droll comedian we had.
He was a creative genius.’
Tommy Cannon, of Cannon and Ball, said: ‘He was a comedy genius and a genuinely lovely man.’
Variety
Veteran comic Charlie Chester, a fellow member of the Water Rats showbiz charity, said: ‘He was like a cross between Robb Wilton and WC Fields with that big mournful expression on his face.
‘He was one of the last of the old school variety comics.
He came out of the northern clubs and was loved by millions.’
Bernard Manning commented: ‘This is a terrible shock for everyone.
He was a classic.’
The comic, who had a history of heart trouble, had become a father for the fourth time only last year, when his second wife Tracey gave birth to their daughter Charlotte.
Today, Mrs Dawson was being comforted at their home in Lytham St Anne's by friends and her husband's grown-up children Julie, Stuart and Pam.
Les's first wife Meg died of cancer in 1986.
James Moir, head of BBC TV light entertainment, said: ‘His unique gruff humour, his exceptional ability to use the English language to produce brilliant comic effect has rarely been equalled and surely now will never be surpassed.
‘Warm-hearted and generous, he exuded perpetual good humour and bonhomie.’
Breakfast
After his last heart scare two years ago, Manchester-born Les was ordered to cut down his drinking, stop smoking and reduce his weight from 15 stone.
He managed the first two but his love of a big fried breakfast meant he never managed to lose much weight.
But his bulk, along with his broad, malleable face, was virtually his trademark and made him an ideal pantomime dame in the finest bawdy music hall tradition.
He was multi-talented, though, not only a great standup comedian but also an accomplished pianist and writer with several published books.
After spending years making his name in northern clubs, his big break came on TV's Opportunity Knocks in 1967.
Happier times…
Les with wife Tracey
Driven mad by maniacs
FUNNY how summer brings them all out of the woodwork isn't it?
Loony drivers.
They're everywhere.
Tearing along the dotted line on roads and motorways without so much as a glance at the Highway Code.
And a report this week from a psychologist confirms what many especially women — have always suspected.
That bedroom inadequacy lies at the heart of most MALE bad driving.
Next time someone cuts you up on the fast lane, pity him.
He's got a chip on the hard shoulder that a crate of Sarson's couldn't cover.
In fact I'm thinking of inviting Dr. Ruth Westerheimer to a mass therapy session at rush hour at the exit to the Birkenhead tunnel.
They're jockeying for position the moment they see the light at the end of the tunnel.
Jaw set, hands gripping the wheel, a steely stare fixed on the fellow next to him, both of them determined to get to the toll booth before the other.
That quiet building society clerk becomes Dick Dastardly behind the wheel.
It's not the taking part that counts in the rush hour race it's the winning.
Even if it means they're only inches ahead in the three mile crawl along the rest of the road at least they're in FRONT.
And by Gad, sir, a man's pride is at stake.
I'm up there with the winners is what they're trying to say.
But really what their over-revved egos are betraying is that their boudoir success has all the acceleration of a Sinclair C5.
Unwind
So next time you catch up at the lights with the smug so and so who was stuck to your bumper a mile back, with all the understanding you can muster just remind him that: ‘There, there dear, size isn't everything you know.’
NEEDING to unwind the key in my back for 10 minutes the other day I passed a church near Everton's ground declaring; ‘It's never too late to talk to God.’
Unfortunately it was only open nine til noon.
Tunnel vision
Lewis v Bruno ON!
LENNOX Lewis against Frank Bruno
Britain's biggest and richest fight looks set to be signed in New York later this month.
Bruno's promoter Mickey Duff is ‘hopeful’ the eagerly awaited WBC heavyweight title showdown will be finalised later this month.
The champion's manager, Frank Maloney, insisted the fight was ‘confirmed’ for September 25, probably at Cardiff Arms Park.
Agassi lift: Andre Agassi's chances of defending his Wimbledon title have lifted.
Organisers of next week's grass court tournament in Halle, Germany, in which Agassi is due to play, have been told his injured wrist is now free of pain.
Hemmings op: Former England off-spinner Eddie Hemmings has had a minor operation on his right knee to remove a piece of cartilage.
Hemmings, 44, who has taken 27 first-class wickets for Sussex this season, is doubtful for next week's championship match against Lancashire at Old Trafford.
Cash out: Former Wimbledon champion Pat Cash has decided not play in this year's championships.
The 28-year-old Australian, men's champion in 1987, has been sidelined with a knee injury since last September and has lost his fitness battle.
Sharp duo: Jamie Spence and Roger Chapman, once part-owners of a racehorse called ‘Pepper the Pin’, peppered their own kind of pin to be joint leaders at eight under par in the Honda Open in Hamburg today.
Spence shot a 66 today and Chapman a 68 for two round aggregates of 136.
Barnet joy: Barnet beat the Football League deadline set to guarantee the club's future and will play in Second Division next season, the League confirmed today.
‘Daffy’ is nothing but a trusted failure
THE selectors made a serious start to the job of digging English cricket out of its present hole by bringing four virtual newcomers to Old Trafford despite the resounding defeat.
I have to say first though, that this august body then let itself down with a bang before a ball had been bowled.
Mark Ilott was in the original 12, yet when Alan Igglesden broke down at practice the day before the match, they not only called up Phillip DeFreitas, they also played him in front of Ilott.
In doing this they have first cheapened the original process of selection which is made meaningless, and then, they shoved their heads firmly back into the sand.
I am afraid that DeFreitas is nothing more than an old, well-tried and trusted failure.
It would not need Sherlock Holmes to detect Graham Gooch's hand there.
My big fear after Old Trafford is that the selectors will again follow Gooch blind.
After scores of 65 and 133, I have no doubt that he will again raise his head above the parapet and express himself forcibly.
After the fiasco of the three one-day matches, I daresay he kept pretty quiet.
His inclination is always to go back to those he knows and feels comfortable with.
But this is no time for Yesterday's Men.
It was in Calcutta last January on a pitch a blind man could tell was going to allow the spinners to turn the ball square, that Gooch decided to play four seamers.
We all know what happened after that.
Now, he and his colleagues have turned their backs on Ian Salisbury's leg spin.
I was right about Shane Warne, wasn't I?
He was the match winner at Old Trafford and the selectors should once more be able to see the folly of their ways.
Sadly, as in India, when we are already one match down!
The most imperative need of all when it comes to Lord's where leg spinners often make their presence felt, is for England to have at least two left handers and to see how Warne gets on against them.
I shall write down David Gower's name in my sleep.
It was ironical that he should have made a magical 153 against Notts, while England's batsmen floundered at Old Trafford.
He plays spin well and is more likely to take Warne apart than anyone else.
Ah, but Yesterday's Man, I hear you cry.
Certainly, but I should hate you to forget that he has scored more runs in Test cricket than any other Englishman.
And tell me of a better left hander.
It's got to be Gower for Robin Smith.
I have lost count of the number of times I have read quotes from manager Keith Fletcher saying that he was impressed at the speed his batsmen learned to play spin in India.
As we saw at Old Trafford, there were quite a number who learned less than nothing and Smith was at the forefront of this group.
The second left hander I would bring in is a chap who scored a century against Australia in the Old Trafford Test in 1989.
His name is Jack Russell and he is also the best wicketkeeper in England.
Alec Stewart again showed he is nowhere near Test class as a keeper and at the moment, his batting is looking very ordinary.
I would also drop Tufnell, who was most disappointing in the First Test.
This was surprising because Peter Such bowled so well at the other end, it should surely have helped Tufnell.
Salisbury must take his place.
I begin to think that Mike Gatting may have lost it, but the Second Test is at Lord's, his home ground and I would give him one more chance.
I am most suspicious of Chris Lewis, who is still a dreadfully inconsistent performer and if he fails at Lord's, I would bring in another all-rounder.
Dermot Reeve maybe, but not Ian Terrence Botham, for his days are over as surely as Dr W. G. Grace's.
He would be Day Before Yesterday's Man!
Ted finds working a warming experience
By PETER GRANT
HE'S the best warm-up man in the business and yes, he's a Merseysider.
Ted Robbins, of the theatrical family which includes telly star Kate Robbins, is always there if an audience needs lightening up.
His roll call of sit-coms and quizzes range from This Is Your Life to Watching, Stars In Their Eyes, Last of The Summer Wine and The Krypton Factor.
Family Fortunes…his list of laughter duties goes on and on.
‘There used to be a stigma about warm-up men,’ says Ted.
‘But happily the days when people would say: ‘Oh, it's just the warm up man,’ have gone,’says Ted.
‘It is an art form.
There's a lot to it, you can't just go on and tell gags you have to take into account the type of show that will follow and the material that will work alongside it.’
Hard working Ted says he doesn't worry that his face isn't that well known even though he has been involved in most light entertainment shows on the box.
‘I've had my share of fame but it comes and goes,’ he says reflecting on his career from quiz show host to stand up comic.
‘It's good to be just one of a group of comedians doing warm up sometimes you do ten minutes one night I had to do six hours because things weren't ready.
‘In the end I ran out of material so I had to use a sketch devised by my son!
When he's not gee-ing up audiences, he says getting home to the Robbins residence near Rossendale Valley in Lancashire is the ideal time for this warm up man to cool off.
‘Saturday morning I am woken up by my children, Jack, three, and Molly, two, they are quite energetic so that stops any chance of a lie in when they start jumping up and down on my bed.
‘I'm sure they think I'm a bouncy castle.
‘I do love big breakfasts because we are not far from Bury and they make the best black puddings in the world, but I do want to stay healthy so my wife Judith makes sure I keep a very balanced diet.
‘I still love rugby so I will probably attempt to play a game.
I'm also a big fan of soccer Wrexham and Tranmere.
‘In the afternoon my wife likes to go out and look around car boot sales.
I DON'T so I stay in and play with the kids.
They have two guinea pigs now and we also all go out and look around the countryside to find interesting nature things.
Some times a whole period is spent looking at a ladybird.
‘Saturday night, if we're lucky, there might be a rare chance to go out.
We seldom venture out socially.
Our ideal night is to stay in.
I will do the cooking,’ he says.
‘Some weeks we will simply get a bottle of wine; have a meal and be in bed by 8.30pm watching a film.
Most people are ready to go out for the evening at that time,’ laughs Ted.
Programmes
‘Judith is also in show biz so the irony is that after years of getting home at three in the morning we'll get the kids to bed and then be in bed early on.
‘Friends ring us up and say: ‘What! you're in bed at this time!’ laughs Ted.
Sunday morning he gets all the newspapers.
I read them all because I work on so many different programmes with so many different people.
I see what they're up to.
‘Later on we often have friends around sometimes people I work with, colleagues.
‘I will cook a meal probably a Lancashire hot-pot.
’ At night we like to sit out and look at the views of the valley with a glass of wine.
‘Weekends are special to us because my working week can be turned around totally.
I could end up having my weekend on a Tuesday!’
For now Ted is concentrating on recording Des O'Connor's new game show called Pot of Gold and he's pleased that he's regarded as one of the best in the trade at warming up people.
‘But it's a good job, I think my bank managers agrees.
‘It's not like doing a series of stand up gags you have to make the audience not feel so nervous.
Some of them sitting there have probably never been in studio before.
‘I'm a link man to take their mind off the cameras and all that technical equipment.
To help them get in the laughing mood.’
ROBBINS NEST: Ted and wife Judith just love their Lancashire weekends
The Princess and the pooch
PRINCESS Alexandra toured a veterinary centre in Liverpool and met a very special pooch called Lassie O'Neill.
The nine year-old collie cross was one of several ‘patients’ introduced to Her Royal Highness during a visit to the Peoples' Dispensary for Sick Animals, Richmond Terrace, Liverpool.
Lassie, who has regular treatment for diabetes, appeared completely underwhelmed by the whole occasion.
The Princess, patron of the PDSA, talked to staff as she toured the centre, which provides affordable veterinary care to pet owners.
She last visited the site in 1979.
Earlier, the Princess unveiled a plaque at the recently-completed Field Lane Hostel for homeless men in Kirkby before visiting Acorn Venture Farm in Kirkby.
Royal approval…
Princess Alexandra meets Lassie the diabetic dog
Chris takes guard for a final chase
By Ken Matthews
AS The Milk Race cavalcade left Liverpool today, Chris Lillywhite looked to be heading for the Banana team's third race victory in four years.
But, with only 48 seconds separating the top nine riders overall after more than 1,000 miles' racing as they headed out through the Birkenhead tunnel, Lillywhite and his team-mates had to be on their guard in today's 85-mile penultimate stage to Salford Quays.
Lillywhite, from Walton-on-Thames, started the day with just 20 seconds to spare over Norway's Ole Simensen, who jumped from ninth to second place when he came in with a four-strong leading group in Liverpool City Centre.
Ireland's Conor Henry, last year's overall winner, went down in sixth place overall and looks likely to have to settle for a placing.
‘I think the threat from Henry is receding,’ said Lillywhite before the start of today's stage.
‘Simensen now looks a bigger danger, and we will need to watch every move during the last two days.’
Czech rider Daniel Kovar and Kazakhstan's Andrei Kivilev were in third and fourth place overall after Wednesday's breakaway, and Banana's second man Brian Smith was also ahead of Henry.
The Milk Race ends with a two-hour circuit race in the heart of Manchester's shopping area tomorrow.
When yesterday's stage 10 of 116 miles from Sheffield into Liverpool city centre ended with victory for Alexandre Nadobenko of the Kazakhstan team on the cobbled climb of William Brown Street, young Norwegian Simensen provided the closest overall challenge to Lillywhite.
But Lillywhite said: ‘My Banana squad and manager Keith Lambert give me confidence to hold on for two more stages.
‘My reward will be to give them the final yellow jersey in Manchester.’
Tributes were paid in Liverpool's major hotels last night by riders and officials.
They were delighted with the turnout of spectators and the general organisations by local authorities.
One notable official of the Milk Race team said: ‘Every time we come to Liverpool, we get a warm welcome and that is why we are keen to return.’
Down to business
SECOND round matches in the Liverpool Business Houses and Merseyside Tournaments for societies from industry and business must be completed by the end of this month.
Fixtures:
Business Houses: Grange ‘A’ v Lucas Aerospace or Littlewoods ‘B’; Edinburgh Park ‘A’or ‘B’v Hough Green or Plessey Mitres ‘B’; Netherton v Ford ‘C’; Manlin v Comsport; Quarry Green ‘B’v Queen of Martyrs; Plessey Mitres ‘A’v Sefton Sports; Huyton Quarry ‘B’or Quarry Green ‘A’v Wimpey; Taveners ‘A’or Littlewoods ‘A’v Vauxhall ‘A’.
Merseyside: Seagulls v Ford ‘B’; Manlin v Sefton Sports; Quarry Green ‘A’ v Huyton Quarry ‘B’; Plessey Mitres ‘B’or Postal Services v Comsport; Ford ‘D’v Plessey Mitres ‘A’; Edinburgh Park ‘B’v Quarry Green ‘B’; Netherton v Vauxhall ‘B’; Wimpey v Royal Insurance.
TOMORROW Merseyside golf extra
Ronnie seals snooker win
IN last night's second round matches in the Licat Top Team Snooker League Championship at Derby Lane, Civic Club of Birkenhead, the Wirral champions, beat the Warrington champions 3–1.
Three times winners Corals of Crosby had a 3–1 win over Cherryfield of Kirkby with Ronnie Croston clinching the match in the deciding fourth frame with a break of 38.
Gary Smith of Civic had the best session break with an opening 39.
The championship now continues on Monday when St. Christopher's, Speke, meet Aloysius of Huyton and Low House, St. Helens, play Southport champions, Southport SC.
Echo staff scoop the awards
LIVERPOOL Echo journalist Rachel Halliwell has scooped a double by winning the Feature Writer of the Year title in the North-West Newspaper Awards sponsored by BNFL.
It follows on from her success last year when she was Young Journalist of the Year.
Colleague Peter Grant is runner-up in the Feature Writer of the Year award.
Echo staff once again feature prominently in the awards.
Martin Birchall has picked up the Photographer of the Year award for the second time.
Picture editor Stephen Shakeshaft is involved in a family double.
Stephen is runner-up as Photographer of the Year, while his daughter Lucy from the Lancashire Evening Post is runner-up for the Young Journalist of the Year.
The Echo's sister paper the Daily Post also featured in the awards, with David Banks runner-up in the News Reporter of the Year section.
Rachel Halliwell Peter Grant Stephen Shakeshaft Martin Birchall
Mersey to host prestige international race meeting
BOATS SPEED IN FOR EURO-CLASH
By Echo reporter
POWERBOATS from around Europe are set to make a spectacular return to the Mersey.
Superpowered craft capable of surging across the water at 120mph will take part in a high speed challenge for the class two championship of Europe over the weekend of June 19–20.
And hopes are high that the river could soon be the venue for a powerboat world championship event.
Rob Yate, spokesman for New Brighton Power Boat and Ski Club's organising committee, said: ‘Britain has been awarded the four litre world championship next year but no venue has yet been decided.
‘We will be putting in our bid and we will pull out all the stops to get it here.’
New Brighton has been the setting for seven British championship events but next week's spectacle will be the first to feature European boats.
Powerboats bigger than anything seen on the Mersey will form part of the multi-national fleet which features drivers from Europe, America and all parts of Britain.
Despite cancellations from Norwegian and Swedish drivers because of boat damage suffered in a recent Italian race, a quality international field will vie for the European championship.
Rob said: ‘It is the biggest event we have handled in terms of prestige.
‘There will be a Euro commissioner from the sport's governing body present so we will all be on our toes to make sure everything goes off just right.’
The European championship will be run in two heats over the weekend and the Sunday racing will combine the British national championship for classes one, two, three and cruiser.
The powerboats will start arriving at Fort Perch Rock car park on Friday, June 18.
Mad about Minis
By Ray Kelly
MINI-MAD Merseysiders hope to turn the old squeeze-into-a-car record on its head next week.
The madcap motorists plan to see how many Minis they can squeeze on to a ferry.
The club is revving up a grand welcome for four-wheel fans from all over Britain.
Cram
Liverpool drivers will lead the way to a weekend festival celebrating the Mini in the Lake District next week.
They will try to cram as many Minis as possible on to the Lake Windermere ferry and see how many consecutive journeys they can make.
Mini owners from Scotland to the South Coast will make their way to Formby where a mass convoy of motorists will make the two hour drive to a campsite on Friday, June 18.
There will be a daylong jamboree, treasure hunt and barbecue on the Saturday.
On Sunday June 20, up to 80 Minis will take part in a specially planned 70-mile tour on roads around some of Britain's best scenery.
Mike Wildman is chairman of Mini-Mad Merseyside.
Convoy
He said: ‘We want to show the rest of the country just what Merseysiders can do.
‘We want as many Mini owners as possible to join the convoy, come for the weekend or just take part in the tour that Sunday.’
Anyone interested should telephone Mike Wildman on Formby 78528 or 31682.
Small object of desire…the new version of the Mini Cooper
Full steam ahead for Widnes ace Koloto
Emosi Koloto…given all-clear
By Nick Walker 005-000 08
EMOSI KOLOTO's career has been saved.
The giant Widnes forward was told to retire just before last month's Silk Cut Challenge Cup final because of a neck injury.
But he has been given the all-clear after an operation last week to remove a second disc from his neck.
Koloto said: ‘I never lost hope, even when I was told I would never play again.
I am just grateful this injury was not as bad as first feared.’
Chemics' manager Frank Myler said: ‘He could be playing as early as October.
The second operation has been a complete success.’
Widnes are looking into a plan in which last season's best player, Richard Eyres, will play in Canberra this summer.
Packman Eyres was suspended for six matches after the Wembley Cup final loss to Wigan and the Chemics want Eyres to sign for Mal Meninga's Raiders to reduce the ban he must serve at the start of the next English season.
MARTIN OFFIAH prepared to return home today with a serious shoulder injury and said he was unlikely to play club rugby in Australia again.
Offiah played only 54 minutes for the Eastern Suburbs club before suffering the injury in his debut match two weeks ago.
He underwent exploratory surgery last week.
His three-year contract with Wigan only allows him one season abroad and he does not believe Britain's champion team will permit him to play club football in Australia again.
‘I've been playing throughout the year for the past six years and I think my body is telling me it is time for a break,’ he said.
Uproar as man of 62 is remanded
By Val Woan
UPROAR broke out in a Liverpool courtroom after a 62year-old man was remanded in custody on an alleged drug plot charge.
Relatives of Peter Williams began shouting and hurling abuse after magistrates refused to grant bail.
Extra police were called to quell the disturbance.
The trouble came at the end of a six-hour hearing at the Liverpool Magistrates' Court yesterday which followed arrests in the Kirkdake area on Wednesday.
Eight men and a 16-year-old are charged with conspiracy to supply heroin.
A 21-year-old woman is charged with benefiting from the proceeds of drugs and assisting in the laundering of £10,000.
The defendants are: Steven Burns, 21, of Oakleigh, Tuebrook; Roy Crumlin, 26, of Harcourt Street, Walton; Kevin Earley, 25, of Raymond Place, Kirkdale; Ronald Lacy, 25, of Delamore Street, Walton; Brian Williams, 21, of Titchfield Street, Kirkdale; Peter Williams Snr, 62, of Athol Street, Kirkdale; Peter Williams Jnr, 25, of Athol Street, Kirkdale; Robert Williams, 19, of Athol Street, Kirkdale; Catherine Devine, 21, of Twomey Close, Kirkdale, and the youth, also from Kirkdale.
All were remanded in custody until next Wednesday.
Stranded…a driver pushes his marooned car in Llandudno today.
Picture: Jeff Pitt
Dutch star Ruud Gullit is negotiating a move to German league runners-up Bayern Munich after deciding to leave AC Milan, according to Italian newspaper reports today.
Rockin' was great!
I AM writing in response to the recent review in the Echo by Lew Baxter of ‘Good Rockin' Tonite’ at the Liverpool Empire.
I can't believe the review is of the same show I saw.
It was a magical evening of pure nostalgia enjoyed by an audience from nine to 90 years of age.
The musical numbers were excellently performed by an extremely talented cast.
The standing ovation by the audience at the end for P.J. Proby and cast spoke for itself!
(Not to mention the audience up dancing!).
Maureen Craig, Childwall.
Hall's run haul
CHESHIRE won their first National Cricket Association County Championship match when they beat Lancashire by 42 runs at Milnrow yesterday to give themselves a chance of winning the North West group.
Cheshire scored 185 with 66 from Andy Hall, then bowled Lancashire out for 143.
In a representative match at Cheadle Hulme, Cheshire County League over-40s beat Cheshire over-50s by 74 runs.
Scores: County League 223–4 Cheshire 149–4.
Water torture…a dinghy floats down a flooded street today in one of the areas of Llandudno where water has been slow to disappear
Yours truly
IT'S wonderful how people sign off their letters.
In Waves we've had them all from ‘yours thankingly’ to ‘up yours.’
But one came to our attention this week from a Pest Control company: ENTOMOLOGICALLY YOURS…
Jokers wild with Lois and Denny
IT'S a laugh a minute when Lois Waters gets together with her dad, Denny.
Last year, Lois even outdid Ken Dodd and Freddie Starr by winning the comedy section of the annual Whitbread Scouseology Awards, which are sponsored by the Echo.
And she was only nine at the time!
Now a mature 10-year-old, Lois, from Aintree, says: ‘I don't think I would be doing comedy if it wasn't for my dad.’
For Denny has been on the local comedy circuit for nearly a decade and was a runner-up in the Scouseology Awards two years ago.
Lois adds: ‘Dad's been a great help to me.
He's given me a few jokes but only ones he used a long time ago!’
Denny says he wanted something gold for
Father's Day, so Lois bought him a fish.
But, seriously folks, he adds: ‘I'm very proud of her.
I think she's got a gift and hopefully she will carry on making people laugh.’
His witty daughter, who attends Gwladys Street Primary School in the shadow of Everton's Goodison Park, says: ‘I'll buy him a nice present and we'll have a little tea party for him.
After all, he is the best dad in the world!’
THE BEST: Denny with daughter Lois
Nerurkar's marathon challenge
RICHARD NERURKAR was yesterday selected to spearhead Britain's challenge in the World Marathon Cup following his winning debut over the distance last month.
Bingley's Olympic 10,000 metres man will lead a five-strong men's team in San Sebastian, Spain, on October 31 and hopes to improve on his excellent victory in 2hrs 10mins 57secs in Hamburg.
Team — Men: D Buzza (Cornwall), A Green (Warrington), K McCluskey (Copeland), R Nerurkar (Bingley), P Fleming (Wolverhampton).
Women: G Horovitz (Aldershot), K Cornwall (North Shields Poly), D Sanderson (Watford), B Walker (Western IOM), L Harding (Houghton-le-Spring)
Barnet get the all-clear by Rob Beasley
BARNET escaped expulsion from the Football League yesterday but the reprieve may prove only temporary if their financial difficulties continue.
The debt-ridden division two side met an 11am league deadline to confirm that they would be able to fulfil their fixtures next season.
But the club, which owes at least £1.3 million to creditors, will remain under close scrutiny by league bosses despite yesterday's assurances.
League president Gordon McKeag said: ‘A response was received from Barnet to confirm that they will be able to honour their commitments to the Football League and, for the moment, we will have to accept that.’
Sanctions
Speaking at the league's annual meeting in Walsall, McKeag added: ‘There was very little detail involved and we are not in a position to investigate in detail a club's financial situation nor would we be able to impose any sanctions against a club which was not in breach of regulations.
Barnet are not in any such situation.
‘But I can assure you that the last thing the Football League wants is a repeat of the Maidstone situation where a club struggles through the summer to a new season and then folds.
Barnet players have not been paid by the club for the past three weeks and, although the Professional Footballers’ Association have moved in to pick up the £30,000 tab, £80,000 in promotion bonuses remains unpaid.
The Barnet crisis dominated yesterday's meeting although their problems were not even on the agenda.
Away from the problems at Underhill, club chairmen gave the go-ahead for the launch of a fund to help finance ground redevelopment and aid clubs to comply with the Taylor Report.
The cash will be raised by a 5% levy on all transfer fees and a 10% levy on clubs' bonus payments the cash received at the end of each season relating to where teams' finish in the final league tables.
The league have also agreed that there will be three substitutes next season, including a recognised goalkeeper, that both sides will take to the pitch together before kick-off and clubs will have the option of putting players names on the back of their shirts.
And to protect their lucrative link-up with the pools companies, the League have agreed that clubs will no longer have the option of moving Saturday games except for television or policing purposes.
JET PROPELLED
WE reveal Paul Cooper, a member of The Bootleg Beatles, is going solo…for a one off show in Liverpool.
Fans of the Fab Four of the 90s need not fret (guitar pun there), the band are looking forward to their date at the Empire in August.
And fans of the Paul McCartney sound-a-like have his mum Mrs Cooper to thank for the one-off show.
‘Me mum said I should do a show concentrating on Paul's work,’ says Paul (left).
So here it is
Already, the show which arrives at the Royal Court on June 24, has gone down very well at Universities.
‘We've a brass section and sample strings.
The Wings over America tour is our inspiration.
The fans love it when we do JET.’
Cash from f the concert, called Broken Wings, will go to Paul McCartney's LIPA school.
CAN you tell me what nationality Mel Gibson is?
I say he's Australian, but a friend of mine says he's American.
Mel Gibson was born in America in 1956, but at the age of 12 emigrated with his family to Australia.
Young swimmers splash out!
PLEASE SEND HEAD TO PROCESS FOR BLACK ON TONE, ACROSS 3 COLUMNS, TYPE CENTRED, FOR ECHO SATURDAY, FIRST EDITION, PAGE 38.
THANKS.
Young members of Prescot Swimming club gather round Stephen Orford, a member of the British Wheelchair basketball team, after presenting him with a cheque for £750 on behalf of the British Wheelchair Sports Foundation.
The youngsters took part in an arduous sponsored swim to raise the cash.
Church hall
A NEW church/community hall planned at Llanfair Caereinion is estimated to cost £65,000.
Top marks
ADRIAN Maher, who teaches at Ysgol Uwchradd Tywyn, has been awarded Rotary International's Paul Harris Fellowship in recognition of his outstanding service to the youth of the Tywyn area.
Cash appeal
THE British Red Cross in Powys are seeking grant aid from Powys County Council to provide a holiday for 12 physically and mentally handicapped children at a total cost of £1,505.
‘Cowboy’ alert A WARNING has been issued by Dyfed's trading standards department about itinerant tarmac and building contractor gangs who charge inflated prices.
Pet subject
THE Newtown and District Cats Protection League is to raise £120 as a matter of urgency to pay for a specialist incubator to care for tiny kittens being regularly abandoned in the area.
Hockey star is the top personality
A YOUNG Welsh international hockey player has been named Wrexham Maelor District Sports Council sports personality of the year.
Rachel Thomas, 16, is a member of Wrexham Ladies Hockey Club and captain of its under-19s team.
Last year she became the youngest player ever to represent Wales.
Culture fear
WREXHAM and District Association for the Arts is to hold a meeting at the town's library on June 24 to discuss the impact the restructuring of local government will have on arts, culture and recreation locally.
On show
THE Chippendales American all-male revue show is to make its only North Wales appearances at Plas Madoc leisure centre, Acrefair, Wrexham, on Sept 17 and 18.
Doubles
Caroline Welsh Open
Tennis review
FORMER Welsh international Caroline Hughes of Llandegla, booked her place in the semi-final of the mixed doubles in partnership with Ian Preston at the North Wales Open Tennis championships in Prestatyn yesterday.
Talented Hughes and ex-North Wales county team member Preston from Prestatyn were too strong for professional coach Arwyn Pierce of Ruthin and his young partner Danielle Morris Jones of Rhyl, running out straight set winners at a cost of six games.
Rousing win
Welsh international Vicki Broadbent of Mold,.
just home from her studies at college in California, teamed up with Welsh junior champion Claire Bennett, also of Mold, to go through to the last four of the women's doubles.
They forfeited only one game in their rousing win while sisters Jane Thomas and Gail Richards of Rhyl made it a family affair, beating Joanne Attwood and Lara Hill of Mold in three tough sets.
The finals will take place today.
Results:-Women's doubles: Claire Bennett and Vicki Broadbent (Mold) beat Viv Spencer (Prestatyn) and Joan James (Penrhyn Bay) 6–0, 6–1; Jane Thomas and Gail Richards (Rhyl) beat Joanna Attwood and Lara Hill (Mold) 4–6, 6–3, 6–4; Vanessa Brown (Prestatyn) and Kate Ridler (Mold) beating Gay Waring and Mavis Collier (Rhyl) 6–0, 6–2.
Builth are boosted by Wall by John Bridgwater
FORMER Breconshire skipper Rob Wall makes his comeback for Builth Wells in today's Multi-signs Marches League clash at home to Burghill.
The experienced Wall, an accurate seam bowler, comes in for only his second league game of the season after suffering a back injury.
Second team bowler Robert Powell is also called up as Builth look to halt their recent decline.
Knighton recall batsman Alan Williams and bowler Doug Williams for the trip to Bromyard while captain Dave Lisvesly returns to lead the second team at home to Bromyard seconds.
Llandrindod are without opening batsman Andy Bradshaw for the outing to in-form Moccas in the Hereford and District League.
Brian Hill (right) presents a special award to three times president Doug Allen
WICKET-KEEPER Dai Rudge returns for Aberystwyth who entertain Talybont in the West Wales Conference premier division today.
Rudge was rested for last Sunday's Welsh Cup defeat against Pontblyddyn to accommodate another bowler.
Experienced Richie Jenkins is one of three all-rounders called up by Talybont who also include Andy Ackroyd and student Ashad Malik.
The two sides will also be meeting again at the same venue tomorrow in the first round of the Augustus Barnet Cup.
Stepping back
Rhayader are without skipper Phil Woosnam for the league encounter with UCW Commoners while Meyrick Marshall is doubtful following a knee injury.
Wicket-keeper/batsman Bernie Jones is called up while the Commoners are without the services of batsman John Chisholm.
Skipper and all-rounder Martin Jones returns for Tregaron's home clash with Aberaeron Seconds in the reserve division.
Tregaron are also strengthened by the return of medium pacer Barri Williams, while batsman Alun Hateley also steps back into the side.
Brynamlwg hope that student's Dominic Farr and Vijen Patel can bolster the batting against visitors Gwerinwyr while spinner Khabar Abbas also gets a chance to impress.
Aberystwyth: N Williams, A Barley, A Price, A Varley, G Lewis, A Pearson, D W Jones, M Francis, A Evans, D Rudge, S Varley.
Talybont: B Matthews, S Ll Williams, J Roberts, N Farmary, G Jenkins, G Roberts, A Jones, A Malik, A Singh, A Ackroyd, A R Jenkins.
Rhayader (from): D McPhee, N Bennett, C Unsworth, P Behan, J Williams, O Evans, T Harvey, P Ireland, D Boyce, B Jones, R Price, A Lewis, I McPhee, M Marshall.
UCW Commoners: D Gwilliam, C Ribchester, P Reynolds, N Chisholm, R Moore-Collyer, W Edwards, O Hides, I Phillips, P Clifton, B Edwards, T Woods.
Brynamlwg: B Darley, B Ashton, V Maharajh, I Ellis, D Farr, B Williams, V Patel, G Whadcock, K Abbas, E Jenkins, G Edwards.
Tregaron (from): M Jones, J Edwards, A Jones, C Rimmer, W Evans, J Evans, A McConachie, B Williams, A R Davies, G Davies, A Hateley, A Morgan.
AMBITIOUS Wolves have made a bid for Crystal Palace and England midfielder Geoff Thomas.
The offer is believed to be worth well over £1 million, though the Midlands club will face competition from big Premier League clubs.
Thomas, 28, was at Molineux for talks earlier this week and seems likely to leave Palace in the wake of their relegation.
Wolves yesterday signed Newcastle striker David Kelly for £750,000 and have an estimated £3 million available for new players.
JOHN BRISTOW and Alan Owen turned in a consistent display to win the J S Williams Trophy at the Welshpool Golf Club two-day event.
The pair finished with a score of 62 nett to claim second spot in the four ball better ball while they won the foursomes with a final nett 66 total.
Results:-Four ball better ball: 1.
Brian Williams and Mark Jones (nett
60), 2.
John Bristow and Alan (62 nett).
Foursomes: 1.
Bristow and Owen (66), 2.
Mike Kendall and Lee Rooke (66), 3, Alan and Barry Marshal-Unit (69).
Double delight
ADAM RUCKWOOD raced to a British 200 metres backstroke record in Sheffield yesterday.
But as far as the Birmingham 18-year-old was concerned, securing his place in Britain's European championship squad was more important either than the record or his victory in the Mycil ASA national championship final.
‘I'm just delighted to make the team.
The record is a bit of a bonus,’ said Ruckwood, whose time of two minutes 01.90 seconds cut 0.68 of a second off Matthew O'Connor's mark.
Mike Fibbins, who like Ruckwood was unable to produce his best at the Barcelona Olympics, also bounced back with victory in the 50 metres freestyle.
Father and son team up to take on top-dogs Quay
Halkyn's Clubbe class
HALKYN'S father and son combination will be spearheading their bid to topple Connah's Quay off their top of the table perch in today's Bass North Wales League division one match at Pant Newydd.
All-rounder Charles Clubbe Senior is one of the oldest players in the league his true age is top secret but he has already taken 23 wickets this season.
Clubbe's 18-year-old son, Charles Junior, is a highly promising batsman and last Sunday he hit a brilliant 123 his maiden century to steer Flintshire Colts to victory over Caernarvonshire in the North Wales County championship.
Young Charles is one of several up and coming teenagers in the Halkyn team along with Gareth Jacobs and Gareth Thomas, while there are a few others in the second eleven hoping for a first team chance.
Jacobs, captain of Flintshire Colts, is ruled out of today's match because of his university studies.
But after last Saturday's impressive win at high-flying Shotton which broke their duck, Halkyn are feeling more confident of facing leaders Connah's Quay.
Too powerful
Gresford, two points below the Quay men in second place, entertain champions Pontblyddyn who returned to winning ways last week after a dismal spell.
Third placed Hawarden Park should be too powerful at home for bottom of the table Chirk.
And dark horses Llay will be looking to continue their steady progress of recent weeks with a win over Bersham at The Ring.
THE Amateur Boxing Association has received a boost following the Sports Council's decision to restore a grant worth more than £100,000.
The future of the ABA was threatened last year when the Council withdrew funding, insisting that the boxing organisation needed to change the way it managed its affairs.
In February the Council stopped paying the £108,000- a-year grant to the ABA because of growing concern over the stability of the organisation.
The Council claimed that the 112-year-old ABA had failed to try to reduce expenditure or increase income sufficiently.
But in a statement yesterday,
Derek Casey, the Council's director of national services, said: ‘A six-man emergency committee has since been set up by the ABA and major changes and re-structuring, which we think are absolutely essential for the future of amateur boxing, are now being made.
‘On that basis the Council has concluded that it is reasonable to start paying the grant again.
‘However, we will continue to monitor the association very closely and will meet regularly with the ABA.
‘Grant aid, which will now be paid monthly rather than quarterly, will be subject to continuing demonstration of sound financial management.’
Lillywhite poised for Race triumph
THE scene is set for Britain's Chris Lillywhite of the Banana professional team to clinch overall victory in the 1993 Milk Race this afternoon.
Lillywhite has only to survive 50 more miles round a city centre circuit in Manchester to don the final Yellow Jersey.
He finished sixth in yesterday's stage eleven, 86 miles from Liverpool's Kings Dock to Salford Quays, as 76 riders came within 30 seconds of winner Jacek Minckiewicz of Poland.
Lillywhite starts today's final stage 20 seconds ahead of young Norwegian rider Ole Simensen who was in a crash yesterday and taken to hospital for attention to minor injuries.
Hall paceman Karl faces cup KO blow
Report by Mike McEvoy
NORTHOP HALL, chasing glory in the Rothmans National Village Knockout Competition, could go into tomorrow's tough fourth round game at Christleton without star bowler Karl Peers.
The experienced paceman sustained a hamstring injury in last Saturday's Commercial Union Competition defeat at Marchweil and faces a late fitness test to decide his fate.
The ambitious Hall, famed cup specialists, are still involved in both the Rothmans and the Welsh Knockout Cups and need the talents of County choice Peers to keep them on track for the double.
On a high
Peers may also miss today's Competition game against Mochdre, but the skills of Darren Peters and all-rounder Kevin Owen could still earn them the points needed to keep them in touch with the pacemakers.
Champions Marchwiel, heading the table again by a point, expect to be unchanged for their visit to Mold who are on a high after two welcome wins last weekend.
Prolific wicket taker Nigel Morris and high scoring Brian Williams carry full strength Mold hopes of taming Steve Craweley's formidable side.
Bangor, beaten for the first time last week, will be keen to bounce back to winning ways by seeing off Ruthin, who welcome back bowler Owen Hughes following a finger injury.
Young batting ace Arran Roberts is still doubtful following a leg operation while Hefin Lewis and Quasim Ijaz are Bangor's danger men.
Prestatyn, poised to snatch top spot should Marchwiel and Bangor slip up, have named an unchanged line-up for their derby date with St Asaph.
Bottom of the table Wrexham travel to Buckley with both teams looking for their first win of the season.
Testing
Jameie Geekie, Buckley's key bowler, and Colin Evans, their young batting hope are both ruled out due to A level studies and that will improve the chances for Chris Lloyd's Wrexham side, who are in need of a success after falling 19 points behind.
Brymbo will be without county player John Shone for the testing home game against Colwyn Bay, but Hull University student Nick Jones could be home to fill the gap.
Colwyn skipper Alistair Kitman has pinned up an unchanged side after two solid wins last weekend.
FITNESS DOUBT: Karl Peers is a major worry for Northop Hall
ISLE OF MAN TT: FOG prevented the Isle of Man senior TT race going ahead yesterday.
The race was postponed until 10am today because visibility on the 37-mile Mountain Course fell to 20 yards between Guthries and Verandah.
It is the first time since 1987 that the race has been held over onto the standby day.
Caernarfon hit by Barnes-storm
CAERNARFONSHIRE'S plan to include a New Zealand all-rounder in their team this weekend has been put on hold.
The North Wales Cricket Association insist on having Aaron Barnes's credentials confirmed in writing so that they can rule on his amateur status.
The 21-year-old who bats number three and bowls medium pace plays for Llandudno and Caernarfonshire want him to strengthen their line-up for tomorrow's North Wales County Championship derby clash with Anglesey at Bethesda.
But Association officials, notably chairman Haynes Formstone, say they need the be given written proof that Barnes is not a professional before they will sanction his inclusion.
Caernarfonshire captain Dave Wallace said Llandudno had not engaged Barnes as a professional and did not pay him for playing.
Llandudno had merely assisted with funding his flight to this country and helped to get him a job in the locality.
Wallace said: ‘We insist that Aaron is a bone fide player, just like all the rest of us, and we are determined to have him in our team.’
Meanwhile, the Association is demanding written proof of Barnes' status both in this country and New Zealand.
Whatever the outcome of the Barnes issue, Caernarfonshire are certain to give another foreign player his debut Bangor's Pakistani all-rounder Quasim Ijaz.
Anglesey meanwhile, have two debutantes in their line-up one of them the first RAF Valley player to be selected for a decade.
The county call-up goes to Steve Lewis, a left hand batsman and wicket keeper who has recently been transferred to the island station.
Also selected for the first time is batsman Mohsin Chohan, who plays for the Bangor club and has appeared for Caernarfonshire in the past.
He has opted for the island county this time qualifying under the residential rule which also applies to captain Mark Harris, who has switched clubs from Menai Bridge to Bangor but stays on for his fourth campaign in charge.
Caernarfonshire:David Wallace (capt)(St Asaph), Hefyn Lewis, Colin Meek, Andy Williams, Quasim Ijaz (Bangor), Euryn Owen, Kevin Williams, Dewi Roberts, Richard Owen (Bethesda), Neil Williams (Pwllheli), Aaron Barnes (Llandudno).
Anglesey: Mark Harris (capt), Mohsin Chohan (Bangor), Mark Jones (Menai Bridge), Paul Jones, Anthony Jones (Anglesey Aluminium), Celfyn Jones, Huw Redvers Jones Dewi Redvers-Jones, Mike Davies, Barry Lander (Llangefni), Steve Lewis (RAF Valley).
Merioneth, wooden spoonists in last season's competition, are having to delay announcing their team to visit reigning champions Denbighshire at Gwersyllt.
Several regular players who have been away this week for work and holiday reasons need to be contacted so making the selection a last minute exercise.
MOHSIN CHOHAN:
Anglesey debut
MOTOR RACING: DAMON HILL is aiming for his first Grand Prix win in the Canadian Grand Prix this weekend.
The 32-year-old, second behind Ayrton Senna in Monaco, knows he has a better chance of glory in Montreal.
He drove here last year with Brabham and the track should suit his Renault V10-powered Canon Williams car.
Band's trophy haul
THE dedication of Scouts and Guides from the Rhyl area has brought them a clutch of awards.
The Rhyl Scout and Guide Band won five trophies in a national competition in Manchester.
The 28-strong band won the bell-lyre and woodwind sections and their drill was judged the best.
They were named the best Scout and Guide band and took the main award for the best band overall.
Trial by video nails pal!
BRITISH LIONS stand-off Stuart Barnes was ruled out of first Test contention in New Zealand this morning by the intervention of his half-back partner Robert Jones.
Barnes's bid for a Test place against the All Blacks in Christchurch was ended abruptly in Invercargill on Tuesday, when the two half-backs were involved in a ruck.
‘I was on the ground and Robert came running over me and accidentally gashed my head with his boot,’ said Barnes.
‘It's only since we saw the video that we found out whose boot it was.
I have given him some heavy sarcasm about it.’
Barnes, 30, added: ‘I knew fairly soon that I was out of the Test match and now I am struggling to be fit for the Taranaki game on Wednesday.
It needed 12 stitches, big ones, and three injections and it hurts.
‘It's ironic that it should be a colleague who caused the wound, because I have now toured New Zealand three times and watched their style of rucking.
‘In 1985 the England team got plenty of studs in their backs and shoulders.
So did the England B team here last year and there have been some rakings on this tour.
‘You accept that.
That is the New Zealand style.
If you get in the wrong part of a ruck and they think you are stopping them getting the ball, you get raked.
You don't come here if you don't want to face that.
‘What no-one condones is raking the head and we just still can't accept what happened to Victor Ubogu on the B tour last year when his ear was almost sliced away from his head.’
TRAGIC IRONY:
Stuart Barnes
Challenge wins support
ORGANISERS of a new ‘Krypton Factor’ type event in Gwynedd are hoping it will become an annual feature.
They say the first-ever Friars TSB Team Challenge in Bangor on July 3 is already attracting lots of support.
The Challenge, planned by the Parent Teacher Association at the city's Ysgol Friars, is aimed at promoting community and commercial relationships with the school
Bangor's biggest.
PTA spokesman Gerry Lynch predicted it would be a spectacular event, involving teams from all over the area.
Giants set to sign up for showdown
LENNOX LEWIS against Frank Bruno Britain's biggest and richest fight in history looks like being finalised in New York later this month.
Bruno's promoter Mickey Duff is ‘hopeful’ the eagerly-awaited WBC heavyweight title showdown will be signed up on around June 25–26 after talks with Lewis's American promoter Dan Duva.
The champion's manager, Frank Maloney, was more definite about the clash of British muscle, insisting the fight was ‘confirmed’ for September 25, probably at Cardiff Arms Park.
And the master plan is for Lewis to make a third defence of his title against American Tommy Morrison in Las Vegas in the third week of February.
Maloney and Duva are presently having talks with Morrison's promoter Bob Arum and manager Bill Cayton about the new WBO champion appearing on the Cardiff bill.
Morrison would attract major income from the American television paymasters.
‘It's been confirmed that Lewis's next fight will be against Bruno,’ said Maloney.
Wide off mark
‘It will be on September 25 and the likely place is Cardiff.
I shall be flying out to New York to finalise contracts with Duva and Duff.
‘Lewis-Bruno has been spoken of as a fight which will gross £18 million, but that's wide of the mark.
I think it's unlikely to gross £8 million.
‘But it's a fight all Britain wants and deserves and we are delivering it.
I believe it will be the greatest moment in British sporting history two Brits fighting for the world heavyweight title.
‘It will make up for the dismal showing of the England football and cricket teams, lift some of the sporting gloom.
‘If Graham Taylor wants to learn how to be a manager, tell him to come and see me.’
Duff replied: ‘Lewis's people have confirmed their readiness to fight Bruno, but we have not finalised terms yet.
‘We have to agree on my involvement in the promotion.
I will be meeting with Duva and hopefully things will be finalised.’
Duff will thus be on dual business in the United States in a fortnight's time.
His former world welterweight title holder, Lloyd Honeyghan, is fighting exWBA champion Vinnie Pazienza on the Evander Holyfield-Alex Stewart undercard in Atlantic City on Saturday week.
WAITING IN THE WINGS: Lennox Lewis (above) could at last face Frank Bruno in September
Home alone
BRITAIN Rugby League international winger Martin Offiah prepared to return home with a serious shoulder injury yesterday, admitting that he was unlikely to play club rugby in Australia again.
Offiah played only 54 minutes for the Eastern Suburbs club before suffering the injury in his debut match two weeks ago.
He underwent exploratory surgery last week.
His three-year contract with Wigan only allows him one season abroad and he does not believe Britain's champion team will permit him to play club football in Australia again.
‘I've been playing throughout the year for the past six years and I think my body is telling me it is time for a break,’ he said.
‘Also, after this injury, I doubt very much whether Wigan will even consider releasing me to come down here again.’
Offiah is returning to England for a shoulder reconstruction operation.
CRICKET Sunday — AXA Equity & Law League (1 day): Basingstoke: Hampshire v Kent; Chesterfield: Derbyshire v Yorkshire; Gateshead Fell: Durham v Middlesex; Hove: Sussex v Northamptonshire; Old Trafford: Lancashire v Essex; The Oval: Surrey v Glamorgan; Worcester: Worcestershire v Leicestershire
Anxious Atherton
by Simon Wilson
LANCASHIRE opener Mike Atherton will learn his Ashes fate first hand from Graham Gooch tomorrow.
Gooch and the England selectors meet in Manchester to choose their squad for the second Test at Lord's, and Atherton's place as Gooch's opening partner is one of those up for discussion.
But the signs are that the Essex skipper will give Atherton good news before leading his side against Lancashire in their Sunday League clash.
Although Atherton failed to reach 30 in England's first Test defeat at Old Trafford, he and Gooch improved their record as one of the best opening partnerships in English history with stands of 71 and 73.
Candidates
And England manager Keith Fletcher has hinted that the batting line-up for Lord's will show little change, despite their collective failure to support Gooch's rearguard action at Old Trafford.
Possible candidates for Atherton's place are Somerset youngster Mark Lathwell and England vice-captain Alec Stewart, who could move up the order to open if Jack Russell was recalled as wicketkeeper.
But the selectors are more likely to make a change in the middle order and even that seems doubtful after David Gower, the number one candidate, was ruled out of Hampshire's current championship game against Kent with a cracked rib.
Phil DeFreitas, Lancashire's other representative in the first Test, also faces a nervous wait, after leapfrogging Essex leftarmer Mark Ilott to play at Old Trafford when Alan Igglesden pulled out injured.
All rounder Mike Watkinson is out of Lancashire's Sunday League game against Essex with a broken finger.
Ian Austin, a hero in Tuesday's B&H Cup semi final win at Leicester but dropped for the championship match against Essex, returns to the side.
Yesterday's play in the championship game was washed out, so Essex resumed this morning on 37–1, with Graham Gooch unbeaten on 23, in reply to Lancashire's 321.
By Andrew Stevens Business Correspondent
ticket-Souness
The£30m man
MONEY may not buy you love, but don't tell Graeme Souness it can't buy you soccer success.
The man Bob Paisley said would have ‘tossed up for kick-off with a Gold Card’ can lay unopposed claim to being the biggest wheeler-dealer manager in British football history.
Time and again as boss of Rangers and Liverpool, Souness has smashed the million-pound barrier to sign players.
The spending of rivals like Kenny Dalglish, Alex Ferguson and Ron Atkinson pales into insignificance alongside the Souness transfer balance sheet.
Incredible
His latest capture of Nigel Clough is likely to cost Liverpool around £2m.
And when the deal is completed it will send Souness's spending on players in seven years as a manager through the £30m mark to an incredible £31.5m.
The Liverpool chief has also recouped £16.4m in sales, leaving his overall dealings standing at a staggering £47.9m.
Clough, in fact, will become the 13th player Souness has purchased for £1m or more since he took over at Rangers in April 1986.
At Ibrox, his million-pound men were Richard Gough (£1.1m from Spurs), Gary Stevens (£1m from Everton), Trevor Steven (£1.6m from Everton), Maurice Johnston (£1m from Nantes), Mark Hateley (£1m from Monaco) and Oleg Kuznetsov (£1.2m from Dinamo Kiev).
Philosophical
At Anfield, he has bought Dean Saunders (£2.9m from Derby County), Mark Wright (£2.2m from Derby), Mark Walters (£1.25m from Rangers), Michael Thomas (£1.5m from Arsenal), David James (£1.1 from Watford), Paul Stewart (£2.2m from Spurs) and Clough (an expected £2m from Nottingham Forest).
But the man himself is philosophical about his philanthropy.
Says Souness: ‘That's the price of the ticket.
‘I think big clubs will always have to compete to stay at the top and these prices show the way the transfer market has gone.
‘If you look at what is likely to happen this summer with Les Ferdinand valued at £5m by Queens Park Rangers and Roy Keane expected to cost £4m, that's £9m for two players.
‘Kenny Dalglish could buy them both in a week with the money I've spent in a couple of years on a rebuilding job.
‘I feel very positive about the signing of Nigel Clough
I think he will be a really good addition to our squad.’
He is naturally quick to stress that while he has undoubtedly bought big, he has ‘sold big’ as well.
And one of his main traits is that he's never been slow to admit he's made a mistake in the transfer market.
At Rangers, players like Colin West, Trevor Francis and Mark Falco didn't last long while Mel Sterland was sold at a profit after only three months!
Then, at Liverpool, there was the controversial decision to off-load Dean Saunders, once a £2.9m British record buy, to Aston Villa last September.
Paraded
Says Souness: ‘I think you realise quite quickly if someone is not suited to playing for you or your club then you do what you have to do.’
Stories of Souness's transfer dealings abound.
One English League boss was once asked, apparently, what it was like doing business with the Liverpool manager.
‘Great,’ he said.
‘I thought of a fee and he doubled it!’
MR MONEYBAGS: The purchase of Nigel Clough will take Graeme Souness' spending since he stepped into management past the £30m mark
By Peter Jardine
GRAEME SOUNESS gets more signings right than he gets wrong.
That's the view of the man who signed many of the cheques during Souness's reign at Rangers.
David Murray became chairman at Ibrox in 1988 and, asked about the Liverpool manager's record in the transfer market, said: ‘Sure Graeme has spent a lot of cash but he's sold well as well.
‘It's all about batting averages.
I think on balance he gets more right than he gets wrong.
‘When he first came to Rangers there was a lot of dead-wood that needed to be sold.
We needed the Terry Butchers and the Richard Goughs and we are still reaping the rewards of his signings now.
‘There was no youth policy here then so Graeme had to go out and buy players.
That side has improved and in real terms we haven't had to spend much in the past two or three years.
‘He is spending big at Liverpool again but when you operate at the top end of the market prices will always be high.’
TERRY BUTCHER
Prost boost
FRENCHMAN Alain Prost took provisional pole position for Sunday's Canadian Grand Prix in the opening qualifying session in Montreal yesterday.
The Williams driver clocked 1 minute 18.98 seconds ahead of teammate, Britain's Damon Hill (1:19.49) with German Michael Schumacher third in a Benetton in 1:20.80.
Italian Riccardo Patrese, in the second Benetton, was fourth fastest while Britain's Martin Brundle clocked seventh place in a Ligier.
But three-times world champion Ayrton Senna could finish only eighth fastest in his McLaren.
NAUGHTY greetings cards are a way of life these days.
As sense of humour and what is regarded as acceptable changes, traditional cards, liberally sprinkled with glitter and sugary prose, take a back seat as titillating varieties, sometimes extremely rude, find increasing space on the shelves.
Spiralling this type of greeting to new limits is a Warrington firm, which is not afraid to thrill and shock with its specialised range of well-illustrated funnies.
Kamrok Greetings is the brainchild of Alan Oliver, alias ‘Odious Oswald’, owner of the company and poet extraordinaire who pens the verses, which are capably illustrated by cartoonist Tim Leatherbarrow.
Such is the demand for Kamrock's outrageous wares that they sold one million cards in the first year of business no mean feat since the company was not cracking ribs until 1991.
No unmentionable topic is spared and fun is liberally poked at everyday events in Kamrok's continuous search to keep customers rocking in the aisles.
Laughter
Punters are responding despite the health warning on their products that ‘Kamrok cards can cause serious laughter.’
Cards cover everyday events as well as the usual Christmas, Birthday and Valentine varieties.
Complimenting the card range are monster badges and mugs, sporting equally funny verses.
Capturing the imagination of the card-buying public has pushed the Helsby based company into what it modestly describes as the ‘elite of humorous publishers’.
It's not hard to see why even when clean, Kamrok's verses are very funny.
There's the one about the talentless golfer ‘This disillusioned simple soul Gets cricket scores on every hole But still the idiot won't give up He think's he's in the Ryder Cup.’
Agents at Kamrok are now busy canvassing outlets throughout the country using all the wit and crudity to push card sales even higher.
As Alan Oliver points out: ‘We always have new stuff in the pipeline and odious little poet Oswald works without rest to produce a steady flow of obnoxious material from which we select anything that's printable.’
Rovers reject part of American dream
EXCLUSIVE by Peter Jardine TRANMERE ROVERS rejected one of the heroes of America's shock US Cup win over England because he couldn't defend!
The Daily Post can reveal that left-back Jeff Agoos, a star for the stars and stripes in England's Boston humiliation, was on trial at Tranmere less than 18 months ago.
He played in a 3–0 Liverpool Senior Cup win over Liverpool at Prenton Park in February 1992, after being recommended to Rovers by Ian St John's son.
But manager John King and his backroom staff didn't offer Agoos a contract, because they believed he wasn't good enough defensively to play in English football.
Reserve coach Ray Mathias said yesterday: ‘I remember him.
He was very fit and good going forward.
He played a couple of reserve and A team games for us on trial.
‘I think he also came on as a substitute in a first team friendly against the New Zealand national team.
‘He was recommended to us and I think he didn't have a club at the time.
I think he had trials with Sheffield Wednesday after being with us.
‘Run and cross’
‘We feel a defender has to be able to defend well first and foremost and that wasn't the best part of Jeff's game.
‘I saw him on the television the other night it was his run and cross down the left that led to the Americans’ first goal against England.
‘That was what he was good at but at the time we didn't consider him any better than players we had at the club.
It happens all the time in football.’
Agoos was 22 at the time and even scored a hat-trick for the youth team during his brief spell at the Prenton Park club.
He now plays for Dallas Sidekicks and has been Dallas All-Sports athlete of the year twice.
Not bad for a player rejected by English football.
YANKS FOR THE MEMORY:Ray Mathias (above) and the rest of the Rovers coaching staff didn't think Agoos would make the grade, but the 22-year-old full-back made a brief mark at Prenton (above right)
Same again for top-dogs Oxton
LIVERPOOL and District Cricket Competition leaders Oxton will be able to name an unchanged team for their trip to Hightown today.
Former Oxton wicket-keeper Rob King misses the game for Hightown and is replaced by ex-captain Norman Gwyther.
Also out are Chris Williams and David Kinsella, giving Michael Cooke and John Rigby first team chances.
New Brighton travel to Ormskirk still without the services of Trevor Barraclough, so skipper Tim Watkins names the same side as last week.
Ormskirk have deferred selection as they await injury reports.
A notable absentee from the Wallasey side in recent weeks has been skipper Mark Anderson who is suffering from a back injury.
And a decision on his match fitness will be left until later this morning.
Sefton, the visitors will be unchanged.
Birkenhead Park, at home to St Helens, have Gareth Evans back after holiday so Phil Davies steps down.
Neil Aconley returns for St Helens so David Eccles makes way.
Formby make two changes for their home clash with Southport.
Gerry Byrom and Mathew Doggert come in for Richard Scanlon and John Pierce.
Southport also makes two changes with Tom Caunce unavailable and Tim McKittrick omitted.
Promising quick bowler Martin Howie returns and Paul Johnson also earns a recall.
Nigel Ogden returns from injury along with Martin Ruane to the Huyton side at home to unchanged Chester.
Joe Bird and Ian Robson are the players to make way.
Liverpool are another side who will be unchanged at home to Bootle who will be without Tony Molloy.
Northern and Neston will also be unchanged at Crosby.
Tomorrow sees the first round of the President's Trophy takes place at Northern.
Both local competition sides meet once again and have named strong line-ups The game starts at 2pm.
Fixtures:-Birkenhead Park v St Helens Recs, Formby v Southport, Hightown v Oxton, Huyton v Chester BH, Liverpool v Bootle, Northern v Neston, Ormskirk v New Brighton, Wallasey v Sefton.
BRITAIN Rugby League international winger Martin Offiah prepared to return home with a serious shoulder injury yesterday he admitting that he was unlikely to play club rugby in Australia again.
Offiah played only 54 minutes for the Eastern Suburbs club before suffering the injury in his debut match two weeks ago.
His three-year contract with
Wigan only allows him one season abroad and he does not believe Britain's champion team will permit him to play club football in Australia again.
‘I've been playing throughout the year for the past six years and I think my body is telling me it is time for a break,’ he said.
‘Also, after this injury, I doubt very much whether Wigan will even consider releasing me to come here again.’
Offiah is returning to England for a reconstruction operation.
SNOOKER:Thursday night's second round matches in the Licat Top Team Snooker League Championship at Derby Lane Civic Club, Birkenhead saw the Wirral champions beat Warrington 3–1.
Three times winners Corals of Crosby had a 3–1 win over Cherryfield of Kirkby, with Ronnie Croston clinching the match in the deciding fourth frame with a break of 38, while Gary Smith of Civic had the best session break with a 39.
BRITAIN's Roger Black finished a disappointing third over 400 metres at an international meeting in St Denis, France, last night.
Black was beaten by Nigerian Sunday Bada and Jean-Louis Rapnouil, of France, in a slow race.
His time of 46.55secs was a second slower than David Grindley ran in Rome on Wednesday and Grindley is now favourite to be picked for the European Cup later this month.
Young get set for the games
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
MERESYSIDE Youth Games, a showcase for hundreds of Merseyside youngsters, will be staged next weekend at Bebington Oval for the second successive year.
Around 1,500 competitors will take part in the festival, which will feature 20 sports for both disabled and ablebodied young people aged 11 to 18.
The event is backed by all five Merseyside local authorities and the Sports Council.
Commercial sponsorships will also help to cover the £52,000 cost of the venture.
But the organisers have acknowledged the vital contribution of a small army of volunteer officials and team managers to the success of the games.
Damien Walsh, spokesman for Wirral leisure services department, said: ‘We owe them a debt of gratitude.’
Wirral leisure services director Andy Worthington said the games would provide a unique partnership between local authorities, voluntary sports clubs, sports governing bodies and schools.
It would be an opportunity to foster civic pride and to identify talented youngsters.
Among the sports will be athletics, badminton, basketball, cricket, gymnastics, handball, netball, rugby league, rugby union, squash, soccer, swimming, table tennis, tennis and water polo.
Further honour Dame
THE Marchioness of Anglesey, who was admitted to the Royal Victorian Order in today's honours, was awarded the CBE in 1977 and became a Dame of the British Empire in 1983.
She has been a member of the board of the British Council since 1985 and is a vice president of the NSPCC.
Paul Loveluck, 51, chief executive of the Wales Tourist Board since 1984, was awarded the CBE.
A native of Maesteg, Mr Loveluck spent 15 years as a civil servant at the Welsh
Office before joining the
WTB.
He is a Justice of the Peace in Cardiff.
Dr Brynley Roberts, 62, of Aberystwyth, who retires as librarian of the National Library of Wales next April after eight years in office, also receives the CBE.
Charles Woosnam, 67, of Builth Wells, who has been the part-time Commissioner for Wales of the Forestry Commissioner for the past six years, and is a former High Sheriff of Powys, receives the CBE.
Awarded the MBE is Meurig Davies, 54, of Deganwy, who has been coxswain of Llandudno Lifeboat since 1970, and retires next April after 30 years service.
Honoured with the MBE for services to athletics is Les Baldwin, 60, of Snowdon Drive, Johnstown, Wrexham.
He has been an active member of Wrexham Amateur Athletics Club for the past 39 years and is the most senior member.
Agnes Hughes, 59, of Herbert Jennings Avenue, Wrexham, is awarded the MBE.
She has been a civil servant for over 30 years and has worked at the town's county court for 24 years.
Mrs Hughes said: ‘I enjoy the work, but the award came right out of the blue.’
Allan Victor Jones, 51, of Bangor, who has been chief fire officer of Gwynedd since 1989 is awarded the Queen's Fire Service Medal.
A WHISTLING sprite, with legs hooped like teapot handles and a green tie knotted Windsor-style, paused before a horse and carriage, parked by St Stephen's Green, to breathe the dust-lifting air of the sultry evening and to adjust the handkerchief in the breast pocket of his Donegal tweed suit.
That done, the wee dandy, roofed by a wig of blazing defiance, hooked thumbs into his waistcoat pockets and sauntered for the bar-top city heights.
With pride in his 42 or so inches, the midget was soon spooning his share of Dublin's foaming romance.
We were there, too, as we have been on the first weekend of June in each of the past four years; the roistering boys whose fever for drink and song has been jaded, ever so slightly, by contemplation of middle age and the fingering of indigestion tablets.
Still, once in the mood and fortified by magnificent slices of roast beef and dollops of mashed potato from the Brazen Head, there was little to check our spirits.
On Grafton Street, not far from the little room where Mr Desmond, the psychic reader, comforts the sad and curious, a refined young man stroked light classics from a saw.
It's a carpenter's tool tuned for the top notes.
The crowd listened as though Yehudi Menuhin was scraping at heaven from the pavement.
Some dropped coins.
Others drifted on, passed the squeeze-box man and the charity collectors, to the girl in black brogues and red ribbons wailing of lost love and wicked soldiers.
Like the head on stout, Dublin resists the slide into modern ways.
The pubs we entered McDaid's, Tommy Wright's, Mulligan's, O'Shea's Merchant, O'Donoghue's and many more are as we left them.
You feel they'll remain forever; with their scrubbed, slyly-charming young men in white shirts, bow ties and waistcoats, serving Guinness on trays to wrought-iron tables on timber floors.
You see, tourism isn't an ‘industry’ in Dublin.
People just like going there.
And the policy of leaving things well alone is working so sweetly.
Money is cascading into the city.
The cabbie, who drove us from the airport to our hotel, had spent some time in Oxford and London.
He loved the appearance of our old pubs, but deplored the tendency to cram them with the hellish gadgetry of the technological age.
Perhaps that is because the Irish love conversation while many Britons, particularly the young, go to considerable lengths to avoid it.
I wish that Merseyside, which I love dearly, would follow the example of Dublin.
It is not only in the pubs where the atmosphere is happier.
It stretches to shops, cafes, restaurants, the unlittered St Stephen's Green and the clean streets.
YOUTH culture has suffered a setback in
Northwich where several publicans have barred drinkers aged between 18 and 21 on Friday and Saturday nights.
Some youngsters have protested, claiming that they should not all ‘be tarred with the same brush’.
Teenagers don't seem to understand that they don't have to actively misbehave to be disagreeable to older people.
In fact, I have little doubt that small groups, displaying a willingness to conform with pub etiquette, would still be served.
It is the boisterous concourse which is unacceptable.
Such ill-dressed creatures, with their expressions of bruised innocence, may also consider that their manners have made numerous pubs across our region no-go areas for anyone over the age of 30.
O N A less acrimonious note, I was glad to read that David Alton, the Liberal Democrat MP for Liverpool Mossley Hill, is likely to stand at the next General Election.
Last October his political career seemed over when, at its Harrogate conference, the party adopted a proabortion stance, which he believed to be repugnant.
At their recent conference in Nottingham, the Lib Dems changed the policy to one of ‘individual conscience’.
That left the way open for the excellent constituency MP to make his peace with the leadership of the party which may, at last, be on the rise.
Gas worker's delight
DEDICATED service to British Gas has earned Thomas William Jones an MBE.
Mr Jones, from York Road, Colwyn Bay, has worked for the gas authority in Wales for 32 years.
He started his career as a distribution engineer, before becoming a service engineer.
Mr Jones, 55, said: ‘I am very surprised to have been selected for this award, but extremely pleased.’
Carlton Boswell, from Clwyd, has received a ‘Commanders’ award in the list for service as Her Majesty's chief agricultural inspector, and as health and safety executive with the Department of Employment.
Head engineer at the National Grid Company Pumped Storage Business at Dinorwig, Llanberis, William Selwyn Williams of Llanfairpwll, Anglesey, has been awarded the MBE for services to the electricity supply industry.
Larwood surprise
PROBABLY the most surprising name in the entire Birthday Honours List is an MBE for Harold Larwood, the bowler who took part in the controversial 1932–33 ‘Bodyline’ Ashes series against Australia.
Mr Larwood, 88, was shunned by the cricketing establishment for many years afterwards and never played for England again.
He now lives in Australia.
His honour reflects the Prime Minister's interest in cricket and is seen by Downing Street as ‘righting a long-standing injustice.’
Harold Larwood
LENNOX LEWIS against Frank Bruno Britain's biggest and richest fight in history looks like being finalised in New York later this month.
by Ray Parker
BARRY METCALFE from Boughton Hall plays his first Wales Minor Counties cricket championship game of the season against Dorset starting at Sherbourne School tomorrow.
And Metcalfe's inclusion means that skipper Andy Puddle from Colwyn Bay won't feel quite so alone.
Puddle was the only player from North Wales in the side which lost to Shropshire in the MCC Trophy last week.
Jamie Sylvester, the Glamorgan Seconds and Maesteg Celtic batsman is also called up for his first game of the season.
Disappointing
Sylvester and Metcalfe, who have both played for Wales in previous seasons, take over from David Hemp and Alistair Dalton who are required by Glamorgan for Monday's Bain Clarkson Trophy game with Northamptonshire.
Wales will be anxious to make up for a disappointing start to the season — their opening home game against Herefordshire was a total wash-out and they suffered a one run defeat against Shropshire.
Puddle said:’ It hasn't knocked our spirit and we are hoping to bounce back, and look upon this as a game we can win.’
Wales take part in a Triple Crown international tournament in the West Midlands next month.
They meet England at Old Hill on July 21, Scotland the following day at Walsall followed by Ireland at Wolverhampton on July 23.
The annual game with the MCC will be a two day affair this season, played at High Wycombe on July 28 and 29.
WALES: A P Puddle (Captain), A W Harris, J Sylvester, J Derreck, K Bell, B Metcalfe, A Smith, B J Lloyd, A Ikram, A D Griffiths, W G Edwards.
NEIL FOSTER faces an Essex fine for kicking stumps in anger but this weekend he could be punching the air in delight if he receives an England recall for next week's second Test against Australia at Lord's.
Despite Thursday's show of petulance at Old Trafford when he kicked over a couple of stumps and a comparative lack of first-class wickets this season, Foster has moved steadily up the fast bowling pecking order.
‘I'm aware of my name being mentioned again as an England candidate, which is nice, but we'll just have to see what happens,’ he said.
‘All I can say is that I'm reasonably confident about my cricket again and should I get the chance of a Test I will stand up to it.’
Left-back rejected because he couldn't defend!
US ace was ditched by Tranmere
TRANMERE Rovers rejected one of the heroes of America's shock US Cup win over England because he couldn't defend!
The Daily Post can reveal that left-back Jeff Agoos, a star for the stars and stripes in England's Boston humiliation, was on trial at Tranmere less than 18 months ago.
Contract
He played in a 3–0 Liverpool Senior Cup win over Liverpool at Prenton Park in February 1992, after being recommended to Rovers by Ian St John's son.
But manager John King and his backroom staff didn't offer Agoos a contract, because they believed he wasn't good enough defensively to play in English football.
Reserve coach Ray Mathias said yesterday: ‘I remember him.
He was very fit and good going forward.
He played a couple of reserve and A team games for us on trial.
‘I think he also came on as a substitute in a first-team friendly against the New Zealand national team.
‘He was recommended to us and I think he didn't have a club at the time.
I think he had trials with Sheffield Wednesday after being with us.
‘We feel a defender has to be able to defend well first and foremost and that wasn't the best part of Jeff's game.
‘I saw him on the television the other night it was his run and cross down the left that led to the first goal against England.
‘That was what he was good at but at the time we didn't consider him any better than players we had at the club.
It happens all the time in football.’
Agoos was 22 at the time and even scored a hat-trick for the youth team during his spell at Prenton.
Debate
Graham Taylor meanwhile will make changes against Brazil tomorrow as England try to dull the pain of the Boston defeat which the manager fears will haunt him for the rest of his life.
But with an ocean buffering him from the worst of the raging debate about his future, he is showing no signs of cracking.
‘If players or myself think this is pressure, wait until we play at home against Poland or the Holland game comes this isn't pressure,’ he said with clear certainty.
RAZOR SHARP: No-nonsense central defender Neil Ruddock could be the answer to Liverpool's well documented defensive frailties
Waqar-jack!
WAQAR YOUNIS showed why he is the world's top-rated bowler by picking up his second five wicket haul of the season as Surrey took charge against joint county championship leaders Glamorgan at The Oval.
On a day when rain wrecked the second day's play in matches up and down the country only three got going the Pakistani pace ace bagged five for 60 to help shoot out the visitors for 166, a deficit of 116.
By the close, Surrey had stretched their advantage by another 39 with all second winnings wickets intact.
Venables ‘battle’ could leave Spurs in limbo
By Daily Post Correspondent
THE legal battle over Tottenham Hotspur could leave the club in limbo until next year, the High Court was told yesterday.
Philip Heslop QC, counsel for club chairman Alan Sugar, said January, 1994, was the earliest date he could see for the full hearing of the dispute between Mr Sugar and Spurs' chief executive Terry Venables.
The judge, Vice-Chancellor Sir Donald Nicholls, commented: ‘That is an appalling prospect.
Nobody knows who is in control of the club.’
Earlier, Mr Heslop had argued that Mr Venables had to go.
Mr Heslop said: ‘The evidence of the majority of the board is that they no longer have any confidence in his ability to discharge his function.
The company appointed him and the company dismissed him.’
Mr Heslop added that a court would not intervene in a management decision to dismiss a chief executive when allegations of bad faith were being made by him against the chairman and other board members.
‘The court does not substitute its commercial judgment for that of the board,’ he added.
Mr Heslop said Mr Venables had no right, except in very special circumstances, to reverse the board's decision.
His remedy was to sue for breach of contract.
Mr Heslop said there was no evidence to support Mr Venables' claim that Mr Sugar had agreed there should be a ‘balanced board’ to protect his position; or that Mr Sugar had agreed to be a non-executive chairman; or that each had agreed not to try to force the other off the board.
Even if there had been such an agreement, there was nothing to stop the board getting rid of Mr Venables if it wished, said Mr Heslop.
‘It is not right or arguable that this public limited company has the burden of having to employ Mr Venables as chief executive indefinitely,’ he added.
Mr Heslop said that, in fact, Mr Venables and his company, Edennote, had put their names to documents specifically stating that no one had entered into service agreements which were not terminable within 12 months.
This was totally in contradiction to Mr Venables' claim that he was promised security of tenure.
Mr Heslop was replying to evidence supporting Mr Venables' attempt to continue an injunction preventing his removal from Spurs pending the hearing of his Companies Court plea for the right to buy out Mr Sugar's 47.8pc holding in the club.
The case continues.
Alan Sugar Terry Venables trying to buy his Spurs shares
TOWYN Harness card
Edberg no match for Aussie's big serve
Tennis round-up
by Nick Robinson
STEFAN EDBERG's Wimbledon preparations were shunted off the rails last night as he crashed to a humiliating defeat at the hands of world No 83 Jamie Morgan in the Stella Artois championships at Queen's Club.
The third seed wasted two match points in the second set tie break before capitulating 4–6 7–6 6–3 to the big-serving Australian.
A routine straight sets quarter final victory looked on the cards for Edberg but his serve began to misfire badly while unseeded Morgan's own delivery proved too much of a handful for the world No 3.
Morgan, hammered down 22 aces, including one to bring up his first match point after more than two hours, which he coolly converted with a bludgeoning service winner.
Edberg could only rue his squandered chances, especially in the crucial tie break which he gifted to his 22-year-old opponent 11–9 with a disastrous double fault.
‘That was a bad one, that's all I can say,’ reflected Edberg of the tie break.
‘He served very well.
It was his best weapon today.’
Best shape
Michael Stich delivered an ominous Wimbledon warning when he dispatched great rival Boris Becker from the Stella Artois championships yesterday.
And the 1991 Wimbledon champion declared: ‘I am in the best shape ever.’
Stich clinched a place in the semi-finals at Queen's with a 6–4 7–6 victory.
‘It is always nice to beat Boris although I am not saying I have proved I am a better player,’ said the 24-year-old Stich.
‘But this gives me confidence and shows I can do well on grass.’
And Becker, who lost to Stich in the Wimbledon final two years ago, quickly acknowledged that his compatriot deserved the triumph.
Although Stich lost a 3–0 lead in the first set, he broke Becker again when he forced him to net a forehand volley.
Both players easily held serve in the second set but Stich romped through the tie-break 7–2, clinching victory in 82 minutes when Becker drove a backhand into the net.
Time to relax
‘Every match I am playing better and better,’ said Stich, who revealed that marriage to German actress Jessica Stockman nine months ago helped put his career back on track after he had slumped as low as 17 in the world last year.
‘It has helped to take me away from tennis when I have time to relax,’ said Stich who has climbed back to world no 9.
In today's semi-final line-up Morgan plays Stich and defending champion Wayne Ferriera, the seventh seed, plays number 11 Todd Martin.
Martina Navratilova has changed her mind and decided to enter the Volkswagen Cup tournament at Eastbourne next week.
Navratilova had planned not to compete at Eastbourne, claiming that playing every day immediately before Wimbledon was too tiring.
But she said that if she lost early at either Beckenham or Edgbaston, then she would reconsider her decision.
Although Navratilova won the title at Beckenham, she suffered a shock third round defeat by 179th ranked Kristine Radford at Edgbaston on Wednesday.
by Phil Stanley
RHYL football club fans last night voted against paying the £5,000 in rent demanded by Belle Vue's new owner David Butters.
And the club committee was given the go-ahead to seek legal advice in their bid to remain at the ground for at least six months under a protected tenancy.
But negotiations are to continue with Colwyn Bay about renting their Llanelian Road ground next season and with Rhyl Town Council over an alternative site in the town.
Co-chairman John Roberts said Colwyn Bay had provisionally agreed to the ground sharing plan subject to permission being given by Colwyn Borough Council.
‘It would mean a saving of around £3,000 but I am also due to meet the Rhyl Town Council on Tuesday to discuss an alternative site which has not yet been revealed,’ he added.
‘We feel we should fight Mr Butters and let him take on a white elephant while we play elsewhere for a year and maybe we can return to Belle Vue.’
PAUL INCE last night removed growing doubts about Graham
Taylor's ability to continue to command the respect of his England players when he insisted ‘we are still 100% behind him.’
‘Everyone keeps talking about Graham Taylor but we're all in this together.
It's not just the manager, it's England and when you ask if we will pull through in the end, the answer is yes and we'll do it together,’ declared England's new skipper.
by Mark Baldwin
NEIL FOSTER faces an Essex fine for kicking stumps in anger but this weekend he could be punching the air in delight if he receives an England recall for next week's second Test against Australia at Lord's.
Despite Thursday's show of petulance at Old Trafford and a comparative lack of first-class wickets this season, Foster has moved steadily up the fast bowling pecking order.
He lost his cool and kicked out two stumps during a frustrating day when he beat the bat consistently.
But now the 31-year-old, who played the last of his 28 Tests against the Aussies in 1989, is ready.
‘I'm aware of my name being mentioned again as an England candidate, which is nice, but we'll just have to see what happens.
‘All I can say is that I'm reasonably confident about my cricket again and should I get the chance of a Test I will stand up to it.’
Foster signed for Mike Gatting's rebel tour of South Africa mainly because he believed knee problems would shorten his career.
He missed the second half of last season after undergoing the latest in a series of knee operations but is now determined to improve on only 12 first-class wickets.
He added: ‘I'm bowling without a great deal of luck at the moment but I feel good about my game.’
Foster's Essex partner Mark Ilott omitted from England's 12 for the First Test, should make his debut.
Peter Such and Andy Caddick, new boys at Old Trafford, will also retain their places but Phil DeFreitas, Chris Lewis and Phil Tufnell could all face the axe.
Surrey's Martin Bicknell, the in-form Glamorgan seamer Steve Watkin and Foster appear to head the list of bowling candidates now that Alan Igglesden, Martin McCague, Dominic Cork and Phil Newport are all nursing injuries.
Devon Malcolm remains an outside bet.
The only possible change to the batting line-up, despite the despair of England's 179run defeat in the Ashes opener, is in the middle-order where the left-handed approach of David Gower or Graham Thorpe may be preferred to Mike Gatting.
NEIL FOSTER 
HITTING THE ROOF…
FLOOD VICTIMS LEFT REELING BY DELUGE DAMAGE
Liverpool selectors President's Trophy preview by Dave Booth
THE Liverpool Competition has struggled with its conscience this year through the debate over overseas players.
Many see the advent of paid professionals as a serious barrier against the development of local youngsters and, at the least, an affront to the spirit of the club game.
But there is no doubt that several new players from abroad have set the league alight this season without overshadowing encouraging performances from homegrown talent.
The decision to select Alistair Campbell of Wallasey and Louis Botes of New Brighton in Sunday's President's Trophy representative side against the Merseyside Competition may mean paid professionals are here to stay but it was not a decision made lightly.
Captain Phil Davies said: ‘There has always been a lot of cloak and dagger about this but this is the first year clubs as a whole have indicated the presence of professionals.
‘I have spoken to most captains and a lot of players and the general feeling is that we have played against sides in the past with Test players and we wanted to be able to fight fire with fire so to speak.
‘We've played against sides from the Durham League and the North Yorkshire League and they have had the advantage of being able to include the likes of Ritchie Richardson, Clayton Lambert and Phil Simmons.
‘Deprived’
‘They had loyalty to those teams and that was a crucial factor in our decision.
We wanted to see if these players would fit into the side and if they wanted to play for the side.
‘There is the other side of the coin in that Alistair and Louis have deprived two local players of places so we ensured that they considered playing just as important as playing for Zimbabwe or Northern Transvaal.’
The selection will certainly give the Liverpool Competition a strong side on paper for a competition it's representative side last won in 1974 when it was the Steiner Cup.
Since then the side has reached four semifinals in the last decade.
‘It is very tough to win,’ said Davies.
‘There is great rivalry with the Merseyside Competition.
‘I have played against them twice in the President's Trophy and they beat us twice fairly and squarely.
‘They will regard it as a very important match and it is very difficult fixture for us.’
Bootle and Oxton players are unavailable for the match in which Liverpool's Andy McDowell comes in for Barry Metcalf who has been picked for the Wales side against Dorset.
Liverpool Competition XI: P Davies (Neston, Capt), J Hitchmough (New Brighton), A Campbell (Wallasey), A McDowell (Liverpool), D Heyes (Wallasey), J Parker (Southport), G Blackburn (Liverpool), L Botes (New Brighton), J Conway (New Brighton), D Williams (Birkenhead Park), M Jones (New Brighton).
Horsing around
THE popular Merseyside Police annual horse show is being staged next weekend with money raised going to charity.
It will be held at the Police Training Centre in south Liverpool next Saturday and there will be a wide variety of family events.
There will be displays by the mounted division and police dog handlers will give demonstrations.
There will also be sideshows and stalls.
Admission to the gala on Mather Avenue, Allerton, is free and car parking facilities at a nearby junior school are available for a small charge.
Stuffing chickens…the Margi Clarke way
Margi Clarke
EVERYMAN THEATRE
Review by Penny Kiley
SOME comedians tell mother-in-law jokes.
Margi Clarke tells mother jokes.
Her best is about the reaction to her public appearances: Every time Margi is on the television, she claims, she goes home to be pursued by her mother with buckets of holy water.
Others have felt the same.
But if you are shocked by Margi on the television, that is nothing to the uncensored version you get on stage.
Margi's new show, titled 21st Century Scut, is a cheerfully outrageous exploration of life as a chicken stuffer turned media celebrity.
The script, by Frank Clarke, is peppered with four-letter words and obscure Kirkby slang.
There are a few songs but mostly the show follows the stand-up format.
A series of fairly unconnected stories follow one another, a surreal mix of fact and fantasy that is very Margi Clarke.
About half hit the comic mark.
Some stories have a ring of truth, if a little exaggerated: They do fit the known biography.
Other routines are pure flights of fancy, all the more extraordinary for the very ordinary setting.
Almost all are very rude.
Margi's stage persona is still a larger than life version of the Kirkby girl and strikes obvious chords with some of her audience.
The show, premiered last night, is beginning a national tour.
It seems difficult to imagine it translating even across the Mersey.
England boss keeps his cool despite national uproar
Haunted Taylor
GRAHAM TAYLOR will ring the changes against Brazil in Washington tomorrow as England try to dull the pain of the Boston defeat which the manager fears will haunt him for the rest of his life.
But with an ocean buffering him from the worst of the raging debate about his future, he is showing no signs of cracking.
‘If players or myself think this is pressure, wait until we play at home against Poland or the Holland game comes this isn't pressure,’ he said with clear certainty.
Both manager and FA chief executive Graham Kelly had the same one word answer to the question: Will he still be in charge for that Polish World Cup qualifier in September?
‘Yes,’ they replied.
‘He has the 100% backing of the international committee,’ Kelly added.
Taylor said: ‘The FA have always been good employers to all the previous managers who have suffered as I am suffering the kind of criticism that is about.
They are being excellent at the present time.’
Whether that will still be the case come the annual summer meeting on June 25 if England lose badly against Brazil and then against Germany in Detroit in a week's time must be debatable.
But Taylor insists that these games will have little bearing on the mood for the Poland match at Wembley on September 8.
‘All we can do is put the football right and you only do that on the pitch.
You put most things right with a win,’ said Taylor.
As well as support from his bosses, the players are clearly and naturally lined up behind the beleaguered manager.
Target
Nevertheless, he will revamp his side.
Crystal Palace's Nigel Martyn looks set to replace Chris Woods and Arsenal trio Nigel Winterburn, Paul Merson and Ian Wright are probables.
Security at England's Washington hotel is being stepped up after Brazil were the target for thieves.
Possible side: Martyn (Crystal Palace), Dixon (Arsenal), Winterburn (Arsenal), Pallister (Manchester Utd), Walker (Sampdoria), Merson (Arsenal), Clough (Liverpool), Sharpe (Manchester Utd), Sheringham (Tottenham), Wright (Arsenal), Ince (Manchester Utd).