

Focus on wildlife
WILDLIFE is the focus of an exhibition which opened at the Grosvenor Museum, Chester, yesterday.
The Natural History Art display features posters from last year's Shell Poster Art Exhibition and paintings and prints from the company's archive.
Wildlife artists Rowland Hilder and Tristram Hillier are also displaying some of their work.
The exhibition is open until July 18 and includes workshops and lectures.
Shell's public affair's officer Ann Bell with Brock the badger at the exhibition
Wildlife walk
WILDLIFE enthusiasts are invited to join Halton Ranger Service on a guided tour of the wildlife-rich land surrounding ICI.
The walk, on June 26, will leave Runcorn Visitor Centre at 10.30am.
Trying to pedal way to £5,000
A DOZEN wildlife watchdogs will turn to pedal power next week in a bid to raise at least £5,000.
The 12, all members of the North Wales Wildlife Trust, will be taking part in a 300-mile bike ride around Gwynedd and Clwyd.
During their seven-day marathon, the riders will call at nature reserves, country parks and sites where wildlife is under threat.
As well as being sponsored, the riders hope to raise awareness of environmental issues in North Wales.
Trust director Morgan Parry, who will be among those taking part, said: ‘The Trust's annual cycle rides have always proved popular and successful in raising funds for our work.
This year's is the biggest-ever and we're asking everyone who cares about wildlife to sponsor the cyclists or make a donation.’
The team will set off with a ride around Anglesey, starting from Menai Bridge on Saturday, June 19.
Subsequent starting points will be Bangor pier; Pensychnant, near Conwy; St Asaph; Wrexham; Dolgellau; and Criccieth.
Better TV reception A NEW television relay system for Beddgelert will be officially launched by Arfon MP Dafydd Wigley next week.
The service has been provided with the support of Gwynedd County Council and funding from the Welsh Office.
Plaid demand
THE Plaid Cymru group on Ynys Mon Borough Council has called for Wales to have its own environmental agency.