

Paula was just 16, when her boyfriend, whose name was not given, went to his probation officer then gave himself up to the police.
Details emerged at the trial of Paula's husband Eddie Gilfoyle, who is accused of murdering her when she was eight months pregnant in June last year.
Paula, 33, was found hanging by a rope in the garage at their home in Grafton Drive, Upton, Wirral.
But he told the judge: ‘Her object has always been to secure the payment not just for herself but the little boy George who is a few months old.
It is said in some quarters she is being vindictive about these matters.
That is wholly and absolutely wrong.’
By Joe Riley
‘THERE'S nothing in the world equivalent to an English summer's day,’ insists Bob Hoskins, bob-bob-bobbing his way into the confines of a comfy armchair.
‘That's why I intend to try and stick in this country.
‘Now I work mainly in America,’ says the cube-shaped superstar, ‘but I bring a lot of money into the UK.
And while I'm not too happy giving it to John Major, that's the way it is.
‘I want my kids to know their grandparents, aunts and uncles and I want to keep them English.’
All this despite the fact that many Yanks now solemnly believe that Hoskins is one of their own.
‘They're convinced I'm American.
Especially as I get the accents right.
In Mermaids, for instance, I had to have a Boston accent.’
For the purposes of our interview, however, Bob is his ordinary self and proud of living in Camden Town.
Not for him the boulevards of Hollywood, nor the slender, sultry looks of Renaissance Screen Man.
Somebody's got to play ordinary people should anyone call New York plumber Mario ordinary.
For this is Super Mario the most popular character in the world if you're into Nintendo.
Which most kids are, with 82 million of the games in global circulation.
Hoskins has landed the job of bringing the video hero to life on the big screen up against a strange breed of dinosaur-like terrors and partnered by John Leguizamo (Hangin' With the Homeboys etc).
‘We all grew up with American films, but looking like me there was no way on earth that people would think I was an actor.
Actors don't look like I do.’
Or they didn't.
Hoskins reckons that his pal Michael Caine had a lot to do with changing things.
‘I saw Michael playing Horatio in Hamlet and thought ‘If he can do it, so can I.’
‘He was a bloke with a Cockney accent and glasses.
He broke all the moulds, and then people like me were in.’
But not until he was 25 (and he's now 51) did Bob even dare to tread the boards.
Indeed, his first part in a play called The Feather Pluckers was by chance.
He went along with a friend who was auditioning for the lead and landed the part himself, playing a thug hanged for murder.
Yet although often seen as a tough guy, Bob Hoskins has tried to avoid typecasting.
Continued on next page
Heartbreak as wedding dreams sink in flood
By Carl Butler Daily Post Staff
A BRIDE was in tears yesterday as her wedding dreams were washed away.
It was the final heartbreaking disaster for Joanne Smith and fiance Maurice Jones as their new home was engulfed by stinking brown flood water.
Their bungalow at Llandudno Junction, which they had spent two years struggling to furnish and which wedding guests should have been visiting next Saturday, was swamped by flood waters on Thursday night.
Fighting back the tears Joanne, 24, of Dolydd, The Meadows, explained yesterday: ‘I cannot believe it everything has gone wrong.’
The catalogue of disaster started when:
Her mum's 30-year-old wedding dress, altered to fit Joanne, was ruined at the cleaners and came back two inches shorter than when it went.
Court action may be pending.
A promised Mercedes to take the couple to All Saints in Deganwy was sold without Joanne and Maurice being told.
The hotel in Deganwy where the reception is to be held has gone into receivership.
But they are hoping the reception can still go ahead.
The flood apart from ruining their home made their own car which should have taken them for the fully-paid honeymoon in Scotland, float off down the road and crash into another car.
‘They've no car even for the honeymoon.
They've been so brave,’ said Joanne's mum, Mrs Sandra Hawkins, of Maes Derw, Llandudno Junction, where the couple are having to live.
Joanne, who works at Bookers store in Llandudno Junction, and Maurice, 25, who works for Mochdre Garage, returned home on Thursday night to find water running right through the house.
‘We put towels under the doors but the water swept them away.
I stood at the front door and it was around my ankles, within five minutes it was around my knees,’ said Joanne.
‘We went back this morning and I opened the door and burst into tears.’
Heartbroken: Joanne Smith and Maurice Jones yesterday Picture: JEFF PITT
Keeping an eye on the weather…adventurer Rosemary Upton Life can be just plain sailing…(with a bit of help, of course) WHEN you get into your seventies for some For Rosemary Upton, who is just into her seventies, life couldn't be more hectic or more adventurous!
Or more rewarding…
Rosemary, who has learnt to cope with severe tinnitus, is all ready to set sail for the THIRD time aboard Lord Nelson, the specially adapted tall ship for disabled adventurers run by the Jubilee Sailing Trust.
‘There is so much adventure still to be enjoyed,’ says Rosemary who is a member of Wirral Tinnitus Group, one of the country's largest tinnitus self-help groups.
‘During my last voyage aboard Lord Nelson we ran into quite a storm in the middle of the Celtic Sea.
‘It is marvellous to see just how even people with the most severe handicaps are able to crew the ship.
‘It really was good fun, although I am hoping for fair weather for next week's voyage.’
Whatever the weather, when Rosemary gets back home she won't be on land for long at the end of the month she's off doing her first stint at white water rafting!
Apart from involving herself in the thick of the action, Rosemary spends a lot of time giving public talks, raising funds for both the Jubilee Sailing Trust and the training of dogs for the Hearing Dogs for the Deaf scheme.
‘There are many groups who give people a great deal of help to get over all sorts of problems.
I just want to spread a few good words and hopefully raise a few pounds for the three groups that I am involved with,’ says Rosemary.
Bon voyage!
Lord Nelson sails out from Liverpool next Friday for an eight-day voyage to the Inner Hebrides.
Further details: Jubilee Sailing Trust: Stuart Roberts: 724 2718 Wirral Tinnitus Group: Bill Griffiths 342 4594 Hearing Dogs for the Deaf:
COLLEGE bosses in Bootle are looking for people to train as English teachers.
Volunteers need only provide a few hours of their time a week to be trained as a tutor.
No special qualifications are needed for the nine hour course over three weeks.
Recruits will be asked to work for two or three hours a week at Hugh Baird's Oriel Road adult learning centre.
For more information call the centre on .
Police Chief Supt Elwyn Roberts, who has headed the police operation in the floods said: ‘It was the storm of the century.’
He was speaking at a press conference at Conwy at which the message to flood victims was: ‘Don't go home until you ring our Helpline.’
Twenty phone lines have been set up in Aberconwy council's offices to give advice to victims.
At least 400 have left their homes.
Alan Carr, Aberconwy's chief executive, said: ‘Don't go back until they have been checked for safety by the public utilities.’
It was vital that electricity and gas supplies were checked.
But a Welsh Water official gave an assurance that supplies were safe, and he said extra pumps were being brought in to take over from giant pumps which had been put out of action by an electrical failure during the floods.
Gwynedd's chief executive Huw Thomas said many of the lessons of the Towyn flood disaster were being put into practice.
He urged holidaymakers to check with hotels before setting out for Llandudno, and for day-trippers to stay away this week-end.
‘Give Llandudno time to recover,’ he pleaded.
Local MP Sir Wyn Roberts, the Minister of State for Wales, said he will be making a personal report to the Prime Minister this afternoon at the Welsh Tory conference at Llangollen.
He added: ‘We're in the midst of a critical floods situation but from what I hear we're getting the better of it.
It's important to keep people as calm as possible, as severely distressed as some may be, and I was impressed when I saw children going to school as normal today.
‘I want to give the impression to the rest of the world that things are bad but we are holding our own.’
Torrential rain continued this morning and more families had to be evacuated from the Morfa area of Conwy and in part of Llandudno.
How to beat that migraine
TAKING a brisk walk instead of retreating to a darkened room may be the best way of coping with migraine and other bad headaches, according to a leading pain doctor.
Dr Chris Wells, director of one of Europe's largest pain clinics at Liverpool's Walton Centre for Neurology and Neurosurgery, says many people lie down in the dark and withdraw from circulation when they have a bad headache.
But this only makes the headache seems worse and taking some form of exercise, like a walk, could see off the headache more quickly.
Dr Wells says sufferers should fight a mental battle against their headaches rather than submit to them.
‘Take on the headache and don't let it win by stopping you doing things,’ he says.
Dr Wells offers his advice on a new audio tape Coping with Headaches and Migraine produced by the Pain Research Institute (PRI).
Visit the dentist!
Doctors describe how people with bad headaches can get relief by using simple techniques including exercise, relaxation, acupressure and even a visit to the dentist!
The relaxation programme on the tape can be used daily to help control headaches.
Listening to music and relaxing the muscles of the head and neck properly can be very effective ways of coping with a bad headache.
Coping with Headaches and Migraine can be obtained from Headache Tape, PO Box 1, Wirral L47 7DD £6.75p (incl. p/p).
Cheques/Po's please to ‘WLAP.’
CHILDREN'S CHARTER TO GIVE VOICE TO YOUNG
School to celebrate
By Barry Turnbull
A MERSEYSIDE school's silver jubilee will be marked in style.
St Gregory's junior, in Lydiate, is celebrating its 25th birthday with a four day extravaganza.
All former pupils are invited to events which take place on the last weekend in June.
The four-day bash will end with a series of activities coinciding with National Music Day.
At the Sandy Lane school, an exhibition showing its development will be supplemented by dance displays and a performance by its Irish traditional music group.
The first flight of fantasy
BRITISH MIDLAND want the plane truth
…
They are searching for passengers who made the first ever trip with them to Jersey 40 years ago.
That flight, we can reveal, set off from Wolverhampton.
It landed in a land then untouched by Bergerac via Derbyshire and Birmingham to clear customs.
Now the UK's second largest airline, flies thousands of holiday makers to Jersey and one of their eight airports is, of course, here in Liverpool.
Says Alan James a high flying spokesman: ‘We would like to hear from anyone with memories of flying to Jersey in those early days for our archives.’
Write to Alan at 49 Utoxeter New Road, Derby, DE 22 3NL.
Air mail with a difference.
By Paddy Shennan
A FEARLESS new organisation has been set up in a bid to finally solve the world's greatest murder mystery the assassination in Dallas of American president John F. Kennedy.
Its leaders claim Lee Harvey Oswald did not gun down JFK and insist there was a cover-up.
But where has The Fair Play For Oswald Committee launched its search for The Truth…
Dallas?
Washington?
New York?
No.
It's none other than number 13 Spofforth Road, Wavertree, Liverpool 7.
The man behind the red door of the terraced house is unemployed father-of-two David Williams, 34.
Co-investigator is second cousin Paul Williams, 31, a taxi driver also married with two children.
So why are they spending time and money trying to clear the name of a dead man 30 years on?
Aren't there causes a little closer to home they could be investigating?
‘It's the greatest murder mystery in history,’ says Paul.
‘There are so many ifs and buts it's fascinating.’
David adds: ‘I think the assassination affected everyone.
There was much going on in world politics at the time, including the Cold War and the Cuba crisis.’
Their increasing interest in the subject actually led to the pair's first ever meeting just a year ago.
David's father used to tell him that he believed Oswald was innocent and Paul became hooked five years ago after reading a book.
The pair didn't even realise they were related when they met at a special course about the assassination at the University of Liverpool, which was held in the wake of the Oliver Stone film JFK.
David says: ‘After it finished, 18 of us from the course decided to carry on meeting but then everyone went their separate ways.
Others from the group now have their own discussion group but we decided to set up an organisation.’
And why the name The Fair Play For Oswald Committee?
Not guilty, says David.
‘It was Paul's idea.
Oswald had been handing out leaflets in New Orleans saying Fair Play For The Cuba Committee.’
The second cousins have just issued their first newsletter and they have grand plans to open an information centre in Liverpool, which would cater for enthusiasts all over Europe.
‘There are loads of books and videos available in the USA but there's not much in this country at the moment.
But we want to change all that and we have a lot of contacts in the States.’
Both men believe Oswald was made a scapegoat.
Paul says: ‘I don't think he got a fair shake.
I believe rogue elements of the CIA killed JFK.’
David agrees and says America would have exploded if the ‘truth’ had been revealed at the time.
Paul's wife, Caroline, and David's wife, Carol, couldn't care less about the subject and their friends reckon they're The Odd Couple!
‘It is an obsession,’ says David.
‘Our mates reckon we're complete conspiracy nuts.
They go mad when we start going on about JFK.
As one of my friends was leaving the house one night he said ‘I don't believe it.
We've gone five hours and you haven't mentioned JFK or Lee Harvey Oswald once!’
But Paul adds: ‘When they actually see one of the videos they get really interested.’
Several friends have asked to join them on their trip to Dallas in November, to mark the 30th anniversary of the assassination.
But Paul says: ‘There's no way they're coming they just want to go for the ale!’
The pair reckon the JFK story will run and run until conclusive proof is provided about the person or persons behind his killing.
‘This is America's national wound,’ says David.
‘It will never be healed until the day the mystery is finally solved once and for all.’
Other cases But if their own theories are ever proved wrong, David and Paul insist their time and money won't have been wasted.
David says: ‘It is time-consuming and expensive but the research has been so fascinating and enjoyable that it wouldn't matter if we were proved wrong or if the truth never came out.’
And there's also other famous cases to keep them going…
With a broad smile, David says: ‘We have also been looking at Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy and we're just about to start on Marilyn Monroe!’
HMS Active
Many fond memories
I AM writing on behalf of the ships company of HMS Active, and in particular the Petty Officers' mess, to formally thank the city of Liverpool for the excellent hospitality that has been shown to us during our visit.
There will be many fond memories taken away from the city which will hopefully be renewed should we visit next year.
There are few places in the world where you can feel welcome away from home, but Liverpool gave us that and more.
We hope we gave something back in return.
Petty Officer S.H.
Delo, HMS Active.
JFK: the search for the truth goes on…in Liverpool that's what friends call them.
But David and Paul are deadly serious
Conspiracy busters: David and Paul Williams Shot while in custody: The moment Lee Harvey Oswald, accused of murdering President Kennedy, is murdered by Jack Ruby.
But did Oswald JFK?
That's what The Fair Play For Oswald Committee based here in Liverpool are seeking to answer.
Kevin Costner in the film, JFK
Mobility guide
Door To Door (pub by Dept of Transport)
THE new edition of this comprehensive guide to travel and transport for people with disabilities is now available.
The booklet is aimed both at people with disabilities and at professionals involved in providing information and services.
Launching the guide Transport Minister Mr Roger Freeman said:
’ Door to Door to Door is published by HMSO and is available in print through HMSO, bookshops, priced £3.95 (with discounts available for bulk orders).
It is also available on tape through the Disability Unit from S10/21, Department of Transport, 2 Marsham Street, London SW1P 3EB (telephone ).
Tape copies are available free of charge to blind and partially sighted people.
POSTBAG:
DEAR Tom: A big thanks to all readers who are continuing to donate various mobility items for our group.
The Disabled Drivers Association has been helping disabled people since 1948, and all donations are used explicitly for the benefit of disabled people.
The North Cheshire & Merseyside Group, and The Wirral Group, were formed three years ago.
Our group publishes a quarterly magazine, giving help, advice and the latest news on access, etc.
This is sent to all our members free of charge.
We also hold socials, parties, and organise day trips, again free of charge.
Our main goal is to bring a little sunshine in to the lives of all disabled people.
If any reader is able to help in any way I would be pleased to hear from them.
Bill , Secretary,
Sex education What about Us?
Sex Education for Children with Disabilities Here's a booklet that could be very helpful to parents of disabled children who so often are viewed as not having sexual feelings and who, as a result, have sometimes had little or no sex education.
Available from: The Secretary, The Home & School Council, 40 Sunningdale Mount, Ecclesall, Sheffield, S11 9HA, price £2 (inc. p&p).
On this day
1509 King Henry VIII married Catherine of Aragon. 1930 The liner Empress of Britain was launched at Clydebank.
1955 Eighty two spectators were killed at the Le Mans 24-hour race.
Food for thought
THE recent statement made by junior minister Baroness Cumberlege, implying that the Government would not object should doctors decide to withhold treatment from patients who refuse to stop smoking, gave me food for thought.
Apparently, some 150,000 tobacco-related deaths occur each year, which gives us approximately one death every 35 minutes.
Also, there is stated to be one suicide attempt every two minutes, therefore treatment could also be withheld from these self-inflicted death attempts.
Great plans are afoot to ban smoking in public places, resulting in smokers soon becoming complete outcasts in society.
Whom should we therefore ban from public places for causing all the depression leading to so many suicides?
It does not take too much thought to work out who would be held mainly to blame, with today's mass unemployment figures and with so much poverty around, does it?
Terry Black, Liverpool 4.
To the swans MY son and I read about the brutal attack upon the swans at Mill Pond, and were very upset by it.
My son, who is just eleven, is quite good at creative writing and I suggested he might write a poem about how he felt, and he did so…
The Swans so graceful Brought pleasure to many.
They lived in peace.
Those who killed them Caused all this to cease.
Their beauty outstanding, Their grace unmatched, Their tender babies that had just hatched.
The brave cob fought against the attack.
The mother is dying I hope she survives.
This act brings shame to all our lives.
M.N., Kirkby.
Once bitten…
WITH reference to the recent Echo letter about the £1 con-trick, I also had this same deed played on myself some months ago at a supermarket.
I reported it to the shop, but there was nothing they could do.
Ever since that event I have never taken a trolley off anyone, and have explained why if needed to and told as many people as possible about it.
They won't catch me a second time.
Mrs A. Baker, Liverpool 36.
Fertile Finns a breed apart
FINNISH men are the most fertile in the world, according to a study published today.
Despite a worldwide decline in average sperm counts over the past 50 years, those of Finnish men remain roughly twice those of men in other countries, according to Finnish research.
Finnish men in rural lake districts have the highest sperm counts and the lowest incidence of testicular cancer, says the British Medical Journal report.
600,000 miss maths exam
TEACHERS yesterday continued their boycott of the National Curriculum tests with up to 600,000 pupils spared three hours of maths exams.
Many schools throughout England and Wales again abandoned the controversial tests for 14year-olds in the face of industrial action by the three biggest teaching unions.
The National Union of Teachers said the boycott remained solid with almost 100pc effectiveness.
However, some schools set their own versions of the tests.
Education Secretary John Patten published yesterday's three one hour maths papers in the hope that when parents see them they will wonder what all the fuss is all about.
Test papers in technology and science plus Welsh for pupils in Wales are scheduled for early next week, although few children are likely to sit them.