

SCIENTISTS believe they are a step nearer to finding the cause of Cot Death Syndrome, which kills hundreds of babies each year.
Doctors find new clue to riddle of cot deaths
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
SCIENTISTS are one step closer to discovering the cause of cot death syndrome which kills hundreds of babies each year.
A research team from Edinburgh has discovered a previously undetected substance in young babies and is launching a three-year study which might prevent future deaths.
And the news has been met with great excitement by scientists in Liverpool who say their colleagues' work could provide the missing pieces in the puzzle.
Dr Caroline Blackwell and Professor Donald Weir of Edinburgh University's Medical Microbiology Department and Professor Anthony Busuttil of the Forensic Medicine Unit are leading the research.
They have discovered that in the period when most deaths occur between two and four months 80–90pc of babies produce a sticky substance in their saliva which makes it easier for bacteria to stick to the nose and throat.
The substance is known as a Lewis antigen.
These bacteria can produce powerful and dangerous toxins.
Normally, even if babies have these bacteria, they don't produce toxins and remain healthy.
The Edinburgh team believes the reaction that leads to cot death is triggered when a combination of factors occur at the same time.
These factors may include the baby being too hot because of another viral infection, wearing too many clothes or sleeping on its stomach rather than its back.
‘These bacteria are normally harmless but are triggered off by a rise in temperature.
If we could identify the factors that cause this, it would be possible to interfere with the process and prevent cot deaths,’ Prof Weir said.
Professor Dick Van Velzen, of Liverpool University's Department of Foetal and Infant Pathology, said: ‘We held a meeting about this on Thursday and Friday.
It is very interesting and is linked to the work we have been carrying out.
‘It also fits in with work being carried out at other research centres.
Rather than have a set of isolated jigsaw pieces we are now able to start putting them together.’
Prof Van Velzen's team found earlier this year that of 34 victims of unexplained cot death, 70pc of them had underdeveloped kidneys.
And they claimed that early and regular monitoring of the baby in the womb could prevent the deaths altogether.
‘What is important about the work in Edinburgh is that the scientists have shown that in children who are growth retarded, the risk of cot death is abnormally stronger,’ said Prof Van Velzen.
‘And delayed development means the child is at risk for longer.
‘We will carry out some work on this and send our findings to the scientists in Edinburgh.’
New use for an old drug
A ‘MIRACLE’ drug abandoned years ago because of its serious side effects may now prove to be a major advance in the treatment of arthritis.
Researchers at Bristol University believe that low doses of naturally occurring human steroids can prevent the progressive destruction of joints of people who have rheumatoid arthritis.