

Star fun:
BOB Dylan and Van Morrison are stars of the annual Fleadh Gaelic for festival expected to be attended by 30,000 music-lovers from around Britain at Finsbury Park in London today.
The event features more than 30 bands on three stages.
Dinosaur epic set to be a monster hit
By Echo reporter
THE dinosaur film epic Jurassic Park looks like being a runaway success judging by the reaction of audiences who packed cinemas in New York last night for the first showing of the film.
Film fans were raving over it even though many had missed key scenes because they were hiding their eyes.
Many said the special effects, a hallmark of director Steven Spielberg, were amazing.
The film opened on 2,400 screens across the United States before opening in Britain and the rest of Europe later in the summer.
New York film critics are largely enthusiastic about the thriller.
‘I'd go again today if it didn't mean waiting in line till a month from Monday,’ said USA Today reviewer Mike Clark.
The New York Times critic Janet Maslin called it ‘a true movie milestone’.
The film, starring Sam Neill and Laura Dern, mixes palaeontology and genetic engineering.
DNA from the blood of dinosaurs is supposedly used to bring them back to life.
The director Stephen Spielberg has banned his children from seeing his latest blockbuster.
He says it's ‘too intense’ according to a national newspaper.
The film is rated PG13 in the US, which means children under 13 have to be accompanied by an adult.
Spielberg, who has four children, all under eight, said: ‘I even know certain nine-year-olds it's OK for but not my kids.’
Sam Neill
Museum stages feast of music history
In the groove city style
IN the swing…
Michael Wheeler, eight, and his sister Alice, five, take advantage of personal stereos to help them appreciate Liverpool Museum's fabulous collection of European musical instruments.
The museum is staging a special exhibition of the items, which explore the social history of music-making from 1600 to the 1960s, and it traces the development of taste during that period.
The exhibition also looks at the making and selling of instruments on Merseyside over the past 200 years.
It also examines the history of Liverpool music-making.
Statue needs a revamp
THE FAMOUS Spirit of Liverpool statue at Liverpool's Walker Art Gallery needs repairing after being eroded by the elements.
Museum chiefs say the marble statue should be removed from the portico of the gallery and replaced by a replica.
They want the statue to be resited in the national conservation HQ being created at the old Midland Goods Depot.
The council's development control sub-committee will discuss an application to remove the statue next week.
Prince Charles clutches his back in obvious pain
Make 'em laugh it's no tall order for these two
COMIC giants are flooding into Merseyside for this year's Liverpool Festival of Comedy.
And while these big men were entertaining outside St George's Hall today, stand-up geniuses Lee Evans and Mark Thomas were gearing up for their show tonight at the Merseyside Academy.
ECHO Norman Wisdom Award winner Mark is acknowledged as the best new comedy talent around.
And Mark has been dubbed a ‘disgusting’ individual by ex-Liberal leader David Steel.
The show gets on the road at 10pm.
A STITCH IN TIME FROM QUILTERS
The ancient craft of quilt making was revealed by Jane Pattison, of Chester, yesterday, when the Cestrian Quilters displayed their skills at Tatton Park, Knutsford Picture: EMMA WILLIAMS
Soap's landlady story-line is flawed
By Daily Post Correspondent
A NORTH Wales court official has attacked TV's Coronation Street for giving the impression that it is easy to obtain a pub licence.
Viewers of the Granada programme have watched Rover's Return barmaid Liz MacDonald move into her new pub, The Queens.
Licensing officer at Mold Law Courts Mr Phillip Parry has written to programme producer Carolyn Reynolds to protest.
He says he would have thought that a programme which attracts such high viewing and media attention would have sought the appropriate legal advice.
‘The impression has been given that it is easy to obtain a justices’ licence and move into a public house,’he said.
On arrival at the new premises the MacDonald family is greeted by a brewery representative and Liz shown her name above the door.
Mr Parry said it should be pointed out that when a person takes over a public house a protection has to be granted first.
Seven days notice of the application has to be given to the court and to the police.
Once the court is satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person, a protection order may be granted.
The applicant could then run the business in the previous licensee's name until an application for a full transfer of the licence was made to the licensing justices.
‘It is only when the full transfer is granted that the applicant is eligible to display their name above the door,’ Mr Parry explained.
He said that licensing justices at Flint, Mold and Hawarden were endeavouring to only grant licences to experienced people and those who had completed various licensing training courses and had passed the British Institute of Inn Keeping examination.
Work delay
THE £80,427 refurbishment contract at Llandrindod Wells Museum due to be completed by the end of June, is expected to be extended due to delays with materials.
Dinosaur film's takings hit£50m
UNIVERSAL Pictures' dinosaur epic Jurassic Park shattered box-office records in its opening weekend.
The film pulled in between £48m and £50m (£32–33.5m) in ticket sales, studio executives said.
With dinosaur-mania sweeping the US and Universal mounting a huge marketing blitz, movie fans packed theatres across the country, giving director Steven Spielberg's new film the biggest four-day opening of all time.
Jurassic Park is located on an island off Costa Rica, where a rich Scottish entrepreneur, played by British actor Sir Richard Attenborough, has genetically raised several species of dinosaur, using the DNA from excavated bones of the ancient reptile.
But things begin to go wrong when a dinosaur expert, played by Irish-born New Zealand actor Sam Neill, and his girlfriend, played by Laura Dern, arrive on the scene.
The science-fiction thriller, expected to be one of the biggest blockbusters of 1993, topped the record set nearly a year ago by Batman Returns, which took in £47.7m (£31.8m) in first Thursday-to-Sunday showings.
Bringing region's musical talent together
LIVERPOOL has had more than its share of pop stars over the years.
But many people don't know that it has also provided many of the big back-room names in the pop business too.
Clive Langer and Ian Broudie are two of the most respected producers in the business.
Stuart Slater is head of publishing company Chrysalis Music Group.
And Keith Blackhurst, who owns and runs independent record company Deconstruction, has just signed up Kylie Minogue.
With the exception of Broudie, they are all now based in London.
But they were back, with many others, for a two-day music business conference held at Liverpool University last month.
Out of the last discussion, titled The Merseyside Perspective, came the idea for a new umbrella organisation to bring together everyone in the business locally.
An inaugural meeting of the Merseyside Music Industry Association has been set up for tomorrow night.
It's to take place at 7pm in the Everyman Theatre foyer.
The organisation is very much the vision of Colin Hall of Liverpool Music House who were co-organisers of the seminars along with the University's Institute of Popular Music.
Opportunities
‘There's so much that can be achieved,’ he says.
‘I see it as culminating in an annual event, perhaps a convention and a festival which would tie in with other events like Africa Oye.
And if the city council has a film liaison office, why not a music office too?’
First things first, and the agenda for Tuesday is the result of feedback from the seminar.
‘Four areas have come out firstly a database, information and networks; then the idea of a convention, festival or seminar; training and education; and lastly music business associations and what they can achieve.’
The organisation should bring together everyone from the musicians working at grassroots level to established businesses, and also involve decision-making bodies like Liverpool City Council and City Challenge.
There are certainly hundreds of people who could be involved and the number could even run into thousands.
As is often the case in creative areas, many of them work in isolation, unaware of other activities or opportunities.
But judging by last month's debate, many of them are hungry for change.
TV debut for director Martin's labour of love
LIVERPOOL-born director Martin Wallace makes his TV debut this week.
His short film Carrera is being screened on Thursday night as part of Channel Four's First Frame series.
The film is a labour of love for Martin, who trained at St Martin's College in London.
It started life as a graduation film and he has spent the last two years finishing it.
And I can claim to have seen the film years before its TV appearance.
Martin who was directing pop videos at the time showed me the video just after leaving college.
It seemed pretty arty but some scenes stick in the memory.
Several involve Martin's ancient Volkswagen Beetle and there is one striking scene shot through an aquarium.
Both, I'm told, are still in the finished version.
African way to a festive mood
LIVERPOOL is in festive mood this week.
And the programme from the festival of comedy and its associated events is out to ensure audiences keep up the spirit day and night.
There is a whole nightlife programme centred on Liverpool's clubs and the music festival Africa Oye! has its own meeting place.
Their designated Festival Club is arts centre The Gallery in Sandon Street, Liverpool 8.
The elegant building overlooking leafy Falkner Square is a fine setting for a summer rendezvous.
Yet, being in a largely residential area, it's an unlikely setting for an arts centre.
But, says owner Joe Farrag, that is the point.
He wants to be where the people are, and if they do not venture to town to visit the Tate or Walker, he'll bring art to them.
In any case, a lot of the residents are artists.
Sixty per cent of the artists in Merseyside live in the area, Joe tells me.
The Gallery was inspired by the Neighbourhood Gallery in New Orleans.
It is already home to three artists working in the studio upstairs and has a large cafe cum exhibition space and a poetry room.
It is currently hosting an exhibition of African women artists black and white as Joe points out.
‘Some people think we're a black arts centre.
But we want to be an arts centre for the people not black people, not white people, just people,’ he said.
Award time for Richard
RICHARD CONLAN hits out for Huyton on Saturday after receiving a special award from Competition sponsors Weightman Rutherfords.
The award recognises his contribution to the success of the Huyton under-15 team in winning the Echo Trophy last year.
Skipper Conlan made three centuries in the summer league, earning him a first team call-up.
He made 45 on his debut against Sefton and then 82 against Liverpool.
But to the screams of excitement from the biggest crowd ever to gather in the Robert F Kennedy Memorial Stadium, over 54,000 of them, Marcio Santos set up a furious climax with a diving header.
Historic chapel's £500 gift
COUNCILLORS have agreed to contribute £500 towards the cost of essential repairs to Warrington's 250-year-old Unitarian Chapel, a listed building in Cairo Street.
Old gutters, downpipes and fascia boards will be replaced and ceiling plaster damaged by water renewed.
The cost of the work will be £4,575.
Planning officer Anthony McGreavey said: ‘The chapel is one of the few surviving buildings of the first part of the 18th century in the town centre
…it's important that its survival be secured.’
Tears for Cheers
BRITISH viewers cried into their beer last night as Channel 4 screened the final episode of Cheers.
When the last show of the bar room comedy was shown in America last month, 150m people tuned in.
The response in Britain was not quite so dramatic the National Grid was untroubled by the kind of power surge that goes with huge viewing figures.
Diehard Cheers fans saw original barmaid Diane, played by Shelley Long, return in the last episode.
Student's star double
A WIRRAL drama student is to play in a national production of A Midsummer Night's Dream.
Rebecca Rainsford, 23, of St David's Road, Eastham, is to play Philostrate and the First Fairy in the production at the Lillian Bayliss Theatre, Sadler's Wells, London.
The production is part of a special showcase season being presented by the Rose Bruford College, where Ms Rainsford is a final-year student on a BA theatre degree course.
The college provides vocational training for actors, directors, theatre technicians and designers.
Ms Rainford is a former pupil of Marymount and Upton Hall convent schools.