

By SARAH NIBLOCK
AT best, they've been called cranks.
At worst frauds.
Healers who use their hands rather than pills and potions are still treated with scepticism.
Even though their skills may date back thousands of years, faith-healers and spiritual healers continually come under fire from the medical profession and lay people alike.
But one practitioner, Eileen Reilly, says that while some unscrupulous healers bring the area into disrepute, there is evidence to show that it does work.
Eileen, who is based in Birkenhead, Wirral, mainly practices reflexology which treats ailments through foot massage.
But she has recently started offering Reiki, an ancient form of laying on of hands.
And her treatment is in demand.
Even a professional footballer is among her clients.
The word Reiki means ‘universal life energy,’ which spiritualists say is the lifeforce that exists in all living things.
The system was developed by a Japanese academic in the late 1800s and is based on 2,500-year-old writings in Sanskrit.
Evidence of similar methods has been found in Japanese, Chinese, Egyptian, Roman and Greek cultures.
Mum-of-two Eileen, who had to take two intensive training courses, stresses that Reiki has no religious connotations and is not the same as faith-healing.
She says: ‘As a patient, you don't have to believe in anything spiritual to reap the benefits.
While faith-healing tends to work on one part of the body, Reiki treats the whole system.’
Eileen herself is very friendly and down-to-earth and quickly puts me at ease.
The Reiki practitioner treats the patient by laying their hands gently onto the body.
The recipient may experience a variety of sensations.
Eileen said: ‘Most feel either intense warmth or cold.’
The most striking sensation is the feeling of deep relaxation experienced throughout the hourlong treatment.
It is hard to stay awake but I had to keep going to the loo!
This is quite normal for a first treatment, Eileen reassured me, as toxins such as caffeine and E-numbers are eliminated.
After the treatment, I did feel refreshed rather like waking up after a good night's sleep.
Eileen has treated a variety of people from different backgrounds for a range of conditions including back problems, PMT and stress.
She says: ‘I worked on a local footballer and I was able to detect all his old injuries.
Since treatment, he has had not more trouble.’
Whatever your feelings about such treatments and that must be for the individual to decide there is no doubt that its deeply relaxing effect can only be good for you.
Eileen can be contacted on .
Eileen shows the tools of her trade