

THE Liverpool Competition scored a comfortable win over the Merseyside Competition at Northern yesterday in the opening round of the President's Trophy.
Honours shared in thriller
AINSDALE tied with Rainhill in a thrilling Merseyside Competition encounter.
Needing nine runs off the last over, Ainsdale were one run short of their target as they lost three wickets, two of them run out.
Simon Brown hit 59 for Rainhill, while Peter Hodgson scored 45 for Ainsdale and took 4–53.
Birkenhead St Mary's extended their lead at the top as the nearest challengers Sutton and Aigburth lost.
Birkenhead beat Bromborough Pool by 116 runs.
Sutton went under by two wickets in a high-scoring affair at home to Wavertree.
Aigburth crashed against Prescot & Odyssey, spinner Andy McComb doing the damage with 5–34.
Caldy won in the last over at Wirral.
Graham Rule claimed 4–34 for Wirral.
Scores: Aigburth 75 Prescot & Odyssey 79–4; Ainsdale 164 Rainhill 164–8 dec; Bromborough Pool 50 Birkenhead St Marys 166–6 dec (J Ford 67, L Roberts 4–21); Irby 142–9 dec (D Newman 69, P Coles 5–53) Liverpool Nalgo 136–9; St Marys College OB 178–9 Port Sunlight 186–3 dec (E Griffiths 81); Sutton 202–6 dec (K Barr 56) Wavertree 204–8 (K Alleyne 91 not out); Wirral 125 Caldy 126–8.
Second XI: Prescot & Odyssey 148–9 dec Aigburth 106–7; Rainhill 107–3 Ainsdale 105; Birkenhead St Marys 162 Bromborough Pool 51; Liverpool Nalgo 167–9 dec Irby 131–8; Pt Sunlight 120 St Marys 178–4 dec; W'tree 119 Sutton 120–5; Caldy 127–3 Wirral 126.
Old Parkonians suffered the narrowest of defeats against Tattenhall in the third round of the Cheshire Cup yesterday.
The scores were level, but Tattenhall lost fewer wickets.
Caldy won at Mawdsley off the penultimate ball to reach the regional final in the Village Cup.
Chris heads new drive to beat drugs
By Anne Harrison
OLYMPIC cyclist Chris Boardman is pedalling against drugs today, as he spearheads a new initiative aimed at beating the menace.
Chris was unveiling a poster this afternoon, picturing his moment of triumph when he won his gold medal in Barcelona last summer.
He hopes the poster will drive home the message to youngsters that drugs are certainly not the key to success.
The poster campaign, launched at Bromborough's Village Hotel, is jointly backed by Wirral Drug Prevention Team and Mersey Regional Health Authority which has printed 5,000 posters to be distributed throughout the area.
Chris is following in the footsteps of other Merseyside sports personalities by throwing his weight behind drugs prevention.
Top snooker player John Parrott and Tranmere Rovers footballers have already featured in similar initiatives.
Mike Ryan, leader of the Home Office-funded Wirral Drugs Prevention Team, welcomed Chris's support.
Mr Ryan said: ‘We hope the success of sports personalities like Chris Boardman will be our success, and that young people will look up to them as role models who are against drugs.’
The poster will also include the regional health authority's freephone number for advice and information on drugs and HIV issues.
The number is .
Young duo hit heights in top displays
Dawn and Clare in Hall of fame
BROUGHTON HALL schoolmates Dawn Adams and Clare Duncan produced one of the fastest 1500 metres races ever seen among under-15 girls in Britain during a high standard TSB Merseyside Schools Championships at Bebington on Saturday.
The pair, running for Liverpool, outclassed the rest of the field, with Dawn running five seconds better than she has done before to record 4 minutes 34.9 seconds and Clare clocking 4–36.6 an improvement of 14 seconds on her previous best.
A repeat at the English Schools Championships in Blackpool on July 9–10 would almost certainly put both among the medals.
Although they did not quite reach the same heights, Ann Welsh (Liverpool) and Claire Swift (Sefton) maintained a high standard in the under-17 race over the same distance, with the Liverpool girl taking the honours in 4–39.0 against her rival's 4–40.4.
Both were English schools entry standard times.
Not to be outdone, Vicky Roberts (St Helens) and Laura Carney (Liverpool) reached the same standard, with Ann just getting the verdict in 4–38.8 against Laura's 4–39.1.
Superb sprinting produced a national standard double for Louise Whitehead (Sefton), who won the 100 in 12.1 seconds and 200 metres in an even better 24.1 seconds.
Trophy for the best performance among the girls, however, went to intermediate Helen Wilding (Wirral), who won the under-17 shot with an outstanding effort of 12.42 metres.
Joanna Mahony impressed with a class under-17 400m hurdles win in 44.2 seconds, as did her Wirral colleague Sophie Cocker and Sefton's Helen McNamara in a fine senior 400 metres race won by Sophie by one-fifth of a second in 57.4 seconds.
There were two topclass long jump performances, both from Wirral athletes.
Top displays
Rebecca Murphy won the under-15 girls with 5.28 metres and Jan Irving the under-17 boys with 6.80 metres.
Dawn Adams and Ann Welsh received the Charles Whiteside memorial trophies for their 1500 displays, with the Norman Graves award for the best boys middle distance win going to Liverpool's Paul Lamb.
He won the under-17 boys 1500m in 4–03.5, just outside the national standard.
Stephen Cross (Wirral) produced a national standard throw of 57.00m to take the under-17 javelin title, with Peter Johnson (Sefton) confirming his place at the ‘national’ with a throw of 56.04m in the senior competition.
Gooch silences Lancs
GRAHAM GOOCH'S Essex defied an angry Old Trafford crowd to crush Lancashire by 60 runs in the Sunday League.
The Lancashire members were furious when they heard that Gooch and the other England selectors had axed Red Rose favourite Phil DeFreitas, preferring Essex pacemen Neil Foster and Mark Ilott.
But Essex's England trio Gooch, Ilott and offspinner Peter Such showed their quality to leave Lancashire with just one win from five matches in the 50 overs competition.
The 6,000 crowd warmed to Gooch, batting at number five, as he hit a typically powerful 67 in a match-winning stand of 116 in 24 overs with John Stephenson.
They guided Essex to a powerful position of 173 for 4 in the 36th over, and Stephenson went on to make 93 as Essex reached 222 all out.
But Lancashire's Ian Austin, Peter Martin, Wasim Akram and DeFreitas forced a collapse as Essex lost their last seven wickets in 14 overs for 40 runs.
Lancashire, however, rarely threatened to make a game of it.
Mike Atherton looked in good touch again until missing a sweep off Such and falling lbw the first of four victims for the England off-spinner.
Neil Fairbrother ran himself out for 15 and Graham Lloyd fell to a brilliant tumbling catch by Stephenson.
The chirpy charmer will bounce back
AT the age of 50, Terry Venables may finally have hit the lowest point of his up-and-down journey through football life.
But all the evidence to be gathered from his colourful career points to only one possible conclusion.
He will bounce back.
Venners, the ‘Son of Fred’ to quote the title of his autobiography, came from a council estate in Dagenham or Corned Beef City as he and his street-pals irreverently called it to taste fame, fortune and hero-worship.
True, he played for England at every level from youth to full international.
True, he turned Queens Park Rangers and Crystal Palace into forces to be reckoned with.
True, he raised English soccer stock abroad by coaching Barcelona to the Spanish League title in his first year at the club.
True, he became a Tottenham cult hero, saving the club from financial ruin with his bold takeover package with Alan Sugar in 1991.
But Venables became a personality in so many other walks of life as well.
As a wordsmith he co-wrote bestselling books and a television serial about a ‘slightly-dodgy’ detective called Hazell.
In business, he ran a chain of clubs and pubs and is currently the host of Scribes West, in Kensington.
But Venables's most cherished dream, to be master of a top football club, has been shattered.
Lee Parry (Liverpool Harriers) scales the heights in the pole vault Robert Capper (Wirral (AC) wins the intermediate 100 metres.
Ann Welsh (left), winner of the 1500 metres inter, and Dawn Adams, who won the junior 1500 metres.
Liverpool Harrier Jan Staneke takes the senior 1500 metres title ahead of club-mate Paul Lamb
Sugar insists: We don't ever want him back at club
By Ian Chadband Daily Post Correspondent
ALAN Sugar celebrated his High Court victory last night, saying: ‘Terry Venables has put me through hell.’
And he added: ‘We don't want him at the club and if I have anything to do with it, he's not coming back at all.’
Sugar, holding a news conference at his lawyers' offices after the judgment in his favour, ruled out the chance of any compromise deal with Venables, saying: ‘I feel deeply aggrieved by the tactics he has adopted.
‘He's put me and a lot of other people through hell and anguish in the last few weeks.
‘The offer I made to him to buy his shares before all this unsavoury business began does not still stand.
‘I believe it was a very fair offer which would have given him the option of walking away with his dignity, but he said it was derisory and there are no more offers to be made.’
Sugar said his main reaction was one of ‘relief’ that the issue had been settled because he had received such abuse from a small section of Tottenham fans.
‘It was very hard for me to take,’ said the Amstrad boss, who was greeted by a small throng of angry fans at the High Court each day.
‘I've had to be very strong through this.
My wife and family have had to put up with abuse.’
Asked if he thought the fans were representative of all supporters, he said: ‘Tottenham has a following of 29,000 people I only saw 25.’
Sugar said he was looking forward to quickly sorting out the future of the players and staff at White Hart Lane, but added: ‘We will get by without Mr Venables.
Tottenham is bigger than any one man.’
Sugar said Venables was still empowered to return as a non-executive director, but was adamant he did not want his opponent at the club.
He said he would be talking to the existing team management duo of Doug Livermore and Ray Clemence, as well as the rest of the players as soon as they get back from vacation.
And providing encouragement for both Livermore and Clemence he said: ‘We've got excellent people in those two.
I'm not knocking Mr Venables, but they did most of the work in the season anyway.
The real donkey work was actually done by those guys.’
A wet day at Anfield but a Royal success.
Libor Pesek and the orchestra take the applause in Prague.
The music must go on!
AS a long-standing supporter of the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, I am delighted to hear that it will be playing at the closing concert of this year's Edinburgh Festival, and to read of its recent resounding success in Prague under Libor Pesek.
However, your article ‘Phil Spectre’ is most worrying.
This talented orchestra can only survive if the people of Merseyside continue to support it.
They will not do this if all the recent most regrettable and very negative publicity persists.
The highly paid management must manage! effectively, accountably and positively, and market this wonderful resource.
In other words they must get their act together and sell the R.L.P.O. to their loyal audience.
Mrs P. McKee, Merseyside.
No action on race fiasco
THE Jockey Club has decided to take no disciplinary action over the Grand National fiasco as any error of judgment had not resulted from a breach of their rules.
The Connell report said part-time recall man Ken Evans had failed to raise his flag and criticised starter Captain Keith Brown for lining up the horses too close to the tape.
Expo hopes
BIRMINGHAM yesterday put itself forward to host the Expo world trade exhibition in 2003.
A delegation of commercial leaders unveiled the city's plans at the House of Commons, sponsored by John Butcher, MP for Coventry South West.
‘Ludicrous sex’ MARY Whitehouse yesterday branded the sex scenes in the BBC Television adaptation of Lady Chatterley's Lover as ‘absolutely ludicrous.’
The head of the National Viewers and Listeners' Association, said the second episode of Ken Russell's adaption was ‘a shocking waste of money.’
Charity show
THE smash-hit musical City of Angels will stage a midnight performance on July 11 to raise money for Aids as police still hunt the killer of the show's assistant director.
Peter Walker was found dead in March at his London flat.
Now police are investigating possible links between his killing and the murder last week of caretaker Andrew Collier in London.
Mirren:Battle Whitehouse:Fury
Spelling out the dangers
MURDER and muggings play no part in the dream world portrayed in holiday brochures.
The talk is only of sun-drenched paradises and beautiful settings.
But the unpleasant reality is that some holiday destinations are positively dangerous.
This has again been brutally underlined by the killing of a 72-year-old Leicestershire man, who was found shot dead in a crime-ridden area less than two miles from the White House in Washington.
It was the latest of a growing number of violent incidents involving British tourists overseas.
Granada TV's World in Action programme will focus on this ‘holiday hell’ tonight claiming that travel agents are not warning tourists about the dangers of crime at many resorts abroad.
Travel companies have strongly denied that they are deliberately misleading customers.
But in a business which is geared to giving people a good time, there is no doubt that there is a strong temptation to gloss over potential problems.
General warnings are usually given, but often as part of the introductory briefing given to holidaymakers on their arrival.
Anyone who has been to such a gathering knows that the fun-loving atmosphere of these occasions is not ideal to hammer home messages about personal safety.
Clear, specific advice is needed.
And it should be issued separately, not mixed in with tips on where to go and what to buy.
People who travel overseas are responsible for looking after themselves.
But those who take them there have a duty to spell out the risks.
Blame lies at the top
RACING'S top brass should be ashamed of themselves.
The inquiry into the Grand National fiasco has put much of the blame on poor Ken Evans, the low-paid flagman whose job was to signal a false start.
The inquiry says he did not raise his flag an assertion he strongly denies.
But whether he did or did not is not the point.
The shambles of this year's National was a pathetic failure of organisation and planning.
Blaming the humble ‘foot-soldier’ is not good enough.
It is the racing industry's ‘generals’ who must carry the can.
TAYLOR FACES GAZZA STORM
ENGLAND manager Graham Taylor could be facing a showdown with Paul Gascoigne after his ‘refuelling’ comments about his star midfielder.
Gascoigne said in a Channel Four interview that he plans to have ‘a private word’ with the England boss following remarks which had suggested that he could have a drinking problem.
Taylor, quizzed on the TV Breakfast with Frost programme about the problems he had with such gifted players as Gazza, re-iterated his view that a player has a responsibility over what he eats and drinks.
Taylor, interviewed by Sir David Frost, said: ‘Between games, as any sportsman knows, you can train as hard as you like, but what is also important is what you eat and how you eat, what you drink and how much you drink.
‘It is as straightforward as that.’
Gascoigne said: ‘Graham Taylor said through the week I had a problem but he was not prepared to announce it.
‘I try to relax and have a drink in the house.
A lot of people drink but it's unfortunate because I am famous and well known people try to have a dig at that side of it.
‘I will be speaking to Mr Taylor privately and we will go on from there.
‘What I must do next season is get really, really fit and prove everybody wrong, which I have done about a thousand times.’
The Gascoigne row cast a shadow over England's battling 1–1 draw against Brazil yesterday, which David Platt hailed as ‘a great result for the nation’.
‘If you have a bad result like we had against Norway then of course you need something like this tour.
You need a chance to finish on a high,’ said Platt.
‘Now we have to go into the Germany game next weekend and build on what we have achieved against Brazil.’
Graham Taylor…made claims on TV
Mick scoops top prize in classic
By Dave Houghton MICK WOOLVINE scored an excellent win in the Octoplus Echo Spring Classic with a 4.740 kilo catch at Moreton Mere.
The 32-years-old Runcorn train driver made a sluggish start from a peg in the centre of the bund bank before locating a shoal of feeding skimmer bream at midwater.
Talk of the north
Mick had a depth of 14ft but pole-fished with yellow maggot at only four feet deep.
By constantly loose feeding loose maggots he was able to keep the fish active in his swim, enabling him to pick them off steadily until he had about 10 lb. 6 oz.
‘I couldn't be happier,’ he said while clinging on to his £1,000 cash envelope presented by Mel Wilde from Octoplus.
‘The Classic is the talk of the north west angling scene and I cut my holidays short just to take part in the qualifying match at Halsnead Park.’
Huyton's Keith Wilson, a member of the Octo- plus Wigan Matchgroup, was second with a 3.890 kilos (8 lb 9 oz) and received £600.
Keith, a 43-years-old engineer, was on the opposite side of the lake to the winner and caught all of his fish by quiver-tipping with a swimfeeder rig and worm bait with both caster and maggot.
His catch consisted of eight skimmer bream.
Other results: 3 Dave Horan, Wigan Octoplus (3.140); 4 Alan Murray, Ellesmere Port (2.220); 5 George Edwards, Irby (2.200); 6 Stan Hargreaves, Ormskirk (2.010).
Sections:(a) Ted Stanley, Irby (1.740);(b) Peter Price, Birkenhead (1.740);(c) Brian Woodruff, Prescot (1.225);(d) Norman Ambrose, Mersey Dockers (1.600).
Winning line…(left to right) Dave Horan, Keith Wilson, Mick Woolvine, Mel Wilde (Octoplus) and Liz Dicastiglione (Echo sponsorship executive) with (front) local youngster David Hill
Top plumber
PLUMBING student Kevin Simon, 31, of Edith Road, Seacombe, Wirral, has won £25 and a certificate in the national plumbing training awards.
Mr Simon was nominated by Wirral Metropolitan College, Birkenhead, for his work on the advanced plumbing course.
Vicar's post
WIRRAL vicar Cannon Frank Pullen has been appointed new chairman of the Bebington Council of Churches, which comprises 18 member churches of all denominations.
Disappointed
He said: ‘I'm disappointed that she has been hijacked by the Scots.
‘Surely the business community on Merseyside could have rallied to raise the cash.’
The vessel was days away from being scrapped in 1991 when SNF came up with a £300,000-plus sponsorship.
Early days…as the Spirit of Merseyside
Howard transfer stunner
WIDNES prop forward Harvey Howard has rocked the Naughton Park club with a transfer request, writes Nick Walker.
Howard is angry the Chemics have blocked his summer stint with Australian Winfield Cup side Eastern Suburbs.
Whiston-born Howard, 24, said: ‘I've told Widnes I want a move and won't play for them again.
A short-term contract would have been ideal experience.’
He added: ‘John Devereux and Richard Eyres have been allowed to play in Australia this summer and I'm suffering because other Widnes forwards are injured.’
Chemics' coach Phil Larder admits: ‘With Emosi
Koloto and Paul Moriarty already missing, our fans would crucify us if Harvey was injured while in Australia.’
CAN you tell me where Mel Gibson was born?
I say he's Australian, but a friend of mine says he's American.
B. Peters, Liverpool.
Mel Gibson was born in America in 1956, but at the age of 12 emigrated with his family to Australia.
Make your man put on the style
WHEN it comes to fashion, my fiance has got about as much style as Compo in Last of the Summer Wine.
He doesn't quite go around in wellies and a woolly hat.
But he rarely wears anything other than jeans and a T-shirt whatever the occasion.
Other men scour the shops for the latest looks and hunt down designer bargains.
Not my man.
When it comes to shops, the most adventurous he gets is a visit to Marks and Spencer.
Mind you, Marks have got some good-looking styles this summer.
I particularly like their classic clothes; elegant suits with a distinct Italian feel.
They look a million dollars especially on Marks model Marcus Schenkenberg from Sweden but cost a lot, lot less.
When they're not in suits, men can still look stylish in separates like blazers and chinos, similar to the ones offered by Great Universal Catalogue.
Teamed with plain or multi-print shirts they look the part whether you are going for a meal, to the pub or to work.
For that holiday look, Great Universal also have some terrific bermuda shorts and wacky tropical patterns and designs
…
But they'd probably look better in Skiathos than Skem!
Ton-up treat
STEVE CRAWLEY staged a one-man demolition show as Oxton raced into the quarter-finals of the Cheshire Cup.
The all-rounder hit 140 not out, including six 6s, as Oxton amassed 246–3 off 40 overs against Cheadle.
Crawley shared a stand of 64 with Matthew Roberts in the last four overs.
The visitors replied with 159–8.
World call
ANDREW GREEN, of Warrington A.C., and Brenda Walker, a former Liverpool Women's 10k winner from the Isle of Man, have been selected by Britain for the IAAF World Marathon Cup in San Sebastian, Spain, on October 31.
Trojans win
LIVERPOOL Trojans scored an easy 17–1 victory at Sheffield Bladerunners in the Northern Conference Baseball League.
Top read
ST HELENS have won the official Programme of the Year title, as judged by Open Rugby magazine.
Widnes finished fourth and RL champions Wigan fifth.
Gary strikes
GARY Connolly, the St Helens centre, scored his third try in two games in Australia as Canterbury-Bankstown went joint top of the RL Winfield Cup with a 30–0 thrashing of Newcastle Knights.
On this day
1839 Henley Regatta was held for the first time.
1955 The Association of British Travel Agents was formed.
1982 Argentinian troops on the Falkland Islands surrendered to British forces.
In the hunt DOUBLE Echo, easy winner of the Crawley Warren Handicap at York on Saturday, will make a quick reappearance in the Royal Hunt Cup next week, for which the gelding has picked up a 7lbs penalty.
Tiger feet
GLOBETROTTING mare Ruby Tiger lifted another valuable foreign prize when winning the Group Three Premio Legnano at the San Siro course in Milan yesterday.
Her next target will be the Pretty Polly Stakes at The Curragh on Saturday week.
THE Prince of Wales was expected to shake off his back injury to take part in the annual Garter ceremony at Windsor this afternoon.
He was to join the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh and the Queen Mother in the procession of Garter Knights to St George's Chapel for the service.
The Prince aggravated an old back injury during a game of polo for his Maple Leafs team at the Guards' Polo Club at Smith's Lawn in Windsor Great Park yesterday.
But Dickie Arbiter, his spokesman, said: ‘He is not badly injured he can walk but obviously as with all back problems it hurts a good deal.’
Ouch…
Prince Charles winces with pain
SUPER FONIC
French ace set to burn up the turf
Captain Becher reports
ROYAL ASCOT, an intriguing mixture of high fashion, gossip and racing, opens its gates tomorrow.
Quite simply, the greatest show on turf.
While many spectators spend the afternoon guzzling champagne and waiting for a glimpse of the Royal family, seasoned punters will be fighting for survival in the betting ring and jostling to see equine champion Zafonic in the paddock.
Zafonic's awesome 3 length annihilation of subsequent Group One hero Barathea in the 2,000 Guineas at Newmarket stamped him as potentially one of the greatest milers of all-time.
Unleashing a stunning turn of foot inside the final furlong, Andre Fabre's power-packed sensation duly smashed the track record, and can justify all the superlatives in the £145,000-added St James's Palace Stakes.
Ironically, Zafonic's biggest opponent in tomorrow's first-day feature is likely to be himself.
The colt's sheer presence has resulted in the smallest field for many years which could count against him.
A falsely-run race on heavy ground contributed to Zafonic's one defeat in six starts by Kingmambo in a four-runner event at Maisons-Laffitte in April.
He requires covering up in a strongly-run race to utilise his formidable finishing acceleration to maximum effect, and connections have taken the precaution of declaring a pacemaker in Wharf.
Confidence
Cash Asmussen believes Kingmambo subsequent French 2,000 Guineas winner and one of Francois Boutin's three Classic winners this season will confirm Maisons Laffitte form.
But providing the rain keeps away there can only be one winner the mighty Zafonic.
Peter Chapple-Hyam is fancied to saddle his first Royal Ascot winner for landlord Robert Sangster with Stonehatch in the Coventry Stakes.
The Manton twoyear-old simply pulverised his opponents at York, sprinting six lengths clear of Sinners Reprieve and Broctune Gold (winner since) in scintillating style.
He looks the week's banker bet.
Beneficial, not entered in the Derby because trainer Geoff Wragg felt he wasn't good enough, is worth a wager in the King Edward VII Stakes.
Strictly on the form book, Beneficial, who slammed Derby third Blues Traveller by four lengths in Chester's Dee Stakes, would have made Commander In Chief pull out all the stops in the Epsom blue riband.
A short head defeat by Geisway in the Predominate Stakes at Goodwood can be attributed to a farcically slowly-run race, and Beneficial should prove more effective over this extra quarter-mile.
ZAFONIC…dynamite over a mile
French ace out of Ascot
ZAFONIC STUNNER
FRENCH supercolt Zafonic is a shock absentee from the St James's Palace Stakes at Royal Ascot tomorrow.
The brilliant 2,000 Guineas winner was pulled out today apparently because the ground is too soft.
Despite more rain over the weekend, clerk of the course Nicholas Beaumont maintains the going is still good.
But a representative from owner Khalid Abdulla's team walked the course this morning before the decision was reached.
Zafonic was beaten on soft going at Maisons-Laffitte in April.
Jockey Pat Eddery will switch to Wharf, originally in the race to make the pace for Zafonic.
The weather is also concerning John Dunlop, trainer of Ventiquattrofogli.
His stable confirmed that the colt will run, but adding the proviso, ‘unless there is significant overnight rain’.
Woosnam in the swing
IAN WOOSNAM jets off to this week's US Open in good heart despite being beaten by Sam Torrance in a four-way play-off for the Honda Open.
Woosnam, Torrance, Paul Broadhurst and Sweden's Johan Rystrom tied on 278, but despite he last-gasp agony Woosnam was delighted by his form.
Torrance clinched the title with a 30 foot putt at the first extra hole and now heads for the Jersey Open tomorrow.
Stich in time: Michael Stich set himself up for Wimbledon with victory in the Stella Artois championships.
The 24-year-old German scored a comprehensive 6–3 6–4 win over South African Wayne Ferreira.
Agassi boost: Andre Agassi is set to make his tournament comeback in Germany tomorrow after eight weeks out of action with tendonitis of the right wrist.
The Wimbledon champion has accepted a wild card entry for the grass court event in Halle.
Lions switch: Loosehead prop Jason Leonard has been switched to the tighthead side of the scrum for Wednesday's match against Taranaki.
The move comes in the wake of the British Lions defeat in the first RU Test against the All Blacks.
Race plea: Milk Race winner Chris Lillywhite today made a plea for the race's future.
It faces the lost of its major sponsor, but Lillywhite said: ‘It will be devastating if the Milk Race is not here next year.’
HILL HOWLER!
Pit stop bungle wrecks Damon's chances
DAMON HILL'S hopes of a place in the top two of the Canadian Grand Prix were wrecked by his own Canon Williams team when they bungled a crucial pit stop.
The 32-year-old Londoner, son of twice champion driver Graham Hill, was in a strong second place behind his team-mate and eventual winner Alain Prost when he It was a routine stop for new tyres for Hill and, he thought, part of the team's plan.
But it went horribly wrong and ruined his hopes of finishing anywhere better than third.
‘I thought they were expecting me in,’ he said.
‘But when I came in they were clearly not ready and they were running around for tyres.
‘It was not what I expected, but I have not yet had a real chance to find out what went wrong.
You could certainly say I was very surprised.’
The bungled pit stop dropped Hill from second on Prost's tail to fourth and, although he recovered to grab a brilliant third place behind the Frenchman, it was difficult for him to hide his disappointment.
Hill added: ‘I was very happy before the pit stop and I am still not sure what happened there.
Obviously, I lost a lot of time there and when I came out I really didn't find the new tyres as much of an advantage as I had hoped.
‘Still, I was quicker and I was pushing hard until about 10 laps from the finish when I thought the engine sounded a little bit different.
So, then, I decided it was better to see the finish than not to finish at all.’
Prost won comfortably to regain the lead in the drivers championship from old rival Ayrton Senna, who was forced to retire while second seven laps from the end in his Marlboro McLaren Ford.
This allowed German Michael Schumacher to sweep into second place in his Camel Benetton Ford with Hill third and Gerhard Berger fourth for Ferrari.
Martin Brundle drove a superbly measured race in his Ligier Renault to come home fifth for his third points-scoring finish in four races.
Mudlarks' garden a heap of fun
By Ann Todd A GROUP of Liverpool youngsters are happy as mudlarks about going into school.
Pupils at Kensington infants' school are having a marvellous time just mucking about.
Old clothes
They are helping to move soil into a garden they are building at the school with the help of mums, dads and teachers.
The boys and girls brought their buckets and spades and old clothes to get stuck into their task and are finding it a lot of fun.
They helped move three-and-a-half tons of soil into the garden.
And as there is another three-and-a-half tons to go, they are looking forward to more mudlarks to come.
Head teacher Jennifer Comish said: ‘They had a wonderful time, there was mud everywhere.
‘We are building our own garden, thanks to a grant from the Merseyside Environmental Trust.
It is going to be a science and community project.’
The children are collecting plants to go into the garden.
Happy as a mudlark…one of the youngsters who is finding the task a load of fun
Salesman Paul's clothes show
PAUL JOHNSON SALES assistant Paul Johnson is up to the minute when it comes to fashion but that's hardly surprising.
The 20-year-old from West Derby works in designer menswear shop Deja-Vu in both the Cavern Walks and St John's Precinct branches.
He says: ‘I have always been a keen follower of fashion, even before I worked here.
‘Now I have to know what the latest styles are it's part of my job.’
When he's not behind the counter, Paul works hard keeping what's under the clothes in top condition.
He says: ‘I go to the gym quite often, keeping fit is important.
‘I used to play a lot of football but I'm too old now.’
What is your personal style?
I like both classically smart and casual styles.
It depends where I am and what I'm doing.
I do go for designer clothes most of the time, because they last longer and are a far better quality.
What do you wear for work?
It has to be smart.
I might wear trousers or, at the moment, a pair of loose-fitting ski-type pants.
I wear both with shirts, waistcoats and always a tie.
What do you wear when you go out?
If I'm going to a club I will wear much the same as I wear for work.
I like overshirts and rib tops with zips and buttons.
I always wear up-to-date gear, usually from the shop.
After all, I have plenty of time to look at what's in.
If I'm going down to the pub with my mates, I will probably just wear jeans but, again, I'll wear a nice shirt and smart shoes.
Which shops do you buy your clothes from?
Obviously Deja-Vu, but I shop elsewhere too.
I tend not to shop in places like Marks and Spencer, but they have got some good gear in there.
I wouldn't wear it, but it is alright for the older man…
Which is your favourite/least favourite item of clothing in your wardrobe?
My favourite is a high-buttoned waistcoat in black, my favourite colour because it's easy to match up.
My least favourites are the patterned shirts in my wardrobe that I bought a couple of years ago
I hate them.
I'll probably give them to my dad, as I do with most my clothes when I've finished with them.
Is there any style you particularly dislike?
The grunge look on short, stocky people you have to be tall to carry it off.
I'm not keen on the 60s/70s look, all these mad flares and things.
How much do you spend on clothes?
About half my wages.
It really depends, if I'm going out I'll try and get something new.
Who is your favourite designer?
I like Armani and Hugo boss but I can't afford their stuff.
I have got some Valentino gear, though that's fairly pricey.
Keane's all set to join Dalglish
REPUBLIC of Ireland midfield star Roy Keane was set to announce today that he will be joining Blackburn in time for the start of the new Premier League season.
Keane, who has also been tracked by Manchester United, Arsenal and Aston Villa, was waiting another 24 hours while he completed further negotiations.
‘It will be a relief to have it out in the open and it will stop all the questions I have been getting about my future,’ said the 21year-old Nottingham Forest player.
Keane's move could cost Blackburn £5 million which will break the British transfer record of £3.6 million that Rovers boss Kenny Dalglish paid Southampton for Alan Shearer.
Keane was set to make his announcement before he left Dublin with the rest of the Republic squad for Wednesday's World Cup tie with Lithuania in Vilnius.
Rivals
There was one late withdrawal from the Irish squad, with Crystal Palace utility player Eddie McGoldrick allowed to travel back to London to finalise a possible move to Arsenal.
Bolton Wanderers have emerged as rivals to Tranmere Rovers in the race to sign Clayton Blackmore.
Burnden Park boss Bruce Rioch is keen to strengthen his squad after winning promotion to the First Division, and Manchester United's Welsh international figures highly on his wanted list.
Blackmore, 28, who played only a cameo role in United's Premier League triumph last season, looks like ending his Old Trafford career.
Tranmere manager John King is believed to be keen to bring the utility man to Prenton Park.
English Rose
MISS United Kingdom, Claire Smith, will attend the launch of Southport's prestigious English Rose beauty contest at the Cafe Bar in Wright Street on Wednesday morning.
Ten weekly heats begin on June 22 with the grand final on September 7.
KING MAMBO THE ASCOT TOPPER
ROYAL ASCOT, an intriguing mixture of high fashion, gossip and racing, opens its gates tomorrow.
Quite simply, the greatest show on turf.
While many spectators spend the afternoon guzzling champagne and waiting in orderly fashion for a glimpse of the Royal family, seasoned punters will be fighting for survival in the betting ring and jostling to see the equine stars.
Sadly, Zafonic will not be among them, recent rain having persuaded owner Khalid Abdulla not to risk the supercolt.
Jockey Pat Eddery now rides Wharf.
The omission leaves the St James's Palace Stakes at the mercy of another French colt.
Kingmambo, the only horse to have beaten Zafonic, is the clear form pick.
He caused a sensation at Maisons-Laffitte in April when making the most of a falsely-run race and heavy ground to beat Zafonic a short head.
But there was no fluke about his victory in the French 2,000 Guineas when showing a fine burst of acceleration to bolt in by a length and a half from Bin Ajwaad.
Peter Chapple-Hyam is fancied to saddle his first Royal Ascot winner for landlord Robert Sangster with Stonehatch in the Coventry Stakes.
The Manton twoyear-old simply pulverised his opponents at York, sprinting six lengths clear of Sinners Reprieve and Broctune Gold (winner since) in scintillating style.
He looks the week's banker bet.
Beneficial, not entered in the Derby because trainer Geoff Wragg felt he wasn't good enough, is worth a wager in the King Edward VII Stakes.
Strictly on the form book, Beneficial, who slammed Derby third Blues Traveller by four lengths in Chester's Dee Stakes, would have made Commander In Chief pull out all the stops in the Epsom blue riband.
A short head defeat by Geisway in the Predominate Stakes at Goodwood can be attributed to a farcically slowly-run race, and Beneficial should prove more effective over this extra quarter-mile.
Snow Board will prove a popular order for the 2 mile Ascot Stakes.
Pat Eddery
…switch
Lillistone is star of the Century
By Ken Matthews
OLYMPIC rider Simon Lillistone (North Wirral) Velo-Kodak easily won the Liverpool Century RC Oscar Dover Memorial 25 miles time trial in 52 minutes 34 seconds at Broxton on Saturday.
Alan Roberts (Crewe Clarion Wheelers), was second in 55.49, with Frank Allen (VC Halton) continuing his good season to take third in 55.59.
Fastest veteran was Barry Bucknell (Birkenhead North End CC) in 56.46. while fastest lady was Mrs Fiona Gillmore (East Liverpool Wheelers) in 1.11.38.
Crewe Clarion Wheelers had strength in depth, with Alan Roberts well supported by Stuart Mitton, 56.41. and Chris Whittle, 58.00. for an aggregate of 2.50.30.
Century kept a share of the prizes at home, with John Aslanian taking first handicap award from a nett 45.56., after an allowance of 21 minutes.
Mike Cloonan was best novice with an excellent 1.2.54. in his first 25.
Best junior was A.C. Critcher (Hyde Olympic) in 59.50.
Marie Purvis of Manx Viking Wheelers lost her National 25 mile title at Andover.
Scotland's Sarah Phillips, who was just one second behind Purvis last year, took the title in 57.16.
Purvis was second in 57.48 and Maxine Johnson (Oundle) third in 59.13.
Askern CC took the team title with Sally Boyden (1.0.20) supported by veteran Margaret Allen (1.1.45) and Margaret's daughter, Katie (1.3.15).
Yesterday's Chester RC 25 was won by Mark Middleton (Cleveleys RC) in 55.51.
Alan Roberts (Crewe) came second in 56.51 and Frank Allen (VC Halton) third in 58.09., repeating their places of the day previously.
Crewe Clarion took the team prize with the same trio who won the Century 25 Alan Roberts, Stuart Mitton (59.26) and Chris Whittle (59.51) for an aggregate of 2.56.08.
Mansell clings to top spot
NIGEL MANSELL has retained his lead in the Indycar championship, despite crashing out of the Detroit Grand Prix.
The 39-year-old Briton, the reigning Formula One world champion, was forced out in the 68th lap of the 77-lap race.
In a hard race, with only eight of the 28 starters completing the 77 laps, Mansell who won the pole position with a speed of 106.627mph spun and hit a wall.
Mansell, in sixth place at the time, tagged the wall in turn nine with nine laps to go.
It was the first crash in an Indycar race for the Briton, who still retained his series points lead by 71 to 68 over Boesel.
Going into the right hand turn, Mansell came upon team-mate Mario Andretti, who was in fifth place and trying to overtake Boesel.
Mansell went wide and hit the outside wall with his right front tyre, damaging the suspension and causing him to retire.
American Danny Sullivan went on to win a race which also saw Emerson Fittipaldi, of Brazil, who shared the front row with Mansell, knocked out in a separate accident.
‘This has not been a very good day, but at least I am still leading the championships,’ said Mansell.
JOY AND PAIN…
Prost celebrates, but Mansell walks from his crash
Bride Carolyn's such a lovely sight all dressed up in her red and white!
By Jane Croft
SOCCER fan Carolyn O'Hagan took star billing at her own version of match of the day when she wore red and white for her marriage to John Stewart.
For the loyal Reds follower choose her wedding outfit in the team colours a dress with red bodice and white crinoline skirt topped by white bowler hat and veil.
Carolyn, 24 pictured here with three of her five bridesmaids, who were also dressed in red and white of Highfield Road South, Rock Ferry, Wirral, wore her eye-catching creation at Christchurch in Port Sunlight.
John from Glasgow Rangers fan is serving in the army in Germany, and knew nothing about Carolyn's unusual choice of dress.
Carolyn's mother, Peggy Lloyd from Belmont Avenue, Bromborough, said: ‘I didn't like the colour scheme at first anyway, I am an Evertonian.
Now I have seen it, it really does look lovely and is very Victorian.
‘Carolyn designed the dress as she has always had a flair for it.
She hadn't told John about the colour scheme because she didn't quite know what he would say.
‘She has always been a Liverpool fan, though, and used to follow them to Wembley.’
The two met through mutual friends four years ago, but it was only in March when they decided to get married.
Battle of Britain ace dies aged 84
GROUP Captain Tom
Gleave, one Liverpool's wartime air heroes, has died in a Berkshire hospital at the age of 84.
His Hurricane was shot down over Kent during the Battle of
Britan and he was badly burned.
He became one of the first to benefit from the plastic surgery techniques pioneered by Sir Archibald
McIndoe.
Group Capt Gleave, who was educated at
Liverpool Collegiate, joined Sefton Tanning
Company in 1924.
He became obsessed with flying from an early age when, in
1912, he saw a Bleriot aircraft flying near his Liverpool home.
Licence
He gained a pilot's licence in 1927 at the
Liverpool and Merseyside Flying Club.
Later that year he went to work in Canada, but on his return, in
1930, he was commissioned into the RAF.
He passed out as an
‘exceptional pilot’ in
1931 and when war broke out flew with
Bomber Command.
Before he was shot down he commanded a Hurricane squadron and was promoted
Wing Commander while he was recovering from his injuries.
He returned to flying in
1942.
After the war he served for 30 years in the history section of the
Cabinet Office.
O'Brien named new Port boss
By David Bassett
FORMER Warrington Town assistant boss Frank O'Brien has been appointed manager of Ellesmere Port Town.
O'Brien, who resigned at Warrington last month in a cash row, replaces Dave McArdle, who recently parted company with Bass NW Counties League side Ellesmere Port.
‘It is a good set-up and I am looking forward to the challenge,’ said O'Brien, who will be taking his first managerial role at non-league level after many years in coaching jobs with Marine, South Liverpool, Northwich Victoria and Warrington.
Dennis Smith, who was also on the Warrington coaching staff, will be his assistant.
O'Brien has called a meeting of all last season's Ellesmere Port players for a week on Thursday (June 24).
Two Warrington players, Colin Russell and Ian Thompson, have joined O'Brien at his new club.
MARINE Youth will be holding trials for youngsters between the ages of 15 and 17, who have had experience at county level.
The trials will be at Hightown Cricket Club every Wednesday, beginning June 23.
Further information from manager Ray Coleman (929–3528).
PRINCE PAIN:
Prince of Wales cancelled appearance at annual Garter ceremony at Windsor due to back problems aggravated by polo.
Prince also to miss whole of Royal Ascot to ‘rest’ and recover from recurrent injury, Buckingham Palace said.
See Page 4 JOBS AXE: Up to 40 management posts to be axed at Unilever Research's Port Sunlight laboratory over next 12 months as part of major shake-up at lab which employs 1,300 staff.
Company says it cannot rule out more job losses after a review of technical and administrative staff has been completed.
Don't miss Monday's 8-page Games pull-out.
SEFTON defend the Liverpool Echo Trophy when five local boroughs contest the Merseyside Youth Games at Bebington Oval sports arena on Saturday and Sunday.
During the next four nights Schools Sports Editor PAUL O'BRIEN looks at the prospects for the Games and the individual sports involved.
Pagel defends injury horror
PROP forward Gary Pagel today defended his part in the raking incident which forced captain Jean-Francois Tordo out of France's tour of South Africa.
The South African Rugby Football Union (SARFU) will hold an inquiry tomorrow into the incident during the Western Province match on Saturday in which Tordo, at the bottom of a maul, was caught by Pagel's studs.
Tordo needed about 50 stitches in his face, but Western Province loose-head prop Pagel said: ‘Rucking is all part of the game.
‘No-one goes into a loose scrum with the intention of inflicting injury on an opponent.
But if a player is lying in a position where he is hindering the ball coming out, he realises he faces the risk of being raked.’
GRIM FIND: Body of woman with stab wounds found in bathroom of house in Old Brompton Road, Kensington, west London, after man set himself alight in nearby grocery shop, Scotland Yard said.
We don't stand a sporting chance
IF a country's international standing really can be measured by its performances in the sporting arena, Britain is in an even worse mess than the bad tempered Commons row between John Major and his former Chancellor suggests.
The reputations of our national football, cricket and tennis teams have sunk to a level where victory over the likes of Macao or the Isle of Man would be greeted as minor triumphs, while even our Olympic sprint gold medallist Linford Christie could finish no better than seventh in mid-week.
This would hardly matter if we still lived in those dim and distant days when nobody took sport too seriously.
When Eric Liddell could wish his rivals good luck before grinding them into the track, and a National Hunt jockey would slow down to help a fellow rider back into the saddle.
Sponsorship
Good form, sportsmanship, amateurism and other long-forgotten traditions meant that success was relatively unimportant, provided one behaved properly, an attitude summed up perfectly by the poet Kipling in his poem ‘If…’ which still hangs, largely unread, over Wimbledon's Centre Court.
Many older people will share my sadness that mounting pressures of nationalism and above all commercialism have consigned such an approach to the legends and myths of the past.
In the modern world, sport has become at once a symbol of supposed supremacy, a means of keeping healthy, an opiate for the hopeless and the unemployed, an excuse for jingoism, and perhaps most of all, a source of considerable income.
Superstars at the top earn large sums of money from endorsements, public appearances and sponsorship in addition to their prize money, while thousands more exploit them in one way or another.
As one of the innumerable Government reports to emerge in the last 12 months confirms, the best part of one million people now earn their living, directly or indirectly, from sports and leisure orientated activities.
Merseyside has been enveloped by sporting influence more than almost anywhere else in Britain, due to its two major football clubs.
Their performances have, over the years, given ordinary people a much-needed reason to feel pride in their native city, while binding them together in the sharing of two terrible tragedies.
As we look at the shambles of England's national football team under the direction of a manager seemingly bereft of ideas or inspiration, and watch our cricketers humbled match after match, there is a feeling of shame as well as inevitable frustration.
There is nothing very new about it all Alf Ramsey was hounded out despite winning the World Cup, while Don Revie, Ron Greenwood and Bobby Robson came in for vilification but things do seem to be getting worse.
It remains true that sport is really all about competing well rather than winning, but when defeat becomes too common, particularly in activities in which we think we should excel, the moment may have come to do something drastic.
Perhaps we should stop castigating individual managers, coaches and players and take a long, hard look at the structure of our sporting institutions.
Many continue to be run by outdated methods and people who have become remote from the athletes they are supposed to serve.
Football is a prime example, with a 78-year-old figurehead, two ruling bodies in constant opposition, too many matches being played, too little proper direction, and too much emphasis on making money on all costs rather than improving declining standards.
After a hundred years of ambling forward in happy confusion, the time has surely come for a new broom or brooms to sweep clean.
Travel latest
No reports of any problems on buses, trains or ferries this evening.
Police reported no new congestion on roads, although traffic was expected to be heavier because of the rain.
New roadworks on Bayswater Road, Wallasey, began today and will last six months.
Up 18.4 at 2262.6 SE-100 up 23.8 at 2885.6 1.5280 dollars 2.4758 marks
Something's brewing
Shop with a surprise in store
IT'S long since been the woman's domain.
Ask any female about Marks and Spencer and she'll reply: ‘Knickers.’
Because, along with their food hall, that's what they're most famous for.
But the men are now muscling in, as ROY WRIGHT discovered.
MENTION Marks and Spencer to many men and the name conjures images of white Y-fronts, grey socks and last-minute panic buys on Christmas Eve.
But Marks' new range could change our shopping habits.
They've just unveiled their first range of beers and, as one with some experience of these things, it fell to me to run the rule over them.
First up is the Traditional Yorkshire Bitter.
It has the right sounding pedigree made by Paul Theakston at the Black Sheep Brewery in Masham.
It boasts a ‘unique and unmistakable flavour’ and has been brewed with ‘care and patience.’
I wasn't entirely convinced by the ‘unique’ bit: it came across as a slightly better than average bottled beer, with possibly a stronger flavour than some.
It certainly suffers in comparison with bitters employing the ‘draught flow’ system, which does wonders for the beer's head and body.
Rich
Traditional Yorkshire Bitter is exclusive to Marks and Spencer and four bottles cost £3.49.
They also offer a rich and hoppy St Michael Best Bitter, brewed ‘in the traditional way,’ at £2.49 for four cans.
But these hot summer nights lend themselves better to cold lager and I felt more at ease with the Schonbrau Original Premium Pilsener lager, very dry and good value at £3.99 for four cans.
At the cheaper end of the Marks market is the Schonbrau pilsener lager at £2.19 for a pack of four.
They also do an award-winning Steinlager from New Zealand, a type of lager already available in some off-licences and you may remember the logos from their sponsorship of the last Rugby Union World Cup.
A pack of four bottles costs a reasonable £3.49.
Finally there's the Biere d'Alsace, a premium lager from Strasbourg in the heart of lager-brewing France.
It claims the finest hops and barley for ‘a distinctly French-tasting beer.’
Ten 25cl bottles cost £4.49.
Value
As with all Marks goods, the general impression is one of good value for money.
I wonder if the wife would like a four-pack of bitter or lager for Christmas?
Or whether I'll get one for Father's Day?
Taste test…
Roy Wright tries out Marks and Spencer's top tipples
TENBY VERDICT: Epsom Derby flop Tenby was not doped, the Jockey Club announced today following results of a test.
A run out in the country
MORE than 1,000 runners disturbed the lazy calm of a country Sunday morning as they battled it out in the 11th Crosby 10k event.
It was a real change of pace for this Little Crosby householder, who turned out to watch the amateur athletes race past.
Stars will drop in
SNOOKER champion John Parrott, Rugby League star Jonathan Davies and comedian Ken Dodd will be dropping in to a major conference in Liverpool next week.
Thousands of nurses from all over the region will gather at St George's Hall for the two-day nursing conference, launched by Health Minister Brian Mawhinney.
The event gives nurse managers, qualified nurses, midwives and health visitors chance to present their achievements.
Other guests expected at the exhibition include Radio Merseyside's Billy Butler and Wally Scott, and Radio City's Debi Jones.
TENBY CLEAR AFTER DOPE TEST
DERBY favourite Tenby was not doped when he flopped in the Epsom Classic, the Jockey Club announced today.
The urine sample taken from the colt after he had trailed in 10th, 23 lengths behind stable-mate Commander In Chief, proved negative when analysed by the Horseracing Forensic Laboratory.
The result effectively ends speculation that the Henry Cecil runner, 4–5 favourite for the big race, had been ‘got at’.
Connections had postponed running plans for the previously unbeaten Tenby until they had established the cause of his failure.
Grant Pritchard-Gordon, racing manager to the colt's owner, Khalid Abdulla, commented: ‘I was not aware of the test result but we are keeping an open mind as to what went wrong.
‘Plans for Tenby are still open.
We are looking at every option.’
Meanwhile, Zafonic's omission leaves tomorrow's St James's Palace Stakes at the mercy of another French colt, Kingmambo.
He caused a sensation at Maisons-Laffitte in April when making the most of a falsely-run race and heavy ground to beat Zafonic a short head.
But there was no fluke about his victory in the French 2,000 Guineas when showing a fine burst of acceleration to bolt in by a length and a half from Bin Ajwaad.
Peter Chapple-Hyam is fancied to saddle his first Royal Ascot winner for landlord Robert Sangster with Stonehatch in the Coventry Stakes.
The Manton twoyear-old simply pulverised his opponents at York, sprinting six lengths clear of Sinners Reprieve and Broctune Gold (winner since) in scintillating style.
He looks the week's banker bet.
Beneficial, not entered in the Derby because trainer Geoff Wragg felt he wasn't good enough, is worth a wager in the King Edward VII Stakes.
Strictly on the form book, Beneficial, who slammed Derby third Blues Traveller by four lengths in Chester's Dee Stakes, would have made Commander In Chief pull out all the stops at Epsom.
A short head defeat by Geisway in the Predominate Stakes at Goodwood can be attributed to a farcically slowly-run race.
Henry Cecil
…trains Tenby
Day of misery as fall guy DeFreitas feels Test agony
ENGLAND reject Phil DeFreitas was nursing a cut hand as well as a badly bruised ego today.
DeFreitas was bitterly disappointed to be dropped from the England squad for the second Test at Lord's yesterday the only change from the side that lost to Australia in Manchester.
And Daffy's day of disaster was completed later as Lancashire took to the field against Essex in the Sunday League.
He slipped on the stairs and smashed a glass panel as he tried to steady himself.
Peter Such, the England spinner, also received a shock as some of the glass fell into his kit bag.
DeFreitas needed treatment before play started, but the injury didn't affect his bowling or catching.
He fired out two Essex batsmen for 38 in his 10 overs, and snapped up England captain Graham Gooch at mid-wicket off Peter Martin.
The announcement of the England 12 for Lord's was delayed by two hours so that Gooch could give Daffy the bad news.
Replaced
He took only two wickets in the first Test after leapfrogging Essex man Mark Ilott when Alan Igglesden pulled out injured, but had two catches dropped by Graeme Hick, including Mark Taylor early in his match-winning innings.
Daffy is replaced by another of Gooch's Essex team-mate, Neil Foster.
‘I'm surprised because I'm aware that I haven't taken many wickets this season, although I do feel I have been bowling well,’ said Foster.
Lancashire's County Championship game with Essex at Old Trafford was abandoned without a ball being bowled today.
Lancs take five bonus points and Essex seven.
‘Bring racing into 20th century’
TRAINER John Upson today launched a stinging attack on racing's hierarchy, after the findings of an investigation into the Grand National fiasco were made public.
Upson was one of the main sufferers of the Aintree shambles on April 3 as his horse, Zeta's Lad, was strongly fancied to win the race.
‘As usual, they've missed the whole point they didn't need an inquiry, it's obvious what went wrong,’ he said.
‘It's absolutely pointless blaming anyone for this episode, there is human error in everything.
‘It seems that the establishment thinking is that if it's been done for 175 years, it must be all right.
‘They are obsessed with the idea that if they make changes, it's a criticism of the way they are doing things.
‘To me, the whole starting issue is a red herring what we should be doing is looking at bringing the control of racing into the 20th century.’
John White, the jockey who rode Esha Ness to victory in the void race, is trying to put the episode behind him and is taking up training in his native Ireland next season.
‘I sent in a report to the committee and I didn't see a flag at any stage,’ he said.
‘But with all the noise, it was hard to tell what was going on.
Enough has been said about this whole thing now and I just want to forget about it.’
Putting the record straight
I WRITE in response to a letter from Mr E. Marnell you published on May 31, headed ‘Costly Appeal’.
It would be wrong if I did not correct the inaccuracies that are contained within the letter.
Firstly, Mr Marnell states that 105 men won their appeal at the Industrial Tribunal, when, in fact, it was 100 men.
Secondly, Mr Marnell states that it would cost ‘at least £2 million’ if the council lost it's appeal.
That is totally untrue and misleading to your readership.
The tribunal decision, which went in favour of the 100 men, could cost up to £1 million that is based on each man being paid the maximum in compensation, which is £10,000.
If the council had gone to appeal, then the only extra cost incurred by the council would have been the barrister's fee.
The compensation could not be increased if the council had lost it's appeal and it would therefore remain as a maximum of £1 million.
Finally, I must correct Mr Marnell's inaccurate version of a quote I made at committee.
It is true that at a Personnel Committee meeting I stated that the council had always honoured industrial tribunal decisions in the past.
I also went on to say that while that policy would be continued, the council always had and always would reserve it's right to challenge any decision that it believed was legally flawed.
Once we received the decision that went against us, I made it quite clear, at the full city council meeting, that we would seek the views of our legal advisors as to whether or not the decision was flawed.
It was our barrister's professional opinion that it was flawed.
However, as you know, the council decided not to pursue an appeal.
Councillor Alan Dean, Deputy Leader, Liverpool City Council.
Recalled Foster is fined by Essex for stump-kicking
NEIL FOSTER, recalled by England for the second Test against Australia at Lord's this week, was today fined £250 by his county Essex for his ‘stump kicking’ outburst.
The 31-year-old paceman produced a show of petulance on the first day of the County Championship match against Lancashire at Old Trafford.
Foster, frustrated by a number of near misses and a dropped catch, turned to take his anger out on the stumps, kicking two of them out of the ground.
He helped umpire Barry Meyer to repair the damage, but was called to the umpires' room at the close of play.
A statement issued by Essex, announcing the fine, added that ‘the matter is now considered closed’.
Meanwhile, England reject Phil DeFreitas was nursing a cut hand as well as a badly bruised ego today.
DeFreitas was bitterly disappointed to be dropped from the England squad for the second Test at Lord's yesterday the only change from the side that lost to Australia in Manchester.
And Daffy's day of disaster was completed later as Lancashire took to the field against Essex in the Sunday League.
He slipped on the stairs and smashed a glass panel as he tried to steady himself.
DeFreitas needed treatment before play started, but the injury didn't affect his bowling or catching.
He fired out two Essex batsmen for 38 in his 10 overs, and snapped up England captain Graham Gooch at mid-wicket off Peter Martin.
Lancashire's County Championship game with Essex at Old Trafford was abandoned without a ball being bowled today.
Lancs take five bonus points and Essex seven.
Temperance quest
I AM doing research into the Victorian Temperance Movement in Liverpool and would be grateful for any information concerning characters, events, strategies, minutes, tracts, hand-bills, meeting places etc., that your readers might be able to provide.
More interesting
I VISITED the top secret Battle of the Atlantic command centre in Rumford Street and was very impressed, but I feel it would be even more interesting if they had dummy figures dressed in naval and wrens' uniforms and placed in their respective positions.
Such an arrangement works well at the Viking Centre in York.
Scruffy city
I MADE one of my rare visits to town this week and I wish I had not.
Right in the centre of Church Street was a stall selling green groceries.
What a disgrace that this is allowed in our city.
There are at least six of these traders in the nearby market.
It reminded one of the two open-air markets in Derby Lane, one at each end, when all the pavement is taken over and one side road is blocked with cars.
People with baby buggies have to walk in the roadway and residents, I think, have to make a detour.
The powers that be just cannot be bothered.
Liverpool gets scruffier every day, with junk shops springing up all over.
Surely in 1993 we do not need a Great Homer Street system of trading as it was in the 1920s.
Let us hope that one day the council will wake up and end all street trading.
Sailors saved in yacht race drama
FOUR yachtsmen competing in a race were saved by coastguards after their vessel flooded and started to sink.
The men aboard Firefly, a 25ft catamaran, had set off from the Isle of Man on the return leg of the race when part of the vessel flooded.
They radioed for help three miles from shore.
The four were rescued by crewmen from the Isle of Man lifeboat and taken back to Douglas harbour.
The Firefly, owned by Jim Connell, of Gatley Drive, Maghull, had almost sunk when rescuers reached it.
Difficulties
The men, who were uninjured, were competing in the Isle of Man Midnight Race, an annual event organised by Tranmere Sailing Club of Birkenhead, Wirral.
The incident happened shortly before 7am yesterday morning.
Minutes later, the yacht Request, which was also competing in the race, fell into difficulties.
A spokesman at Crosby Coastguard Station said: ‘The yacht Request was on passage from Douglas to Birkenhead when she lost her rudder.
‘A crew of three yacht owner John Graham, of Prenton and two friends were on board and the vessel was taken back into Douglas harbour.’
A man was airlifted from an Isle of Man ferry to hospital after suffering a heart attack.
Nick Hodgkinson, a passenger on the King Orry, collapsed at 10pm on Saturday night, 20 miles from Liverpool.
We stand by Ken's account, say officials after start chaos probe
Aintree backing for man in Grand National fiasco
By Echo reporter
A £28-A-DAY flag man was today facing the prospect of disciplinary action over the Grand National fiasco.
After Ken Evans had borne the brunt of the blame in the official inquiry report, senior Jockey Club stewards were meeting to decide whether to summon the part-timer before a disciplinary committee.
The inquiry found he twice failed to signal a false start.
Defended
But Mr Evans, 57, of Bryn, near Wigan, who has worked at the course since 1989, was defended by the Aintree executive.
A statement issued by the board said: ‘We maintain, as we have done throughout the inquiry, that there is no reason to doubt Mr Evans's own submission that he did raise his flag on each occasion, and we have not been made aware of any evidence that he did not.’
The country's most popular horse race was reduced to a shambles last April when 30 riders failed to realise that a second false start had been called and the event had to be declared void.
Mr Justice Connell's inquiry, set up by the Jockey Club, refused to accept Mr Evans's evidence that on both occasions he waved his flag to signal to the riders that the race had been stopped.
The inquiry report said instead that he appeared to have walked off the track to get out of the way of the field of on-coming horses a finding strongly challenged by course officials.
Veteran starter Captain Keith Brown, in his last season, was also criticised for allowing the horses too close to the start tape, which broke twice, impeding the horses.
And the ‘grey gate’ starting system itself was said to be ‘not satisfactory’for the needs of the Aintree course.
Lever
The problems of the system under which the starter operates a lever had been known for some years, but the Jockey Club and the course executive failed to replace it, the report added.
The course and Capt Brown could also face disciplinary proceedings by the Jockey Club.
A Jockey Club inquiry into starting procedures, headed by Brigadier Andrew Parker Bowles, is expected to report by the end of the summer.
Comment Page Six 
Under fire…flag man Evans
Row on bill for lollipop patrols
EDUCATION chiefs are to challenge a £1m police bill to provide for lollipop men and women at Liverpool schools.
Merseyside Police Authority say the likely charge for the school crossing patrol service this year will be £1,034,390.
Liverpool City Council set aside £821,300 for the service based on the previous year's charges.
It will be faced with a £213,000 overspend if the bill cannot be reduced.
Councillors are angry that the police authority did not inform them earlier of the massive price hike.
But they have told parents: ‘Your children's crossing patrols are safe.’
The row could end with the council taking over the running of the service.
MPA provides crossing patrols on behalf of the five local authorities on Merseyside.
He's a champ
IT'S DAD'S WEEK in the Echo and every day we'll be talking to famous sons and daughters about the favourite man in their lives their dad.
Today we meet Olympic cycling champion Chris Boardman Keith.
IF it wasn't for his dad, Chris Boardman says there is no way he would be the proud owner of an Olympic gold medal, MBE…and Echo Sports Personality of the Year award.
‘As a parent myself, I can now say there is no way I could live up to what mine have done for me,’ says Chris, 24.
His dad Keith and mum Carol live just a few streets away in Hoylake, Wirral.
‘A lot of parents push their children but my dad has never done that.
He has only ever given me encouragement and support.’
That support involved ferrying Chris all over the country for race meetings in his younger days.
And he still looks after all his race entry forms.
‘I wouldn't have achieved what I have, if it wasn't for my dad.’
Father's Day coincides with an annual cycling week in the Isle of Man and Chris and family will be toasting Keith over a meal.
But the man of the moment, 55, says modestly: ‘Chris's success is all down to him.
His dedication is amazing.’
Meet the dads who are Top of the Pops in tomorrow's Echo Woman Extra.
Surprise your dad with a Father's Day greeting see page 23.
Pa excellence
The best dads on Merseyside
WHAT marvellous Merseyside dads there are.
We asked you to tell us why your dad was Top of the Pops and you kept those letters pouring in.
We chose the following three dads as the winners of our Top of the Pops Competition because they either warmed our hearts or made us laugh.
Each dad will receive a £100 goodie bag from Marks and Spencer.
JANET TANSLEY spoke to them all.
Wigan home start
WIGAN will launch their bid for a fifth consecutive Stones Bitter Championship title at home to Hull one of just two sides to win in the league at Central Park last season.
Royce Simmons' men snatched a shock 14–13 victory in September, although they lost their next three games against the champions, including a 42–0 defeat on their own ground.
The opener on Sunday, August 29, will be the first competitive match in charge for new Wigan coach John Dorahy.
And the occasion will be given more spice by the fact that Dorahy played at full back and stand off during a spell at the Boulevard.
Last season's runners-up St Helens again start their campaign with a trip to Humberside, to face George Fairbairn's Hull KR.
Wigan have two Friday night encounters being televised live by Sky Sports in the first month of the campaign, entertaining Leeds on September 10 and then their Wembley victims, Widnes, a fortnight later.
In compiling the full fixtures for the season, programme planners had to take into account a first division increased in size by two to 16, plus this autumn's tour by New Zealand.
The tight schedule will be helped slightly by the fact that Great Britain are due to face France just once next season away on April 10 with the home leg having been scrapped.
Opening fixtures
Friday, August 27: Castleford v Leeds (7.30pm)
Sunday, August 29 (3pm unless stated): Bradford Northern v Widnes, Halifax v Oldham, Hull KR v St Helens (3.15pm), Leigh v Featherstone Rovers, Salford v Sheffield Eagles, Warington v Wakefield Trinity, Wigan v Hull.
Official blamed for National fiasco
AINTREE BACKS FLAG MAN KEN
By Echo reporter
A £28-A-DAY flag man was today facing the prospect of disciplinary action over the Grand National fiasco.
After Ken Evans had borne the brunt of the blame in the official inquiry report, senior Jockey Club stewards were meeting to decide whether to summon the part-timer before a disciplinary committee.
The inquiry found he twice failed to signal a false start.
Carol with proud dad John
John is big on family
GETTING into the bathroom can be a bit of an ordeal in the Watts household…because there are 14 people battling for the washbasin.
But dad John Watts makes sure all his 12 children take their turn and controls the chaos.
But though the 39-year-old from Garston rules his home with the necessary military-style order, his children seven girls and five boys think he's the greatest!
Eldest daughter Carol, 18, tells us: ‘Even though there are 12 of us, he is always there for each of us when we need him or his shoulder to cry on.
‘I finished with my boyfriend recently and he was right there to tell me there are plenty more fish in the sea.
‘And he gave me a big cuddle even though I'm 16, which made me feel tons better straight away.’
She adds: ‘He acts all big and tough but he's a real softie underneath.
‘He can't work because he is disabled but he does his best for us and makes sure we have everything we need.’
John was astounded to learn Carol had entered him in the competition only mum Linda was let in on the secret.
He says: ‘It is hard coping with such a large family, but we manage by pulling together.
‘If we have any problems we all sit down and talk about it till they are sorted.
‘I love children which, I suppose, is obvious.
They are always around me…to be honest, I'd be lost without them.’
Eddery puts on the Ritz
By The Marquis
PAT Eddery was today installed favourite to take the Ritz Club Trophy awarded to the top jockey at Royal Ascot.
Coral quote the former champion at 4–5, but William Hill are less generous offering 1–2.
Eddery, winner of the Royal Ascot jockeys' title four times since 1986, has a powerful book of rides for the four day showpiece meeting.
Tomorrow he teams up with Factual (Queen Anne Stakes), Placerville (Prince of Wales's Stakes), Wajiba Riva (Coventry Stakes), Yeltsin (King Edward VII Stakes) and Bokaro (Ascot Stakes).
Eddery's mounts later in the week include Allegan (Gold Cup), Lyric Fantasy (King's Stand Stakes) and So Factual (Jersey Stakes).
Current champion Michael Roberts is rated second favourite
9–4 with Coral and 5–2 with William Hill.
Sheikh Mohammed's retained jockey kicks off on Tuesday with Inner City (Queen Anne Stakes), George Augustus (Prince of Wales's Stakes), Crazy Paving (Coventry Stakes), Needle Gun (King Edward VII Stakes) and Taroudant (Ascot Stakes).
Coral's Ritz Club Trophy betting: 4–5 Pat Eddery, 9–4 Michael Roberts, 8–1 John Reid, 14–1 Michael Kinane, 16–1 Frankie Dettori, 20–1 Richard Quinn & Willie Carson.
Make your man put on the style
WHEN it comes to fashion, my fiance has got about as much style as Compo in Last of the Summer Wine.
He doesn't quite go around in wellies and a woolly hat.
But he rarely wears anything other than jeans and a T-shirt whatever the occasion.
Other men scour the shops for the latest looks and hunt down designer bargains.
Not my man.
When it comes to shops, the most adventurous he gets is a visit to Marks and Spencer.
Mind you, Marks have got some good-looking styles this summer.
Classic
I particularly like their classic clothes; elegant suits with a distinct Italian feel.
They look a million dollars especially on Marks model Marcus Schenkenberg from Sweden but cost a lot, lot less.
When they're not in suits, men can still look stylish in separates like blazers and chinos, similar to the ones offered by Great Universal Catalogue.
Teamed with plain or multi-print shirts they look the part whether you are going for a meal, to the pub or to work.
Tied up!
TIE Rack has got a great selection of ties and they're great for Father's Day presents, either as a little-extra or for those who can't afford to splash out.
It's a lovely token he'll love, whichever.
Tie Rack has got cartoon ties in silk at £14.99, superhero ties with Spiderman and The Incredible Hulk, also at £14.99, and a selection of other plain and patterned ties from £9.99 to £35.
THORNTONS bosses have had a bit of a chuckle with their Father's Day range this year.
They have brought out a range of confectionery for the man in your life, be it father or partner.
There's a lemon and lime Jelly Welly at 25p within almost anybody's reach and a dark chocolate novelty bow tie filled with mint fondant at 55p.
At the dearer end of the scale there are whisky truffles (£1.49) and a milk chocolate racing car with white chocolate headlights (£2.75).
A BACK injury aggravated by polo forced the Prince of Wales to pull out of the Garter ceremony today and cancel plans to attend Royal Ascot.
The prince limped from the polo field at Smith's Lawn, Windsor, yesterday and lay in agony on the sidelines after straining his back.
Buckingham Palace officials at the time played down the seriousness of the problem and insisted he would join today's traditional procession of Garter Knights to St George's Chapel, Windsor, with the Queen, Duke of Edinburgh and Queen Mother.
But the prince was still in pain today and was forced to cancel the engagement.
Something's brewing
Shop with a surprise in store
IT'S long since been the woman's domain.
Ask any female about Marks and Spencer and she'll reply: ‘Knickers.’
Because, along with their food hall, that's what they're most famous for.
But the men are now muscling in, as ROY WRIGHT discovered.
MENTION Marks and Spencer to many men and the name conjures images of white Y-fronts, grey socks and last-minute panic buys on Christmas Eve.
But Marks' new range could change our shopping habits.
They've just unveiled their first range of beers and, as one with some experience of these things, it fell to me to run the rule over them.
First up is the Traditional Yorkshire Bitter.
It has the right sounding pedigree made by Paul Theakston at the Black Sheep Brewery in Masham.
It boasts a ‘unique and unmistakable flavour’ and has been brewed with ‘care and patience.’
I wasn't entirely convinced by the ‘unique’ bit: it came across as a slightly better than average bottled beer, with possibly a stronger flavour than some.
It certainly suffers in comparison with bitters employing the ‘draughtflow’ system, which does wonders for the beer's head and body.
Safety code planned after ECHO Inquiry into deaths
CRACKDOWN ON KILLER GAS FIRES
By Mark Davies
TOUGH new rules are being drawn up to end the danger of killer gas fires.
The move comes in the wake of the recent Echo Inquiry which exposed the potential danger in flats and bedsits.
And Liverpool Broadgreen MP Jane Kennedy launched a Commons campaign calling for regular checks on gas appliances.
Four key proposals are to be examined at a meeting of health and safety chiefs later this month: The introduction of a duty on landlords to maintain all gas appliances in a safe condition.
Nick's top pairing
NICK FALDO and Tom Kite, the reigning Open champions on both sides of the Atlantic, will meet ‘head to head’ when they set off in pursuit of the second major title of the golfing year in the US Open on Thursday.
Faldo, who dramatically captured the British Open title at Muirfield last July, will have the company of US Open champion Kite and American amateur winner Justin Leonard for the opening two rounds at Baltusrol, New Jersey.
The three tee off in one of the most attractive groupings over the first 36 holes at 2.10pm on Thursday afternoon.
Faldo shot a closing 77 in last year's US Open at Pebble Beach to finish joint fourth, six shots behind Kite, who broke his duck in the majors by mastering the windy conditions in California.
The current holders of the other two majors, Bernhard Langer and Nick Price, are also bracketed.
Langer is hoping to add a third major to his collection after winning at Augusta while Price, the US PGA champion, and recent Memorial Tournament winner, Paul Azinger, complete a high-powered threeball.
A confrontation between two of the game's biggest hitters is assured when Ian Woosnam pipped in a play-off for the Honda Open sets off in the company of the awesome former US PGA champion John Daly and another top performer, Payne Stewart.
Stewart is aiming to return to the winner's enclosure after a blank spell following his success over Scott Simpson in a play-off for the 1991 US Open.
Nomads star in pledge of loyalty
CONNAHS QUAY NOMADS' new management team of Neville Powell and Phil Evans have been given a boost with the news that star striker David O'Gorman is staying with the club.
The former Wrexham starlet hit 31 goals for the Deesiders last season, despite only joining them in October.
In a further boost, the rest of the Nomads squad are expected to re-sign shortly.
Meanwhile, Nomads have landed a plum home pre-season friendly against FA Premier League champions Manchester United on July 20.
Other attractive fixtures at the Halfway are: Chester (August 2), Wrexham (Aug 4) and Colwyn Bay (Aug 7).
Nicol answers Lions SOS
ANDY NICOL, Scotland's scrum-half on their tour of the Pacific islands, is staying down under as stand-by for Robert Jones on the Lions tour of New Zealand.
Nicol, capped four times last year, was due to fly home yesterday but the Lions' anxiety about Jones's throat infection caused the management to ask Nicol to travel from Western Samoa to New Plymouth.
‘We thought it was stupid for him to fly all the way back to the UK and then find that we had a problem with Jones,’ said Lions' manager Geoff Cooke.
‘When Jones sat on the bench on Saturday in the Test we were praying that he did not have to come on.
‘Our tour doctor has had one batch of blood tests on Jones but was unable to make an absolutely positive diagnosis and has taken a second set of tests.’
Jones trained during a constant downpour yesterday in preparation for Wednesday's match against Taranaki and has been named in the team.
And it is likely that Nicol will duplicate Steve Smith's 1980 experience of becoming a non-playing Lion.
THROAT INFECTION:
Robert Jones
Report by Phil Stanley
RHYL Football Club's committee will meet Rhyl Town Council officials tonight to discuss proposals for relocating their pitch.
This is one of the options open to the club after the unanimous vote by members and season ticket holders at Friday's special general meeting against paying the £5,000 a year rent demanded by Belle Vue's new owner David Butters.
Mandate
The club continues to occupy the ground under a protected tenancy requiring Butters to give them six months notice to quit but he has changed the locks and was ‘too busy’ to allow committee members access to check the pitch on Sunday.
‘We have been given a mandate by our supporters not to pay the rent and with Mr Butters refusing to reduce it further, the situation is still deadlocked,’ committee spokesman John Daley said yesterday.
‘It was the initiative of the town council to discuss a relocation of the pitch but we don't know where the site is yet.
‘We are also due to have talks with Colwyn Borough Council about a possible ground sharing deal with Colwyn Bay FC at Llanelian Road so it's going to be a crucial week for the club,’ added Daley.
The FA of Wales will present a special long service award to Llanidloes Town president Dick Thomas at the clubhouse on Friday night.
Thomas has clocked up 40 years service with Llanidloes.
DIARY TODAY Meeting of European Agriculture Council, Luxembourg and European Farmers' Day…
Shropshire Holstein Frisian Breeders Club's Summer Show and Sale, Shrewsbury.
Judging 10am, sale 12.15pm.
Start of three-day Three Counties Show, Malvern, Worcs.
FUW meeting with Midland Bank, Caernarfon.
TOMORROW Start of two-day Cereals ‘93 National Cereals and Combinable Crops Event, Easton Lodge Farm, Wansford, near Peterborough.
Final judging of Welsh Lamb Product of the Year, Rhoson-Sea.
FRIDAY Start of three-day Essex County Show, Great Leighs, near Chelmsford.
Anglesey FUW Open Day Brynmawr Farm, Penmon, Beaumaris, Anglesey, 11am.
SATURDAY Production sale from the Castleton Herd of British White Cattle, Abergavenny, Gwent, 12 noon.
Sale of imported German heifers, Crewe, 11am.
Cumbria NFU ‘Farming Comes To Town’ display, Carlisle.
TUESDAY Cheshire County Show, Tabley, near Knutsford.
WEDNESDAY Cheshire County Show, Tabley.
Start of four-day Royal Highland Show, Ingliston, Edinburgh.
12th Annual Sale of Continental cross cattle, Carlisle, 10.30am.
Lancashire NFU Executive Committee, Myerscough College, Preston, 7.30pm.
THURSDAY Annual meeting of the Council for the Protection of Rural England.
North Western Holstein Friesian Club's ‘Summertime Special’ Show and Sale, Crewe, 11am.
FRIDAY Annual Prize Giving, Coleg Llysfasi, Ruthin.
First service for disabled tennis event
COMPETITORS from all over the country will take part in the first North Wales regional tennis centre wheelchair tennis tournament at Wrexham this week.
Play starts on Thursday with the finals taking place on Saturday.
The winners of the tournament will be integrated into the early rounds of the centre's VW Ratings Tournament with able bodied players playing finalists of the wheelchair event.
No lifeline for hospital THE Welsh Office is refusing to intervene to retain Broughton Hospital at Hawarden for community use and respite care.
It says any proposal to decommission the hospital will first have to go out to public consultation.
No sex, please OFFA Community Council is urging Wrexham Maelor Council to enforce a law licensing and restricting the number of adult shops after the opening of a second such establishment in the town.
Friends indeed
LEAGUE of Friends branches have handed over nearly £4,000 to the Robert Jones and Agnes Hunt Orthopaedic Hospital at Gobowen at a recent meeting.
MP's visit SHADOW Welsh Secretary Ron Davies is to visit the remodelled Victoria Junior School, Wrexham, tomorrow.
Bowled over
HOLYWELL Coun Gareth Roberts is asking Delyn Borough Council to consider a new bowls pavilion and floodlighting at Fron Park in Holywell.
Barrow targets Deepdale duo
FORMER Everton apprentice Mark Leonard is on Chester City's wanted list.
And Deva Stadium manager Graham Barrow is also tracking Leonard's Preston team-mate Colin Greenall.
The pair, both available on free transfers from Deepdale, have had talks with Barrow but are adopting a wait-and-see attitude to his offers.
Barrow said: ‘I've had talks with both players but they are being paid by Preston until July so understandably are in no hurry to make up their minds.
‘Leonard was at Everton as a youngster and is the kind of forward who can hold the ball up.
‘I don't think we've had anyone like that in my time here at the club and I will be pleased if Mark agrees to join us.’
Greenall is a centre-half and between them the experienced pair have clocked up more than 700 League appearances.
Barrow is also having talks about resigning Neil Morton and Dave Thompson, who were not among the names on City's retained list.
‘That was taken out of my hands because of the uncertain future of the club,’ Barrow added.
‘I've had a chat with both of them and am hopeful that we can come to an agreement.’
Teenager Mark Limbert has also resigned for City along with Blackburn teenagers Ian Berry and Lee Moss whose signings Barrow clinched last week.
OPTIMISTIC:
Graham Barrow
Tourists flock to old station
THE ageing Trawsfynydd nuclear power station is gradually becoming one of the area's top tourist attractions.
Figures released at yesterday's meeting of the station's Local Community Liaison Council show that so far this year more than 8,000 visitors have visited the station, 70pc up on the same period last year.
There is every hope, said station manager John Moares, that the figure will reach 50,000 by the end of the year.
With the station's new information and visitors centre proving to be a great attraction, the increased numbers of visitors has led to the company employing an additional eight guides this year, he added.
‘Such is the success of the venture, which also includes nature trails, that we are planning to build a cafe close by, which again will mean more employment locally,’ said Mr Moares.
A lakeside centre for anglers is also being pursued.
Saints re-vamp Konica all-clear
Grounds of hope
Report by JOHN BRIDGWATER
NEWLY-promoted Llansantffraid's ground improvements look certain to meet with the Konica League of Wales' requirements.
The Saints were forced to carry out sweeping changes to their site, including a new stand, entrance, steps from the dressing room and floodlights.
Remarkable
But Konica League secretary John Deakin now says: ‘I can't see any problems now.
The management committee have been very impressed with Llansantffraid and the way in which they've gone about their improvements.
‘I think it's remarkable what they have achieved in such a short space of time.
When I first went to the ground a couple of months ago, I wouldn't have thought it was possible.
‘If they can maintain that enthusiasm they'll certainly be an asset to the League.’
The Saints, who won the Manweb Cymru Alliance title, were given a July 1st deadline to put their house in order.
Although the floodlights have yet to be installed, the club have now got planning permission from Montgomeryshire District Council.
‘I've been sent a very favourable letter from the council and there now looks to be no problems on that score,’ added Deakin.
Tribute
Llansantffraid boss Graham Breeze paid tribute to the band of helpers who have worked tirelessly behind the scenes to bring the ground up to scratch.
‘They've been amazing,’ he said.
‘It's hard to believe the amount of work that's gone on and it's all been voluntary.’
With the ground sorted out, Breeze will now be looking to bolster his team for next season.
‘I haven't been able to do too much so far.
But once we know where we stand, I can start sorting a few things out,’ he added.
PHIL WOOSNAM and Richard Cross have been appointed as the management team of Cymru Alliance side Rhayader for next season.
GENEROUS TRIBUTE: Graham Breeze
Dunkirk spirit helps make Jubilee Show a big success
By David Lloyd Farming Correspondent
SUNSHINE after the storms saluted the Dunkirk spirit shown by the organisers of the Golden Jubilee Aberystwyth and District Show, at Rhydyfelin, near Aberystwyth.
It was decided to press ahead with Saturday's show despite access to the main field being badly cut up by exhibitors' vehicles having to be tractor- towed into position.
But underfoot conditions in car parks and other sections of the show field stood up well despite the pre-show downpour.
Secretary Meretta Griffiths said: ‘With so much work having gone into preparing the 50th anniversary show and with many exhibitors having taken up position we decided that the show should go on.’
While the attendance was significantly down those who turned up found increased entries of cattle, sheep and horses.
Prizewinners received Golden Jubilee rosettes and all the exhibitors present received a special 50th anniversary commemorative horsebrass.
The success of Drysgol Una the Limousin cow which emerged as champion of champions in the cattle section also provided an historical link with one of the first shows.
The show catalogue featured a cover picture on a youthful Leslie Thomas, leading the Dyfed-based family's Dairy Shorthorn bull which won at Aberystwyth before gaining championship laurels at the Royal and Royal Welsh shows.
Una, his 10-year-old which collected breed honours at the 1991 Royal Welsh Show, is the daughter of a cow which he had imported from France during the build up his herd of 45 breeding cows at Drysgolgoch, Llanfyrnach.
Reserve supreme honours went to Michael Wyn Jones's giant Welsh Black bull Deiniolen Dewi which had the previous week occupied the star spot at the Montgomeryshire County Show.
In the sheep section an untrimmed Suffolk ram lamb from the 25-strong Pankymoor flock of Shropshire breeder John Sherratt, of Wem, found favour with the panel of judges by securing a clear nine point margin to gain the supreme all-breed sash.
Fellow Salopian Stanley Hulme, of Ellesmere, collected the group award with a trio of Suffolks.
Two North Wales breeders were in the money.
Hugh and Aline Jones, of Glanrafon, near Corwen, who showed the supreme champion in 1992, produced the Blue Du Maine championship and a Roiuge De L'Ouest ram lamb from E A Davies & Co, of Llangernyw, Abergele, headed the any other breed classes.
Interbreed and breed champions in the cattle and sheep sections were: -Cattle.
Supreme allbreeds champion and champion female, L V B & M Thomas & Son, Llanfyrnach, Dyfed (Limousin); reserve supreme and supreme male champion, Michael Wyn Jones, Penisarwaen, Carenarfon (Welsh Black) bull.
Reserve male W J & C M Hodges, Churchstoke (Hereford).
Reserve female, Interbreed group J G P Lwis & Co, Llanilar, Aberystwyth (Holstein Friesian); reserve L V B & M Thomas & Son (Limousin).
Welsh Black, Michael Wyn Jones.
Hereford, W J & C M Hodges.
Simmental, D G Richards, Pumpsaint, Dyfed.
Limousin, L V B & M Thomas & Son.
Butchers' beef, Mr & Mrs G D Jenkins, Newcastle Emlyn.
Holstein Friesian, J G P Lewis & Co.
Sheep.
Supreme all-breed, John Sherratt, Wem, Shrops (Suffolk); reserve Mr & Mrs D G Hazelby, Newcastle Emlyn (Charrolais).
Hill breeds, H Williams, Talybont (Welsh Mountain Hill Flock); reserve J G & E James, Penybont, Carmarthen (Black Welsh Mountain).
Group, J S Hulme, Ellesmere, Shrops (Suffolk); reserve, R S & J A Gregory, Wem (Charollais).
Welsh Mountain (Pedigree), G Husband, St Clears.
Black Welsh Mountain, J G & E James.
Welsh Mountain (Hill Flock), H Williams.
Welsh Speckled Face, Emyr H Lewis, Aberhosan.
Badger Face, T G King, Llanelli.
Jacob, Mrs H E Wheeler, Llangurig, Powys.
Suffolk, John Sherratt.
Bleu Du Maine, Mr & Mrs T H Jones, Glanrafon, Corwen.
Charollais, Mr & Mrs D G Hazelby.
Texel, G Williams & Sons, Tregaron.
Border Leicester, D J & G A Watkins, Vowchurch, Herefords.
Any other breed, E A Davies & Co, Llangernyw, Abergele.
Commercial, A; lwyn Davies, New Cross, Aberystwyth.
Butchers' lamb, Emma Williams, Llandewi Brefi.
Eight-year-old Gemma Jones and Bleu Du Maine breed champion Jager.
NORTH WALES owned Caerberllan Gold Gift provided a fitting climax when it was judged the top animal at the Show.
The top Shire Horse from William Tudor Jones, of Llanfihangel-y-Pennant, Tywyn, lined up with the supreme champions in the cattle and sheep sections to compete for the show's super supreme title.
The task of judging overall champion fell to honorary president Ieuan Jones and Lord Geraint of Ponterwyd and they ‘back’ the horse.
Pike ace Gordon's Angling
by Dave Perry
PIKE angling specialist Gordon Burton will spend June 16 fishing on the River Crossens near Southport.
The narrow land drain is his favourite fishery and where better to begin the new coarse fishing season?
He will be searching for a monster pike and working his way slowly along the river by casting spinners and lures into all of the likely spots.
Gordon, a 41 year old builder who says he only works to fund his fishing, is regarded as the best ‘lure’ fisherman in Britain.
Raided
He has developed his sport into an art and never stops fishing.
In the past month he has been busy in Scotland on Loch Lomond, and Lochs Woodhall and Ken near to Dumfries.
The Southport angling fanatic towed his boat — complete with electronic fish finder — across the border and raided the lakes in fine style to catch 19 pike weighing between 16lb and a monster scaling 26lb 4oz.
He used a variety of lures and even took a few fish on fish baits.
All of the fish, and numerous smaller ones, were returned unharmed to the lakes.
There was fabulous boat fishing in Cardigan Bay for four Merseyside anglers on board the charter boat ‘Sea Bryn’.
Skipper Mike Harris managed to locate feeding fish on the shallow reefs just a few miles from shore where John Smith, Bryce Smith and Jamie Smith from Meols, and Liverpool tackle dealer Alan Sharpe, included 50 tasty black bream in their haul.
John Smith realised an angling ambition when he boated a fine 39lb tope which will qualify him for membership of the Tope Angling Club.
There were other tope, bull-huss and thornback ray.
Jane moves in
JANE SMITH, who breeds Simmental cattle at High House Farm, Bryngwyn, Raglan, Gwent, has taken over as secretary of the National Sheep Association's Wales and Border ram sales at Builth Wells.
A past secretary of Monmouthshire Show she has taken over from Liz Davies who is now full-time NFU group secretary for Brecon and Radnor North.
JOHN DUTTON, 47, a graduate of Lancashire College of Agriculture who started his journalistic career as a Press officer with the Milk Marketing Board has been appointed Editor of ‘British Farmer’, the official journal of the NFU.
CUMBRIA NFU group secretaries Tom Hodgson and Rodney Coward and their office staff at Ulverston will share more than £2,000 as their reward for services ‘beyond the call of duty’ in helping farmers complete their IACS forms.
Oswestry
OSWESTRY TOWN officials admit they are bitterly disappointed at being rejected from the Cymru Alliance.
The club, back in business after folding five years ago, hoped to make a fresh start in Welsh football next season.
But the Alliance clubs voted against accepting Oswestry despite agreeing to increase the number of teams to 18.
Buckley, Llandudno and Cemaes Bay stepped up while relegated Brymbo and Gresford now remain in the league.
‘We were very disappointed with the decision,’ said secretary James Bond.
‘We felt we had a good chance and thought we presented our case well.’
The club, who are founder members of the Welsh FA, will now apply to either the Richards Builders Mid-Wales League or the Read Construction Welsh National League.
FLINT TOWN UNITED manager Les Davies has made five significant signings to strengthen his squad for next season's Konica League of Wales campaign.
Davies has snapped up three players from neighbours Holywell Town, goalkeeper David Edwards, centre back Alex Goss and midfielder Darren Horne who had a previous spell with Flint.
Two other notable acquisitions are Mold Alex striker Chris Davies and defender Dewi Parry from Connah's Quay Nomads.
All of last season's squad have agreed to stay and Davies hopes to clinch another two signings this week.
Meanwhile the Deesiders have fixed up four attractive preseason friendlies against football league opposition at Holywell Road.
They will face Crewe Alexandra on July 14, Stockport County the following night, Chester on July 29 and Wrexham on August 7.
Report by John Bridgwater
ABERYSTWYTH stormed into the second round of the Augustus Barnett Cup with an emphatic 97-run win over Talybont.
Opener Andy Varley paved the way with an unbeaten 97, featuring in a 107 run stand with David W Jones as Aber closed on 206–5 off 40 overs.
Bob Matthews was the pick of the Talybont bowlers taking 1–12 while John Wheeler grabbed 2–47.
Talybont were then sent back for 109, Wheeler hitting 33 not out and Simon Lloyd Williams 31.
Aberystwyth's spinners did the damage with second teamer Alun Davies taking four-10 and Anthony Evans 3–28.
Tregaron booked a place in the second round after squeezing home by two wickets with two balls to spare against Brynamlwg.
Vijay Maharaj hit a patient 54 and Tim Woods a 47 as Brynamlwg reached 166–6 in 40 overs.
But a fine 61 from Martin Jones steered the home side to a thrilling win.
League official Harri left stuck on 99 not out
Jones falls just short
HARRI JONES, general secretary of the League, proved to be the unlikely star of a truncated cup programme when he got agonizingly close to his maiden century.
Jones hit a gritty 99 not out as he carried his bat for Fron Dinas in a Tysilio Cup first round victory over Pwllheli by 166 runs.
Three sixes and seven fours gave the opener 46 runs in boundaries and the rest were grafted in ones and twos during his 40 overs stay.
But Jones was denied that special extra run.
Fron piled up 232–4 as Gwilym Williams (56) and Steve Jones (37 not out) weighed in with useful contributions, and then Pwllheli were shot out for total of just 66 as Chris Tilston took 5–13.
Anglesey Aluminium knocked out former cup winners Amlwch winning their away tie by 23 runs.
The works team scored a modest 95, Mark Williams hitting 31 not out as Tony Hughes took 4–36.
But that proved to be more than enough as Amlwch were dismissed for 72 despite 31 from Jim Harrison.
Alun Williams claimed 3–4 and Graham Eastwood 3–14.
In the Pike Trophy, first division champions Bangor snatched a thrilling win at Porthmadog with just four deliveries to spare.
Port had posted 179–7 thanks to an unbeaten half century by John Roberts.
But Bangor recovered from 42–4 to triumph without losing another wicket.
Haydn Davies slammed 73 no and Javed Iqbal 58 not out in an unbroken stand of 140.
Bethesda disposed of Beaumaris by five wickets with 10 overs left thanks chiefly to a fighting 60 by Bryn Butler.
Class above
Beaumaris ran up 116, with Ian Owen hitting 41, but Bethesda got home.
Llanrwst were a class above their hosts Menai Bridge, winning by 147 runs.
Aled Hughes fired 62 as Llanrwst totalled 207–8 despite useful bowling stints by Phil Cook (3–30) and Andy Roberts (3–65).
Menai were shot out for 60, David Wright taking 5–15.
All the others ties were postponed because of waterlogged grounds.
Gwynedd League Pike Trophy Round One: Beaumaris 116 Bethesda 119–5, Menai Bridge 60 Llanrwst 207–8, Porthmadog 179–7 Bangor 182–4.
Tysilio Cup Round One: Amlwch 72 Anglesey Aluminium 95, Fron Dinas 232–4 Pwllheli 66.
First cards are dealt out
THE first batch of cards supporting the campaign for Meirionnydd to be given unitary authority status has been sent to Welsh Secretary John Redwood.
Campaign chairman Lord Elis-Thomas has already called on Mr Redwood to postpone the plans by his predecessor, David Hunt, to amalgamate Meirionnydd with both Arfon and Dwyfor.
More than 8,000 people in Meirionnydd have already come out in support of the campaign, and their cards will now be sent to the Welsh Office in batches of between 600 and 700.
The cards will be supported later this month by a formal petition to be presented to Parliament by local MP Elfyn Llwyd.
‘The cards are being sent to the Welsh Office for Mr Redwood's attention in batches as we are able to sort them out into community areas,’ said campaign secretary Bryn Williams-Jones.
‘We want Mr Redwood to be in no doubt as to the strength of public opinion in Meirionnydd.’
‘What the campaign is seeking is a Meirionnydd-based authority, and all the evidence indicates that the people of Meirionnydd are backing us strongly.’
Elfyn Llwyd
Six hits!
HOLDERS Wrexham sank Brymbo 6–3 to book a place in the semi-final of the North Wales Mens Inter Club Tennis Shield.
Former Welsh international Geoff Roberts and partner Bob Moore reeled off a hat-trick of wins to see Wrexham home.
Teenagers Paul Dinsdale and Gareth Dixon notched two wins to earn Wrexham a semifinal tilt at Bangor.
Ruthin join them in the last four after routing Rhos on Sea 8–1, Arwyn Pierce and Stephen Flanagan and Geraint Wyn Jones and Dave Fuller with three wins and Sid Smith and Stefan Dowitcz two.
Nicky stars in champion show
CHAMPIONS Deganwy remain on top of the Daily Post North Wales Coast Bowling League Section A table after sinking Dyserth A 10–4.
Nicky Jones was Deganwy's star performer with a 21–5 win over H Cunnah while Darren Williams saw off G Cunnah's challenge 21–8.
For Dyserth, Gwyn Davies had their best win with a 21–2 slamming of previously unbeaten Steve Jones.
Bangor City toppled Rhos Park A 8–6 with Derek Caughter enjoying a 21–10 verdict over Jim Ditchfield while Lionel Davies was Rhos' best winner with a 21–11 result against Gary Healy.
Llanfairpwll A beat Denbigh A 9–5.
In Section B Colwyn Bay Cons crushed Llandudno A 12–2 while Llanrwst A ran out 11–3 victors over Llanfairpwll B. Conwy A pulled off a 9–5 victory at Caernarfon while Craig-yDon's home fixture with Rhuddlan was postponed.
In the Marstons Welsh Counties Bowling League, Deganwy were sent crashing to their first defeat of the season, 7–3 fall at Esclusham, to have their lead cut at the top to 10 points.
David Rogers spearheaded Esclusham's charge with a 21–4 victory over Nicky Jones while Dave Jones routed Gary McGill 21–8 to hoist Esclusham into third place with a match in hand.
The Wrexham-based challengers doubled up with an 8–2 triumph at Beaumaris to inflict the first home defeat of the season on their Anglesey hosts.
Defending champions Denbigh moved themselves menacingly into second place by crushing Craig-y-Don 9–1 in the biggest win of the week, but Sunny Rhyl lost ground in a shock 7–3 tumble at lowly Min-y-Don Park.
Flint new boy Bowden fires
Debut delight!
FLINTSHIRE new boy Darrel Bowden of Hawarden Park signalled his belated debut at the age of 31 with an unbeaten knock of 37 on his ground to ensure a stunning eight-wickets victory over Montgomeryshire.
Put in on a slow wicket, Montgomeryshire were bundled out for just 65 taking up virtually 45 overs.
Flawless knock
Only John Gough (19 not out) offered any resistance as veteran spinner Keith Madeley grabbed 4–9 off eight overs.
Skipper Gareth Ryan, his St Asaph clubmate, took 2–13 and Russell Wiseman of Boughton Hall weighed in with 2–17.
Opener Bowden then vindicated his selection with a flawless knock as he and Matthew Needham of Connahs Quay, with an unbeaten 17, swept Flintshire to 68–2 off 20 overs.
Madeley was named man of the match.
It was sweet revenge for Flintshire, who lost out in the corresponding fixture last season, and it gave them the perfect start as they bid to recapture the North Wales county crown.
Reigning champions Denbighshire soared to a 118runs win over Merionethshire at Gwersyllt to sound an early warning to their challengers.
False hope
Taking no chances, power packed Denbighshire amassed 243–6 after losing opening batsman Richard Buckley-Jones of Marchwiel for a duck with only three on the board.
It proved a false hope for Merioneth as Brymbo's Nigel Roberts (78), Stuart Williams (35) and Mark Jones (20 not out) teamed up with Chris Lloyd of Wrexham (63) to post a daunting total to Merioneth.
Adrian Jones (2–35) was the most successful Merioneth bowler, but his side could only manage 125 off 49 overs in reply.
Phillip Leeds (29), and Richard Hesworth (25) resisted well, but the versatile Nigel Roberts took 5–41 off 14 overs to take the man of the match award.
Ruthin schoolboy Gareth Edwards, 16, enhanced his reputation with impressive debut figures of 3–38 off his 18 overs stint, eight of them maidens.
New Zealand all-rounder Aaron Barnes cleared late on to play in the North Wales County Championship after queries over his amateur status had a dream debut for Caernarfonshire.
Barnes slammed 65 with the bat and then captured 4–32 with his medium pace bowling to steer Caernarfonshire to a 54-runs victory over Anglesey at Bethesda.
The Llandudno star figured in a stand of 96 for the third wicket, partnering team captain Dave Wallace, who hit a steady 38.
Pocketed
And then Colin Meek added 31 as Caernarfonshire took the final total for their innings to 209–8.
For Anglesey, newcomer Mohsin Chohan appearing against his former team mates pocketed 3–39 and Huw Redvers-Jones 3–61.
The island county offered a stubborn reply but were always chasing a target well out of their reach and finally fell short on 155 all out.
Anthony Jones hit 36 and RAF Valley wicket keeper debutante Steve Lewis made a fighting 24.
LEADING LIGHT: Flintshire skipper Gareth Ryan took two wickets
Underdogs as Colwyn by Mike McEvoy
COLWYN BAY'S BJ Welsh Knockout Cup campaign ended in disaster when unfancied Pontblyddyn sent them crashing out with a seven-wicket blasting.
Colwyn, who requested the match to be brought forward a week to avoid clashing with this weekend's important game between Glamorgan and Durham at their Rhos on Sea ground, must have wished they hadn't bothered.
Pontblyddyn, reigning champions of the Bass North Wales League but currently struggling in fifth from bottom place with only three wins to their credit, produced a major upset after confining the Seasiders to 66–9 off their 40 overs allocation.
Put in on an unyielding wicket, Colwyn were heavily indebted to all-rounder Glyn Gibbons whose 26 not out averted total batting humiliation.
Destroyer-in-chief Phillip Snell took 3–11, Rhys Jones 2–5 and Mike Lockitt 2–8 as Pontblyddyn turned the screw.
The modest target posed no problems for the bubbling Pontblyddyn side as they stormed to a winning 67–3 in the 20th over, opener Mark Hughes (31) and Mark Williams (16) ensuring that shell-shocked Colwyn missed out on a zone semi-final.
Now buoyant Pontblyddyn will face the winners of the other quarter-final between Brymbo and Mold which is being played this Sunday.
Meanwhile, cup specialists Northop Hall are still on course for a date at Lords in September after sending fancied Christleton tumbling out of the Rothmans National Village Knockout in the zone semi-final.
Electing to bat, Hall skipper Paul Trickett saw his side post 134–9 off their 40 overs.
Graham Hughes (25), Phil Evans (19) Craig Wilson (18) and promoted second teamer Clive Popplewell (15) all contributed to show Northop's strength in depth when the chips are down.
The prospects of success looked bleak as Christleton raced to 45–0 off only nine overs, but the tide turned as Robbie Hall and Brian Mitchell both went for 22.
Christleton were all-out for 118 in the 39th over as Hall called upon their reserves of experience.
Welsh international all-rounder Kevin Owen produced a crucial stint finishing with 1–12 off nine overs to put the brakes on the Christleton charge.
Paceman Karl Peers, recovered from injury, bagged 3–33 and Darren Peters picked up 2–28 to steer the Hall to a home tie, probably against Styal, in the zone final on Sunday week.
Bronwydd Cricket Club are looking for players to join their tour to Paris from July 25–31 where they will play four games.
Anyone interested should contact Richard Moore-Colyer on .
GIBBONS: Unbeaten
29 not enough for Bay
Celebrations
LLANFYLLIN'S 700th anniversary Charter celebrations begin on Thursday with an open air service at St Myllin's Well, followed by the opening of the Floral Arts Exhibition at the Parish Church.
Trust invite
THE Ceredigion and Mid Wales NHS Trust is to hold its first public meeting on Thursday, June 24 at 7pm in the Lecture Theatre, Postgraduate Centre, Bronglais General Hospital, Aberystwyth, giving the public an opportunity to be kept informed on the key issues which the Trust is currently facing and to hear of proposed new developments in the pipeline.
Gifts visit
A GROUP of 35 children from Dothill county infants school, Telford, will be visiting the Laura Ashley garment factory in Carno on Thursday to be presented with cotton aprons produced specially for them after they designed their own patterns based on the theme ‘Around Our School.’
Just in time
REPRESENTATIVES from 32 companies from all over Mid Wales met at Coleg Powys, Newtown, to learn about a new state-of-the-art manufacturing method, Just in Time.
The event was the latest in a series of breakfast meetings of the newly formed Mid Wales Manufacturing Group.
Electromagic
THE Mid Wales electronic specialists, Davlec Ltd of Welshpool, are organising the area's first ever seminar dealing with electromagnetic compatibility, at Ladywell House, Newtown on Friday June 25.
Mr Angry in fine form
RECALLED England paceman Neil Foster has been fined £250 by Essex for his ‘Mr Angry’ outburst against Lancashire.
Foster was punished for kicking out at the stumps during a frustrating spell at Old Trafford on Thursday.
‘I accept I was in the wrong,’ said the 31-year-old.
‘I regretted it immediately but it was just a lot of frustration.’
The show of dissent didn't do Foster's England chances any harm as 72 hours later he was told of his recall by Essex skipper Graham Gouch at the expense of Lancashire's Phil de Freitas.
Meanwhile, Essex and Lancashire were again frustrated by the Manchester weather on the final day of their championship match.
With an exciting Essex run chase in prospect, play was abandoned without a ball being bowled the second washout of the match, and Lancashire's fourth in the Championship this season after their rain-ruined trip to Aigburth.
Neil Fairbrother's side took just five bonus points, and the Red Rose skipper will be hoping for better luck in the four-day match against Sussex at Old Trafford on Thursday.
Farmed out tourist attractions like Farm World on the Clwyedog Valley Heritage Trail are drumming up publicity for a new Crosville bus service for visitors.
Farm World staff are pictured with the bus and some of their animals at Erddig Hall, one of the other attractions on the new route Picture: VIC CLEVELEY
Mac's move
VERSATILE Eddie McGoldrick last night finalised a £1m move to double cup winners Arsenal.
McGoldrick signed on for four years after talks with Highbury boss George Graham and said: ‘The boss has outlined his plans, but he hasn't guaranteed me a first-team place.’
Williams: I believe in Damon
DAMON HILL has won a massive vote of confidence from Canon Williams' team boss Frank Williams after his latest ration of rank bad luck in the Canadian Grand Prix.
Hill finished third in Montreal and is still without a win after taking over from 1992 world champion Nigel Mansell.
But Williams said there was no question in his mind about Hill's ability despite the mounting pressure on him to deliver a victory.
‘I am not disappointed in Damon at all,’ he stressed.
‘We made a mess of a pit-stop on Sunday and that was the trouble.
‘I believe in him, there is no question of that.’
The 32-year-old Londoner led from the start when he beat teammate Alain Prost off the grid and held his lead for six laps.
He was then reeled in by the Frenchman, a three-times champion who now has a record 48 victories to his name while Hill has raced in only nine Grands Prix.
Like Williams, Hill was defiant about his talent and ambitions, saying: ‘I am not too disheartened because I am improving all the time as a Grand Prix racer and you have to remember it is my first season.
‘I am learning with every race and the more I finish the more I learn and the better I get.
But I know people are not given any time in F1.
‘You are expected to perform straight away and if you are in a front-running car you are expected to perform like a front-runner immediately.
‘All I can say is that I am nearly there, but I do lack experience.
I've led a number of races and I don't think I have made too many cockups.
‘As far as Frank is concerned, he is entirely satisfied with what I am doing and he has given me the space to get on with it.
‘He's not putting any pressure on me that would cramp my style at all.’
Hill blasted critics who believe he could have blocked the Frenchman's passing move in Montreal instead of moving across to allow him room to go through.
He said: ‘I am doing it my way and if I am to be able to beat Alain Prost I want to do it on the track by out-driving him, not by any other means.
‘He is my team-mate and we want both cars on the track.’
Hill now heads towards the faster European Grands Prix in France, Silverstone and Germany with confidence high, saying: ‘I can get my teeth into those circuits.
They suit me more especially Silverstone.
‘Of course, I want to win but remember it took Nigel Mansell five years to get his first victory.
I am not doing so badly at all.’
DAMON HILL
His way
MP boosts power with TV switch
A NEW television relay system for Beddgelert, Snowdonia, will be officially launched by Dafydd Wigley, MP for Caernarfon and president of Plaid Cymru, on Friday.
The service has been provided with the support of Gwynedd County Council and Welsh Office funding.
Mr Wigley will switch on one of two transmitters at Bron Hebog mast.
Clerical appointments THE Rev Christopher Armstrong, priest-in-charge of Cropthorne with Charlton, Worcs, is to become Vicar of Aberdaron and Llangwnnadl, while the Rev David Bryant, Vicar of Llanegryn and Llanfighangel y Pennant with Talyllyn, is to become Vicar of Llanwnda and Llandwrog.
The Rev Canon William Jones, of Llanystumdwy, has been appointed treasurer of Bangor Cathedral.
Favoured treatment for Wimbledon's star turns Champion Agassi
Report by NICK ROBINSON
ANDRE AGASSI was given a helping hand last night in his bid to retain his Wimbledon title when he was elevated five places above his world ranking to No 8 seed for the Championships, which begin next Monday.
And Martina Navratilova's wish to avoid Steffi Graf until the final was granted when she was promoted above higher-ranked Arantxa Sanchez Vicario to second seed.
The other significant departure from the world ranking list is twice former champion Stefan Edberg's rise of one place to No 2 behind top seed Pete Sampras, at the expense of baseliner Jim Courier.
Promotion
Agassi's promotion despite being sidelined for eight weeks with tendonitis of the right wrist was expected with the Wimbledon seeding committee keen to officially acknowledge their reigning champion.
It means he cannot meet another top eight player until the quarter-finals.
Formby-born tournament referee Alan Mills said: ‘It was a difficult decision bearing in mind he has not played much in the last couple of months because of injury.
‘But he is the defending champion and he proved he can play on grass and he is playing this week on grass in Halle.’
The elevation of nine-times former champion Navratilova to No 2 was also widely forecast.
The 36-year-old American is unlikely ever again to have such a good chance to lift a 10th title, with Monica Seles absent and Graf out of the way until at least the final.
Mills, who explained no approach was made by, or on behalf of, Navratilova, said:
‘Her past record on grass speaks for itself.
The committee thought that for a grass court tournament she should be marginally favoured over Sanchez Vicario.’
Edberg's rise to No 2, although a welcome gesture from Wimbledon in recognition of his two titles, could backfire, with the chance that today's draw could place him in the same half as former champions Boris Becker and Michael Stich.
AGASSI…avoids top eight player until quarter-finals
Pearce signs
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY have paid Coventry £500,000 for centre half Andy Pearce.
Manager Trevor Francis sealed the deal before leaving for a family holiday in Florida.
The early days: Venables, left, jostling for a ball with then Spurs colleague Jimmy Greaves
The early days: Tycoon Alan Sugar on the day that his giant electronics company, Amstrad, went public
by Rob King in Detroit
ENGLAND'S new goalkeeping hero Tim Flowers will almost certainly be dropped for Saturday's game against Germany in Detroit.
Despite a sure-handed debut against Brazil in the 1–1 Washington draw that restored English pride, the Southampton player will be asked to make way for the third goalkeeper on the trip, Crystal Palace's Nigel Martyn.
It is a harsh decision by manager Graham Taylor but in keeping with his U.S. Cup policy of spreading experience around his squad.
There will be no complaints from 26-year-old Flowers, even though it was his self-confidence which seemed to infect an England team short of inspiration in the past two weeks.
‘In my wildest dreams the most I expected was to come on and get maybe a quarter of an hour.
I never expected to start a game,’ he said.
Surprise
‘I enjoyed myself immensely and I hope I did myself proud.’
Flowers, a surprise call-up a month ago when the squads for the World Cup double in Poland and Norway were announced, so much looked the part as Chris Woods's stand-in that he may have leapfrogged up the goalkeeping queue.
But with the record books littered with frustrated goalkeepers who lived in the shadows of a rival, Flowers is right to savour this moment.
‘If I never play again, no one can rob me of the memory,’ he says.
After two settled years there are the first signs of imminent change in Taylor's goalkeeping plans, with first choice Chris Woods suffering an alarming dip in form in the last month.
Flowers looked a figure of total confidence from the moment he made his first save from Brazilian skipper Rai.
But he revealed: ‘That's without a shadow of a doubt the hardest game I have ever played in.’
Howard's away vow
Widnes prop Harvey Howard has vowed never to play for the club again after being refused permission to spend the summer with Australian side Eastern Suburbs by his Norton Park bosses.
Howard, the 24-year-old former Waterloo Rugby Union player, has asked for a transfer after the Widnes ban.
Widnes have allowed Richard Eyres, the Great Britain forward, and Welsh international winger John Devereux to play in Australia this summer.
But coach Phil Larder said: ‘With Emosi Koloto and
Paul Moriarty already missing the start of the season, our pack would be decimated if Howard was injured playing in Australia.
Hull at home is test for Dorahy
Title kings Wigan
Report by Martin Hamer
MIGHTY Wigan launch their bid for a fifth consecutive Stones Bitter championship title at home to Hullone of just two sides to win in the league at Central Park last season.
Royce Simmons' men snatched a shock 14–13 victory in September, although they lost their next three games against the champions including a 42–0 defeat on their own ground.
The opener on Sunday, August 29 will be the first competitive match in charge for new Wigan coach John Dorahy, the successor to fellow Australian John Monie.
And he will be without the services of Martin Offiah, who suffered a dislocated shoulder while playing for Aussie club Eastern Suburbs earlier this month.
Wembley victims
Monie, who guided the Cherry and Whites to four successive league and Wembley doubles, narrowly failed to lead them to the Grand Slam last term after they were beaten by St Helens in the premiership final.
Wigan have two Friday night encounters both being televised live by Sky Sports in the first month of the campaign, entertaining Leeds on September 10 and then their Wembley victims Widnes a fortnight later.
In compiling the full fixtures for the season,programme planners had to take into account a first division increased in size by two to 16, plus this autumn's tour by New Zealand.
‘One benefit of having 16 clubs means there will always be a number of competitive matches each week,’ said chief executive Maurice Lindsay.
The tight schedule will be helped slightly by the fact that Great Britain are due to face France just once next season away on April 10 with the home leg having been scrapped.
Opening day fixtures (3pm kick-offs unless otherwise stated):-Friday August 27: Castleford v Leeds (7.30pm).
Sunday August 29: Bradford Northern v Widnes, Halifax v Oldham, Hull KR v St Helens (3.15pm), Leigh v Featherstone Rovers, Salford v Sheffield Eagles, Warington v Wakefield Trinity, Wigan v Hull.
MARTIN MISERY: Wigan look likely to be without Martin Offiah when they kick-off against Hull
Partnership seminars help promote region
THE Merseyside Partnership holds the first of three Corporate Partnership Seminars at its offices in the Cunard Building today as it continues its work of promoting the region.
Tomorrow is the start of a two day conference entitled, ‘The Business Sector and Partnership: Strategies for Economic Regeneration and Jobs’ taking place at the Atlantic Tower Hotel.
The Corporate Partnership Seminars are aimed at giving the business community a first hand insight into the role the Partnership will play in the promotion of the region and exactly how it intends to operate.
Tomorrow evening the Mersey Partnership will be sponsoring the official conference dinner at the Maritime Museum where the Partnership's Chief Executive Christopher Gibaud will be the keynote speaker.
Leg strain
Rosenthal is a national hero in Israel and at 29 may be tempted by the thought of a permanent return home even though he would prefer a move to France or Spain.
He is currently in Israel although a leg strain will keep him out of the national side, who play Finland in Helsinki in a World Cup tie tomorrow.
Maccabi Haifa won the domestic cup last season and want Rosenthal to help boost their European Cup Winners Cup campaign.
They would even be prepared to take Rosy on a one-year loan period, if that suited the player and Liverpool.
Landing Israeli soccer's best-known export would be a massive coup for owner Yacov Shachar.
Reports from the country last night said that Shachar has spoken to Souness, and had been given permission to speak to the player.
Rosenthal has rejected a one-year deal to stay at Liverpool but has dismissed the possibility of a move to Turkish club Besiktas, who showed interest last week.
Strengthen
Rosenthal signed for Liverpool three years ago but is reluctant to spend another season at Anfield with no guarantee of first team football.
Selling him would help strengthen Souness's financial hand.
The fall of Terry Venables as chief executive at Spurs will not have missed his attention — and it could strengthen the Liverpool manager's bid to persuade £2m defender Neil Ruddock to come to Anfield.
John is top shepherd
YOUNG shepherds from all parts of Wales and the Borders demonstrated their skills in a series of tests during Hill Sheep ‘93.
The ‘Young Shepherd of the Year’ title and £100 went to John C Griffiths, of Gilfach Farm, Brecon.
Arthur Edwards, of Llanrhaedr-ym-Mochnant was runner-up with Raymond Powell, of Aberedw, Builth Wells, in third place and Alan Wright, of Lydbury North, Shropshire, fourth.
The Welsh Speckled Face Sheep Society also ran competitive classes at the event.
HOMEWARD BOUND?:
Maccabi Haifa want to sign Liverpool striker Ronny Rosenthal 
Young Shepherd of the Year John Griffiths with one of his dogs
by Ray Parker
WALES captain Andrew Puddle led by example in his side's six-wicket Minor Counties win over Dorset at Cherborne School — a victory that didn't look possible at the start of play on the second day.
Puddle was run out for 97 after figuring in a third wicket stand of 181 with opener Andrew Harris which provided the platform for Wales's impressive success.
Two hours play was lost during the morning session and Wales were finally set a target 228 runs in 127 minutes plus 20 overs.
They reached their goal with five overs to spare.
It was thought a generous declaration — but not in the light of Wales's batting in their first innings.
And when they lost Jamie Sylvester and Boughton Hall's Barry Metcalf for just 11 runs the outlook was bleak.
But Harris, who made 47 in the first innings and Puddle who promoted himself in the batting order had other ideas.
They dominated the Dorset bowlers — in sharp contrast to the first innings — and the century partnership was achieved in even time.
Breathtaking
When the last 20 overs were reached, Wales wanted just 87 to win.
And although Harris and Puddle were both run out in the space of 21 runs, there were no more hiccups as Wales swept to their first win over Dorset in six seasons.
Harris and Puddle produced their breathtaking stand in just 138 minutes, no doubt influenced in their hurry by the black threatening clouds which scurried across the sky for most of the day.
Harris batted for 155 minutes and hit five fours in his innings while Puddle's stay lasted two minutes less.
He struck seven boundaries.
Former Glamorgan player John Derrick struck an unbeaten 30 of 21 balls to see Wales safely home and provide them with the perfect tonic for their Nat West Trophy game with Sussex at Hove next Tuesday.
Scores: Dorset 202–3 dec (GD Reynolds not out 81, A Willows not out 58), 154–2 dec (T Richings not our 68, JJD Harvey not out 44).
Wales 129 (AW Harris 47) and 228 -4 (AC Puddle 97, Harris 88, J Derrick not out 30).
Result: Wales won by 6 wickets.
Points: Dorset 6, Wales 17.
VIV RICHARDS yesterday ensured that his final innings at The Oval earned championship leaders Glamorgan a draw.
The visitors, who needed 427 to win after starting on 16 for three today, were grateful that the weather permitted only 17.1 overs.
They lost Tony Cottey but Richards, who has announced his retirement at the end of this season, stood firm.
Flynn steps up Harper chase
WREXHAM manager Brian Flynn has confirmed his interest in utility player Alan Harper, given a free transfer by Everton at the end of last season.
The 32-year old has had talks at the Racecourse with the Robins' boss who said it was premature to talk about concluding a deal.
‘We had a very good chat but, like most players at this stage of the year, Alan is keeping his options open,’ said Flynn.
‘We did not go into any financial discussions but obviously I am interested in signing him.
‘He has the sort of experience I want and players of his quality who become available are very few and far between.
He can play virtually anywhere and, perhaps more importantly, doesn't mind where he's playing as long as he is in the team.’
But Flynn is not pushing Harper for a decision and is happy to leave things in the air for a fortnight or so.
His other target, former Stoke goalkeeper Peter Fox comes back from holiday at the weekend and will be getting a phone call from the Wrexham manager.
‘He has been offered a player/coach position at Exeter City and that's obviously interesting him but I will be getting in touch with him before I go on holiday to see what he's doing.
‘I'm doing quite a lot of work behind the scenes and talking to various people but I'm not rushing into anything.
‘It seems probable that any signings I make will be in the pre-season period when all the lads are back in training.’
VERSATILITY:
Alan Harper
KEMP JOINS PALACE COACHING STAFF
David Kemp today joined the coaching staff at Crystal Palace as new manager Alan Smith attempts to bring some stability to the relegated club.
Smith has long-admired Kemp's professional approach and said: ‘I believe that he will complement Steve Harrison.
Both are extremely good coaches.’
Kemp has spent the last year in charge at Conference club Slough who have appointed former Millwall and Bradford City boss John Docherty in his place.
It is the second time Kemp has switched from Slough to Selhurst Park.
The first occasion was as a player 18 years ago.
He later broke into management at Wimbledon, initially at youth level.
‘He was youth manager at Wimbledon when I held a similar position at Palace.
He did a good job there and also at Plymouth and now he can do a good job for us.
‘Some people appoint their drinking partners, but this is a business proposition.
Both David and Steve will have objective views rather than tell me what I want to hear.’
Smith, meanwhile, is waiting to learn whether Republic of Ireland forward Eddie McGoldrick is joining Arsenal and whether England midfielder Geoff Thomas is going to Manchester City or Sheffield Wednesday.
The deals will bring in more than £2 million and that will help Smith keep other players at the club.
‘Chris Armstrong and Nigel Martyn both want to stay.
I need stability which I don't think we have had here for three seasons.
It's been a roller- coaster club.’
Palace have accepted a bid of £1m from City but it is understood that Sheffield Wednesday have made an identical offer.
City could be favourites because the Manchester-born player was once a supporter of the Maine Road club.
He said recently: ‘I would walk up the motorway for a chance of playing for my home town club.’
City boss Peter Reid is believed to have already discussed personal terms but Thomas will also listen to the terms offered by Wednesday boss Trevor Francis who is on holiday in Florida.
Under-fire England boss takes fresh heart from Brazil draw
We can beat best, says Taylor
GRAHAM TAYLOR now not only believes he will take England to the World Cup finals but that the draw against Brazil shows what might be possible when they get there.
After a fortnight in which most people wondered if he would survive to lead the team home next weekend after defeats against Norway and the USA, the England manager should enjoy his summer holiday.
He still has a match against world champions Germany to negotiate next Saturday, but his much-maligned players have shown they still possess the spark to brazen out the autumn qualifying triple against Poland, Holland and San Marino.
Taylor did not panic when the heat was at its fiercest, neither is he tempted to round on his critics on the strength of one game.
‘The pressure only comes off and then to a degree, not totally when you qualify for the World Cup,’ he said as the squad transferred to Detroit.
‘It's a long wait to September for me.
Poland will be a totally different game.
But what they have shown me against Brazil is that in ‘94 they can play the way they're going to have to play.’
‘Playing on a nice cool September evening or a cold October night at Wembley, you have to chase the game.
‘But you play your tournaments in red-hot weather in the middle of July and you have to be able to adjust.
If you chase the game against the likes of these teams they'll just pick you off and slit you open.
‘But we kept our shape well and it was unfortunate that we weren't able to nick a second goal.
‘Our purpose in coming has been to give people experience and it was always going to be a hard tournament against Brazil and Germany.
‘Things can get out of your hands and you start to chase things.
So in that respect the performance and result has brought things back into focus.’
Teddy Sheringham-Big money signing
Coffee time
DIOCESAN social workers are holding a coffee morning today at Bishop's House, Chester (10.30am).
Goods plea
GOODS are needed to sell at a church fete next month in Tarvin.
Anyone able to donate home produce, crafts, plants or bric-a-brac is asked to contact Tony Bland  The fete, on July 18, will raise money for St Andrew's Church, Tarvin.
Eyes down IT'S eyes down tonight at Delamere Community Centre when another prize bingo is being held (8pm).
A prize bingo is also being held this evening at Rudheath High School, Northwich.
(7pm).
Pauline is a mane attraction
QUEEN of the Liverpool Festival of Comedy Pauline Daniels arrived in fine style for her first festival appearance yesterday.
Ms Daniels turned up at the Vines Hotel, Lime Street in regal robes leading the Peter Walker shire horses Majestic and Surprise.
The brewers Peter Walker are sponsoring a number of festival events including Ms Daniels' appearance last night at The Vines with fellow comic Pete Price.
Pauline is performing throughout the festival including a premiere of her one-woman show Making a Show of Sex at the Everyman Theatre on Friday.
Directed by local film director Chris Bernard (of Letter to Brezhnev fame), the show celebrates famous funny women like Mae West, Sophie Tucker and Barbara Streisand.
The festival, featuring scores of comedians, runs throughout Merseyside until June 24.
Festival Queen Pauline Daniels offers a pint of beer each to the Peter Walker shire horses Majestic and Surprise
Faldo prepares for major target
By Gordon Simpson at Baltusrol
NICK FALDO, never afraid of hard work in his pursuit of golfing perfection, has spent 30 hours in practice for his challenge at the 93rd US Open which starts at Baltusrol, New Jersey on Thursday.
The 36-year old current British Open champion hungers after the US Open title, which he has come close to winning on a handful of occasions in the last five years.
As most of the leading American challengers arrived at the tough, par-70 lay-out to begin their preparation, Faldo had already been through a punishing schedule since Thursday.
‘I've done an awful lot of work,’ admitted Faldo at the course where Jack Nicklaus won in 1967 and ‘80.
Faldo spent almost 30 hours between Thursday and Sunday either playing, hitting shots on the range or working on his putting and he hopes the back-breaking labours pay off next weekend.
The Open champion arrived early specifically to play nearby Pine Valley and he said: ‘I played the par three course there twice on Thursday, which was great.
‘I then played the main course at Pine Valley on Friday and Baltusrol on Saturday and Sunday.
‘On Sunday I spent three hours along working on my putting.
I am finding that when I get the ball further forward in my stance it helps.
I've put a lot of work into the last few days.’
The Pine Valley experience has helped to relax the normally intense Faldo, who lost a play-off to Curtis Strange in 1988, finished third in 1990 and occupied fourth place 12 months ago.
Longest
Baltusrol is unusual in many respects, most notably that it contains the longest hole in championship golf, the 630 yard 17th.
The finishing hole is also a five to complete two lopsided halves of 34–36.
However Faldo said: ‘I think it is a fair course fairer than most US Open courses.
‘You need a career shot to reach the green if you go into the rough but that's the way it should be.
Colin Montgomerie, who took third place at Pebble Beach last year, was a late starter on the first official practice day after finishing 12 shots behind Vijay Singh in the Buick Classic.
Seve Ballesteros's failure to make the halfway cut at Westchester afforded him, and Jose Maria Olazabal, an early look at the course.
Rivals plan tactics as fight moves on
By Daily Post Correspondents
TERRY Venables was ousted as chief executive of Tottenham Hotspur yesterday but the bruising battle for the club's future seemed far from over last night.
Many of the angry fans gathered outside the High Court in London after yesterday's decision vowed to boycott matches in the future, and there was a warning that as many as 12 players could now leave the club.
Venables himself pledged to continue the battle to buy out the Spurs chairman, Amstrad boss Alan Sugar, and regain his position at the club.
News of Venables' defeat was greeted with fury by hundreds of Spurs fans outside court, amid pledges that they would picket matches to discourage other supporters, until he was reinstated.
Although Venables' failure to win an in- junction preventing his sacking means Spurs will start next season without him at the helm, he could still regain control if his bid to buy out Mr Sugar proves successful.
He remains a non-executive director of the north London club he has played for and managed and in a statement last night said he would proceed with his petition to buy out Mr Sugar ‘unless advised by my lawyers not to do so.’
He added: ‘I am no less confident of my case today than I was when I was wrongfully dismissed as chief executive on May 14.’
At a separate news conference, Sugar was in equally confident mood, telling reporters: ‘We don't want him at the club and if I have anything to do with it, he's not coming back at all.’
Continued on Page 3 Continued from Page 1 Asked if he thought the fans demonstrating outside the court were representative of Spurs supporters, he said: ‘Tottenham has a following of 29,000 people I only saw 25.’
But the fans said they planned to force Mr Sugar out by starving the club of ticket sales.
Lifelong Tottenham fan Ted May, 54, from Meldreth, Cambs, said he and many others would not be going to any more home games.
‘There will definitely be a boycott.
There's enough of us to do it.
We'll be picketing the gates in an orderly legal fashion and trying to persuade people not to go in.’
Mr May broke down in tears as he added: ‘This is the saddest day I can remember in football.’
One fan vowed: ‘I'll picket every home game.’
Another said: ‘Sugar won't succeed because too many people are against him.
‘They'll be no money coming through the turnstile.
I don't know if he realises that.’
The fans chanted ‘we want Sugar out’ as they waited outside the court, but the chairman did not hear them he left court by the judge's entrance.
Venables' commercial agent Eric Hall, who also represents several Spurs players, said after the hearing: ‘I think he's lost the battle maybe today, but the war's still on and he'll win the war.
Threshold
‘I represent about 12 players at Tottenham Hotspur, and they've all told me in the last couple of days that they certainly will put in for transfers and leave Tottenham Hotspur.’
Teddy Sheringham, the striker whose transfer to White Hart Lane from Nottingham Forest was highlighted in Sugar's evidence, said he was shocked by Venables' defeat.
‘I can't believe it,’ he said from Washington, where he has been with England for the US Cup games.
‘I'm sick for Terry.
I know how much he wanted to succeed.
To get ousted when he felt on the threshold of something great is a crying shame.’
Sheringham's Spurs future must now be in doubt, though he refused to say he would never play for them again.
Vice Chancellor Sir Donald Nicholls, declining to grant Venables the injunction he sought yesterday, said that to have done so would override the majority decision of the Spurs board, which had the right to ‘hire and fire.’
He recalled that Venables and Sugar had been hailed as the ‘dream ticket’ team to run Spurs when they took control in 1991 but the relationship turned sour.
‘There is no longer room for both of them at the club.
The dispute between them is too bitter,’ said the judge.
‘The acrimony reached the stage where it was impossible for these two talented men to work together.’
The club's board had voted by a majority to remove Venables as chief executive, and Sir Donald said he did not believe it would be ‘right or sensible’ for him to make an order overriding that.
…with Kite for company
NICK FALDO and Tom Kite, the reigning British and US Open champions, will meet ‘head to head’ on Thursday.
Faldo, who won at Muirfield last July, will join Kite and American amateur winner Justin Leonard for the opening two rounds at Baltusrol, New Jersey.
Augusta winner Bernhard Langer joins US PGA champion Nick Price, and American Paul Azinger.
Big hitters Ian Woosnam and former US PGA champion John Daly are joined by Payne Stewart.
BRITAIN'S athletics selectors were slammed yesterday after persuading Kriss Akabusi to come out of international retirement for one final fling.
Akabusi agreed to take part in the European Cup 400m hurdles after Frank Dick persuaded him that newcomer Gary Cadogan was too inexperienced.
Cadogan's coach Gary
Oakes said: ‘I feel sorry for him (Akabusi) because I think selectors have put undue pressure on him to run.
‘They should have given Gary a chance.
He wouldn't have let his country down.’
Cadogan himself was philosophical.
‘I'm disappointed but not devastated and I'll be cheering Kriss on in Rome.’
Appointments
Mike joins Saville sales team
AUDIO Visual specialist The Saville Group, of Picton Road, Liverpool has strengthened its sales team with the appointment of Mike Addis, 36, who returns to the area after 10 years as sales office manager at JVC Professional products.
Mr Addis will concentrate on the promotion of Saville's range of equipment across Merseyside and North Wales, while his predecessor Mike Appleton goes to London to extend the company's activity.
JIM WELLS, who recently retired as training director of the North West Training Council has been appointed a director of their main board.
Mr Wells worked for the council for over 25 years initially as Group Training Officer becoming area training manager 25 years ago and Chief Executive and Training Director in 1984.
He was instrumental in developing links with European training organisations.
WARRINGTON based independent insurance brokers P W Creamer and Company have appointed Bob Gardner as development manager with responsibility for commercial new business.
Mr Gardner previously worked in the Preston area and more recently with Zurich Municipal in Manchester.
MALCOLM Lewis of Parkgate and Gary Graves of Horwich have joined the board of Wainhomes,
Mr Graves joined the firm in 1988 and has recently served as technical manager before becoming technical director.
Mr Lewis has ben with the company 18 years, the last six as design manager.
HAYDOCK man Alan Hill has ben promoted by Ideal Homes to projects manager at The Country Park, West Derby, Liverpool with overall responsibility for the company's biggest developments in the North West.
He was named Ideal Homes' National Site Manager of the Year in 1990.
MEMBERS of Strutt and Parker's land management team in Chester, Richard Williams and James Hall, have been appointed Associates of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors after qualifying through professional examinations.
JOHN Gittins, 33, has been appointed finance director of CRT Group, the consultancy, recruitment and training company based at Eastham.
Wrexham hot on Harper's trail
ALAN HARPER, given a free transfer by Everton at the end of last season, is a target for second division Wrexham
The 32-year old has had talks at the Racecourse with Wrexham manager Brian Flynn.
‘We had a very good chat but, like most players at this stage of the year, Alan is keeping his options open,’ said Flynn.
‘We did not go into any financial discussions but I am interested in signing him.’
Meanwhile transfer activity is hotting up at Crystal Palace.
Versatile Eddie McGoldrick last night finalised a £1 million move to double cup winners Arsenal while Manchester City have tabled a £1m bid for ex-England midfielder Geoff Thomas.
McGoldrick signed on for four years after talks with Highbury boss George Graham and said: ‘I'm delighted it's all gone through so smoothly.’
Crystal Palace's defender cum winger was released from World Cup duty with the Republic of Ireland when Arsenal's interest emerged at the weekend.
‘George Graham has outlined his plans, but he hasn't guaranteed me a first-team place,’ said McGoldrick.
Although Palace have accepted a bid of £1m from City for Thomas it is understood that Sheffield Wednesday have made an identical offer.
City could be favourites because the Manchester-born player was once a supporter of the Maine Road club.
He said recently: ‘I would walk up the motorway for a chance of playing for my home town club.’
WANTED MAN:
Alan Harper
by Bill Pierce
ROY KEANE'S British record transfer to Blackburn Rovers was still on ice last night as the Republic of Ireland midfielder decided to delay the announcement of his new club until after tomorrow's World Cup qualifier against Lithuania in Vilnius.
And even though big spending Blackburn seems certain to be Keane's choice, his Nottingham Forest manager Frank Clark insisted: ‘Roy's going nowhere until we get the £5 million at which we value him.’
Clark, who took over at the City Ground from Brian Clough last month and has already sold Clough's son Nigel to Liverpool, said: ‘Roy seems to be under the misapprehension that he can sign for anybody he likes.
‘But that is not true.
He is under contract to us and he won't be leaving until we get the price we want.’
Clark revealed that there has been only one official bid for Keane since the end of the season — a £3.5 million verbal offer from Rovers which Blackburn's chairman Robert Corr subsequently confirmed in writing to Forest chairman Fred Reacher.
Record fee
But Premier League champions Manchester United and double cup-winners Arsenal are also in the hunt and have both spoken to Keane, even though he has already agreed personal terms on a lucrative four-year contract offered by Blackburn manager Kenny Dalglish.
The £3.5 million offer tabled by Rovers tops, by £200,000, the record fee they paid Southampton for England striker Alan Shearer last summer, but Clark is adamant: ‘It is still not enough and nobody has come remotely near what we want for Roy.’
Keane, in County Monaghan yesterday preparing with the Irish squad for tomorrow's Group Three World Cup qualifier, is still under contract to Forest until the end of October.
He said: ‘Nothing will be decided until after the match against Lithuania.
‘I have made up my own mind where I want to go and I spoke to Frank Clark this morning the first time for a fortnight.
‘It is now up to Forest to complete the business situation regarding my transfer.’
Ireland manager Jack Charlton is thought to have played a part in the delay over Keane's announcement.
He wants the matter to be put on the back burner until the Republic have taken another important step towards next year's USA finals.
Milestone
The Belfast-Liverpool service will move to the new VT3 berth this autumn.
Work on the 20-acre terminal is nearing completion.
It will be equipped with three ship-to-shore gantry cranes, three transtainers for shoreside movements and 400 metres of working quay.
MDHC chief executive Trevor Furlong last night described the deal as a significant milestone for both CCL and the Port of Liverpool.
Gordon Irwin, chief executive of Belfast Harbour Commissioners, said the VT3 opening would make an impact on the speed and quality of service between Ireland, Great Britain and Europe.
Last year, CCL worked for BG Freight Line, British Pipe Coaters, Ellerman Line, Gracechurch Line, MacAndrews and RMS at its Belfast, Dublin and Liverpool terminals.
Belfast's new Victoria Terminal 3 under construction
Jim Wells
Customers in the tea room of the Walker Art Gallery got a close-up view of a classical sculpture clean-up when they called for their cuppa.
The Sculpture conservers completing the intricate clean-up of the statue ‘Death of Virginia’ are Arlinda Ribeiro (left) and Polina Agapaki, of the National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside.
Picture: RICHARD WILLIAMS
Business as usual for new Wigan boss
Central Park coach promises open rugby
WIGAN'S new Australian coach John Dorahy took charge yesterday and pledged to stick with an English-style open game.
Dorahy knows he has a tough act to follow in attempting to emulate the success of his predecessor John Monie who won every available honour.
He said: ‘I'm relishing the opportunity to follow someone like John but I have my own goals.
‘Wigan play a great entertaining game and I don't intend to change the style.’
Confident
Dorahy, previously No 2 in charge at Aussie outfit Newcastle Knights, is no stranger to England after spells with Leigh, Hull KR and Halifax, where he also had 12 months as coach.
He has signed a three-year contract at the Central Park club.
Wigan chairman Jack Robinson said: ‘We have had a long period of success under a lot of good coaches and we are confident John can do a great job for us.’
Monie, who steered Wigan to four major trophies last season, has joined New Zealand club Auckland Warriors and will lead them into Sydney's Winfield Cup competition in 1995.
MONIE: Set the highest standard in Britain
Old timers shine
ROYAL BLACKHEATH, the oldest golf club in England, played host yesterday to some of the oldest golfers in Britain.
A total of 74 players took part in the second Lawrence Batley Over-80's Championship and this time they all lived to tell the tale.
The inaugural event at Moortown, Leeds, last year was marred by the death of an 81-year-old who collapsed after just four holes.
Oldest competitor was full time astrologer Gerald Pitchforth, who at 91 still manages nine holes twice a week at Ferndown.
He still has some way to go to earn a place in the golfing record books.
Canadian Arthur Thompson played until he was 103 and even equalled his age in one round that year.
He died at 105.
The tournament was won by Bob Church, an 82-year-old 14-handicapper from Little Aston.
The former captain of Staffordshire, who played off scratch for many years, beat his age by two shots.
Also taking part was Geoff Pymer, the 81-year-old former speedway rider who has been acting as Tony Jacklin's caddie on the European tour recently.
Organisers are staging another event at Moortown on September 6 and it could be followed by a World Over-80's tournament.
School work
BROOKFIELD Comprehensive School, Kirkby, begins its Technology and Industry Week next Monday.
Every pupil will gain hands-on experience by visiting local companies, including the Liverpool Daily Post and Echo.
Allotted time
KNOWSLEY Borough Council is to open four allotment sites to the public next Sunday to coincide with the European Day of the Garden.
Holm finds his range
Direct Line Open
Tennis round-up
HENRIK HOLM recovered from a shaky start to beat Brett Steven 3–6, 7–5, 6–4 after the Direct Line Insurance Manchester Open was delayed for five and three quarter hours by rain yesterday.
Only two matches were played and the Swedish second seed was all at sea in the 32-minute opening set, losing his service three times in five attempts.
Scramble
Holm, 24, who reached the last 16 at Wimbledon last year before losing to Stefan Edberg in four sets, also trailed 5–4 in the second set but found his range in time to break New Zealander Steven in the 11th game to level the match.
Then one break in the seventh game of the final set enabled the world-ranked No 19 to scramble home after one hour and 51 minutes.
Nicolas Pereira of Venezuela won the only other match beating American Alex O'Brien in three sets by 6–7, 6–3, 7–6.
Gold medallist Steve angered
Take a jump!
Report by Ian Chadband
WORLD-BEATING Merseyside high jumper Steve Smith leapt into a war of words with chief coach Frank Dick after learning he must jump off with rival Dalton Grant for a place in the British European Cup team.
Smith was annoyed when he heard of the decision for a jump-off in Belfast this weekend which will determine who will join the team for the championships in Rome later this month.
And the Liverpool Harriers athlete hit back at criticism from Dick, who claimed he had ‘shown no respect’ for his opposition in last weekend's British final at Crystal Palace by using the competition as a training session.
‘I was surprised at Steve,’ said Dick, after watching the world junior champion clear only a paltry 2.05 metres on Sunday compared to double European Cup winner Grant's 2.25.
‘Every competitor has to have respect for the opposition.
‘It's rude to the other competitors and disrespectful to selectors.
‘His approach showed no respect and I'll be talking to his coach.’
But 19-year-old Smith has already jumped far higher than Grant this year, including 2.33 for his club in his first competitive outing two weeks ago.
And he hit back, saying: ‘Maybe the British Athletic Federation should have shown me a bit of respect and credit after all the effort I've put in for them this year.
‘I wasn't being big-headed at Crystal Palace.
‘And whatever happens in the jump off, if they pick Dalton, they're picking the wrong man.’
SMITH: European Cup place on the line after dismal showing at Crystal Palace
Leaders caught out
Bredbury's solid start ends in first defeat
BREDBURY, league leaders in the Meller Braggins Cheshire Cricket League, went down to their first defeat of the season at Cholmondley on Saturday.
Bredbury won the toss and chose to bat but after a solid start Richard Francis took four wickets to leave Bredbury on 147–9 off their 45 overs.
Peter Smith (62no) and Mark Jones (64no) saw Cholmondley home to an eight wicket win.
Despite defeat Bredbury stay top though second placed Styal closed the gap with a six wicket win at home to Hale Barnes, who were dismissed for 129.
Mobberley stay third despite defeat at home to Christleton.
Mobberley keeper and opening bat Johny Thompson decimated the Christleton bowling on his way to an unbeaten 126 taking the home side to 189–5.
But Christelton won by seven wickets thanks to Mike Hollindale (65no), Barry Mitchel (56no) and Robert Hall (51).
Barnton lie only two points behind Mobberley after a convincing win at Knutsford.
Winning the toss and putting Knutsford in to bat on a damp wicket gave leftarmer Mike Cross the chance to shine with 4–19.
Knutsford were bowled out for 61, Barnton winning by nine wickets with Alan Cope scoring 42no.
Bowdon Vale were bowled out for 82 by visitors Oakmere, Paul Valentine taking 7–30.
Oakmere struggled to a one wicket win, Nigel Troup taking 6–30.
Ashley were back to winning ways, bowling Prestbury out for 120 and scoring the runs for the loss of two wickets with Steve Tyrell hitting 82no.
At the top of the Second Division leaders Middlewich were routed by Offerton, Mike Potter taking 4–9 to dismiss the home side for 62.
Offerton lost eight wickets in reaching the target.
Davenham are the new leaders following their three wicket win at Weaverham, dismissing the home side for 95 (Tony Insley, 5–49).
Weaverham's Steve Edwards took 5–42 as the visitors struggled to a seven wicket win.
Highest score
Lindow are now second having held home side Sandbatch to 133–9 and reaching the total for the loss of two wickets, Paul Arcari 59no.
Chelford were bowled out for 135, Rick Shenton making 57, but the visitors could not reach the total, finishing on 132–8.
Pott Shrigley had the highest score of the day in the division with 171–9 at Holmes Chapel before the home side were bowled out for 86.
High Lane's 159 all out was good enough for a draw against Woodford who reached 136 -8.
Ex-PM's ROYAL SERVICE
LORD Wilson of Rievaulx former Prime Minister and Huyton MP Harold Wilson made a rare public appearance yesterday for the Garter ceremony at Windsor.
The ex-Labour PM, now 77, joined the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh for the traditional service.
Full story Page 2
Leonard move hands Brian a Test chance
Moore merrier!
From Terry Cooper in New Plymouth
BRITISH LIONS hooker Brian Moore's chances of a second Test spot were boosted yesterday by the drastic decision to convert Jason Leonard into a tight-head prop for Wednesday's match against Taranaki in New Plymouth.
The selectors, clearly disappointed with Scottish tight-head props Paul Burness and Peter Wright, have switched Leonard from the left to right side of the scrum.
Leonard has only to play effectively to win a Test place against the All Blacks in the second international in Wellington on Saturday week.
And the change could also increase Moore's chances of a place in the Test line-up.
Moore, rejected as Test hooker for Scotland's Kenny Milne in the defeat by New Zealand in Christchurch last weekend, said: ‘The change suits me.
It means I have a new tight-head partner working with me and there should be a better balance in the scrum.’
He did not criticise Wright but there is no doubt that his Test chances suffered by hooking with the Scot in three matches.
The Lions scrum was pushed around each time.
‘The scrum has been the least impressive aspect of our game and the Lions are looking to improve in that area,’ added Moore.
Chirpy
If Leonard and Moore become an effective unit and Lions' newcomer Martin Johnson plays to his normal form, there is the possibility of a dozen Englishmen in the second Test.
Leonard was in a chirpy, ‘play anywhere for a Test match’ mood, saying: ‘Every game on tour gives me and others the chance to impress.’
Leonard's switch represents the second change of heart by the Lions' management in the last week.
Just before the first Test they rejected blind-side flankers Mick Galwey and Mike Teague and chose to play Ben Clarke, tour No 8, out of position.
It proved a masterstroke despite the 20–18 defeat.
PROP forward Gary Pagel yesterday defended his part in the raking incident which forced captain Jean-Francois Tordo out of France's tour of South Africa.
The South African Rugby Football Union (SARFU) will hold an inquiry today into the incident during the Western Province match on Saturday.
Tordo needed about 50 stitches in his face, but Pagel said: ‘Rucking is all part of the game.
No one goes into a loose scrum with the intention of inflicting injury, But if a player is hindering the ball coming out, he faces the risk of being raked.’
Nichol on Lions alert
ANDY NICOL, Scotland's scrum-half on their tour of the Pacific islands, is staying down under as stand-by for Robert Jones on the Lions tour of New Zealand.
Nicol, capped four times last year, was due to fly home yesterday but the Lions' anxiety about Jones's throat infection caused the management to ask Nicol to travel from Western Samoa to New Plymouth.
‘We thought it was stupid for him to fly all the way back to the UK and then find that we had a problem with Jones,’ said Lions' manager Geoff Cooke.
‘When Jones sat on the bench on Saturday in the Test we were praying that he did not have to come on.
Our tour doctor has had one batch of blood tests on Jones but was unable to make an absolutely positive diagnosis and has taken a second set of tests.’
Dupicate
Jones trained during a constant downpour yesterday in preparation for Wednesday's match against Taranaki and has been named in the team.
And it is likely that Nicol will duplicate Steve Smith's 1980 experience of becoming a nonplaying Lion.
British Lions (v Taranaki): A Clement (Wales); R Wallace (Ire), S Gibbs (Wales) V Cunningham (Ire), T Underwood (Eng); S Barnes (Eng, capt), R Jones (Wales); P Wright (Scot), B Moore (Eng), J Leonard (Eng), M Johnson (Eng), D Cronin (Scot), M Teague (Eng), M Galwey (Ire), R Webster (Wales).
Replacements: W Carling (Eng), R Andrew (Eng), D Morris (Eng), P Burnell (Scot), K Milne (Scot), B Clarke (Eng).