

Healthier lifestyles
GOVERNMENT plans to cut the death rate from heart attacks, strokes and other illnesses took a step forward yesterday.
An overwhelming 90pc of GPs plan campaigns aimed at helping patients lead healthier lifestyles, as part of the Health of the Nation White Paper published last year, Health minister Brian Mawhinney announced.
A total of £62m will be available from July 1 for nine months to pay for the schemes, which include asthma and diabetes management programmes.
Dr Mawhinney told MPs in a Commons written reply: ‘This impressive contribution from GPs and their practice teams is exactly the sort of response we are looking for to take forward our plans to improve the nation's health.’
Brian Mawhinney
Restored my faith in human nature
I AM writing to express my sincere thanks to a gentleman who restored my faith in human nature.
I was feeling very upset after having my handbag stolen in a large hotel in Liverpool.
I had been to the health club there.
An elderly man whom I had never met before came up to me to offer help.
He told me that there are good people about and not to let this incident cloud my vision.
He then held my hand and pushed £5 into my palm.
I did not want to take this, but he insisted.
I asked him his name but he modestly said ‘that doesn't matter.’
But I found out from his friend that his name is Billy Davis, formerly from Donaldson Street in Anfield.
I would like to say a big THANK YOU to you Billy.
You are a true gentleman.
Your kindness and sincerity really did restore my faith in human nature.
I'll treasure the £5 because it will always remind me of your kindness and integrity.
Catherine Murphy, Anfield.
KINDNESS and integrity are qualities to be appreciated and just the ones to restore your faith in human nature after such a distressing theft experience.
We often hear about the people who bring misery into our lives crooks, conmen, burglars etc. but all too often the people with real values who help to brighten up our day remain anonymous.
We echo your praise of generous Billy and would like to hear from other readers who have experienced similar acts of kindness.
Let's give a public pat on the back to more good Samaritans.
Health guidelines for flood victims
HEALTH chiefs in Aberconwy have issued hygiene advice to flood victims who may be having to cope with flood-water contaminated with sewage.
They say that by following basic advice illnesses, such as sore throats and diarrhoea, can be avoided.
Children should not be allowed in sewage-contaminated water or mud as it could cause minor eye and ear infections.
People cleaning their homes should wear plastic gloves.
Hands should be washed afterwards in clean water.
Do not smoke or eat while clearing up the mess.
Flood-damaged refrigerators and freezers, which are put outside, should have their rubber door-seals removed to avoid the danger of young children hiding and suffocating in them.
Tetanus immunity should be checked for anyone with a cut or deep scratch.
Anyone developing any illness should contact their own GP.
Welsh Water say supplies are clean, although taps should be sterilised with a bleach solution.
Parents race to send son on trip of hope
By Philippa Bellis, health reporter
A COUPLE have appealed to Merseysiders to help them raise £15,000 in three months to send their son to a pioneering medical clinic in the United States.
Shaun Skelhorn, who is autistic and has behavioural problems, has been accepted at the Higashi Institute in Boston in September.
But his parents are faced with a desperate race against time to raise the money necessary for his treatment.
Parents Linda and Lesley of Halton Brow, Runcorn, have already managed to raise £5,000.
Now they are appealing for anyone to hold fund-raising events to boost the coffers.
Shaun, five, has been locked in his own lonely world since he was 18months-old.
He cannot speak although he does scream and cry.
His parents believe the intensive programme of treatment the clinic offers may open the door on a new life.
But time is of the essence.
The earlier an autistic child gets treatment, the better the chances of success.
Mr Skelhorn said: ‘If there is anyone out there who can do charity events, raffles or anything else, we would be extremely grateful.’
The couple will have to hire a house in Boston for a year.
And they have to deposit the first year's payment at the clinic as soon as they arrive.
Anyone who wants to make a donation should send it to The Shaun Skelhorn Fund, c/o Lloyds Bank, Shopping City, Runcorn WA7 2DW or PO Box 111, Runcorn, Cheshire, WA7 2XU.
Racing time…
Linda Skelhorne who is trying to raise £15,000 to help her autistic son Shaun
Council scheme to keep tabs on shops
YOUTH TEAM IN PLAN TO STUB OUT CIGARETTES
By Barry Turnbull
AN UNDERCOVER youth squad in Sefton may be used to smoke out shopkeepers who sell cigarettes to under age children.
A psychologist will keep tabs on teams of youngsters and will stop the operation if they show signs of stress.
But before the plan gets under way tobacco sellers will be sent a letter advising them of cigarette sale rules.
A month afterwards the teams will be sent out to discover whether retailers are sticking to the letter of the law.
Traders must display a notice banning sales to under 16 year olds.
Sefton's consumer protection chief Tim Cox said: ‘A recent survey showed that of 132 retailers visited, 12 per cent were not displaying the statutory sign.
‘It is suggested a letter be sent to each known tobacco retailer giving full details of the law.
‘After one month a random survey will be carried out involving test purchases.
‘A psychologist would be asked to attend all such purchases to ensure that no child is placed under any pressure.’
‘In the event of an assessment of stress the purchase would be aborted.’
Anyone reported selling cigarettes illegally could be reported for prosecution.
Sefton council will consider whether to sanction the operation.
Clifford turned me into a monster
By Tim Oglethorpe
JAMES WILBY who plays Lady Chatterley's cuckolded husband in the current BBC serial admits that playing the part put his own marriage in jeopardy.
He became as bad tempered and irritable as his character.
James, 32, says: ‘I made the mistake of taking the character home with me.
That caused me stress and drained me physically and mentally.
‘I feel particularly bad about making my wife, Shana, suffer the consequences of my state of mind.
‘I'd be rude to her about silly things.
If I found there was no coffee in the house I'd shout and swear at her and I must have been an absolute pain to live with.
I had a permanent scowl on my face for weeks.’
James's problems were increased by a break in filming between the bulk of his scenes and a few that had to be tacked on at the end of the shoot.
‘It meant I had to stay in character for the five weeks between the two periods of works.
‘But I couldn't risk slipping out of character.
If I'd been anything less than convincing, the audience would have picked up on it and I'd have been furious with myself.
‘I know it brought tension between Shana and I but if you're going to do a job properly you have to be prepared to put yourself out.
If you're not prepared to do that, it's time to give up acting.
‘But it's not an experience I'd care to go through again.
Shana was forced to resort to humouring me rather than getting into arguments with me.
At the time, Shana a picture researcher was expecting the couple's second child and, having miscarried the previous year there was a fear she might do so again.
‘It was a very difficult time for us and I'm fortunate that I have such an understanding wife.
‘Especially when I was shutting myself away until two or three in the morning, so that I was absolutely certain that I was going to be able to go into the studio a few hours later and deliver something that was believable and complete.’
The sheer task of learning Clifford's speeches demanded a great deal of concentration from James, a father of two; Barnaby, four, and Florence, one.
‘My character's part is actually bigger than that of the gamekeeper Mellor's, in terms of words.
When Clifford opens his mouth a paragraph, or three, spills out, not just a sentence.
‘And he has this ridiculous, small moustache.
‘Ken Russell, the director, insisted I grew one of my own, rather than wear a false one, so that I looked completely convincing.
‘The moustache came to symbolise everything I hated about my character and the effect he was having on me and my marriage.
‘I couldn't wait to get it off and there was a ceremonial shaving on the set at the end of the shoot.’
James realised he was going to have to live with a monster when he began to immerse himself in the part of Sir Clifford.
‘He was wounded in the war and paralysed from the waist down.
But I felt no sympathy for him.
‘He is vicious, manipulative, small-minded, yet incredibly intelligent.
‘He has no compassion and actually encourages his wife to have an affair with Mellors so that he has an heir to his estate.
‘For DH Lawrence, Clifford exemplified the class war in Britain.
Because he was from the landed gentry he thought himself superior to people like Mellors.
‘He calls Mellors a half-tamed animal with a gun and he meant it.
‘Lawrence actually wrote three versions of Lady Chatterley, called Lady Chatterley John Thomas and Lady Jane Lady Chatterley's Lover, and Clifford becomes more vicious as the books go on.
The BBC version is an amalgam of all three books.’
James finally got Sir Clifford out of his system when he went on a yachting holiday in the Mediterranean with three friends.
Shana was going to come but because she was pregnant decided not to risk it.
‘It was the best thing I could possibly have done.
It was physically very demanding and I sweated Clifford right out of my system.
‘It took a while, though.
‘My friends weren't going to take any nonsense from me and if I was at all Clifford-like with what I was saying, they quickly brought me back to reality.’
BITTER: Clifford Chatterley and his aide Mrs Bolton (played by
Shirley Anne Field)
Baton move
HOME Secretary Michael Howard was today seeing a demonstration of new types of police baton, one of which may replace the truncheon that has hardly changed in 150 years.
Safety plan for gas heaters
Exclusive by Mark Davies TOUGH new rules are being drawn up to end the danger of killer gas fires.
The move comes in the wake of the recent Echo Inquiry which exposed the potential danger in flats and bedsits.
And Liverpool Broadgreen MP Jane Kennedy launched a Commons campaign calling for regular checks on gas appliances.
Four key proposals are to be examined at a meeting of health and safety chiefs later this month: The introduction of a duty on landlords to maintain all gas appliances in a safe condition.
Extending the existing ban on installing non-room-sealed appliances in bathrooms, so that it covers bedrooms as well.
Forcing independent gas suppliers to respond to gas leaks reported to them.
Extending the regulations to more types of gas appliances including premises using gas from cylinders or garden tanks.
The Echo investigation highlighted a series of The new proposals from the Health and Safety Executive were revealed in a letter sent to Mrs Kennedy by junior Employment Minister Patrick McLoughlin.
They follow a review of existing gas safety regulations.
If the proposals are accepted, a Health and Safety Commission consultative document will follow in September.
In March this year, students John Else and Claire Short, both 19, died after being overcome by gas fumes in a shared house in Croxteth Grove, Toxteth.
John's father Eric today welcomed the new proposals.
He said: ‘If the Government carries out what has been proposed it will be a good thing.
‘Hopefully it will save other lives, although it is too late for my son.’
Mrs Kennedy saluted the Echo's action over gas fire deaths.
She said: ‘The Echo investigation coincided with my campaign, and everything coming together has really worked.
‘The proposals to be considered by the Commission are very good news.
‘We now have to wait for their report.’
In addition to the Health and Safety Executive proposals, British Gas is to review the impact of its own campaign on maintenance and safety checks on gas appliances in properties of multiple accommodation.
Gas chiefs have also vowed to support campaigns by university bosses and students' unions to create more awareness of gas safety.
And the Liverpool Student Homes organisation is considering a plan to tell landlords that, unless they conduct annual checks on gas appliances, they will not be able to register with them as providers of approved accommodation.
Turn to Page Two From Page One
Grin and bear it!
Nice to meet you…10-month-old Eleanor Kilroy makes friends with Winnie and her unnamed pal at the annual teddy bears' picnic organised by Crosby and District branch of the National Childbirth Trust at Blundellsands Key Park on Saturday when several teddies and their owners joined in the fun and frolics.
Picture: EDDIE BARFORD
Tommy is a ‘right little hero’
By Jason Burt
Picture by Martin Birchall
QUICK-THINKING Tommy Robinson is the toast of his family today after saving his four-year-old cousin from drowning.
Tommy, of Freesia Avenue, Walton Park, Liverpool, dived into a lake after little Jade Robinson toppled over the side of the boat they were both in.
The 13-year-old pupil at Alsop High School then grabbed hold of Jade and pulled her to the side of the boat even though he is not a strong swimmer himself.
His proud father, also called Thomas, said today: ‘It took a little while for us to realise what he had done.
‘The kids were out in the lake on one of those pedal boats.
Jade must have stood up and fell over the side.
‘We were at the side of the lake having a bite to eat when it all happened.
‘The next thing we knew, Tommy was carrying Jade towards us.
‘And they were both sopping wet.
‘Tommy told us that she had been under the water and he had to do something to save her.
‘Everyone was very shocked when they realised what had happened.
‘He's a right little hero.’
The drama happened at Tarleton Lake, near Preston, as the family enjoyed an evening out.
Pam Dixon, a teacher at Alsop High, said Tommy has become quite a celebrity with his school pals.
She said: ‘It was a very brave act and he's become a bit of a star.’
My hero…
Jade gets a lift from Tommy
NICE to meet you…10-month-old Eleanor Kilroy makes friends with Winnie at the annual teddy bears' picnic organised by Crosby and District branch of the National Childbirth Trust at
Blundellsands Key Park.
Picture: EDDIE BARFORD
Parents in cash race to give sick son hope
By Philippa Bellis, health reporter A COUPLE have appealed to Merseysiders to help them raise £15,000 in three months to send their son to a pioneering medical clinic in America.
Shaun Skelhorn, who is autistic and has behavioural problems, has been accepted at the Higashi Institute in Boston in September.
But his parents are faced with a desperate race against time to raise the money necessary for his treatment.
Scream
Parents Linda and Lesley of Halton Brow, Runcorn, have already managed to raise £5,000.
Now they are appealing for anyone to hold fund-raising events to boost the coffers.
Shaun, five, has been locked in his own lonely world since he was 18months-old.
He cannot speak although he does scream and cry.
His parents believe the intensive programme of treatment the clinic offers may open the door on a new life.
But time is of the essence.
The earlier an autistic child gets treatment, the better the chances of success.
Mr Skelhorn said: ‘If there is anyone out there who can do charity events, raffles or anything else, we would be extremely grateful.’
Hire
The couple will have to hire a house in Boston for a year while Shaun attends day classes.
And they have to deposit the first year's payment to the clinic as soon as they arrive.
After the first year, they can pay in instalments.
Anyone who can help should contact Mr Skelhorn on .
Anyone who wants to make a donation should send it to The Shaun Skelhorn Fund, c/o Lloyds Bank, Shopping City, Runcorn WA7 2DW or PO Box 111, Runcorn, Cheshire, WA7 2XU.
Racing time…
Linda Skelhorne who is trying to raise £15,000 to help her autistic son Shaun
Don't career ahead, for a fulfilling life play…
Happy families
HUNDREDS of people today shun a family for the sake of a thriving career.
But, according to the experts, if you want to stay healthy and happy you should have children.
They says couples who deliberately remain childless face emotional problems.
PRU LANGTON reports.
ARNOLD Schwarzenegger and Maria Shriver vouch for it, so do Goldie Hawn and Kurt Russell and a whole host of other celebrities.
Bill Cosby positively enthuses about it.
Having children is good for you.
Not just because it enhances and enriches a relationship, but because there are positive medical advantages too.
‘If you want to stay healthy and happy, make sure you have a family.
Couples who deliberately remain childless face mental and emotional problems,’ maintains social psychologist Dr Frederick Koenig.
Failures
‘Couples who are childless by choice have far more marital problems than parents,’ he adds.
‘And it's not uncommon for them to blame each other, as they get older, for taking the decision not to have a family.’
Indeed, he claims that they work too hard, substituting their career for a child and are more likely to become alcoholics or take drugs.
They can come to feel they are failures.
‘Those who tell you their careers come first and don't leave them time for a family, are simply making an excuse.
‘It is perfectly possible to combine a family with a career if you really want to.’
Someone who agrees with that is Goldie Hawn.
Goldie, 46, has three children at home and has regular visits from live-in lover Kurt Russell's son Boston, 14, from his previous marriage.
But, at an age when most women figure their nappy days are over, the thought of never again hearing the patter of little feet is just too much for Goldie.
‘I feel lost without kids,’ she says.
‘I love to have them around me all the time.’
‘They make everything all right at home, and without that I'm no good in all the other areas of my life.’
Harrison Ford is married to ET writer Melissa Mathison, and they have two children, Malcolm, six, and Georgina, three.
He has vowed not to miss a moment of the children's formulative years.
His decision is based on bitter experience.
He has two grown-up sons by his previous marriage and missed much of their growing up through working away on film sets.
He says: ‘I didn't miss years, but I did miss some very important times in their lives.
Children are a vital part of happy married life and blessed with this new lease of family life, I don't intend to make the same mistake again.’
Movie tough guy Arnold Schwarzenegger and his TV reporter wife Maria Shriver have two children, Katherine, two, and Christina 18 months.
The 44-year-old star watched little Christina battle for life after an operation for a hole in her heart.
Thankfully, the operation was successful, but the star has never forgotten the impact it on his life.
And he says the experience brought him and his wife closer together.
He says: ‘It's when something like that happens that you know just how important children are in a relationship.’
But there is hope for those who do not want children.
Dr Koenig says as long as both partners sit down and talk out the decision, there should be no long-term ill-effects on the marriage.
‘It really only causes a problem when only one partner wants to remain childless,’ he said.
‘If a husband or wife wants a family deep down, then it may eat away at the relationship and they may blame their partner for not allowing them to fulfil their needs.’
(I think) Mum's not always the word
IT IS a fact of modern life that one in three marriages end in divorce.
But why, I wonder, is it almost always assumed that when a marriage (or relationship to use modern jargon) ceases to function, the man is to blame and that where there are children, he is less fitted to oversee their upbringing?
Logic suggests that blame for such a situation must usually be equally divided, and that there are just as many bad, uncaring or downright lazy mothers as there bad, selfish and irresponsible fathers.
We have all come across women who had children by accident, because they thought it was the thing to do, or because they wanted to qualify for Council accommodation, and we have all come across women who expected someone else to do everything for them.
When it comes to apportioning blame, men and women deserve an equal share, though it does nobody much good to spend too much time in recrimination.
Instead of blaming one partner we should drum home the essential message that parents have equal responsibilities.
If they are not prepared to accept them jointly, they should not have children at all.
Brian Reade is back tomorrow
Over the hill and picking up speed!
IT'S A fact that a fit 70-year-old has the same heart work-rate efficiency as a 30-year-old who takes little exercise.
And it's never too late in life to improve your fitness, allowing you to enjoy a better quality of life…and more of it!
Exercise improves your heart and lung power.
And it is proven to lead to stronger, more solid bones, relieve tension, depression and insomnia.
But getting fit takes time and commitment and if you're no spring chicken, you have to take it easy along the way.
The Chartered Society of Physiotherapy and PR Sprays have teamed up to produce a new booklet targeted at people approaching retirement and who believe that retirement means a life as a couch potato in front of the telly.
The booklet points out that age is never a reason for giving up an activity or taking up a new one.
‘The less the body is exercised, the weaker it becomes.
To understand the importance of mobility, just think of someone who has broken a leg and has had to endure a plaster cast for several weeks.
‘The cast is used to keep the leg immobile but when it's removed, the unexercised muscles will already have started to waste.
‘Although this is a drastic comparison it is still worth bearing in mind, especially when we begin to pass from youth to maturity.
‘Our muscles and tendons lose some of our elasticity just like our skin.
It is important to maintain flexibility to prevent stiffness and strength.’
Some tips to get you started include using stairs instead of lifts and enjoying more sedate forms of exercise, such as bowling or the nonviolent martial arts designed to keep you trim.
It's important that if you do get an ache or a strain, treat it with a specialised spray similar to what trainers use with injured athletes which can either heat up an area or cool it rapidly, bringing relief.
If the pain persists, you must see your doctor about it.
You can win a collection of PR sprays together with a waterproof rucksack, battery-operated pocket massager and a hand and foot warmer.
It is worth £25 and we have got 20 packages to give away.
All you need to do is send you name and address on a postcard to: Liverpool Echo/PR Sprays Offer, PO Box 63, High Wycombe, Bucks, HP10 8XA.
The first 20 picked out of the hat will win the pack.
WIN!
This collection can be yours
Extra report by Janet Tansley Rare disease is caused by bacteria found on one in three
TOXIC SHOCK SYNDROME is so rare that most medical professionals will not encounter a case in their entire careers…but it can kill.
Only 18 cases were reported last year, yet the disease is caused by a bacteria present on one in three people.
Because it is so rare, most people simply do not know enough about it to avoid the worst of the disease.
Early diagnosis and treatment is simple and effective.
Builder Ken will kiss and make-up
FATHER-of-four Ken Jackson is the greatest dad in the world.
Why?
‘Because he lets me put rollers in his hair!’
Six-year-old Dawn Jackson knows about the important things in life and how to style one's hair when one gets older is high on the list of priorities.
‘Love’
And there's no better way of acquiring that know-how than by practising on dad.
Says Dawn, of Blundellsands: ‘I love my dad because when my mum goes out he let's me put mousse on his hair and rollers.
‘He even lets me put make-up on his face.’
But that's not all.
Builder Ken, 48, takes her to the park, lets Dawn water his precious plants and buys her 10 sweets a day.
Says Ken: ‘I just read the Echo while she's doing it and let her get on with it.
‘Anything for a quiet life!’
But wife June adds: ‘He dotes on Dawn.
We had her after a 10-year break the boys, Kenneth, Neil and Carl, are 21, 18 and 16.
‘They all think the world of her too.
‘But she and her dad are really close.
She cried when we said he had won the Woman Extra competition.
‘More than anything, he is proud of her and he lets everyone know!’
‘I love him because he lets me put make-up on his face,’ says six-year-old Dawn of her dad Ken Jackson
Having a nappy time
WHEN she gave birth to twin boys in May last year, Linda Loughlin nearly despaired.
She already had two children, Matthew, six, and Rebecca, three, and she feared she wouldn't be able to cope with two new babies.
But Linda, 34, from Stoneycroft, was forgetting the help she would get from hubby, John, 35.
She says: ‘As you can imagine it was a busy time for us.
Without John I doubt is any of us would have got past the first post.
‘Even though John has a busy and demanding job as planning manager at Broadgreen Hospital, he would be up with me twice a night to feed the babies, Andrew and Daniel.
Took charge
‘Then he'd get up early to make sure they had their breakfast, get Matthew ready and then take him to school.’
And when Linda returned to work at weekends when the twins were eight-weeks-old he took charge of all four.
He even does the ironing what a man!
Adds Linda: ‘If you ask the children who's got the best dad in the world they all jump up, clapping and shouting ‘we have’.’
John and Linda with the Loughlin youngsters, Rebecca, Matthew and twins Daniel (left) and Andrew
For a real smoothie
TODAY'S man needs to look fit, smooth-skinned and perfectly groomed wherever he is.
But, when he's on the move, it can be difficult.
A close wet-shave is not really possible, say if he's thousands of feet up in the air and he wants to stay sweet with fellow plane passengers.
But a dry shave doesn't always give him the results he wants.
Clinique, though, say their new Electric Shave Primer is just the job.
The cool, oil-free lotion, they say, instantly lifts beard hairs while protecting the skin against irritation.
Even the most sensitive-skinned people should be able to use it.
It costs £8.50 from most main department stores.
Can my mother divorce a missing husband?
MY dad left my mum about 12 years ago.
He was always unreliable and has never been in touch.
My mum doesn't have a clue where he is and says she doesn't think she can divorce him because of this for all we know he could be dead.
Could my mum get a divorce without knowing where he is?
NINA SAYS…
The answer is yes.
First of all, there are ways that missing husbands can be traced so that the divorce petition can be sent to them.
Where the divorce petition has in it a claim for maintenance payments for the wife or child, if approached by an interested solicitor, the DSS will provide details of the whereabouts of the husband if they can.
Information may also be obtained from the Passport Office.
However, if after all the reasonable steps have been taken your father cannot be traced, a court can order that the divorce petition need not be sent to him.
You will need to tell your mum to consult a solicitor if she now wishes to obtain a divorce.
I HAVE been treated for a particular medical condition since childhood.
Six years ago, I had my first child with no complications.
Shortly afterwards my usual medication was changed.
I was told that the new drug I was given was better than the one I had been previously taking and I was not warned about any side effects or told not to get pregnant.
I did not suffer any side effects myself from the new drug but, after I had been taking it for nearly two years, I became pregnant.
I asked the doctor who was seeing me in the hospital antenatal clinic whether or not I should stop taking the drug and he said it was OK and that I should just carry on.
I eventually had my baby, a little girl, but she was born with spina bifida.
My friend says I should not have been taking this drug during my pregnancy and that it is well known that it can cause these problems.
Can I sue?
NINA SAYS…
Unfortunately, you have not given me enough information about your medical condition or the drug which you were taking to enable me to say definitely whether or not you can make a claim.
Some drugs are known to cause foetal damage and should not be taken during pregnancy.
If the drug which you took is known to cause foetal damage, then it would appear that the doctor who advised you at the hospital has been negligent.
Once you have established fault, you are half way to proving your claim.
However, you would also have to show that the drug in question had actually caused the spina bifida and you still need an expert medical opinion in order to establish this.
If you can prove this question of causation and show that the doctor gave you incorrect advice then your claim ought to succeed, in which case the damages will be substantial.
My advice would be to see a solicitor immediately as your case needs very careful investigation and consideration.
Nina Roland is a partner with Merseyside-based Goldsmith Williams Solicitors.
Highlighted
Extending the existing ban on installing non-roomsealed appliances in bathrooms, so that it covers bedrooms as well.
Forcing independent gas suppliers to respond to gas leaks reported to them.
Extending the regulations to more types of gas appliances including premises using gas from cylinders or garden tanks.
The Echo investigation highlighted a series of deaths caused by carbon monoxide poisoning from faulty gas fires.
The new proposals from the Health and Safety Executive were revealed in a letter sent to Mrs Kennedy by junior Employment Minister Patrick McLoughlin.
They follow a review of existing gas safety regulations.
If the proposals are accepted, a Health and Safety Commission consultative document will follow in September.
In March this year, students John Else and Claire Short, both 19, died after being overcome by gas fumes in a shared house in Croxteth Grove, Toxteth.
John's father Eric today welcomed the new proposals.
He said: ‘If the government carries out what has been proposed it will be a good thing.
‘Hopefully it will save other lives, although it is too late for my son.’
Mrs Kennedy saluted the Echo's action over gas fire deaths.
She said: ‘The Echo investigation coincided with my campaign, and everything coming together has really worked.
‘The proposals to be considered by the Commission are very good news.
‘We now have to wait for their report.’
Jane Kennedy
…good news
ARE my husband and I unusual because we no longer want to have sex?
We are both in our fifties, and had enjoyed an imaginative sexual relationship.
About six months ago, we mutually decided that it was something we could do without.
I have friends who are actively involved still, and occasionally I wonder if we stopped because there was something lacking in our marriage that we weren't aware of.
WENDY SAYS…
You stopped because you both decided it was the right thing to do for you at the time.
If there was anything serious lacking in your marriage, I'm sure you would be aware of it.
Hospital worker Sandra Davies, pictured today, who told Liverpool Crown Court she loved a Wirral man accused of murdering his pregnant wife.
Full story Page 5
I can't get over my holiday fling
I HAVE been happily married for five years and we have two children.
Because of the difficulty of leaving the children, my wife and I decided to have a short break away on our own this year.
She went to stay with her sister in London, and I went sailing for a week with a colleague from work.
How I wish that I hadn't gone.
In the pub one night, I met a girl, fancied her and you can guess the rest.
Now I am filled with remorse, loathing and longing, because I love my wife and children but I remain attracted to this girl and can't get her out of my mind.
The loathing is for myself.
How could I have done such a thing?
I know I should put this girl out of my mind, and I have stopped myself getting in touch with her again.
I feel I should tell my wife what happened, because, if our relationship means anything, we should be honest.
Devastated
I know she will be devastated, and I'm not sure what she will want to do.
That is what frightens me and stops me from telling her.
What should I do?
WENDY SAYS…
Generally, I would agree that honesty is the best policy, but there are times in a marriage when it is better to keep things to yourself and this is one of them.
As you seem truly sorry and regret what you did, then I would advise you not to tell your wife, because once you've told her, you can't untell her.
You are bound to lose her trust and you could wreck your marriage.
Give yourself full marks for having the determination to try and put this girl out of your mind.
Keep at it and you will succeed.
As to why you did it, only you can tell.
You won't be the first or last man or woman who gets themself involved in a holiday romance.
Time to revise options
I AM just finishing my first year at college.
My home is 90 miles away, so I haven't been able to afford to go back very often.
I have been so homesick.
I had never been away from home before.
I've found it difficult to work, haven't made any friends and I am dreading next year.
I'm not even sure that I'm doing the right course.
My mum thinks I'm having a great time, as I tell her that I am but it's a lie, and it hasn't got any better.
She has always had this dream that I would make it to university and she will be devastated if I don't continue, but the way I am feeling now, I don't want to.
All this is making me ill.
WENDY SAYS…
Most people feel homesick the first time they leave home, no matter how old they are.
The person you should talk to about this is your tutor at college and to a counsellor.
They should be able to offer you the support you need at an academic and personal level.
Think very carefully before you give up, because if you do you may regret it later on.
Having said that, you may come to the conclusion that you don't want to continue because it isn't what YOU want to do.
You can't go through life doing what your mother wants.
She won't be as damaged by you dashing her dream as you could be by continuing with something that makes you ill.
A Wise move…
IN THE past women rarely took jobs that involved getting their hands dirty, though in the war they kept the wheels of industry turning as their men went off to fight.
Nearly half a century after those dark days, 300 girls attending secondary schools will spend time over the next two weeks on a bus that is going nowhere.
The Wise (Women into Science and Engineering) bus visits eight Gwynedd schools to give girls an insight into modern technology and a taste of what a career in engineering today might be like.
Its visit is organised by the Gwynedd Education Business Partnership, which seeks to make education more relevant to the needs of business.
In reality, it is a mobile teaching and exhibition unit with seven hands-on work stations providing a range of technological activities for girls in the 13–14 age range.
It is sponsored by Crosville Cymru and is one of six in a scheme initiated by the Engineering Council and the Equal Opportunities Commission in 1984.
It will show the girls that the image of an engineer as a man in dirty overalls tinkering with engines is completely misleading.
One wonders what viewers of BBC2 will make of Pobol y Cwm when it is shown with sub-titles on that channel from January.
Though the most successful Welsh language programme on S4C, its daily audience of an average 200,000 (almost half Wales's Welsh-speaking population) is a drop in the ocean compared with what it can attract on BBC2.
The reaction of a television critic in a Sunday newspaper was enthusiastic, though rather patronising of the rural story lines.
He predicted it could well be a smash-hit.
The worry for regular viewers to the series which has been running for 19 years, is that the ethos of the programme may be changed to pander to the larger English audience.
Though the Welsh version continues to go out on the day it is filmed, the new audience will be regaled with story lines familiar to the Welsh audience a few weeks later.
The affair between village head teacher Beth and one of her teachers, Hywel, is included an affair that has already run its course in Welsh.
In the three month experiment, unlikely rural topics like cot death, abortion, murder and villagers' fight against toxic waste dumping are shown, though it seems some episodes will be cut as only four episodes a week are planned.
Third World problems come to city
CHESTER World Development Day takes place on Saturday, June 26 when people can take part in workshops based on Third World topics or listen to discussions on global issues by guest speakers, including Gyles Brandreth MP, in the Town Hall.
Global unity will be reinforced by music and drama in the town square.
Performers will include Blacon High School Bell Ringers, and pupils from Merton House, Saughall and Oldfield Primary Schools.
People can also experience the contrast between developed and Third World countries during a rich-poor lunch.
A number of charities, including Oxfam, Amnesty and Cafod, will man stalls.
Shop trolley sculpture THE only sculpture show of its kind in the North West this year can be seen at Tatton Park, Knutsford until September 26.
The exhibition is the work of 16 sculptors from England, Scotland and Wales.
In addition to demonstrating the creativity and originality of the British sculptors today, the exhibition highlights the inventive use of recycled materials as in Mark Tilley's shopping trolley seats or Adrian Moakes' rocking chair.