

Cancer checks success
MORE than 12,500 women attended the Victoria breast screening unit during the first three years of the programme.
This represented a 78pc response from 16,000 women contacted throughout the Macclesfield Health District.
The second three year programme has begun in Congleton.
Screening is offered free to all women between 50 and 64 who are registered with a GP.
All the unit's staff are women.
Screening should be repeated after three years.
More details about the unit are available on .
Holiday magic in the park FAMILIES can take part in wildlife magical mystery tours in Marbury Country Park, Northwich, during the schools' summer holidays.
Children from eight to 13 can join in various activities, among them bug hunts, face-painting and natural sculpture.
Advanced bookings can be made through Cheshire Countryside Ranger David James on .
Trident work for shipyards
THE Royal Dockyards at Devonport and Rosyth yesterday won contracts for work on the Trident nuclear submarine force.
The Ministry of Defence insisted there was no connection with the long awaited Trident refitting order.
Each contract is valued at just under £3m over four years.
‘No sell-out’ ENGLAND'S historic buildings were not being ‘sold out to tourists’under a new scheme to transfer them to local management, the chairman of English Heritage, Jocelyn Stevens, said yesterday.
He was handing over management of three monuments to Dartmoor National Park Authority.
First toll M-way plan unveiled PLANS for Britain's first toll motorway were unveiled by Roads and Traffic Minister Robert Key yesterday.
The 27-mile Birmingham Northern Relief Road, a £300m route intended to relieve congestion on the M6, is the first of several proposed privately-owned toll roads.
BMW puts on a show of quality
Super smooth clean machine
by Mike Alexander
USED CAR ROAD TEST
MAKE: BMW MODEL: 520i SE AGE: 1990 (H-Reg) MILEAGE: 28,000 PRICE: £14,500 FOR the sleekest, sexiest saloon shape on the road, it's hard to beat the BMW 5 series.
Here is a beast of impeccable breeding, and with reputation all-important in the used car market, you can't get a much higher image than the BeeEm.
It's a proven symbol of success.
The test car was a cool looking two litre multivalve model in glacier blue, first registered in October 1990 and supplied by Georgesons of Breck Road, Anfield.
Motorway magic
It was a delightful car to drive, purring effortlessly round town, but at its best on the open road.
There's no strain on the ears as you heap on the gas.
It's swift and easy acceleration-60 in fractionally under 10 seconds and creamy smooth all the way to the red line.
Handling is excellent with plenty of grip, balance and a confident feel from the power steering.
And the brakes feel like they could stop an express train.
The ride is firm but damping first class as undulations and bumps are swallowed up with ease.
At first I found the car uncomfortable, but the driver's seat and steering wheel adjustment is so good you soon find a near perfect position.
There is a sensible dashboard layout too with instruments at or near the fingertips.
Only in the back does a problem occur.
No argument over the legroom or headroom, but with five adults aboard the middle passenger is forced to perch on a solid hump with neighbours shoulders a touch too close for comfort.
Boot space is perfectly adequate quite shallow but long.
The model included standard goodies such as electric windows and mirrors all round, power steering, central locking and catalytic convertor.
And the test car, which had a full service history, also featured alloy wheels and burglar alarm.
Security is spot-on.
This is a strongly-built machine throughout and the doors close with a prison-like authority.
And if you leave the sunroof or a window open just turn the key in its lock and, hey presto, a moment later they close.
Insurance is quite high group 14 and fuel consumption fairly thirsty at 29 miles per unleaded gallon, but the 520i is a driver's delight a real thoroughbred.
Stan Parry, the RAC's regional operations manager, said:’ Service history and satisfactory vehicle documentation play an important role in the purchase of this marque.
A very desirable vehicle, reflected by its high standing in the market place.’
VERDICT
Ice cool looks, solid build and sky high image, the BMW offers a perfect blend of performance and style.
CAN YOU put me in touch with someone who could possibly get me a window wiper arm for a 1985 Fiat  Strada 1300?
We were told by one dealer we might have to write to Italy to get this particular part.
Any help would be welcome.
A Fiat spokesman is puzzled by your description of the part needed.
He thinks you want either a windscreen wiper arm or a window regulator arm.
The trade admit there can be problems obtaining some spares for the Fiat  Strada , but Norman Watson, manager of the spares department of Stanley Motors, East Prescot Road, Liverpool (tel: assures us that if you contact him he will order the correct replacement for you.
CAN you please tell me where I can purchase a rubber sealing ring for a Tempo High dome Pressure Cooker, 10 inches in diameter.
Our cooker is about 35 years old, but is still in excellent condition except for the sealing ring.
You are out of luck, Mr Swift.
Tempo cookers are no longer manufactured and, unfortunately, the diameter of the sealing ring is not the only factor that matters.
The shape is all important and rings rarely inter-change between makes.
Short of finding a long forgotten stock of Tempo spares in a local high street hardware shop, it looks as though it will have to be a new cooker.
Nappy technology to the fore
WHAT do babies nappies and chemical companies have in common?
So far as Allied Colloids is concerned a great deal.
It has been enjoying spectacular growth for its sales of the super absorbent polymers which make nappies that much more comfortable.
This business is now 8pc of its total sales and it is investing £20m in a new plant.
Value
Allied has a splendid record of exporting 85pc of its output.
Latest profits are 5pc up at £44m and the dividend up 10pc.
Cash is up from £16m to £24m, and net assets have grown from £145m to £169m.
However, the assets are written down and a better measure of the true value of the company is the near £600m which the stock market puts on it.
Over the past 15 years Allied Colloids has been able to achieve compound annual growth rates of over 20pc.
Its new range of Glascol resins used in printing inks is gaining market share as they given an even glossier appearance to the print.
Shares at 224p have excellent long-term potential.
Lord Justice Scott
Electric shock
I HAVE recently had an electric card meter installed in my one bedroom flat, as I prefer to pay as I use knowing how unwelcome bills can be.
But I was shocked to discover there is a surcharge of £1.30 each week.
Surely this is unacceptable!
Shouldn't people have the right to pay as they choose, without having to finance the privilege?
Pool safety plan will end menace of fumes
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
NEW emergency procedures at council swimming pools are to be introduced to ensure the safety of schoolchildren.
It follows last April's evacuation of Kirkby swimming pool after scores of schoolchildren were overcome by noxious fumes.
An investigation launched by Knowsley Borough Council found that staff had reacted swiftly and that procedures complied with current legislation.
But John Bell, director of leisure services, added: ‘We are gravely concerned about the incident and have taken steps to ensure that, by additional training and regular monitoring, the safety of schoolchildren at the pools, and swimmers generally, will continue to be of the highest priority.’
A total of 23 pupils from the Simmonswood and Kirkby C of E Schools were treated at Liverpool's Alder Hey Hospital, with five detained overnight.
The Health and Safety Executive found that sodium hypochlorite used to unblock a toilet in the male changing rooms had caused the problem.
Recommendations include: Training of staff outlining hazards of maintenance operations.
A revision of emergency evacuation procedures.
Clarification of pool emergency arrangements.
Routine monitoring and inspection for maintenance problems and vandalism.
Agreed ratios of staff to pupils at pools, with clarification of responsibilities.
A young boy with streaming eyes is comforted after the April incident
High-speed scanner for hire
By Mark Currie Deputy Business Editor
POOLS company Littlewoods, which has invested millions of pounds in new high-speed scanning equipment to check coupons, is ready to give other business organisations the chance to use the facilities.
Potential customers include the government, financial institutions, market research organisations or companies involved in major national promotions.
A spokesman for Littlewoods said the service was aimed toward users with a need to process huge numbers of documents.
New business would provide a more optimum use of the equipment, presently in the main restricted to weekends.
The Liverpool-based operation has recently designed, developed and installed 25 new document scanning machines, each of which can handle up to 25,000 pools coupons an hour.
All coupons passing through the machine are microfilmed on both sides simultaneously and losing coupons are sifted from winning ones which are then marked fully.
All the relevant data is captured on a machine console and data can be transferred to mainframe computer for specific analysis.
‘We have had enquiries in the past about using our facilities,’ said the spokesman, ‘but that was not possible until these new machines were up and running.
‘We are now in business and the two main areas of interest we believe will be from banks or building societies wishing to carry out quite sophisticated research among their millions of customers and from companies involved in national promotions or competitions.’
Egg donor scheme provides new hope for childless couples
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
EXCLUSIVE A HUMAN egg donor programme, which offers new hope to hundreds of childless couples, will be provided for the first time by a Merseyside hospital.
The Royal Liverpool University Hospital Trust will begin offering the service within its IVF unit later this year.
The treatment involves healthy, fertile women under the age of 35 donating their eggs to women whose are deficient.
The eggs are implanted in the recipient and fertilised by her partner's sperm.
Recipients and donors are carefully matched and counselled but never learn each other 's identities.
‘We are about to embark on an ovum donor programme,’ medical director of the IVF Unit at the Royal Hospital, Charles Kingsland, said.
‘We have one of the most up-to-date units around with some of the best equipment and a natural extension to this is an egg donation service.
‘We hope to get it off the ground very shortly and it will be run in conjunction with the Women's Hospital.’
Unfortunately the service may come to late for a childless woman who has made a desperate plea for an egg donor.
The woman, who is unable to have children of her own and does not wish to be identified, is one of 485 women at a fertility clinic waiting for donor eggs.
Time is running out because she is in her forties and has been told she only has about 18 months in which to become pregnant before she will be deemed too old.
And through her appeal she hopes to raise public awareness about the desperate situation many thousands of women with fertility problems are in.
The woman, who is married and lives in Formby, Sefton, said: ‘I have been trying for a child for 19 years.
‘I had no idea that so many women are in the same situation as me.
‘I have only 18 months in which to get pregnant and would appeal to women to consider donating their eggs to help others.
‘I have suffered two miscarriages and also had abdominal problems and had an ovary removed.
‘I am receiving treatment at the Lister Hospital in London and any women who would be willing to donate eggs would only have to make two trips down there.
‘Her expenses would be paid for by the hospital.’
Anyone who would like to find out more can contact the hospital on  and ask for Lena.
The above woman's reference number is 105375.
Medical director Charles Kingsland and his team