

Carol with proud dad John John is big on family
GETTING into the bathroom can be a bit of an ordeal in the Watts household…because there are 14 people battling for the washbasin.
But dad John Watts makes sure all his 12 children take their turn and controls the chaos.
But though the 39-year-old from Garston rules his home with the necessary military-style order, his children seven girls and five boys think he's the greatest!
Eldest daughter Carol, 18, tells us: ‘Even though there are 12 of us, he is always there for each of us when we need him or his shoulder to cry on.
‘I finished with my boyfriend recently and he was right there to tell me there are plenty more fish in the sea.
‘And he gave me a big cuddle even though I'm 16, which made me feel tons better straight away.’
She adds: ‘He acts all big and tough but he's a real softie underneath.
‘He can't work because he is disabled but he does his best for us and makes sure we have everything we need.’
John was astounded to learn Carol had entered him in the competition only mum Linda was let in on the secret.
He says: ‘It is hard coping with such a large family, but we manage by pulling together.
‘If we have any problems we all sit down and talk about it till they are sorted.
‘I love children which, I suppose, is obvious.
They are always around me…to be honest, I'd be lost without them.’
Student grants lesson for councillors
TWO students, one formerly at Bristol Polytechnic, the other formerly at Birmingham Polytechnic, have been overpaid in their grants by Powys County Council, one student by £1,084, the other by £768, after abandoning their courses.
One of the students has been in prison and the council has been told it is unlikely that his overpayment can be recovered.
The other student has not been traced.
New radio anchormen RADIO Maldwyn, the independent radio station for Mid Wales and the Borders, due to go on the air on Thursday July 1, will have Lee Thompson, 27, presenting The Breakfast Show between 7am and 11am, Monday to Friday.
Station manager John Barnes, 32, will present Lunchtime, from 11am until 2pm; Mark Williams, 37, will present the Afternoon Show until 6pm; and Tony Paul will present the Saturday Afternoon Show.
Other weekend programmes will be presented by Mark Hannah, Keith Middleton and Martin Adams.
The last bus?
MEMBERS of Dyfed County Council's highways and transportation committee will decide on Friday whether to continue the Sunday morning town bus service in Aberystwyth, operated on an experimental basis since last October.
The contract provides for local journeys between 9.30am and 11.30am and during the winter period revenue averaged £4.59, although the actual operating cost was £12.
DECADENCE has come to the Third Rome.
Moscow is a city of soup kitchens and strip shows, of Cadillacs and corruption.
The city has changed so much that anyone who has been away for a couple of years could be forgiven for thinking that he arrived in a time machine, not an airliner.
There was always a furtive seediness behind the communist slogans and the red flags like the hard currency prostitutes in the hotels for foreigners or the backhanders required to get a table in a restaurant.
But now the sleaze has bubbled to the surface and is being brandished like a fetish by the ‘new class’ reckless entrepreneurs living on their wits in the capital of the Wild East.
Given good contacts and a lot of nerve, Moscow is an excellent place to make money in a Russia which is wide open to the global market.
The city is home to an estimated 20,000 dollar millionaires and, according to some estimates, has more Mercedes cars than any other capital in the world.
The new Russian rich, whose favoured vehicles for tackling Moscow's potholed boulevards also include Lincoln Continentals, 7-series BMWs and even the occasional Land Rover, like to play hard as well as work hard.
Their favoured nightspot is LIS'S, a neon-lit discotheque throbbing with the latest music which takes up half of the 45,000-seater Olympiysky indoor soccer stadium.
It cost my host, Andrei Nikitenko, one US dollar to park his Lada Riva with central locking and alarm a sum equivalent to 900 roubles or more than a day's pay for the average Russian.
The entrance fee was another 15 dollars but this is nothing to Nikitenko.
A founder of Menatep, one of Russia's biggest banks, the quietly spoken physics graduate is now the boss of a trading company with an offshore office in Gibraltar.
Two weeks ago he was in London, staying in Belgravia and sewing up another deal.
He is confident that given five years and more know-how, Russia will have international companies capable of competing at a global level.
Our companions were Andrei's girlfriend Yelena, a tall, strawberry blonde with stunning legs and her statuesque, dark haired friend Tatyana.
They met as contestants at a Mrs Moscow competition which Yelena won; modelling contracts and divorce followed for both.
Tatyana is now looking forward to a week in Las Vegas this summer modelling shoes, while Yelena has work lined up in Italy.
At the entrance to the club we were searched with metal detectors by security staff in sharp suits.
More than 100 are on duty to keep an eye on the 2,000 clubgoers who nightly dance or drink away the small hours from 11pm to 6am.
The club is split into a disco, where the younger set cavorts under strobe lights in front of a showroom line-up of prestige Western cars.
A huge advertising hoarding for Daily Kommersant, Russia's would-be Financial Times, dominates one wall.
The other half of the club has a stage surrounded by white plastic tables and chairs, above which a blonde girl in a white body stocking was dangling from a rope, with only a ligature around her ankle saving her from crashing head first to the floor.
A group of grinning Koreans from Kazakhstan craned their necks skywards as she spun like a top.
After her act another blonde in black, thigh length leather boots, studded belt, bra and pants strutted onto the stage, removed her top and stepped up to the front row, where the Koreans stuffed dollar notes down the front of her knickers.
As one increasingly explicit act followed another, it became clear that the emphasis is on strip rather than tease.
After a round of drinks (one beer and three fashionable gin and tonics for 25 dollars) the girls decide they are not impressed by the striptease.
‘It's not sexual just to show off your bottom,’ opines Yelena.
Club owner Sergei Lissovsky is well aware that most of his performers are lacking in artistic talent.
The problem is that foreign scouts snap up the talented ones to work abroad.
But Lissovsky's biggest problem is to persuade the gangsters who frequent the club to settle their differences elsewhere.
Last month, Moscow Mafia chieftain Valery Dlugach, nicknamed Globus, was leaving LIS'S at 3 am when he was shot dead with a Simonov sniper rifle from a rooftop opposite.
On another occasion staff found a man dead from stab wounds in one of the stadium's labyrinthine corridors.
‘This place right now is like Chicago in the 1930s,’ says publisher Vladimir Grigoriev, one of a new breed of Russian businessmen capable of holding their own with the best in the world.
‘A couple of weeks ago one of these Mafia men was sitting in his Mercedes when it was taken out with a grenade launcher from a range of 300 metres.
‘Protection rackets are everywhere.
I pay some local boys five dollars to wash my car, but they have to give half of that to the mafia.’
Despite the lawlessness and corruption, Grigoriev has achieved some notable successes, including Edvard Radzinsky's book The Last Tsar now a Book of the Month Club choice in the UK and Larissa Vasilieva's Kremlin Wives, which sold 450,000 copies in Russia and is soon to be published here by Weidenfeld and Nicholson.
At his office in the stable block of a former count's palace in north east Moscow, Grigoriev's company, Vagrius, has helped set up the Task Force Against Piracy, a legal action fund to combat flagrant breaches of copyright which sees Western books and Russian editions illegally produced and sold.
More than 45 million Agatha Christie novels have been sold in Russia every one a pirate edition.
‘You can buy a copy of an album or a video in Moscow the day after it is released in the West,’ says Grigoriev.
‘It's a well organised operation in which the original is sent here by courier and then copied.’
Business people who want their country to become more like the West are frustrated by the way Russian entrepreneurs squander their profits on expensive cars.
‘Nobody wants to invest in production,’ says Grigoriev.
‘It's not so easy to buy land or factories, so as soon as someone makes money they spend it on a top-of-the-range Mercedes or on expensive furniture for their flat.’
Dancing the night away…
LIS'S nightclub provides the bright lights and music for Russia's rich set.
Members of the jet set…
Andrei Nikitenko, founder of one of Russia's biggest banks, with models Yelena and Tatyana.
Down and outs…as Moscow's poor resort to the bottle for comfort.
Two victims of capitalism…but the soup kitchen provides welcome food.
Bowl of soup is a feast for the poor
AT the other end of the social scale life is a constant struggle to get enough to eat.
There are fewer shortages and queues are rare but inflation, at 2,000 per cent last year, means that prices are outside the reach of many.
Michael Zhidkov, a great grandfather with a look of Ken Dodd, tries to alleviate the suffering of those left behind by the stampede for capitalism through his work as head of the Compassion Ministry.
Based in offices next to the city's main Baptist Church, the ministry runs eight soup kitchens for Moscow's poor and is one of the only charities to care for Aids patients and ex-prisoners.
At one of the soup kitchens near the Kursk Railway station, respectable office workers rub shoulders with alcoholics and young army conscripts, who find themselves unlikely companions in poverty.
An estimated 2.5 million people come into the city every day, mostly by train.
Some never get further than the nine railway termini which connect the capital to every part of the former Soviet Union.
Each is a 24-hour village of seething, overburdened humanity part market, part warehouse and part dormitory.
At the Kursk station, women in peasant headscarves squat on the floor selling bunches of hot tasting radishes encrusted with soil.
Kiosks sell a bewildering variety of Russian and imported goods, from Mars bars to fake Rolex watches, an example of the primitive commerce which has turned Moscow into a vast souk.
The Compassion Ministry's staff visit the station at night to help those in need.
‘Our contacts in the West used to smuggle Bibles to us.
Now they send us aid,’ says Mr Zhidkov, who was taking delivery of 50 tonnes of food, medicine and clothes from North Wales-based charity, Operation Christmas Child, to be distributed in Moscow, St Petersburg and Nizhni Novgorod.
OCC founder Dave Cooke was surprised but undeterred to discover such stark contrasts between rich and poor in what was once a nominally egalitarian society.
‘I think we've got to help them because there is still a lot of poverty and the potential is there for a social explosion,’ he says.
‘And with all those nuclear weapons around, that would be very dangerous for us as well.’
For information on the work of Operation Christmas Child, please contact them at PO Box 732, Wrexham, Clwyd, LL11 1RQ.
Tel:.
CAN anyone tell me why: I can put the water on for a bath, pop out and come home to find HIM up to his ears in it uninvited.
I dash to Tescos expressly to buy some washing power, spend £40 and 45 minutes in there and forget the Radion.
You can take a toddler to a summer show to see the cows, dogs, cats, rabbits, sheep, goats, horses and a funfair and he's only interested in the red and white police cones marking out the car park.
Yep…
It was one of those weekends.
The law of frustration
WHEN law-abiding citizens are driven to desperation by criminals who apparently flout the law with impunity, it is hard to blame them when they take things into their own hands.
Householders who catch burglars in the act may get a bit rough and individual policemen may strike out in some after-hours pub rough-house.
All thoroughly unlawful but there is a limit to public patience when the law- abiding feel they are not protected by officialdom.
And when the law actually penalises people who inflict punishment outside the law through sheer frustration with its inadequacies, has not the time come for judges to realise they are dealing with real-world situations and sentence accordingly?
Yesterday, two Norfolk men who kidnapped a prime suspect and took him for a ride were sent to prison for five years and apparently the suspect did not even get a police caution.
Perhaps his guilt could not be proved.
But the two men had no chance to prove their innocence; they were ‘advised’ to plead guilty.
Had they contested the case, a jury with more awareness of contemporary social stresses than the judge might have returned a verdict of not guilty to national applause.
Law makers, givers and enforcers should show more understanding and sympathy in the face of intolerable provocation.
The law is too rigid and recognises too little of what goes on in the housing estates and back alleys of industrial towns.
Adultery gives Ray pause for thought
Ray Gosling: ‘The response to the series was fantastic.’
‘It takes a lot of courage to confront these issues’
Your home may be a ‘star’
NEVER mind if it is a medieval castle or a two-up, two-down terraced house the British Film Commission wants details of your home.
A dossier of properties available for use as sets is being compiled as an incentive to film-makers to bring their business to Britain.
The commission hopes to have 110,000 offerings on its computer by the end of the year, including stately homes, factories, warehouses and high rise flats.
Properties are being catalogued in the Midlands and already on the books is Hagley Hall in Stourbridge, Worcestershire, ancestral home of Viscount Cobham.
The somewhat less imposing Noah's Ark Pet Shop in Northfield, Birmingham, is also listed by FIND the Film Information National Database set up by the commission at a cost of £500,000.
Variety
‘Those two properties demonstrate the range we are looking at,’ said Alison Hill, locations co-ordinator for the Central England Screen Commission.
‘No property is too humble.
The success of the system will be based on the volume and variety we can offer a film-maker.
‘We will bring the filmmakers and the properties together free but it will be up to the owner to negotiate a facility fee depending on the scale of the project.
We will advise where necessary.’
Application forms are available from the British Film Commission in London, telephone .
Down to bare facts
HOW about this extract from a letter to the Pensions Office sent in by  from ?
‘Mrs E. had no clothes, she has not had any for a year.
The clergy have been visiting her…’
Your quote wins you a fiver Mrs P. She also send a gem from Henry Ford.
‘Exercise is bunk!
If you are healthy you don't need it.
If you are sick, you shouldn't have it.’
This from  of 
Little girl: ‘Daddy, do all fairy tales begin with ‘Once Upon a Time?’
Her father replied: ‘No dear.
Some begin with: ‘If I'm elected.’
Being the recipient of a large number of offers to ‘Pay Now Die Later’ I asked my wife that if she ‘Oh surprise me’was her reply.
Sent in by  from 
Two women talking on a bus.
One said: ‘Oh yes, both of my lads love working with animals.
Harry wants to be a vet and Michael would love to be a butcher.’
Over the hill and picking up speed!
IT'S A fact that a fit 70-year-old has the same heart work-rate efficiency as a 30-year-old who takes little exercise.
And it's never too late in life to improve your fitness, allowing you to enjoy a better quality of life…and more of it!
Exercise improves your heart and lung power.
And it is proven to lead to stronger, more solid bones, relieve tension, depression and insomnia.
But getting fit takes time and commitment and if you're no spring chicken, you have to take it easy along the way.
The Chartered Society of Physiotherapy and PR Sprays have teamed up to produce a new booklet targeted at people approaching retirement and who believe that retirement means a life as a couch potato in front of the telly.
The booklet points out that age is never a reason for giving up an activity or taking up a new one.
‘The less the body is exercised, the weaker it becomes.
To understand the importance of mobility, just think of someone who has broken a leg and has had to endure a plaster cast for several weeks.
‘The cast is used to keep the leg immobile but, when it's removed, the unexercised muscles will already have started to waste.
‘Although this is a drastic comparison it is still worth bearing in mind, especially when we begin to pass from youth to maturity.
‘Our muscles and tendons lose some of their elasticity just like our skin.
It is important to maintain flexibility to prevent stiffness and strength.’
Some tips to get you started include using stairs instead of lifts and enjoying more sedate forms of exercise, such as bowling or the nonviolent martial arts designed to keep you trim.
It's important that if you do get an ache or a strain, treat it with a specialised spray similar to those trainers use with injured athletes which can either heat up an area or cool it rapidly, bringing relief.
If the pain persists, you must see your doctor about it.
You can win a collection of PR sprays together with a waterproof rucksack, battery-operated pocket massager and a hand and foot warmer.
It is worth £25 and we have got 20 packages to give away.
All you need to do is send your name and address on a postcard to: Liverpool Echo/PR Sprays Offer, PO Box 63, High Wycombe, Bucks, HP10 8XA.
The first 20 picked out of the hat will win the pack.
WIN!
This collection can be yours
Helpline numbers
ABERCONWY Borough Council advice line:.
Aberconwy advice on structural safety:, ext 3564.
Aberconwy advice on public health matters:.
GRWP Aberconwy:.
MANWEB emergency number:.
North Wales Police:.
North Wales Gas:.
Welsh Water:352 58551.
Gwynedd Trading Standards:.
Llandudno Citizens Advice Bureau:.
Colwyn Care and Repair:.
‘My husband to retire…but I would probably just die if I ever did!’
Dame Thora speaks out
Seen and Hird
ACTRESS, now Dame, Thora Hird has a little, framed sign in her bedroom which reads: Don't stop doing things because you are growing old — because you will only grow old if you stop doing things.
And she must be one of the country's best inspirations.
Having just celebrated her 82nd birthday, she has filmed three television programmes this year and has written five books.
As presenter of the BBC television programme, Praise Be, for 17 years, she gets sackfuls of mail and gifts.
Thora keeps all the birthday cards she receives.
She puts them in her large collection of books as bookmarks.
In fact, she did not realise she was to have the honour conferred on her for a few days after the letter arrived.
‘I'd just come home from a cruise and the mail was up to my knees.
I'd opened half of it and the letter was in the other half.
Third award
‘I get little tiny needlecases.
I've got one needle case I adore, it's so beautiful and it was from an old lady aged eighty something with arthritis.’
The letters arrive all year round though Praise Be is shown for only five or six weeks a year.
‘There's so many people living on their own, I never realised.
They say they feel I've gone into their living room.
They say, ‘Thank you for playing the hymn, you didn't mention my name so although I know you weren't playing it just for me, I felt as if you were’.
I've had many a weep, I can tell you.’
Dame of the British Empire is Thora's third award.
She is an OBE and has an honorary doctorate from Lancaster University.
Thora is currently filming ‘Thora and the Broad and Narrow’ for the BBC.
Thora is a lady in her eighties with arthritis.
She has had three hip-replacement operations and open heart surgery.
‘My husband, Scottie, says to me almost daily: ‘Will you retire tomorrow darling?’ and I say, No thank you.
‘I would probably just die because I am so used to studying and travelling.’
Thora is a strong supporter of Help The Aged, and highly indignant that older people are often treated differently the moment they become pensioners.
‘It's always amazing to me that you can be a man in charge of 100 or 200 people, then you get your pension book and suddenly you are regarded as deaf and daft.
‘Have you ever been in a group and somebody gets pointed at with that awful expression: ‘She does very well for 79.’
That infuriates me.
They say it when you are a little child, you get called precocious, then when you're older, you get sympathy.’
DAME THORA…her third honour
Suicidal children help delay tackled
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
A TOP level meeting has been called in the wake of revelations that suicidal children have been told they face a 50-week delay for counselling.
Two headmasters have complained about the waiting lists at the Family and Child Therapy Unit at Ellesmere Port.
They were both told of the lengthy queues when they rang to take children there for aid.
In the wake of the Daily Post revelations, health chiefs have called an urgent meeting to discuss the matter.
Local councillor Peter Shephard, who led the campaign, has welcomed the positive moves to solve the problem.
He had feared that children's lives were being put at risk and called on the Chester Health Authority to hold a study into the local need.
He said yesterday: ‘I have been contacted and told they will be holding a meeting of all agencies next month to discuss the matter.
‘They are children on the brink, at the end of their tether, and we can't be saying to them come back in 50 weeks.’
Health chiefs admit that the queue had built up to‘unacceptable levels’ but claim they are now down to 10 weeks.
People in Liverpool make me laugh a lot
Move to cut counselling waiting list
A TOP-LEVEL meeting has been called in the wake of revelations that suicidal children have been told they face a 50-week delay for counselling.
Two headmasters complained about the waiting lists at the Family and Child Therapy Unit at Ellesmere Port.
The health authority has called a meeting with the local councils and Chester and Ellesmere Port Community Health Council.
The meeting will be held next month and health chiefs want to explain new initiatives being carried out to cut the waiting list.
They include a second unit, based in Chester, with a new consultant and backup team, which opened in January.
The regional unit, Pine Lodge, also based in Chester is to expand its five day service to a seven day service.
Health chiefs say the waiting time is down to 10 weeks.
Having a nappy time
WHEN she gave birth to twin boys in May last year, Linda Loughlin nearly despaired.
She already had two children, Matthew, six, and Rebecca, three, and she feared she wouldn't be able to cope with two new babies.
But Linda, 34, from Stoneycroft, was forgetting the help she would get from hubby, John, 35.
She says: ‘As you can imagine it was a busy time for us.
Without John I doubt if any of us would have got past the first post.
‘Even though John has a busy and demanding job as planning manager at Broadgreen Hospital, he would be up with me twice a night to feed the babies, Andrew and Daniel.
Took charge
‘Then he'd get up early to make sure they had their breakfast, get Matthew ready and then take him to school.’
And when Linda returned to work at weekends when the twins were eight-weeks-old he took charge of all four.
He even does the ironing what a man!
Adds Linda: ‘If you ask the children who's got the best dad in the world they all jump up, clapping and shouting ‘we have’.’
John and Linda with the Loughlin youngsters, Rebecca, Matthew and twins Daniel (left) and Andrew Picture by Martin Birchall
Builder Ken will kiss and make-up
FATHER-of-four Ken Jackson is the greatest dad in the world.
Why?
‘Because he lets me put rollers in his hair!’
Six-year-old Dawn Jackson knows about the important things in life and how to style one's hair when one gets older is high on the list of priorities.
‘Love’
And there's no better way of acquiring that know-how than by practising on dad.
Says Dawn, of Blundellsands: ‘I love my dad because when my mum goes out he let's me put mousse on his hair and rollers.
‘He even lets me put make-up on his face.’
But that's not all.
Builder Ken, 48, takes her to the park, lets Dawn water his precious plants and buys her 10 sweets a day.
Says Ken: ‘I just read the Echo while she's doing it and let her get on with it.
‘Anything for a quiet life!’
But wife June adds: ‘He dotes on Dawn.
We had her after a 10-year break the boys, Kenneth, Neil and Carl, are 21, 18 and 16.
‘They all think the world of her too.
‘But she and her dad are really close.
She cried when we said he had won the Woman Extra competition.
‘More than anything, he is proud of her and he lets everyone know!’
‘I love him because he lets me put make-up on his face,’ says six-year-old Dawn of her dad Ken Jackson
Holiday respite scheme
A SCHEME which aims to provide respite for the parents of children who are on their summer holidays is being organised.
Hoylake and District Council for Voluntary Service has designed summer activity courses for children and teenagers aged from five to 18.
Programmes giving details of the summer events, along with a booking form, are available from the Council for Voluntary Service office in Hilbre High School, Newton, Wirral.
Information is available on  between 10am and noon.
Strolling into history ANYONE interested in local history can join a guided walk this afternoon around Neston Park organised by the Parkgate Society.
The boundaries of the medieval deer park which gave the village its name will be examined.
Walkers meet at the Old Quay pub car park at 7pm.
And its bath time at last for Bill
OLD soldier Bill Brownbill, 102, has been granted his dearest wish a new bath with help from your Echo.
His delighted sister Florence Robson, 88, said today: ‘He's very happy although he's started grumbling about the disruption it will cause.’
World War I veteran Mr Brownbill has been waiting two years to see if his application for a house renovation grant would be successful.
Now Mr Brownbill, whose plight was taken up by the Echo's Champ, Bill Jackson, has been told that work will start within the next few days at his South Liverpool home.
A Liverpool City Council spokesman said: ‘He has got a disabled facilities grant and mandatory renovation grant.’
Mrs Robson had contacted the Echo a few weeks ago to say that her brother's cast-iron bath was 40 years old and had not been used for 12 years.
Something's brewing
Store has got it in the can
IT'S long since been the woman's domain.
Ask any female about Marks and Spencer and she'll reply: ‘Knickers.’
Because, along with their food hall, that's what they're most famous for.
But the men are now muscling in, as ROY WRIGHT discovered.
MENTION Marks and Spencer to many men and the name conjures images of white Y-fronts, grey socks and last-minute panic buys on Christmas Eve.
But Marks' new range could change our shopping habits.
They've just unveiled their first range of beers and, as one with some experience of these things, it fell to me to run the rule over them.
First up is the Traditional Yorkshire Bitter.
It has the right sounding pedigree made by Paul Theakston at the Black Sheep Brewery in Masham.
It boasts a ‘unique and unmistakable flavour’ and has been brewed with ‘care and patience.’
I wasn't entirely convinced by the ‘unique’ bit: it came across as a slightly better than average bottled beer, with possibly a stronger flavour than some.
It certainly suffers in comparison with bitters employing the ‘draughtflow’ system, which does wonders for the beer's head and body.
Rich
Traditional Yorkshire Bitter is exclusive to Marks and Spencer and four bottles cost £3.49.
They also offer a rich and hoppy St Michael Best Bitter, brewed ‘in the traditional way,’ at £2.49 for four cans.
But these hot summer nights lend themselves better to cold lager and I felt more at ease with the Original Premium Pilsener lager, very dry and good value at £3.99 for four cans.
At the cheaper end of the Marks market is the Schonbrau pilsener lager at £2.19 for a pack of four.
They also do an award-winning Steinlager from New Zealand, a type of lager already available in some off-licences and you may remember the logos from their sponsorship of the last Rugby Union World Cup.
A pack of four bottles costs a reasonable £3.49.
Finally there's the Biere d'Alsace, a premium lager from Strasbourg in the heart of lager-brewing France.
It claims the finest hops and barley for ‘a distinctly French-tasting beer.’
Ten 25cl bottles cost £4.49.
Value
As with all Marks goods, the general impression is one of good value for money.
I wonder if the wife would like a four-pack of bitter or lager for Christmas?
Or whether I'll get one for Father's Day?
Taste test…
Roy Wright tries out Marks and Spencer's top tipples
Haven for young mothers
YOUNG mothers and mothers-to-be can benefit from an initiative which aims to provide information, relaxation and companionship.
The scheme has been set up by Sefton Youth Service and is aimed at women in the Bootle area who are 21 or under.
Weekly meetings are held at Christ Church in Oxford Road, Bootle.
Project co-ordinator Davina Suthren said: ‘We have a lovely big room full of toys and two nursery nurses who have volunteered.
‘Young mums and mums-to-be can come along and their children can play and be looked after in safe surroundings while they enjoy a chat and a cup of tea.’
Should I stay with a cheat?
MY marriage has been in trouble for two years, ever since my husband started having affairs.
We have two children, aged eight and six, and I know my husband thinks the world of them, but he is carrying on living the life of a single man, with no thought for me.
I have started divorce proceedings, as we have been living apart for the last two months, but now he is pleading with me to take him back.
I don't know what I am doing.
I have a part-time job, but I have been off sick for the last two weeks, because I can't keep my mind on it.
I'm on tranquillizers to calm my nerves.
What would you advise me to do, Wendy?
He says he will be faithful, that he loves only me, but I know he has had three affairs in the last year.
WENDY SAYS…
I suspect you really have three children, not two the third one being your husband.
He is the kind of man who thinks that whatever he does, he should be forgiven.
Mother love has a tendency to forgive all, and a lot of men seem to think that their wife is their mother!
But you are not his mother, and you need to make this clear to him.
You don't say anything about your feelings for him.
Do you love him?
If you do, then maybe you should give him the chance he is asking for.
If you decide to do that, don't feel you are giving in.
What you are doing is taking a mature view of the situation.
If it doesn't work out, no one including yourself will be able to blame you for the breakdown of your marriage.
No end in sight to road noise nightmare
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
DEMANDS to sound-proof up to 1,500 houses on a busy ring road look set to fall on deaf ears.
Residents living along Queen's Drive Liverpool's principal circular route have long complained of sleepless nights caused by traffic noise.
Coun Christopher Curry, of Broadgreen, asked Liverpool City Council to investigate whether acoustic insulation could be installed in properties fronting the road.
But environment officers say the cost would be ‘substantial’ estimated at between £600 and £700 for each home.
Pressure
Initial sound pressure monitoring would first have to be carried out to assess the ‘noise climate’ along the route, said Michael Kennedy, principal environmental health officer.
He points out in his report to tomorrow's environmental services and consumer protection committee that noise levels are higher in other parts of the city.
‘Besides the property on Queen's Drive, there are other busy roads in the city where dwellings are closer to traffic than they are for most of Queen's Drive,’ he said.
‘If any finance was provided to insulate property it should be used on a priority basis to meet the most pressing needs.’
About 60pc of the houses are council-owned, with the remainder in private hands.
Mr Kennedy said there was no legal requirement on the council to carry out sound-proofing work or provide grants.
Site fear: Residents' fears over coke gas detected under the pitch of the rundown Holly Park stadium in Garston, have been calmed by city council officials, who say problems with contaminants would only be a risk if the ground was disturbed.
Pool pledge: A swimming pool blunder which hospitalised 23 children in Kirkby should never happen again, Knowsley councillors will be told tonight.
Joely Richardson as Lady C. Sean Bean as Mucky Mellors
POTTING sheds will never be the same again.
By Maria McGeoghan
That humble little abode for plant pots, trowels and gro-bags has suddenly taken on a new meaning in the light of the latest Sunday night shocker Lady Chatterley.
The ratings for the drama starring Sean Bean as Mucky Mellors and Joely Richardson as Lady C. have soared, electricity bosses report a surge in power when the nation tunes in and people who have viewed their video recorder with fear and suspicion since the day it came out of the polystyrene box have discovered the freeze frame feature overnight.
So what's all the fuss about?
Well, sex mainly, and the mistaken male view that women dream of having a wild and torrid fling in the afore-mentioned potting shed with someone who spends more time with mulch and manure than Gillette shower gel.
If any man out there thinks that this book written by a man is a woman's idea of a romantic fantasy, they are mistaken.
This may have been the case when Lady C. first frightened the servants back in the twenties, but now that kind of behaviour would probably land Mellors in the hot water he so obviously needs.
The plain fact is that us women are fussy.
The mere sight of a dandruff-laden shoulder, a grimy collar or a grubby fingernail is enough to bring the most promising of romances to a sudden end.
Unless, that is, you can drop enormous hints with family-size bottles of Head and Shoulders, biological washing powder and a nail brush the size of a hedgehog.
Two of my brothers used to be car mechanics and would use ANYTHING washing up liquid, bleach, industrial strength cleaner to get those tell-tale oily fingernails clean before they ventured out on a date.
Instead of buying them aftershave at Christmas, their eyes lit up at enormous, giftwrapped, tubs of Swarfega.
They knew that there was nothing more off-putting for a woman that a romantic encounter at the cinema holding hands with a large dollop of Castrol GTX.
Superstar Cher is with me on the great cleanliness debate.
Toy boy
She has gone down in history with this quote when she spotted a likely-looking toy boy at a celebrity bash.
‘Have him stripped, washed, and brought to my tent.’
When recounting this story to some friends a few weeks ago, one of them added: ‘Well, even that has changed.
Now he would have to be stripped, washed, FLOSSED and brought to my tent.’
And just in case any men out there still need to be convinced that cleanliness is next to Robert Redfordness, how about the tale of a friend of mine who was desperate to impress a woman he had been pursuing for weeks.
She finally agreed to go to the most expensive Chinese restaurant in town with him.
He took out a second mortgage, and off they went.
I won't go into all the grim details, but suffice it to say that when he laughed too much at one of his own jokes with his mouth full and a Chinese mushroom shot out of his nose…
He looked up to see the restaurant door slam and was left with nothing but a whiff of her perfume.
Men, take note.
Can there be honour by degree?
IT'S a feat that his circus act father would have made a million bucks from, but how could Mr Major-Ball have foreseen that everything little John touched would turn into 100% pure horse-dung?
Even when you avert your eyes from his daily economic blunders, you'll always find another sad aspect of his premiership slapping you in the face.
This hit home for me in a 10-mile traffic gridlock around Birmingham last weekend, gazing at the rows of orange cones he swore to sweep away with Citizens' Charters while listening to his critics savage his new improved Classless Honours List.
Where, were the promised changes to the
Honours System that would replace favour with merit?
Isn't this the same old band of Establishment figures given knighthoods for services rendered, hidden from the headlines by a liberal sprinkling of show business and sports stars?
’ Outrageous Who's bothered’scream I.
If your ultimate ambition is to become a faceless, top-hat-and-tailed number at a Buckingham Palace Garden Party, getting to shake the monarch's glove and putting three meaningless letters after your name then you should worry.
If not, don't give the subject a second thought.
The greatest human being I ever met, Bill Shankly, sent me a letter 20 years ago, after hearing I'd written to Harold Wilson demanding to know why he hadn't been honoured.
‘I'm not disappointed about not being recognised,’ the Incomparable One wrote.
‘The people who dish out honours are not really my people.
My people go to Anfield.
If I can make you all happy then that is my greatest ambition.’
I felt like a train-spotter for writing to the Prime Minister about such trivia.
Because that's all it is.
So here's some advice for the beleaguered Mr Major.
Instead of getting worked up about who is or isn't in the Queen's Honours List why not demand the scrapping of a far more cynical honours system University Honorary Degrees.
A student nowadays has to graft for three years on a pittance of a grant, begging the government for a loan and at the same time being excluded from any welfare benefits.
Unless daddy's rich, it's never,, been tougher to become a graduate.
So how do students feel when the likes of Gary Lineker, Bryan Robson, Nigel Kennedy and Lenny Henry are handed honorary degrees by their universities while they're swotting in some squat with all the comfort and respect afforded to a New Age Traveller?
These are the same celebs who grace children's TV shows with inspiring lines like: ‘Me?
I were real rubbish at school.
Were only good at footie and makin' other kids laugh.’
Whenever universities hand out degrees on the basis of who will bring in the best publicity and therefore the biggest cheques, they dishonour their own honours system.
And it's dangerous ground, because before you know it they're not just honouring millionaires by putting their names on degrees, they're putting their names over the door.
Isn't that right Mr Moores?
Or do you prefer Sir John?
Rubbish show
A TIDY Britain Group ‘Bin it for Britain’ roadshow is set to visit Wrexham on Aug 2 to encourage 15 to 25 year olds to use litter bins.
TVs stolen A THIEF has stolen TV sets and video recorders worth £1,320 from a house in Wynnstay Avenue, Marford.
Daily pinta delivery is still under threat
THE daily delivery of milk to the doorstep is under threat.
Already doorstep sales are down to half of total milk sales.
The forecast from Chris Haskins of Northern Dairies which now owns Express Dairies and has over 3,000 milk rounds delivering a daily pinta to five million 5m doorsteps is that the fall in doorstep delivery will not stop until it is down to about a third of the total.
Central London, where even Hitler's bombs never stopped the daily pinta getting through, may be the first area where the milkie becomes an extinct species.
In this modern Jurassic jungle so many live as singles in bedsitters, never even having a cup of coffee until after they get to the office.
In London the supermarkets already dominate the milk supply business, for the good reason that they are open late at night which is when the singles do their shopping and can sell it much more cheaply, 35p against 40p.
Two full lorry loads of milk go into some of the bigger supermarkets every day.
Think what a difference in cost there is between handling that bulk volume and the early morning milkie making his drop of a single pint on scattered doorsteps.
So far the dairies have been able to contain the problem of the rising costs of doorstep deliveries by converting many of the rounds into one-man businesses.
On these a roundsman can earn £15,000 a year or more.
Northern of course do not live by milk alone.
It is a big supplier of recipe dishes and desserts to the supermarkets.
Just four of the top names M & S, Sainsbury's, Safeway and Tesco take half of its output and sales to them are rising by 10pc a year.
It is also big in the fresh pizza business.
Northern has got the formula right, and as a result sales of its pizzas are shooting up 20pc a year.
Northern is taking steps to protect its supplies when the Milk Marketing Board's monopoly on milk ends.
Farmer
This is set to happen in October but could be put off until March.
Northern will be ready with a partnership arrangement in which it and the dairy farmer will work together.
The Northern Foods shares are lower than they should be, because the stock market has got it into its head that competition is tougher than ever in the food business.
But competition is what Northern has thrived on, and at 284p the shares look excellent value to me.
Sadness of petty prejudice
READING the ‘Girls with a view’ letter criticizing men who are less than perfect wearing shorts in the present warm weather, saddened me.
It highlighted the pettiness of what happened to me recently.
I was walking through a Wirral village and decided to have a soft drink in a pub to cool off.
I am a female, mid-twenties and happen to have my nose pierced with one small silver ring.
I realise this is not to everyone's taste, but I did not expect to be turned away from the bar.
Having drank in that pub for eight years and having never caused any trouble in that time, I am disgusted by the fact that there is a general ban on customers with a pierced nose.
‘I could remove the ring would my whole personality change?’
I asked the woman behind the bar and was told, ‘Yes, remove it and I can serve you.’
At this point I left.
Such pathetic prejudice leaves me cold.
I'm sure there are many things we all dislike about other people, yet we would not dream of ostracising them.
In my opinion, it is from such pettiness that stems the very sad and dangerous prejudices prevalent in the world today.
IT is sad that a pub should turn you away simply for the kind of fashion you decide to adopt, particularly since you had been an accepted customer for some years.
The pub's action would be more understandable if what you were wearing could cause offence to other customers, but it is hard to see how the item you describe could have upset anyone.
If you choose to have your nose pierced that is your concern but, to be fair, the pub also has a right to set its own rules.
The ultimate answer, of course, is to take your custom elsewhere which you did, and the original pub was the loser in this case.
Do any other readers, including, of course, pub landlords, have a view on this kind of situation?
Plans to move children's home spark row
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
A ROW has broken out over plans to move a home for problem children to Chester's biggest council estate.
Cheshire County Council wants to sell Appleton House Assessment Centre in Upton, Chester, and to move its residents to the Gorse Hill home for the mentally handicapped in Blacon.
They plan to release the residents of Gorse Hill into the community or into other council owned accommodation.
But residents living near Gorse Hill are furious.
City councillor John Fetherston, said: ‘Blacon is already an area of high family stress and residents feel they can do without the addition of a home for children from problem backgrounds.
‘It has caused uproar.
People don't want it in their backyard.
People want to know, why Blacon?
Why not somewhere else?
‘And as far as the mentally handicapped people go I don't believe we should be throwing them out on the streets.’
But Harold Tomlins, county councillor for the area and Labour spokesman on social services, says residents have got hold it wrong.
‘They seem to think we are going to put a remand centre there,’ he said.
‘That is completely incorrect these are children who are waiting to be fostered or waiting for more permanent homes.
‘Nothing is definite as yet.
We want to hear the residents’ views.
I can accept their fears, but I think they should listen to the explanation from the professionals before they start jumping to conclusions.’
Doug Lawson, principal officer for children's services at Cheshire County Council says Appleton House is considered too large and too institutional to continue as a children's home.
‘Appleton House only has 12–14 residents when it was built for 30 originally,’ he said.
‘We simply don't have the resources to keep it running.
He added:’ The residents, who come from a variety of backgrounds, would be rehoused in two smaller six bedroomed units at Gorse Hill.’
Blacon residents will meet councillors to discuss the plans at a public meeting at St Theresa's School, Blacon tomorrow at 6.30pm.
Cheshire feast on Cornish pasties
CHESHIRE made light work of Cornwall to open their championship programme with a resounding six wicket victory at Stalybridge yesterday.
A convincing one-day success was wrapped up with 15 overs to spare as Cheshire outplayed the Duchy in every respect.
Cornwall, asked to bat first by Ian Cockbain, laid the foundations for a decent total by reaching 110–2 in the 32nd over.
But then a major collapse set in and they slumped to 132–7 before.
Only a late-order rally through the efforts of Godfrey Furse and skipper Graham Watts helped the last three wickets add 41 runs.
Ex-England Test spinner Geoff Miller was the pick of the Cheshire bowlers, picking up 4–52 off 24 overs, although John Potts also produced an excellent spell, producing figures of 3–35 off 11.2 overs.
Cheshire were left plenty of time to pursue a victory target of 174, and even an 18-minute rain stoppage just prior to the start of the final hour failed to unduly affect them.
Widnes opener Tim Bostock laid the base with 52 made off 117 balls, with skipper Cockbain cracking 44 off just 54 balls in 42 minutes to keep the run- rate going.
Miller and John Bean both kept the runs coming as the weather threatened again.
Victory arrived in a flourish when Richard Hignett deposited the last four balls of the 42nd over from Furse for 6, 2, 4 and 6.
No baby could take the place of our James, say Bulgers
By Daily Post Correspondent
THE parents of toddler James Bulger have spoken publicly for the first time since their son's tragic death in February.
Ralph and Denise Bulger tell the world of their joy over the prospect of a new baby in a magazine interview published this morning.
And on the front cover of Spanish-owned Hello! magazine the couple explain why they have chosen to break their silence and announce Mrs Bulger's pregnancy.
They say: ‘We didn't want to share our sorrow.
But now we have good news to tell.’
In the magazine's six-page exclusive, Mr and Mrs Bulger say: ‘We're still taking every day as it comes.
We can't plan ahead.’
Now the pair reveal that they had not planned the child they are expecting at the end of the year.
‘No baby could ever replace James,’ says Mrs Bulger.
And she adds: ‘We were shocked at first.
The pregnancy came as a real surprise.
But now we're made up about the baby.’
It has not been revealed how much money the Bulgers have been paid for the interview, but the figure is thought to be in the five-figure bracket.
The couple are pictured with some of the more than 1,000 soft toys they received from wellwishers after their son's death.
And in the interview, conducted last week, they deny reports that they have needed psychiatric intervention to cope with their trauma.
Instead, they tell of the support they have received from their extended family in Kirkby.
Mrs Bulger has 12 brothers and sisters, while her husband Ralph is one of six children.
And no fewer than five sets of relatives live in the street where the couple are now staying with Mrs Bulger's mother.
The Bulgers are also quick to defend their home city from the criticism it received in the national media after James's death.
Mr Bulger says: ‘We certainly don't hold Liverpool responsible.
It's a great place, full of warm people.
If only the people who criticise it from afar would actually come here and see it for themselves.’
And he adds: ‘One journalist compared Kirkby to Alcatraz!
But there are far worse places.
We like it here and whatever happens, we're definitely going to stay long-term in this area where we were born and bred.
‘There's a really good sense of community and neighbours are always glad to help each other.’
Ralph and Denise Bulger: We didn't want to share our sorrow
Baby Sam needs eye operation urgently
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
THE family of little Sam Hayton are racing against time to raise the cash required for pioneering eye surgery to enable him to see.
Sam, who was born three months prematurely, has a detached retina in each eye.
His only chance of sight is an operation in the United States which costs £60,000.
The operation is booked for next month, but Sam's parents have so far only raised about £23,000.
‘I don't know what will happen if we don't reach the £60,000 mark by the end of July,’ said his mother, Rachel Somerville, 21, of Garston, Liverpool.
‘I'm trying not to think about it.
‘We have somewhere between £22,000 and £23,000 in the bank and there is cash still to come in, but we have a long way to go.’
She explained: ‘Our appointment is for July 20 at the William Beaumont Clinic in Michigan.’
The operation has a 90pc success rate, she said, adding: ‘It is our only chance.
‘The operation was carried out in Britain a number of years ago but failed and doctors here are unwilling to try it again.’
Sam weighed only 1lb 6oz when he was born 18 months ago.
‘He is such a happy little boy,’ said his mother.
‘He's always laughing and doesn't let his disability stop him from having fun.
‘I want to show him all the beautiful things trees, flowers and birds but most of all I want him to see his big sister, Katie.’
Various fund-raising events, including parachute jumps, charity nights and sponsored walks, have been held.
Anyone who would like to help can donate money to account number 2/3 8856 626/ 1 at any Halifax Building Society branch.
Sam Hayton, 18 months, and his mother, Rachel Somerville
The memory of blitz on Liverpool ‘must stay alive forever’
AS BRITAIN commemorates the North West's efforts in the Battle of the Atlantic, a Merseyside author is keeping the memory of an earlier struggle alive.
John Hughes believes that the severity of Liverpool's blitz, which claimed more than 1,800 lives in May, 1941, has been underestimated by historians studying World War II.
Using eye-witness accounts, insurance documents and death records, Hughes has reconstructed the eight horrific days of the blitz in his new book, Port in a Storm.
The book argues that the blitz should be seen in the same light as the Battle of the Atlantic, which aimed to inflict economic damage on Britain, rather than as a terror attack intended to undermine the morale of citizens.
Hughes has recounted the devastating effect of successive raids on Liverpool and Birkenhead, in which 130 vessels were damaged or sunk and countless warehouses containing sugar, cotton and other vital commodities were destroyed.
‘Merseyside was the most dangerous place to be in 1940 and 1941, but the Government and media tended to emphasise the fate of London, because it couldn't be hidden.
Events in the rest of the country were often played down,’ said Hughes.
Hughes is convinced that the North West, its tales of achievement drowned out by London's much-trumpeted experiences, has not received the credit it deserves for its wartime resilience.
But he rejects the popular belief that information about the city's blitz was suppressed to avoid damaging civilian morale.
‘When I looked at the archive material, I was surprised at what the censor passed rather than what was hushed up.
‘People believed that information was being withheld because, for a short period in 1940, newspapers were required to refer to Liverpool only as ‘a North West town’.
But throughout 1941, specific details were given.
‘Many of the people I spoke to felt that Merseyside had been forgotten.
The main reason for believing that it was neglected was its complete absence from any cinema newsreels of the period.’
As he journeyed into the darkness of the past, Hughes attempted to compensate for this neglect by capturing the mood on Merseyside's battered docksides.
‘From Mass Observation records, I discovered that Liverpool's spirits were raised by the presence of foreign sailors, determined to enjoy their shore leave.’
Hughes, 46, a long-time historian of Merseyside, has spent seven years examining public records and interviewing people who remember the blitz in an effort to paint a detailed image of the times.
Author John Hughes:
‘Blitz under-estimated’
‘Many are eating a very poor diet’
Shock survey says half area's men are fatties
By Cath Steward Daily Post Staff
ALMOST half the men in Cheshire and Wirral are overweight according to the findings of a health survey published yesterday.
A third drink more than the recommended levels of alcohol, and more than half of men and women never exercise.
The statistics are among the findings of a health and lifestyles survey carried out on a sample of 10,000 people from throughout Cheshire and Wirral.
The study has been commissioned by Liverpool University on behalf of the local health authorities.
Although 78pc of people described their health as good, 53pc never took exercise, 29pc smoked and 86pc drank alcohol.
While a quarter of women were overweight, 40pc of men were too heavy.
Roughly one in ten people surveyed were obese.
Conditions shared by most people are high blood pressure (13pc) and asthma (nine pc).
A long-standing illness, disability or infirmity was reported by almost a quarter.
The survey also showed that many people are eating a very poor diet.
A large number of young men reported eating white bread, chips, meat pies and sweets regularly.
They were also the group least likely to eat fresh fruit.
A report on the survey's initial findings is due to be put before Chester Health Authority on Friday.
The data will then be used to target areas of public health which need most improvement.
The information will also be compared with national and regional data to identify priority areas in Cheshire.
The health authorities say it is too soon to comment on the implications of the figures as yet as they still have to be assessed in the light of the type and ages of the people who responded.
Dr Dave Haran, of Wirral and Cheshire public health said: ‘Discussion is now underway on a project to use the information to provide lifestyle profiles of localities distinguished by their social and economic composition.’