

The Northern Echo
PUPILS from Langbaurgh School had an extra history lesson when they met the Mayor of Middlesbrough, Coun Eddie Bolland, in his parlour yesterday.
The 11 youngsters discussed the links between Cleveland, the De Brus family and its most famous member, Robert the Bruce, the Scottish king said to have been born at Skelton Castle.
The pupils, aged 12–13, presented the Mayor with alternative coats of arms for Middlesbrough.
Coun Bolland said: ‘They were rather magnificent.
The children had obviously spent a lot of time on them.’
He said the blue lions on Middlesbrough's coat of arms were directly attributable to the influence of the De Brus family.
‘We should make more of our links,’ he added.
Teacher Fran Wood said the children had greatly enjoyed the visit.
HOUSE has been called for the last time at the Mecca bingo hall in Middlesbrough and its future is now uncertain.
The former Empire Theatre in Corporation Road is a Grade II listed building and has been a haven for the eyes down regulars since the 1960s.
It is owned by the Rank Organisation and it is understood that bar boss Bary Faulkner, who owns Faulkner's in the town's Albert Road, is interested in buying it.
Middlesbrough Council was offered the opportunity to buy the building, but had to turn it down.
Spokesman Doug Allan said the actual buying of the building was not a major problem.
‘But the renovation and running costs would be high at a time when the council is being threatened with poll-capping and its budget desecrated by government cuts,’ he said.
The 20 members of staff were offered alternative employment but accepted redundancy payments instead.
SUNDERLAND-BASED Dawn Milligan had her first open winner of the year when home-bred Woodhill Echo bounced back to form to win a high-class £1,000 open at Nottingham.
The April 1989 Game BallSlaneyside Speed whelp snatched the lead just before the line, winning by a neck at useful odds of 6–1.
Now Milligan is hoping the speedy brindle can retain the Steel City Cup, which it won, along with a £2,000 prize, last April.
Woodhill Echo went on last year to win a £1,000 open at Brough Park before finishing third in the Scottish Derby.
But after being knocked out in the first round of the English Derby the dog injured a hind muscle and was out of action for a long time.
Milligan had two dogs in the final of the Northumberland Gold Cup at Brough Park last month, but had to be satisfied with second-placed Smashiton.
Now she is hoping that her open luck will change, though it looks as though Smashiton will have too much to do in tonight's £100 450 metres open at Sunderland.
The race includes Dave Conway's Farncombe Tiger, which seems to love the East Boldon circuit, while Harry Williams' Capricorn Note, which beat Derby favourite Balligari in an open sprint at Sheffield will also be in with a shout.
There are three more opens on an attractive 12-race card.
Jan Little's Wath Fantasy is expected to start favourite in the 255 metres event, though Shawfield's Rhincres Legend, which won at Sunderland last week, makes a quick return and connections are  excited about Conway's new dog, the wide-running Irish import Outcast Charlie.
There are two puppy opens, with Williams' ever-improving Arfur Daley, a recent open winner at Brough Park, looking to have a great chance alongside Gordon Rooks' Movealong Sharp and Tommy Robinson's Just Right Air.
The second puppy open looks like being a contest between Robinson's Just Right Kyle, which won an open at Nottingham on January 27 and Graham Calvert's Ruffside Rock, successful in a recent A3 race at Sunderland.
Friday's charity meeting at Sunderland is expected to raise £2,000 for the Samaritans and The Northern Echo is sponsoring race seven.
In a bid to attract more dogs for its Monday night permit meetings Sunderland will be paying £3 appearance money plus prize money of between £15 and £25 a race, with no entry fees for trainers.
BROUGH PARK is preparing for next week's heats of the All England Championship Hurdle over 500 metres.
Some of the best jumpers in the country will be chasing the £4,000 first prize, including Paddy Hancox's Kildare Slippy, which holds track record at Catford, Hackney and Hall Green.
But Brough record-holder Jenks Challenger and litter brother Badgers Panzer are expected to be in contention.
The first round will be on Tuesday, the semi-finals on Saturday and the final the following Thursday.
CLEVELAND PARK is hoping to set up a two-dog match between the Middlesbrough track's current top dog, Goulane Peggy, and exciting newcomer I'm Sloppy.
Goulane Peggy was a comprehensive winner of its last match against Tailteann Lass, winning by 3 7 lengths in a calculated 29.14 secs for the 462 metres trip.
But I'm Sloppy, bought by owner-trainer Ronnie Chambers from Barry Draper at Sheffield, has trialled in a calculated 29.03.
The January 1989 white and fawn dog finished second in a 631 metres open at Sunderland, and switching to Middlesbrough's inside hare has not proved to be any problem.
Goulane Peggy races at Middlesbrough tonight, when ladies will be admitted free, and with I'm Sloppy having a second solo trial the match is expected to take place next Wednesday night.
OPPOSITION is mounting to a controversial rule which has robbed a Middlesbrough student of his last chance to run in the English Schools Cross Country Championships.
Mandale Harrier Shaun Purcell, runner-up in the Cleveland Schools Championships, has been told he cannot compete at Bristol next month because he missed the annual School InterCounties with a flu virus.
Now Peter Buckby, head of PE at Byedale School, Marske, is ready to mount another campaign to have the rule changed.
Buckby wrote to every head teacher in Cleveland last year seeking support after Langbaurgh runner Adam Mead, the county champion, was prevented from running in the English Schools because the departure date of a school skiing trip was brought forward 24 hours.
‘I think it is a disgusting rule,’ said Buckby, who runs for New Marske Harriers.
‘There seems to be a small minority in Cleveland who want to stick by the rule and are blinkered in their view.
We have had a few meetings about the rule but they have always brought in extra bodies to out-vote us.
But we have to push forward as hard as we can and hopefully someone will see sense.’
Buckby, who is also secretary of the Langbaurgh Schools Cross Country Association, said he had been trying for nearly ten years to have the rule changed.
Last year, after publicity about Mead missing the English Schools Championships, the rule was amended slightly to say that a county champion could be excused missing the Inter Counties but no-one else.
Purcell, a student at Longlands College, Middlesbrough, finished second to clubmate Darryl Churchill in the senior boys' race and is not affected by the amendment.
Buckby believes Cleveland should adopt the same selection policy as Durham County that the first five in the county championships win automatic selection, with three additional discretionary places.
He said: ‘For the second year running Cleveland Schools will be denying themselves the services of two exceptionally good athletes and denying the lads the chance of taking part in the English Schools Championships.
‘We are trying to educate young people and point them in the right direction and I don't think we are fulfilling our duty very well when we have a rule like this.’
Mike Cotton, cross country secretary of the Cleveland Schools AAA, said: ‘I feel sorry for the lad but there is absolutely nothing we can do about it.’
FORMER international sprinter Wendy Addison is now a mother in retirement, writes Simon Turnbull.
The North Shields Polytechnic athlete, who finished third in the 200 metres final in the 1989 UK Championships, gave birth to her first child, Victoria, on Monday.
Addison, 31, didn't compete on the track last summer and has decided to hang up her spikes.
ATHLETICS champion Nadeem Malik who suffers from cerebral palsy has received a grant for equipment from Middlesbrough council.
Nadeem's PE teacher at Ormesby School, Ian Smith, said he fully deserved the £200.
Mr Smith said: ‘He has done brilliantly.’
Nadeem, 16, of Saltersgill, Middlesbrough, competed in the Northern team at the British Sports Association for the Disabled championships in 1990 and 1991.
He has won five medals, three of them gold.
‘I enjoy the sprints best,’ said Nadeem.
PUPILS at a Middlesbrough school welcomed the Bishop of Whitby into their classrooms when he called in for a day's visit.
The Rt Rev Gordon Bates was responding to an invitation from Rev Jeff Hatton, chairman of the governors at the 900-pupil Eston Park School in Burns Road, Eston.
A full itinerary included visits to upper and lower school assemblies and teaching groups, religious education lessons, coffee in the staff rooms, chatting to pupils and meeting governors.
THE search for Middlesbrough's ‘superwoman’ is underway.
Organisers of the Women's Festival are looking for the woman who has done most for the welfare, health or quality of life of women in the town in the last year.
‘This competition is different,’ said Middlesbrough council's equal opportunities officer Sheena Hannan.
‘It's about women, for women and judged by women.
It gives women a chance to express themselves, to celebrate their role in families, neighbourhoods and communities.’
Leaflet campaign to win visitors
A NEW leaflet produced by Middlesbrough Council's tourism section should be a big draw for visitors.
More than 3,000 copies of a colourful two-sided leaflet have been produced to give a quick-reference guide to the town's attractions.
The leaflets are being distributed to hotels and guest houses registered with the Northumbria Tourism Board and to travel trade representatives and coach operators throughout Britain.
Singing head:
Ian Graves, 41, the new headteacher at Dene School, Thornaby, is to sing for charity at a money raising cabaret on February 14.
Visitor welcomed:
Glenys Carter, the director of Playmatters the National Toy Libraries Association, was welcomed by Labour candidate Peter Mandelson when she visited the office of the Hartlepool Toy Library in Victoria Road yesterday.
Top notch:
Hartlepool nuclear power station has produced over 395 million units of electricity in the last two weeks thanks to the continuous operation of both reactors.
NEW-born baby lambs caused quite a stir in Stewart Park, Middlesbrough, on their first public outing in yesterday's sunshine.
The three Jacob lambs were born to a resident tup and ewe and arrived earlier than normal in the year.
One is pictured as mum exchanges glances with her llama neighbour and Geoff Edwards, who is helping to look after them, said: ‘They are really delighting the young visitors jumping about in the unusually warm and sunny weather.’
TAKE a bag of used banknotes, legitimately acquired and amounting to a quarter of a million pounds.
The first place most people might take it is a Caribbean island where the sun never goes down and the rum prices never go up.
Alternatively, you could put it in a pot and grow sweet peas in it, or lettuce or house plants.
People speak to house plants, so in the latter case they could speak to money as well, which would make a change from money talking.
The proof that where there's brass there's muck is being unearthed in the North-East.
It may seem a waste but waste is precisely the point of it.
‘It nearly brought tears to my eyes,’ confessed Dr Phil Gates yesterday in recalling the moment that he had a polythene bag in front of him which contained £250,000 in old notes.
‘They were old and shredded but it crossed my mind to get out the glue stick.’
Instead he did the scientifically decent thing and used all the lovely lolly to grow things in.
Some of it was mixed with other ingredients as a compost, some of it was used as pure money.
Both have so far proved effective, which shows that ready cash is more versatile than credit cards and cheque books.
Dr Gates, of Durham University, is working with Middlesbrough Botanic Centre in what all parties hope will be a profitable venture.
Potato waste from the leftovers of crisp manufacturing is already proving successful.
‘All organic waste could probably be used in some form,’ said Dr Gates.
‘The Bank of England got in touch last year.
They had been dumping all their notes till then in landfill sites.’
Notes go out of circulation at a rate of 2,000 tonnes a year, which is probably riches beyond dreams.
They have proved beneficial for plants partly because of their cotton fibre content, which lends moisture.
This too would assist house plant owners keen on chatting to their charges but less of a mind to water them.
There is some way to go in all this despite the promising early signs.
For used money to be viable it has to be seen to make new money.
Recycling is not a non-commercial venture.
But as the search goes on to find a replacement for peat scientists are optimistic.
It might become just the thing to have a plant standing in a four and a half inch pot which contains a cool five grand in shredded tenners.
The scientists have approached the tests with a decent mixture of the deadly serious and light-hearted.
The species of tomato they chose to grow in the banknote compost is called money maker.
End of the line
BY THE time these words are being read Frank Gray might be the former manager of mighty Darlington FC, this space's favourite football team.
If not it may be about time to offer a vote of confidence and see him on his way the week after.
It is always a dodgy business, sacking a manager or calling for his sacking.
But managers know the unwritten rules when they enter the business.
Results decide their destiny.
Gray, one of the sweetest left backs of his generation, took over a vibrant team.
They had shortcomings but behind them were two seasons of unprecedented success, a sturdy platform on which to build or to consolidate.
This has crumbled away.
Last Saturday's exhibition against Hull City, a side with a pitiful away record, was inept and occasionally heartless.
Here were a team either playing to a manager's orders and failing woefully, or simply not playing for him.
Tuesday night's match at Fulham yielded the side's heaviest defeat of a poor season.
The danger is that all the good, solid work will be thrown away.
The fans can sense that possibility.
It was rife in Saturday's crowd.
It is a pity about Gray because he has given much to the club over three years.
He does not appear, however, to have grasped the management nettle or to have found a way of dealing with its stings.
Criticism in this space during an inexorable slide this season has always been delivered with a heavy heart.
But it has always produced two results: support from other fans who think Newcastle aren't half lucky and complete silence from the club which many fans also accuse of poor public relations except on one occasion when the assistant manager was economical with the truth.
It is a sad matter, but delayed action will make it much sadder still.
Hedge record:
Pupils from Manor Comprehensive School, Hartlepool, planted a wildlife hedge in record time at Bowesfield Pond in Stockton.
They put in around 200 young plants to provide habitat for insects, birds and small mammals at one of Cleveland Wildlife Trust's urban nature reserves.
Tip tipped:
A rubbish tip at Deepdale, Loftus, given its third extension against the wishes of residents, has been closed until further notice.
Carlin How Farm, near Guisborough, is a likely new future tipping site.
AN all-weather soccer pitch made of supertough plastic is out of action after only six months' use.
Middlesbrough council is unhappy with work done by the contractors who laid the pitch at the Southlands Centre.
It has warned the site could become a danger to players if repairs are not carried out.
The pitch will be out of action for a week for remedial work.
The problem was spotted when council engineers checked the pitch, laid last July.
Contractors Bernhards Rugby Sports Services have agreed to carry out the repairs at no extra cost to the local authority, said a council spokesman.
MIDDLESBROUGH won through to a moneyspinning cup semi-final against Manchester United last night.
Boro beat Third Division Peterborough with a goal ten minutes from time to win a tense Rumbelows League Cup quarter-final at Ayresome Park.
MIDDLESBROUGH'S Young Sports Personality of the Year, Stephen Markham, has had requests for grants turned down by Middlesbrough Council and Cleveland County Council.
The 17-year-old, £35-a-week apprentice engineer, who won the AAA's under-17 100 metres hurdles in a record time of 12.9 seconds last year, said: ‘I am bitterly disappointed to be rejected by two local authorities.
Travelling and equipment is so expensive.
‘Many athletes in the South are backed by sponsorship.
In the NorthEast, there is little encouragement.’
Phillip Markham, his disabled father, said he was disgusted by the lack of support.
‘What does a teenager have to do to earn recognition?’ he asked.
Middlesbrough Council spokesman Mike Clark said the £15,000 available for grants had been over-subscribed four times.
‘Markham received help for two years, but with new applicants coming along it was felt he could not receive a third grant.’
A Cleveland County Council official said it was a very difficult task to recognise 22 sports for major grants with a limited budget.
A MAGNIFICENT Stuart Ripley goal put Middlesbrough into the Rumbelows League Cup The former England Under-21 winger is not a noted a goalscorer.
But his matchwinner ten minutes from time was worthy of any international striker.
Now Middlesbrough face the formidable challenge of Manchester United in the two-leg semi-final, a rich reward for the only League club firing on three fronts.
Peterborough made them fight every inch of the way.
After an early scare when Ken Charlery headed wide from a left-winger corner by Mick Halsall, Middlesbrough set a blistering pace with Ripley the danger man.
Fred Barber made a good save from Robbie Mustoe when Ripley crossed into the middle.
Peterborough had a lucky let off when Nicky Mohan headed against the bar.
Barber then denied John Hendrie as the ball rebounded into play.
Boro threatened to run riot but could not provide the finishing touch.
Peterborough weathered the storm and could have taken a shock lead after 31 minutes.
Pat Gavin had a good scoring chance but Stephen Pears brought off a brilliant save.
The battling visitors gained in confidence, but much to Middlesbrough's relief, Ken Charlery pulled the ball behind Halsall.
The Posh tackled hard and supported well.
Middlesbrough came close to a breakthrough in the 63rd minute.
After a flash of Hendrie's skill on the byeline, Paul Wilkinson's fierce shot was blocked by Robinson.
Peterborough substitute Peter Costello had a great chance to be an instant hero.
But he completely missed the ball when presented with a scoring chance within a minute of his introduction.
Middlesbrough skipper Alan Kernaghan, who faces a two-match ban, received another booking when he fouled Halsall.
A minute later Peterborough full back Noel Luke brought Hendrie down from behind.
He was fortunate to be shown only the yellow card.
Ripley brought the crowd to their feet with his stunning winner.
He dragged defenders with him in a diagonal run, turned, and hit a superb curling shot into the far corner.
The winger said: ‘When I cut inside I was forced to the left.
I checked and the Peterborough players with me went for the check.
That created a little space and I just hit the ball.
Luckily for me, it went into the corner.
‘The two Manchester United games will be great for the fans and the club.
They will generate a lot of revenue that will put us in good stead for the future.
‘Peterborough did a good professional job.
The crowd were very patient because they knew it was a difficult game for us.’
Manager Lennie Lawrence saluted Stuart Ripley's ‘wonder’ goal: ‘If you watch Sky Television, and watch Italian football, you will not see a better goal than that.
It needed a goal of that quality to win the game.
Peterborough played extremely well, though nervous tension affected our game in th e first half.’
Peterborough manager Chris Turner said: ‘We could not have played better than we did tonight.
For 20 minutes Middlesbrough ran us ragged.
They must have crossed 1,000 balls in the first half hour.
Yet we defended well and had the best first-half chance.
‘Their goalkeeper made only one save in 90 minutes, so a lack of quality in the box let us down.
We played better tonight than against Liverpool.
Liverpool allowed us to play a lot more than Middlesbrough.
‘Middlesbrough will give Manchester United a hard game at Ayresome Park.
The crowd were phenomenal tonight.’
FAR from the crowded Second Division title race, Blackburn goalie Bobby Mimms loves coming back to the peace of his home village in North Yorkshire.
The Rovers return, it might justifiably be said for 28-year-old Mimms has just bought the pub next to the house where he was born.
‘There are people here who bring you back down to earth,’ says the goalkeeper innkeeper.
‘Whatever I am in Blackburn, here I'm Bob from next door.’
Rovers' one-time record buy is also loving life at homely Ewood Park, after manager Kenny Dalglish decided that however many more expensive players he might sign Mimms remained his number one.
‘Blackburn's like going back in time,’ he says.
‘They filmed the Hovis advert at one end of the ground, which says a lot about it.’
Rovers also have the Football League's only coal-fired boardroom.
The talk, says Mimms, is that when they develop a new ground it'll be built around the old boardroom.
But football hasn't always landed the 6ft 3in ‘keeper so squarely on his feet three frustrating years at Spurs left him ‘thoroughly pigged off’ he admits.
He was born at Blacksmith's Cottage in Newton-on-Ouse, a village between York and Easingwold with two pubs, a handsome church and not much else.
Bobby's pub, run by his brother, Glenn, is the adjacent Blacksmith's Arms.
Their father, Bernard, a wartime goalkeeper with Brentford, still lives in the cottage.
‘He's very good but goalkeepers have more time now,’ says Bernard, 72.
‘In my day, if you held the ball for more than a second you got clattered, really clattered.’
Always football daft ‘there wasn't a lot else to do in this village’
Bobby became a Halifax Town apprentice from school.
‘Even at school there were players more skilful than me, but I was the one who really wanted to do it in every game.
I still do.
‘A lad in the village was an apprentice with Middlesbrough, but he found progress difficult.
‘I decided I'd rather go to a small club and work my way up.
Halifax was maybe a bit close to the line, but it served a purpose for both me and them.’
Transferred to Rotherham, where he still lives with his wife and two young sons, he moved to Everton for £150,000 in 1985 understudy to the enduring Southall.
Subsequent loan deals included four games at Sunderland and six at Blackburn before the ill-starred move to Spurs.
‘At Everton I felt at home as soon as I walked through the door,’ says the affable Mimms.
‘The lads were tremendous and the club was run for the players.
‘From day one at Tottenham I had the opposite feeling, even when I was in the team.’
Bought to replace the ageing Clemence, he was in turn ousted (’ a real kick in the teeth’) by the Norwegian Erik Thorstvedt.
‘There were a lot of things about the club I didn't get on with.
I made a lot of mistakes but I owned up to them and was starting to play pretty well.
‘When they came in they talked of the first team and it seemed an offer I couldn't refuse; with hindsight, I should never have gone.’
Don McKay, then Rovers' manager, paid £250,000 for him on New Year's Day last year.
The following week Middlesbrough-born Steve Livingstone son of the former Hartlepool and Middlesbrough centre forward Joe Livingstone signed for £450,000.
But after the new season's first frantic flush, Rovers were at the foot of the Second Division.
Caretaker boss Tony Parks eased the pressure after Mackay was sacked; the enigmatic Dalglish has taken them four points clear at the top.
‘At Liverpool he seemed so uptight; here he's so relaxed,’ says Mimms.
‘Sometimes it seemed like he was breaking the club transfer record every week, but he told me if I kept on doing it I was safe.’
Blackburn's likely promotion could also be a Mimms family double; the Blacksmith's Arms team, managed by Glenn, are in the semi-finals of the North Riding Cup.
Premier division apart, Bobby's ambition is to gain full international recognition alongside three England Under 21 caps.
On Tuesday, before the now mandatory all-ticket crowd, Rovers beat Derby County 2–0 his 13th clean sheet of the season at Ewood Park.
On Wednesday, when Ladbrokes ceased to call odds on Rovers lifting the long-awaited championship, he was pulling pints at the Blackie's.
STOCKTON, thumped by 40 points in their last two games, ring the changes up front for tomorrow's attractive home match with West Hartlepool, which kicks off at noon.
Props Robert Preston and Ian Johnston come in for Phil Henderson and Simon Brown, while John Saunders is replaced by Chris Aldus.
Wing forward Mike Wilson is at work and Ian Allan comes in, while the other flanker, Martin Howe, is dropped in favour of Mark Graham.
It is a testing time for Stockton.
They have slipped from the standards which have earned them recent success and even though West will be without half back stars Jonathan Wrigley and John Stabler, both injured, they are strong favourites.
Former Stockton scrum half Barry Corbett and fly half Glynn Armstrong replace the injured duo.
Redcar take on Ripon in the first round of the Yorkshire Cup and Andy Rogers replaces Jim Butcher at prop, while Mike Donoghue returns to the second row.
The backs shuffle around with Roy Myers moving from fly half to full back, Richard Forrest from full back to wing and Paul Evans from wing to centre.
Mark Trodden comes in at fly half.
Durham City meet Middlesbrough at Hollow Drift in another noon kick off to  accommodate the France v England international.
City bring in Mike Fenwick at hooker for Paul Rogers and Tom Smith at prop for John Bell, with other forward changes Steve Lynn for Howard Nicholson and Phil Heslop for Andrew Harle.
Full back Jon Bland is doubtful.
MANCHESTER United central defender Gary Pallister, looking ahead to the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final clash with his old club last night warned his teammates: ‘We've a fight on our hands.’
Pallister, who made a then British record £2.3m move from Teesside to Old Trafford, was at Ayresome Park for Boro's thrilling quarter-final replay win over Peterborough United on Wednesday night.
Pallister said: ‘When I get back to Old Trafford, I will tell the lads we have a fight on our hands.
‘It would be naive and stupid to think we have a walkover just because we are favourites for the First Division title.
‘Sheffield Wednesday beat us in the Rumbelows Cup Final at Wembley last season when they were a Second Division side.
‘Boro are on a high.
Probably more than we are at the moment.
‘I was impressed by the Boro.
The team looks more mature than at the start of the season.
‘Stuart Ripley's goal was the best I have seen this season.
I was on my feet, cheering with the rest of the fans in the North Stand.
‘Bernie Slaven, who was sat next to me, thought Rippers would have a go when he started his run.
‘Ripley was easily the outstanding player.
He showed his speed, strength, and never-say-die attitude.
‘He always looked stronger than the players around him.
He also got a bit of bend on the ball for a magnificent strike.’
Pallister will play against the Boro for the first time, on February 26, since his headline-hitting move three years ago.
‘I am not sure whether I will get a hot reception from the fans when I run out at Ayresome Park.
But I am looking forward to the first leg.
‘Middlesbrough is a club close to my heart.
Their result is the first I look for every week, and I get home as often as I can.
‘Bernie is my closest pal in football.
We have ribbed each other ever since there was the prospect of Middlesbrough meeting United.
‘We have never played against each other before.
Bernie said my sciatica would play me up and rule me out.
I told him he is not trying to get fit in time.
‘I'm not sure if Bernie will be ready but we will have a laugh and joke after the game.
‘It just seems a little weird that we could be playing opposite each other in a semi-final of a big competition.’
Pallister has learned to live with the pressure-cooker atmosphere of Old Trafford.
‘It was something of a culture shock when I first went down there.
But I have got used to it.
‘Manchester United are the team that everyone wants to beat.
There are no matches when we can take it easy.
‘I have set myself a target of winning every domestic honour.
‘I have an FA Cup medal.
I now want to win the Rumbelows Cup and, the ultimate prize, the First Division championship.’
Manchester United have not won the title for 25 years, a staggering statistic for a famous club.
United are the current favourites and the strong tip of many people in the game to capture the elusive trophy in May.
Does this put extra pressure on the team?
‘I don't think we are wound up more than other teams.
Everyone wants to win the First Divisiocn championship.
‘I'm just looking forward to us pipping Leeds United.’
DAN Sherry, still seething a year after a controversial fight with Chris Eubank, insisted yesterday: ‘I'm no actor.’
The Canadian was widely accused of theatricals during tenth-round mayhem in a WBO middleweight title clash with Eubank at Brighton.
As Sherry writhed around on the canvas, Eubank was awarded a technical decision after the backward butt which later brought a £10,000 Boxing Board of Control fine.
Now Sherry has a chance to get even.
If he overcomes Benn, Hearn has guaranteed him a re-match with Eubank this year.
—PHIL Thomas School of Boxing hold a strong hand in tonight's North-East Divisional finals of the ABA championships at Gateshead Leisure Centre.
(7.30).
But the Middlesbrough club's three boxers will have to work hard.
Although welter John Green fights only once, his brother Andy, a lightweight, and John Mett, a light middleweight, face two fights to qualify for the North-East counties finals in a fortnight.
But it's a prospect they view with  equanimity , especially club coach John Lowe.
‘At one time you had to box straight until it ended.
It was nothing to have to box four bouts in one night,’ he said.
Lowe a former professional, started the club, then known as Joe Waltons, with his brother Ronnie.
Now, with Teesside boxing doyen Phil Thomas as president it trains in the former Palm Lounge of the DeNiros pub/disco.
MIDDLESBROUGH midfield player Andy Peake has won an immediate recall for the FA Cup fifth round at Portsmouth tomorrow.
Peake will be on duty at Fratton Park after being cup-tied for the Rumbelows League Cup replay against Peterborough United.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said Peake played a crucial role in away wins over Sheffield Wednesday and Port Vale last week.
Middlesbrough will fly to London this afternoon and complete their journey to the South coast by coach.
The Football League have announced Rumbelows Cup semi-final dates against Manchester United.
Middlesbrough will be at home on Wednesday, February 26, with the second leg at Old Trafford on the following Wednesday.
Lawrence would have preferred the first leg on Sunday, March 1.
The only chance of the game being put back would be an FA Cup replay with Pompey.
An extra game would certainly add to Boro's packed cup and league programme.
A rearranged game with Grimsby for February 25 has been postponed again because of the first leg.
Lawrence said: ‘Apart from next week, which is set aside for internationals, we face a series of mid-week games.
‘There will certainly be plenty to interest our fans.
‘If we maintain our progress it will be the club's most memorable season for a long time.
‘With luck, it might be the most memorable in their history.’
Lawrence was uncertain whether Bernie Slaven would recover from a knee injury in time for the first Manchester United cup-tie.
‘I would not dismiss the idea totally, though he has a lot to do.
‘Ideally, I would prefer a comeback in the reserves.
But we will see whether he can get back into full training for a few days.’
Slaven has trained on Redcar beach in a bid to speed up his recovery.
MIDDLESBROUGH have a very young side in the Central League this season.
Andrew Todd, the 17-year-old son of former Middlesbrough manager Colin Todd, is one of the many promising youngsters.
He is following in his father's footsteps as a central defender.
With a limited squad, there are six first-year YTS players in the side.
Youth development officer Ron Bone said: ‘Results are not as important as the development of young players.
Obviously, it is easier for them to develop in the Second Division rather than the First Division.’
Fixtures: Tomorrow the juniors home to Rotherham United.
Wednesday, Reserves away to Blackpool.
DARLINGTON were not the first NorthEast team to find that Tranmere always pack their reserve side with first-team players.
A team with eight players of senior experience were far too strong for a Darlington side packed with YTS players.
Darlington went down 4–0 at Prenton Park.
Fixtures: Tomorrow.
Juniors at home to Halifax in Northern Intermediate League.
Wednesday.
Reserves away to Halifax in Midland Senior League.
HARTLEPOOL'S Midland Senior League game with Wrexham was postponed at the request of the FA Cup giant-killers.
Pool are helping former Newcastle United midfield player Michael Parkinson to recover from injury.
Reserve team manager Eddie Kyle said: ‘Parkinson has trained with us for a while.
He has played a few games and had received treatment.
‘There is a possibility he could sign for us, depending upon a full recovery and whether he impresses manager Alan Murray.’
Following their 2–1 win over Middlesbrough, the juniors visit Doncaster in the Northern Intermediate League tomorrow.
Fixtures: Home to Bury in Midland Senior League Cup next Wednesday.
NEWCASTLE:
Mick Quinn and Franz Carr are set to continue their comebacks from injury in Wednesday's Pontins League match at Barnsley.
Both completed 90 minutes in this week's 1–1 draw with Sheffield United Reserves at St James Park, but look some way off full match fitness.
Despite the presence of several first-teamers, Reserve coach Derek Fazackerley was critical of his side's disjointed performance.
‘The service to the frontmen wasn't good enough and when we did get the ball to them, we immediately gave it away,’ he said.
United, second from bottom of the First Division, looked doomed to defeat when they fell behind 14 minutes from time, but Lee Clark rescued a point with a 25-yard special in the 88th minute.
‘Lee's goal was a cracker,’ added Fazackerley.
‘And just when we needed it.
But a draw was a fair result.’
Defender Matty Appleby picked up a calf injury, but is not expected to be sidelined.
‘It's nothing he should shake it off easily,’ said the coach.
Fixtures: United Reserves are at Barnsley on Wednesday and the Juniors also meet Barnsley at Benwell tomorrow (noon).
SENIOR students at Brackenhoe School, Middlesbrough, talked on a one-to-one basis with  representatives from industry and training at a careers convention yesterday.
More than 20 organisations attended the event at the school based in Marton Road, including Wimpey, the Inland Revenue, the Army and the RAF, Cleveland County Council, and Teesside Transport Training Association.
EARLY birds in Middlesbrough could find a Valentine surprise on their doorsteps today.
Nominations have been flooding in from Dale Farm's milkmen for the ‘most deserving customer’.
The winners, along with the daily pinta, will receive a bouquet of flowers.
The milkmen have been watching out for customers who lay their part in the community, are good neighbour, keep a watchful eye on elderly residents, or putting nuts out for the birds.
Fewer visitors:
The number of visitors to Redcar has fallen dramatically according to latest figures and Langbaurgh councillors blame its ‘invisible’ tourist information office, which has moved from the seafront to Dundas Street.
Saltburn's office had 37,702 visitors, Guisborough 23,497.
Arson quizzing:
Detectives investigating arson attacks at South Bank Football Club on Teesside have questioned two men.
Both were released on police bail until the end of the month and neither has been charged.
The club, in Normanby Road, and its stand have been the scene of a series of unexplained fires, the latest being last Friday when the stand was gutted for the second time.
Making a splash:
Swimmers old and new are being urged to book early for courses at Berwick Hills pool, Middlesbrough, as hundreds were enrolled on a previous programme.
Spare time:
An introduction to leisure course, run by Middlesbrough council leisure services, starts on February 27.
Contact Tony Sharkey on Middlesbrough 245432, ext 3825.
Training hope:
A company which claims to train a third of all motorcyclists in the country could be setting up a school at Langbaurgh's Wheelbase complex at South Bank after winning council support.
The Essex-based company CSM says it will provide 20 new bikes for on and off road hire.
Rallying call:
All regimental organisations and groups in the Stockton area are invited to a meeting in the town's RAFA club tomorrow to discuss a proposal to set up a confederation of ex-service organisations.
Happy tenants:
The majority of Langbaurgh Council tenants are happy with the service they receive according to a survey by the local authority.
Pitch in: Marske United Football Club has won planning permission for a football pitch and a running track on land beside Green Lane in Redcar.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Denis McLoughlin, David Lee, Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
MIDDLESBROUGH will today seek FA Cup revenge at Portsmouth for their most humiliating defeat of the season.
Skipper Alan Kernaghan said: ‘We owe Portsmouth one for our 4–0 Second Division defeat at Fratton Park in December.
‘Pompey gave us a real chasing.
We were second to the ball every time.
‘We did not even offer protection to goalkeeper Stephen Pears, who was being watched by England number two Lawrie McMenemy.
‘Portsmouth were probably the sharpest side we have played this season.
But they will come up against a different side this time.’
Middlesbrough are on a high at the moment after their Rumbelows League Cup win in midweek which means a two-leg semi-final glamour tie with Manchester United.
The club is chasing trophies on three fronts and today's FA Cup tie gives them a chance of a quarter-final place and another money-spinning match against a big club.
Kernaghan added: ‘We have played so many cup-ties this season that we do not feel any pressure.’
The return of Andy Peake for Mark Proctor or Jamie Pollock will be the only change.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said Portsmouth faced their first real test after knocking out Third Division Leyton Orient and Exeter.
‘They will have a big crowd with full media coverage.
We will see whether it brings the best out of them.
‘I want a solid, professional performance from my team.’
Middlesbrough midfield player Andy Peake has been recalled to today's team with Mark Proctor expected to be on the substitutes' bench.
Teenager Jamie Pollock hopes to start off week-end birthday celebrations with a win.
Pollock, 18 tomorrow, said: ‘A Cup double after our mid-week Rumbelows League Cup success against Peterborough United would be great.
‘But my biggest ambition is to play in the First Division for Middlesbrough.’
Team: Pears, Parkinson, Phillips, Kernaghan, Mohan, Mustoe, Peake, Pollock, Wilkinson, Ripley, Hendrie.
Substitutes, Proctor, Payton.
Portsmouth captain Martin Kuhl is doubtful.
Team from: Knight, Awford, Beresford, Kuhl, Symons, Butters, Neill, Powell, Whittingham, Burns, Anderton, Murray, Wigley, Russell, Chamberlain, Clarke.
LAWRENCE hopes to sign Southampton defender Jon Gittens on loan.
The 28-year-old Gittens would not be available for the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final against Manchester United should he agree to the move.
OVER 200 of the North-East's best young athletes will be battling it out in the Durham Association of Boys' Clubs cross country championships at Aykley Heads, Durham, tomorrow writes FRANK JOHNSON.
The first nine in each of the four events will be selected for the national championships at Stoke on March 28.
Last year, Durham swept the board at the National Boys' Clubs championships, winning all four team events and claiming two individual gold medals in a superb performance.
Durham are expected to be even stronger this time and competition for places will be fierce.
The junior boys' race sees another clash between NorthEast champion Glen Hilton, of Durham City Harriers, and the North-East Schools Inter-Counties winner Chris Hilton, of Chester-le-Street.
But Middlesbrough and Cleveland are sending a strong squad, including Steven Helm, Kevin Mace and Glen Harland, while Sunderland's Dave Clark is also expected to be in the thick of the action.
The senior boys' race has also attracted a strong entry, including the former English Schools 3,000 metres track champion Michael Threadgill, of Middlesbrough and Cleveland, who faces opposition from Chester-le-Street's Steve Scott and Phil Solomon, of Sunderland.
SUNDERLAND Harriers will be chasing their fourth consecutive victory in the Sherman Cup cross country meeting at Jarrow this afternoon.
The trophy is awarded to the club with the lowest points total in the four age groups.
The Wearsiders underlined their strength in depth by winning four of the five team awards in the North-East Championships.
HEATON Harriers stage their first open track meeting at the Lightfoot Stadium, Newcastle, tomorrow, starting at 11am.
Entries are accepted on the day and the programme is: 150m girls, boys, senior men; 300m inter-senior women, colts, youths; 600m girls, boys, senior men; 1,000m girls, boys, senior men; 3,000m inter-senior women, youths.
BRITAIN'S national indoor athletics championships at Birmingham will not seem quite the same this weekend with new sponsors, no Cosford, no national TV coverage and no Linford Christie.
For the first time in 14 years, the country's top sprinter, currently sunning himself in Australia, has decided to skip the event at which he has won a record nine men's titles.
With ITV and long-time sponsors Pearl Assurance switching their allegiance to the attractive invitation meeting in Glasgow last week, the championships have been reduced to a sorry state.
Insurance firm Minet stepped in yesterday to take up a last-minute offer to sponsor the event, while BSkyB will provide satellite coverage.
But it has not been enough.
Of the elite, only hurdler Colin Jackson and 200 metres man John Regis are entered for the first championships to be staged in Birmingham's new National Indoor Arena since the move from nearby Cosford.
Yet despite Christie's absence, at least the men's 60 metres should still provide the highlight of the two-day meeting, with young Jason Livingston out to prove he could be the man to spoil the Olympic silver medallist's last year in international competition.
New Derby deal for Cox FOOTBALL: Arthur Cox linked with a return to Newcastle as part of Kevin Keegan's management team, yesterday committed his future to Derby County when he signed a new long term deal with the club.
Cox has agreed a two-year extension to his present contract, which will now run into 1996.
It will take his spell at the Baseball Ground to 12 years but Cox admitted that the decision to sign had not been easy.
He said: ‘I thought long and hard about my future in football and with Derby County.
But I now relish the challenge of rebuilding the club.’
Tours backed RUGBY UNION: Australia and New Zealand can expect government approval to play against South Africa.
The African National Congress yesterday told the Australasian countries that the sport was now fully integrated in South Africa and bans had been lifted on international tours.
No reprisals FOOTBALL: Torquay defender John Uzzell, whose career is threatened by a shattered cheekbone, wants no reprisals when his team-mates face third division promotion-chasers Brentford at Griffin Park today.
Brentford striker Gary Blissett was sent off for the foul that resulted in Uzzell going to hospital for an operation to rebuild his cheek on December 14.
Below par Lyle GOLF: Fallen star Sandy Lyle hit a dismal seven-over-par 79 in the first round of the Northern Telecom Open in Tucson, Arizona.
The former British Open and US Masters champion, starting a two-month stay on the US Tour, included a triple-bogey eight at his fifth.
Hodgson shock SQUASH: Stephen Hodgson, York champion for the last three years, who has competed in nine successive finals, winning six of them, crashed to a shock defeat by Marcus Wood in the quarter-finals.
Hodgson won the first two games but the retrieving ability and fitness of Wood proved decisive as he won 4–9, 2–9, 9–5, 9–6, 9–5.
School starts
FOOTBALL: Middlesbrough Football Club Community Officer David Geddis will hold his first half-term soccer school on Monday.
Thirty senior class pupils from ten primary schools in the Yarm area will attend a three-day pilot project.
The course includes coaching, training, an Ayresome Park tour, and a five-a-side competition.
Similar courses are planned in other areas.
Bears pair agree SPEEDWAY: Australian pair Mark Lemon and David Cheshire have agreed terms with Middlesbrough for the new season.
First Division Poole are to allow Lemon to have a second loan season at Cleveland Park.
Super Sarah TENNIS: Unseeded Sarah Pitkowski, the 16-year-old French prodigy, won the LTA women's satellite event when she beat Belgium's Caroline Wuillot in yesterday's final at Swindon.
GB clean sweep TENNIS: Four British players will contest today's semi-finals of the LTA indoor satellite tournament at Telford.
Jeremy Bates takes on Davis Cup teammate Danny Sapsford and Andrew Richardson faces Chris Wilkinson.
ALAN Temple, a new England international, laid on a short but tremendous display at the North East divisional ABA finals at Gatehead Leisure Centre last night.
He forced Steve Hurcombe of Lambton Street into first round retirement in their featherweight final with speedy unanswerable attacks that totally outclassed Hurcombe.
Hartlepool's Mark Chicocki departed more slowly and controversially.
He was disqualified for leaning on after receiving three warnings in the third round of an absorbing light middleweight semi-final against John Mett of the Phil Thomas School of Boxing.
They had waged three rounds of quick fire war in an all action bout that contained just about every move and punch in the sport.
It was a sad end booed by the crowd to a tremendous contest.
Alan Exley of Grainger Park also laid on a great display, his coolness, footwork and left jab  dominating his middleweight semi-final against Sunderland's Steve Bellfield.
Middlesbrough John Green, whose lightweight brother Andy had earlier won his semi-final, was too strong for Shildon's Brian Wright in the welterweight final.
His swarming attacks gradually overwhelmed wright who took two knock downs and a standing count before the referee halted it in the third.
Results: Lightweight semi-final: Andy Green (PTSOB) bt Alan Graham (Grainger Park).
Heavyweight semi-final: Ian Laskey (Teams) bt John Greenwell (Shildon).
Light  middleweight semi final: John Mett (PTSOB) bt Mark Chicocki (Hartlepool Catholic Club) on third round disqualification.
Midleweight semi final: Alan Exley (Grainger Park) bt Steve Bellfield (Sunderland) points.
Flyweight final: Steve Parry (Lambton Street) bt Darren Noble (Ocean Road BC) points.
Bantam weight final: Alan Martin (Hartlepool Catholic Club) bt Steve Newman (South Bank) points.
Featherweight final: Alan Temple (Hartlepool BW) bt Steve Hurcombe (Lambton Street) retired first round.
Welterweight final: John Green (PTSOB) bt Brian Wright (Shildon) referee stopped contest in the third.
DONALD Fothergill has a palpable and daily reminder of the responsibility he has taken on as managing director of Stockton-based Pickerings Lifts.
Staring balefully from the 30-year-old's office wall are pictures of his six predecessors.
‘I don't get mine up there until I've achieved something,’ says the new boy.
Prominent among the pictures is an 1854 sepia photograph of Jonathan Pickering, the bewhiskered company founder.
His premature death opened the way for John Fothergill, an engineer and the first of five generations of Fothergills to head up the Tilery Bank business, to take over.
Nearly a century and a half later the company is unrecognisable from the one which first installed an electric push-button lift in 1858.
It has a turnover of £24m and its profits for 1990 were around £3m.
Nearly 500 employees work at its ten regional offices.
But Stockton retains pride of place as the company's headquarters, employing 130 staff.
‘Stockton is very important to us.
There are so many diverse skills in this little factory,’ says Fothergill.
It is outwardly then a  buoyant picture: a long-established family firm mindful of its responsibility to its home town.
And turning in good profits.
But ‘Mr Donald’, as he is known to his staff, has inherited the top spot from his father Christopher at a particularly lean time in the lift business.
As befits an MBA graduate of Henley management school, Fothergill does not disguise the tough times ahead.
‘March is the end of our accounting period and I can say there will be reduced profits at Pickerings.
They will be in line with the general recession but the market is so unstable at the moment that you have to review commercial policy almost on a monthly basis,’ he says.
In addition to the anticipated fall for 1991 the new managing director says 1992 and 1993 will also be periods of trading difficulty.
The moribund commercial property market has hit Pickerings hard, as office schemes have become scarce and orders for wall-climbing, glass-fronted apartment-sized lifts are a natural victim of the slump in that market.
So how will the new recruit ensure the company returns to its 1990 levels of health?
Associated and supplier companies in Europe are one way.
Pickerings has a Dutch subsidiary called Mijnssen and other interests in France and Germany.
Refurbishment, maintenance and service work on existing lifts, rather than building new products are another way.
But the new lift sector in the UK still has £400m worth of work a year up for grabs, from the smallest nursing home service lift to multi-storey hotel contracts.
And when Pickerings supplies them its reputation appears to be flawless.
‘Pickerings supplies innovative products, often they are too good for the rather mediocre schemes its lifts are installed in,’ says one prominent regional architect with experience of the company and arch rival Otis, although a bigger concern, retains a deferential view of the Stockton business.
‘We have a great deal of respect for them.
As we do for any competitor,’ says Barry Wheeler, assistant marketing director of Otis.
Fothergill says his company's reputation has been built on a philosophy that views a lift as more than a metal cabin; rather something which can add value to a building.
‘My view outlined in our company literature is that a lift is an integral part of the design and structure of a building a piece of kinetic architecture the result of creative dialogue.’
Dialogue is essential, he adds.
The choice of lift and fittings is bewildering.
Hydraulic or electric traction lift?
Firemans control unit or braille pushes?
Smoke vents, interior trims, depth of lift pits and machine room specifications are just a handful of decisions which have to be made.
Past customers swayed by the dialogue include Fujitsu which installed nine lifts worth £300,000 at its Aycliffe factory, and developer Murray International which gave Pickerings the £150,000 contract to supply lifts for Dunedin House, the Teesdale site office block.
Despite this local work, Fothergill adds his voice to the current vociferous debate, overseen by Teesside Chamber of Commerce, about keeping business contracts in the region.
‘There are a surprising number of bodies with the remit of promoting the area who I shan't name that put jobs with non-local competitors,’ he says, flaring a little with regional pride.
And despite an accent that belies his Middlesbrough birthplace Fothergill says he feels a heavy responsibility to the area.
This, combined with an impeccable knowledge of his business from the bottom up he worked as a lift fitter's mate for a year and the quality of the Pickerings product are the reasons that the company should see off the imminent dip in profits.
Fothergill has no doubts about it.
‘Everybody here is very committed to making the company survive the recession.
We can derive a strength from being a family company that other businesses cannot.
And that should see us through the difficult times.’
And if Pickerings does come through he might just get his picture on the wall.
Horse riders to hold talks
LOCAL owners and riders are meeting in Loftus Town Hall at 7pm on Wednesday to discuss the problems of horse-riding in the area.
Some have complained about lack of space in just exercising their mounts.
Civic Trust officer Jane Taylor said: ‘This will involve finding out how many people ride, where they go and the problems they have getting there.’
THERE is now only one Football League team firing on all three fronts Middlesbrough.
It's got to the point where manager Lennie Lawrence must wake up at times wondering which big game is next.
Over the last seven months, Lawrence has quietly got on with a rebuilding job at Ayresome Park.
While Sunderland and Newcastle United have been in turmoil, and have consequently stolen much of the limelight, his side have progressed in two major cup competitions and challenged for Premier League status.
Lawrence, however, feels the team have not won the recognition they deserve.
After Saturday's draw at Portsmouth, a result which gives the Boro an excellent chance to reach the quarter finals, he said: ‘Perhaps the media in the North-East will now give the team the credit they deserve, instead of concentrating on events a little further up the road.’
H is ambitions are H clear.
‘I want H Middlesbrough to be the No.1 club in the North-East.
If we are in the Premier League, and the other two are in the Second Division, we have a half-chance of receiving the recognition we deserve.
‘From a personal point of view, I am quite happy.
But I want the players to get the accolades.
‘The lack of recognition is serious.
Early doors, it did not bother me.
But it has bothered me since the turn of the year.
‘We have done the business, without the recognition.
‘I think the players are used to lack of recognition, but it is something that puzzles me.
‘Middlesbrough are the most successful team on the pitch.
Financially and commercially, we are in a far stronger position than the other clubs.
‘We must improve our average gate and get into the Premier League as quickly as possible.’
Ironically his former club are competing with Middlesbrough for a play-off place but there can be no doubt that, despite the Kevin Keegan and Denis Smith events of recent months that Middlesbrough are the team of the moment.
With two games in hand over all of the teams above them they are still well-placed for  an automatic promotion spot.
The danger of course, lies in taking on too much.
Remember Oldham two seasons ago?
It's a lesson that will not have escaped Lennie Lawrence but, for the moment, he and the fans couldn't be happier.
BORO manager Lennie Lawrence won a tactical battle to prevent a repeat of Pompey's 4–0 League win at Fratton Park.
8e Lawrence admitted: ‘We watched them play that day and they slaughtered us.
I'm not brilliant but I have only to be shown once.
‘I was determined they would not repeat their lesson.
We stopped them playing.
It was a fair result, because I did not think either side did enough to win.’
On this occasion, Middlesbrough restricted the movement of Portsmouth's attacking full backs.
Despite pressure, there were no problems for goalkeeper Stephen Pears.
Middlesbrough's attacks did not flourish either.
Full back Jimmy Phillips was denied by the best save of the match.
Alan Knight made a stunning reflex save from Phillips five minutes from time and it looked as though Boro were on the way out.
Central defender Alan Kernaghan equalised two minutes from time and Middlesbrough survived two late scares as Pompey pressed for the winner in a tense finale.
There were more thrills in the final ten minutes than in previous play.
Middlesbrough were not at their best after a punishing programme, but Lawrence praised their character and determination.
Portsmouth manager Jim Smith spent part of the game jumping in and out of the dug-out and was obviously disappointed with the result.
Smith said: ‘I thought we were naive with the equaliser.
We should have pushed up and caught Kernaghan offside.
‘Middlesbrough will think they have won the tie because of their unbeaten home record and our poor away form.
‘But we have won three of our four away cup-ties this season.’
Record signing Andy Payton is in line for a first-team place against Blackburn after a supporting role in recent weeks.
SOUTHAMPTON central defender Jon Gittens will make his Middlesbrough debut in the Second Division promotion clash with leaders Blackburn Rovers on Saturday.
Gittens has agreed to a loan move and will deputise for suspended Alan Kernaghan at Ayresome Park.
Lennie Lawrence clinched a deal on the eve of Saturday's tie.
Gittens, however, will not be eligible for the Pompey replay.
The postponement of the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final with Manchester United was welcomed by goalscorer Kernaghan.
Kernaghan will now complete his two-match ban against Portsmouth to be available for the March 4 first leg.
His absence against Pompey, however, will create a defensive problem.
FA rules stipulate a player has to be signed before the first game.
A draw at Fratton Park has increased Middlesbrough's fixture pile-up, especially as the Cambridge United home match will be postponed if they reach the sixth round.
MIDDLESBROUGH and Cleveland Harriers stole the show with all four individual winners and two team gold medals in yesterday's Durham Association of Boys' Clubs cross country championships at Aykley Heads, Durham.
And the Teessiders rounded off a superb afternoon by claiming another six gold medals in the female section with sisters Leanne and Kerry Matthew winning the minor girls and girls races in faster times than the seniors.
The most impressive winner of the afternoon was North-East junior champion Michael Threadgill.
He pushed into the lead at the end of the first of three 1.7 mile laps to win by 67 seconds.
Hit by a virus, the 20-year-old former English Schools 3,000 metres gold medallist was a disappointing 22nd in the Northern Championships last month.
But he demonstrated yesterday that he is now back on song and he is looking forward to a good run in the National Championships at Newark at the end of the month.
Threadgill led Middlesbrough and Cleveland to team victory, following on from the junior boys team success, when the club provided the first four runners home, spearheaded by Alan Aitchison.
Rees Connor won the boys race after an exciting finishing sprint against Sunderland's Kieron Routledge, while Steven Jackson won by a five second margin in the colts event.
Results Seniors (approx 5.1 miles): 1 M Threadgill (Middlesbrough and Cleveland) 29.06; 2 G Lancaster (Sunderland) 30.15; 3 G McAdam (Durham City) 30.22; 4 M Openshaw (Chester-leStreet) 30.33; 5 J Chipchase (M&C) 31.21.
Teams: 1 Middlesbrough and Cleveland 27; 2 Sunderland 30.
Junior Boys (3.4 miles): 1 A Aitchison (M&C) 19.57; 2 D Choosey (M&C) 20.14; 3 S Helm (M&C) 20.31; 4 K Mace (M&C) 20.42; 5 B McCormack (Sunderland) 20.02.
Teams: 1 Middlesbrough and Cleveland 10; 2 Chester-le-Street 39.
Boys (1.7m): 1 R Connor (M&C) 10.22; 2 K Routledge (Sunderland) 10.24; 3 M Knowles (Sunderland) 10.26; 4 R Mulley (Sunderland) 10.30; 5 G Mulvaney (Sunderland) 10.45. teams: 1 Sunderland 14; 2 Middlesbrough and Cleveland 30; 3 Chester-le-Street 45.
Colts (1.7m): 1 S Jackson (M&C) 10.55; 2 M Lundy (Sunderland) 11.00; 3 D Bunn (M&C) 11.13; 4 A Barker (Sunderland) 10.21; 5 S Dempster (Sunderland) 11.26.
Teams: 1 Sunderland 18; 2 Durham 42.
Minor Girls (1.7m): 1 L Matthew (M&C) 12.18; 2 V Haswell (Sunderland) 12.39; 3 C Tibbett (M&C) 12.51; 4 T Docherty (ClS) 13.04; 5 K Weall (M&C) 13.19.
Team: 1 Middlesbrough and Cleveland 16; 2 Sunderland 25; 3 Hartlepool Burn Road 66.
Girls (1.7m): 1 K Matthew (M&C) 11.36; 2 K Lazenby (M&C) 12.36; 3 S Watts (ClS) 13.02; 4 L Watson (HBR) 13.28; 5 K Bewick (Sunderland) 13.29.
Team: Middlesbrough and Cleveland 19.
Junior Girls (1.7m): 1 S Thompson (M&C) 14.44; 2A Edwards (Sunderland) 14.44; 3 L Gillie (M&C) 14.47.
Senior Girls (1.7m): 1 B Blakeman (Sunderland) 12.56; 2 L Turnbull (M&C) 15.29.
Combined team: Middlesbrough and Cleveland.
SUNDERLAND and Middlesbrough will face former heroes in the quarter-finals of the FA Cup if they win their fifth round replays.
The Wearsiders' prize for victory at West Ham will be another trip to London against a Chelsea side managed by their old FA Cup hero, Ian Porterfield.
Cup-winning boss Bob Stokoe is also on the Chelsea pay-roll as a scout.
And Nottingham Forest manager Brian Clough could make an FA Cup return to Middlesbrough, where he rewrote the history books as a goalscorer.
The quarter-final draw offers the chance of Boro facing the team of one of their most famous sons.
Boro will earn an intriguing tie if they beat Portsmouth.
Both Middlesbrough and Forest face heavy cup and league programmes, and Boro manager Lennie Lawrence is certain to ban dressing-room talk of Forest before Pompey's visit on February 26.
It was Porterfield who brought the trophy back to Sunderland in 1973 when he scored the only goal of the game against Leeds.
Sunderland's caretaker boss Malcolm Crosby said last night: ‘It's an interesting draw.
‘We would have to fancy our chances of winning at Stamford Bridge if we can overcome West Ham away.’
Crosby added: ‘It is also intriguing because of the Ian Porterfield connection.
‘I was at Wembley in 1973 and, like all Sunderland supporters, his goal is one of my greatest footballing memories.’
Sunderland's last visit to Wembley in a cup competition was the 1985 Milk Cup final against Norwich City, which followed a 3–2 semi-final second-leg victory at Stamford Bridge after a 2–0 win at home.
The two clubs have never met before in the FA Cup.
SUNDERLAND defender Kevin Ball starts his third suspension of the season in a fortnight and would miss an FA Cup quarter final.
Ball's booking after a rash challenge on West Ham's Stuart Slater, takes him over the 31 penalty point mark and earns him an automatic two-match ban.
Ball missed the opening three matches of the season because of a suspension carried over from last season, and then served a two match ban last month for reaching 21 points.
The latest suspension will start a week on Saturday and Ball will be unavailable for Sunderland's home game against Wolves and the sixth round of the FA Cup or a trip to Leicester.
Vice-captain Gary Bennett, who limped off against West Ham with a thigh injury, will miss Saturday's game at Southend but hopes to be fit for the FA Cup replay.
The replay at Upton Park will be all ticket for Sunderland supporters.
Sunderland have been allocated 4,000 tickets, including 500 £11 and £12 seats.
Sunderland season ticket holders can buy tickets today, tomorrow and Wednesday.
From Thursday gold card members can buy tickets the standing price is £7.
FA Cup sixth round draw: Ipswich or Liverpool v Aston Villa; Portsmouth or Middlesbrough v Nottingham Forest; Chelsea v Sunderland or West Ham; Bolton or Southampton v Norwich Ties to be played March 7, 8 or 9
Robson has operation
FOOTBALL: PSV Eindhoven coach Bobby Robson has had part of his large intestine removed in an operation and is not expected to work again for some weeks.
The team gave no further details of the complaint which put the 58-year-old former England manager in hospital.
His assistant, former Danish international Frank Arnesen, has taken over in his absence.
The Dutch League champions said last month they would not renew Robson's two-year contract which expires at the end of June.
Money-spinner FOOTBALL: The FA of Wales have had private talks about using Cardiff rugby club's ground, which lies in the shadow of Arms Park, for Wales's potentially money spinning World Cup game against Belgium.
Jahangir hurt
SQUASH: World No 1 Jahangir Khan yesterday pulled out of the Leekes Welsh Classic squash tournament because of a pulled back muscle.
Jonsson wins RALLYING: SWEDISH Toyota driver Mats Jonsson led the field throughout the final day of the Swedish motor rally on Sunday to finish 39 seconds clear of his main rival, Briton Colin McRae in a Subaru.
Revised draw RUGBY LEAGUE: The revised third round Silk Cut Challenge Cup draw is: Castleford v Featherstone Rovers, Halifax v Bradford Northern, Workington Town v Hull, St Helens v Wigan.
Ties to be played on the weekend of February 22–23.
Marching on FOOTBALL: Juventus clinched a thrilling 2–1 victory over Atalanta yesterday to claw back a point from Italian first division leaders AC Milan who could only manage a goalless draw at lowly Fiorentina.
Cup odds FOOTBALL: Liverpool and Nottingham Forest have been made 11–4 favourites for the FA Cup by William Hill who then offer 7–2 Chelsea, 15–1 Villa, 111 Norwich and Southampton, 16–1 West Ham, 25–1 Middlesbrough, 40–1 Portsmouth, 50–1 Sunderland, 80–1 Ipswich, 150–1 Bolton.
Champions SQUASH: Simon Cairns won the York squash championship for the first time beating No 2 seed Paul Adams 9–5, 9–3, 9–5, in the final at Dunnington.
Sharon Hawksby retained the women's title by beating Susie Booth 9–6, 9–1, 9–3, in a repeat of last year's final.
In the final RUGBY UNION: Middlesbrough Wasps reached the final of the North Yorkshire Trophy for the first time when they beat Rowntrees 11–6 at Acklam Park yesterday.
They play the winners of next Sunday's semi-final between Redcar Mariner's and Wharfdale A. Batty fit FOOTBALL: Leeds midfielder David Batty was last night declared fit to join England's combined senior and B squad for the friendlies against France this week.
He has had a knee injury Record man SWIMMING: Australian Keiren Perkins broke his own world 800 metres freestyle record by 1.25 secs at the New South Wales swimming championships, finishing in 7 mins 46.6 secs.
IT TOOK perhaps two minutes for Glenn Miller to line up his shot.
He would no sooner place his arm where he wanted it to be than his upper body was wracked by a spasm.
In the next court Geoffrey Turton was performing with his head, pushing the ball down a bit of drainpipe.
They were playing the ancient game of boccia.
Their muscular limitations did nothing to diminish their tactical awareness.
Miller was behind in his game but never panicked.
He merely wore down his opponent.
Turton issued instructions with the wiliness of an old fox.
This was the North-East Cerebral Palsy Sport regional boccia championships.
The winners go on to the national finals in York, the winners of that may have a chance of selection for the Paralympics in Barcelona.
Boccia, pronounced botcha, is one of the few games that some cerebral palsy sufferers can play.
It is a form of bowls, the idea being to get your ball near a jack.
The outsider's first instinct on seeing the competitors attempt to place their ball near the jack is sympathy.
It seems an appropriate enough reaction on watching someone struggle so much just to line up a ball.
But they want to be there, their competitive edges are well honed.
Talking to Glenn before his contest with Averil Marshall it was clear he did not like losing.
He could put up with it, he agreed, but he did not have to like it.
Boccia playing is restricted in Cerebral Palsy Sports tournaments to classifications one and two.
These include the most extreme sufferers of the disease.
There are six other classifications.
Both ones and twos are restricted to wheelchairs.
In the case of ones they cannot throw the ball, they need what are called assistive devices, a ramp down which to push the ball.
They instruct helpers where to point the ramp.
Competitors must have the last touch of the ball before it goes on it way.
‘To be good at the game you have to have a reasonable level of intelligence,’ said Cathy Williams, a teacher from the Percy Hedley School in Newcastle which caters for children with cerebral palsy.
‘There is a great deal of strategy involved in positioning the jack and blocking your opponent.’
Glenn Miller was demonstrating some of this on court one in the Nissan Sports and Social Club at Sunderland.
At 14 he is already one of the top class two boccia players.
He knows when to score and when not score.
Had he not suffered from cerebral palsy, said, Cathy Williams, he would be a fine athlete, one to compete with the best.
He will have to settle for boccia and the look in his eye suggested that many opponents will suffer in the years ahead.
Competitors can throw either overarm or underarm and part of his strength is his unerring patience.
It was absorbing to watch him wear Averill down.
Nissan sponsored the championships for the first time as part of its community relations work.
It bought trophies but more importantly it also provided two new sets of boccia balls.
They are pliable, easy to use and cost £140 a set.
Cash for disabled sport is not exactly on tap at present.
Meanwhile Geoff Turton, 16, was issuing instructions via an electronic machine with arrows on what way the ramp should point.
It was, admitted Cathy, a temptation to look when helping.
And why indeed should gamesmanship not exist in disabled sport when it is rife everywhere else?
Christine Cruice, whose daughter is a class eight  cerebral palsy sportswoman, is also chairman of the national classification committee.
‘It is a fine level of judgement,’ she said.
‘But it isn't how disabled you are, it is about how able you at your sport.’
It is not quite a handicap system either but the point is that some sufferers can, for instance, swim better than others and may therefore go up a classification.
It counts because it counts to them.
They trained seven days a week when it got really serious,’ she said.
Even for the northern regional championships the players at Cleveland Spastics Centre in Middlesbrough had trained five times a week.
They were dedicated perhaps because they had to be.
Watching them line up their wheelchairs, moving them in the box which is two yards by a yard, it was clear they wanted to win.
They were not along for the ride.
It was an instructive couple of hours which showed that sport can cross any barriers.
Sackcloth time
IT WAS sackless not to have thought of it in the first place.
But sackless is another great North-Eastern word meaning silly, stupid or not quite all there.
Bill Wood of Durham called about it, desisted from hurling it in this direction and merely gave the fascinating information that it has been about for 1,500 years and started off in Anglo Saxon as sacleas, meaning ‘without strife’.
THREE players will miss the Second Division promotion clash between Middlesbrough and Blackburn Rovers at Ayresome Park on Saturday.
Boro will be without skipper Alan Kernaghan, who starts a two-match ban, and Blackburn will miss two key players.
Hat-trick hero David Speedie is suspended and £1m striker Mike Newell is injured.
Boro boss Lennie Lawrence said: ‘As I feared weeks ago, Blackburn have established a clear lead and are threatening to run away with the championship.
‘We must win this week-end to have a glimmer of hope of catching them.
If we lose, we have no chance.’
Tickets for the FA Cup replay with Portsmouth will go on sale to season ticket holders, and the public, from Thursday.
A club spokesman has responded to criticism that some season ticket holders will not get their usual seats for the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final first leg against Manchester United.
The reason is United have been allocated the entire East End.
Some season ticket holders will be moved to other areas of the ground.
SUNDERLAND caretaker boss Malcolm Crosby has hit out at transfer-listed striker Thomas Hauser and told the towering target man to get his act together.
Crosby dropped the £100,000-rated Germ an from the Roker reserves for lack of effort last week.
Hauser has been told he can negotiate his own move away from the second division club.
But only Motherwell have shown interest and Hauser turned down the Premier League side after failing to agree personal terms.
Crosby said: ‘It's up to Thomas.
If he wants to get another club, he has to pull his finger out.
‘If he does that, he will have a chance to prove to me he's worth a place in our first team.
‘But if he isn't going to bother, I don't think it's fair to the other players to keep choosing him for the reserves.
‘Hopefully he will respond, turn things around and get back among the lads.’
The injury-hit Wearsiders have been dealt another blow with the news that a torn thigh muscle will keep defender Gary Bennett out for three weeks.
Bennett will certainly miss Saturday's trip to Southend and is already extremely doubtful for the FA Cup replay at West Ham in eight days time.
Midfielders Paul Bracewell and Gordon Armstrong came through Saturday's 1–1 draw with the London club, but the pair will be training cautiously this week.
And £1.5m-rated midfielder Gary Owers is still waiting to discover whether he needs surgery on a troublesome groin injury.
Meanwhile, Sunderland were yesterday faced with a Monday night FA Cup trek to Chelsea if they overcome West Ham at the second attempt and reach the quarter-finals.
The sixth round Stamford Bridge tie has been selected for live showing by BSkyB on March 9 (7.45).
TV dictates that the four-match round is spread over three days, with Ipswich or Liverpool v Aston Villa earmarked by the BBC as their Sunday game on March 8 (3.05).
The other two ties, Portsmouth or Middlesbrough v Nottingham Forest and Bolton or Southampton v Norwich, will be played on the original date, March 7.
THE CUP success of Middlesbrough Football Club has forced the nearby Cleveland Park greyhound stadium to switch its racenights over the next three weeks.
From next week the normal Wednesday meeting will be moved to Thursday, with the Monday and Saturday racenights staying the same.
Middlesbrough's assistant racing manager, Craig Latcham, said: ‘It is great to see Middlesbrough doing so well, but Wednesday night matches hit our attendances hard.
‘The directors here are great believers in keeping faith with our regulars, but many of our greyhound racing enthusiasts are football supporters as well and we all know what Cup fever is like.’
Tonight Middlesbrough stages the heats of the February Trainers' Stakes, with the winners going through to the final on Saturday night.
SUNDERLAND are preparing to welcome between 30 and 40 new permit-trainers.
Demand for application forms for the £20 licences has been brisk recently and managing director Peter Stephenson is hoping there will be enough new dogs at the track to have two permit meetings a week.
Sunderland have an attractive £100 open over 580 metres tonight, when Marks Brilliant, which proved its staying ability when winning over 631 metres last week, will have strong support.
Star pup The danger looks like being Middlesbrough-based I'm Sloppy, which was third in the 631 open.
In good form is Terry Hart's Soda Blue, which has won three of its last four races.
The Harry Williams-bred September 1990 brindle pup, out of the same Slippy Blue-Soda Pop 11 litter as the eye-catching Pond Tornado and Pond Pavarotti, is rapidly improving and could be in line for Sunderland's Greyhound of the Month award.
Sunderland stage their fifth BAGS meeting tomorrow, when admission will again be free.
BROUGH PARK'S representative in the BAGS Championship will be the track's current top performer, Burnhope Jimmy.
Yvonne Bell's charge hit trouble when finishing second in his heat, but was back in sparkling form charging through on the last bend to win the track final by 2 9 lengths at generous odds of 6–4.
Now Burnhope Jimmy, which has been quoted by Corals at 101, will race in the semi-finals at Hackney next Thursday or Crayford next Saturday.
The first three in each race will go through to the final at Brighton on March 4.
The £4,000 All England Champion Hurdle, second only in importance to the Grand National, got underway at Brough Park last night, when some of the best jumpers in the country were on view.
The semi finals will be held on Saturday, with the final next Thursday.
PAUL Henderson, who has left his A-level studies behind to tour Zimbabwe, emerged from the hard school of Durham cricket with first-class honours yesterday.
The 17-year-old Middlesbrough all-rounder took a hat-trick as Zimbabwe B were dismissed for 230 on the opening day of a four-day match at Harare Sports Club.
Henderson was swamped by back-slapping colleagues who have helped him through the difficulties of adapting to life in Zimbabwe in the last two weeks.
While looking good with the bat, he has struggled to find his form with the ball, but has worked hard in the nets and earned his reward yesterday.
On the ground where Durham were put in and bowled out for 120 on Sunday, the wicket was again damp following watering of the drought-stricken square.
David Graveney asked the hosts to bat and Nigel Hough, who hit 200 not out against Durham last week, immediately began to plunder the bowling.
The score had raced to 37 in the eighth over before Stewart Hutton took a fine catch in the gully to dismiss Sadiq Dudhia.
Henderson then struck in his second over.
Swinging the ball away at a lively pace, he had Hough caught at slip by Paul Parker, then Ebrahim EssopAdam slashed his first ball straight to John Glendenen at gully.
‘I had never even been on a hat-trick before,’ said Henderson.
‘I just set out to bowl it straight and make sure the batsman had to play at it.
‘It turned out to be a beauty and Andy Fothergill took a good catch.’
Wicket-keeper Fothergill did well to hang on to the ball low to his right, especially as the whole team went up in jubilation before the ball had reached his gloves.
Henderson almost made it four in four as Guy Whittal failed by a whisker to get an edge to the next delivery.
Simon Brown, also producing his best bowling of the tour, returned to have Mark Dekker caught at short leg by Gary Brown and Zimbabwe B were 57 for five.
John Rennie, on two, then survived a sharp chance to Hutton at gully and went on to lead the recovery with a hard-hitting 84.
Although Brown took two more wickets to make it 121 for seven, Rennie and chunky left-hander Steve Peall added 87 for the eighth wicket, with Peall successfully chancing his arm against the luckless Phil Berry.
Henderson returned to have both Rennie and Peall caught at long leg, leaving Durham with 19 overs' batting to the close.
John Glendenen was dropped at gully on two and also survived a couple of injudicious waves outside the off stump.
But otherwise he was at his commanding best, hitting six cracking fours in his unbeaten 38 as he and Hutton reached 62 without loss.
Myers to leave Wigan WIGAN'S 18-try Great Britain under-21 winger David Myers has asked for a move.
The 20-year-old lost his first-team place after Wigan splashed out a world record £440,000 on Martin Offiah in January.
Myers, under contract until the end of next season, said he had made the transfer request reluctantly.
The Wigan directors have yet to respond to his request.
Jo pulls out BADMINTON: Kent's Jo Muggeridge has been forced to pull out of the England team for the Uber Cup competition in Holland this week due to wrist and arm injuries.
No replacement has been named.
Jump to it
ATHLETICS: Alan Jobson (Middlesbrough), the reigning British under-13 long jump champion, again broke the British standing long jump record in The Northern Echo-sponsored Cleveland championships at Thornaby Pavilion.
He cleared 2.68m to beat the previous record of 2.67m set by Paul Parker of Cumbria.
Campbell quits FOOTBALL: Former Chelsea boss Bobby Campbell has resigned as personal assistant to chairman Ken Bates because he misses the day-to-day involvement with players.
Celtic turmoil FOOTBALL: Celtic's embattled board of directors are facing the prospect of an extraordinary general meeting before the end of the season after a meeting yesterday between Parkhead chairman Kevin Kelly and powerful Canadian businessman and Celtic shareholder Jim Doherty, who is the central figure in a group demanding sweeping changes in the running of the club.
Screen switch FOOTBALL: BBC Scotland will screen the Scottish Cup quarter-final between Hearts and Dundee or Falkirk live from Tynecastle on Sunday, March 8.
The new date will avoid a clash in Edinburgh with the ScotlandFrance Rugby Union international the previous day.
IT will be the end of an era when Peter and Kathleen Cooper leave their Darlington shop.
The couple have run Ronald Richardson Jewellers for 16 years and have 140 years of tradition behind them.
But this will all cease later this year when the Coopers retire and leave their Post House Wynd business.
The Richardson business started in 1852 in a small shop in Sussex Street, Middlesbrough.
The company, founded by Mrs Cooper's great grandfather Robert Richardson, soon began to specialise in clock making and became so popular it had to set up a separate factory at Robert Street.
Dozens of Victorian clocks in the region bear the Richardson name.
They include clocks at Middlesbrough town hall, Albert Park, St. Cuthbert's Church, Darlington, the Wesleyan Church, Bishop Auckland, and the Albert Edward Dock clock in North Shields.
The company also made the Birkenhead tower clock and exported clocks to Mozambique and North America.
At the turn of the century it was appointed watchmakers to the Admiralty and in 1908 the firm was awarded the Grand Prix in the horological section of the Franco-British Exhibition in London.
The company rapidly expanded and built on its reputation.
Shops were opened in Stockton, Redcar and in 1945 their last shop was opened in Darlington.
But changing patterns in the jewellery trade and competition from bigger chains meant business declined.
The company was forced to close its Redcar and Stockton shops and the Middlesbrough branches were demolished to make way for the Cleveland Centre.
Mr Cooper said: ‘I suppose it is the end of an era, but we felt it was time to move on.
We will both retire around May and I hope to spend my free time on my hobby, photography.’
CHRIS Ayers is getting on his bike to raise money for Guide Dogs for the Blind.
The 26-year-old Cleveland man and two friends will cover more than 3,000 miles on an arduous ride around the British coast.
Chris, of Epping Close, Thornaby, said he hoped to recruit one or two more riders.
‘We aim to have two people riding 24 hours a day for ten days,’ he said.
Chris became involved with Guide Dogs for the Blind while in the Army Cadet Force.
‘I wanted to mark the ten years since the Middlesbrough office opened,’ he said.
Andrew Martin and Carl Cartwright are already lined up for the trip.
ANGLERS will be able to tell a tall tale or two in a competition on the banks of the Tees later this month.
One hundred free tickets are available to anglers on a first come, first served basis from fishing tackle shops in Stockton, Darlington and Middlesbrough.
The competition is being staged by the National Rivers Authority on Saturday, February 29, on the north bank of the Tees between The Holmes and the A66 road bridge near Stockton.
Individual locations along the riverbank will be drawn at Preston Park Museum at 9.15 am on the day, with fishing being between 10am and 3pm.
The authority is hoping to collect as much information as possible on the Tees course fishery in the light of the river's barrage development.
A CLEVELAND woman celebrated her 101st birthday yesterday and a shake of the tambourine showed that Donella Carter retains her lifelong dedication to the Salvation Army.
Relatives and friends helped Donella celebrate her birthday at Levick House, Cambridge Road, Middlesbrough.
Four surviving children, 12 grandchildren, 26 great grandchildren and six great, great grandchildren helped mark the milestone in style.
Officer in charge at Levick House, Anne Wilson, said: ‘Donella is a gentle, sweet and pleasant person.’
Chairman of Cleveland County Council Ted Wood was one of many visitors.
He said: ‘She is a lovely lady.’
A MIDDLESBROUGH teenager has been called into the England women's football squad.
Stephanie Dearlove will be training with the stars of the game this weekend.
The 16-year-old, top scorer with Middlesbrough Ladies, will join the party at Lilleshall on Friday.
Middlesbrough Ladies' skipper and coach, Marrie Wieczorek, said: ‘This is well-deserved.
Stephanie has pace and is very skilful.’
Marrie said she expected Stephanie to make the under-21 team in the near future and possibly even the full team.
Stephanie, of Hutton Road, Middlesbrough, is a pupil at Newlands School, Saltersgill Avenue.
FORMER Ayresome Park favourite Tony Mowbray has no regrets about leaving his home town club despite Boro's hopes of cup and league glory.
Mowbray moved to Celtic in a £1m move last year but has been dogged by injuries since his transfer.
Boro, meanwhile, are having one of their best ever seasons with hopes of success in the FA and Rumbelows League Cup and a place in next season's Premier League.
Despite missing out on Boro's tremendous run, the 28-year-old defender says he's not jealous.
‘I wish Boro all the luck in the world.
I am not jealous of their success.
I have wonderful memories to look back on.
‘When Boro played Peterborough United in the Rumbelows League Cup I was cheering on the lads.
I hope to be back for the first leg with Manchester United.
‘Should Middlesbrough win promotion, and go all the way to Wembley, I will be thrilled.
‘But it won't change my views over my Celtic move.
The time was right for me to leave, because I had become stale.
‘I am sure I could have finished my career at Ayresome Park.
I could have had a contract to compare favourably with any offered to anyone at the club.
‘But I had reached the stage where I found it difficult to be motivated for run-of-the-mill games.
‘Manager Lennie Lawrence appreciated my problem.
‘It was important that I moved on to a bigger stage, with a club in the top bracket of the English First Division, or Celtic and Rangers.’
A Celtic move set Mowbray up for life financially, and Middlesbrough hit the jackpot with a seven-figure profit for a player from the junior ranks.
Yet Mowbray has been dogged by injuries since he crossed over the border.
He has played only four games since November.
‘It is all very frustrating,’ he admitted.
Celtic manager Liam Brady was furious when a Scottish TV commentator claimed Mowbray would not play again this season.
Brady appeared on the TV programme the following week and had a stand-up argument over Mowbray's fitness.
Mowbray said: ‘I had just recovered from an Achilles injury on my right leg when I hurt my left ankle.
‘Possibly, I tried to rush back too quickly.
‘My fitness has been a major talking point in Glasgow.
I feel frustrated rather than embarrassed, because I want to prove myself to Celtic fans.
‘With luck, I could be back in a week or two.
‘I am fortunate to have played for two clubs with passionate fans.
‘Glasgow is a city of football fanatics.
Fans live and breathe for either Celtic or Rangers.
Rivalry is intense.
‘People in Middlesbrough were used to seeing me walking around.
In Glasgow, it is different.
People look at me as if I'm a green man from outer space.
‘Everyone wants to shake hands and talk football.
The build up for the old firm game with Rangers went on for weeks.
‘I want to help Celtic win honours and to be part of the club's history.
But I will be cheering on the Boro from a distance.’
SOUTHAMPTON defender Jon Gittens, who joined Middlesbrough yesterday on three months' loan, has denied he reneged on Newcastle United last month.
Gittens, 28, blamed the Newcastle board for the collapse of his transfer to St James's Park.
He said: ‘I was made out to be the bad guy.
‘With hindsight, I don't believe the United board were prepared to back Ossie Ardiles with hard cash before they sacked him.
‘Newcastle claimed they pulled out because I had gone for talks with Wimbledon.
It was a feeble excuse.
They messed me around for days.
‘After I had agreed terms with Ardiles, I was asked to take a pay cut before I was even on their payroll.
‘I was not happy with this, but I went along with it because I had enjoyed playing under Ossie at Swindon.
‘Ardiles put off my visit to Newcastle on two or three occasions because of the club's money problems.
‘When Wimbledon asked to speak to me, I told Ossie I would catch the second flight to Tyneside.
‘I was perfectly within my rights to speak to Wimbledon and did so out of courtesy.
‘On a car radio on the way to Wimbledon I heard the deal was off.
I did not even discuss terms with Wimbledon and I would have been quite happy to sign for Newcastle.
‘If Ossie had been sacked a few days later, I would have accepted it as part and parcel of football.
‘When Chris Nicholl re-signed me for Southampton last March for £600,000, he told me I was a big part of his plans.
‘After Nicholl was sacked Ian Branfoot took over and told me I had no future under him.’
Gittens, who played against Sunderland in the 1990 Wembley play-off final, is thrilled at the prospect of first-team football at Ayresome Park.
The Birmingham-born player will make his debut against Second Division leaders Blackburn Rovers on Saturday, but he will not be available for the FA Cup replay with Portsmouth.
Gittens was not signed seven days before the date of the original tie.
‘I have not come to the North-East just to play in the FA Cup,’ he said.
‘I want my career back on the track.
The fact that Middlesbrough are still in the competition is a bonus.
‘The town is buzzing and it will be great to be involved in first-team football again.
‘I am being thrown in at the deep end against Blackburn and I am really looking forward to the game.’
Boro have agreed a fee of around £300,000 should Gittens impress in a hectic cup and League programme.
Boro roll on
ROLLER HOCKEY: Middlesbrough Roller Hockey Club consolidated their lead at the top of the table with two wins out of three against Durham and Glasgow, losing to host club Willington.
Hanley blow
RUGBY LEAGUE: Ellery Hanley, the Great Britain and Leeds skipper who has been out of action since last November, suffered a calf muscle injury in training and has been ruled out of for Leeds' game at Warrington on Sunday.
Piquet signs
MOTORSPORT: Three-times Formula One world champion Nelson Piquet of Brazil has signed to race in a Buick-powered Lola in this year's Indianapolis 500 race on May 24.
Duff cruising
BOWLS: Scotland's Hugh Duff, the 1988 world indoor singles champion making a second title bid, cruised into the second round of the Midland Bank's £135,000 tournament at the Guild Hall, Preston, yesterday, defeating Northern Ireland teenager Ian McClure 3–1.
Sharron support SWIMMING: Top British swimmer Sharron Davies has sent a further message of support to the Jesmond Swimming Project.
‘I will be thinking of you all and wishing you continued good fortune with your worthwhile venture,’ said Sharron, who was the star of a promotional video used to raise funds towards the pool reopening.
Wells done BOWLS: John Wells, of Hartlepool, has won a place in the prestigious under-25s national indoor bowls championships to be held at Nottingham on February 22–23.
Ex-soccer star is new Tory agent FORMER professional footballer Robin Baldry, who played for Ipswich Town from 1956 to 1962, has been appointed election agent for Tory MP Tim Devlin's marginal Stockton South seat.
Mr Baldry, 49, a qualified football coach, was until recently managing director of a travel and sports company.
Safety gift:
Carisbrooke School, Thorntree, has received a £1,080 cheque from workers at ICI Wilton.
The rest of the £2,475 raised through a safety incentive scheme went to South Cleveland Hospital's special baby care unit, Middlesbrough General's children's cancer ward and the Freeman Hospital children's heart unit.
Past drill
NORTHALLERTON school strikes gold next month with a drill to show just how much schooling has changed in 50 years.
Past and present are brought together with demonstrations of physical education, craft and technology and a dramatic reconstruction of school in the 1940s.
Allertonshire School is inviting past and present pupils, friends and staff to the celebrations from 6.30pm to 8.30pm on Friday 13 March.
MIDDLESBROUGH Reserves should have their best crowd of the season if the Central League game with Mansfield is rearranged for next Thursday night striker Bernie Slaven and midfield player Willie Falconer are in line for comebacks.
The game has been postponed from Wednesday night when Middlesbrough will be FA Cup replay hosts to Portsmouth.
Anthony Lee, son of former Whitby Town, Billingham Synthonia and Gateshead manager Tony Lee, made his second-team debut in a 1–0 win at Blackpool.
DARLINGTON'S record signing Nick Cusack scored twice in a 2–0 win over Halifax Reserves.
Manager Frank Gray played his strongest side of the season.
Gray said: ‘It was the first team but for Andy Toman and Steve Mardenborough.
I did not want to take risks with them.
It was good preparation for our match at Torquay following our home defeat by Huddersfield.’
Fixtures: Tomorrow, Juniors away to Bradford in Northern Intermediate League.
Wednesday, Reserves at home to Hartlepool United in Midland Senior League.
SUNDERLAND caretaker boss Malcolm Crosby was full of praise for his reserve side who went down to a single goal defeat to star-studded Manchester United Reserve side at Roker Park on Wednesday evening.
Fixtures:
Next Thursday, home to what is expected to be a strong Sheffield Wednesday Reserve side.
Kick off 7pm.
HARTLEPOOL United beat Bury 2–1 at home.
Manager Alan Murray said: ‘David Proctor and Lee Crosby, released by Middlesbrough, had trials.
We will have another look at them before we make a decision in their best interests.’
Fixtures: Tomorrow, Juniors home to Leeds United in Northern Intermediate League.
Wednesday, Reserves away to Darlington.
MIDDLESBROUGH striker Bernie Slaven will be ready for the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final showdown with Manchester United.
The Republic of Ireland international resumed full-time training yesterday.
Slaven went through his paces as the club announced a sell-out for the March 4 first leg at Ayresome Park.
Manager Lennie Lawrence was impressed by Slaven's recovery after a knee operation.
Lawrence said: ‘Slaven was sharp and in tremendous physical condition in view of his lay-off.
‘I was very impressed.
‘Willie Falconer and Slaven back with the first team was a sight to behold.
Slaven was thrilled over his progress and the prospect of playing against former teammate Gary Pallister for the first time.
‘I feel great.
I have told Pally to watch out.’
Monte Carlo or bust and the little Morgan made it, without the luxury of either hood or heater!
Theirs was also the only three-wheeler in the Monte Carlo Challenge, run over the traditional route, and their 1933 Morgan completed the gruelling 2,000-mile distance to finish 82nd out of 100 cars, half of which travelled from starting points in Berlin and Oslo.
The race was won by an Aston Martin DB4 and the Guisborough duo came sixth in the overall concours and fourth in their class of 1,000–1,300cc grand touring sports cars.
Back home this week, Mr Ivor Simon and Mr David Brown, both member of Teesside Yesteryear Motor Club, spoke of the six-day adventure which took them from Edinburgh to the Mediterranean coast.
The pair, who made the return journey last weekend in 27 hours travelling across France by freight train, say their biggest fear was that they might run out of petrol.
‘We only have a four-gallon tank,’ explained Mr Simon, an independent financial advisor, of Eglinton Avenue, who bought the car in November specially to enter the challenge.
Being something of a gas guzzler, averaging only 27mpg, the Morgan had to be topped up more regularly than any other vehicle in the run.
But they did carry an extra two-gallon can, and had to resort to it three times.
‘The worst time was driving through the night as we approached Nice at 3am.
There were three filling stations side by side which could only be used with French credit cards,’ said Mr Brown, a 48-year-old college lecturer, of Craven Vale.
‘We had to use our spare two gallons,’ he said, adding that despite the handicap of such a small tank they were never stranded.
‘We had planned and plotted and fortunately found garages at the right points.
We were very lucky.’
They did the journey without the luxury of a hood or a heater in temperatures which at one point dipped to minus 4C.
Layers of clothes, snow boots and weatherproof headgear were the order of the day.
In fact, Mr Brown, who lectures in engineering at Longlands College, Middlesbrough, wore a crash helmet to keep out the cold and the noise of the 990cc Matchless motorbike engine while his companion wore a Biggles-type helmet with ear muffs.
Both are motorcylcists of long standing and had hardened themselves in readiness by taking to their bikes in the run-up to the rally.
The Morgan, which has regular brake and clutch pedals but an accelerator lever on the steering wheel, was entered in the rally last year by its previous owner, Mr Terry Hands-Heart, from Surrey, but fared less well in his hands.
‘Last year six people were out within 7hour of leaving Edinburgh because of the deep snow,’ said Mr Simon.
It was the worst conditions in which the rally had taken place for 27 years and at one stage a frozen Mr Hands-Heart and his travelling companion had to be lifted out of the car, he added.
Mr Simon and Mr Brown marvelled that they had done the run without a single hitch remarkable considering that in the two weeks before, every major thing that could have gone wrong had done so.
Space was at a premium and a slim attache case containing maps and other documents had to be jettisoned at Scotch Corner, a traditional stop on the Montes of old.
The only room for some of the contents was the floor.
They had had had a tremendous send-off on the Sunday from the Esplanade at Edinburgh Castle, including 40 cars from the MG club.
And at Scotch Corner, fellow members of motorcycling clubs to which they belong turned out to greet them.
Mr Brown grew up in Darlington where his parents, Mr and Mrs Allan Brown, still live in Coatham Crescent, and in his youth he used to stand at a vantage point near the Whessoe Road/ Honeypot Lane junction to watch the rally cars speeding on their way, never dreaming that one day he would be among them.
The race used to be cash-orientated but these days attracts more enthusiasts than those determined to be first over the line, said Mr Brown, who was reminded of the film made about the race when they saw a man in a huge Alvis wearing what appeared to be an animal.
The furry-coated competitor looked just like Tony Curtis, he said.
Father-of-three Mr Simon says he regretted fitting moto-cross motorcycle tyres, which for all but about 100metres of the rally were the wrong choice.
‘There was little snow this year in contrast to last year's challenge when the entire route was snow-covered,’ he said.
But they were glad of the tyres on one stretch where four-wheeled vehicles had left tracks unconducive to their three wheels, leaving them travelling ‘broadside but in control,’ he insisted.
The pair became used to the waves and hoots from passing motorists, trucks and even train drivers as they journeyed to the Mediterranean coast.
And they revelled in the moment when they mounted the famous ramp at Monte Carlo for photographs.
Mr Brown has a constant reminder of their week-long adventure in the shape of a beard which he grew specially to keep his face warm!
Now the challenge is complete, he is considering a close shave, probably in the name of charity.
Mr Simon, left, and Mr Brown, back home with the Morgan.
Mr Robert Richardson outside the first shop.
A copy of an 1873 receipt: 7/6 for repairing a clock, 6s for repairing a watch.
140-year-old business closes A family jewellery and watchmaking business which has spanned four generations is to close.
R. Richardson's Jewellers, of Post House Wynd, Darlington, has sold and repaired watches, clocks, antique and high quality jewellery in the area since the founder, Robert Richardson, first opened a shop in Middlesbrough in 1852.
But the final branch of the business, which opened in Darlington in 1945, is to shut its doors by May this year.
Mrs Kathleen Cooper (nee Richardson) and her husband Mr Peter Cooper, who run the business, are to retire.
‘It will be the end of an era with it being four generations of the family,’ said Mr Cooper, ‘but we are ready to enjoy our retirement now.’
The couple plan to continue living in Darlington after the shop closes.
Richardson-made clocks still grace the front of many town halls, churches and landmarks in the region, including Middlesbrough Town Hall and the Transporter Bridge, St Cuthbert's Church in Darlington and the Wesleyan Church at Bishop Auckland.
The original clock and watchmaker business expanded in the late 19th century and a separate clock factory was set up in Robert Street, Middlesbrough to cope with the demand.
Watchmaker to the Admiralty and winner of the Franco-British Exhibition in London in 1908, Richardson's clocks still keep time across the border in Dumfries and across the oceans in Mozambique and America.
Shops opened in Stockton at the turn of the century and in Redcar in 1924 but closed in the 1960's due to a fall in demand.
The two Middlesbrough shops in Linthorpe Road and Newton Road were demolished in 1969 to make way for the Cleveland Shopping Centre development.
Long service awards for trio of Terriers THREE part-time soldiers with nearly 70 years in uniform between them have been honoured for long service.
Their  achievement was recognised at a special ceremony at Bishop Auckland when the Lord Lieutenant of Durham, Mr David Grant, handed out medals and certificates to two dozen ‘Terriers,’ among them Darlington bricklayer Mr Cliff Readshaw, contract nurse Mr Jim Airey from Stockton and Mr Brian Curry, a construction worker from Newton Aycliffe.
Sgt. Maj. Airey enlisted in the TA's 6th Battalion The Durham Light Infantry in 1961, switching to the Royal Army Medical Corps six years later.
The father-of-three, at present Warrant Officer in charge of the regimental aid post with the 7th (Durham) Battalion The Light Infantry, received the second clasp to his TA efficiency medal, first awarded in 1973.
Cpl.
Readshaw, aged 35, who enlisted in the TA in 1977, received the Lord Lieutenant's Certificate.
A member of 34 Signal Regiment which has its headquarters in Middlesbrough, he recently completed the Royal Signals detachment commanders' course and is now actively involved in training combat linemen.
The certificate was also awarded to Sgt. Curry, who joined the TA in 1965 and served with the Royal Army Service Corps and the Royal Corps of Transport before signing on with 124 Recovery Company (Tyne Electrical Engineers) REME in 1971.
Sgt. Curry is one of the most experienced HGV drivers in his unit.
Left to right: Sgt.Curry, Cpl.
Readshaw and Sgt. Maj. Airey.
Bus rally:
Vintage bus enthusiasts will have a day to look forward to as the first Quaker Rally is held in Darlington on May 17.
Buses will gather at Russell Street car park.
Scrapbook plea:
Harold Svensson, chairman of Darlington CHA and Holiday Fellowship Rambling Club, is compiling a scrapbook on the club's 56year history.
He is also compiling a list a founder members and has appealed for photographs and Press cuttings to help his research.
Mr Svensson can be contacted on 0325–483472.
Bingo night:
A bingo and supper event will be held at the village hall in Stillington, near Bishopton, on Shrove Tuesday, March 3, to raise money for church funds.
Admission 50p.
Swim discos:
A series of Friday night swim discos get under way at Bishop Auckland's Woodhouse Close leisure complex next week.
Admission costs £1 and the first disco will be held on February 28.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York 656476; Sian Roberts on Richmond 850407 and Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Denis McLoughlin, David Lee, Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Chocolate soldier saves the day
NEWCASTLE UNITED were so bad against New Zealand on Tuesday, said Kevin Keegan, he almost rose from retirement and the dug-out to apply a little first-hand help.
‘Then Terry McDermott reminded me I'm the manager,’ said the Magpies' Messiah.
Up in the Milburn Stand, sampling his first taste of football spectating, eight-year-old Turnbull Junior wasn't very impressed either.
His man of the match verdict, sought five minutes from the merciful final whistle, drew an instant vote for ‘the New Zealand number eleven.’
The Kiwis' left-winger having hardly touched the ball, he was asked to point to the chosen chap for confirmation.
‘Him there,’ he said, gesturing to the ball-boy wearing a number eleven track suit in the Leazes End.
The Magpie Choccy Bar, he said, made the trip worthwhile.
But, he pleaded, ‘can we go and see a proper team like Sunderland next time.’
Nightmare returns
PAINFUL memories were revived for one Middlesbrough player when Lennie Lawrence welcomed his latest recruit this week.
Jon Gittens, on loan from Southampton, has featured in John Hendrie's nightmares since the day he almost ended his career in a Swindon-Leeds clash two years ago.
The sight of his old foe was bad enough but Boro's new boy would happen to choose Hendrie's peg on which to hang his clothes before his debut training session.
Hendrie, fortunately, saw the funny side.
Five-a-sides could be a different matter.
Move over Wilf NOT a lot of people might know this, but a Newcastle United player has come closer to an Olympic medal than poor old wobbling Wilf O'Reilly.
In his days as an amateur, Ronnie Simpson kept goal for the Great Britain team which finished fourth in the 1948 football tournament.
As a Gallowgate favourite, Ronnie collected FA Cup winners' medals in 1952 and 1955 and was one of the ‘Lisbon Lions’ in Celtic's European Cup-winning side of 1967.
He also holds the unique distinction of being the youngest player in a Scottish first class game (for Queens Park at 14 years 304 days) and the oldest international debutant (36 years 196 days).
Magic of the Cup PEOPLE in glass houses should never, of course, throw stones.
But the brick dropped by a local Sunday newspaper last weekend is worthy of mention.
Newcastle United, claimed its lead back page story, had been ‘dumped out of the FA Cup’ by David Speedie's hat-trick for Blackburn.
Wor Kev may have many powers but they do not include turning back clocks.
United, of course, made their FA Cup exit in the long-lost era of Ossie Ardiles.
Work on this
IN these days of rising unemployment, this week's team is a collection of players professionally qualified by name to elude the dole queue: Fred Barber (Peterborough), Nicky Tanner (Liverpool), Colin Cooper (Millwall), Lee Clark (Newcastle), Paul Butler (Rochdale), Mark Draper (Notts County), Richard Cooke (Bournemouth), Gary Porter (Watford), Paul Baker (Hartlepool), Robbie Painter (Maidstone), John Taylor (Cambridge).
Subs: Ian Bishop (West Ham), Owen Archdeacon (Barnsley), Brett Angell (Southend).
LEADING scorer Paul Wilkinson, who saw a move to Blackburn collapse last year, yesterday insisted: ‘I made the right choice in joining Middlesbrough when I left Watford.’
The 16-goal striker faces Rovers at Ayresome Park today.
And he stressed: ‘At Blackburn I might be wondering whether Kenny Dalglish would go out and sign another player!’
Wilkinson is not worried whether he passes his 24-goal record in his first season at Watford.
‘It is more important that goals are spread around,’ he said.
Manager Lennie Lawrence is looking for a 20,000 crowd and three points against the runaway leaders.
Lawrence said: ‘Blackburn have a 12point lead over us and superior goal difference.
Even if we win our two outstanding games we would be virtually seven points behind.
‘The title race would be a foregone conclusion if we don't.’
Andy Payton will be in the starting line-up today for the first time since Boro's last defeat, at Millwall, five weeks ago.
Debutant Jon Gittens knows there will be a good atmosphere for the promotion clash.
The Southampton defender was caught up in the passion of Boro's FA Cup-tie at Portsmouth last week.
Gittens said: ‘I am sure no-one knew who I was when I sat among the Boro fans.
The vocal support was  unbelievable .’
Team from: Pears, Parkinson, Phillips, Gittens, Mohan, Mustoe, Pollock, Peake, Payton, Wilkinson, Hendrie, Ripley, Proctor.
Dog dopers strike
GREYHOUND RACING: The sport was reeling from scandal after it was revealed that five dogs in a race had been doped.
The only ‘clean’ greyhound in the race, run at Canterbury this month, was the 5–2 favourite and it finished last.
National Greyhound Racing Club chief stipendiary steward Frank Melville refused to name the substances administered to the greyhounds, but added: ‘They would not have got there through normal food or drink.’
Immediately after the race on February 4, which was televised in betting shops, bookmakers were advised to withhold payment because of‘unusual betting patterns’ off-course involving forecast and tricast bets.
One report suggested off-course bookmakers stood to lose as much as £100,000.
Experts said it was possible the first three dogs had been doped to go faster, while the fourth and fifth had been slowed down.
The performance of the favourite was a mystery.
Bill Wood dies CRICKET: Bill Wood, former chairman and president of Bishop Auckland Cricket Club, died yesterday aged 78.
Capped by Durham County at cricket, he also played football for Bishop Auckland reserves in the 1950s.
Big chance FOOTBALL: Peter Shreeves has thrown 18-year-old England youth team forward Nicky Barmby into Tottenham's squad for today's crunch home derby with Arsenal.
Bates in semi TENNIS: Jeremy Bates reached the semi-finals of the LTA indoor satellite circuit in Coventry by beating Italian Allesandro Dalboni.
Veterans' debut FOOTBALL: Middlesbrough FC Over 35s team will play their first competitive match against Hull City in the veterans' professional tournament at Norton Sports Ground, Norton, tomorrow (11am).
LENNIE Lawrence faces a selection dilemma over the FA Cup fifth round replay against Portsmouth at Ayresome Park on Wednesday night.
With Alan Kernaghan suspended, and newcomer Jon Gittens not eligible, Lawrence has to find an answer to the centre half problem.
There is no other recognised central defender at Ayresome Park to partner Nicky Mohan.
Lawrence played it cagey after the goalless draw against Blackburn Rovers.
‘I have to come up with something.
I have to juggle our resources to cope.
But whatever my decision I will keep it up my sleeve,’ he said.
Although a recognised left back, Jimmy Phillips had experience at centre half with Rangers.
Phillips could be a strong candidate, though Lawrence knows that Pompey's £1m rated Darren Anderton must be curbed down the right.
Versatile Robbie Mustoe could fill the gap should Phillips be switched.
Curtis Fleming has been tried at centre half in two recent Central League games but lacks experience for a key job.
Mustoe should be fit after being withdrawn at half-time on Saturday when he complained of a groin injury.
Middlesbrough would have checked the championship march of Blackburn if they had taken their chances.
Blustery conditions affected the standard of play, though Boro had two matchwinning chances in the second half.
Andy Payton was denied with a good Bobby Mimms save as he burst through on the first occasion.
In the 90th minute Payton suffered the agony of a three-yard miss when Paul Wilkinson headed on a Phillips' corner.
It looked a glorious chance, though Lawrence refused to criticise Payton.
‘I don't think it was as easy as it looked.
The ball came at him very hard.’
Lawrence is concerned though over Middlesbrough's poor scoring record and the promotion threat of Ipswich.
‘We are a hard side to beat, but our goals record is not good enough.
We must not allow Ipswich to widen the Lennie Lawrence Blackburn are virtually home and dry for the championship, but the challenge of Ipswich could leave Boro chasing a play-off spot.
Lawrence said: ‘We are a hard side to beat, but our goals record is not good enough.
We must not allow Ipswich to widen the gap.’
Blackburn manager Kenny Dalglish would not concede the championship race was over.
The ultra-cautious Dalglish said: ‘We will take one game at a time.
Our aim is to get as many points as possible and as quickly as possible.
‘It was a pity the wind ruined it for everyone.’
On-loan Gittens no doubt felt a little ring rusty in his first taste of League football since New Year's Day.
Gittens said: ‘The fans did not see the best of me.
Because of the conditions, I tried to keep it simple and was extra careful not to make any mistakes.
‘I felt nervous in the second half, because I knew one mistake could cost the game.
‘The manager has shown faith in me and I hope to earn a permanent contract.’
Gittens won a tremendous round of applause with a superb tackle that denied Jason Wilcox a matchwinning second-half chance.
His timing had to be perfect to check the player and avoid the risk of a penalty.
SPIT THE PIPS, one of the most bizarre bands to have ever come out of Middlesbrough, come to Darlington tonight.
Last year the group, who play a neat line in distinctive guitar pop, were awarded Melody Maker's Single of the Week for their EP Never Crib a Boggy.
The first 30 in through the doors at Doc's Orders in Yarm Road tonight will receive a copy of the EP.
On Thursday The King Bees play at the same venue.
They have spent ten years perfecting their own blend of rhythm and blues and building up a solid base in the region.
The Bees play a mix of Chicago blues, Memphis soul, Motown plus a hint of rock.
— Looking down: Spit the Pips, pictured left.
A TOWN'S newest soccer league for youngsters is set to kick-off with a little help from the local beat bobby.
More than 200 youngsters in 30 teams will be taking part in the floodlit league based at Thorntree Park, recently given a facelift by Middlesbrough council.
The fledgeling league's first match is scheduled for tonight when the council's football development officer Jim Wattis, ward member Coun Syd Holt and local beat bobby PC Dave Peacock will be on hand to start the ball rolling.
Jim, who organises the league, said: ‘The improvements at Thorntree Park were carried out with local people in mind, providing easy access to the facilities they want.’
The local community council is providing the trophies and most of the youngsters taking part live in the vicinity.
‘We are hoping to see parents involved in managing and coaching,’ added Jim.
New team named at Teesside Airport THE general aviation hangar and maintenance facility at Teesside International Airport will be under new management from March 1.
The facility will be run by Teesside General Aviation, a division of the Yorkshire Helicopter centre which currently operates the Tyne-Tees helicopter centre at the airport.
TGA will take over from Frontline Aviation.
Anglia Link: Adams Hydraulics of York has signed an agreement with Anglian Engineering Services, an operating company of Anglian Water, to collaborate on the development and supply of complete treatment installations within the water industry.
The agreement allows AES to distribute all Adams' water pollution control equipment in the Anglian region, while Adams will distribute all AES sewage treatment products outside Anglian's area.
LIVERPOOL University has begun research into ‘the effects of various refereeing decisions on the body.’
Jeff Winter of Middlesbrough found himself the first guinea pig.
With something scientific strapped to his chest, and wearing an extra watch, Jeff confidently took charge of Northwich Victoria v Wycombe Wanderers in the Vauxhall Conference.
‘I'm a Northern League ref too,’ he said.
‘You have to be fit in the Northern League otherwise the club officials catch up with you.’
At half time his heart and his stress indicators all seemed fine.
Unfortunately, his calf muscle was done for and he had to be substituted by the senior linesman.
‘It's the first time it's ever happened,’ he said.
‘I don't think the scientists counted on that.’
Train spotting
THE Teesdale Mercury, which St Bride and All Angels preserve, carries a report of Northallerton Boys against Barnard Castle Boys.
The bit about a ‘goalmouth misunderstanding’ which led to Northallerton scoring needs clarification, however.
Northallerton play next to the main East Coast railway line.
The misunderstanding coincided with the passing of one of those new fangled 225 things.
‘What happened,’ says an attendant parent, ‘is that our defence stopped to look at the train.
There've not been trains in Barney for 30 years; a lot of them had never seen one in their lives.’
Old, old story WHILE the ‘Boro remained goalless against Blackburn, their elders were showing them how to score.
Making their debut, the Ayresome Over 35s beat Hull City 4–1 the following day Terry Cochrane, having one of his English periods, hit two.
Billy Woof and Graeme Hedley got the others.
Hedley, just 35 and subject of a birth certificate inspection, was the bairn of the side.
Full back Alec Smith, 48, emerged as the old man.
Other familiar names included goalkeeper Pat Cuff, who had a blinder, Darlington assistant manager Tony McAndrew, Stan Webb and David Mills.
The old lads had hoped to warm up for Hull with a friendly against Cleveland police the previous week, but most of the constabulary failed to turn up.
‘It's just like they say,’ observes left back Peter Creamer.
‘You can never find a policeman when you want one.’
In the bag
THE weekend's real crunch match, of course, was at Peterlee Smith's Crisps (Peterlee) v Smith's Crisps (Portsmouth.)
Our lads won 12–1, and barely had to take their jackets off.
‘It was a pretty ordinary game’ reports Peterlee FC secretary Danny Cassidy.
‘Not much flavour at all.’
Sixth sense
THE current issue of 90 Minutes magazine carries a Top Ten of League clubs who've gone longest without being relegated.
Arsenal lead the table on 79 years, followed by Everton (41) and surprise, surprise Coventry City on 40.
The bigger surprise still is in sixth place good old Hartlepool United who've not gone down anywhere for 23 seasons.
‘It illustrates,’ says chairman Garry, ‘that we have been the most successful North-East club over the past 20-odd years.’
Fielding questions
WHILE mooching round Northallerton Town v Whitby on Saturday we bumped into the region's resident Mansfield Town fan.
‘Name two players,’ he said spontaneously, ‘who've gone from the Mill Field to Field Mill.’
The answer to that little problem on Friday.
Old Wive's Tale BILLY Simmons, Sunderland Football Club's number one fan, rings with news of the Senior Supporters Association's annual meeting on Pancake Tuesday, March 3.
Open to anyone over 60, its speakers have included the often taciturn John Burridge and Steve Cram, equally unlikely to have given out his home telephone number.
The meeting's in the Roker Park lounge at 1 30pm; membership details are available from Jimmy Wright (091–528–0353) who lives opposite the near-legendary Bobby Gurney in East Herrington.
‘Bob's 84, going strong, and never misses a meeting,’ says Billy.
Himself a mere 74, Simmons is anxious to point out that membership is open to both men and women.
Mrs Simmons will not be attending, however.
‘If she went,’ he says, ‘I'd never get a word in edgeways.’
If at first…
…and finally, we are again grateful to the Whitby Gazette, this time for an account of Whitby Nomads rugby match with the formidably named Red Rebel Rossendale.
They're Whitby's over 35s.
The latter day war of the roses, says the Gazette, was their debut game.
‘The Nomads,’ it adds, ‘were led as usual from the front by Fred Howarth.’
MIDDLESBROUGH referee Jeff Winter is hoping to achieve his ambition of reaching the Football League middle at the end of the season.
The financial consultant, who started his refereeing career in the Northern League but now officiates in Conference matches and runs the line in Football League games, is hoping that he is one of the lucky half dozen who graduate.
‘I'm in my fourth season as a panel referee in the Conference, so I'm hoping to get a chance in the summer,’ he said.
‘But there are a hundred referees that take panel games, and two thirds of those are assessed regularly.
And with only a few places available each year, it's like a bottleneck near the top, and the harder it becomes.
The Football League middle is not an easy school to break into.’
Jeff is one of several NorthEast whistlers who are currently in the Conference Dave Oliver, Terry Heilbron, Jim Betts and Roy Pearson are also striving to progress.
‘With George Courtney retiring at the end of the season, we're hopeful that somebody from the North-East will get on the Football League list, and with luck, it could be me.’
However, Jeff, who was the fourth official in the 1990 FA Cup final at Wembley, thought he had blown his immediate chances of progression last week.
He agreed to take part in a Liverpool Polytechnic experiment to assess the effect of stress on referees, by monitoring the heartbeat and pulse, taking other factors such as fitness into account.
However, Jeff, who has taken charge of over 1100 games in his career, had to go off injured at half time with a calf injury, the first time ever he has had retire during a game.
‘It was a very important game, because one of the top assessors was there, but if I continued after half time, I could have done myself harm physically.
So Kenny Parker took over from me for the second half.
‘Fortunately, I was given a good assessment on the first 45 minutes, and apparently the experiment proved I'm very fit.
‘The Conference is a good league to referee in.
It's a great standard, there is a good atmosphere, and in fact some matches are on a par with Third and Fourth Division standard.
But I still enjoy refereeing in the Northern League.’
YORKSHIRE'S unsettled batsman Phil Robinson should find it easier to attract a new county after a change of heart by the Test and County Cricket Board yesterday.
Robinson, who has turned down the offer of a two-year contract by Yorkshire, had been classified by the TCCB as a List I cricketer.
With counties restricted to fielding two players whose registrations are contested within any five-year period, Robinson had threatened to sue the TCCB.
But the TCCB has now put Robinson on List II, which allows any county to apply for his registration for next season.
Registration committee chairman Dennis Silk said there are still ‘misunderstandings’ about the regulation dealing with extraordinary registrations and added: ‘The Board is preparing a simplified guide to the relevant rules, which will be issued shortly to all cricketers.’
— WITH most of the other clubs in the Darlington Building Society NYSD league opting for pace, Stockton and Middlesbrough have signed left-arm spinners as their professionals for the coming season.
Stockton's choice is Pakistani Masood Anwaar, who had two highly successful seasons with Darlington in 1990 and 1991.
Australian, Jamie Stewart, will be sampling his first season in England when he arrives at Middlesbrough.
Last season in grade cricket, back home, he took 42 wickets at a cost of 15 runs apiece.
As a member of the Australian Cricketing Academy, he toured Sri Lanika last February and is to tour South Africa in March.
Born:
Wallsend, Feb 2 1956 Clubs: Burnley 1972–76; Leeds United 76–79; Vancouver Whitecaps 79–82; Middlesbrough 82–83; Peterborough 83–84; Wolves 1984–85 League apps: 251 Goals: 79 — England Youth and Under-23 international — Also played in non-league football for Whitby (85–86) and Guisborough (86–89).
— Managed Northallerton (8990) before returning to Guisborough as coach (90–91)— Became Football in the Community Officer at Darlington and then youth team coach when Brian Little quit the Quakers as manager last summer
TEN-YEAR old Middlesbrough lad Wesley Thomas is going to save the world.
Wesley will be telling England rugby star Will Carling today that after he's done his PhD he's going to be a top consultant on ecological waste disposal.
This is despite Wesley being severely physically handicapped, suspected of some deafness and suffering from dyslexia.
The plucky youngster, of Parkside, Ladgate Lane, is in London as one of ten finalists in the Smarties Young Junior of the Year national handwriting competition.
He and proud mum Christine will be waiting with bated breath as Will Carling announces the winners at a special ceremony in the Howard Hotel.
Christine said thanks to sheer determination and hours of extra work Wesley was now capable of doing anything at all.
She added:’ He has been determined to beat dyslexia and is Wesley is a pupil at Kemplah School, Guisborough.
SPEEDING driver Shaun Largue almost killed himself in a head-on collision, a court heard.
Largue, 19, broke both his legs, his jaw, nose, hip and wrist and suffered a fractured skull in the accident.
The driver of the van which he hit Stephen Whitehead, a self-employed glazier and joiner was off work for six weeks after the accident.
Now Largue, of Acklam Road, Middlesbrough, is facing a possible custodial sentence after he appeared before Teesside Crown Court yesterday and admitted reckless driving.
Mr Recorder Paul Worsley adjourned the case until Friday for social inquiry reports to be prepared because he was considering locking Largue up as a warning to other young drivers.
Toby Wynn, prosecuting, said Largue was driving his Ford Escort across Victoria Bridge in Stockton which has a speed limit of 30 miles per hour.
But Mr Wynn said: ‘He was driving fast, at least 50 miles per hour, when he completely lost control as he tried to overtake another vehicle.
‘He veered across the road and went into the opposite lane where he collided with a transit van.’
Laurence Hazell, defending, said Largue spent two weeks in intensive care after the accident and his mother thought he was going to die.
He lost three stones in weight and had to be wrapped in tin foil in hospital because of heat loss.
Mr Hazell said: ‘He has come as close as anyone can to meeting his maker and surviving.’
Largue has since had to give up his job as an apprentice turner and is now re-training as an electronic engineer.
Mr Hazell said: ‘My client wants to offer his heartfelt apologies to Mr Whitehead.’
Calm before the storm?— Ray Hankin yesterday after being handed the ‘mountainous’ task of keeping Darlington's struggling football club in the Third Division.
The 36-year-old Tynesider stepped up to the manager's chair after Frank Gray became the third North-East football boss to lose his job since Christmas.
Gray and his assistant Tony McAndrew were dismissed by the club's chairman Dick Corden yesterday after a ‘diabolical performance’ at Torquay on Saturday.
After the changes were announced at Feethams late yesterday, Hankin said he owed a great debt to Gray.
But ‘football is a cruel game,’ added the former Burnley, Leeds and Middlesbrough striker.
A BIG crowd is expected at Brough Park tomorrow night for the star-studded final of the £4,000 Sportslink All-England Champion Hurdle.
The main attraction will be Hall Green's Kildare Slippy, which is certain to be odds-on after breaking the clock in last Saturday night's semi-final.
The Paddy Hancox-trained flyer led from the first flight to win by three lengths in 31.06 secs, clipping an astonishing 27 spots off the record, which had been held by Brough Park's Jenks Challenger.
The wide-running Kildare Slippy, which also holds track records at Hall Green and Hackney, has been drawn in its favourite trap six for the final.
Victory tomorrow night would set the ace jumper up nicely for its main objective next month's Daily Mirror/Sporting Life Grand National at Hall Green.
White Pudding, which also went round faster than the previous record, clocking 31.18 secs, is drawn in box four and the main danger to Kildare Slippy tomorrow could come from Run on King, which has been favourably allocated trap one.
The draw for the final is: 1 Run on King; 2 Glenrobin, 3 Marina Jerry, 4 White Pudding(W); 5 Solitary Life(W); 6 Kildare Slippy(W).
There will be five supporting opens on an excellent programme, including an 825-metres marathon.
Gordon Rooks' Union Jack, which won three flat races before reaching the semi-finals of the All-England Champion Hurdle, underlines its versatility by contesting the long-distance event.
There will be two puppy opens and Harry Williams' brilliant youngster Pond Tornado reputed to be worth £18,000 will be in action.
It will be Pond Tornado's third competitive run after finishing second in an A1 debut race at Sunderland and winning an open at Sheffield.
The pup trialled at Brough Park on Saturday night and was only two lengths outside the sprint track record.
SUNDERLAND stage three £100 opens tonight.
Brough Park's Movealong Sharp will be chasing a hat-trick of victories at the East Boldon circuit in the 450 metres puppy open, but there is expected to be a serious challenge from wide running Pond Pavarotti, which is also trained by Harry Williams.
Williams could also be on the mark with Capricorn Note in the other 450 metres open, though Dawn Milligan's latest acquisition, Valentinos Joy, which has moved down from Scotland, trialled in 26.60 secs (going 30 fast).
In the sprint event, Sheffieldbased Carrigeen Chief is fancied, though Graham Calvert's Lucky Streak won the last sprint open at Sunderland and competed recently in a top open at Bristol.
MIDDLESBROUGH have clinched an improved £2,500 sponsorship deal with Bass Breweries.
The cash will be split between two competitions, which will merit category three grading from the National Greyhound Racing Club.
DARLINGTON midfield player Gary Gill wants to play abroad after being given a free transfer by new manager Ray Hankin.
Gill, 27, said last night: ‘Ever since I have been in football I have yearned for a chance to play in Europe.
‘After an unhappy season, I would like a clean break away from everything.
‘I want to achieve something in the game.
A new lease of life could do me good.
Apart from sporadic spells, I have not played anywhere near my best this season.
‘I have given 100pc but my play has been affected because I have not been mentally happy.’
The former Middlesbrough player said his contract was cancelled by mutual agreement and denied he was sacked.
‘There is no animosity between Hankin and myself.
‘I have known Hankin for many years.
As an Ayresome Park apprentice, I cleaned his boots when he joined Middlesbrough.
‘I wish Hankin, and the rest of the lads, all the best in their survival fight.’
Hankin said Gill's contract was cancelled because he knew the player had been unhappy at the club for some time.
‘In our present plight, I need battlers.
Without players who are committed, we will struggle.
‘I want players to give 120pc.
Gill believes he can play in a higher standard of football.
We parted on the best of terms.’
Hankin stressed chief scout Barrie Geldart would remain an important member of his backroom staff.
No decision has been made over a youth coach, a position Hankin held before his sudden promotion to the manager's office.
— FRANK Gray said last night he was not bitter over being sacked after eight months in charge.
He said: ‘I went into the job with my eyes open.
Everyone knows what happens if a manager is not successful.
‘Results show we did not have a good season and at the end of the day the responsibility was mine.
‘Despite everything, I enjoyed my spell in charge.
It was good experience.’
Gray had no regrets over not joining Brian Little at Leicester City last summer.
He said he wanted to stay in the game and would keep his options open.
‘A lot of hard work has gone into Darlington over the past two years.
I sincerely hope Ray Hankin gets the results to pull the team out of trouble.’
MANAGER Lennie Lawrence forecasts the biggest week in Middlesbrough's history if they beat Portsmouth in tonight's FA Cup fifth round replay at Ayresome Park.
A sixth round tie with Nottingham Forest and the return of Brian Clough would be sandwiched between the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final legs with Manchester United.
Lawrence said: ‘We want to keep the momentum going.
You cannot stand still in football.
‘We want to move forward this week, this season, and next season.
I don't know how far the club can go but we have to try and find out.
‘My players must class the replay as the most important game of the season and ignore the Rumbelows Cup and the promotion race.
Cup success has a spin-off effect in the League.
We must grasp every opportunity and not worry what will happen in future games.
‘What worries me is the assumption in the town is that the replay result is a foregone conclusion.
I foresee similar problems to the Peterborough United replay, though Portsmouth have a different style.’
There was no real pressure on his players, despite the increasing number of big games.
Lawrence added: ‘There is pressure when you are at the bottom.
Struggling clubs involved in cup runs are often relegated.
‘In the last ten years football has been littered with Wembley teams who have gone down.’
Midfield players Robbie Mustoe and Andy Peake should be fit tonight.
Jamie Pollock returns to the squad.
Striker Bernie Slaven could again be on the substitutes' bench after his quick recovery from a knee operation.
Lawrence has not revealed who will be Nicky Mohan's central defensive partner.
He wants to keep Portsmouth in the dark until the teams line-up for the kick-off.
Middlesbrough will start favourites, especially in view of the teams' contrasting home-and-away records.
Boro have a good home record while Pompey are bad travellers.
Portsmouth boss Jim Smith is set to recall midfielder Chris Burns.
Burns was left out of the drawn League match at Wolves on Saturday to make way for loan signing Alan McLoughlin.
PUTTING aside last week's question of the game that masqueraded under the name of alma, a more pressing question is where was the pub or hotel of that name?
And what was the connection between a famous Alma landlord and the national game?
The story starts in the middle of the last century when Darlington was expanding rapidly.
Even Cockerton could not escape progress and in 1860 John Prior began building the street of houses that still bear his name.
For himself he built a hotel on the corner of the ancient Coal Road West Auckland Road and called it the Alma.
He chose Alma to commemorate an 1854 battle fought over a newly-built Russian fortress during the Crimean War.
(Coincidentally the town of Alma-Ata has now a population of over one million and is in Kazakhstan).
His successor as landlord, James (possibly a relation of John) decided to rename the Alma the Jubilee Hotel, but in 1878 John Wharlton converted it back into The Alma Hotel.
The name Alma survived the alterations of 1937 and 1954 until in January 1969 the building was bought by the Whitbread brewery.
Ten years later the brewery embarked on a substantial redevelopment programme and rechristened the pub The Brown Trout ‘to bring it more into keeping with Darlington’.
The Alma's footballing connection is one Alf Common, landlord from 1925–43.
England international Alf's claim to fame is that he was the first £1,000 player when in February 1905 he was bought by Middlesbrough from Sunderland.
The exorbitant fee caused uproar in the land.
Even the House of Commons stepped in and denounced Middlesbrough for attempting to buy their way out of the relegation zone.
An upper limit was then set on transfer fees.
But for Boro it worked.
Alfie Common scored a penalty at Bramall Lane, home of Sheffield United, to give Middlesbrough their first away win for two years and they managed to avoid the drop to the Second Division.
For Alf, born near Sunderland in 1880, the Boro was his fourth professional club.
His career commenced at Jarrow in 1897 before moving to Sunderland and then Sheffield United where in 1902 he became the youngest player ever to win an FA Cup winners' medal.
He returned to Sunderland before that epic transfer to Ayresome Park, and then his career went a little sour.
In September 1907 he was stripped of the captaincy and fined £10 for drunkenness and violent behaviour and in 1910 transferred for a measly £100 to Woolwich Arsenal.
In the twilight of his playing days he won a Second Division Championship medal with Preston North End.
In 1919 for some unknown reason he arrived in Darlington and became landlord of the Cleaver Hotel in Skinnergate.
Six years later he transferred to the Alma where he was so heavily into Methodism that he led those that had congregated in the bar to church.
He retired from the pub game in 1943 and died 11 months after his wife on April 3, 1946, at his home in Coniscliffe Road.
A BOY'S ambition to run a cafe with a smile has won him the title of Smarties' Young Achiever of the Year.
Stephan Yates, 10, of Cullercoats Primary School, North Tyneside, wrote that his ambition was to open a ‘happy cafe’ with a smiling face logo and the motto ‘service with a smile’.
He was awarded a TV, video camera, and video recorder for his school, and £500 for himself by England rugby star Will Carling.
The award asks children between the ages of nine and 12 to write about what they would like to do when they grow up.
Runners-up included ten-year-olds Claire Butler, from, Pickering, Yorkshire, who intends to become a journalist and start a paper called the Nosey Parker, and Wesley Thomas, from Middlesbrough, who wants to be an ecological dustman because he ‘likes getting mucky’.
DARLINGTON'S John Bradley, a student at Bath University, is among the 13 members of the England senior squad who compete in the first World Cup final in Majorca this weekend after qualifying through the recent Cup meets in Europe.
He swims in the 50m butterfly, for which he is ranked No 3 in Britain, and hopes to compete in other events.
Ian Wilson (Sunderland) declined the invitation and is training with the City of Leeds club, including Olympic champion Adrian Moorhouse, in Florida.
Senior international Vicki Horner (Newburn) and Esso England youth squad member Laura Jackson (Derwentside) defend two titles in one event at the first of this year's six Northumberland and Durham championship galas at Bishop Auckland on Saturday (2 and 5.45pm) when there are 20 titles up for grabs.
Vicki will be trying to repeat her double 1991 success in the junior and senior open women's 200m individual medley while Laura has the junior and senior women's 50m freestyle trophies at stake.
Vicki is also favourite for the undefended girls' 1618 years 100m butterfly title.
The second fastest qualifier in the 200m individual medley is Esso England junior squad member Susan Rolph (Newcastle), also the likely gold medallist in the girls' 14 years 100m backstroke.
England youth squad member Lee Dalzell (GatesheadWhickham) clearly heads the qualifiers in the girls' 15 years 100m breaststroke.
Outstanding prospect Lindsay Robinson (Chester-le-Street) continued her excellent start to the season at the Derwentside long distance meet by winning all her six girls' 11–12 races over 200m backstroke, breaststroke, butterfly, 400m individual medley, 400m and 800m freestyle.
A hat-trick of titles fell to Ben Shaw (Harrogate) when the first of this year's Yorkshire championships were staged at Leeds.
He won the junior men's 200m freestyle, 200m and 400m individual medley and Robin Francis (York) won the boys' 10 years 50m breaststroke.
Claire Huddart (Leeds) won the women's 100m and 200m backstroke.
The Middlesbrough water polo pair of Paul Floyd and Lee Cooke have been selected for England in the home countries junior (20 and under) international tournament at Glasgow on March 6–7.
Middlesbrough defeated Newcastle B team 13–11 at home in a Northumberland and Durham League water polo fixture.
ANOTHER of England's World Cup stars is on show in the North-East this weekend when giant lock Wade Dooley takes the field for Preston Grasshoppers against Durham City at Hollow Drift.
Grasshoppers confirmed yesterday that Dooley will play in the Courage League Division Four match, just a week before he attempts to help England secure the Grand Slam against Wales at Twickenham.
Dean Richards and Rory Underwood helped swell the crowd at Newcastle Gosforth when they played for Leicester in their 10–0 Pilkington Cup quarter-final victory last Saturday.
And Dooley's massive presence is bound to add interest for City spectators, even though it could create problems for their players, especially at the line-outs, where his dominance has been a vital factor in England's recent success.
City make three changes from the side beaten at Hartlepool Rovers last week, with scrum half Steve Kirkup returning for Charlie Turvil, who is on the replacements' bench.
Up front, Mike Fenwick replaces Andrew Fletcher and John Bell is back for Gary Gray.
Middlesbrough move the kick off of their home North Division One match with Sandal back to 3pm.
Without a game last week, they bring back Mark Willis and Andrew Vincent for league action.
Boro full back and fly half Ian Bircham has landed a job in Italy so his appearances will be limited to the weekends he is home.
Bishop Auckland travel to Acklam for a Durham and Northumberland Division One match with an unchanged team, calling up Jimmy Collinson and Tim Wood to the replacements' bench.
SCOTLAND have given a vote of confidence to the team that beat Ireland in Dublin for their Five Nations' Championship clash with France at Murrayfield on March 7.
Neil Edwards, the 27-year-old Harlequins lock forward who broke his nose and had stitches inserted in a gashed lip in the 1810 win over the Irish, did not play for his club on Saturday but hopes to be fit to face Bristol this weekend.
He was replaced in the closing minutes in Dublin by Rob Wainwright, who returns to the replacements' bench.
Craig Chalmers, who was a casualty in Melrose's game against Boroughmuir on Saturday, has not decided yet whether his leg injury will permit him to play this weekend against Stirling County.
David Sole extends his record as Scotland's captain to 22 matches, three more than the figure set by British Lion Ian McLauchlan.
The game against France will be refereed by Freek Burger of South Africa.
G Hastings (Watsonians); T Stanger (Hawick), S Hastings (Watsonians), S Lineen (Boroughmuir), I Tukalo (Selkirk); C Chalmers (Melrose), A Nicol (Dundee High School FP); D Sole (Edinburgh Academicals, captain), K Milne (Heriot's FP), P Burnell (London Scottish), N Edwards (Harlequins), G Weir (Melrose), D McIvor (Edinburgh Academicals), D White (London Scottish), I Smith (Gloucester).
Replacements: P Dods (Gala), G Shiel (Melrose), G Oliver (Hawick), R Wainwright (Edinburgh Academicals), P Jones (Gloucester), J Allan (Edinburgh Academicals).
Wade Dooley
BORO'S treble hopes were dealt a shattering blow last night after being dumped out of the FA Cup.
But there were celebrations for Sunderland at Upton Park where the Second Division visitors stifled Billy Bonds Hammers.
The Roker men go through to the Quarter-Final for the first time since 1976.
A delighted Sunderland caretaker manager Malcolm Crosby said: ‘I am proud of the players.
‘It is not easy to give a two goal leaf away to First Division and then show the character to come back and win the game.
‘But I thought overall we deserved it.’
Middlesbrough Manager Lennie Lawrence made no excuses after the shock 4–2 replay defeat by Portsmouth.
Lawrence said: ‘This is the second time Portsmouth have humiliated us this season.
It's as simple as that.
‘We gave away so many bad goals.
We lost our discipline, our shape, and fell apart.
I will never ever leave my players to their own devices.
They need a rigid pattern.
Paul Wilkinson was magnificent.
I feel sorry for him.
‘With a little more experience, Portsmouth could have annihilated us.
If we do that against Manchester United I will be having nightmares for years.
‘Against a good First Division side it will be double figures.
No-one will be rested at Swindon on Saturday, but people will be dropped.
‘This has to be our watershed.
We either pick up, go on, or we crumble.’
Lawrence thought his side had let down the fans.
Welsh international Barry Horne earned Southampton a place in the sixth round of the FA Cup when scoring after 108 minutes in a pulsating replay at The Dell.
Third Division Bolton had been just seconds from victory before Horne cracked in a superb 35-yard goal to send the tie into extra time, in injury time.
Julian Darby had given Bolton a 2–1 lead after 89 minutes.
Alan Shearer had put Southampton ahead after 28 minutes, only for Bolton to level through Andy Walker.
SUNDERLAND produced a magnificent away performance to knock First Division West Ham out of the FA Cup last night and secure a money-spinning quarter-final tie.
But there was only misery for Middlesbrough as their treble hopes went up in smoke with a 4–2 defeat at home to Portsmouth in their replay.
The Rokermen go through to the quarter-final for the first time since 1976 and a delighted caretaker manager Malcolm Crosby said: ‘I am proud of the players.
‘It is not easy to give a two-goal lead away to a First Division side and then show the character to come back and win the game.
‘But I thought overall we deserved it.’
Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence made no excuses after the shock replay defeat.
Lawrence said: ‘This is the second time Portsmouth have humiliated us this season.
It's as simple as that.
‘We gave away so many bad goals.
We lost our discipline, our shape and fell apart.
I will never ever leave my players to their own devices.
They need a rigid pattern.
Paul Wilkinson was magnificent.
I feel sorry for him.
‘With a little more experience, Portsmouth could have thrashed us.
If we do that against Manchester United I will be having nightmares for years.
‘Against a good First Division side it will be double figures.
No-one will be rested at Swindon on Saturday, but people will be dropped.
‘This has to be our watershed.
We either pick up, go on, or we crumble.’
Lawrence thought his side had let down the fans.
Welsh international Barry Horne earned Southampton a place in the sixth round of the FA Cup when scoring after 108 minutes in a pulsating replay at The Dell.
Third Division Bolton had been just seconds from victory before Horne cracked in a superb 35-yard goal to send the tie into extra time, in injury time.
Julian Darby had given Bolton a 2–1 lead after 89 minutes.
Alan Shearer had put Southampton ahead after 28 minutes, only for Bolton to level through Andy Walker.
EXPECTANT mum Helen Tibbett drove herself to hospital to give birth to her daughter but her husband went by ambulance.
The couple had waited ten years to have a child, only for driving instructor David to fall into a delirium with appendicitis as Helen went into labour.
‘All the neighbours thought the ambulance was for me,’ said Helen, 31.
‘He went by ambulance.
I drove myself — in labour — to hospital.’
As Helen drove to the maternity wing at South Cleveland Hospital, Middlesbrough, to deliver little Sophie, David was rushed to North Tees Hospital, Stockton, on the orders of an emergency doctor.
‘As he was going into theatre, I was pushing her out,’ Helen said.
He has seen her for all of 30 seconds.
I rushed her over to see him as soon as I could but he was still drugged up after the operation.’
David, 32, who is still in hospital after being treated for a kidney infection, telephoned his wife yesterday to tell her he will be in hospital for at least another five days after developing an infection in his thigh.
They will not let him come home because the baby has no immunity.
He has only got photographs of her and what everybody has told him,’ said Helen.
After looking forward to being present at Sophie's birth, David was crestfallen.
‘He was past himself,’ said Helen, now back home in Hatfield Close, Eaglescliffe.
‘He went to all the parent craft classes.
He knew more about having a baby than I did.
I called the midwife Dave, though her name was Liz, because I did not want anybody else there.’
MIDDLESBROUGH fan Ann Marie Fishwick made a touchline marriage proposal to boyfriend Colin Farrer at last night's FA Cup replay with Portsmouth.
The leap year proposal ceremony was conducted near the player's entrance by Ayresome Park disc jockey Mark Page.
Ann Marie moved from the Holgate End to propose before the 19,000 crowd.
To the cheers of the crowd, Farrer accepted with three words ‘Of course, dearest.’
Page promised them a wedding night at Crathorne Hall Hotel and an invitation to a Boro game of their own choice.
— Match report: Sport, pages 1 and 8.
MIDDLESBROUGH manager Lennie Lawrence will make sweeping changes for the Second Division promotion clash at Swindon tomorrow.
Lawrence promised tough action after the second-half collapse in the FA Cup replay defeat by Portsmouth.
The fact it was an out-of-character performance for this season cut no ice.
Lawrence said: ‘I must act because the Swindon game is terribly important if we are to win promotion.
‘There is not a lot I can do in relation to the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final with Manchester United.
‘My choice is restricted through players being cup-tied.
‘But the Second Division is a different proposition.
More players are available.
‘After the way we started against Portsmouth it would be difficult to imagine that we would fall apart.
‘It was like watching two completely different games.
‘Paul Wilkinson was outstanding but I felt the other front players were not effective.
‘At the same time, the midfield was overrun in the second half and the defence made some horrendous errors.
‘Pompey's third goal killed us off and allowed them to run the show.
But neither the goal, nor our collapse, should have happened.’
Alan Kernaghan's absence was certainly felt against Pompey and the skipper is certain to return after his two-match suspension.
Jon Gittens could be recalled after not being available for the cup-tie.
Bernie Slaven, Curtis Fleming and Mark Proctor are also in with a chance of selection.
THE Middlesbrough-Manchester United Rumbelows League Cup semi-final first leg will start at 8pm next Wednesday.
AN ABA title is the ultimate target of the boxers at tonight's North-East Counties championships finals; for the organisers it's a new van.
Stockton ABC stage the event at Thornaby Pavilion (8pm) hoping for a good crowd that will more than cover their expenses.
The surplus will go towards replacing their club van that was used to transport boxers to events and beach training at Redcar.
It was stolen in November and found burnt to a shell in Middlesbrough.
‘We are now restricted to using private vehicles,’ said club president Mike Meynell.
‘And that is usually club coach Chris Bailes's car.
As he has to take another coach, it means we can transport only two or three boxers to shows.
It's not very satisfactory.’
Tickets, at £5 and £10, are available on the door tonight, and they should be a passport to a cracking ten-bout night's boxing, with a heavy Teesside emphasis, as the North East division champions meet the Yorkshire and Humberside holders.
Middlesbrough brothers Andy and John Green face a torrid night against Hull opponents.
Welterweight John meets Peter Waudby, whose only loss last season was to Adrian Carew in the ABA final.
Andy, a lightweight, meets the experienced John Phelan.
At this stage on the road to the Royal Albert Hall, no bout is easy, and the Yorkshire fighters have the disadvantage of having had to re-box their finals last week after the ABA discovered weigh-in irregularities.
Programme (N-E boxers first): Flyweight: S Parry (Lambton Street) v K Sheridan (Plantworks); bantam: A Martin (Hartlepool Catholic Club) v N Crosby (St Paul's, Hull); feather: A Temple (Hartlepool BW) v A Benton (Batley); light: A Green (PTSOB, Middlesbrough) v J Phelan (St Paul's); light welter: S Armstrong (Hartlepool BW) v M Baker (St Paul's); welter: J Green (PTSOB) v P Waudby (St Paul's); light middle: J Pearce (Wellington, Middlesbrough) v S Hendry (Bermantofts); middle: A Exley (Grainger Park) v J Sharp (Sharlston Colliery); light heavy: K Dukes (Sunderland) v C Joseph (Sedbergh); heavy: D McFarlane (Birtley) v N Kirkwood (Grimethorpe); super heavy: M Hopper (Spennymoor) walkover.
The former striker played under several big-name managers from the day he made his First Division debut as a raw teenager.
Jimmy Adamson gave him his chance at Burnley.
‘Adamson was absolutely terrific for kids at Burnley.
Without him, I don't think I would have got so far in my career.
‘Jimmy Armfield signed me for Leeds United, but when Adamson took over it was clear he had lost some of his motivation after being sacked by Sunderland.
‘Jock Stein moved to Elland Road and there were great hopes.
Unfortunately, he went back to Scotland after only 44 days.
‘When I joined Vancouver Whitecaps I played under the best manager of my career.
‘Johnny Giles knew the game inside out and could motivate players.
I had three great years under him.
‘During that time, I had a three-month loan spell at Arsenal under Terry Neill.
I did not enjoy it.
I am not a lover of London.’
Middlesbrough manager Bobby Murdoch brought Hankin back into Englsih football and was sacked a week later.
Hankin recalled: ‘Malcolm Allison took over.
For some reason, we never saw eye to eye.
I don't hold grudges though.
‘I have nothing against Malcolm from a personal point of view.
‘With Middlesbrough, I was very disappointed things did not work out.
Especially after great times at Burnley, Leeds and Vancouver.’
Hankin moved on to Peterborough and then signed for Tommy Docherty at Wolves.
The Doc was not one of his favourites.
At 30, Hankin walked out of Molineux with a year left on his contract.
Hankin helped Guisborough Town and then had his first taste of management with Northallerton Town.
‘Getting the best out of players is one of my strong points,’ he said.
‘If I did not believe I could lift Darlington I would not have taken the job.
‘There must be mutual respect, because without that you have no chance.
I am not promising miracles but one thing is certain.
‘We will all do our our best to get Darlington away from the bottom of the table.’
DARLINGTON striker David Cork has been transfer-listed at his own request.
YOU might think there's enough railway heritage in the North-East to satisfy anybody.
But you'd be wrong if you met six men who live and work on Teesside.
For the group of ardent rail enthusiasts are building a 46ft x 13ft replica of Biggleswade station, Bedfordshire.
For two nights every week, a tiny room in an innocuous Thornaby youth club becomes a hive of modelling activity.
‘It's a labour of love,’ said Richard Nice, of Billingham, perhaps the man most responsible for the project, now in its eighth year.
Richard and his friends Mark and Martin Lloyd, Dave Scott and Harry Anstess had decided to build a faithful model railway of the 1955–60 period.
‘It had to be the East Coast main line apart from the obvious attraction of the line, we had a considerable fleet of locos and rolling stock of the right pedigree,’ said Richard.
The big question was, which station would they choose?
Middlesbrough was never on the main line and Newcastle, Darlington, Thirsk and Northallerton were all too large.
‘Durham would have made a beautiful model, but the city below the viaduct was a daunting prospect,’ said Richard.
Few stations south of Thirsk had much to offer until Richard discovered Biggleswade on a visit to his sister's home.
‘We visited the site and fell in love with it,’ said Richard.
Biggleswade had everything and the team moved in to observe, to measure up and to photograph.
But much more information was needed to make the faithful model the men wanted to produce.
Although two years of work lie ahead, the team remains enthusiastic.
Bus driver with a friendly charm is Britain's best A bus driver thought he was in trouble when a stranger telephoned his manager asking for his name.
But Mr Norman Bell, who drives the No 8 United bus between Barnard Castle and Bishop Auckland, was called in to learn a survey had found him the friendliest bus driver in Britain.
The stranger was the Rev. Ian Gregory, founder of the Polite Society, who travelled incognito on the 50-minute Teesdale bus service with Mr Bell on January 12.
He visited North-East towns including Darlington, Barnard Castle, Durham and Middlesbrough for eight days for a study of regional manners commissioned by Northumbria Tourist Board.
‘I was in the canteen on Wednesday when the manager called me in about a passenger on my bus,’ said Mr Bell.
‘My first thought was ‘Oh no, what have I done now?’
I was very surprised when I discovered what he was ringing about.’
Mr Bell, aged 39, of Oakley Gardens, West Auckland, said he has always tried to be polite during his 17 years as a driver.
‘But I really am no different to anyone else.
I can be just as nasty as friendly if I must, but it is not often necessary.’
People throughout Teesdale are very friendly and he knows most of his passengers by name, he said.
‘One woman, a regular passenger, is nearly always two minutes late.
But I stop the bus to wait for her and nobody is too concerned,’ he said.
Mr Gregory said Mr Bell did more for the community than any amount of social workers, teachers or vicars.
‘He must be Britain's friendliest driver.
It would be wonderful if more were like him.’
Mr Peter Sloyan, chief executive of Northumbria Tourist Board, said he commissioned the survey after the North East came eighth out of 11 favourite tourist areas in Britain.
‘If we could just say please, excuse me and thank you I think we would be top in the list of places people want to visit.’
But the final word on politeness is with Mr Bell.
When our reporter thanked him for the interview, Britain's friendliest bus driver said: ‘You are most welcome.’
MIDDLESBROUGH'S fading hopes of improving their current eighth place in the Carlsberg League division two could receive a boost tomorrow when they entertain Ware at the Rainbow Centre (4pm).
But they must be at their best to overcome the visitors, who are comfortably holding down third place in the division.
The return of Tony Hanson to the team that lost in the last five seconds at Broxbourne could be the inspiration, but with Doncaster playing second placed Oldham and Plymouth at fourth placed Brixton, the two teams above them could well lose ground.
Certainly Middlesbrough are capable of living with any of the teams in division with the exception of Bury, the only unbeaten team in the league.
With a final place of eighth meaning a trip to Bury in the play-offs, Steve Appleyard's men will be anxious to improve on their current position to avoid that.
Sedgefield Racers make the long trip to Chiltern tonight looking to maintain an end of season run that has taken them to the fringes of the play-off chase.
With three relatively easy home fixtures remaining, player-coach Ivan Whitfield is confident his side can make their top-eight target.
But the two remaining away games offer much sterner opposition.
Whitfield enjoys a comparative luxury tonight with a full squad available.
MIDDLESBROUGH striker Andy Payton has suffered another injury blow.
The £750,000 Payton has been ruled out for two weeks with a torn hamstring sustained in the FA Cup replay defeat by Portsmouth.
Payton said: ‘I am absolutely gutted.
I have had more injuries in three months with Middlesbrough than eight years at Hull City.
‘Middlesbrough fans have not seen the best of me because of the nightmare run of injuries.
But they will when I am fit.
‘There are plenty of League games left.’
Payton will miss Second Division promotion clashes at Swindon, today, and against Cambridge United, at Ayresome Park, next Saturday.
The club's record buy is not eligible for the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final against Manchester United.
Manager Lennie Lawrence will swing the axe at Swindon and demand 90-minute commitment.
Skipper Alan Kernaghan said: ‘We have to put the cup game behind us and concentrate on another big game.
‘We have to respond to the manager's criticism, especially with the League our priority.
‘Swindon are a good side, but we would have beaten them at Ayresome Park but for a crazy final ten minutes.’
Boro will go back to a 4–5–1 formation to try and hit Swindon on the counter attack.
Kernaghan, Bernie Slaven, Jon Gittens and Curtis Fleming could be recalled.
Team from: Pears, Parkinson, Phillips, Pollock, Kernaghan, Gittens, Mohan, Mustoe, Peake, Slaven, Wilkinson, Hendrie, Ripley, Fleming, Proctor.
BORO have an 8,000 ticket allocation for the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final second leg at Old Trafford.
Tickets will go on sale from tomorrow for season ticket holders and Portsmouth replay ticket holders, and on general sale on Wednesday.
BILLINGHAM Synthonia will have virtually a full squad when they take on giant-killers Cockfield today.
The cup holders are without striker Chris Rooney, who is suspended, but former Middlesbrough striker David Shearer is likely to return after injury, while striker Dave Golden and defender Andy Harbron are also included in the squad after missing the midweek game against Whickham.
Meanwhile, Cockfield, who expect to have virtually the whole village behind them, add recent signings Nigel Sams and Stephen Barker to the squad, but there will be late fitness tests for midfielder Mark Roughley and Kevin Pierce.
HFS Loans League BISHOP Auckland manager Harry Dunn will give another player his debut when they take on Southport at Kingsway today.
Dunn intends to start the game with former Northampton midfielder Stephen Hall, signed from Easington, in his line up, as well as another midfielder Phil Ostle, who was signed a fortnight ago from North Ferriby.
Bishops have slipped in the last two months following their excellent run around the turn of the year, and Dunn is looking for points to lift his side into the top half of the table.
One outgoing player is striker Derek Parker, who made only a couple of appearances after coming from Hyde United.
Sole calls it a day
RUGBY UNION: David Sole, who led Scotland to the Grand Slam in 1990, is to retire later this year.
The 29-year-old prop, Scotland's longest serving captain, has decided to make this summer's tour to Australia his swansong.
Sole, capped 40 times by his country, will make his final appearance at Murrayfield against France a week today when he will lead Scotland out for a record 22nd time.
Clarke stays FOOTBALL:
Northern Ireland international striker Colin Clarke retains his place in Portsmouth's team for the home League game against Tranmere after scoring twice in the FA Cup victory at Middlesbrough in midweek.
Poor Rovers FOOTBALL:
Doncaster Fourth Division strugglers Doncaster Rovers lost £123,989 last season despite making a record profit of £285,000 on transfer deals.
Rescue plans FOOTBALL:
Northampton Town's Supporters Trust, an independent body set up in January after a public meeting in the town, have unveiled plans to keep the debt-crippled Division Four club alive if they are placed into the hands of the official receiver on March 11.
Bob's milestone FOOTBALL:
Charlton Athletic's former Sunderland goalkeeper Bob Bolder makes his 250th appearance for the club in today's game at Barnsley.
Palace turmoil FOOTBALL:
Two Crystal Palace directors have resigned in protest over the ‘dictatorial policies’ of chairman Ron Noades.
Keith Sinclair and Gordon Lucking claim they have not been kept in touch with club affairs and that there has not been a board meeting since May last year.
Deal rejected FOOTBALL:
Sheffield Wednesday have had an offer for Bari's Australian international striker Frank Farina rejected.
A DREAM of one day playing for Middlesbrough Football Club helped one of the team's biggest fans through a four year prison ordeal.
Colin Oliver never stopped following his favourite team despite being jailed after he was wrongly convicted of manslaughter.
Colin, 22, of Hamilton Road, Stockton, Cleveland was beaten up by fellow prisoners after he was imprisoned for his alleged part in the stabbing of 94-year-old Stockton pensioner Kate Simpson.
He and two friends were cleared of the killing on appeal earlier this week.
Despite the injustice, he never lost sight of his love for football, winning two shields at inter-prison soccer matches.
And Middlesbrough FC were never far from his thoughts.
‘I would love to play for them.
I would like to go just for a trial.
‘I would clean their football boots for them anything,’ said Colin yesterday.
Colin's father Brian, 50, sent his son programmes for every home game, while Middlesbrough striker Bernie Slaven sent him a video tape and got all the team to autograph a football shirt for him.
Yesterday Slaven said of Colin's ambitions: ‘Everyone can dream and he may get his dream it's a strange game.
I am glad he is out if he did not do it.’
He added: ‘I think it is marvellous he kept on supporting us from inside prison.’
Colin's friends David Higgins, of Alder Road, Stockton, and Stephen Lea, of Diamond Road, Thornaby, also had their convictions for killing widow Mrs Simpson quashed by the three appeal judges.
Mrs Simpson was stabbed in the chest with her own kitchen knife after disturbing burglars in her home in Hartburn Avenue, Stockton, four years ago this week.
Cleveland Police have said they are not looking for anyone else in connection with the murder and are not reopening the case.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Denis McLoughlin, David Lee, Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Swindon Town 0 Middlesbrough 1 BERNIE Slaven has been recalled to face Manchester United in the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final first leg at Ayresome Park on Wednesday.
The Republic of Ireland striker is in line for a recall after just one appearance as substitute in over seven weeks.
And it means not only a leading role in Boro's biggest game of the season, but also a showdown with close friend Gary Pallister.
The former Boro central defender was United's acting captain at Coventry City on Saturday.
Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence will include Slaven in a more orthodox formation.
Lawrence said: ‘United are the best team in the country and it is important we do ourselves justice.
At our absolute best, we have a good chance of a favourable result.
‘We must remember it is played over two legs.
We must not get involved in an attacking extravaganza.
‘There would be no point in bombarding their goal and losing 1–0 before we go to Old Trafford.’
Lawrence has learned from the FA Cup replay defeat by Portsmouth.
Success at Swindon was achieved by solid graft, rather than attacking flair.
Middlesbrough reverted to their 4–5–1 away formation and climbed two places in the promotion race with a smash-and-grab win at Swindon.
A reshaped back four took time to settle and Swindon could have had the points wrapped up inside half hour.
Lady Luck certainly smiled on Boro as Swindon missed gilt-  edged chances and twice struck the woodwork.
David Mitchell even shot wide of an open goal after taking the ball round goalkeeper Stephen Pears.
Boro rubbed salt into the wound by scoring with their first genuine scoring attempt.
Straight after the break skipper Alan Kernaghan took advantage of slack marking at the far post to head in Jimmy Phillips' free kick.
Kernaghan said: ‘Phillips told me he was going to smash the ball across.
I think their centre forward was ball watching instead of marking me.’
Middlesbrough showed their battling qualities as they soaked up strong second-half pressure, and even survived a hotly disputed penalty.
Kernaghan protested his innocence when the referee pointed to the spot.
‘Their player just ran into me.
He was watching the ball,’ he claimed.
Justice was done when Stephen Pears denied Micky Hazard with a brilliant save.
Apart from a superb save early in the game and the penalty save, Pears played well after being flattened in a collision.
Pears felt groggy in the closing stages and found it difficult to concentrate.
He was relieved to hear the final whistle.
Middlesbrough were stronger defensively in the second half as, surprisingly, Swindon tried to upset them with a long-ball game rather, than with their usual slick passing style.
Lawrence said: ‘I said ten days ago Blackburn would run away with the championship.
I partly believed that, but I also wanted to put Blackburn under pressure.
‘Blackburn have gone off the track a little, which opens the door.
We are back in the ball game with a vengeance, especially if we beat Cambridge United next Saturday.’
MIDDLESBROUGH and Cleveland Harriers were third to take the bronze medals in the youths race at the national cross-country championships at Newark.
The Teessiders were led home by the Durham County Boys Clubs junior champion, Alan Aitchison, who finished in 28th position.
It is believed to be Middlesbrough and Cleveland's first set of national championship medals since Steve James won the junior title in 1959 and led his team to victory at Peterborough.
North-East champion Brian Rushworth finished a best-ever 11th in the senior men's race, which was won for the second time by Commonwealth Games 10,000 metres gold medallist Eamonn Martin, of Basildon.
Results Seniors (8.6 miles): 1 E Martin (Basildon) 40.29; 2 W Dee (Luton) 40.56; 3 S Carey (Warrington) 41.13.
North-East placings: 11 B Rushworth (Sunderland) 42.08; 26 I Archbold (Morpeth) 42.44; 35 M Hudspith (Morpeth) 43.04; 39 K Brown (Mandale) 43.11; 41 G Nagel (Valli) 43.13; 69 I Hudspith (Morpeth) 43.46.
Teams: 1 Tipton 229 pts; 10 Morpeth 753; 14 Sunderland 895; 16 Mandale 1026; 27 Valli 1795; 50 Richmond and Zetland 2756.
Juniors (5.8 miles): 1 A Pearson (Longwood) 28.36; 2 J Gascoyne (Harlow) 29.13; 3 K Cullen (Chelmsford) 29.15.
North-East placings: 27 P Wadge (Gateshead) 31.04; 35 D Fielden (Mandale) 31.13.
Teams: 1 Sale 125; 6 Gateshead 260; 10 Mandale 298.
Youths (4 miles): 1 M Steinle (Blackheath) 21.21; 2 M Laffar (Havant) 21.26; 3 I Bowden (Pudsey) 21.29.
NorthEast placings: 19 C Hilton (Chester-le-Street) 22.09; 28 A Aitchison (M&C) 22.25; 30 P Wilson (Wallsend) 22.32; 31 S O'Brien (Alnwick) 22.35; 35 K Mace (M&C) 22.38; 38 L Morgan (Wallsend) 22.41; 39 D O'Brien (Alnwick) 22.41; 91 D Choosey (M&C) 23.24; 113 S Helm (M&C) 23.34.
Teams: 1 Shaftsbury Barnet 186; 2 Derby and County 187; 3 Middlesbrough and Cleveland 267; 5 Wallsend 268; 10 Mandale 350.
Tottenham 1 Nottm.
Forest 2 (aet)
NOTTINGHAM
Forest overcame a bomb scare, dreadful conditions and a determined Tottenham to book their third League Cup final in four seasons.
Brian Clough's men earned their second trip to Wembley this season and their sixth in the last four years thanks to Irishman Roy Keane's stunning extra-time header on an afternoon of high drama at rain-soaked White Hart Lane.
It took them until the 100th minute of an enthralling Rumbelows Cup semi-final second leg to finally break down Spurs' gallant resistance as former Cobh Ramblers player Keane met Gary Crosby's corner to beat Erik Thorstvedt with a thumping header.
It was a goal Forest, who dominated the later stages of the game deserved only three minutes earlier Teddy Sheringham had missed from close range from Keane's cross and provided sweet revenge for last season's FA Cup final defeat at the hands of the North Londoners.
Forest are already at Wembley for ZDS Cup final in which they meet Southampton on March 29.
Now in the Rumbelows Cup final they will meet either Middlesbrough or Manchester United.
It was a game that kicked off an hour late after a bomb alert closed White Hart Lane leaving thousands of fans and both teams locked outside for more than two hours.
No bomb was found after a search of the ground with tracker dogs and when the game eventually started over a hour late, both teams, level at 1–1 after the first leg went at each other in an explosive start.
Forest struck a devastating first blow after 11 minutes.
Scott Gemmill played a one-two with Lee Glover and saw his shot blocked, but Glover picked up the loose ball to ram it low past Thorsvedt.
But just four minutes later Spurs were level, as Gordon Durie's cross from the left was met by Gary Lineker who headed firmly past Mark Crossley for his 25th goal of the season.
PAUL Gascoigne opted for Rome and a seat in the Lazio directors box yesterday and missed out on the White Hart Lane drama.
The Tottenham and England midfielder, set to join the Italians for £5.5 million this summer, watched his prospective new team draw 1–1 in a scrappy derby against Roma.
WEST Hartlepool and Newcastle Gosforth warmed up for their Courage League National Division Two showdown a week on Saturday with wins of vastly contrasting styles.
While West were battling out a tough 24–18 win at Coventry, Newcastle ran riot against relegated Liverpool St Helens, scoring 13 tries in a 76–4 rout.
London Scottish top the table with 16 points, with West in second spot with 14 and Newcastle third on 12, level with Sale, who have played a game less than the top three and are still in with a very good chance of snatching one of the two promotion slots.
Newcastle have a vastly superior points difference than all their rivals and this could yet prove crucial at the death, though they have to win at Brierton Lane on March 14 to maintain their challenge.
There is only one league match left after that and a West derby victory would put them out of reach.
At Coventry on Saturday, West took early control and after missing a penalty, John Stabler was successful in the 23rd minute.
Coventry levelled before Stabler regained the lead for West with a penalty and converted Andy Mitchell's try, slotting another penalty to make it 15–3 at the break.
A Brown try and Stabler conversion after the break brought a two-penalty reply from Coventry, but Stabler had added another penalty before Coventry finished with a converted try and a penalty.
The result on March 14 could well hinge on the boots of Stabler and his Newcastle rival David Johnson, whose 28 points on Saturday maintained his position as the country's leading points scorer.
Johnson even added his first try of the season to nine conversions and two penalties, with Richard Arnold and Graham Clark scoring hat-tricks and Mark White, Alastair Meadows, Dave Bennett, Paul Holdstook and Peter Walton also scoring.
There was also a penalty try.
In National Division Four North, Durham City had a fine 24–15 home win over Preston Grasshoppers, whose England lock Wade Dooley cried off after being named in the side.
City scored a try in the third minute from Jeremy Troughia, Jon Bland adding the conversion and a penalty to make it 9–6 at half-time, Grayson having replied with a penalty and drop goal.
Hindle put the visitors ahead with a try which Grayson converted, but Bland made it 12–12 before Grasshoppers edged ahead again with a Grayson penalty.
A Hughie Nicholson try and a conversion, penalty and drop goal from Bland earned City the points.
In North Division moved into second place with a 24–12 win Hartlepool whose outstanding player, full back Marty Saunders, scored a consolation try, Alan Calvert adding the conversion and two penalties.
had only a Paul Bromley penalty to show as they went down 35–3 at home Bradford and while Michael Robson was the star 22–13.
Robson kicked four penalties and a conversion to add to tries by Peter Millichip and Ross Webber.
In North-East Division went down 24–10 their tries coming from scrum half Gary Spence and Ron Stock, full back Roy Myers adding a conversion.
won the Northumberland and Durham Division One title with a resounding 42–3 win playing the sort of open rugby they are not often given credit for.
Horden full back Gary Ellis gave a faultless kicking display, converting five tries by Mark Withan, Paul Priestley (2) and Ian Grint plus a penalty try, and adding four penalties.
Darlington's only reply was a Mark Butler penalty.
Darlington produced a fine performance to outgun a side 16–18, despite losing Ian Dent and hooker Keith Gaddis early in the game through injury.
Gaddis was able to return with his gashed head bandaged and Dent's replacement, young wing forward John Hall, had a fine game.
Ron Archer and Phil McNeilly scored tries and Colin Woodcock kicked two penalties and a conversion.
Mowden found themselves 6–3 down at half-time and despite much second half pressure, they could not make the breakthrough and went down 12–3, a late Ryton try settling the issue.
Andy Craggs kicked a penalty for Park.
Bishop also slipped up 19–12 who kept up their promotion drive with tries by Steve Cahill and the outstanding Drew Kendall, who added three penalties and a conversion.
All Bishops' points came from Ian Campbell penalties in a game which the home side deserved to win.
RESULTS Courage Leagues National Division Coventry 18, West Hartlepool 24; Newcastle Gosforth 76, Liverpool St Helens 4.
National Division Four Durham City 24, Preston Grasshoppers 15.
North Division Middlesbrough 22, Sandal 13; Stockton 3, Bradford and Bingley 35; Tynedale 24, Hartlepool Rovers 12.
North-East Division Blaydon 13, Novos 7; Gateshead Fell 22, Pontefract 10.
North-East Division Bridlington 24, Redcar 10.
Durham and Northumberland Division Acklam 19, Bishop Auckland 12; Consett 34, Hartlepool 0; Darlington 3, Horden 42; Darlington RA 16, Sunderland 10; Ryton 12, Mowden Park 3.
Italo and Franca Rigali ran the chip shop in Easington Colliery for 21 years.
He had a reputation for being bad tempered; she was the local ‘mother confessor’.
‘Everybody came in and told her all their stories.
Some people didn't like me but everybody liked her,’ says Italo, his hands alternately jabbing and caressing the air as he speaks.
He is a big man.
He shouts when talking would do and his voice — a barely definable mash of Scots and Italian — tells a story in itself.
Thousands of Italians have settled in the North-East over the last hundred years.
The earliest had left their homeland during the turmoil of its unification.
Now they are scattered through every town and village, families founded on ice cream and fish and chips.
Many, like Italo, came to the North-East via Scotland.
Hence the Latin-Celtic roll of his Rs.
Most of the ice cream parlours have gone now — Rossi's from Bishop Auckland, the Roma, Willington, the Gaiety Temperance Bar, Houghton-le-Spring, Scappaticci's ice cream salon in Middlesbrough, Di Mascio's Regal Cafe for Ice, Darlington.
But they and the families which ran them are now as much a part of local history as pits and shipbuilding.
‘It was like a family.
Everyone knew the local Italian.
He was like the vicar or the mayor,’ says Italo.
Nearly all the original Italian families in the North-East come from just two small areas of Italy — Cassino in the south and Barga in Tuscany.
The southerners were itinerant musicians and street vendors; the people of Barga made and sold intricate statuettes.
Tony Coia's grandfather, Massimino, came to Britain from Cassino with his wife in 1886 and bought a barrel organ.
After making a living in London and Scotland the family moved to Spennymoor in 1905 and Coias have been in the town ever since.
Tony's father Biagio (known as Jimmy) ran the Broadway Parlour and Temperance Bar in Weardale Chambers and Cheapside and won the gold medal for ice cream making at the Rome exhibition in 1925 — equivalent to an Olympic gold medal in the ice cream world.
Tony, a retired headteacher, is the third generation of Coia's in Spennymoor, and far more County Durham than southern Italian.
He and his five brothers married English girls.
He barely speaks Italian and in fact has only been to the country of his ancestry once — on a school trip.
‘But we still keep up one or two little customs,’ says Tony, 56.
‘I make the spaghetti sauce once or twice a week — like any other English person.’
The transformation over just two generations is something he is proud of.
His mother's parents were illiterate, his father self-educated; but all seven children went into professions — two teachers, one lawyer and four doctors.
And none of them had the arranged marriages which were normal just one generation earlier.
Franca Rigali, who like her husband Italo, comes from Barga, says: ‘I know Italian families who hope their child will marry an Italian boy or girl.
‘But I don't care.
I always say to the kids, ‘Just marry who you fall in love with, as long as you're happy’.’
Daughter Daniela has married an Englishman and all three are very English.
‘The second and third generation lose it a bit,’ says Italo.
‘My sons and daughter don't have any Italian friends at all.’
Conversation in the Rigali household is bi-lingual.
‘Many times I start in Italian and finish in English and then the other way round,’ says Franca.
And they use words like ‘potto’, ‘cellaro’, and ‘brosha’— which are neither Italian nor English but a combination of the two.
When Italo started making big fish fingers in the chip shop he called them ‘fingeronis’— giving them the Italian ending for ‘big’.
The name has stuck, although the shop is now run by someone else.
The Rigalis' 31-year-old son, Amedeo, meanwhile, joins in with a voice as Easington as you might find: ‘I'm proud to be half Italian, but I don't give it that much thought.’
There are 2,000 Italian-born people living in the North-East, according to Durham University lecturer Hugh Shankland, and many thousands more who are second, third and fourth generation Italians.
Hugh, who is known affectionately to local Italians as Hugo, recently staged an exhibition in Newcastle and Middlesbrough about the Italian community in the North-East.
‘There was a chain effect during this century,’ he explains.
‘Once you had one Italian doing well in a place, more from their town or village followed.’
Life wasn't easy for the first Italian immigrants.
‘All our days were just work and sleep,’ recalls Italo, who arrived in 1947.
‘We sent money home to our mothers and brothers and we didn't care if we didn't have a social life.
‘I did eight years’ work in four years when I came.’
During the Second World War most Italians were interned as enemy aliens, even though they may have been respected members of the community for 30 or 40 years — and even had relatives serving in the British forces.
Mauro Ferri came to Easington in 1939 with his mother and brother to visit his sister who had married another Italian, Dennis Donnini, who was a fusilier in the British Army.
Now Mauro has a strong North-East accent but then he suffered for his Italian name and voice.
His brother was interned, his mother was told to move inland, away from the coast — where presumably it was thought she might signal to enemy U-boats, and Mauro himself, although a child, was not allowed to leave Easington without a permit.
We had a few broken windows,’ he says.
Many Italians changed their names to English versions — or had them changed by English people who couldn't pronounce Italian ones.
‘When I came to Easington to buy the shop I used to wear tinted glasses,’ says Italo.
‘I bought them in Italy (I was the first person in England to wear tinted  glasses — Prince Philip had them after me) and the little girl in the shop used to say, ‘Dad, Dad, that's Roy Orbison’.’
To everyone in Easington Italo is still known as Roy.
‘We go to Italy once a year but both really are home,’ he says.
‘Now we're neither meat not fish.’
SEVEN Newcastle United fans were still recovering in hospital last night after a double fatal accident on the A66 trans-Pennine road.
Police have appealed for witnesses to the crash, which happened a mile west of Bowes at 8.10am on Sunday, between a Vauxhall Cavalier and a hired minibus.
The car driver Brian Edward Boyle, 37, of Howe Hill Close, Yafforth, Northallerton, died at the scene, while the driver of the minibus Gary Hutchinson, 25, of Frederick Street, Meadowfield, died later in hospital.
Ian Dye, 25, of Dorlonco Villas, Meadowfield, was last night  stable in intensive care at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
He was one of ten fans in the minibus returning from United's game at Port Vale.
Tony Curl, 23, of Black Road, Langley Moor, was poorly but stable in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
The following were comfortable in the Memorial Hospital: Peter Clark, 25, of South View, Meadowfield; Peter Nolan, of Hemmel Court, David Dobson, 22, of Elm Avenue, Norman Reeve, 24, of Alder Park, and Stephen Richardson, 21, of Murrayfield Drive, all Brandon.
THE owner of the Jade Garden Restaurant in Linthorpe Road, Midlesbrough, Mrs Le Quang Chung, was the 500th to register under a new food safety law.
It marks the half-way mark in the council's campaign to get all 1,000 businesses in the borough covered by the regulations to sign up.
Swim wedding:
Samantha Purvis of Stockton, the 26-year-old holder of the 200 metres British butterfly record, is to marry former British international swimmer Martin Porter next summer.
She is presently training in the hope of qualifying for this year's British Olympic squad and needs help with the costs.
FORMER Middlesbrough rider Daz Sumner is to return to Cleveland Park on a year's loan from Belle Vue.
Sumner, 24, joined Belle Vue for £12,000 last year but struggled to hit form.
Middlesbrough co-promoter Tim Swales said: ‘Sumner asked if he could rejoin us.
I think he wants to get his confidence back.
‘Sumner left as No.1 but will return as No.2 or No.3.
That will make life easier for him.
‘His Cleveland Park form was good but his form on bigger tracks was not so impressive.
‘Sumner will strengthen our team for a season that starts against the Danish touring side on March 26.’
Mark Lemon will not be available for official press day on March 19.
He will arrive from Australia three days later.
MIDDLESBROUGH manager Lennie Lawrence has made three changes for the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final first leg against Manchester United at Ayresome Park tomorrow night.
Gary Parkinson and Nicky Mohan are recalled to the defence and Bernie Slaven is back in the attack.
Andy Peake and Jon Gittens are cup-tied while Andy Payton is cup-tied and injured.
Lawrence said: ‘I think the players who have got the team so far in the competition deserve a crack at the best team in the country.
‘To some extent, I owe them that.
It will be different when we get down to League games.
‘Parkinson and Mohan were not made scapegoats when they were dropped at Swindon following our FA Cup replay defeat by Portsmouth.
‘Others would have been left out if more players had been fit.
I did not recall Slaven for tactical reasons.
‘Slaven proved his fitness in the Reserves last week and he will play.
‘Bernie is a big-occasion player and I am sure he will enjoy the challenge.
‘I don't expect miracles from him after being out of the first team for seven weeks.
‘But I will be happy if he snaps up a chance or two.’
With Middlesbrough in the national spotlight, Lawrence hoped his players would grasp the chance of cup glory.
He stressed it was important to remember the winners would be decided over two legs.
Boro could be punished if they adopt an all-out attacking policy at home.
Lawrence dismissed as ‘rubbish’ reports he would listen to offers for record buy Andy Payton.
A report of a move for Hartlepool United midfield player Brian Honour was ‘fiction.’
Boro have rearranged their home game against Barnsley for Tuesday, March 24.
The game has been put back from next Tuesday because of the Old Trafford second leg.
BORO chairman Colin Henderson is giving the club's fans the chance to design next season's kit.
He suggested a questionnaire about the team's strip should appear in fanzine Fly Me To The Moon.
HARTLEPOOL United defender Keith Nobbs has been ruled out for four weeks.
The former Middlesbrough player suffered a groin injury in training yesterday.
Manager Alan Murray said: ‘You get that type of blow when things are not going well.
He has a torn muscle.
Murray meanwhile called on his players to knuckle down after a series of disappointing results.
‘It is important for everyone to roll up their sleeves and fight to get back on the winning trail.’
Pool hope to improve on a 2–2 draw at Burnden Park when they entertain Bolton Wanderers tonight.
Murray forecast another tough battle with Bolton playing a similar game to Swansea, who triumphed at the Victoria Ground on Saturday.
Bolton, who were desperately unlucky to suffer an FA Cup knock-out at Southampton, will soak up pressure and hit on the break.
Pool midfielder David McCreery is fit after precautionary X-rays for a chest infection and could return to the side.
Former Manchester United reserve Paul Dalton is rated extremely  doubtful with a strained thigh muscle.
Hartlepool United (from): Hodge, Cross, Tinkler, MacPhail, M.Smith, McCreery, Johnrose, Olsson, Baker, Honour, Peake, Tupling Fletcher.
GARY Pallister was labelled a £2.3m flop when he joined Manchester United from Middlesbrough three years ago.
But on the eve of his first Ayresome Park return for tonight's Rumbelows Cup semi-final first leg, former teammate Bernie Slaven put a £4.5m price tag on the 26-year-old central defender.
‘Pally must be the best central defender in the country.
His valuation has doubled since he hit the big-time,’ said Slaven.
‘Fees of £1m are being suggested these days for some players who I have hardly heard of.
‘So I don't think a £4.5m tag for Pally is over the top.
I am not talking with the benefit of hindsight when I say his success has not surprised me.
‘Many people did not appreciate how good Pallister was at Ayresome Park.
‘Fans used to tell me Tony Mowbray was a better player and a bigger influence behind our promotion success.
‘But they were totally different players.
Mowbray was an inspiring leader with a never-say-die attitude.
He attacked the ball and encouraged players around him.
‘Pally was more laid back.
He had class and pace.
Supporters did not realise how fast he was.
With his long legs, he made it all look easy.
‘Yet I am sure he is as fast as Stuart Ripley.’
Slaven and Pallister's close friendship will be forgotten for 90 minutes tonight, and at Old Trafford next Wednesday.
There has been good-natured banter  between the two since the draw was made.
Slaven said: ‘Pally has said he will kick me up in the air if he gets a chance.
I have promised to stick the ball in the net if I get a chance.
‘I am not sure what type of reception he will get from the fans.
I am sure they recognise what he has achieved since he left.
But some fans might not forgive him for leaving.
‘Pally has a soft spot for his old club.
I hope he enjoys his return but not too much.
‘United are the best team in Britain and will want to reach Wembley after their FA Cup knockout by Southampton.
‘But there is no fear in our dressing room.
All the lads are looking forward to the game.
‘Should we reach Wembley it will be our biggest achievement.’
United will have captain Bryan Robson and goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel back.
Robson missed Saturday's game at Coventry with shin and calf injuries.
Schmeichel has been out for two matches with a poisoned hand.
Andrei Kanchelskis has also received the all-clear.
He was substituted at Coventry because of a toe injury.
Team from: Schmeichel; Parker, Irwin, Donaghy, Webb, Pallister, Robson, Ince, McClair, Hughes, Kanchelskis, Giggs, Blackmore, Robins.
PUPILS at Ayresome junior school, Middlesbrough, have been busy painting a mural which was declared officially open yesterday.
The 56 pupils who created the work with the aid of local professional artist Keith Bridgewood chose the staircase for the setting and the stairs are a predominant feature.
Stuart McFarlane, of Radio Cleveland, and folksinger Ron Angel, a retired Ayresome schoolteacher, performed the opening ceremony.
Meanwhile a giant garden mural has sprung up at Stockton's North Tees Hospital.
Beauty and Tranquility is the name of the wall painting in the reception area of the physiotherapy department.
Artist Janet Margrave has created a window opening on to a scene of flowers, ivy-clad trellis, a rush fringed pool and trees.
It was paid for by the WRVS in conjunction with Northern Arts.
SHROVE Tuesday was flipping good fun for lots of people in the region.
For instance a pancake race in Stockton was just what the doctor ordered.
Twelve people armed with frying pans raced across Dicken's Hypermarket to raise £200 for the Yellow Brick Road appeal to build a centre of excellence in the North East to treat children's diseases.
A team put up by the store won the pancake tossing dash.
In Middlesbrough, the whole of a school for children with severe learning difficulties enjoyed a pancake race.
All 115 boys and girls from Carrisbrooke School, in College Road Even the wheelchair-bound joined in the fun flipping the pancakes in true Shrove Tuesday style.
The pupils had been learning to make the mixture in the school's kitchen, and although there were a few minor mishaps none of the pancakes stuck to the ceiling.
DEFENDER Mark Sunley will carry Darlington's hopes into the final heat of the Rumbelows Sprint Challenge at Sheffield today.
Sunley is a substitute for the injured Steve Mardenborough.
Manager Ray Hankin said: ‘Sunley volunteered for the race.
He is fairly confident.’
Sunley is Darlington's third choice for a heat with a £500 prize and entry into the final for the two fastest runners.
Defender Jim Willis withdrew when he was transferred to Leicester City earlier in the season.
Sunderland also have a substitute for Gary Bennett, who has struggled with an injury.
Winger Kieron Brady will represent the club.
Middlesbrough defender Nicky Mohan has pulled out of the event.
Ninety minutes against Manchester United last night was not ideal preparation.
Newcastle United's hopes will rest with Steve Watson.
Ricardo Gabbiadini (Hartlepool United), Andy Curtis (York City) and Simon Thompson (Scarborough) also compete for a Wembley place.
The national race-off will take place before the Rumbelows League Cup Final on April 12.
JON Birch had some consolation after losing to Nigel Bond in the £60,000 Strachan Professional Championship at Thornbury, Bristol, yesterday.
The 24-year-old Middlesbrough player, beaten 5–3, said: ‘It means I can now get back to Ayresome Park to watch the Rumbelows Cup semi-final against Manchester United.
‘I thought I might have to sell my ticket,’ added Birch, who returned to action yesterday for the first time in six months.
‘Hopefully all my problems are now behind me,’ said Birch, who underwent surgery to remove his thyroid gland last October.
‘I just want to get this season over and start from fresh again,’ added the ring-rusty world No 55, also forced to play in glasses for the first time.
‘Considering everything, I was quite pleased with my form, but I wasn't sharp enough to take my chances.’
Birch has seen  contemporaries Ken Doherty and James Wattana come of age this season and now he wants a slice of their action.
He has sat and matched the former world amateur champions shoot up the rankings and said: ‘I'm glad to see them doing so well but it's annoying when you know you are as good as them but are not able to do anything about it.
‘There appears to have been a connection between my thyroid gland condition and eye trouble.’
Birch hit back from 3–1 down to level at 3–3 against the Cue Masters star but scored only 21 points in the final two frames.
Bond, from Darley Dale, plays Hong Kong's Franky Chan in the quarter-finals while fellow Derbyshire professional David Roe will meet world and UK champion John Parrott in the final eight.
World No 50 Roe upset the form book by beating top 16 candidate Darren Morgan of Wales 5–2 to reach his second ranking quarter-final of the season.
KEVIN Keegan has lodged a substantial bid for an unnamed player but won't tie up the deal in time for Saturday's home game with Brighton.
The Newcastle boss had hoped to be able to reveal the identity of the player yesterday before the move hit a hitch.
‘Now it's unlikely to go through this week,’ he said.
‘It's frustrating because clubs play games but I refuse to be drawn into a Dutch auction.
We have a budget and I have offered what we can afford.
I'm sticking to the rules and I refuse to panic by paying over the odds because that's how this club has got into trouble in the past.
I still hope that I can tie a deal up next week.’
Keegan described the player he is chasing as being the right age and pedigree and insisted: I'll only bring people in who are better than what I've got.’
The mystery man is believed to be a utility player who can perform in two or three positions.
Even without a new signing Keegan still has an embarrassment of players to chose from for the vital Brighton clash.
He said: ‘I could probably put out two teams with first team experience.’
That's why he is fielding a strong reserve side at Liverpool tonight.
Franz Carr, Bjorn Kristensen, David Roche, Steve Howey and Andy Hunt are among the players on view and Keegan will take a personal look at how they perform.
Kevin Sheedy meanwhile definitely returns against Brighton after injury but Ray Ranson is still short of full fitness.
— ROKER Park will attract a host of scouts tonight as manager Malcolm Crosby gears up for his end-of-season sales.
With the transfer deadline exactly three weeks away, Sunderland reserves host West Brom.
And the vast majority of the Roker reserve squad tonight are either on the transfer list or have requested to leave.
With Crosby looking to offload a number of his professionals before the deadline the players have an ideal opportunity to impress potential buyers.
Reserve coach Roger Jones recalls striker Thomas Hauser for the game after leaving him out of his side for a number of weeks.
Fourth division Halifax, having failed in a bid for winger Brian Mooney, made a move for striker Warren Hawke yesterday, but the 21-year-old turned down the offer.
Jones also confirmed that reserve skipper Tim Carter yet another Wearsider on the list will be fined after his sending-off in last week's draw with Sheffield Wednesday.
Sunderland Reserves: Carter, Williams, Michael Gray, Pascoe, Sampson, Walls, Mooney, Martin Gray, Hawke, Hauser, Brady.
On the first team front, centre-half Gary Bennett continues to recover well from a recent thigh injury and remains the only doubt for Monday's FA Cup tie at Chelsea.
— HARTLEPOOL United goalkeeper Martin Hodge appears before an FA appeal hearing in Sheffield today.
The former Leicester City player is appealing against a two-match suspension.
Two policemen claimed Hodge swore during a game at Shrewsbury on November 23 and the FA imposed a ban after studying correspondence.
Club chairman Garry Gibson and manager Alan Murray will attend the hearing to support Hodge.
Gibson said: ‘Neither the referee, nor the linesmen, heard the alleged offence.
‘Nor were complaints made by any spectators.
‘One over-zealous policeman has reported a number of players at Shrewsbury this season.
‘Hodge has never been sent off in his career.
He has been booked only twice in 500 or 600 appearances.
‘The manager and I want to support Hodge and prove his innocence.’
— FIT-AGAIN striker Andrew Fletcher is set to be recalled to Scarborough's side for the long trip to Maidstone on Saturday.
The former Middlesbrough reserve bounced back to form after a spell on the sidelines by hammering a hat-trick in the 6–1 win over Harrogate Town on Tuesday.
Fletcher's fine display may prove just too good for manager Ray McHale to ignore with the Seasiders desperate for a return to winning ways.
McHale's men have won just once in eight matches and Fletcher has not started since the 5–1 defeat at Barnet on February 8.
DARKO Pancev kept holders Red Star Belgrade on course for another European Cup final appearance by scoring both goals in their Group A semi-final against Panathanaikos yesterday.
The result, coupled with Sampdoria's surprise 3–2 defeat at Anderlecht of Belgium, sent the wandering Serbs top of the group, one point clear of the Italians.
The eager Yugoslav striker, who also provided the late winner last December that gave Red Star a 3–2 win over Anderlecht, was the key to his team's 2–0 defeat of the Greeks.
His first strike came after 70 minutes with a sharp right-footed shot from close-range while his second was a 35-metre blast four minutes from time.
Anderlecht's Luc Nilis gave Sampdoria a bitter taste of Pancev's medicine by emulating the Yugoslav with two goals.
He equalised after 67 minutes and hit a last minute winner.
Dynamo Kiev of the newly-independent Ukraine, sharing some of the problems of the Yugoslav team in that they no longer have a league worth speaking of at home, looked short of inspiration against Barcelona in their Group B semi-final.
The Spaniards completed a comfortable 2–0 away win without ever injecting any real passion.
Real Madrid showed too much passion and had two sent off in the last 16 minutes of their UEFA Cup tie at Sigma Olomouc of Czechoslovakia.
In the Cup Winners' Cup quarter-finals, Monaco's hopes of becoming the first French league club to take a European title were boosted when drew 0–0 at Roma, who were booed off the pitch.
Italian teams took all three European titles in 1990 and in the UEFA Cup, Torino look semi-final candidates after a 20 win at BK Copenhagen.
Werder Bremen, the only German club left in European competition this season, beat Turkey's Galatasaray 2–1 after being 1–0 down until 12 minutes from time.
Manchester United stayed on course for a League and Rumbelows Cup double with a high-quality away-leg performance in the semi-final at second division Middlesbrough.
Only a superb performance by their former reserve goalkeeper Steve Pears prevented United going into the second leg at Old Trafford next Wednesday with a commanding lead.
But United's Danish international Peter Schmeichel also had to show top form in twice denying Gary Parkinson from long range.
Schmeichel, back after missing two games with a poisoned hand, also blocked Bernie Slaven's close-range blast with his legs but most of the spotlight fell on Pears who left United for Middlesbrough six years ago in a £70,000 deal after making just five first-team appearances.
Pears went full stretch to tip over fine efforts by Paul Parker and Paul Ince as United combatted Boro's buccaneering style with cool composure and thoughtful build-up.
MIDDLESBROUGH turned in a spirited display to hold league leaders Manchester United in a battling cup tie at Ayresome Park last night.
After the goalless draw at Ayresome Park Boro boss Lennie Lawrence praised his side for their performance in the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final first leg.
Lawrence, who criticised his players a week ago for a humiliating FA Cup performance against Portsmouth, said: ‘I am proud of them.
‘I think everyone connected with the club can go home knowing that they have done their best.
With a little bit of luck in their penalty area we could have won the game.
‘On a couple of occasions we just did not get the bounce of the ball.
Having said that, the 12 who played out there could not have done more.
‘You have to look at Manchester United and see that they have internationals in almost every position and we matched them.
‘We played to the game plan, worked tremendously hard and we are still in with a chance.’
Manchester United will be without suspended Mark Hughes for the second leg at Old Trafford next Wednesday night.
United will start favourites to reach Wembley, but Middlesbrough will gain encouragement from the fact they have only drawn eight of their last ten games.
Lawrence described Pears as marvellous ‘but then we have come to expect those sort of saves from him.’
The Boro boss said Peter Schmeichel also had a good game and he could sense 15 minutes from time that neither goalkeeper was going to make a mistake.
‘I could not have asked for anymore from my players tonight.
We have played four First Division sides this season and we have not yet been beaten.
I hope those people who came to Ayresome Park tonight enjoyed the game.
I thought at the end both sides were happy to hear the final whistle.
I think we gave a thoroughly professional performance.’
Lawrence thought Slaven had had a remarkable game bearing his seven-week lay-off from first team football.
United manager Alex Ferguson said: ‘We quietened them quite well and we played excellent football.
There was a nice freshness about us.
My players enjoyed the game.
‘Steve Pears contributed to a goalless draw, but we also missed a couple of chances.
We just needed the goal and a nice win behind us and the results will show a marked improvement.
‘I expected a wee charge from Middlesbrough early on.
That's part of their game to get the crowd going.
But we are 90 minutes away from Wembley with a game to follow on our ground.
That's not a bad position to be in.
It gives us a good platform.’
Ferguson revealed Mal Donaghy had received five stitches in an eye wound.
Former Middlesbrough central defender Gary Pallister said it was an unusual experience to return to Ayresome Park in the opposing side.
The £2.3m Pallister said: ‘When I was going into the dressing rooms before the game I almost walked into the home one.
‘Middlesbrough came at us really strong and had a couple of chances to punish us.
When we settled down we played some tremendous football and maybe should have sneaked it in the end.
‘Stephen Pears proved what a class goalkeeper he is.
We had to be satisfied with results.’
Pallister said he got a ‘little bit of stick’ from the Holgate end on his return, but he had expected it.
MIDDLESBROUGH'S Wembley dream was kept alive last night by goalkeeper Stephen Pears.
His spectacular saves kept out the first division leaders, Manchester United, in a thrilling Rumbelow's Cup semi-final at a packed Ayresome Park.
Middlesbrough battled every inch of the way to gain a creditable 0–0 draw and only a second leg at Old Trafford now lies between Middlesbrough and their second Wembley Cup Final in two years.
Fans were unable to see the highlight of the game on television last night after Tyne Tees TV and the football league failed to reach agreement over coverage.
— Full report and pictures: Sport 1, 4 and 5.
IS THERE a more senseless waste of money than the annual four-yearly scramble to host the Olympic Games?
Almost certainly yes.
But even so, the time has arrived when the practice of rotating the Games around the world must be sternly challenged.
During the worst recession for half a century the British government is committing £55m to Manchester's bid to stage the 2000 Olympics.
The city itself, undaunted by the loss of £3m of public and private cash on its failed bid for the 1996 Games, will be spending a further hefty, though unspecified, sum.
If Manchester wins, the whole of the North West's economy will enjoy a tremendous boost.
But much of the money spent in Berlin, Sydney, Istanbul, Bejing, and Milan, Manchester's rivals, will have gone down the tubes.
And the same will be true of Britain's spending if Manchester loses for a second time.
The government has decreed that the centrepiece of Manchester's bid, a new £150m ‘national’ stadium, will be built regardless of the Olympics.
But if this national facility is needed, there should be a national debate about its location.
Such an obviously prestigious development should not arrive on the back of one city's possibly unsuccessful Olympic bid, with no consideration of the claims of other places or regions.
The consequences of a failed bid are not clear.
Asked how Manchester's stadium would then be funded, Sports Minister Robert Atkins spoke vaguely of seeing ‘how events proceed.’
A mini Channel Tunnel fiasco could be on the cards.
The size and cost of a present day Olympic complex suggests to me that both the summer and winter games should now have permanent, internationally-funded homes.
The winter Olympics especially are becoming ever harder to fit into sensitive mountain settings, which must be protected from a rolling programme of environmental damage.
If international rivalry dictates that the Games must continue to rotate, the bid process, now stretching over two years, should be shortened and simplified.
Its basis need be no more than detailed plans, backed with statements showing how they will be achieved.
To require six cities virtually to embark on building an Olympic complex, five of which won't be needed, doesn't look a prudent way of managing things.
DAVID HOOKES, the former Australian Test batsman, is retiring at the end of this season.
For what might he be best remembered (quiz setters take note).
For retrieving a certain G. Boycott's cap from the spectators who seized it when the great man scored his 100th century during the 1977 Headingley Test.
DARLINGTON'S Karl Aldorfer left the rest of the field well behind storming to victory during the Chester-le-Street open on the River Wear with 23–14–0.
Drawn in the park above the noted weir peg, Karl worked a mid-river line with the waggler and maggot netting a succession of quality roach and dace.
Alan Hepple (Cairns Angling), at the next peg upstream, clinched runner-up spot taking 8–5–0 as the main shoal refused to wander far from the wear top.
Others: Malcolm Lyver (Cairns Angling) 7–10–0; Neil Laing (Washington) 6–6–8.
Tremendous midweek pleasure catches raised competitors' hopes for Sunday's Dunelm Denis Fox Memorial open on the River Wear around Durham City.
Disappointingly, the expected dace and roach shoal failed to put in an appearance and gudgeon weights off adjoining pegs made the results look respectable.
Local ace Barry Lockey (Dunelm) drew the noted swim opposite the wall above Prebends Bridge and used the pole at five metres with maggot to whip out a winning 6–14–0.
Peter Shepherd (Durham) followed just behind locating a few small roach among the gudgeon shoal for 6–9–0 from Jimmy Messor (Dunelm) 6lb.
All the fancied pegs failed to deliver the goods during Middlesbrough AC's Ron Evans Shield on the middle Swale between Pickhill and Ainderby.
Bill Blyth (Newman Scott) led the way returning 18–10–0.
Staked above the shallows at Holme Top, feeder and bread down the nearside brought five chub, best 4lb 15oz, and victory.
Runner-up John Leyland (Bramley Ward) also located five chub.
This time off the Pickhill section as three fell to float fished bread and two to the bomb for 15–1–0 to finish well ahead of third placed Jeff Herbert landing a brace of chub for 6–2–0 from Ainderby.
Low, clear conditions marred Bradford's charity open on the usually prolific Cowthorpe reaches of the River Nidd.
Fishing the kennel section, Goole's John Rogers clinched a comfortable victory  recording 1411–0.
Trotting the far bank overhanging trees utilising stick float and caster three chub plus a specimen barbel of 7–15–0 obliged.
Arthur Hand (Bradford) alternated between the bomb and waggler tempting four chub on the caster for 10–6–0 downstream at the footbridge.
Best of the roach and dace weights came from above the weir as Middlesbrough Newman Scotts' skipper Dave Smiddy weighed in 9–3–8 to the waggler and maggot.
Others results: Thirsk Open, Salmon Hall Richard Smith 5–6–0, gudgeon, pole and maggot; Tim Ing 4–15–0; Barry Craddock 4–20.
Bradford City AA Open, River Ure, Langthorpe Eric Fothergill 12–10–0, four bream, feeder and caster; Tony Smith 11–150; Paul Bennett 9–4–0.
Tickets are now on sale for the Junior Sport Open on Hemlington Lake, Saturday April 4, 50 pegs.
Fishing time 9–1pm; top ten all receive prizes.
Tickets £1 from Middlesbrough junior match secretary Dusty King at Anglers' Choice; tel: Middlesbrough 850428.
Darlington Brown Trout AA are holding their annual presentation night on Friday April 3 at the Rolling Mills Club.
Fixtures: March 7 Star AC, River Swale, Salmon Hall.
Yarm AA Juniors Tony Porter Memorial Trophy, Yarm.
Angling Times Winter League Northern Semi-Final, River Trent, Swarkstone.
March 8 Black Ox Albert Mawson Memorial Trophy, Bedale Beck.
Wetherby Open, River Wharfe, 60 pegs; tel: Kevin Bell on 0937–581603.
Richmond AS End of Season Trophy, River Swale, Great Langton.
Locke Park Match 103pm.
York WL (6), Ouse below York.
Tadcaster APA Open, River Wharfe, Small Ings, 100 pegs; tel: Bob Barker on 0937832972; tickets cost £8.
Yarm AA March Open, 156 pegs, tidal Tees.
Borough Bridge AC, River Ure, Ellenthorpe.
Thornaby AA Jack Aston Open Trophy, Tees, Croft to Hurworth.
Chester-le-Street Open, River Wear, 60 pegs; tickets £7 all in from local tackle shops.
Stockton AA match, River Tees, Worsall.
ENGLAND are planning a tour of South Africa in 1994 as part of their long-term aim of becoming the best rugby side in the world.
Will Carling's squad expect to confirm their status as Europe's top team by beating Wales at Twickenham tomorrow for a second Grand Slam.
And England manager Geoff Cooke, whose job will be decided after this Five Nations championship ends, sees the South Africa trip as an important step in widening their dominance.
The planning is in its embryo stage as the Springboks, re-emerging on the world scene after eight years exile, juggle home and away trips.
They visit Twickenham on November 14 as part of a busy schedule that follows rugby reunification between the races.
If England's trip comes off it would follow 10 years after they played the last official Test against the Springboks at Johannesburg and would be the perfect dress-rehearsal if South Africa's strong bid to stage the 1995 World Cup succeeds.
Cooke said: ‘My motivation for wanting to stay on as manager is to see England as the top team in the world.
‘There is no reason why we should not be the best.
It is a realistic ambition but we must register major victories over Southern Hemsiphere sides.’
Meanwhile, England coach Dick Best pledged: ‘We will carry the ball in our hands as often as possible against Wales.
But it will be a very difficult game, because they are good at putting teams under pressure.’
Best inevitably nominated Robert Jones, the Welsh scrum half, as the man England need to control.
‘He has played international rugby during the lows and occasional highs for Wales and learned to survive.
We must make sure he does not thrive.’
Wales have not yet been regularly dominated by England in the way that France and Ireland have been recently.
Since Cooke took charge the teams have played four times with the score standing at 2–2.
DARLINGTON have developed an injury crisis to add to their mounting problems, writes Tim Wellock.
After losing one of their most promising players, full back David Glendenning, to Hartlepool Rovers, they have six players out through injury for tomorrow's 1.15 kick-off at North Durham.
Prop Jock Farrell, fly half David O'Kelly and centre Steve Ellis have rib injuries, centre Paul Charlton has concussion, flanker Steve Peck a groin strain, and prop Eric Troughton a neck injury.
After losing 83–6 to Blaydon and 42–3 to Horden in recent weeks, the injuries are not helping to get back on the rails in time for their final two league matches this month against Sunderland and Mowden Park.
Mark Eccles plays at full back, with Ian Dove and John Nicholson at centre, Paul Barkes in the back row, and Brian Baldwin continues his comeback at hooker.
The players are still in the dark about the sale of the ground, and have asked to be put in the picture before the end of the season.
Glendenning follows a long trail of Darlington players who have gone to Rovers, but he is unable to force his way into the first team.
Martin Saunders retains the full back position for the hastily arranged game at Middlesbrough, which kicks off at noon.
Boro were due to play at Kelso, but declined their hosts' request to play tonight.
The rearrangements came too late for fly half Mike Robson, who was unavailable to travel to Kelso and was selected in the seconds.
His place goes to Ewan Crouch, with Alan Louden at scrum half as Phil Hudson is unavailable for next week's league match at Birkenhead Park.
Rovers have left out Dave Passman against his old club, with Nick Hardy coming in at lock.
Bishop Auckland will kick off at 2.30 at home to Seaham and hand former Newton Aycliffe player Gary Hamilton his debut at scrum half as skipper Willie Bond is unavailable.
Mowden Park have flanker Ian Dunnabie back for the visit to Blyth (2.30).
John Whitehouse switches to No 8 in the absence of Greg Young.
MIDDLESBROUGH midfield player Willie Falconer could win a dramatic first-team recall for the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final second leg against Manchester United at Old Trafford next Wednesday night.
Manager Lennie Lawrence hinted the former Watford player could be on the bench after his third second team game against Huddersfield on Monday.
Falconer, who made an impressive start to his Ayresome Park career, has not figured in the first team since a knee injury in the Rumbelows Cup first round against Bournemouth.
Central defender Tony Mowbray believes his former team have a fighting chance at Old Trafford.
The £1m Celtic player was in the near full-house crowd for the first leg on Wednesday night.
Mowbray said: ‘I thought the lads battled really hard.
‘The way Jamie Pollock played against Bryan Robson summed up their performance.
Jamie never left Robson alone.
‘Very few gave Boro a chance at Sheffield Wednesday.
Yet they rose to the occasion.
I feel they have a real chance next week.
‘United's pitch is a bit of a paddy field, but I am sure it will be another great match.’
No player will look forward to the game more than Boro goalkeeper Stephen Pears, who defied his former team in the first leg and aims to shatter their Wembley hopes.
Statistics show that 30-year-old Pears has the best average of leading goalkeepers in the country.
He has conceded less than a goal a game in his 249 Football League appearances.
The 25,572 crowd at Ayresome Park on Wednesday night fell just short of capacity when Manchester returned around 400 tickets.
MIDDLESBROUGH lost 2–0 to a more experienced Derby County side at the Baseball Ground.
Derby had nine players with first-team experience, while seven of Boro's side will be eligible for the juniors next season.
Midfield player Willie Falconer continued his comeback with a 90-minute run-out.
Youth team goalkeeper Andrew Collett, who has played for Middlesbrough Boys and Cleveland Boys, has signed a professional contract.
Fixtures: Tomorrow Juniors away to Huddersfield.
Monday Reserves away to Huddersfield.
DARLINGTON won 3–2 at Bury with goals by John Borthwick, Drew Coverdale and Lee Tucker.
Chief scout Barrie Geldart said: ‘We are concentrating on bringing youngsters through the ranks.
‘Everyone likes to win but it is more important to produce first-team players.
‘Lee Ellison, Sean Gregan and Anthony Isaacs are still eligible to play for the juniors.’
Fixtures: Tomorrow Juniors away to Sheffield United.
Wednesday Reserves at home to Halifax.
NEWCASTLE'S survival in the Pontins League First Division is in their own hands, claims coach Derek Fazackerley.
Five of the last nine fixtures of the season are against sides embroiled in the relegation struggle, and Fazackerley believes United are running into form at just the right time.
United had won two successive games without conceding a goal before last night's difficult trip to Liverpool, and Fazackerley said: ‘We have a lot of games to play against teams near the bottom like us and our players are getting fit again after all the injury problems.
It will be tough, but we are capable of escaping.’
Second bottom United were five points from a survival spot at the start of this week, though they have played more games than any of the three clubs immediately above them.
Newcastle Juniors lost 1–0 at home to League leaders Leeds on Wedneday, but coach Colin Suggett said: ‘The lads played ever so well and were unfortunate to lose.’
Fixtures: Both the Reserves and Juniors travel to Bradford City this week the Reserves on Thursday, and the Juniors tomorrow.
SCARBOROUGH manager Ray McHale last night re-signed Ian Ironside from Middlesbrough to solve the club's goalkeeping crisis.
Ironside, who joined Boro for £40,000 in the close season, has agreed to return on a month's loan.
The Sheffield-born keeper, who made his League debut with Scarborough in 1988, goes straight into the side at Maidstone tomorrow.
McHale decided to go for Ironside after both Phil Hughes and Steve Hewitt suffered serious injuries.
Ironside, who is 28 on Sunday, has yet to make a senior appearance for the Ayresome Park club, and McHale said he had welcomed the chance of League action.
‘Ian still lives in the Scarborough area and naturally reckons first team action is better than playing in the reserves,’ said McHale.
‘Apparently, he's been playing very well recently and we know all about him.
He was a favourite with the fans at Scarborough and is looking forward to the eight matches over the month.’
Ironside played his last away game for Scarborough at Maidstone in May and comes into a side with just one win in eight games.
McHale hinted that he may make as many as four changes for the trip, but was not revealing anything last night.
Hewitt should discover today whether his wrist is broken.
YORK City manager John Ward could make changes for tomorrow's home game against high-flying Crewe Alexandra.
City will welcome a return to home territory after three successive away games, which have seen them pick up only one point from the draw at Carlisle on Tuesday.
Ward has been searching for a winger for some time and last night he was hopeful of clinching a signing on loan.
He has been watching a number of wingers in the last three months in a bid to add some firepower to his team, who have scored only 31 goals in 31 League games this season.
Ward will have a full squad to choose from apart from former Hartlepool defender Tony Barratt, who has a calf strain.
HARTLEPOOL will be on a revenge mission at Stockport County tonight.
Pool need to avenge their home defeat to check an alarming slide down the Third Division.
Manager Alan Murray cancelled the players' day off after the 4–0 home defeat by Bolton Wanderers.
Murray also arranged for the players to watch a video of the game on the coach on the way to Stockport.
Team selection has been deferred.
Sunderland full back Anthony Smith has returned to Roker Park after an extended loan.
Jason Peake, another loan signing, will return to Leicester City this month.
Hartlepool had an option to buy Peake, but the player feels the North-East is too far from his Midlands home.
Winning ways
NORTH-EAST pupils have won half the scholarships awarded by the public school, Giggleswick, for pupils starting in September.
They are: John Swindells of Ripon Cathedral Choir School, Lindsay Wood of Polam Hall and Nicholas Bowater of Durham Chorister School (Music); Ivan Weightman of Durham Chorister School (art); Charlotte Sanderson of Ripon Cathedral Choir School (general distinction); Charles Ford of Hurworth House and Charlotte McKillop-Mash of St Martin's School, Nawton (Continuation).
Scholarships to Giggleswick's prep school Catteral Hall go to Theo Brittan of Glusburn primary school, Adam Barr of Kirkby Stephen primary, Kathryn Goodhew of Settle primary and Sandy Dalglish of All Saint's Primary, Thirsk.
Accent on learning
SIXTH formers are perfecting their accents as they set off for work in the French town of Dunkirk.
A dozen A-level French students from Marton Sixth Form College in Middlesbrough will spend a week working in Dunkirk's town hall, banks and solicitors offices.
It is their first taste of European work experience and the college hopes more students will have the chance of work in France, Holland and Spain next year.
MIDDLESBROUGH football fans unable to get to Wednesday's Rumbelows Cup semi-final second leg tie against Manchester United at Old Trafford will be able to see it after all.
Granada Television confirmed last night  confirmed they will be covering the match on Wednesday for Tyne Tees Television.
Negotiations by Tyne Tees to broadcast highlights of the first leg of the tie on Wednesday night broke down, leaving thousands of fans disappointed.
The breakdown occurred after talks with the Football League, which handles contracts between clubs and television companies, stepped in.
Lee Walker, of the Football League, said the deal which Tyne Tees was trying to make with Middlesbrough FC did not meet contractual obligations.
However, Roger Tames, sports editor for Tyne Tees, said the matter had been resolved amicably between Tyne Tees and the club.
He said problems arose for covering last Wednesday's match because of the kick-off time of 8pm and the Spurs v Feyenoord European match which ITV had networked.
‘It was unfortunate in this circumstances that we could not cover the match but there is no dispute between us and the club,’ said Mr Tames.
Mr Walker said: ‘Tyne Tees wanted a different starting time in order to show highlights during or after the European game but by that time Boro had made arrangements for policing and so on and they refused the request.
‘Tyne Tees then made a request to transmit the match in the Tyne Tees area but we have strict rules about live transmissions in our contract with ITV and these could not be met.’
A NEW ski village in the NorthEast opens its main run today.
But would-be ski instructors at the Eston Hills ski village, near Middlesbrough, are not so thrilled.
They say they are being presented with a £200 bill for training.
Managing director Michael Jackson says coaching charges are less than elsewhere.
‘It will provide them with an excellent standard,’ he said.
THE Williams family are rather special…and next week they could become national celebrities.
They are one of three finalists in the search for the national family of the year.
On Monday they take part in a gala lunch at London's Inn on the Park, where the award will be presented by the Princess of Wales.
Andrew and Helen Williams and their boys Matthew, 12, Thomas, 11, Richard, nine, Jonathan, seven, and James, 18 months of Grey Towers, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough, were nominated by family friend Michael Harvey.
He said: ‘Generosity, happiness and warmth abound in their presence — I so appreciate their friendship, especially when my wife was ill with leukaemia.’
In February Helen, 36, a Teesside Hospice physiotherapist, donated bone marrow to a patient in America.
Nearly 500 families were nominated for the award and the Williams were selected from a shortlist of 12.
Andrew, 38, a buyer for a sports equipment company, said they were very surprised when they learned they had been entered.
Helen said: ‘There must be thousands of families just like ours.’
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Denis McLoughlin, David Lee, Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
SCARBOROUGH slumped to their third successive defeat against Maidstone to leave their season virtually in ruins.
Manager Ray McHale has now admitted that the club has no chance of reaching the play-offs.
However, if they keep up their current form they will finish in the bottom eight.
McHale issued a rallying call to his beleaguered troops: ‘We still want credibility.
We've got to keep working hard and finish as high up the table as possible.
‘That means getting a result at Wrexham tomorrow night.
It's very disappointing the way things have gone recently.
‘The conditions were difficult and Maidstone were that bit cuter in front of goal.
We keep getting beaten by the odd goal and it's disappointing not to get anything from these matches,’ he said.
It was a poor match for the 1,019 crowd to endure and with both sides using the big boot upfield on the sloping pitch, it wasn't a game for the purists.
Maidstone had the best of the early exchanges but the Seasiders were under little real threat and seemed to be on course for at least a draw.
Tommy Mooney should have done better just before half time after going through but he rushed his shot and failed to even hit the target.
The game came alive just 24 seconds after the break when Scarborough took the lead through a well-worked goal.
Mooney sent Darren Foreman away down the right and his cross was perfectly converted by substitute Mark Jules in the centre.
The Seasiders looked to be on their way but as so many times this season their poor defensive marking was exposed from a set piece.
Gary Stebbing flighted a free kick into the box which was flicked-on by Jason Lillis and an equally unmarked Mark Smalley headed in the equaliser.
Maidstone won it three minutes later when on-loan Ian Ironside from Middlesbrough pushed a strong Stebbing shot into the air and Rob Painter nodded home the loose ball.
Scarborough were lucky not to lose 4–1 with Bradley Sandeman and Painter both missing sitters late on.
So what now for Scarborough?
As McHale said, they must try to climb back up the table but an end-of-season clear out could be a good idea.
LENNIE Lawrence forecasts a four-horse race for the two automatic promotion places in the Second Division.
Blackburn are no longer running away with the championship.
And Middlesbrough boss Lawrence said: ‘Blackburn are beg inning to rock a bit.
They have slipped up since I forecast they would leave only one spot.
‘It was a little pyschology on my part, but I am not that clever.
I'm amazed really how they slipped up in recent matches.
‘Blackburn, Ipswich, Cambridge and ourselves are contenders for automatic promotion.
‘April will be vital.
We could play eight to ten games next month.’
A MAJOR talking point after the Second Division promotion clash was why Sheffield referee John Key turned down a goal that would have shattered Middlesbrough's unbeaten home League record.
Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence was at a loss to explain the official's decision.
Lawrence admitted: ‘I haven't a clue.
It could not have been for offside.
Yet I did not see a foul.
All I know is that it was our biggest stroke of luck this season.’
Boro full-back Jimmy Phillips said: ‘No-one fouled me.
I was as surprised as anyone when the referee turned down the goal.
I was also as relieved as anyone.’
Cambridge players were angry but could not express their views because manager John Beck has banned them from talking to the Press.
Beck explained: ‘We have taken adverse publicity over the way we play.
Some of my players have been a bit naive over what they have said.’
Key was surprised when I asked him to clear up the controversy.
‘What controversy?’ he asked.
‘I cannot understand why there was any controversy.
There was a foul on the Middlesbrough full-back.
He was caught from behind.
‘I had blown my whistle a long time before the ball was in the net.
There were no Cambridge protests, even before the free-kick was taken.
‘In my mind, I had no doubt about an offence.’
Middlesbrough were fortunate to survive on this occasion.
Yet there can be no sympathy for Cambridge missing out on their ninth away win of the season.
Cambridge have more critics than Wimbledon's old Crazy Gang.
Those behind the Premier League shudder at the prospect of them heading for the big time.
Beck's boys are competitive and effective with their up-and-under style of play.
They are also frustrating with timewasting tactics and an offside trap that caught Boro out 13 times.
Beck has got the best out of his limited resources and no-one can knock his results.
But I question whether North-East fans would accept Cambridge's style of play.
Entertainment value was limited at Ayresome Park on Saturday.
Cambridge were difficult to play against and Middlesbrough's style suffered as the game wore on.
The referee added seven minutes of injury time in a stop-start first half.
Well-organised Cambridge tried to kill the game and Boro were naive when caught out so often by the offside trap.
Dion Dublin, who has been linked with a number of top clubs, put Cambridge ahead after 53 minutes with his 17th goal of the season.
Boro striker Paul Wilkinson hit back with his 19th goal after Phillips proved the value of getting behind the Cambridge defence.
Nineteen goals at this stage of the season, especially with a new club, is an impressive record.
Surprisingly, it was the first League goal by the Cup king since his Boxing Day matchwinner against Newcastle United.
Middlesbrough full back Gary Parkinson limped off in the final minute with an ankle injury.
He will be fit for the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final second leg at Manchester United on Wednesday night.
THE bulk of England's Grand Slam heroes are reluctant to rush into retirement in the aftermath of their latest success.
Only wingers Rory Underwood and Simon Halliday went so far as to deliver confirmation of their departures from the international scene after the 24–0 win against Wales at Twickenham on Saturday.
Full back Jonathan Webb and lock Wade Dooley both suggested they might be tempted to delay their farewells for the Twickenham visit of South Africa on November 7 one last chance to prove the side's pedigree against Southern Hemisphere opponents.
Flankers Mick Skinner and Peter Winterbottom have also left the door ajar, declining as yet to state their unavailability for international selection next season.
Skinner, 31, who began his career with Blaydon, has decided to leave Harlequins in May but intends to play a season for Blackheath before hanging up his boots.
Webb, 28, who played for Northern until his medical studies took him to the west country, said: ‘You're a long time retired.
I'm not going to rush into a decision.’
Geoff Cooke, whose continuing position as team manager is expected to be confirmed today, said he hoped there would be ‘another couple of Frank Sinatratype comebacks.’
He added, however: ‘If players decide not to make themselves available we'll have to accept it.
I don't think it's of great benefit to English rugby to go around persuading people to stay on if it's against their wishes, and possibly against their better judgement.
‘We've had a long, non-stop period of internationals and I think we've got to let time take its course now.
When September comes round and they get the smell of embrocation in their nostrils again, who knows what they'll decide?’
Underwood, born in Middlesbrough and educated at Barnard Castle School, has already made his decision.
He'll be playing club rugby for Leicester next season, but Saturday's match was his 53rd and final international.
His biggest regret, he said, was not signing off with a 34th try.
‘I'm just sad to be leaving such a great side,’ he said.
‘I'll never forget the reception the crowd gave us at the end.’
QUE Sera, Sera, whatever will be will be, we're going to Wembley…
It might not be the most original football song but, given the dearth of lyrical ability on today's terraces, it was reassuring to h ear Portsmouth's fans singing at least something on Saturday.
These dissonant days the best a player can hope for as an inspirational backdrop to his talent is an off-pitch dirge.
At Middlesbrough the high spot is a rarely more than an ‘eee aye oh, eee aye oh, eee aye oh’ accompanied by much bobbing and swaying of arms.
At Roker Park all you get is an incessant ‘Red and white army.’
But it was not always thus.
The terraces used to sparkle with wit; songs were seasonal, directed at individuals and always inspirational.
St James's Park has always had Blaydon Races as its anthem but in the Sixties and Seventies there were many others.
When Newcastle won the Fairs Cup there was a song that began ‘Some call us Newcastle United, most call us the kings of the land, and here's to Bobby Moncur, the Fairs Cup in his hand…
’ More often than not, the wags would plunder the current pop songs.
There was a harmony to the tune of the Small Face's song Sha La La La Lee which began ‘Shalalala-MacNamee.’
The reply would be something like: ‘Who the hell is MacNamee?’ and then the roar: ‘The greatest centre half in history.’
Mighty Quinn, made famous by Manfred Mann, was changed to Mighty Wyn as a tribute to Newcastle's leaping centre forward, a Kinks' song was amended to ‘What are we living for, to see Sunderland in Division Four’ and who can forget ‘Half-a-sixpence is better than, Arthur Horsefield?’
EACH Christmas the Leazes End songsters would add seasonal flavour with ‘Noel, Noel, Noel, Noel, Davies is king of Newcastle.’
And when it got particularly boring they would amuse themselves with a 15-minute rendition of ‘Frank Clark knows my father’ substituting the full back for the equally famous Lloyd George.
Nobody ever knew why, but it whiled away many a long afternoon.
Some songs were adopted by other clubs —‘Aye, aye, Aye, McFaul is better than Yashin, Suddick is better than Eusebio and (opposing team) are in for a thrashing’ springs to mind.
Others were pure spontaneity.
Elsewhere, and for no good reason, Liverpool's Kop invented: ‘We all agree, Tiswas is better than Swapshop’ and, on a more highbrow note, Stoke City fans sang: ‘Land of Smoke and glory; Home of Stoke City; Higher, higher, higher; On to victory…
’ Nowadays Que Sera Sera is a rare treat.
And even that will disappear once all-seater stadiums have further numbed the supporters' creative outlets.
MIDDLESBROUGH hope to close the gap on third-placed Cambridge United at Ayresome Park.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘It will be a gigantic step forward if we win.
Six points against Swindon and Cambridge would help to erase the disappointment of the FA Cup defeat by Portsmouth.
‘Against Cambridge, it will be important not to be drawn into their direct style of play.
We must stick to our own style.
‘Cambridge have a lot of critics.
But they have made the best use of their resources.
‘We must compete and cope with their style, because there's no point in moaning later.’
Lawrence usually rules out players who do not train on the day before a game.
Yet Robbie Mustoe and John Hendrie will figure in the squad, along with Mark Proctor, who has a knee injury.
Lawrence was happy with the performance of his back four against Manchester United.
As a result, on-loan Jon Gittens will have to be content with a substitute's role.
A final team choice has been deferred but Andy Peake will return in midfield.
Lawrence added: ‘Peake is not a spectacular player.
But I know from our Charlton Athletic days exactly what he can do.
‘Peake plays the same way before a 5,000 crowd or a 50,000 crowd.
The back four benefit with Peake just in front of them.’
Team from: Pears, Parkinson, Phillips, Kernaghan, Mohan, Peake, Mustoe, Slaven, Pollock, Wilkinson, Hendrie, Ripley, Proctor, Gittens, Falconer.
Cambridge midfielder Colin Bailie has recovered from injury and returns to the side.
United had only one fit midfield man, Chris Leadbitter, after the suspension of Tony Dennis but Bailie out for the last five games proved his fitness in the reserves' 4–1 victory over Aldershot in midweek.
Cambridge coach Graham Scarff said: ‘Middlesbrough bombard people at Ayresome Park.
I've seen them three times this season so I know how tough it's going to be.’
Team from: Sheffield; Vaughan, Fensome, Daish, Chapple, Kimble, Rowett, Leadbitter, Bailie, Heaney, Dublin, Taylor, Heathcote, Clayton.
If Middlesbrough and Manchester United finish level on aggregate in the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final next Wednesday night, a second replay will be at Hillsborough, Sheffield, on Wednesday, March 18.
THE grand slam ties and jumpers were already packed and bound for Twickenham last night.
England expects nothing less than the first back-to-back grand slam since 1924 and there is little evidence to suggest it might not be duly delivered in south west London this afternoon.
Wales, for all their burning pride and their improved form, are unlikely to prevent Will Carling leading his side to a glorious achievement which eluded the great Welsh teams of the 1970s.
Without Emyr Lewis, who withdrew because of illness yesterday, Wales have precious little in their pack to trouble England.
Even with Robert Jones at his scheming scrum-half best, the would-be party-poopers should be powerless to stem the white tide.
Upholding the honour of those Welsh warriors from the Seventies will provide much motivation for the underdogs, as much as the natural Celtic instinct to seek vengeance against the old oppressor.
There are those who already claim Carling's white labels are superior in quality to the vintage Welsh brew.
But this England side, for all it has achieved, has yet to apply the masterful finishing flourish on the biggest of big occasions.
There have been many peaks along the way: the beating of Australia which heralded the Cooke and Carling era, the wins at Murrayfield and Parc de Princes and, perhaps most of all, the six tries scored against Ireland at Twickenham last month.
But there was the failure at the Arms Park in 1989, the slip in the 1990 grand slam decider at Murrayfield and defeat against Australia in the World Cup final last November.
Even when last year's grand slam was clinched, the French won the try count three-one at Twickenham.
This afternoon provides the chance for the side Geoff Cooke has assembled to put the record straight with one last hurrah before retirement claims Winterbottom, Underwood, Dooley and Halliday for certain and possibly Webb too.
Should they succeed, the record will require considerable straightening the record book, that is.
No side has won successive grand slams since Wavell Wakefield's England of 1924, though it is worth recalling that what has become known as the Irish Problem deprived Wales in Barry John's farewell year, 1972; they won handsomely against England, France and Scotland but like the Scots dared not venture to Dublin at the height of The Troubles.
All-time greatness would doubtless be bestowed upon Carling, already a veteran captain at 26.
As a graduate in psychology from Durham University and a man who played his first game as a senior for Consett, the North-East could claim some part in his making.
The same would be said of two men with individual sights on the record book.
Jonathan Webb, the Bath full back, learned his rugby at Newcastle's Royal Grammar School, and his immense contribution to England's championship cause should be confirmed with the six points he needs to surpass Simon Hodgkinson's Five Nations record (60 last season) and the seven he requires to beat Dusty Hare's alltime England points record (240).
Rory Underwood, born in Middlesbrough and educated at Barnard Castle, already holds the national try-scoring record (35) and the record for England caps (54).
Another try this afternoon could make him only the second Englishman to score in all four internationals in a season; COULD, because Dewi Morris, whose mobile scrum half play has done much to transform England this season season is also on course to match the feat Carston Catcheside of Percy Park achieved in Wakefield's 1924 side.
There is also a collective points target.
England, with 94, start eight short of the championship record set by Mervyn Davies' Welsh team in 1976.
The superior merits of Mervyn's men JPR, Gareth Edwards and all will be debated long and hard after the final whistle this afternoon, and rightly so.
But the record book lies beyond the bounds of argument.
Rewriting it today would be a fitting finale for the finest of England sides.
Inn Off The Park, Middlesbrough
MIDDLESBROUGH Jazz Society was upset when Harry Edison's European tour was cancelled because of health problems.
In his place, and at a later date, they quickly arranged for Roy Williams and John Barnes to extend their Northern tour in the comfort of the Inn Off The Park.
From the opening numbers, Stan Barker's BOB Blues and a roaring version of Broadway, the two leaders were at the top of their form.
Their careers together go back to the 1960s with Alex Welsh with a later spell with with Humphrey Lyttelton and they obviously relished the chance to play together again.
They've also completed a 15 day tour of the North with the Stan Barker Trio and had honed up playing together.
For this one date they were supported by the Billy Harper Trio with Peter Stuart and Adrian Tilbrook on bass and drums and they fitted in as if they'd all been on tour together.
Roy's trombone features included the little known Nobody Else But Me and I've Grown Accustomed To Her Face, and John's solo spots on baritone sax were Stardust and Duke's Ive Got It Bad and That Ain't Good.
Together they revived their party piece from the Sixties, Open Country, which like everything they played, was superb.
These two master musicians clearly relished this brief reunion and with outstanding support from our local trio, they gave an object lesson in swinging jazz.
Let's hope they'll be back again before long.
CHAMBERS Dictionary defines a moped as a motor assisted pedal cycle; Geoff Thomas and his friends are racing to change its sit up and beg image.
Once he had the capacity for international road race events.
Now Thomas and scores of other North-East bikers have imposed a 50cc speed limit.
But moped racing, they insist, is scooting towards the little big time.
‘It got to the stage where it was my marriage or my road racing,’ admits Thomas, a Guisborough motor bike dealer.
‘My mortgage money was going on tyres, and I'm not kidding.
‘With moped racing you can pick up a 50cc for about £20, almost literally throw a bucket of paint over it and you're away.’
Already there's a British championship with three six hour team races, a Le Mans type start and a sidecar class too.
Some competitors are nearly 60.
But the event at Langbaurgh motor sports park near Redcar has had to be switched to Lincolnshire because of worries over excessive noise on a Sunday.
‘They don't seem to us to be acting very sensibly,’ says Thomas, quietly.
Whatever the noise, though, the average speed is little more than 40mph.
‘I don't find it frustrating at all.
You can touch 70 on the straight, the adrenalin's still going and there are plenty of bones you can break at that speed.
‘This way you don't have to worry about ACUs, licences and doctors’ certificates.
It's tongue in cheek, we don't take ourselves too seriously yet.’
We met at a meeting of the North Yorkshire Road Racing Support Group (in Northallerton Rugby Club) where the moped messengers were spreading the word that life begins at 50.
Russ Armstrong, a Middlesbrough motorcycle dealer, has also changed gear after 18 years of the road racing power game.
It got too expensive, he says.
‘There are people who say they wouldn't be seen dead on of these things, but after one ride they're queuing up.
‘Some of the lads just chuck the bike in the corner from one meeting to the next, others treat them like it was a grand prix.
‘It's cheap, good fun, very competitive and you don't necessarily even need leathers.
You could go moped racing in a Barbour suit.’
He admits, though, that the sport may have to consider a more streamlined name as it becomes more popular.
The quicker, you might say, the Lambretta.
LADY in black Jackie Miller could hardly be called a mo-pedestrian either.
At a private 50cc speedway event at Cleveland Park, Middlesbrough, she beat the men in every race she started.
‘It's the kind of sport where you don't need lots of cash to do well,’ she says.
‘Money can't really make a difference.’
But auburn-haired Jackie, 22, is a girl with a lotta throttle her gleaming pride is an 1100cc, 150mph road bike nicknamed The Beast and bored out to 1168cc.
Third party insurance alone is £1168 a year.
‘Even as a little kid I used to gaze in motorcycle shop windows and wish I had something like this,’ says hell for leather Jackie, from Marske near Redcar.
Eventually she hopes to be a winning road racer too.
For the moment she's just sitting pretty.
REPUBLIC of Ireland B international full back Curtis Fleming has been put on stand-by for Middlesbrough's Rumbelows League Cup semi-final second leg at Manchester United tomorrow night.
The 23-year-old Fleming will be thrown into the Old Trafford cauldron if Gary Parkinson fails a fitness test.
Fleming was born in Manchester but moved to Dublin as a baby.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said last night: ‘Parkinson did not train today because of his ankle injury.
He has no more than a 5050 chance.’
Midfield player Robbie Mustoe also missed training but will return after being rested against Cambtidge United.
Lawrence is confident Middlesbrough could shock United after a goalless draw at Ayresome Park.
‘United are one of the best counter-attacking sides in the country.
Yet we were not exposed last week,’ he said.
‘We will face more  sustained attacks at Old Trafford and this will give us a chance of hitting United on the break.
‘Manchester have struggled on their heavy pitch.
I don't think it suits their style of play.
‘A second replay has been arranged for Hillsborough.
We could have tossed a coin for Ayresome Park or Old Trafford if both clubs had agreed.
‘United manager Alex Ferguson was not keen on the idea.
Maybe he did not want a second game on their pitch.’
Midfielder Willie Falconer could figure in a Boro first-team squad for the first time since September.
Falconer would welcome a return to Old Trafford.
He played there for Scotland in a youth international against England.
United's Welsh international Mark Hughes starts a two-match suspension.
Ryan Giggs could move to centre forward
CONGRATULATIONS go to Peter Hart, of Caithness Road, Teesville, Middlesbrough.
He has won a day for himself and a companion at Doncaster Races on March 19 the opening meeting of the Flat by providing the first correct entry opened in our recent racing competition.
He will get two Club Badges, free racecards, free return rail travel, buffet lunch and the use of a private entertaining room during the afternoon.
The correct answers were: British Rail's racing promotion is Back a winner by train; The Classic race run at Doncaster is the Coalite St Leger.
WEST Hartlepool will be back at full strength for Saturday's National Division Two promotion showdown at home to injury-hit Newcastle Gosforth.
While West welcome back centre Craig Lee, winger Andy Mitchell and flankers Alan Brown and Paul Pook, Gosforth's latest doubt surrounds Steve Bainbridge.
The former British Lions lock has a leg infection after being stung by a jelly fish while on holiday.
Lee missed West's win at Boroughmuir on Saturday because he was playing for the North under-21s on Sunday, and he scored the injury time try which completed the North's clean sweep in the Divisional Championship.
MIDDLESBROUGH will have winger Mike Latus at scrum half for Saturday's North Division One match at Birkenhead Park as Phil Hudson, Alan Louden and Dave Kenyon are all unavailable.
Latus has some experience in the No 9 shirt, including the match at Stockton in December, when he made the switch after Kenyon went off with a dislocated shoulder.
Full back Ian Stallard, fly half Mike Robson and lock Steve Howe all return, with Ross Webber switching to the wing and Ewan Crouch to centre.
THE North are hoping to stage their game against South Africa on November 10 at Elland Road, Leeds.
A crowd of over 20,000 is expected for the third game of the Springboks' four-match visit to England and North officials have begun negotiations with Leeds City Council to use Leeds United's ground.
WITTON-LE-WEAR wonder Pond Tornado has been backed to win nearly £100,000 in the Greyhound Derby.
Harry Williams' home-bred flyer has attracted tremendous ante-post support at odds of 100–1 and now the bookmakers have dramatically cut the price to 50–1, with a few layers offering a more generous 66–1.
Greyhound betting specialist Tony Morris has laid Pond Tornado to lose £60,000, while Corals would have to pay out £25,000 if the July 1990 white and brindle dog wins the Daily Mirror/Sporting Life-sponsored classic in June.
The 14–1 ante-post favourite is Geoff De Mulder's Certain Way, the Wembley 490 metres record holder.
Significantly, Pond Tornado trialled in a faster time than Certain Way at Belle Vue last week, with a length faster section time.
Both are competing in the Manchester track's Gorton Cup, and if Pond Tornado repeats its earlier form, his Derby odds could come tumbling down.
SUNDERLAND are staging three £100 opens tonight, including a trial stakes for the forthcoming £2,000-to-the-winner Milligans Bakery Challenge Trphy, which starts a week tonight.
Lining up tonight in the 450 metres event are the highly-rated Belle Vue racer No Joe Soap, Powderhall's Rhincrew Legend, Dawn Milligan's Smashiton, Sheffield-based Ragus and Gordon Rooks' Movealong Sharp, which won three on the trot at the East Boldon circuit before losing on the run-in last week.
There are two puppy opens.
Division One sees a clash between Dave Mullins' speedy railer Kyle Alex, which won a P1 grade race at Sunderland last Friday, and Harry Williamstrained Mailcom Soda.
The Division Two race promises an interesting clash between track rivals Typical Torment, trained by Eddie McDermott, and Dawn Milligan's Lowland Bernard.
The meeting concludes with an A1 race in which the leading candidates appear to be Jan Little's Wath Snowy and Williams' highly-rated youngster Arfur Daley.
Sunderland's BAGS meeting tomorrow starts at 1.49, and entry will be free.
The most attractive race on the card is a 631 metres event which sees McDermott's improving young stayer Too Fast, running off scratch, giving 15 metres start to top marker Baron Again and 11 metres to Lee Anns Tramp.
BROUGH PARK'S top grader, Burnhope Jimmy, won a 640-metres open for trainer Yvonne Bell at Middlesbrough on Monday night.
CLEVELAND PARK saw two new track records established in the space of three days.
On Saturday, Dave Ward's Sunrays Cannon clocked 25.38 for the recently introduced 400 metres trip, while in Monday's open races, Mona Wainright's Sheffield-based Milebush Groovy became the first greyhound to win over the new 774 metres distance in 51.02 secs.
Middlesbrough race tomorrow night for the final week before reverting back to their usual Wednesday evening slot.
Kitson in £1.3m move FOOTBALL: Derby County yesterday smashed their transfer record when they signed Easington-born striker Paul Kitson in a £1.3 million deal from promotion rivals Leicester.
Derby paid £800,000 for the England under-21 international with fellow strikers Phil Gee and Ian Ormondroyd moving to Filbert Street as they make up the rest of the deal.
Kitson's transfer beats the £1 million paid by manager Arthur Cox for both Dean Saunders four years ago and former Sunderland striker Marco Gabbiadini earlier this year.
Top-five Wattana
SNOOKER: ‘Thai-Phoon’
James Wattana has jumped to no 5 in the provisional rankings for next season following his victory in the Strachan Professional Championship last Friday.
He began the season at no 20.
Wilkinson best
TENNIS: Chris Wilkinson has leapt 27 places to a career-best world ranking of 168 following a successful four weeks on the LTA Satellite Circuit.
Title incentive
BOXING: Colin McMillan, the British and Commonwealth featherweight champion, is set for a world title chance if he beats American Steve Thibodeaux at Dagenham on March 25.
Promoter Frank Warren said yesterday he was hopeful of bringing WBO champion Maurizio Stecca of Italy to London sometime in May.
Same again
RUGBY UNION: French selectors have made no changes to their squad for the final game of the International Championship against Ireland in Paris on March 21.
Charity night
FOOTBALL: Teesside Supporters' Association are holding a charity night at the Catholic Club, Billingham, tomorrow.
Proceeds will go to Action and Research for Multiple Sclerosis.
Hamilton benefit
FOOTBALL: Middlesbrough midfielder Gary Hamilton is to have a testimonial match in recognition of ten years' service.
Hamilton, 26, forced to retire with a knee injury, will have a match next season after Tony Mowbray's benefit against Celtic.
Darley death
CRICKET: Joseph (Joss) Darley, secretary of York and District Saturday Cricket League for 29 years until retiring in 1980, has died in a nursing home near York aged 85.
UNTIL ten days ago we knew nothing of the Hartlepool Vinegar Incident, and even then we knew nothing much.
The suspense story of the Napoleonic Monkey was familiar, of course.
In January we'd also dug up the Hartlepudlian legend of the Mass Frying Pan Burial.
(The Armada threat having passed, Parliament sent a message to stop firing from the Beacon.
The schoolmaster, clever clogs, read it as stop frying bacon and the Mayor dutifully decreed the interment.)
But the Vinegar Incident was hitherto unheard of.
What could so have soured the Hartlepool atmosphere?
It flirted three teasing words, no more in a book review in one of the posh papers and before it could be embraced, was gone.
The book is Fish and Chips and the British Working Class —: page 109, with thanks to the Leicester University Press fax machine, is more substantial.
The Incident happened in the 1930s when a Hartlepool couple were jailed for attacking a shop owner who'd remonstrated with them for drinking out of the vinegar bottle.
Whether it was because he had other fish to fry is unrecorded, but Hartlepool's chippies had made the law courts before.
In 1894 James Macgregor, a West Hartlepool JP, was fined five shillings for selling fish and chips at 3am on Christmas Day.
With the condiments of the season, presumably.
John Walton's scholarly book records many other hardships of the fry by night trade.
In 1935 a Mr Cole of Middlesbrough complained to the Sea Fish Commission that they were still having to sell at the pre-war prices of a halfpenny fish and a ha'porth of chips.
In 1905 a fish shop in Stockton could be bought for £20.
‘Some of the dirty looking establishments,’ observed the Fish Trades Gazette, ‘would be dear at that.’
Bishop Auckland friers grumbled in 1936 that unskilled rivals were coming off the dole to set up shop.
Fish and chip men again plead poverty today.
Forget the vinegar bottle, today there are pinches of salt.
— Leicester University Press, £35.
The Hartlepool Vinegar Incident, curiously enough, goes unrecorded in the other great masterwork of fish and chip literature.
‘Frying Tonight’ did get the sizzling news from the 1971 frying trades exhibition in Doncaster, however.
‘The competition to find Miss Hot Chips in Hot Pants attracted 42 entrants, including one female impersonator called Barry.’
The book also records the 1972 National Federation of Fish Friers conference at the Park Hotel, Tynemouth, where the president's banquet and ball cost £2.50 and delegates were entrailed in a debate about what to do with chicken giblets.
‘Despite protests on behalf of the ladies,’ it adds, ‘a resolution was carried that in future conference should not adjourn to play bowls.’
And there's a 1970 quote from that seminal magazine Honey: ‘Fish and chips are Trendy, Where It's At, Now — like Frank Zappa, Princess Anne, Dougal and Zebedee.’
Frying Tonight was written 20 years ago by Gerald Priestland, known better as a BBC foreign correspondent, and draws extensively on trade Press columnists like ‘Anchovy Sauce,’‘Dorsal Fin’ and the wonderfully named Molly Codling.
There's tell of tripe dressers, cruelty to eels and even fish and chip limericks like A widow who fried at Dunbar Had a bust much admired, near and far When she asked ‘Shall I wrap ‘em?’
They said ‘Don't let it happen, ‘Leave 'em all hanging out as they are.’
When the book was published Britain had around 15,000 fish and chip shops, 6,000 of them NFFF members.
Now there are 9,000 shops, barely a quarter in the Federation.
They use 600,000 tons of potatoes each year a tenth of the total crop and 59,000 tons of white fish.
NFFF general secretary Arthur Parrington argues that for fish shops to prosper they must emulate the brash and breezy burger bars.
‘The challenge isn't selling something different.
I'm sure most people in those places would rather be eating fish and chips.
It's just that most fish shops don't do bright boxes and balloons.’
THE 1992 NFFF conference is at the Viking Hotel, York, from May 46.
The president's banquet and ball is £22.50, chicken giblets has so far not appeared on the agenda, and the bowls is on Tuesday afternoon.
THE current issue of the Fish Friers Review reveals how the fat has hit the fire, or the fan, or whatever.
Among the main worries is that fish price increases will put the country's favourite meal out of popular reach.
‘It is easy to see the reasons for pessimism,’ says an editorial.
There's an article on the best chip potato (the Piper calls that particular tune), a piece on pizza parlour v burger bar (headlined ‘War and Pizza’) and a For Sale advertisement for a cafe/take away in Darlington ‘takes £5,000 p.w.
on 54pc gross profit.’
Sadly, and we have searched most diligently, the Molly Codling column is no more.
The finalists are:
Dowdale School, Dalton-in-Furness, Cumbria; Heworth Grange Comprehensive, Gateshead; Macmillan College, Middlesbrough; St Thomas More High School, North Shields; West Redcar School, Redcar.
The ideas which the children are presenting include promoting tourism in their local areas.
Other schools are looking at business and industry in their home towns.
The competition has been organised by Northern Electric.
Spokesman Neil Midgeley said quality improvement measures have boosted his company's performance enormously.
Club plays the generation game
THE former Club Havana once the centrepoint of Teesside's youth dance scene is set to attract an older clientele.
Frederick Frank Veazey has bought the club and aims to target older people when the Middlesbrough premises re-opens as The New Belmont Club.
Mr Veazey previously ran the Belmont Club, Southfield Road, Middlesbrough, which he has sold to Teesside Polytechnic.
An application for a public entertainment licence for the new venture goes before Middlesbrough Council's licensing sub-committee tomorrow.
Manchester United 2 Middlesbrough 1 (after extra time)
A GOAL in the second period of extra time by Ryan Giggs brought Middlesbrough's hopes of Rumbelows Cup glory to an agonising end at Old Trafford last night.
Battling Boro came back from a 1–0 half-time deficit to take the semi-final into extra time through a fine goal by Bernie Slaven.
After drawing the home leg 0–0 Boro were denied victory by their former central defender Gary Pallister, who cleared a John Hendrie shot off the line with ten minutes to go.
Boro were also out of luck when Danish international goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel denied substitute Wille Falconer with a brilliant save in the first period of extra time.
Falconer's header from a Hendrie cross was going towards the top corner until Schmeichel flung himself across goal.
The middle of United's notorious pitch was a swamp long before kick-off, posing the threat of stamina-sapping conditions.
Boro recalled full back Curtis Fleming for the injured Gary Parkinson and Falconer was in the squad for the first time since suffering a knee injury in the Rumbelows Cup first round against Bournemouth in September.
United recalled Steve Bruce in defence and Lee Sharpe in attack, while the suspended Mark Hughes was in the Press Box as a radio commentator.
Boro began with a 4–5–1 formation which has been successful in recent away games.
Paul Wilkinson operated as a lone striker, with Slaven in a midfield role.
Backed by a vociferous 9,500 following, Boro showed they were not overawed.
Wilkinson headed over after two minutes and at the other end Stephen Pears punched out a Neil Webb free-kick for Denis Irwin to volley wide.
Despite the conditions, play was fast and furious in the opening stages.
United began to step up their pressure and took the lead after 30 minutes when Sharpe celebrated his recall in fine style.
Bryan Robson began a move which saw Webb run from the halfway line down the right.
Webb took the ball in his stride, cut inside, and Sharpe finished off with a low angled shot which gave Pears no chance.
Boro were being pushed back but Stuart Ripley raised hopes with a brilliant run down the middle in which he beat three players.
Jamie Pollock crashed a shot wide with Slaven screaming in the middle for a pass.
United had shown far more threat in attack and deserved their interval lead, but Boro equalised with the second half only five minutes old.
Ripley beat Paul Parker on the left, cut inside and hit a low cross to the near post.
Slaven pounced for his 14th goal of the season, his first since his knee operation, in front of Boro's jubilant fans.
When the injured Ripley left the field Falconer took over and shortly afterwards Pollock was booked for a foul and substitute Mark Proctor replaced Robbie Mustoe.
THE long legs of Gary Pallister denied his former Middlesbrough team-mates the chance of Wembley glory last night.
The Manchester United defender cleared off the line from John Hendrie in the 80th minute to send an absorbing Rumbelows League Cup semi-final second leg into extra time, when it was settled by a goal from Ryan Giggs.
Boro's magnificent performance, and the backing of their fans, made it a memorable night, on which they were also denied by the fingertips of Danish international goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel, who made a superb save from Willie Falconer in extra time.
Boro lost 2–1 after extra time and manager Lennie Lawrence paid tribute to his side's superb effort.
‘It is impossible for us to be nearer to Wembley than we were tonight,’ he said.
‘The players were magnificent.
They battled tremendously well and earned more than their fair share of chances.
‘But for a wonder save by Peter Schmeichel from Willie Falconer's header we would have won.
‘Those 13 players could not have done any more.
We were inches away at times.
‘I don't think Manchester had too many chances in extra time and a Falconer goal would have won it for us.
How Schmeichel stretched that far I don't know.’
Lawrence added: ‘We have played five games against First Division sides this season and it has taken extra time in the fifth for us to be defeated.
‘The fans were magnificent in the way they got behind us.
They will go home with pride intact, but disappointed we are not at Wembley.’
THE road to the finals gets rougher for competitors in the ABA national quarter-finals at Gateshead Leisure Centre tonight (8pm), when the North-East Counties champions meet the North West title holders.
Alan Exley faces an intriguing middleweight meeting with Moss Side's Eric Noi, last season's ABA finalist.
Exley, of Grainger Park, forged a dramatic win against hard-hitting Jason Sharp of Sharlston Colliery in the last round.
Noi isn't unbeatable, as Paul Hitch nearly proved last season.
Hitch, then of Horden and Peterlee, now professional, unluckily lost a majority points decision after a ludicrous bout in which Noi's headguard came off six times in one round.
Middlesbrough's Andy Green hopes for a repeat of last season's result at the same stage, when he stopped George Naylor in the second round.
This time, the Phil Thomas School of Boxing international lightweight meets Kirby's Gary Ryder.
Alan Temple, Hartlepool Boys Welfare England international southpaw featherweight, will need to use his considerable ring skills to frustrate Jamie Mellor's long reach.
Spennymoor super heavyweight Michael Hopper meets Preston's Rod Allan, who, because of walkovers, has yet to box in this year's championship.
Tonight's programme is (North-East Counties names first): Light flyweight: Peter Culshaw (Huyton) w o.
Fly: Steve Parry (Lambton Street) w o.
Bantam: Lance Crosby (St Paul's Hull) v Tony Mulholland (Transport).
Alan Temple (Hartlepool Boys Welfare) v Jamie Mellor (Transport).
Light: Andy Green (Phil Thomas SOB, Middlesbrough) v Gary Ryder (Kirkby).
Light welter: Sean Armstrong (Hartlepool BW) v Darren McCarrick (Boarshaw).
Welter: Peter Waudby (St Paul's Hull) v Paul Burns (Gemini, Liverpool).
Light Shaun Hendry (Burmantofts) v Danny Peters (Golden Gloves).
Middle: Alan Exley (Grainger Park) v Eric Noi (Moss Side).
Light heavy: Craig Joseph (Sedbergh) v Stan Wood (Currock House).
Heavy: Neil Kirkwood (Grimethorpe) v Mark Levi (Collyhurst and Moston).
Super heavy: Michael Hopper (Spennymoor) v Rod Allen (Preston and Fulwood).
MICKEY Duff is working on a rescue television package for the Henry Wharton v Kenny Schaeffer fight in York next Thursday following the collapse of satellite channel Sportscast.
They were due to televise the contest from the Barbican centre in York to local pubs and clubs.
It is hoped the fight sill still be filmed and be picked up by one of the other satellite companies.
THE day Ron Morris arrived in Middlesbrough to launch an innovative house-building dream was the day sceptical Teessiders first thought about taking bets on his chances.
‘The odds were 7–2 that I would disappear with the money before we even started, even money that I'd wait until the houses were built and leg it with the money,’ recalls the London born-and-bred ‘community builder’, with all the relish of a man who beat the bookies.
‘The hard times that many people had been through had made them disillusioned and cynical.’
As it turned out, those drawn into Morris' dream backed the right horse.
Roseberry Construction, the cooperative he launched with a handful of jobless locals four years ago, now employs 34 people in building low-cost homes ‘for working people like themselves’.
And its basic concept linking the problems of housing shortage, poor training and unemployment in order to find a solution to all three is the focus of a new initiative, SkillBuilding, launched recently with the support of the Yorkbased Joseph Rowntree Foundation.
Local authorities, housing associations, community groups, government agencies, private developers and building societies were all represented at the launch, where they were told how Middlesbroughwrought experience and expertise could be applied to similar schemes nationwide, with the SkillBuilding social enterprise company offering guidance on planning, funding, construction and long-term management and also able to act as developer or sub-contractor.
As Ron Morris acknowledges, the basic premise behind the aims of Roseberry and SkillBuilding is hardly revolutionary, but it remains an idea rarely turned into the bricks and mortar of practical success.
‘I was by no means unique in noting how the problems of high unemployment, low skills and high housing need existed side by side in so many places.
You felt that if the right component was put into the equation it could help tackle them all.’
At its most basic, that vital component is to confront all three problems together: simple, even self-evident, and yet so often ignored in a construction climate where the all-powerful big developers tend to be more interested in low-cost employment than low-cost housing and both central and local government treat each problem in not-so-splendid isolation.
Ron Morris tells how Roseberry's first project involved residents in the Langridge Crescent area of Middlesbrough in planning and building homes to suit their need for both housing and employment.
‘Some flats nearby had just been ‘re-habbed’ but the firm which won the contract brought a bus-load of workers down from Tyneside each day to do the work.
The local people who were unemployed just had to sit there and look out of their windows at others doing work they desperately wanted.’
The first seven members of the Roseberry co-operative had been unemployed for an average of five years and seven months when they began working on the Langridge Crescent site, and their growing band of colleagues has continued to include those frequently bypassed by mainstream employers in the construction industry: a deaf and dumb carpenter, a former labourer with a history of heart trouble, a young woman training to be a painter and others.
Arthur Skyrne was 59 and had been on the dole for ten years when he joined Roseberry; now he is site safety officer and one of the directors of the company.
Deciding who will join their ranks is just one of the questions the cooperative members have had to get to grips with; learning self-management has not always been easy.
Says Morris.
‘It's difficult to shake off the ‘us and them’ feeling and realise that there's only ‘us’.’
The workforce is currently completing work on a 32-house site off Newport Road for the Cleveland and Teeside Housing Association and is working with Middlesbrough Council to construct 60 more homes for sale on a site within the council's City Challenge area.
Morris observes: ‘I want Roseberry to go forward because I want other people in other places to look at what we have done and say, ‘there's an ordinary crew of folks who have really achieved something, what's to stop us having a go?’‘
With the construction industry currently enduring its most severe depression in memory, the picture is not entirely rosy even for Roseberry.
Winning financial backing and contracts has meant overcoming suspicions about the viability of a small co-operative with social commitment and an unusual building method timber-frame construction to keep costs down and training straightforward.
Securing public funds made available for urban regeneration has been a key target.
But Ron Morris is confident that those who have joined him have enjoyed proper training, decent wages (above the industry's going rate), and many have secured permanent jobs.
In addition they are improving the environment that they return to when tools are downed each evening.
‘They have earned their money by building houses that have benefited people like themselves,’ he says.
‘It's old folks and neighbours that have gone into the houses, and it will be children who will benefit in years to come from the jobs that are created.
They have done it and I know they can hardly believe it themselves sometimes.’
MIDDLESBROUGH have set themselves a target of remaining unbeaten to the end of the season to clinch a place in the Premier League.
That's the response to the midweek defeat at Manchester United, which ended the club's bold bid for a Rumbelows Cup Wembley place.
Said skipper Alan Kernaghan: ‘The lads are all agreed that if we can go unbeaten to the end of the season we'll probably go up.
‘That has to be the target now beginning at Southend on Saturday.
‘We got a boost out of the cup run, but promotion has always mattered most and now we have nothing to interfere with that.
‘There is still plenty to play for.
The League picture has changed a lot in the last couple of weeks.
Blackburn are faltering and Newcastle did us a favour at Cambridge.
Ipswich look to be the only side on fire.
‘We've got games in hand and a great chance to end the season with a flourish.’
Kernaghan said there were a lot of tired legs after 120 minutes on the heavy Old Trafford pitch.
Among the casualties are hamstring victim Stuart Ripley and Robbie Mustoe, out with an injured groin following a hospital scan yesterday.
Midfielder Mark Proctor is due to have a knee operation tomorrow.
But Boro may postpone that until the injury situation clears up.
TEAMS are needed to take part in an obstacle course in Stewart Park, Middlesbrough, on Sunday, May 10 in to raise cash for an ambulance.
Chris Russell, who is organising the event for St John Ambulance Norton Quadrilateral Division, says it is a gentle course.
Teams should consist of four people and each one should pledge at least £100 or £25 per person, to be raised through sponsorship or a straight donation.
Entry forms can be obtained from Chris, of Harlsey Road, Hartburn, Stockton.
BRAIN surgeon Fred Nath is competing in this year's gruelling Yorkshire Moors Race in a bid to help two handicapped Romanian children.
Mr Nath recently performed a life-saving operation on Romanian baby Bogdan Ursu who was dying of water on the brain.
The toddler is now recovering with foster parents in Middlesbrough.
He will tackle the half-marathon on July 7 to raise some of the £10,000 needed to fly two children, both under two, to Teesside for operations on their cleft palates.
Old girls:
Veterans of the former Middlesbrough Girls' Training Corps and the present day Girls Venture Training Corps join forces on Wednesday night at the Marton Country Club for a 50th anniversary.
MIDDLESBROUGH, which is at the forefront of efforts to encourage the country's disabled to take up sport, hosted regional table tennis championships organised by the British Sports Association for the Disabled at the weekend.
Competitors who converged on the Southlands Centre from all over the North-East were playing for places in the national finals in Reading in August.
Ex-international Janet Swan played an exhibition game and gave expert tips, and Mayor Eddie Bolland was on hand to present the prizes.
THE FA have told Middlesbrough that 18-year-old Jamie Pollock could be in line for a youth international tournament in the summer.
Pollock must rank as the North-East's discovery of the season following his astonishing rise from junior football.
‘I'm the luckiest lad in the world.
It's all a dream,’ he said.
Cleveland schools plan fond farewells Cleveland county council has given the go-ahead for a number of school retirements this year.
Mr Malcolm White, head at Norton Primary School, will leave this summer after 38 years of working with children, and Mr Desmond Connell, head at St. Bede's Primary School in Stockton, will take early retirement at the same time after a 36-year teaching career.
Next month Mr Alan Oyston will take early retirement from his job as principal of Stockton and Billingham Technical College after 35 years in education.
A number of Stockton schools will also lose teachers over the next few months.
St. Bede's will say goodbye to Mrs Ann Connell, who is taking early retirement after 32 years, and next month Mrs Christina Haslam will leave Ian Ramsay School and Mrs Maureen Dargue will take early retirement from Bishopsgarth School, both after spending 28 years in the profession.
Mr Peter Sutherland will end a 20-year teaching career when he takes early retirement from Tilery Primary School in the summer, at the same time as Mr James Burton retires from Bishopsgarth School after ten years in the profession.
Also leaving Bishopsgarth in the summer will be Mrs Isobel Fraser after a 27year career.
Mrs Vivien Schofield will leave Crooksbarn Primary School at the end of a 28-year career.
In Billingham Mrs Ruby Beckwith takes early retirement from Ash Trees School next month after 25 years of teaching, and Mrs Margaret Llewellyn based at Billingham Campus retires later this year after 18 years in the profession.
In East Cleveland Mr Alan Forster will take early retirement from his post at Loftus Junior School next month after 38 years of working with children.
Mr Thomas Lamb will leave Warsett School in Brotton in the summer at the end of a 34-year teaching career, and at the same time Mrs Dorothy Olliver will leave Belmont Infant School in Guisborough after 26 years in the profession.
In the Middlesbrough area, Marton Sixth Form College has lost Mr Thomas Hume, who has retired at the end of a 28-year teaching career, and taking early retirement from Nunthorpe School in the summer after 19 years is Mrs Margaret Brown.
Next month Chandlers Ridge Primary School in Nunthorpe will lose Mrs Mary Mapplebeck, who retires after 25 years of teaching, and at the same time Mrs Gail Saunders will take early retirement from her post at Marton Sixth Form College after 26 years in the profession.
Exley vows: ‘I'll be back’ Amateur By JEFF TODHUNTER ALAN Exley bowed out of the ABA championships in the national quarter finals at Gateshead Leisure Centre because, possibly, he showed his opponent too much respect.
The Grainger Park middleweight lost on a unanimous points decision to Manchester's Eric Noi, finalist last season, and admitted afterwards: ‘My timing was way off, but I showed him too much respect.
‘He is a good, experienced crafty boxer, but didn't worry me too much.
‘My trouble is that I've got to be hurt to really start fighting.
He wobbled me only once, and I know I did the same to him.
But he was crafty and buried his chin in my shoulder.’
Exley, at 30 almost a veteran, but who had had an impressive run in this year's championships, vowed: ‘I'll be back next year and if I meet Eric I'll beat him.’
Spennymoor super heavyweight Mike Hopper earned a place in the English semi-finals at Bletchley in a fortnight with a hard-earned majority points decision over Preston's Rod Allan.
But he admitted afterwards: ‘I'm pleased to win, but I've got a lot of work to do in the gym still’
After a hard-hitting first round in which both boxers traded body punches, the initiative ebbed away from Hopper in the second as he allowed himself to be drawn into a slugging match instead of using his jab.
But two early knockdowns in the third swung the bout his way, although he was unable to take full advantage of his superiority.
Results (North East Counties names first, and points unless stated): Bantam: Lance Crosby (Hull) lost to Tony Mulholland (Transport).
Feather: Alan Temple (Hartlepool BW) bt Jamie Mellor (Transport).
Light: Andy Green (Phil Thomas SOB, Middlesbrough) bt Gary Ryder (Kirby).
Light welter: Sean Armstrong (Hartlepool BW) lost to Darren McCarrick (Boarshaw).
Welter: Peter Waudby (Hull) lost to Paul Burns (Liverpool).
Light middle: Shaun Hendry (Burmantofts) lost to Danny Peters (Golden Gloves).
Middle: Alan Exley (Grainger Park) lost to Eric Noi (Moss Side).
Light heavy: Craig Joseph (Sedbergh) bt Stan Wood (Carlisle).
Heavy: Neil Kirkwood (Grimethorpe) lost to Mark Levi (Collyhurst Moston).
Super heavy: Mike Hopper (Spennymoor) bt Rod Allan (Preston and Fulwood).
STEPHEN Hodgson maintained his 20-fight unbeaten record with victory over Welsh champion Chris Adams in the national schools boxing championships semi-finals at Liverpool on Saturday.
He forced his opponent's corner into throwing in the towel in the second round.
Joining him in the national finals at Derby in a fortnight is clubmate Craig Wake, and Darlingtons Aaron Kelly, John Lee and Jim Smith.
MIDDLESBROUGH gave a gritty performance for a result that could be more important in May than the memories of the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final against Manchester United.
Manager Lennie Lawrence described it as a good old-fashioned scrap.
‘Six months ago we would have rolled over and died.
Today, we stood up to be counted,’ he added.
After the majestic setting of Old Trafford, Middlesbrough could not have expected a greater contrast than Roots Hall.
Yet there was no After The Lord Mayor's Show flop.
Middlesbrough showed a resilience that emphasised they are no longer a soft touch on their travels.
They refused to yield against awkward opponents, on a difficult pitch, in a match of high drama and controversial incidents.
The second half exploded when Middlesbrough full back Jimmy Phillips and Southend goalkeeper Paul Sansome were sent off in the space of seven minutes.
Phillips was first to go after an off-the-ball incident that escaped the attention of most people in the ground.
The player was surprised over his dismissal.
The referee told him ‘You're off’ without an explanation.
Sansome's early bath was more controversial.
The goalkeeper brought down John Hendrie as the winger moved to his right to prepare to shoot for goal after pouncing on a back pass.
A linesman immediately flagged.
The referee awarded a penalty and, after consulting the linesman, ordered an early bath for Sansome.
Southend protested bitterly before Bernie Slaven beat stand-in goalkeeper Steve Tilson for his 15th goal of the season.
Lawrence sympathised with Sansome.
‘I thought he mistimed his challenge.
A penalty would have been sufficient punishment.
‘I did not want to see the goalkeeper go off.
‘A better rule would be to award a goal and let the goalkeeper stay on the field.’
Southend threw everything at Middlesbrough in the ten-man battle.
Skipper Alan Kernaghan again led by example, with Nicky Mohan solid as a rock alongside him.
Stephen Pears showed his class with a double reaction save from Brett Angell and Ian Benjamin.
Pears also denied Adam Locke in brilliant style, though he was fortunate when Benjamin struck a post with an overhead kick.
EX-MARINE Doug Pearson proved too tough for his rivals in the final North Yorkshire and South Durham Cross Country League meeting of the season at Loftus yesterday.
The 30-year-old Mandale Harrier was making his first appearance over the country for a year, but he broke clear on the second of the three laps of a gruelling nine  kilometre course and held off a late challenge by Newton Aycliffe's Kevin Vose to win by an emphatic 13 seconds.
Pearson, who is in training for the Gisborough Moors Race later this month, was delighted with his performance in his first NYSD outing since he won the youths title in 1978.
‘I am over the moon with that run,’ said the Viking Chase record-holder.
‘Kevin Vose was 130th in the national and to beat him like that is a dream for me.
‘I was treating this as a speed session before the Gisborough Moors race and I couldn't be more pleased.’
In the absence of Hartlepool Burn Road Harrier Ian Cook, who clinched the men's championship in the penultimate meeting at Darlington, Pearson looked as though his main rival would be Dan Mutrie, of host club Loftus, and New Marske's Tony Livingston.
But it was Vose who came through with a strong finish on the final circuit to claim second place, but he could not match Pearson's strength on the hills.
New Marske's Helen Humphrey, who started the final race of the series with a six points lead, finished fourth, two places ahead of her nearest rival, Ripon's Karen Leeming, to retain the senior women's title.
Newly-crowned English Schools junior girls champion Donna Riddler, of Richmond and Zetland, notched up the biggest winning margin of the afternoon, beating Shildon's Nicola Woodfine by 52 seconds in the 3.3K race to take the girls title.
Leanne Matthew won the minor girls championship, while Middlesbrough and Cleveland clubmate Rees Connor, 14, won the boys' title.
Colts champion Michael Gilpin maintained his unbeaten record, winning his 2.6K race by a comfortable 18 seconds.
Results (denotes champion) Senior Men (9K): 1 D Pearson (Mandale) 34 mins 37 secs; 2 K Vose (Newton Aycliffe) 34.50; 3 T Livingstone (New Marske) 35.02; 4 D Mutrie (Loftus) 35.04; 5 M Threadgill (Middlesbrpugh and Cleveland) 35.07; 6 M Burn (Thirsk and Sowerby) 35.16; 7 G Hemblade (Priory Street) 35.22; 8 G Baird (M&C) 35.39; 9 K Sanderson (Teesdale) 35.44; 10 S Luton (Richmond and Zetland) 35.53.
Youths (6.4K): 1 P Mescus (Mandale) 23.55; 2 D Churchill (Mandale) 24.40; 3 A Aitchison (M&C) 25.10; 4 K Mace (M&C) 25.17; 5 D Choosey (M&C) 25.44.
Boys (3.3K): 1 J Pratt (M&C) 11.49; 2 R Connor (M&C) 12.04; 3 M Smith (Hartlepool Burn Road) 12.11; 4 M Raw (R&Z) 12.19; 4 S Blower 12.20.
Colts (2.6K): 1 M Gilpin (Loftus) 9.48; 2 S Jackson (M&C) 10.06; 3 C James (M&C) 10.20; 4 M Armitage (Teesdale) 10.23; 5 R Laws (Scarborough) 10.28.
Senior Women (4.5K): 1 E Kipling (Teesdale) 20.11; 2 K Shaw (Shildon) 20.15; 3 E Raw (Teesdale) 20.17; 4 H Humphrey (New Marske) 20.21; 5 G Houghton (Scar) 20.23.
Girls (3.3K): 1 D Riddler (R&Z) 12.57; 2 N Woodfine (Shildon) 13.49; 3 K Lazenby (M&C) 13.59; 4 E Peel (Scar) 14.13; 5 K Gibb (14.26.
Minor Girls (2.6K): 1 K Duke (Mandale) 10.58; 2 L Matthew (M&C) 11.02; 3 K Weall (M&C) 11.11; 4 C Tibbett (M&C) 11.12; 5 S Bell (R&Z) 11.13.
Bowing out:
Cleveland Red Cross worker Mrs Nancy Finch is retiring from office.
ENGLAND manager Graham Taylor has recognised the outstanding form of Middlesbrough goalkeeper Stephen Pears by including him in a B squad for a friendly in Czechoslovakia next Tuesday.
Pears, 30, has been a key figure in Boro's hectic season and thoroughly deserves his call-up.
He has recovered his form superbly after a broken finger threatened his career last season, and England boss Graham Taylor said: ‘Sometimes when you're with a Second Division club or out in the far North East you can feel forgotten.
‘But he has kept goal exceptionally well, not only this season but for two or three years and it would be unwise for me not to look at him.’
Pears said: ‘I was stunned when the gaffer told me just before training.
It's an honour to be considered for the B team.
‘This season has been different in many respects.
We have held our own against First Division teams.
‘I would not say this has been my best season.
I'm just a member of a team doing his job.
‘Promotion would round off the season nicely.’
Pears thanked Boro boss Lennie Lawrence, first-team coach John Pickering, and former Manchester City goalkeeper Joe Corrigan.
Corrigan gives Pears specialist coaching one day a week at Ayresome Park.
Taylor was obviously impressed by Pears in Boro's 2–1 FA Cup win over Sheffield Wednesday at Hillsborough last month.
Lawrence described Pears as the most consistent goalkeeper in the Football League.
‘I would not make a case for Pears to be better than Manchester United's Peter Schmeichel, but there is no-one more consistent.
‘Pears is a terrific professional.
His qualities are his temperament and composure.
He also has a great pair of hands.
‘Pears never looks as though he will drop a clanger.
He cannot be as dominating in the air as a 6ft.4in goalkeeper.
‘But he comes out at the right time and he stays on his line at the right time.
‘A lot of goalkeepers throw themselves around and look spectacular at taking crosses.
But they miss one in six.’
Skipper Alan Kernaghan said Pears gave Boro's defence tremendous confidence and his international recognition was fantastic news.
Boro are likely to ask the Football League to postpone next Tuesday's rearranged home game against Barnsley.
Tonight Boro aim to reduce the six-point lead of third-placed Cambridge United at Abbey Stadium.
Lawrence believes his side have shown the right ingredients for promotion success in the last four games.
Lawrence said: ‘The Manchester United cup-ties gave a clear indication of our football ability.
‘Our aim is to stay in the top six until we are in a position to catch up with our games in hand.
‘The target will then be a top-two spot.’
Boro will be unchanged tonight, with Jon Gittens and Alan Moore again on the substitutes' bench.
Team: Pears, Fleming, Phillips, Kernaghan, Mohan, Peake, Slaven, Pollock, Wilkinson, Hendrie, Falconer.
Midfielder Mark Proctor hopes to be back in two weeks.
Proctor was in light training yesterday after a minor knee operation on Saturday.
MARK Hateley has been given a long-awaited second chance by England.
His comeback in Czechoslovakia next week will cause a European Championship flutter among Graham Taylor's pack of young strikers.
Welcoming the Rangers ace back into the international fold after almost four years in the wilderness, manager Taylor quickly reassured Arsenal star Ian Wright, the man who made way for him.
But with 20 goals in 28 games for the Scottish champions, including six in the last four, Taylor wonders whether maturity will now allow a player who withered in the Mexico World Cup to blossom in this summer's Euro climax in Sweden.
‘Maybe what happened to him in ‘86 might be reversed in ‘92,’ said the England manager.
‘He's an experienced player now and I would be disappointed if he hadn't matured as a player all round.’
Hateley made his England debut as a substitute in a Wembley defeat by the USSR in June, 1984, and looked to have made the central striking role his own with nine goals.
But then they dried up and the last seven of his 31 caps came as substitute.
Arsenal's Alan Smith looks most threatened by Hateley's return, but it could also unsettle the youngsters fighting to succeed Gary Lineker, including Alan Shearer, David Hirst, Paul Merson and Nigel Clough.
The one to feel it most is Wright, and Taylor said: ‘He probably feels he has not done himself justice when he's played.
But he's slightly ahead of some of the others because he had three weeks with me last summer and I saw a lot of him.’
Swedish certainties David Platt and Paul Parker return after missing the win over France, while John Barnes is included for the first time this season.
Keith Curle drops to the standby list along with Wright, Paul Parker is unavailable because of suspension, while out of form Aston Villa winger Tony Daley is dropped.
Meanwhile, World Cup hero Alan Ball has been such a big hit with Graham Taylor that he could soon be named as England's permanent coach.
The 46-year-old Exeter manager was drafted in for last month's win over France at Wembley as the England manager cast around for a successor to the disgraced Steve Harrison.
With his experience and enthusiasm he was an instant hit and is now close to climbing aboard for the European Championship finals this summer.
England's combined squad for the Senior and B friendlies in Czechoslovakia next week Woods (Sheff Wed), Seaman (Arsenal), Coton (Man City), Pears (Middlesbrough); Dixon (Arsenal), R Jones (Liverpool), Pearce (Notts Forest), Dorigo (Leeds), Walker (Notts Forest), M Wright (Liverpool), Parker (Man Unt), Pallister (Man Unt), Keown (Everton), Mabbutt (Tottenham); Platt (Bari), Thomas (Crystal Palace), Batty (Leeds), Rocastle (Arsenal), Webb (Man Unt), Stewart (Tottenham), Palmer (Sheff Wed), Barnes (Liverpool), Merson (Arsenal), Le Tissier (Southampton), Sinton (QPR), Lineker (Tottenham), Smith (Arsenal), Shearer (Southampton), Hirst (Sheff Wed), Clough (Notts Forest), Hateley (Rangers).
Stand-by: Martyn (Crystal Palace), Burrows (Liverpool), Curle (Man City), Barrett (Aston Villa), M Thomas (Liverpool), I Wright (Arsenal).
The Scotland squad for the friendly international against Finland at Hampden Park next Wednesday Goram (Rangers), Smith (Hearts), Marshall (Celtic), Malpas (Dundee Utd), McKimmie (Aberdeen), Robertson (Rangers), Boyd (Celtic), McPherson (Hearts), Gough (Rangers), McStay (Celtic), McAllister (Leeds), Strachan (Leeds), McCall (Rangers), Collins (Celtic), Bowman (Dundee Utd), McClair (Manchester United), Durie (Tottenham), Fleck (Norwich), McCoist (Rangers), Robertson (Hearts).
Aussie fighters
THE Australians, they work hard, fight hard, play hard.
Whine?
Never.
Yes, their own country was in danger from the Japanese, but they stayed where the fighting was at its hardest, side by side with the British.
In December 1941, Britain, the Anzacs, the Commonwealth, fought with their backs to the wall.
Other nations had thrown in the towel.
Bigger nations sat on the fence.
The day Britain declared war in 1939 the Australians immediately declared with us.
They fought alongside us from then until the bitter end.
We recently had a PM even more rude than Paul Keating.
To be irritated by criticism is to acknowledge it was deserved.
R.P.
Simpson, 2 Finchale Crescent, Darlington.
YORK:
Labour's Hugh Bayley is 2/7 favourites to win the highly marginal seat.
Conal Gregory, defending a majority of 147 for the Tories, is 9/4.
Karen Anderson (LibDem) is 20/1 and no bets are being taken on the Green candidate Steven Kenwright.
ONE of the newest clubs in Cleveland may have to close down due to a fall-off in attendance.
Age Concern Cleveland opened the leisure club at the New Albert, Grange Road, Middlesbrough, in January, amid widespread publicity and an official opening ceremony.
Over 500 meals were served in the first two weeks and new activities launched.
But the last three weeks have seen a turn-down in numbers.
Spokesman Dave Punshon said: ‘We have no idea what has happened to cause people to stay away.
Over 200 people have become members for a nominal fee, but where are they?’
He appealed for members to comment by ringing Brenda on Middlesbrough 244860 or calling in at the club.
STEPHEN Pears celebrated his England B call-up with a man-of-the-match display to earn Middlesbrough a vital point against third-placed Cambridge.
Pears was Boro's hero when Cambridge put them under fierce pressure in the first half.
Boro battled well for a hard-earned point in a poor game and they remain six points behind Cambridge but with four games in hand.
After they reached the dressing room the Boro players learned second-placed Ipswich had lost to Watford.
It was a real rearguard action by Boro as they battled to stay on level terms before the interval.
The home side had an early chance after an Alan Kernaghan slip but Curtis Fleming blocked Dion Dublin's shot.
Middlesbrough hit back with a 25-yard shot by Jimmy Phillips which just went over the bar.
Hard-running Cambridge came close to a goal after 24 minutes.
Dublin struck the bar and Steve Claridge missed a close-range chance.
Fleming was booked for a foul on Chris Leadbitter, hurting himself in the challenge and receiving treatment before he was shown the yellow card.
Pears tipped over a dangerous Neil Heaney cross and then saved a fierce Claridge shot.
Middlesbrough had been at full stretch against Cambridge's direct, high-ball game and their own attack posed little threat in the first half.
Ten minutes after the break Middlesbrough suddenly burst into attack with two good chances in a minute.
John Hendrie shot against Jon Sheffield after he held off Liam Daish's challenge and cut inside.
And before the danger was cleared, Bernie Slaven crossed from the left to Hendrie who, with time and space, headed over.
Cambridge substitute Mick Nobury was denied a moment of glory when Pears tipped over his dipping shot.
The game was a hard slog with no finesse, despite the promotion aspirations of both sides.
Willie Falconer headed into the net from a Slaven cross but his jubilation was cut short when a linesman flagged for offside.
Middlesbrough substitute Jon Gittens took over from the injured Jamie Pollock with 12 minutes to go.
Boro were seen more as an attacking force in this half without achieving a breakthrough.
The bridge in Darlington that proudly displays the Teasdale Bros name is Stonebridge although the plaque on it refers to it as St Cuthbert's Bridge.
It was built in 1895 to replace a two-arched stone-bridge.
Teasdale Bros, it seems, were primarily agricultural engineers formed in 1835.
An advert on the front page of the Darlington and Stockton Times in May 1885 boasts that the company worked out of the Bank Top Iron Works and was expert as ‘engineers, boiler smiths, iron and brass founders, iron merchants etc’.
Quite how the bridge-building side of things came about is a mystery as is the fate of the firm.
Young footballers hit winning trail
A STRUGGLING school football team in Middlesbrough is cock-a-hoop at winning its first games of the season.
Abingdon junior school could now be on the road to a Wembley final in a national six-a-side competition.
The keen youngsters had not won a single game since the season started in September.
But last week they won two games out of four in the MCP Car Crime Prevention tournament at Ayresome Park gymnasium.
If they win the semi-final and final next month they will represent the town in the area finals and then be only two steps away from the Wembly final.
THE English schools team for the 21st annual home countries schools international at Hull on Saturday includes three Newcastle swimmers.
They are in Susan Rolph, girls' 12–14 years 200m  individual medley; Nick Sultman, boys' 1416 years 200m individual medley, and Craig Eldred, boys' open 400m freestyle.
Derwentside's Laura Jackson was selected for the girls' 14–16 years 100m  freestyle but had to withdraw through injury.
England have never been beaten in this contest against Scotland, Wales and Ireland.
The North-East Gateshead annual open junior meet at Felling on Saturday (9.30am, 2 and 6pm) and Sunday (9.30am and 2pm) is again over subscribed with 2,000 entries having been accepted from 21 clubs and over 600 refused.
The first of the North Yorkshire Swimming League's 1992 fixtures, sponsored by Prontoprint, is on Saturday (6pm) with a new venue when league newcomers Ryedale entertain Northallerton, Thirsk and league champions Stokesley.
A trio of local swimmers were among the record-breakers who set 19 new marks at the British Students Championships.
Jonathan Hunter (Derwentside) won the men's 50m, 100m and 200m backstroke titles, all in record times.
John Bradley (Darlington) also scored a hat-trick of wins in the men's 100m freestyle, 50m and 100m butterfly, with records in the latter two.
David Warren (Tynemouth) achieved a record-breaking double in the men's 200m butterfly and individual medley.
Harrogate's Ben Shaw broke the county junior record when winning the Yorkshire men's open 200m freestyle title at Leeds.
His clubmate, Renato Peral, was first by over three seconds in the boy's 11 years 100m butterfly.
Robin Francis (York) was a double gold medallist in the boys' 50m backstroke and freestyle, and his clubmate Hannah Wilby, who was first in the women's 200m breaststroke.
The North-East Counties under-20 water polo team with the Middlesbrough club's Paul Floyd, Lee Cooke and David Easby in the side, made a successful Scottish tour.
The Boro started with an 18–18 draw at Portobello, then, in a tournament at Hamilton, it beat the Ulster under-21 team 10–9 and drew 10–10 with a Western Scotland select team.
At Leith it defeated the Ulster under-21 team 9–3 and lost 8–5 to a strong Warrender side.
JILL HUNTER goes into the World Cross Country Championships on Saturday with her Olympic team place already booked but with a psychological hurdle to clear.
Hunter, the Tyneside runner now based in Albuquerque, has been told she need not compete in the British women's 10,000 metres trial race in Sheffield on June 5.
She only needs to make a token 1500 metres or 3,000 metres appearance in the main trials meeting, in Birmingham on June 27 and 28, to claim her Olympic team place alongside world champion Liz McColgan.
The selectors feel she has already earned her passage to Barcelona, having last summer finished second in the Europa Cup, ninth in the World Championships, and moved to fifth place in the world all-time 10,000 metres rankings.
Such faith is a timely boost to the former Blaydon Harrier as she prepares to partner McColgan in the British women's team at the World Cross Country Championships in Boston on Saturday.
Together, Hunter and McColgan could help achieve the first British team success since the English women's squad triumphed at Neuchatel, Swotzerland, in 1986.
As rivals in the individual stakes, though, McColgan starts as the leading British challenger and is strongly fancied to stop American Lynn Jennings claiming a third successive title.
Though the 27-year-old Scot has yet to win the championship she was third last year, on her comeback following pregnancy she has been in unbeatable form since her 10,000 metres World Championship triumph in Tokyo, winning the New York Marathon, setting a world indoor 5,000 metres record and lapping all of her 3,000 metres rivals in the Great Britain v USA indoor international last weekend.
Hunter, 25, who was ninth in the 1988 World Cross Country Championships and seventh in 1989, has beaten McColgan just once, in the Bali 10km road race in 1988, and has become accustomed to running in her shadow.
‘I still have negative thoughts about running against her,’ she confessed from her New Mexico home yesterday.
‘I wouldn't say I do think I can beat her, but you've got to pretend you can.
I know I should be more positive about it.
I should have more confidence in myself.
Teesside decathlete Anthony Brannen has chosen to join City of Stoke AC after resigning from Middlesbrough and Cleveland.
REPUBLIC of Ireland defender Mick McCarthy took charge of Millwall yesterday when former Middlesbrough manager Bruce Rioch resigned after two years at the Second Division club.
Former Scotland captain Rioch, 44, has been barracked by fans at the Den for much of a disappointing campaign after failing to build on last season's success of reaching the promotion play-offs.
And yesterday chairman Reg Burr said: ‘His unselfish decision to resign was made in what he believes to be the best interests of the club.’
Millwall have hovered in mid-table and three successive defeats have virtually destroyed any lingering hopes of once again featuring in the end-of-season play-off drama.
Last Saturday's 6–1 thrashing at Portsmouth finally prompted former Torquay chief Rioch who succeeded Bob Pearson at The Den in April 1990 to quit.
SCOTLAND manager Andy Roxburgh has welcomed the return to fitness of Middlesbrough midfielder Willie Falconer.
Falconer, who won youth and Under-21 caps with Aberdeen, could be considered for a problem role at senior international level.
Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘Scotland don't have anyone to fill a wide left-sided midfield role.
‘Roxburgh was all set to watch Falconer before his knee injury last September.
He is keen to pick up the pieces again.
‘A problem for Falconer is that he is just on the way back.
He has had three tough games but is still short on match fitness.
‘Scotland's last friendly international is next week, and that might be a little early for Falconer.
‘But it is good to know they are monitoring his progress.’
Boro face a fixture pile-up following the England call-up of goalkeeper Stephen Pears.
Lawrence admitted four games in an eight-day spell would be a problem after the postponement of the Barnsley game next week.
Yet he stood by his decision not to withdraw Pears from England's squad.
Lawrence said: ‘It was not a dilemma.
I would be the last person to begrudge Pears his chance.
‘I am thrilled after pressing his claims so hard.
‘Middlesbrough are sometimes described as an unfashionable club in a national sense.
Pears has earned international recognition for the club and himself.
‘I am embarrassed though over Bernie Slaven.
He was not chosen for Republic of Ireland's World Cup warm-up game against Switzerland because of the Barnsley match.
‘When I said Slaven was not available I had no idea Pears would be called up by England.
‘Football League clubs can postpone a match for an England call-up, but not for a Republic of Ireland game.
‘Slaven has been chosen before by Jack Charlton, but I can understand his disappointment.
I have apologised to him.’
SCARBOROUGH manager Ray McHale said he was relieved to see his side return to form with a 3–2 victory against Chesterfield at the McCain Stadium on Tuesday.
But he thought the Seasiders played better against Blackpool last Saturday when they went down 2–1 to the Fourth Division leaders.
‘I thought we played better against Blackpool and lost but it's still nice to get three points.
‘You could tell there was a bit of tension out there, among the players and the supporters.’
McHale was pleased that his side finally moved off the 38-point mark after a three-week wait to break the 40 points barrier.
FREE business health checks are on offer today as Teesside Training and Enterprise Council (TEC) throws open its doors to small local companies.
The TEC's business growth centre, at its headquarters in Queen's Square, Middlesbrough, is hosting an open day for businesses with a problem to solve.
Starting at 9am and finishing at 5pm experts from Teesside TEC and other leading organisations will be on hand to offer advice and help.
John Howell, Teesside TEC's chief executive said: ‘The open day is aimed at helping small businesses and presents an opportunity that should not be missed.’
SCARBOROUGH last night faced a goalkeeping crisis with on-loan Ian Ironside poised for a shock return to Middlesbrough.
But manager Ray McHale received a boost when central defender Mark Ogley agreed to join the Seasiders from crisis-club Aldershot.
Ogley, 25 last week, will make his Scarborough debut at Carlisle tomorrow, but who will play in goal at Brunton Park is unknown.
Ironside, on loan for a month, has been put on stand-by after Middlesbrough keeper Stephen Pears picked up a cheek injury at Cambridge on Tuesday.
If boss Lennie Lawrence decides Pears is unfit to play against Brighton tomorrow, Ironside, 28, would make his debut for the club.
McHale said last night: ‘Middlesbrough have left us in a difficult situation because they won't be able to tell us if we can have Ian until tomorrow.
‘If they need him we will be left without a fit keeper.
But I don't want to sign another one at this stage.’
If Ironside is recalled to Ayresome Park, Scarborough will have to chose between walking wounded Steve Hewitt and YTS keeper Neil Robinson.
Hewitt last week had a pot removed after suffering a suspected broken wrist in training, while Robinson is suffering from an ankle sprain.
Ogley agreed to join the club on non-contract terms until the end of the season.
‘Mark is a steady player and will play at Carlisle.
We've had a lot of young lads in the team and this will allow me to swap things round a bit,’ added McHale.
Ogley has played nearly 200 League matches following spells with his home town club Barnsley, Carlisle and Aldershot.
Striker David Holmes is struggling with injury, while McHale is also considering resting YTS defenders Steve Swales and Jon Rocca.
Dick Corden dropped a bombshell on relegation-haunted Darlington when he resigned as chairman yesterday.
Richard Tonks and John Brockbank are now the only directors at Feethams following his departure.
Corden said: ‘I don't want people to think I am deserting a sinking ship.
I have left the way clear for anyone to take over as chairman.
‘I think it is better for the club if I make a clean break.
‘Darlington are in urgent need of financial backing.
There could be someone in the outside world who is prepared to take over and put money into the club.
‘Similar to all lower-division clubs, Darlington have problems.
‘I have tried all season to recruit new directors but the recession has hit businesses.
‘Yet Darlington are in a healthier position than when I took office.
Foundations are good, with an excellent youth policy, and a manager who is going places.’
Corden, managing director of a Middlesbrough scaffolding company, said business commitments had also influenced his decision to step down.
‘I don't have the time to do the job justice,’ he added.
Corden was appointed chairman three years ago, just before Darlington crashed out of the Football League.
He backed manager Brian Little with a two-year contract and rejected the idea of operating with part-timers in the Vauxhall Conference.
Success followed with a double promotion triumph.
When ambitious Little joined Leicester City it was a blow for the club and chairman.
Corden admitted: ‘I wanted to resign when Little left the club.
A new manager, a new chairman, a new era.
‘I thought Alan Noble would be a natural successor.
It was a bolt out of the blue when Alan resigned.
‘We backed Little and he did the job.
We backed Frank Gray as his successor and even paid a record club fee for Nick Cusack.
‘Unfortunately, things did not work out.
Players’ heads dropped too quickly.
‘With hindsight, we should have sacked Gray earlier and given Hankin another six games in charge.
But we hoped all the time we would turn the corner.
‘Hankin has the same qualities and enthusiasm as Little.
Results have not gone in his favour in the short-term, but I believe the club will have a job holding on to him in the future.
‘I believe Hankin will prove a good manager.
I am sad I don't have the time to form a working relationship with him.’
Darlington's gates are 20 per cent down on last season and well below a break-even figure of 4,000.
But while Corden thanked the loyal hard core, he did not criticise the floating fans.
The financial solution for all lower-division clubs was to sell one player a year, he said.
Darlington's youth policy would pay dividends in the future.
Corden said he would consider going back on to the board if a new chairman extended an invitation.
THE FA have suspended Middlesbrough full back Jimmy Phillips for three matches after he was sent off for violent conduct in an off-the-ball incident against Southend last Saturday.
An ever-present this season, Phillips will start his ban at Charlton next week and will also miss games against Leicester City and Watford.
Boro have recalled goalkeeper Ian Ironside from his month's loan at Scarborough and he is on stand-by after keeper Stephen Pears picked up a cheek injury at Cambridge on Tuesday.
If boss Lennie Lawrence decides Pears is unfit to play against Brighton tomorrow, Ironside, 28, would make his debut for the club.
Two promising Boro players have been chosen for representative games.
Midfield player Graham Kavanagh will represent the Republic of Ireland in an under-19 match in Dublin on March 31.
Goalkeeper Andrew Collett will play for the North against the South in an England youth trial at Stafford next Tuesday.
Collett, a Middlesbrough boy, turned professional last month.
— HARTLEPOOL hope to record their fourth successive win and step up their promotion play-off bid at Fulham tonight.
Manager Alan Murray said: ‘Fulham are bad travellers but they are a different side at home.
We must show 100 per cent commitment.’
Central defender John MacPhail has again been ruled out with a knee injury.
Middlesbrough teenager Ian McGuckin looks set to continue after an impressive first-team debut against Darlington, while Steve Fletcher could take over in attack from injured Andy Saville.
Midfield player Jason Peake has returned to Leicester after a month's loan.
Peake was not interested in a permanent move and Pool did not pursue the idea of an extended loan.
FORMER Darlington and Middlesbrough director Henry Moszkowicz last night ruled out a return to Feethams following the resignation of chairman Dick Corden.
The wealthy London-based businessman said his loyalties were with Middlesbrough.
Moszkowicz added: ‘I served on the Darlington board for about a year because I misread Football League rules.
‘The League informed me I had to sell my Middlesbrough shares or resign as a Darlington director.
I resigned.
‘The situation has not changed.
I remain Middlesbrough's major shareholder.
‘I think I caught everyone on the wrong foot at Ayresome Park when I increased my shareholding to 48 per cent earlier in the season.’
Moszkowicz was a key figure in the consortium that rescued Middlesbrough in the 1986 liquidation crisis but resigned the following year after boardroom differences.
When Moszkowicz increased his shareholding, he was invited to rejoin the board by a director.
But Moszkowicz said: ‘The invitation was made in the press, not to me personally.
‘Even if it is a genuine invitation, circumstances would have to change before I would accept.’
Moszkowicz felt the town of Darlington had not rallied round the team at the start of the Third Division campaign, but he wished the club the best of luck.
Alan Noble, another former Darlington director, said he would not rejoin the board because of business commitments.
DICK Corden yesterday resigned as chairman of Darlington Football Club which is threatened with relegation.
The Middlesbrough businessman cited work commitments and the need for a clean break as his main reasons for deciding to call it quits after three years at the helm.
Mr Corden's departure comes less than a month after Frank Gray was sacked as manager of the Third Division's bottom club.
Would-be business tycoon Mrs Mandy Field was this week chosen as the Cleveland Top Young Entrepreneur in the Livewire UK competition.
Mrs Field, aged 22, of Carlin How, runs the Guisborough company Field and Field Interiors with her husband, Vic.
For the competition she had to produce a business plan and attend an interview with a panel of judges.
She was presented with a cheque for £600 by Mr Peter Johnson, of Northern Business Systems, which sponsored the contest.
Mr and Mrs Field and Mr Johnson area seen above.
The couple's company designs and makes decorative glassware and soft furnishings as well as offering a full design and decorating service.
Runner-up in the Cleveland heat was Miss Sharon Connell, below, aged 25, of Fairfield, Stockton, who runs All Things Frilly, a lace and silk bedroom accessories company, from Stockton Enterprise Centre.
She received a £400 cheque from Mr Johnson and accompanies Mrs Field to the regional final in Middlesbrough in April.
The winner of that round goes forward to the national final and stands to win £3,000 and the title UK Livewire of 1992.
BE prepared to be dazzled by the Pale Saints when they play in the North-East next week.
The band have tightened up their live set and feel they are playing their best music ever.
Drummer Chris Cooper explained: ‘We've been criticised for being shoddy live so we decided to do something about.
Our manager even said the criticism had gone worldwide but I don't think we are quite that important.’
They have just released new album In Ribbons, a veritable cacophony of sound with swirling guitars and tender vocals.
Chris feels it is some of the best stuff they have ever done.
‘We spent a lot of time recording it and it is a lot better than the first album.
We took more time over the song-writing and all chipped in together.’
Chris met lead guitarist Graham at school where they were involved in various dodgy bands.
Bassist Ian was soon roped in and the latest recruit is local lass Meriel from Catterick.
‘She's an RAF baby,’ said Chris.
‘It's good to get new blood as it gives us more spark.’
And that spark will light next Tuesday at Middlesbrough Arena, phone , and Wednesday at Newcastle Riverside, details on Newcastle,.
Grove mistake
A RARE thing happened yesterday.
The man from the Royal Mail put up his hands and said that it, the Royal Mail, had probably made an error.
Pending investigations, that was.
He was replying to a query about how a letter correctly addressed to 27 The Grove, Hartlepool TS5 1PQ had been delivered to 27 The Grove, Hartlepool TS26 9LZ.
Both are no doubt splendid residences in their own ways, but the fact is they are different and lived in by different people.
John Fullard wrongly received several similarly correctly addressed letters a couple of years ago and is concerned the dreary process is about to resume.
He eventually decided to take the latest letter round to the proper 27 The Grove.
‘I spoke to the people next door at number 26 and they get mail intended for the other number 26,’ he said.
‘I just wonder if it's happening to every house in the street.
It certainly makes a the postcode  system look a bit silly.
But the really bad news was that the post in question was an important insurance form.
The chap had complained to the insurance company about its non-arrival.’
Mike Rayner, Middlesbrough area manager for the Royal Mail, said it looked like a mistake had been made.
He would have to check to see how it happened.
Actually, he intends to check the whole of The Grove.
This is good news.
The other bad news is that not only did John Fullard get a letter for the wrong house in The Grove, he also got another on the same day intended for 27 The Oval.
Jump unsuitable
THERE would have been a report in today's paper about the first parachute jump to be undertaken by 81-year-old old Mick Terrans, chairman of Durham County Council.
It would, you may recall, have coincided with a heavy-duty exercise at Catterick Camp involving a mid-air collision of civilian and military aircraft.
The reason there is not a report is that Coun Terrans's jump was called off for a day, perhaps because parchute jumps and mid-air collisions, even of a mock variety, are not a good match.
The exercise successfully complete he jumps today for real at 2pm.
Writer's block AMONG other jobs Kevin Wilkins, Darlington's new residential writer, once worked as a toilet roll tester.
This falls into the category of the things that writers do.
Presumably all that is behind him now, though he may well remember during his tenure that some of the great literary masterpieces started life on toilet paper.
Stock spotting
FROM a stocky little Welsh person visiting her homeland comes news of a train journey from Cardiff yesterday.
For a moment she wondered where she was.
She saw above her a map of the Tyne and Wear Metro, not to mention information about trains round Whitby, Northallerton and Darlington.
British Rail rolling stock travels anywhere.
SO, the palace knives are out for Fergie, are they?
She must be quaking in her ski pants…
After all, if the Palace ostracises her she won't be able to go to any more of those incredibly interesting garden parties to meet all those terribly fascinating people like the head of the Surbiton philatelic society.
And then she'll miss all those amazingly absorbing dinner parties with great heads of states like Billy Bubongoronga from Back-of-Beyond province or whatever.
The travelling, the meeting of interesting people.
All that will be out the window too.
No more whistle-stop tours of the newest shopping centre in Nuneaton to look forward to.
Worst of all, of course, she'll miss the fascinating family nights with the in-laws.
No more listening to Charlie  wittering on about architecture and the environment and bringing home his latest plant pals for her to talk to.
No more studying The Sporting Life with H.M.
and picking out the winners when the going gets rough at Ascot.
No more nights spent discussing the merits of the long-barrelled, quickfire, multi-warhead Webley weapons or the size of the latest bag from Saturday's shoot with Greek God Philip.
No more disco dancing with Diana and long hours spent lamenting the demise of Duran Duran and Spandau Ballet.
Oh me, oh my, it's all going to be awful, isn't it?
Poor old Fergie will have to start living her own life.
It will be tough at first.
She'll have to get used to going out at night again instead of sitting at home waiting for a husband who never shows up.
And when she's off on the piste she'll doubtless miss the Press lads following her around calling her an idle good-for-nothing.
She'll have to learn how to have fun all over again without some supercilious, long-nosed retainer giving her a cream-curdling put-down stare.
Fergie, of course, should never have married into the Royal Family at all .
She never had the necessary attributes.
In fact she had all the wrong ones: flaming red hair, big bits in all the right places and an outrageous idea that life could, indeed should, be fun.
For, let's face it folks, fun is not what the House of Windsor is all about.
The Royal Family is all about serious responsibilities: pomp and circumstance, figureheads for the land of hope and glory.
Being Royal is all about being.
Stiff upper lip, crystal cut accent, county pursuits, castles and crowns and being ever so proper.
Fergie, it has to be said, never did fit the bill.
But who would want to?
Being Royal is no fun at all.
You and I, presented with loads of dosh and plenty of places to live in, would spend our time whooping it up.
Meeting Steve the stamp man from Surbiton or Billy from the back of beyond or travelling around attending street parties and generally being gawped at by the Press and the populace is not my idea of whooping it up.
Me, I'd take half a dozen ski trips a year, spend a lot of time on the beach, have a lot of fun in pubs and clubs (and, by the by, give Middlesbrough FC enough money to win the Football League and FA Cup).
A shallow lifestyle?
You bet your life.
The alternative, as discovered by fun-loving Fergie, could be a lot worse.
And while she might not have done herself a lot of favours over the last five years, it has to be concluded that she is better getting out while the going's still good.
Better that than spending a miserable lifetime in the Windsor soup…
HARROGATE'S
Ericson Atkins plays his first game for three weeks today when Yorkshire step into the seething cauldron of Redruth.
But Yorkshire have no fears about the army winger's ability to withstand the rigours of the ADT County Championship semi-final.
He has proved his fitness in training, and it is hoped that his thundering tackles will help to knock Cornwall out of their stride.
Yorkshire are determined to avenge their defeat in last season's final at Twickenham, and are hoping Atkins' clubmate Guy Easterby, making his county debut at scrum half, will rise to the occasion in front of a 14,000 capacity crowd.
Middlesbrough prop Phil Wright was yesterday called on to the Yorkshire bench, where he will join his former clubmate Jim Chapman.
Wright will be replaced by Gary Harker for Boro's home match against Huddersfield.
Despite their county calls, Harrogate hope to make further progress in their defence of the Yorkshire Cup when they entertain Ripon in the delayed second round tie.
They bring in Edward Cooke on the wing, Bill Freeman at scrum half, Mike Ruthen at lock and Stuart Cameron at prop.
West Hartlepool, originally scheduled to visit Harrogate, are happy to do without a game.
The first team will train, while the Stags entertain Mowden Park in a Durham Second Teams Cup semi-final.
Newcastle Gosforth have arranged to play their Northumberland Cup tie at Morpeth, but their scheduled opponents Durham City have failed in a similar bid to play their Durham Cup match against Horden.
Lock Terry Roberts returns after his back injury in place of Simon Gibbs in an otherwise unchanged Gosforth team.
City have arranged a visit from Seaham and welcome back flanker Andy Harle and lock Howie Nicholson.
Starting with next Saturday's home match against Towcestrians they face three successive league matches, with Durham Cup ties in midweek.
Attempts to bring the Horden tie forward from April 1 failed because the visitors had already arranged to play Guisborough.
Hartlepool Rovers are unchanged for the visit to Northern, but call former Darlington full back David Glendenning on to the bench.
SCARBOROUGH were last night boosted by the news that on-loan keeper Ian Ironside can play at Carlisle United this afternoon.
Ironside was poised to be recalled by Middlesbrough until Stephen Pears was passed fit to face Brighton.
However, hopes that defender Mark Ogley would make his debut today have been dashed due to‘contractual complications’ over his move from Aldershot.
Youngster Stephen Swales is given a reprieve and will play at left back with skipper Paul Mudd again partnering Lee Hirst in the centre.
McHale brings back Andy Mockler in place of YTS midfielder Mark Price.
Wingers Mark Jules and John Ashdjian both win a recall as McHale plans to use an attacking 4–2–4 formation.
Ironside, Thompson, Swales, Lee, Hirst, Mudd, Mockler, Himsworth, Mooney, Ashdjian, Jules.
Subs: Fletcher, Manderson.
GOALKEEPER Stephen Pears goes into hospital tomorrow for an operation on a cheekbone injury that has ruled him out of an international debut next week.
The 30-year-old Middlesbrough keeper plays against Brighton today but has withdrawn from England's B international against Czechoslavakia.
An elbow in the face at Cambridge United ruined Pears' international breakthrough.
Pears said: ‘Obviously, I am downhearted over missing the trip.
I only hope I get another chance either this season or next season.
‘A specialist has said I could be out six weeks.
But I hope to play next Saturday!
‘I have had too many setbacks in recent years.
I missed the last three months of last season with a broken finger.
‘The previous season I missed the last 12 games through a hernia operation and Achilles tendon trouble.
‘I'm not going to miss out again.
‘I told manager Lennie Lawrence I would be happy to play against Brighton.
Once the game starts, the adrenalin will make me forget the injury.’
Boro will be unchanged with Lawrence delaying a final choice of substitutes.
Stuart Ripley, after a quick recovery, and Andy Payton are among the five candidates.
Team: Pears, Fleming, Phillips, Kernaghan, Mohan, Peake, Slaven, Pollock, Wilkinson, Hendrie, Falconer.
Ironically, Middlesbrough called off next Tuesday night's game against Barnsley after Pears' England call-up.
A new date has yet to be confirmed but the Barnsley switch could mean a hectic four-game, nine-day spell.
Boro could entertain Barnsley on Monday, April 12, after a visit to Tranmere on the previous Friday night.
Home games would follow against Oxford United (Wednesday) and Plymouth Argyle (Saturday.)
Brighton winger John Robinson and midfielder Dave Clarkson are both out with hamstring injuries today.
Robinson was forced off during last Saturday's 3–0 home defeat by leaders Blackburn and Clarkson suffered his injury playing in the reserves in midweek.
Midfielder Les Briley, 35, is recalled to the squad for the first time in nearly four months.
Team from: Digwood; Munday, Gallacher, Wilkins, McCarthy, Chapman, Robinson, Meade, Gall, Codner, Walker, Chivers, Briley, Reed, O'Dowd.
THE visit of Cheshire Jets to Crowtree tomorrow sees Dave Elderkin's men looking to make it three wins out of three against the league's bottom club.
Controversy has surrounded Saints' clashes with Cheshire this season, with first Nottage then Colin Kirkham being sent off in close games.
Middlesbrough Mohawks travel to second-placed Oldham today as they bid to retain their eighth place in the league.
Success could be rewarded with a trip back to Oldham in the play-offs.
Sedgefield Racers host Mid-Sussex tonight (5.30) knowing there is no margin for error between now and the end of the season.
The National League new boys are one of six teams chasing four remaining play-off places in the third division.
Sedgefield need victories in all three of their remaining games to keep in with a chance.
ONE of Cleveland biggest annual fundraising events is challenging local businesses to make a bigger splash than ever this year.
The sponsored Superswim at Eston baths not only broke all records last year, but won world acclaim when its organisers were  honoured by Rotary International.
The 1991 swim raised enough money to donate £10,000 to more than 100 local charities, while putting £6,000 into a permanent Superswim Fund which will help to support charities for years to come.
Superswim takes place on Saturday and Sunday, May 9 and 10 at Eston Leisure Centre.
Shiela Joslin, of Cleveland CCVS, 47 Princes Road, Middlesbrough, is asking local businesses to support the ‘healthy, caring and fun’ event either by direct sponsorship, or by encouraging teams to enter.
Spring fair:
The Hartlepool Youth Choir parents association is staging a spring fair in St George's Hall, Park Road, today from 10am-noon.
Admission which includes refreshments, is 25p.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
BORO'S promotion challenge has gained fresh momentum following the Rumbelows League Cup knock-out by Manchester United.
Seven points in three games have put Boro in a strong position, especially with rivals feeling the pressure as the battle for Premier League status hots up.
Bernie Slaven warned promotion rivals after his hat-trick against Brighton: ‘We will go flat out for a top-two spot.
‘We are confident, without being over confident, of automatic promotion.
We know we have to win our games in hand, but we can do that on current form.
‘Our home record is superb and we could play three home games in a week next month.’
Brighton must hate the sight of Slaven.
He hit a hat-trick at Brighton  last year and also scored at the Goldstone Ground, as a second-half substitute, earlier this season.
Slaven said: ‘Obviously, I was delighted to score three goals in front of our fans.
But results are more important than individuals.
‘Paul Wilkinson put in a great header but I got the final touch for my second goal.’
Slaven welcomed the return of Willie Falconer after a five-month absence through injury.
‘Willie has given us extra height and skill in midfield.
I think he has done a great job on his return to the side.’
Another Scot, John Hendrie, made his mark on Saturday.
Slaven stole the headlines with the seventh hat-trick of his career but Hendrie struck the best goal of the match.
Slaven is the master of the tap-ins while Hendrie has a reputation for scoring spectacular goals.
Hendrie left Brighton goalkeeper Perry Digweed helpless with a shot into the top far corner of the net.
Brighton had a relegation stamp all over them and there was a surprising lack of atmosphere in the opening half hour.
Slaven's two first-half goals lifted the game and Middlesbrough went on to record their highest win of the season.
Injured Stephen Pears, who took a calculated gamble with a cheekbone injury, was never tested in goal.
The championship race has suddenly become wide open and Middlesbrough are poised to put pressure on the three leading teams.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘A few weeks ago I forecast Blackburn Rovers would walk away with the championship.
‘I believed that but I also wanted to wind them up.
They have struggled since and the promotion battle is now in the melting pot.
‘A few weeks ago Middlesbrough were 20–1 for the championship.
The odds were cut to 11–1 two weeks ago.
You won't get 10–1 now.
‘At one time I thought Blackburn would get 96 points but the situation has changed.
‘I still think a team will need over 80 points to get into the top two.
We will have 81 if we win seven of our remaining 12 games.
‘If we do that, we will be in touching distance of a top-two spot.’
ENGLAND manager Graham Taylor has told Middlesbrough goalkeeper Stephen Pears: ‘You will not be forgotten.’
The message was a tonic after the player withdrew from the international squad for Czechoslovakia.
Pears said: ‘I was down after my injury, so I was pleased to get a call from Taylor.
‘Taylor told me he would have me watched in future games.
I can only hope I get another chance.
‘It will be very difficult, though, to win a place for the European Championships in Sweden.
‘There will be only two goalkeepers in a 21-strong squad.’
Pears went to hospital yesterday for an operation on a depressed fracture of the cheekbone.
Manager Lennie Lawrence will study a medical report before deciding whether to recruit another goalkeeper before Thursday's transfer deadline.
Lawrence said: ‘There is no point in recalling Ian Ironside from Scarborough unless I play him.
‘If Pears was going to be out for only one or two games I would send for Ironside.
‘Should Pears be out for much longer I would have to think about a contingency plan.
‘We play a lot of games over the next three or four weeks and I would be stuck if Ironside was injured.
‘Pears wants to play and I have to bear that in mind.’
The 30-year-old goalkeeper recalled a similar operation to former teammate Peter Davenport.
Davenport played within four days of a similar operation.
Lawrence could strengthen his squad for a final promotion push.
He stressed there would be no £1m deals — and no outgoing transfers.
KENNY Dalglish yesterday told his faltering Blackburn Rovers stars: ‘It's time to pull your socks up.’
Dalglish is concerned after seeing the Second Division table-toppers manage just one win in their last seven games.
They were beaten 2–0 at Ewood Park by play-off hopefuls Charlton on Saturday, and although they remain two points clear, the chasing pack is closing in.
Dalglish said: ‘We have played worse than that this season, but now it's time we pulled our socks up.’
Second-placed Cambridge have played one more game, but Ipswich, who drew at the Abbey Stadium, have a game in hand and can pull level on points with Rovers if they win it.
Charlton's win keeps them right in contention.
ENGLAND captain Gary Lineker headed an astonishing list of crocks yesterday as manager Graham Taylor was left desperately scratching for a squad for the internationals in Czechoslovakia next week.
Lineker missed Tottenham's game at Liverpool with a bad throat and his boss Peter Shreeves has told Taylor he might not be available.
Shreeves said: ‘Gary could be as bright as a button on Monday, but I felt we had to let Graham Taylor know.’
Taylor had already lost four original choices from his squad of 31 before the weekend, and yesterday the list of players definitely out increased alarmingly.
The full tally was Liverpool's Rob Jones (leg), Manchester United's Gary Pallister (back) and Neil Webb (calf), and Manchester City's Keith Curle (hamstring) and Tony Coton (shoulder).
Taylor is left with an unenviable patching-up job, making the B international tomorrow and the following night's senior clash almost meaningless in his build-up to the European Championships.
Before the weekend he had lost Liverpool's Mark Wright, Manchester United's Paul Parker, Stephen Pears of Middlesbrough and Crystal Palace's Geoff Thomas.
He already has two other keepers in his squad in Chris Woods and David Seaman, so he may not call up another to replace Coton and Pears.
But he has now lost four central defenders in Wright, Pallister, Curle and Parker, while Leeds's Tony Dorigo is struggling to shake off a knee problem.
Liverpool's David Burrows, Richard Jobson of Oldham, Chelsea's Paul Elliott and Arsenal's Tony Adams and Steve Bould must all be in line for a late call.
Ian Wright of Arsenal would be the natural replacement if Lineker drops out, and fellow strikers David White of Manchester City and Everton's Peter Beardsley must also be in with a shout.
With Mark Wright injured, Nottingham Forest hard man Stuart Pearce is standing by to take over as skipper.
Taylor was relieved that there were no further casualties from yesterday's Arsenal v Leeds game, when seven of his original squad were in action.
ON BEHALF of the Newcastle University Anti-Nazi League and the other Tyneside Anti-Fascist groups involved in the demonstration against the British National Party in Sunderland on February 22, I would like to thank the people of Sunderland.
The support from those in the demonstration and those shouting messages of support as they passed was greatly appreciated.
We realise that from your perspective we are ‘just passing through’ the area and that, ultimately, only you can keep fascism out of Sunderland.
In view of this the involvement of local people in our groups is both crucial and extremely welcome.
I would urge any readers interested in helping keep Nazism out of Sunderland to contact one of the numerous local or national groups, be it the ANL, the Anti-Fascist Association or another.
Nazism is not just a threat to homosexuals, ‘Lefties’ and racial minorities, but the very concepts of democracy and freedom and those who believe in them.
James Lyons, President, Newcastle University Anti-Nazi League.
Run for DIAL UK
THE Great North Run is nearly upon us, and I am writing to ask for help in finding a runner who is prepared to run for DIAL UK, the National Association of Information and Advice Lines.
During the past ten years, DIAL UK, through its network of local groups, has continued developing the vital role of providing free information, advice and counselling to people with disabilities, their carers, professionals and others, in well over 120 areas of the country.
As you may know, there is a strong self-help element in DIAL UK, as the service that is provided is done so, wherever possible, by people who are themselves disabled or who have a direct experience of disability, and this has proved to be very successful.
We would be very grateful to anyone who is prepared to obtain sponsorship for DIAL UK by running in the Great North Run.
We can be contacted by writing to the address below or telephone  where sponsorship forms can be obtained.
Mark Rough, DIAL UK, Park Lodge, St Catherine's Hospital, Tickhill Road, Doncaster DN4 8QN.
MORE than 1,000 pupils from Cleveland's primary schools will have the opportunity of hearing the London Symphony Orchestra.
Some will have the added thrill of playing their own musical compositions to LSO musicians.
The big event will take place on April 7 at Middlesbrough Town Hall.
Led by conductor Richard McNicol, pupils and teachers from 27 Cleveland primary schools have been exploring Mussorgsky's Pictures at an Exhibition by composing their own versions of it.
They will be sharing their ideas when four members of the LSO visit schools.
A lucky few will then be chosen to play their versions at the town hall concert when the full LSO, conducted by Richard McNicol, will play the original.
Glum game
AS the World Cup semi-final ended the other lunchtime the mood was reminiscent of another World Cup semi-final almost two years ago.
There was melancholy and a feeling in the air of being cheated.
All around faces were glum, faces which had been concentrated on the screen for eight hours.
Back in 1990 England had lost to West Germany at football in a match decided by a penalties.
That was understandable.
But on Sunday they had won, the lucky ones when another crazy sporting rule was invoked.
There was no jumping for joy, no elation.
People simply felt cheated.
They would have preferred England to lose in a genuine climax than to win by such underhand means.
The quiet despair showed we still abide by the old maxim (written by an American, actually) about when the great scorer comes he cares not who won or lost but how you played the game.
It quite spoiled our little party.
Somebody said it wasn't cricket, old boy.
It was.
THE SECOND Division promotion race has been thrown wide open with leading teams feeling the strain.
Blackburn Rovers have lost the tag of runaway leaders and championship certainties.
The Lancashire side are now an even-money bet for the title.
Six weeks ago one leading bookmaker stopped taking bets on Kenny Dalglish's multi-million pound outfit.
Ipswich Town are second favourites at 2–1 while Middlesbrough's odds have been slashed to 4–1.
The bookies could trim those odds further if they studied Boro's run-in.
They face only two fixtures against the current top eight sides.
They have played pacemakers Blackburn, Ipswich and Cambridge United home and away.
After the visit to Charlton Athletic on Saturday, Boro visit seventh-placed Leicester City the following Wednesday.
Middlesbrough's final game of the season is at Wolves, who are 12th in the table.
The rest of their opponents are at present in the lower half of the table.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘Teams fighting against relegation sometimes scrap just as hard as teams challenging for promotion.
‘Yet we would prefer to meet those teams than our rivals in the final run-in.
We are in a healthy position.
‘Five matches in 11 days in mid-April will be crucial.’
Final fixtures: Charlton (a), Leicester (a), Watford (h), Bristol City (a), Tranmere (a), Barnsley (h), Oxford United (h), Plymouth (h), Sunderland (a), Bristol Rovers (h), Grimsby (h), Wolves (a)
Latest championship prices: Blackburn evens, Ipswich 2–1, Middlesbrough 4–1, Cambridge United 14–1, Portsmouth 40–1, Derby County, Charlton and Leicester 66–1.
BORO midfielder Mark Proctor could make a comeback in a Central League game against Burnley at Ayresome Park tomorrow night.
Proctor has recovered from a minor knee operation.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘Proctor could have a 50–50 chance of being in the first-team squad for Charlton Athletic on Saturday.’
Full back Gary Parkinson resumes training on Thursday and will not be ready for a weekend recall.
Nottingham Forest striker Stephen Bell has joined home club Middlesbrough on a month's trial.
The 18-year-old former Cleveland County Boys player is a first-year professional at Forest.
Middlesbrough will play Grimsby in their final home match.
The game has been rearranged for Tuesday, April 28.
DARLINGTON manager Ray Hankin last night denied Cambridge United have made a bid for goalkeeper Mark Prudhoe.
Hankin said: ‘I have had no contact from Cambridge since I took over.’
With the transfer deadline looming, there is speculation Darlington could sell a player to ease debts.
Hankin added: ‘If a bid came in for Prudhoe, or any other player, we would consider it.
‘We would decide whether the bid was right for the club and for the player.
‘I have a high opinion of Prudhoe.
I rate him alongside Stephen Pears as the best goalkeeper outside the First Division.
‘It is a harsh fact of life that lower division clubs have to sell to survive.
‘Anything can happen before Thursday's deadline.’
GARY Owers and Gary Bennett are poised to give Sunderland an FA Cup tonic this week.
Owers, out for two months with pelvic trouble, and defender Bennett both bid to make reserve team comebacks at Barnsley tomorrow.
‘My fitness has picked up a lot in the last two or three weeks and I'm kicking a ball and running fine,’ said Owers.
‘But it's not just a case of getting fit.
I have to prove that I can do a better job than the lads already in the side.’
Bennett has also made a good recovery from a torn thigh muscle but insisted: ‘I'll only play when I'm 100pc right.
I came back too quickly last time and paid the price.’
Sunday's derby game at Newcastle could come too soon for Owers but Bennett has a real chance of being fit.
Boss Malcolm Crosby has taken only eight fit players away to Scotland in preparation for the derby clash and the Cup semi-final showdown with Norwich.
‘Things have been a bit intense, with a lot happening on and off the park,’ said Crosby.
‘We are swimming, playing golf and fell walking, but we'll be back training on Wednesday.’
Crosby hopes to line up a couple of loan deals before Thursday's transfer deadline.
‘It doesn't matter to me whether the players I get are cup tied or not,’ he insisted.
‘The League is the most important thing.
The cup will take care of itself.’
Queues stretched for a hundred yards yesterday as season ticket holders lined up for tickets for the Hillsborough semi-final on April 5.
Tickets for Sunday's derby match at St James's Park are already sold out.
HARTLEPOOL United are not prepared to give up their fight for a Third Division promotion play-off place.
Chairman Garry Gibson said: ‘As long as there is an outside chance, we will go for it.
‘At this time last year we were ninth and finished third.
‘We are now 11th and aiming for sixth place.’
Pool are eight points behind sixth-placed Birmingham City.
The loss of striker Andy Saville for the season with a broken arm has been a tremendous blow and manager Alan Murray is making inquiries to replace him.
SCARBOROUGH striker Darren Foreman has joined GM Vauxhall Conference strugglers Stafford Rangers on loan until the end of the season.
The former Barnsley striker, who cost Crewe Alexandra a club record £80,000 when he joined them from Oakwell two years ago, signed for Scarborough on a free transfer last spring.
Despite having over a year left on his contract, McHale told Foreman that he did not figure in his long-term plans.
Foreman agreed to link up with Stafford to give him the chance to attract another League club.
Meanwhile, McHale is waiting to see if Middlesbrough decide to recall on-loan keeper Ian Ironside because of the injury to Stephen Pears.
He underwent a cheekbone operation on Sunday but is hoping for a quick return.
Ward given England call YORK City manager John Ward has been asked by England manager Graham Taylor to help with England Under-21 coaching.
Ward assisted Taylor with England last year after he had left Aston Villa.
But when Ward was appointed City manager in November, Taylor said that he would give him a rest so that he could concentrate on settling in at Bootham Crescent.
But now Taylor, who worked with Ward at Watford and Aston Villa, has written to City chairman Douglas Craig asking if Ward can help England this summer and Craig and the City board have immediately agreed as they believe it is a great honour for the club.
Italian job CRICKET:
New Zealand captain Martin Crowe has agreed to coach Italy's national cricket team for the next two months to help their bid to qualify for the next World Cup in 1996.
Tangled Webb FOOTBALL:
Southend United yesterday insisted they have had no approach from either Tottenham Hotspur or West Ham United for manager David Webb.
Special guest FOOTBALL:
Middlesbrough chief executive Keith Lamb will be guest of Teesside branch of the Football Supporters' Association at the Marquis Hotel, Middlesbrough, on Thursday night.
Cup venues FOOTBALL:
The 1994 World Cup Finals in the United States will be staged at nine venues and will feature the first indoor stadium ever used in the tournament's history, the Silverdome in Pontiac, Michigan.
SNOOKER:
Former champion Alex Higgins and young pretender Alan McManus were involved in a high speed, high quality battle at the £850,000 Embassy World Championships at Preston last night with Higgins requiring six of the remaining 10 frames to earn a fourth round meeting against Robert Marshall or Brian Rowswell.
A MIDDLESBROUGH school has scooped £2,500 in the face of stiff competition to win the Teesside TEC schools/industry engineering competition.
Hall Garth in Acklam triumphed for their project at the Clydesdale Forge Company, Hartlepool.
Barry Hope, operations director, said the five pupils had done ‘an absolutely first-class job’.
The team had to decide whether the firm should invest in a computer-controlled lathe.
‘They came up with the same answer as I did,’ said Mr Hope.
‘It's sometimes surprising what young people can achieve.’
Ian Ramsey School (Stockton), Lawrence Jackson (Guisborough) and High Tunstall (Hartlepool) all received £400 for their efforts.
Pat Hanson, who led the successful Hall Garth team Vanessa Conning, Gail Hall, Mark Jackson, Tom Newbould and Keith Webber said they had put in a lot of hard work.
‘We did not even know what a computer-controlled lathe was before we started,’ she said.
‘Everyone at the school is thrilled we won.’
TALENTED swimmer Stephen Davison is one of several young people being helped by a council.
Stephen, 17, of Highbury Avenue, Tollesby, Middlesbrough, holds four records for the breaststroke.
He has been awarded £200 from Middlesbrough council's community chest to help with his training and travel expenses.
Other grants made by the leisure sub-committee were: Steven Duffy, 13, of Suffield Street, St Hilda's, £150 for boxing strip and equipment; Geoffrey Mullins, 38, of Baldoon Sands, Acklam, £150 to help qualify as a senior athletics coach; St Margaret's Carpet Bowls Club, Brookfield, £477 to buy equipment; Linthorpe Community Art Group, Linthorpe Community Centre, £200 for materials and equipment and Northern Sinfonia Orchestra, £250, to help with concert expenses.
TEAMS will be competing in Cleveland county stadium's first ever It's a Knockout event on Mothers' Day.
The competition starts at 11am on Sunday and admission to the stadium in Park Road South, Middlesbrough, is free.
One team will include mums who attend aerobics classes at the stadium.
ANOTHER dispute is looming over a five-a-side soccer development in Middlesbrough.
A replay is to be played out over the proposed Clairville Common complex between Anchor International and local objectors.
Licensing justices blocked a liquor licence for the planned £1.25m football centre last December.
Anchor supported by Middlesbrough Council said it could not proceed without the drinks licence.
Now it has submitted a new application and the council is supporting it once more.
But residents who opposed the development will repeat their protests.
Joe McGonagle, one of the leading opponents, said last night: ‘We will continue to argue that this is common land for the use of the people.’
Opponents also argued that open space in the centre of town should not be used up and suggested re-siting the complex on former industrial land.
Council leader Michael Carr said the soccer centre would create 30 jobs and offer considerable community use.
‘There is enormous support for the scheme in the town and when they considered the first application, the only resident input came from a small group of people who opposed it,’ he said.
‘Clearly it is right the bench should be given a balanced view representative of all sections of the community.’
Coun Carr said many residents' groups had urged the council to try again.
But Joe McGonagle said the council was behaving ‘like a spoiled brat’ and ignoring several hundred signatures opposing the project.
‘The Labour party were very sorely wounded by their first public defeat and ran a campaign claiming most people were in favour of the project,’ he added.
‘We collected several hundred signatures on the petition and our opposition will continue.
We know the ropes this time and we will fight on.’
MIDDLESBROUGH goalkeeper Stephen Pears is set to maintain his ever-present record for the season in the Second Division promotion clash against Charlton Athletic on Saturday.
Pears was back in training yesterday after his weekend operation on a cheekbone fracture.
Manager Lennie Lawrence looked on in admiration as Pears had a light workout at Ayresome Park.
Lawrence said: ‘I would regard Pears as odds-on to play against Charlton at Upton Park.
‘In fact, I think he would play tomorrow if there was a game.
‘Pears has the attitude of a good professional.
He would not play and let either his teammates or himself down.
‘A number of clubs are prepared to offer me a goalkeeper.
‘Most of the big clubs with three and four goalkeepers find it difficult to give them a regular game.
‘I have to decide whether to get a goalkeeper on loan for the rest of the season in case something happens to Pears.
‘At the moment, I don't want to recall Ian Ironside from Scarborough.
I would rather him play first-team football with Scarborough than bring him back for our Reserves.’
Midfield player Mark Proctor is the only recognised first-team player in a Central League side against Burnley at Ayresome Park tonight.
With Jamie Pollock suspended for one match, Proctor could press his claims for a recall to the squad.
Stuart Ripley and Andy Payton proved their fitness as second-half substitutes against Brighton.
Gary Parkinson is not due to resume training until tomorrow, so there is no chance of him lining up with Curtis Fleming at full back.
Willie Falconer could take over the No.3 shirt from suspended Jimmy Phillips.
Falconer had experience as a full back with Aberdeen, his first professional club.
Leading scorer Paul Wilkinson is expected to recover from a knee injury.
SUNDERLAND-based Harry Williams looks to have another puppy sensation on his hands.
But the Witton-le-Wear trainer must face a local stewards' inquiry at the East Boldon circuit to explain the dramatic improvement in form of Carley Pop.
The white and brindle dog is a litter brother to long-range Sporting Life/Daily Mirror Greyhound Derby fancy Pond Tornado.
But the July 1990 whelp had done nothing spectacular before it slaughtered the field in an A2 race at Sunderland on Saturday night.
The dog, which was hardly backed at 5–1, clocked a tremendous 27.47 secs for the 450 metres trip, and even allowing for the +30 going still ‘found’ 47 spots.
Williams is already booked in to face the Sunderland stewards to answer questions on time finding by two more youngsters in his care, Pond Skylark and Mailcom Lad.
All the dogs involved are puppies, which are notoriously inconsistent, and the improvement is likely to be accepted as part and parcel of the growing up process.
Sunderland stage two semi-finals of the £2,000-to-the-winner Milligans Bakery Challenge over 450 metres tonight.
The first sees Dawn Milligan's Valentinos Joy, drawn favourably in trap two after winning its last two opens at Sunderland, lining up against the highly respected Belle Vue dog No Joe Soap (trap 4) and Brough Park's Movealong Sharp (3).
The second semi-final is expected to be dominated by bookmakers' favourite Risk It Miss, trained by Midlands-based Charlie Lister.
Risk It Miss justified odds of 4–5 winning its heat from Sullane Castle and has drawn its favourite trap one, while Milligan's wide-running Bring Plenty runs from trap six.
Three dogs from each semi-final go through to Saturday's final, when the track will have a special 2am late licence, with New Faces winner Stephen Lee Garden, the star attraction.
BROUGH PARK stages four open races tomorrow night and last year's Wimbledon Puppy Derby finalist Slippy Brindle another of Harry Williams' charges will contest the highly competitive March Stakes over 500 metres.
Slippy Brindle will be lining up against Dawn Milligham's Woodhill Echo, Currallone Gara, a recent open winner at Sunderland, and Shawfield's Comrades Delight.
The Quick March Sprint, over 290 metres, sees a clash between litter brothers Lucky Streak, an open-winner at Sunderland trained by Graham Calvert, and Lucky Boy, now based at Hull.
Both dogs are familiar with the Byker circuit, having been bred by Brough-based Norman Oliver before moving on.
Calvert's Ruffside Rock, which has also impressed at Sunderland, has been drawn in trap one for the March Puppy Stakes, over 460 metres, and the danger looks like being Shawfield-based wind runner Cocoa Powder, out of trap four.
Brough Park's leading performer of late, Burnhope Jimmy, will be strongly fancied to win the Long March Stayers Stakes, over 670 metres, having won a similar event at Middlesbrough earlier in the month.
But there is bound to be a strong challenge from Stitch Them Up, also based at Brough, which won an open for trainer Tom Robinson at Sunderland on Monday night.
In-form at the moment at the Tyneside track is Deneview Dipper, which has won its last two races, including an A1 event last Saturday night.
— TWO of the more expensive lots on show at the Cleveland Park sales a fortnight ago have started trialling at Middlesbrough and both look worthy of their price tags.
Headford Arms, an October 1990 Balalaika dog now trained by David Connor, went for a four-figure sum and has run impressive trials.
Magical Hero, a May 1990 Westmead Cannon dog, bought privately off the bench by owner-trainer Bob Stephenson, also seems one to look out for, clocking 29.20 in his first solo trial.
ENTRIES have been coming in thick and fast for the Northern Echo Schools Cricket Competition.
So far more than 20 schools have expressed their eagerness to take part in our search to find the stars of the future.
And there's still time for other schools to push their claim with the closing date for entries April 7.
The competition is open to teams of Under-15s from schools in Durham, Cleveland, Tyne and Wear and North Yorkshire and carries prize-money totalling £8,000.
Entry forms are available from the Promotions Department, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington, DL1 1NF.
The full list of schools to have entered so far is: Harton Comprehensive School, South Shields; Ian Ramsey School, Hartburn, Stockton; Sedgefield Community College, Sedgefield; Boroughbridge High School, Boroughbridge; Greencroft Comprehensive School, Stanley; Lanchester St Bede's Comprehensive School, Lanchester; Filey School, Filey; Hermitage Comprehensive School, Chester-le-Street; Ferryhill Comprehensive School, Ferryhill; Scalby School, Newby, Scarborough; Brackenhole School, Middlesbrough; Hedworthfield Comprehensive School, Jarrow; Royal Grammar School, Newcastle.
Easingwold School, Easingwold, York; St Leonard's RC Comprehensive School, Durham; Ryton Comprehensive School, Ryton; Northfield School, Billingham; Richmond School, Richmond; Durham Johnston Comprehensive School, Durham; Wensleydale School, Leyburn; Parkside Comprehensive School, Willington, Crook; Whitburn Comprehensive School, Whitburn; Tanfield School, Stanley; Barnard Castle School, Barnard Castle.
FORMER Middlesbrough defender Owen McGee has joined Fourth Division Scarborough on trial and could make his debut against Halifax Town on Saturday.
The Seasiders have an injury crisis and McGee, 21, could step in to ease manager Ray McHale's selection problems.
McGee, who began as an apprentice with Middlesbrough but was released after making 30 League appearances, has had a unsuccessful spell with Leicester.
But he has now linked up with Scarborough and has impressed McHale during training and in the 2–2 friendly draw at Hyde United on Monday night.
McHale said McGee was in with a good chance of starting against Halifax because he can play in defence or midfield.
McGee could come in for Andy Mockler, who is the latest injury casualty and leaves McHale with a depleted squad.
Mockler joins Adie Meyer, David Holmes, Steve Swales and John Moore on the list of walking wounded.
The Stockton midfielder will be out for three weeks with damaged knee ligaments.
The directors are set to give McHale a big rise in his budget for players in a bid to win promotion next season.
Chairman Geoffrey Richmond said ‘We are considering going completely against the current trend in the league and significantly increasing the amount of the players’ budget,’he said.
Richmond said McHale was already planning his side for the next campaign.
Scarborough need one or two experienced players to work alongside the line-up of enthusiastic YTS players McHale has fielded recently, said the chairman.
‘The youngsters have proved they have the talent, but lack the experience and that's where one or two players from other league clubs could feature strongly.
‘It is generally thought from talks I have had with other chairman that there will be between 600 and 800 players released at the end of this season because clubs are seeking to trim their wage bills.
A lot of good players are being released.
‘The days of the £20,000 to £50,000 transfer fees are gone.
Players are now being offered on free transfers by clubs, just to cut their wage bills’.
While Scarborough still needed to increase its income, many clubs would be happy to be in their position, he said.
‘We are disappointed that after an encouraging run up to Christmas we have slipped back, due in no small measure to the month long lay-off because of the wintry weather.
But the team has shown it has potential and we now want to help that talent by bringing in some experienced players.’
JOURNALISTS from The Northern Echo were unable to accompany John Major on his bus trip yesterday because the paper has refused to apply for Conservative Party media passes.
To acquire passes journalists are required to give personal details including date of birth, nationality, home telephone number and car registration numbers.
This information is run through Home Office computers and then left on police computers.
Peter Sands, editor of The Northern Echo has written to Conservative Party chairman Chris Patten to say that if letters of accreditation or normal Press cards were acceptable, then the paper would be happy to cover ministerial visits.
Mr Sands said: ‘While I appreciate that Conservatives ministers need to be vigilant, I do not believe that my staff should be expected to give personal details, which will be kept on police computers, merely to help a political party publicise its election  campaign .’
Mr Sands stressed that he would have taken the same view of any party who laid down such a set of pre-conditions.
The Evening Gazette in Middlesbrough has also refused to apply for media passes for similar reasons.
First class
EVERYONE was out in Darlington Tory candidate Michael Fallon's house when the postman knocked the other day.
It was a special delivery too the ‘red boxes’ that Fallon, still a minister though no longer an MP, continues to receive.
The postman eventually found him canvassing on the High Row and handed over the State secrets there and then ‘I was very impressed,’ says Fallon.
A welcome spin-off AMONG Hartlepool's pleasures were a pint in the Jacksons Arms and a re-acquaintance with the admirable Elsie Reed, Leadbitter's agent since 1964.
Coming up 70 and buoyant as ever (’ I keep going on cigarettes and pots of tea’she said) Elsie has officially retired but works tirelessly on.
‘She gives me confidence a sharp mind, a safe pair of hands and a lovely sense of humour,’ said Peter Mandelson.
Her son David became Britain's second youngest MP (after Bernadette Devlin, whatever happened to her?) when elected to the old Sedgefield seat in 1970.
At 46 he's now director of corporate communications at Whitbread's Brewery what others might call a spin doctor.
Auckward
YESTERDAY'S Diary explained where the main parties stood on British Rail (between carriages jammed against the netty door, very likely.)
Here is another example of BR communication photographed on Middlesbrough station as we waited for the Hartlepool train.
A thumb through the timetable has failed to locate a station called Hexham Auck, though Bishop Auckland is more familiar, of course.
We didn't realise it was between Seaham and Heworth, though.
Do they know of this in the new fangled City of Sunderland?
Guide launched to boost tourism
A NEW guide has been launched in a bid to attract visitors into Langbaurgh.
The 36-page brochure was unveiled at the Ideal Homes Exhibition in London this week and spotlights Redcar, Saltburn and Guisborough as bases for summer holidays or short breaks under the heading ‘Where Moorland Meets The Sea’.
More than 20,000 copies have been distributed throughout the country and Langbaurgh Council's chief tourism and leisure officer Paddy Corcoran said: ‘Response has been very encouraging so far.’
No wrinkles:
The Cat Nab Clog Dancers from Saltburn have been presented with a large box of red non-wrinkle tights following their appeal on Esther Rantzen's That's Life programme.
The cloggies are delighted.
KEITH Rodger (Hartlepool) and Anne Pashley (Brotton) have been named as top seeds for the Middlesbrough championships to be held at the Southlands Leisure Centre this weekend, March 2829.
Former Scottish international Rodger, who won the men's singles last year in the Middlesbrough Borough Councilsupported event, has a particular strong field competing against him for his title.
The second seed is the veteran from Stockton, Malcolm Corking, while Ormesby's British League stars Steve Brunskill and David Fewsdale are in third and fourth positions.
Former county champion Lindsay Taylor is fifth while Steven Souter, Jevon Chan and Steven Cooper make up the eight seeds.
Ormesby's Nick Simon, the Welsh international, is probably the best of the unseeded players.
Last season's women's champion Anne Pashley is the top seed for the women's singles with Stockton's former England No 1 junior Jane Durham in second place.
The biggest entry is for the handicap singles with 74 players competing.
The handicap team event is also very popular with a total of 24 teams.
The championships start with the cadet boys' singles at 9am on Saturday with the under 11, cadet and junior finals being played on Saturday evening.
On Sunday play starts with the mixed doubles at 9am with the men's open singles starting at 10am.
The main finals will be staged from 5.30pm.
FIVE North-East swimmers are in the 27strong Esso England junior squad making the trip to Germany this weekend.
They are Lee Dalzell (GatesheadWhickham) and Susan Rolph, Nick Sultman, Anthony Day and Craig Eldred (Newcastle).
Susan is in nine events 100m and 200m backstroke, breaststroke, butterfly, freestyle and 200m individual medley.
The chief coach is Nick Juba (Helmsley) and the medical officer is Alyson Jones, the former Hartlepool Commonwealth Games silver medallist.
They will be competing at the Haribo meet in Bonn, where the German World Cup fixture has been held for the past four years and where many world and European records have been broken.
Also competing is a Yorkshire County age group team of 13 boys and seven girls aged 14–17 years, including Ben Shaw (Harrogate).
A trio of Olympic hopes who returned from a British potential Olympic team camp in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, last weekend, compete at the Monk British Grand Prix fixture at Leeds this weekend.
Ian Wilson (Sunderland), already preselected for Barcelona, races in the 200m butterfly, 200m, 400m and 1500m freestyle, and Los Angeles Olympic finalist Samantha Purvis (Stockton Aquatics) is in the two women's butterfly events.
National 800m freestyle champion Samantha Foggo is in the women's distance freestyle races and is one of seven Newcastle swimmers competing with five others from Stockton.
Robin Francis (York) made a clean sweep of his four races to win the award for the top ten-year-old boy at the Gateshead open meet.
Darren Wigg (Newcastle) won the award for 11–12-year-old boys with four first places, and Mark Bewick (Sunderland) topped the 13–14 group with a hat-trick of wins.
Top of the girls' 11–12 group was Lindsay Robinson (Chester-le-Street), while Angela Lambert (Gateshead-Whickham) was a double winner and also got a bronze in the 13–14 age group, and Clare Goatman (Newcastle) had one first and two second places to win the girls' ten-years award.
Newcastle won six of the 12 relay races and easily took the top club trophy with 220 points.
Gateshead had 101 and Sunderland's 93.
The trials to select the Great Britain under 20 water polo squad are at Sheffield this weekend and among those invited are Middlesbrough's Paul Floyd and Lee Cooke.
From the squad the team will then be selected to play in a four-nations tournament at Charleroi, Belgium, on May 1–3.
Middlesbrough are away to Birkenhead on Saturday in the ASA's Plate  competition for teams knocked out of the national club senior championship.
MIDDLESBROUGH manager Lennie Lawrence will rely on his current squad for a final Second Division promotion push.
There will be no beat-the-deadline signing.
Goalkeeper Stephen Pears is prepared to play after his cheekbone operation, and Lawrence has decided not to recruit a young player to deputise for suspended Jimmy Phillips.
Lawrence said: ‘I am not prepared to sign a player who would go into the reserves after three games.
‘I think the squad is good enough to cope with any injuries we might suffer.
We have a good spirit and I don't want to do anything which might put it at risk.’
Midfielder Willie Falconer is lined up to deputise for Phillips, who was sent off for violent conduct against Southend United.
The former Scottish Under-21 international wore the No.3 shirt for Aberdeen and was signed by Watford as a left back.
Coun Eddie Bolland, the Mayor of Middlesbrough, will have a penalty-taking practice session against Pears tomorrow.
The mayor is preparing for a charity penalty shoot-out competition at the Leicester City-Middlesbrough game next Wednesday.
Coun Bolland feels he needs the practice.
He has not kicked a ball for 20 years.
SCARBOROUGH manager Ray McHale last night plunged into the transfer market to strengthen his injury-depleted squad before this afternoon's transfer deadline, and said: ‘Scarborough will be going all out to get promoted next season.’
McHale, who is set to receive a significant increase in his budget for next season, has signed four players and expects to increase that to five today.
Barnsley striker Colin Marshall, 22, and Rotherham goalkeeper Stuart Ford, 20, have both joined Scarborough on loan until the end of the season.
Hartlepool striker Ricardo Gabbiadini, 22, younger brother of Marco, has signed for a month's trial, with a view to a possible longer-term deal.
Former Middlesbrough defender Owen McGee, 21, yesterday completed his move to the McCain Stadium while centreback Mark Ogley is expected to sign from Aldershot today.
McHale revealed: ‘Basically, it's down to them to come here and impress.
They could all be in contention to secure longer deals.
‘This season has been a gamble.
We've thrown in lots of youngsters but really the players’ budget has basically been the same for five years,’he said.
Realistically, I have been fighting against the odds since I took over.
We need three or four decent players to give us a chance of getting promoted.’
A GUIDE through the red tape to set up  after-school care schemes has been launched by Cleveland Council for Voluntary Service.
‘Cut the Hassle’ can be obtained from the CCVS office in Princes Road, Middlesbrough.
Spokesman Bernard Storey said the schemes provide much-needed care for children aged between five and 14 out of school hours during term-time and in school holidays.
The guide, which costs £5, plus 50p postage, describes in detail how to set up and run a successful after-school and holiday care scheme, plus vital information such as basic legal requirements.
CAN anyone help solve the devil of a mystery over a Middlesbrough landmark?
A sandstone bridge at the meeting of Newham and Marton West becks in Acklam has been known as Devil's Bridge for 200 years but no one knows why.
Yesterday an ‘imp’ from nearby Newham Bridge primary school took a view from the bridge to try to solve the mystery.
Shirley Muir, beck valleys officer for Middlesbrough Council, said: ‘Residents believe its name may refer to days when monks used the route to get to and from abbeys.
‘Maps refer to Newham Bridge, but if anyone can shed light on the Devil's Bridge name, we would use it on display boards.’
ANGLING'S most colourful match star Jan Porter, of Nottingham, is touring the country with a brand new angling road show, which comes to Middlesbrough Town Hall Crypt next Thursday (7.30 to 11pm).
Among the exhibitors will be Van Den Eynde, Octoplus, Garbolino, Ignesti, and Halken Hunt.
Jan will make two 45-minute appearances on stage discussing a wide variety of topics and answering questions.
Admission will cost £2.50 for adults and £1 for under 16s.
Gale-lashed Hemlington Lake was more like the North Sea for Saturday's opening Middlesbrough NFA team fund-raiser.
Jeff Herbert (Anglers Choice) opted for the feeder with the wind in his face on the dolomite bank.
Feeding bloodworm and odd casters, he pinned his faith on redworm on the hook.
A  hybrid and common carp of a pound apiece obliged, followed by a mirror carp, taking his winning score to 3–8–0.
Northallerton Match Group's Steve Russell, drawn on the sheltered path of the lake, utilised the pole to good effect and put together an all-gudgeon bag of 3–2–0 falling to bloodworm at seven metres.
Others: Steve Cooper (Middlesbrough Newman Scotts) 2lb 14oz; Dave Harvey (Anglers Choice) 2–9–0.
Cold conditions greeted Ferryhill and District members for their Pattinson Cup on Teesdale Pond and most sport came from the deep water pegs.
Clyde Burgess drew the deepest, 18ft at ten metres from the bank, and alternated between the pole and feeder with maggot, netting nine skimmer bream for a winning total of 4–13–0.
Herbert Lynne was second with 2–13–0 from Melvyn Shadforth on 2–12–8.
The water has just been stocked with roach and rudd from Leazes Park in Newcastle and the club plans to introduce more fish from other venues.
The brown trout season opened on the rivers last Sunday and Thornaby AA enjoyed a tremendous response as 74 anglers competed for the Trout Cup on the Tees between Croft and Hurworth.
The river was carrying nearly three foot of extra water and most struggled for bites.
Darlington's Robert Willis float fished maggot at peg 62 above the salmon pool, tempting five brownies and winning easily with 3–8–0.
George Hodgson filled the next spot, landing three fish for 1–14–0 off the waterfall swim in the Butcher's field from Carl Aldorfer 1–9–0.
Leighton Reservoir: 120 anglers grassed 294 trout.
Top fish of the week, a magnificent rainbow of 5lb 12oz was landed by Fred King (Nunthorpe) on a black lead head from the road bridge end of the reservoir.
Most productive lures vivas, black flash, and montanas.
Fixtures: March 28 Middlesbrough NFA Team Open, Hemlington Lake, 9am — 2pm.
March 29 — Durham City AC Fly Match, Tunstall Reservoir; details from Mr G March, tel: 091–3869531.
March 30 Middlesbrough AC meeting, 7.30pm, Middlesbrough Golf Club.
April 1 Progress on the Tees barrage.
Meeting 7.30pm at the Georgian Theatre, Green Dragon Yard, Stockton.
All welcome.
April 2 Jan Porter Angling Show, 7.30pm Middlesbrough Town Hall Crypt.
Thirsk AC meeting, 7.30pm, Lord Nelson, Thirsk.
MOWDEN Park will be content with a one-point victory when they visit Darlington tomorrow.
They need either to win by more than 50 points or rely on Darlington RA beating Bishop Auckland if they are to pip Bishops for the third promotion place from Durham and Northumberland Division One.
But chairman of rugby John Widdall said: ‘Our derby matches are always very tight.
The only way we will go up is if RA do us a favour.’
Mowden will hold an extra training session tonight in the hope of repeating last season's 6–0 win.
Full back Andy Craggs and centre Neil Holland return, with Dave Wray reverting to fly half.
Mowden Park: A Craggs, S Towns (capt), B Cowton, N Holland, G Edwards, D Wray, T Teesdale, E Rankin, A Westgarth, M Philbin, R Wilson, K Robinson, J Whitehouse, I Dunnabie, C Gibson.
Middlesbrough complete their North Division One programme at home to Widnes without lock Steve Howe, who is moving to Nottingham and has yet to make a decision about his playing future.
Tony Wilkinson moves to lock, with Clive Freeman coming in at No 8, while prop Phil Wright, flanker Peter Millichip and full back Ian Stallard return.
Durham City hope to climb further away from danger in National Division Four North at home to Towcestrians, who are two places above them.
Veteran flanker Mike Howard, a late replacement in last week's 44–6 win against Seaham, keeps his place as Andy Harle is unavailable for the rest of the season.
Lock Graham Wanless returns for Steve Lynn, and hooker Mike Fenwick, also unavailable last week, is on the bench.
FOUR Durham City players have been selected for the England under 16s trial at Castlecroft, Wolverhampton, this weekend.
They are full back Jonathan Benson, centre Chris Blacklock, scrum half Phil Harvey and flanker Jeffrey Roberts.
Roberts' elder brother David recently captained England Colts against Italy under 18s and is in the squad for the Home Internationals.
FRANCE'S leading rugby writers yesterday took their hats off to England by naming 11 of Will Carling's Grand Slam team in their International Championship XV for 1992.
The journalists from France's national sporting daily L'Equipe picked the whole front five and all the threequarters, with two Scotsmen and two Frenchmen making up their imaginary side.
J Webb (England), S Halliday (England), W Carling (England), J Guscott (England), R Underwood (England), R Andrew (England), M Nicol (Scotland), J Leonard (England), B Moore (England), J Probyn (England), M Bayfield (England), W Dooley (England), J-F Tordo (France), D White (Scotland), L Cabannes (France).
IRELAND'S squad for the tour of New Zealand in May and June is: Backs: K Murphy (Cork Constitution), J Staples (London Irish), R Wallace (Garryowen), P Danaher (Garryowen, capt), M Ridge (Blackrock College), N Furlong (UCG), R Carey (Dungannon), V Cunningham (St Mary's College), M McCall (Bangor), J Clarke (Dolphin), D McAleese (Ballymena), P Russell (Instonians), F Aherne (Lansdowne), M Bradley (Cork Con).
Forwards: N Popplewell (Greystones), T Clancy (London Irish), S Smith (Ballymena), T Kingston (Dolphin), G Halpin (London Irish), P McCarthy (Cork Con), N Francis (Blackrock (College), M Galwey (Shannon), B Rigney (Greystones), R Costello (Garryowen), G Hamilton (Ballymena), M Fitzgibbon (Shannon) K Leahy (Wanderers), B Robinson (Ballymena), N Mannion (Lansdowne), P Lawlor (Bective Rangers).
Middlesbrough Bears 41 Slangerup 47 THIS was set to be one of the most exciting challenges for the opening of a new season at Middlesbrough's Cleveland Park last night, but wet and miserable conditions turned it into something of a farce.
The slippery track made it a follow-the-leader procession in most of the 15 races with the visitors from Denmark's Super League uncertain in the early stages and the Boro's new look team sliding to defeat as they lost their grip in the final six heats.
American newcomer Donny Odom started well and finished unluckily, but Mark Lemon could not get anything right on a disastrous night which started with a crash into the safety fence and finished with an engine failure.
Only Daz Sumner, back with the Bears after spending a year in the first division with Belle Vue, was at ease on a track where he is aware of all the wrinkles.
Dave Cheshire and newly signed Steve Regeling, the team's new captain, were happy to get through a difficult night without injury.
Regeling, who had one nasty fall, had to wait until the last race for his first win.
In contrast, reserve Duncan Chapman with two wins from his four rides boosted his confidence.
The defeat for Boro was of little significance and in the end the first division experience of several of the Danes had a telling effect.
Middlesbrough: Daz Sumner 11, Steve Regeling 8, Dave Cheshire 7, Duncan Chapman 7, Donny Odom 6, Mark Lemon 2, Paul Pickering 0.
Slangerup: Peter Ravn 13, Jan Pedersen 8, Per Sorensen 8, Lars Munkedal 7, Jesper Olsen 5, Bo Sorensen 5, Jan Staechmann 1.
POST Office workers put up a first class performance blasting round Britain's fastest motor racing circuits in a Royal Mail delivery van.
Middlesbrough men John Rigg and Jim Stokes donned crash helmets and fire-proof overalls to take part in the Sealink Stena Challenge.
Even though their Ford Escort van was up against pukka racing cars like the MG Metro 6R4 and Ford's turbo-charged Sierra Cosworth, the pair were far from disgraced.
In fact, their van, which is normally used for delivering letters in the Darlington district, was such a success that Ford technicians refused to believe it was a standard production line van.
When an expert from Ford's competitions department at Boreham approached the pair, John said, he could not believe how well they were going.
‘When I told him that the van was standard apart from a roll cage he found it even more difficult to accept.
They were intrigued by our entry and thought we had installed a much more powerful engine.’
During the five-day event the little red van covered almost 2,500 trouble-free miles and tore round 17 circuits in England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales.
Competitors had to drive around the country's top racing circuits within the five-day time period.
If they did not make it they were excluded from the event.
The daring drivers found each circuit a fresh challenge.
John, who is a former stock car racer, said: ‘Silverstone was so long we were flat out in fifth for most of the way.
Our favourite was Brands Hatch, where we had a really good time.’
As part of the event John and Jim collected £1,200 for charity which will be split between the British Heart Foundation, North Riding Infirmary, Motability and British Paralympics.
Handling the cheques over yesterday John said: ‘It was great fun and we would love to have another go sometime in the future.’
FORMER Yorkshire and England cricket all-rounder Chris Old has been ‘bowled over’ by local interest in the fast-moving game Kwik Cricket.
He has been in charge of a three-part training course to introduce the game to school teachers and group leaders in the Middlesbrough area.
Over 60 turned up at the first two sessions at the town's Southlands Centre.
Top Tees ‘matron’ retires Gifts including a gold watch and a music centre were presented to Mrs Val Moore, of Great Ayton, when she retired as director of nursing at South Tees acute unit.
Her 40-year career began at Whitby, but nearly all that time has been spent in Teesside hospitals, including senior  positions at Middlesbrough General, Poole and North Ormesby.
As a volunteer, she is to advise the new Alzheimer's Society centre on the Teesdale complex.
FORMER Middlesbrough player Gary Pallister could win a coveted award tomorrow night.
The 26-year-old Manchester United defender is a strong candidate for the Professional Footballers' Association Player of the Year Trophy.
Pallister has been a key figure in United's bid to win the First Division championship for the first time in 25 years.
A player who began his career with Billingham Town is on a short-list of six which, surprisingly, includes three other defenders.
Forwards and midfield players have dominated the PFA awards since its inception.
Colin Todd (Derby) and Norman Hunter (Leeds) are the only defenders to have won in 18 years.
Pallister's rivals are: Steve Bruce (Manchester United); Stuart Pearce (Nottingham Forest; Paul McGrath (Aston Villa); Gary Lineker (Spurs); Ray Houghton (Liverpool).
Pallister won the backing of Middlesbrough players even before he kicked off the line in the Rumbelows League Cup semi-final at Old Trafford.
Skipper Alan Kernaghan said: ‘Pallister has been very consistent and has played a major part in Manchester United's success.
‘I always rated Pally at Ayresome Park, but there is no doubt he has blossomed on a bigger stage.
‘He is outstanding in the air and has good composure.
A lot of people don't realise he has electrifying pace.
‘Just when a player thinks he is past him, Pally will stick out a long leg and nick the ball off him.
Or kick off the goal-line.
‘I think he deserves the award.’
Guest of honour Trevor Brooking will present the award before a distinguished gathering at a top London hotel.
DARLINGTON manager Ray Hankin will play the youngest team in the club's history before the end of the season.
Hankin promised: ‘I will have eight or nine youngsters in the side by the time we play Exeter in our final match.
‘I aim to concentrate on youth, with one or two old heads.
It's the only way to progress.
‘It may take time, but eventually supporters will have something to look forward to.’
Five young players will figure in today's promotion-relegation clash at Peterborough.
Teenager Anthony Isaacs starts his second game, alongside Mark Sunley, Sean Gregan, Steve Gaughan and Gary Hinchley.
Lee Ellison, Lee Tucker, Simon Shaw and Richard Cooper are waiting in the wings.
Hankin added: ‘Ellison scored a lot of goals earlier in the season.
But he was kept in the first team for too long.
He lost a bit of confidence and the goals dried up.’
Peterborough and Darlington are heading in opposite directions after sharing promotion glory last season.
The Posh are making a strong promotion challenge and their experienced, hard-running side knocked Liverpool out of the Rumbelows League Cup and impressed in defeat against Middlesbrough.
They hit a good League run after the Cup knock-out, before two successive defeats checked their progress.
Hankin said: ‘I had 18 fabulous months as a player at Peterborough.
They have always been a club with potential, and that potential appears to have been realised this season.
‘They have had a brilliant season, but we will go out to win.
‘In our position, there is no point in sitting back for a draw.’
Seventeen players have been chosen for the trip, with a final choice delayed until just before the kick-off.
Midfielder Mick Tait is included after completing a four-match ban.
Team from: Prudhoe, McJannet, Sunley, Gregan, Gaughan, Toman, Tait, Cusack, Cork, Pickering, Isaacs, Borthwick, Smith, Hinchley, Coverdale, Tucker, Mardenborough.
BACK: Mick Tait
SKIPPER Alan Kernaghan is confident of automatic promotion if Middlesbrough maintain their current form.
A win over rivals Charlton Athletic today would be a tremendous boost for a demanding ten-match April programme.
Kernaghan said: ‘If we can maintain our superb Ayresome Park record, and not lose our final away games, we have a great chance of going up.
‘Charlton could be as tough a fixture as any, but we have got our act together after struggling on our travels earlier in the season.’
Kernaghan has no regrets about rejecting a move to Charlton last summer after manager Lennie Lawrence switched clubs.
The 24-year-old central defender has hit the best form of his career.
Kernaghan reflected on his experiences with three previous manager.
‘Willie Maddren, for some reason, thought I was big-headed.
‘Bruce Rioch switched me around, though to be fair he improved my game.
‘Colin Todd told me centre half was my position, but he listened to the crowd and made me a scapegoat after a Cup defeat at Aston Villa.
‘I have a good relationship with Lawrence and the fans, and I'm pleased with the way the season has gone.
‘We have a good promotion chance and my form has been very consistent.
‘In the past, I got too hyped up because I wanted to do well.
I was nervous on the ball and made mistakes.
‘I have felt the benefit of a more relaxed approach this season.’
Lawrence should receive a terrific welcome from Charlton fans, who respect his tremendous nine-year service with the London club.
There will be no room for sentiment once the game gets underway.
There is too much at stake.
Lawrence said: ‘Charlton was a memorable part of my life.
But that belongs to football history.
My return could give them a lift.’
On the other hand, Lawrence's knowledge of Charlton could give Boro a tactical advantage.
With Jamie Pollock and Jimmy Phillips suspended, Mark Proctor and Stuart Ripley return in midfield for Boro.
Willie Falconer will deputise at left back.
Team: Pears, Fleming, Falconer, Kernaghan, Mohan, Peake, Slaven, Proctor, Wilkinson, Hendrie, Ripley.
Substitutes from Payton, Gittens, Kavanagh.
Charlton, bidding for their fourth successive League win, include on-loan striker David Whyte from Crystal Palace and another loaned striker, John Hendry, who returns to Tottenham on Monday.
Charlton from: Bolder; Pitcher, Minto, Pardew, Webster, Balmer, Lee, Bumstead, Leaburn, Nelson, Walsh, Hendry, Barness, Whyte, Gritt.
A LEISURE club for the over 50s which opened three months ago is to close next week due to lack of members.
The Age Concern Cleveland club switched from the St Mary's Centre in Corporation Road, Middlesbrough, to the New Albert Club in the town's Grange Road.
Organisers hoped that the move nearer to the town centre would increase the financial viability.
But after three months hard work, publicity and campaigning there remained only a small core of about 30 people regularly using the club.
Dave Punshon, Age Concern's chief officer, said they did not have the funds to bear such heavy losses.
‘We will try to relocate the various activities as close to the town centre as possible,’ he said.
‘Any member who requires a refund of their membership fees should call at Age Concern Cleveland, 150 Linthorpe Road.’
Mr Punshon said it should be  remembered that membership was of the organisation not the club.
William Guthrie, owner of the New Albert, said it was sad that the catering facility had not taken off.
‘But those members of the group who joined the club are still very welcome to use the premises for a cup of tea or a sit down,’ he said.
EFFORTS to get Cleveland scrapped and Yorkshire restored to its former boundaries are being stepped up with renewed efforts by white-rose enthusiasts.
Members of the Campaign for Real Yorkshire were in Middlesbrough on Saturday gathering signatures on a petition.
They hoped to collect ‘at least a thousand’ names.
Spokesman Nigel Wilkin, of Yarm, said Cry was being supported by several groups within the territorial county of Yorkshire.
‘During the spring Cry hopes to gather many thousands of signatures all over real Yorkshire in order to convince the Local Government Commission that Yorkshire people wish to see their county made whole again,’ he said.
‘We all have somewhere that we call home whether it's Yorkshire, Middlesex or Scotland,’ said Mr Wilkin.
‘If you try to tell someone one night he went to bed in one county and woke up in another and he was no longer a Yorkshireman, he gets more than a bit upset.’
THE traditional skills of hedge-laying are being revived in Cleveland on land recently acquired by the county council for public open  space .
Over 150 metres of roadside hedge has been laid at the top of Ormesby Bank, Middlesbrough, under the urban fringe scheme.
The work was carried out by 80 people.
Senior project officer Brian Spink said: ‘In the spring, new young shoots will come up from the stumps and ‘pleachers’ to form a thick hedge.
Before the days of barbed wire and creosoted posts, all hedges were managed this way, any gaps being filled with the thorny prunings, known as dead hedge.’
Crying out:
Whitby's town crier, Andy Lowe, is staging a national contest for criers in the town on June 21.
ELVIS nut Brian Davies was crying in the chapel yesterday with tears of joy.
The King lookalike couldn't help falling in love with Lynn Willoughby and yesterday they tied the knot.
To a background of Elvis love songs, the couple made their vows at St Thomas More Church in Middlesbrough, Cleveland.
Brian, known as S J Stephens on the North-East club circuit, is renowned for his Elvis impersonations.
Yesterday he donned white suit and cowboy boots for the service while Lynn sported a white silk wedding gown.
Brian, 44, said: ‘I've been an Elvis fan since 1954 and have all his records.
It seemed the natural thing to have him singing at the wedding.
Lynn's a wonderful person, you can't help falling in love with her.’
Lynn, 38, confessed she wasn't as nutty about Elvis as her new hubby, but admitted she's growing to love the King.
‘I have varied music tastes, but gradually I'm being converted to Elvis.
Brian's a smashing bloke, I'm sure he'll Love Me Tender.’
SPEAKING after a visit to the headquarters of the Cleveland Ambulance Service, Paul Raynor, Conservative candidate for Middlesbrough, said the government's NHS reforms were already bringing tremendous benefits to the people of Cleveland.
He said spending on the service had increased by 63pc over the last three years.
More significantly, the organisation was now free to manage itself so as to give a better  service to patients.
‘The re-equipment programme means that in June of this year it will be the first ambulance service in the country to have a fully trained paramedic in every ambulance,’ he said.
He said the emphasis on staff training meant that in May it expected to gain the prestigious BS5750 award for the quality of care it provides.
SOCCER player Colin Cooper told yesterday of his anger after furniture he put into storage was stolen in a burglary.
Cooper, who played left back for Middlesbrough before moving south to Millwall FC, had put much of the family's furniture into storage with W H Williams, of Byers Green, Spennymoor.
But he said when he and his pregnant wife Julie came to claim the furniture back, they were told it had vanished during a burglary in November.
Earlier this The Northern highlighted the plight of Fred Smith and Ann Clarey, of Glamis Terrace, Evenwood, who say they lost many of their electrical goods in the burglary.
Another couple, Joseph and Evelyn Greaves, are now having to live with daughter Susan Berry in Fir Tree after losing about £7,000 worth of belongings.
Detectives have already revealed they are investigating the removals firm, which customers have been told did not have adequate insurance to cover the loss from the burglary.
Cooper, whose Trimdon-based father, Denis, paid £69.16 including insurance said the firm collected his dining room suite and lounge furniture from a cottage in Elton, near Stockton, in August.
But the £2,500 suite and other items were missing from the load delivered in January.
‘My father discovered some of it had been stolen, even though he was still being sent a bill each month to cover storage,’ said Cooper.
‘We chose that company because we thought they were reputable and we had to do everything speedily.’
Mr and Mrs Greaves sold their home in Cleveleys, near Blackpool, to move north in May.
But when their belongings were delivered to their daughter's home in early December, they discovered many items were missing.
‘I was appalled.
My parents have lost about £7,000 worth of things,’ said Mrs Berry.
Yesterday Carl Williams, a company director, said the matter was being dealt with.
SCARBOROUGH fans are being offered a summer ‘sale of the century’ on season tickets by ambitious chairman Geoffrey Richmond.
Season ticket holders will get a FREE pass for the 1993–4 campaign if the club fails to figure in the promotion frame next year.
And manager Ray McHale is to get a £50,000 boost for players' wages at a time when most clubs are planning drastic cut-backs.
‘We've run a very tight ship and we feel now is the time to take advantage of that by substantially increasing the manager's budget,’ said Richmond.
He said Scarborough fully intend to get promoted next season in what will be their sixth year as a Football League club.
‘We've been in the League five years and have decided now is the time to really go for promotion.’
If the Seasiders fail to finish in the top seven of the new Third Division next term, pass holders will get a free season ticket for the following campaign.
‘Season tickets will be marketed between now and the end of the season at half-price rates based on this season's match-day prices,’ said Richmond.
‘We're also giving a guarantee with the tickets that in the event that we don't obtain promotion or fail to reach the play-offs, we will give free tickets for the next season.’
Richmond said the unique offer would ensure fans get value for money: ‘Scarborough folk are a bit canny and its up to us to give value for money.
We hope they will respond in a very positive way.
‘This offer is dramatic.
Nothing like it has ever been done before.’
Richmond and the club's five directors have agreed to increase McHale's wages budget by 25pc to give the manager a chance to bring in better quality players.
Players who a year ago would have cost between £20,000 and £70,000 will be on free transfers this summer but will still demand good wages.
Newcomers shine McHale has already drawn up a list of possible transfer targets.
He is looking for a goalkeeper, centre-back, midfielder and striker.
SCARBOROUGH'S version of New Faces worked well for experimenting manager McHale at the McCain Stadium on Saturday.
The Seasiders cantered to victory against a hard-working Halifax outfit, despite the presence of four newcomers in the 13.
Former Middlesbrough defender Owen McGee was the pick of the new boys and McHale must be hoping the trialist can repeat his debut display.
‘Owen came into defence and did a good job.
Overall, it was a good performance and we took our chances well so that it was all over by halftime,’ said McHale.
‘Because of the injury situation we had to throw in four new lads and they fitted in quickly.
We're giving them a chance to show us what they can do.’
It was McGee who started the goal rush by winning the ball at the back and playing it forward to John Ashdjian who flicked-on to Mark Jules.
Jules laid the ball off to on-loan Barnsley striker Colin Marshall who ran on and hit the target from just outside the box with the help of the far post.
Leading scorer Tommy Mooney netted his eleventh goal of the campaign on 38 minutes.
Jules helped the ball on and Mooney outpaced Russell Bradley before firing past Lee Bracey.
It was 3–0 seconds before half time when Mooney sent Simon Thompson through the middle and after being forced wide by Alan Kamara still managed to beat Bracey from 15 yards.
Halifax battered Scarborough for ten minutes after half-time and from the third of a series of corners, Dave Evans rattled a shot against the crossbar.
Middlesbrough's on-loan keeper, Ian Ironside, made a fine save to prevent Paul Wilson from reducing the deficit with a well-struck drive.
But the Shaymen with just nine away goals all season failed to break through and Scarborough tried to add to their tally.
Mooney headed just over under pressure from Bracey while Jules had a goal-bound shot cleared off the line by Billy Barr.
As McHale plans ahead for next season, the arrival of McGee and Co.
suggests that some of the answers could be on the McCain Stadium doorstep.
ALL FALL DOWN: Halifax skipper Alan Kamara tangles with Scarborough's Simon Thompson
A CHANGE of tactics has put Middlesbrough on course for promotion with a realistic chance of a top-two spot.
Middlesbrough will not figure in high-scoring games or football classics away from home.
The emphasis will be on a rigid pattern, solid defensive work and team discipline.
It may not be entertaining but the target is a Premier League place.
Manager Lennie Lawrence devised the plan after his side lost 2–0 at Millwall on January 18.
He said: ‘I knew then that I had to box it up.
We could not afford a cavalier approach.
‘We have set our stall out.
We defend in numbers.
We don't leave any holes.
I have not done that before in my career, but I knew things would not happen for us without action being taken.
‘Stephen Pears was the key.
A good goalkeeper is essential for it to work.’
Since the defeat at The Den Middlesbrough have conceded only one League goal in five away matches.
Middlesbrough will complete matches against top-eight teams when they visit Leicester on Wednesday.
The aim is to stay in touch with the promotion pacemakers before a run-in of five home games out of seven.
Middlesbrough were happier than Charlton with a point at Upton Park.
The London side needed three points for their automatic promotion challenge and dominated the first half.
Pears pulled off the save of the match from a Garry Nelson header in the opening minutes.
Skipper Alan Kernaghan led by example at the heart of defence and Andy Peake did an excellent job against his former team.
Fortunately for Boro, Charlton were off target before Paul Wilkinson headed wide just before the break.
After Boro's only real threatening first-half attempt, Bernie Slaven shot across the face of the goal from an angle.
Central defender Nicky Mohan was booked for a foul on Nelson.
The caution takes Mohan to 21 points and a one-match ban that will rule him out of the home game against Barnsley.
Middlesbrough came more into the game as an attacking unit as the match wore on and could have won.
Substitute Andy Payton had a chance after Stuart Ripley went off with a dead leg.
From Peake's brilliant pass, Payton brought the ball well down but shot wide.
John Hendrie burst through in the closing minutes, but his strong shot was pushed away for a corner by Bob Bolder.
Middlesbrough face a gruelling ten-match programme in April.
Yet if they press home their advantage of games in hand, they will overtake Blackburn, who have shown a staggering decline recently and could be left to fight for a play-off place.
Pears shock omission MIDDLESBROUGH goalkeeper Stephen Pears is a shock omission from the PFA Second Division team of the year.
The vote has gone to Watford's David James.
Team: James, David Kerslake (Swindon), John Beresford (Portsmouth), David Linighan (Ipswich), Colin Calderwood (Swindon), Mike Hazard (Swindon), Gordon Cowans (Blackburn), Scott Sellars (Blackburn), Duncan Shearer (Swindon, now with Blackburn), John Aldridge (Tranmere), David Speedie (Blackburn.)
IT has been a bitter-sweet couple of days for Hartlepool.
First came the disappointing news that House of Fraser is to close its branch of Binns in the town.
Now it is confirmed that the Imperial War Museum will site its maritime branch there.
The latter news softens the impact of the former up to a point.
The House of Fraser decision was a savage blow for a town clinging rather tenuously to the belief that it is a regional shopping centre.
Without a major department store its reputation as a place to shop is significantly tarnished and the knock-on effects will be felt by other town centre traders.
The closure reflects the state of the town's economy.
The store had not been trading profitably for some time indicating there simply is not enough money circulating in the area to sustain it.
Its proximity to another, larger, Binns store in Middlesbrough only made it the obvious candidate for the axe.
The Imperial War Museum's arrival in the town and 300–400,000 visitors it is expected to attract every year is just the sort of development the town needs to help fend off an unjustified reputation recently and most controversially fostered by the Wall Street Journal as a dying town.
But the fact should also be faced that these two developments represent in microcosm what has happened and is happening in many of Britain's older industrial towns.
Real industry the making and selling of goods is giving way to the supplying of services and the heritage business.
There is nothing wrong with the service and tourism sectors, but overreliance on them produces an economy just as vulnerable to recession as previous versions built around heavy manufacturing industry.
Those responsible for bringing the Imperial War Museum to Hartlepool fully deserve the congratulations of the town.
But they also need to re-double their efforts to attract other companies to ensure a broad-based economy which will, hopefully, one day will be big enough again to make the likes of House of Fraser think about returning.
THREE Football League clubs showed interest when Kernaghan played schoolboy football in Bangor, Northern Ireland.
Scouts of Middlesbrough, Manchester United and Ipswich Town spotted the potential of a Yorkshire-born youngster.
Kernaghan, at 16, was not swayed by the glamour of the famous Manchester club.
He had enjoyed a trial with Middlesbrough and had been impressed by the set-up.
Kernaghan was also aware United invited 40 Irish youngsters over for trials during every school holiday.
Most returned home disillusioned with early hopes of the big-time shattered.
Middlesbrough manager John Neal signed Kernaghan and the player made good progress through the ranks.
With his versatility, he was a useful member of the first-team squad in his early days at Ayresome Park.
Kernaghan played as a striker or at the heart of defence.
He once struck a brilliant first-half hat-trick at Blackburn Rovers.
After the club's liquidation crisis in 1986, he shared in the fairytale rise from the Third Division to the First Division in successive seasons.
Kernaghan suffered the agony or relegation and looked to be on the way out of Ayresome Park when he joined Charlton Athletic on loan last season.
Charlton manager Lennie Lawrence discussed a permanent move to the London club.
The persuasive Lawrence convinced Kernaghan a change of clubs would be good for him.
Before a transfer could go through, Lawrence took over from Colin Todd at Ayresome Park.
Lawrence then had the task of persuading Kernaghan to forget about a move to London!
Kernaghan has not looked back since then.
He has shown the best form of his career and won over boo-boys on the Ayresome Park terraces.
He has also taken the responsibilities of team skipper in his stride.
Kernaghan has been Boro's most consistent defender and a key figure in the Second Division promotion drive.
His displays have not gone unnoticed at international level.
Republic of Ireland manager Jack Charlton has monitored his progress, particularly in stirring Rumbelows League Cup semi-final ties with Manchester United.
Kernaghan is eligible to play for Eire.
His grandparents were born in Belfast  before the 1921 ‘division’ of North and South.
Club commitments will rule Kernaghan out of a possible call-up when an American team visit Dublin at the end of April.
Kernaghan, however, hopes Big Jack will select him for a visit to the States at the end of May.
The more immediate target is promotion.
The next 11 games will determine whether Kernaghan leads Middlesbrough into the Premier League.
FACTFILE Born:Otley, 25.4.1957 Married:to Gillian Career record (league and cup matches) Middlesbrough.
League, 140 appearances, plus 40 substitute appearances, 13 goals.
FA Cup, 8 appearances, four substitute appearances, three goals.
League Cup, 20, seven substitute appearances, one goal.
Charlton Athletic (on loan).
League 13 appearances, no goals.
As a boy living in Middlesbrough and Redcar I was frequently called as ‘balmpot’ by my mother, possibly with some justification.
She was born in Middlesbrough and her parents and family were from Skelton, so I always assumed it to be a North Yorkshire expression.
In your article on the Emmerdale glossary, however, I see that Ruth Dent, Yorkshire Dialect Society chairman, says it does not relate to the North Riding.
I had not heard it used by anybody else until it was uttered by Jim Taggart, well known to TV  viewers as Glaswegian.
Can anyone tell me where ‘balmpot’ did originate as it has puzzled me for some 60 years?
Frank Berner, Salvin House, 7 St Charles Road, Spennymoor.
A POPULAR town centre cafe is creating up to 18 new jobs, thanks to a bumper cash boost from the local council.
Owners of Brambles Coffee Shop in Middlesbrough received a £21,970 grant which will enable it to expand at its Newport Road premises.
The money will go towards converting derelict cottages at the rear of the cafe.
The grant was one of several agreed by councillors on the economic development and planning committee.
Other grants recently given to firms include:— Barry Chow, Wilson Street, £14,880 to help modify empty building for take-away restaurant, with up to ten jobs created;— Ruby Tuesday, Parliament Road, £11,804 to help create extra space for planned business expansion by fashion accessories firm, with five additional jobs planned;— S Upex and Son, North Ormesby Road, £7,690 to help improve premises;— Tyne Tees Cash-and-Carry, Cargo Fleet Lane, £20,975 to help reconstruction of access road and security fencing;— A Razzaq, Linthorpe Road, £6,667 to help refurbish property used as a take-away restaurant;— Laing Employment Training Organisation, Parliament Road, £1,908 to help with site security at its base in the old Cleveland Transit bus depot;— Fletcher Investment Consultants, Wilson Street, £1,108 towards painting and cleaning outside of premises.
GEORGE Blackett, who has been looking after the safety of council workers and buildings in Middlesbrough since 1974, is retiring through ill health.
He trained as a safety officer with ICI before joining the council at a time when the Health and Safety at Work Act greatly uncreased the duties of local authorities.
‘It was very much a case of starting from scratch introducing new systems and procedures,’ said George, 58, who lives in Billingham and at times had responsibility for 132 different premises and up to 2,500 employees.
Highlights of George's council career include the overhaul of the sewer safety system in Middlesbrough, since copied countrywide, and the major safety and public relations exercise prompted by the discovery of asbestos when flats in Corringham Walk, Netherfields, were being demolished.
Coun John Jones, chairman of the central safety committee, said: ‘The council's safety record is, to a large extent, down to him.’
The private, public and voluntary sectors were all heavily represented at the Marton Hotel and Country Club, Middlesbrough.
Sara Clay, of Face Ltd, who organised the conference with Teesside Training and Enterprise Councils, said the day was the first of its kind in the North.
‘In our research, we found disabled people were being discouraged from even thinking about setting up in business,’ she said.
‘There was a lack of information and a lack of communication between the agencies involved.
‘You would find enterprise agencies did not know what to do with a disabled person they would refer them elsewhere and lose the problem.’
Ms Clay said the system was like ‘spaghetti junction,’ discouraging disabled people from trying to get started.
In a speech at the conference, Bill Gulliver, a blind person who runs his own business, said: ‘Some firms exemplify blindness not in terms of visual impairment, but crass ignorance.
‘My wife asked a computer firm about their policy on employing people with disabilities.
She was told: ‘We wouldn't be able to employ people like you.
The floor is highly polished and you would keep slipping over.’‘
John Howell, chief executive of Teesside TEC, said the TEC was well-placed to offer training and enterprise support to disabled people.
‘We actively encourage people with special needs,’ he added.
‘There are undoubtedly people who could go through self-help programmes and become economically active.’
Mr Howell said the ‘spaghetti junction’ of organisations had partially stemmed from the economic regeneration funds pumped into the North-East.
This had ‘spawned a variety of groups and caused confusion,’ he said.
‘We hope the TECs can focus people's minds on solving specific problems,’ added Mr Howell.
‘We also must start conditioning people's minds that we can help.
They must come forward.’
OPPONENTS of a five-a-side soccer centre plan have vowed to mount a more organised protest this time around.
Hundreds of people spoke out against Anchor International's scheme to bring ten floodlit pitches to Clairville Common, Middlesbrough, last year.
The plan was scrapped when magistrates refused a drinks licence for the £1.25m complex, but Anchor has submitted a second application.
Tony Coleman, who led the opposition previously, said the dissenting voices would not go away.
‘We have already met once and will meet again later this week to discuss detailed tactics,’ he said.
‘But last time was an ad hoc protest.
This time we will be more organised.’
Mr Coleman said opponents of the scheme were ‘disgusted’ that their views seemed to be ignored by Middlesbrough Borough Council, which backs the scheme.
Another protester said: ‘There is massive anger in the area.
The protests will be bigger and louder this time.’
A STUDENT barred by police from canoeing over England's mightiest waterfall has been seriously injured in a daredevil river plunge.
Richard Fish, 24, told from his hospital bed last night how he fractured his spine in three places when his bid to equal the world canoe free-fall record for a second time went ‘horribly wrong.’
Richard was in ‘unbearable pain’ after canoeing over the 50ft Sgwd-yr-Eira single-drop fall in South Wales and hitting the water at about 80mph.
Last summer, he and fellow Teesside Polytechnic student Paul Kuiken, 19, were prevented by police from becoming the first to canoe over the 72-ft High Force waterfall in Teesdale because of fears they would be killed.
Richard said: ‘I was heading for a perfect landing, but leaned back and landed flat.
I knew it had gone horribly wrong and it was going to hurt.
‘The pain was pretty unbearable.
I thought it was my spine but I could move my limbs so I thought it couldn't be too bad.’
After being hauled out by rescuers using a rope, he was helped up 300-ft high steps and a mile-and-a-half across moorland before changing back at his car and travelling back to Middlesbrough where the extent of his injuries were discovered.
He is expected to be fit again within eight weeks, but faces regular physiotherapy and has been ordered to rest completely.
Only about a dozen canoeists, including Richard and Paul, have conquered Sgwd-yr-Eira in the Brecon beacons Paul broke three ribs when the pair achieved the feat in January.
Now, they say they are going ahead with plans to go over High Force later this year.
‘We believe it's less dangerous because it is a staggered fall,’ said Richard.
SEVEN years after leaving the dole queue Gary Pallister has won the PFA Player of the Year award.
The tribute from fellow professionals is another achievement in the remarkable story of the Manchester United player who is proud of his North-East roots.
Pallister was never chosen for a district or county side when he played schoolboy football on Teesside.
When Grimsby offered him his first trial with a Football League club, he gave away a penalty after two minutes.
When Middlesbrough gave him a chance, he had a nightmare debut against Oldham Reserves.
Pallister recovered from early setbacks when he could so easily have drifted back into Northern League football.
His success as a central defender, at Ayresome Park and Old Trafford, has been well documented.
Yet Pallister began as a centre forward in schools football, with ambitions of being a goalscoring professional.
Pallister recalled the day he was switched to defence for Blakeston School.
‘Our centre half had just taken part in an all-night ice skating event for charity.
He had a terrible game, because he was so tired.
‘A teacher was annoyed when he found out what had happened.
He shouted: ‘Watson off, Pallister centre half.’
From then on, I was a centre half.
‘In my last year at school another teacher roared with laughter when I said I wanted to be a professional footballer.
Maybe he had heard it so many times.’
Pallister played for Stockton Sixth Form College and was with Billingham Town when a scout asked him if he would like to play for Grimsby.
‘I was gobsmacked.
The following morning, the scout picked me up and I went for a trial.
Peter Beagrie, who was also in the car, is now with Everton.
‘After my disastrous penalty give-away, Peter and I played quite well and were invited back.’
Fortunately for Middlesbrough, scout Barrie Geldart stepped on the scene and arranged a trial at Ayresome Park.
Reserve team manager Willie Maddren offered Pallister words of comfort after a disastrous performance.
‘Pallister was a raw youngster among strangers in strange surroundings.
He was against professionals who were older and fitter.
‘I told Gary I would keep tabs on him.
But I could see from the look in his eyes that he did not believe me.
Yet I felt there was something in his game to work on.’
When Maddren was appointed manager, he sent for Pallister, who was working as a time clerk and playing non-League football.
Middlesbrough had financial problems and local businessman Dick Corden sponsored Pallister's wages for several months.
Corden, who later joined the boards of Middlesbrough and Darlington, explained the reason behind his generous gesture.
‘I had seen Middlesbrough lose some of their best young talent in players like David Hodgson, Craig Johnston and Mark Proctor.
As a season ticket holder, I wanted to try and help the club maintain their youth policy.
‘Stephen, my son, and Gary made their Boro debuts on the opening day of the 1985–6 season at Wimbledon.
‘Stephen broke a leg and never played another League game.
He is happy with Whitby Town, though, and studying for an engineering degree.
‘Gary has gone on to prove himself an international class player.
I am thrilled for him.
He is a smashing lad.
I am proud of an England shirt he gave me.’
Manchester United broke the British record when they paid £2.3m for Pallister three years ago.
Pallister recalled: ‘What some people in the game said at the time left a bad taste in my mouth.
Those who thought I was only interested in money were wrong.
I had a great contract at Middlesbrough.
‘Middlesbrough were going through a bad patch at the time.
The younger players, like myself, were giving 100 per cent, but some of the senior players could not care less.
‘Manchester United offered me a contract that was only just better than the one I was on at Ayresome Park.
But Manchester United are a world-famous club and I was ready for a new challenge.’
Pallister survived a traumatic start at Old Trafford to win FA Cup and European Cupwinners Cup medals, and now the First Division championship is within United's grasp.
‘The present players are constantly reminded of the Busby Babes and great names of the past.
‘It would be terrific if we could win the title for the first time in 25 years.’
United manager Alex Ferguson recognises Pallister as a key figure in a title drive.
Ferguson said: ‘Pallister has played under the pressure of a huge £2.3m fee, without having many honours to show for being one of the country's most expensive players.
‘The PFA award is confirmation from people he respects.
I am sure it will do nothing but further his belief in himself.’
Manchester United registered an astonishing double for the second year running as Welsh whizz-kid Ryan Giggs won the Young Player of the Year title.
Last year, United striker Mark Hughes won the main award, with Lee Sharpe rated the best youngster.
The PFA's Merit Award, in the past handed to such luminaries as Bill Shankly, Tom Finney and Matt Busby, went to Forest boss Brian Clough.
Slovenia in Milk Race CYCLING: Yugoslavia, who last competed in the Milk Race 30 years ago, will be represented by the breakaway state of Slovenia, which has joined the Commonwealth of Independent States in taking up the last places in a record field of 18 teams.
The race starts from Penzance on May 24 and ends in Lincoln two weeks and 1,150 miles later.
Slovenia's team will include Bogdan Fink, bronze medallist in the 1990 world junior road race championship at Middlesbrough.
Pyatt steps up BOXING: Chris Pyatt will make his middleweight debut in Norwich tonight against American Melvin Wynn with a debt of thanks to Chris Eubank and Nigel Benn, who have moved up to the 12-stone division.
Plain sailing YACHTING: New Zealand beat Japan's Nippon by one minute 43 seconds in the first of the America's Cup challengers' semi-finals off San Diego, California.
Big entry BOXING: More than 250 fighters from 21 countries will compete in the European Under-19 amateur championships in Edinburgh from April 6–11.
Widnes blow RUGBY LEAGUE: Widnes and former Great Britain half back David Hulme, 27, is out for the rest of the season after dislocating his shoulder in Sunday's defeat at Featherstone.
Sainz roars on MOTORSPORT: Spaniard Carlos Sainz extended his lead to 18 minutes after the fourth leg of the Kenya Safari Rally yesterday.
Bobby's best
FOOTBALL: Bobby Charlton was yesterday hailed the outstanding player of the last eight European Championship finals in a poll of 135 football journalists from 25 European countries.
Cole stays
FOOTBALL: Arsenal have agreed to extend the one-month loan of striker Andrew Cole, 20, to Bristol City for the rest of the season.
Adams' title
BADMINTON: England international Mick Adams, the Yorkshire County player, swept to victory in the final of the Hull Open Badminton Championship, beating Colin Haughton (Lancs) 15–9, 15–9, in the final.
Olazabal leads
GOLF: Leading places in the Volvo European Tour Order of Merit after the Volvo Open in Florence: 1 J M Olazabal (Spain)
£130,985.83, 2 J Rivero (Spain) £124,320, 3 R Rafferty (N Ire)
£113,663.33, 4 A Forsbrand (Swe) £108,043.33, 5 S Ballesteros (Spain)
£105,575.
SPENNYMOOR-BASED Yvonne Bell seems to have discovered a top hurdler in Devlins Paddy.
The once moderate grader at Brough Park has astonished everyone with his transition to hurdle racing and has won his last five races.
The July 1989 Fearless Action-Rose Bouquet brindle dog started over the jumps as a novice in January.
He received nine metres start in his first hurdles race and finished second.
Devlins Paddy did nothing special in his next three races but then suddenly seemed to get the hang of chasing over the barriers.
And now, after his five sparkling victories, he will be the scratch dog at Brough Park tomorrow night giving track hurdles record holder Jenks Challenger three metres start.
‘The dog has really taken to hurdles racing and will improve even more with experience he can only get better,’ said racing manager Jimmy Nunn.
‘He has only had nine hurdles races and to win five in a row is obviously something special.’
SUNDERLAND'S Trainer of the Month for March is Sacriston-based David Mullins.
Mullins, who moved to the North-East to take over the kennels of the late Tom Whitfield in November after working as head lad for his mother, Linda Mullins, in Essex, gets the award after providing 15 winners from 61 runners, an average of 26.6pc.
Mullins' successes included Im A Guy and Rusty Phil, which each won two open races at the East Boldon circuit.
Runner-up was Allison Waggott, who had eight winners in 36 runs, an average of 22.2pc.
Dog of the Month was Mally Woods' High Noon Away, which came back after injury to win four and finish second in its five outings.
The November 1987 fawn bitch, by Taranarac out of Rip Gem, won two 450 metres and two 580 metres events.
Sunderland stages a Bookmakers Afternoon Greyhound Service meeting tomorrow, when entry will again be free.
The first race is off at 1.49 and the highlight of the afternoon's 12-race programme looks to be a 631 metres handicap, when Eddie McDermott's excellent stayer, Too Fast, will be off scratch, giving top-marker Lee Anns Tramp 12 metres start.
Too Fast will be strongly fancied to do well in the Regal Stayers Trophy at Sunderland at the end of the month.
Several of the greyhounds sold at CLEVELAND PARK'S recent sale have now completed initial trials and are now ready to appear on the racecard.
While most interest has been attracted by the expensive buys, one of the cheapest lots on offer has been the first to grade.
Catunda Alfredo, an October 1990 bitch, cost owner-trainer Janice Ormerod just 50 guineas (£52.50) and makes her debut tonight.
A puppy with only one sprint at Harolds Cross on her Irish card, she could improve over the coming weeks.
Bruce MacDonald joins the Cleveland Park training ranks on Sunday, when he moves to Teesside from Harwich.
He will bring with him over 20 dogs from the London tracks, supplied by friends and contacts he made while head lad to Hackney trainer David Vowles.
In form at Middlesbrough at the moment is the former Sheffield dog, Batley Ranger, now with trainer Ronnie Chambers.
After winning the top-heat level breaks for the last two Saturdays, Batley Ranger could notch up a hat-trick in Saturday's event, which is sponsored by DLS engineering.
MIDDLESBROUGH are prepared to support PFA strike action if talks tomorrow between Gordon Taylor and Premier League officials break down.
Skipper Alan Kernaghan said: ‘It is up to everyone to stick together.
Our livelihoods after football depend upon it.
PFA pension plans are at stake, along with other benefits when players’ careers are over.
‘I think supporters would back players’ action.
After all, they go to matches to watch players and not directors.
It is vital for lower-division players in particular that we rally round.’
Only First Division players are involved in a ballot this week, with the result announced on Friday.
But there is no doubt players outside the top bracket would back strike action all the way.
Taylor, the players' union chief executive, has agreed to meet Premier League hierarchy today in a bid to settle the dispute.
The critical talks, which centre on future TV cash, will take place under the independent gaze of Professor Sir John Wood, who was also present on Monday when Premier League chief executive Rick Parry first approached Taylor in an attempt to end the impasse.
‘It was Sir John's unsolicited offer and I'm perfectly pleased for that to happen,’ said Taylor.
‘He is chairman of the Professional Footballers’ negotiating committee and a totally appropriate person to have involved in such a dispute.’
Premier League chairman Sir John Quinton, who will also attend the talks, made ‘final offer’ noises last Friday when Taylor rejected a deal that would have given the PFA 5pc or a minimum of £1m from future revenue.
‘I've since had quite a number of first division chairmen clearly indicating they did not consider it a final offer and that they want this thing settled,’ said Taylor.
LEICESTER manager Brian Little rates Middlesbrough highly.
Little said: ‘Middlesbrough are certainly one of the best Second Division sides.
‘I expect them to finish in the top two.
Only Cup runs have kept them out of those positions so far.
‘I expect our toughest game of the season against them.’
Little has done an excellent job at Filbert Street since he left Darlington last summer.
Leicester are in with a strong chance of the play-offs and will be keen to avenge a 3–0 early-season defeat at Ayresome Park.
Bar none
THE Langbaurgh and Redcar counts will both be at the Coatham Bowl in Redcar: there is some concern, we gather, that the Redcar result may never be published.
Langbaurgh counts in the bar and Redcar around the stage.
The fear is that by custom and tradition the Press will never leave the bar.
Having his Phil TEMPORARILY forsaking the canned Purcell, Home Secretary Kenneth Baker was greeted at a public meeting in Skelton on Monday evening by a couple of snatches of rock superstar Phil Collins.
Since Collins has publicly vowed to emigrate to America if Labour wins the election, it could be seen as appropriate.
Those present were somewhat puzzled by the choice of song, however Against All Odds and I Missed Again.
Take your pick.
Wrong horse…and speaking of odds, word reaches us that super-confident Hartlepool Conservative candidate Graham Robb is so much the punters' favourite that the town's biggest bookie has stopped taking bets.
‘You can't put money on him,’ confirms Tory agent Carl Gibson, but there's a different explanation.
‘We've never taken odds on the Hartlepool constituency, and won't be,’ says a lady at John Joyce.
There's plenty of interest in the national stakes, though.
They lay Labour 4–7 to win most seats, Graham Robb's stable 5–4.
Swimming
NEWCASTLE swimmers Nick Sultman and Susan Rolph won two of the eight medals gained by the 27 members of the Esso England Junior squad at the Haribo international meet in Bonn.
Nick was runner-up in the 200m individual medley and Susan was third in the 200m butterfly and although sixth in the 100m freestyle, such was the high standard that she still broke the Northumberland and Durham junior and senior open women's records.
Lee Dalzell (Gateshead-Whickham) finished fifth in the 200m freestyle and she still broke the North East Counties junior women's record.
She was also sixth in the 200m individual medley.
Swimmers from as far afield as Glasgow, Cheltenham and Saffron Walden are among the members of 38 clubs who have sent in 1,000 entries for the Richmond Masters and open spring meet on Saturday (1 and 5.30pm).
The age groups start at 19–24 and go up in five-year bands to 80-plus.
Among those taking part are Paul Wright (Hull), the World Masters 50m breaststroke champion and Pam Lester (York), the former Olympic swimmer.
The men's 200m individual medley and men's and women's 100m backstroke championships are the highlights of this year's four Darlington club galas, sponsored by McDonalds at the Dolphin Centre on Tuesday (6.30pm).
There are races for all age groups from eight and under upwards and also one for the disabled.
Good performances in the British under 20 water polo trials at Sheffield have results in Paul Floyd and Lee Cooke (Middlesbrough) being selected for the 16-strong squad from which the 13 players will be selected for the four-nations tournament in Belgium on May 1–3.
Both boys, along with team mate David Easby, are also in the NE Counties team for the ASA Inter-District under 20 championship at Walsall this weekend.
Three other Boro players, Mark Easby, brother of David, John Pratt and Scott Docherty are in the NE Counties 16 and under team who also play against the other districts at Walsall this weekend.
Middlesbrough were well beaten 22–7 at Birkenhead in the ASA's Plate competition for teams knocked out of the ASA's club senior championship.
BRADFORD and former Middlesbrough rider Gary Havelock has been chosen as England's captain for the first Test of the new season against Australia.
Havelock, 23, will lead the youngest-ever squad into international action at Oxford next week.
Havelock, of Yarm, said: ‘I am thrilled.
To captain your country, at any sport, is a great honour.
‘I was chosen as a last-minute deputy for the injured Kelvin Tatum at last year's World Cup Final in Denmark.
But this is different.
‘I will lead by example, with the benefit of experience as Bradford's skipper.
I thrive on the role as extra pressure brings out the best out in me.
‘At the moment, I have been chosen to captain England in one Test.
But I want to hold on to the role.’
As a teenager, Gary showed outstanding potential.
He rode for Boro Bears at 16, before he joined Bradford for a £20,000 fee.
Havelock said: ‘I have had my troubles in the past, but I have never let England down.
‘I am always proud to wear an England race jacket.
I am learning all the time and I feel I am ready to hit the big time.’
England have put the accent on young talent for the start of the Test series next Friday.
Marvyn Cox (Poole) is the ‘veteran’ at 27, with the average age of the eight-rider squad just under 22.
Havelock hopes his England honour will lead to a memorable season.
‘My burning ambition is to be world champion.
‘I lost my chance last year with a bad meeting on the Bradford track.
Ironically, it was one of only three bad meetings in 1991.
‘Over the year, my averages were among the best against world-class riders.’
Gary Havelock (Bradford, aged 23), Chris Louis (Ipswich, 22), Joe Screen (Belle Vue, 19), Martin Dugard (Oxford, 22), Mark Loram (King's Lynn, 21), Marvyn Cox (Poole, 27), Dean Barker (Oxford, 21), David Norris (Ipswich, 19).
Stand-by reserves: Dean Standing (Swindon, 22), Ray Morton (Reading, 23).
Meanwhile, Middlesbrough will be at home to Edinburgh Monarchs tonight in their first Gold Cup fixture of the season.
They name the side which lost to Danish club Slangerup last week.
Hartlepool United, perennial prop of the Football League, currently stand within sight of Second Division football.
The reality was printed in black and white in the Third Division table yesterday.
The reelection regulars are four points away from a play-off place, with a game in hand of once-great West Bromwich Albion, who hold the vital seventh position.
Five wins in six games has transformed only their second season outside English football's basement.
A similar return from the six games left would more than likely put the Victoria Ground on the ‘First Division’ map in the truncated Football League next season.
Chairman Garry Gibson yesterday laughed at the prospect not merely of promotion, but the possibility of passing the Magpies on the way.
‘Imagine that,’ he pondered, ‘The North-East's big three: Middlesbrough, Sunderland and Hartlepool.’
Great as the kudos might be, he had second thoughts: ‘We'd rather play Newcastle next season.
We'd need the money, and we'd like the chance to beat them.’
The Gibson blend of basic business sense and ambition has already made Hartlepool United the success story of the decade to date, most certainly in the NorthEast, and most likely beyond.
They began 1990 on course for non-League football and the GM Vauxhall Conference until, with Gibson guiding from the boardroom and Cyril Knowles in charge of the team, the fairytale turn of fortune began.
Two years on, Pool have built on their deserved promotion of last year, banishing all fears of a relegation rebound, their fate in 1968–69 when the club last enjoyed life beyond the bottom division.
The tragic loss of Knowles was a sorry enough blow to suffer.
Yet the rise has continued up the league ladder, even with the sale of playing assets.
Don Hutchison, Joe Allon and Rob McKinnon have all departed for £525,000, and all been adequately replaced with a tidy profit to offset long-term debts.
The club has cast off its rags and twice this season broken its own transfer record, buying Lenny Johnrose for £50,000 and Andy Saville for £60,000.
Success has added to the value of the current playing staff.
A £150,000 bid for Paul Dalton from a Scottish Premier club was rejected.
Gibson reckons he is worth £400,000.
Few who've seen Pool of late will doubt their ability to sneak up on the rails, as they did last season, as a surprise late success in the promotion race.
But few have seen them.
And that, inevitably, casts doubts about their ability to survive at a higher level.
Only 2,222 turned up at the Vic for the 3–1 win against Exeter on Tuesday well below the average attendance for the season, 3,500.
‘The fact that we're sneaking up is one factor,’ said Gibson.
‘You don't get the crowds until you're right up there and people realise you're going to get promotion.
‘That suits us from the point of view of pressure.
All of the top clubs have been faltering and we're quite happy to creep up on them.
‘Nobody has expected us to go up so we've done well whatever happens.
But I think we've got a good chance of getting into the play-offs and we're capable of beating anyone on our day.
‘If we did go up we'd benefit from away teams bringing more supporters.
We might get a thousand or so more from Hartlepool but if we were in the First Division we'd struggle to get 7,000.
‘Hartlepool just doesn't have a rich football heritage.
We've never had the 20,000 crowds.
We've only got eighty years of disappointment to draw on.
‘There's simply not a lot of money about.
If you worked out a table of the economic prosperity in the towns which have Football League clubs, Hartlepool would probably be in the bottom three.’
He declines to talk about the club's financial position.
He says of its debts ‘they're less than Newcastle and more than Middlesbrough’.
However, the club has come close to the brink, surviving winding up orders.
‘On the brighter side, the value of our players would increase if we were in the Second Division.
Everyone knows our strategy must be to sell one player every year or eighteen months,’ says the chairman.
‘It might not be popular with the fans but we've got to do that to keep our noses in front.
Better that than going the way of Aldershot.’
Pool may well have gone that way had Gibson, Knowles and Murray not worked their wonders.
Instead, the club will be on the treasure trail at Leyton Orient on Saturday.
Another three points will haul Hartlepool closer to the top half of English football.
‘We've gone for promotion all along this season,’ said Gibson.
‘When Andy Saville broke his arm after signing two weeks ago a lot of people thought we would give up, but we pushed the boat out and bought John Thomas.
‘If we get into the Second Division our objectives would change.
I wouldn't expect us to straight into the First.
We'd have to look to consolidate.
‘But we'd enjoy seeing what we could do and, you never know, we might surprise ourselves.
We certainly wouldn't have any fears.
‘I sincerely think the top half of the Third Division is as good as the bottom half of the Second.
We could see off a lot of those sides, I'm sure.’
Those sides, of course, include Newcastle and Sunderland.
In their plight at present, they'd settle for the same status as Hartlepool next season in the Second Division.
We've only got eighty years of disappointment to draw on’ GIBSON: ‘Nobody has expected us to go up’
Midfielder Jamie Pollock scored his first League goal in superb style for Boro, but they suffered their first League defeat since mid-January.
Pollock, 18, equalised with a 25-yard shot eight minutes after the break and celebrated with a somersault before being mobbed by fans who invaded the pitch.
Boro had fallen behind to a fourth minute penalty on a ground where they were seeking their first win since 1938.
After Nicky Mohan brought down Phil Gee, Mills took two paces forward and gave Stephen Pears no chance with an accurate ground shot just inside a post.
It was the first League goal conceded by Boro in five away games, but they hit back with Stuart Ripley threatening on the left, where he had a shot from the edge of the penalty area saved by Kevin Poole.
In a lively first half Paul Wilkinson wasted a good chance at the far post after 33 minutes.
John Hendrie headed on a Ripley cross but Wilkinson headed across the face of the goal.
Poole was by far the busier goalkeeper before the break, though a powerful 35-yard David Oldfield shot flashed just wide.
Gee struck the bar for Leicester and Pears brought off a brilliant save from Mills.
Middlesbrough, however, had taken the sting out of Leicester and were playing with more confidence and control at this stage.
Leicester pulled off £250,000 debutant Michael Whitlow, the former Leeds defender, and sent on substitute Nicky Platnauer after 77 minutes.
It was a shock when Tommy Wright restored Leicester's lead with ten minutes to go.
Boro immediately sent on substitutes Mark Proctor and Andy Payton.
Goal: Mills (1–0 4 min pen), Pollock (1–1 53 mins), Wright (2–1 80 min)
Att: 19,352 Ref: J.Lloyd (Wrexham) Leicester City (4–4–2): Poole 7, Grayson 7, Walsh 7, Hill 6, Whitlow 6 (Substitute Platnauer 77min), Mills 7, Oldfield 7, Thompson 6, Wright 6 (Substitute Russell 84 mins), GEE 8, Ormondroyd Middlesbrough (4–4–2): Pears 7, FLEMING 8, Mohan 7, Kernaghan 7, Falconer 7, Hendrie 6, Pollock 7,(Substitute Proctor 80 min), Peake 7, Ripley 7 (Substitute Payton 81min) Wilkinson 6, Slaven 6.
SCARBOROUGH strolled into the semi-finals of the North Riding Senior Cup with a 6–2 victory over Middlesbrough Reserves.
The Seasiders, boosted by the inclusion of leading scorer Tommy Mooney were always on top and showed sharp finishing.
David Manderson gave Scarborough the lead after six minutes when he intercepted an off-target Dave Logan shot and clipped the ball over keeper Andy Collett.
After 34 minutes when Mooney crossed from the left after a fine run and Andy Fletcher hit a crisp shot past Collett against his former club.
Boro pulled a goal back through Alan Moore before the break but were overrun in the second-half.
Mooney scored the goal of the game when he burst down the left and hit a low shot into the far corner.
Trialist Ricardo Gabbiadini made it 4–1 with a sweet 20-yard shot, Fletcher added Scarborough's fifth direct from a free-kick and Moore scored his second late on from fully 35 yards.
YOUNGSTERS involved in a wide range of sports won backing from Cleveland County Council yesterday.
Ten of the county's up-and-coming young sports stars were presented with grants of £1,000 each by council chairman Coun Ted Wood at a ceremony in Middlesbrough.
It is the third year the council has run its sports award scheme, aimed at helping Cleveland sportsmen and women who have proved themselves at national level and have real prospects of international success.
Among those who received awards yesterday was Claire Metcalfe, 15, of Thornaby, who has been practicing judo since she was five and has now won a place in the national team.
Another recipient was surfer Robin Hildreth, 15, of Saltburn, who achieved considerable national success over the past two years.
Netball star Liz Millican from Hartlepool has played for England and is now aiming for a trip to the World Junior Games in Australia.
Elizabeth Fletcher, 14, from Marton, Middlesbrough, has already had great success in her chosen sport of tennis, playing at county, regional and national level.
Others to receive grant awards were: Suzanne Houghton, 18, of Bishopsgarth, Stockton,(Athletics-Cross country); Shaun Purcell, 18, of Acklam, Middlesbrough,(Cross County and Track); Lee Lagan, 17, of Ormesby, Middlesbrough,(Billiards); Graham Storr, 15, Norton, Stockton,(Bowles); Christopher Newton, 18, of Linthorpe, Middlesbrough,(Cycling); and Alex Jones, 19, of Billingham,(Ice Scating).
THE only Football Supporters candidate ever to stand for Parliament has issued his touchline manifesto to the North-East's election candidates.
Nigel Downing polled 163 votes in last November's Langbaurgh byelection, but cannot afford to stand again.
Yet the 27-year-old artist and Middlesbrough fan is determined not to let football issues slip off the political agenda.
‘We ran a fun campaign last year, but also made some deadly serious points,’ said Nigel, co-editor of Boro fanzine Fly Me To The Moon.
‘The key issue at the moment is all-seater stadia.
Fans want the choice to sit or stand in safety and comfort and the message that all-seat doesn't mean all-safe is getting through to politicians and clubs.
‘I call on all North-East candidates to make their position clear on this vital issue.
Nigel, of Acklam, Middlesbrough, is also asking candidates to support increased spending on ground development, one controlling body for the game and a national training scheme for stewards.
He also wants Bovril designated as the national football drink.
‘I'm sick as a parrot not to be standing,’ said Nigel.
MICHAEL Hopper topped a great night for North-East boxing when he thumped out a tremendous win in the ABA English semi-finals at Bletchley.
The Spennymoor super heavyweight forced the referee to step in after Hopper had pounded the more fancied Craig Parsons of Brighton into three standing counts in the second round.
It was a marvellous victory even Parsons, who had stopped all his previous opponents in the first round, admitted: ‘I've never been hit like that in my life.’
Hopper joins three other NorthEasterners Sunderland flyweight Steve Parry, Hartlepool featherweight Alan Temple and Middlesbrough lightweight Andy Green in the British semi-finals at Gateshead on April 13 and 14.
Hopper held his own in a hard, heavy-hitting first round in which he took the fight to Parsons, even though he took some punishment.
In the interval his coach Robert Ellis told Hopper to work harder and he did with a vengeance.
In a brilliant display of hitting he harried Parsons unmercifully.
‘It feels great,’ said Hopper afterwards.
‘Craig hurt me in the first round, but Robert told me to work harder and it all went well.’
He now meets the Scottish champion as yet unknown at Gateshead, while the other English winner at Bletchley, Donovan Holness, who beat Bristol's Kasiena Oputu, meets the Welsh champion.
Royal Marine Gary Grounds, from Billingham, lost his middleweight semi-final to Manchester's Eric Noi on a unanimous but narrow 59–58 verdict.
Grounds, 22, leaves the Navy in July and will join the Phil Thomas School of Boxing at Middlesbrough.
No reigning champions are left in the championships, although Olympic qualification needs barred several from entering.
English qualifiers for Gateshead: Light fly: Darren Fifield (Henley), Mike Woodcock (Royal Navy), fly: Steve Parry (Sunderland Lambton St), Mick Horobin (St Pancras); bantam: Pat Mullins (London), Mike Aldis (Crawley); feather: Alan Temple (Hartlepool Welfare), Marlon Ward (Newco-Repton); light: Dean Amory (Midlands), Andy Green (Phil Thomas School of Boxing, Middlesbrough); light welter: Adrian Stone (Western Counties), Darren McCarrick (Boarshaw); welter: Paul Burns (Gemini), Mark Santini (Birmingham); light middle: Glen Catley (Western Counties), Dean Francis (Basingstoke); middle: Eric Noi (Moss Side, Manchester), Lee Woolcock (Eastern Counties); light heavy: Kelly Oliver (Lincoln), Paul Rogers (Swindon); heavy: Scott Welch (Hove), Chris Henry (London); super-heavy: Donovan Holness (St Pancras), Mike Hopper (Spennymoor).
KEVIN Keegan has started clearing the decks at Newcastle.
Keegan has paid up the contracts of Billy Askew, David Keavney, Archie Gourlay, David Robinson and Anth Cole as the first step in a Geordie clear-out.
Gourlay has gone to Motherwell, Robinson to Reading and young defender Cole to Middlesbrough.
‘I have to get the staff down to sensible proportions,’ said the Newcastle boss, who has over 30 professionals on the books.
Keegan also revealed that Ray Ranson could have gone before the transfer deadline but decided to stay and fight for his place.
And he confirmed that skipper Kevin Scott and Gavin Peacock had shelved talks on their futures until the summer.
‘I want to get those two under contract and build a team around them,’ he said.
‘But I respect their decisions and people should not read too much into it.’
Keegan would like the deadline on offering new contracts to players to be brought forward to January.
‘The current system means I'm having to tell players now whether I want them or not at the most important point in the season,’ he reasoned.
‘It's not good if you have to tell a player that you don't want him after the season then expect him to give 100 per cent.’
At the same time Keegan believes there would be value in a ‘swap’ system that enabled clubs to put four freed players into a pool then draw lots for a draft pick on the lines of American Football.
‘It would mean you'd get the chance to pick out four players better suited to your needs with very little money changing hands,’ he said.
‘I'm only a rookie boss and no doubt some people will tell me it won't work.
But these are ideas I feel might be worth an airing.’
Three players Tommy Wright, Mark Stimson and Liam O'Brien are injury doubts before tomorrow's home match with Tranmere while Brian Kilcline is already ruled out.
Keegan said he would have no worries about pitching in Pavel Srnicek for shoulder-injury victim Wright.
‘He's technically a very good goalkeeper and he has come on in leaps and bounds in recent weeks,’ he said.
Bjorn Kristensen is very much in Keegan's plans but the Newcastle boss doesn't want to rush him back after a season's absence following a knee operation.
Newcastle held their annual general meeting last night behind closed doors.
In past years events of the meeting have been covered by the media.
But express instructions were given yesterday excluding the press.
‘It's a shareholders meeting and the press are excluded,’ confirmed a club official.
No surprises were anticipated from the meeting, at which all directors were up for re-election.
MIDDLESBROUGH reserve goalkeeper Ian Ironside will play his final match for Fourth Division Scarborough tomorrow.
Ironside's one-month loan spell will be completed after the home match against play-off outsiders Gillingham.
His return to Middlesbrough as cover for Stephen Pears will leave Scarborough manager Ray McHale with a key position to fill for the final five matches.
Rotherham's on-loan keeper Stuart Ford looks likely to make his League debut for Scarborough against Hereford next Tuesday.
Ford, 20, is set to get his chance after the club's other keeper, Steve Hewitt, was sent on loan to non-League Matlock Town last week.
LOUISE STUART, Teesside's Olympic sprinter, has joined UK Women's League champions Sale Harriers.
Stuart, 24, a student at Newcastle Polytechnic, resigned from Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harriers in November, accusing the club of ‘dragging its feet’ in moves towards a possible merger with Mandale AC.
Having played a major role in Middlesbrough's promotion to the UK League, in which they'll start as a Division Four team this summer, Stuart now finds herself number one sprinter with the champions of the past three years.
Sale's team includes Commonwealth 800 metres champion Diane Edwards and two other international middle distance runners, Ann Williams and Paula Fryer.
‘Sale didn't approach me,’ said Stuart.
‘I knew a lot of people from the club because their ‘B’ team competed against Middlesbrough in the Northern League.
‘They're a smashing bunch of people.
They're prepared to release me straight away if the Teesside clubs ever merge.’
Stuart, a 4 x 100 metres relay medallist for Britain in last year's World Student Games, won't be eligible to compete for her new club until her automatic nine-month suspension ends towards the end of the season.
BRIAN LITTLE, the man who guided Darlington from the GM Vauxhall Conference to the Third Division, is being lined up as Sunderland's next manager.
Though the former England winger yesterday insisted he was content to remain with Leicester City, the club he joined from Darlington last summer, it is understood that moves are already underway to install him in the vacant Roker job.
Little's wife has failed to settle in the Midlands and, despite Leicester's rise to fourth place in the Second Division table, a return to his native North-East seems likely after the season ends next month.
Bob Murray, Sunderland's chairman, has stressed again this week that Malcolm Crosby has no guarantee of permanently securing the job he has held on a temporary basis since Denis Smith's sacking in December.
Crosby has been preparing the Roker side for an FA Cup semi-final against Norwich City at Hillsbrough this Sunday with the official title of first team coach.
It seems increasingly likely that he will join Smith as assistant manager at Bristol City, although the Roker board could be forced to offer him the manager's post if Sunderland win the FA Cup.
Already this week, Sunderland goalkeeper Tony Norman has stated on national television that the uncertain position has put the side under pressure.
‘Everytime you lose, you think it might have cost Malcolm the job,’ said the Welsh international.
With both Leicester and Sunderland still chasing honours, the situation will probably remain unclear until the season ends.
Little is known to have strong support in the Sunderland boardroom, but he was anxious to dismiss speculation yesterday.
‘I don't go around looking for a job,’ he said, ‘though I'm flattered by the speculation.
‘I am perfectly happy at Leicester.
It would be ludicrous for me to think of doing something else.
‘I won't deny I miss the NorthEast.
I am a North-East lad and I thoroughly enjoyed my time with Middlesbrough and Darlington.
‘But that is not to say I am going to rush back there at the first opportunity.’
Little, 38, an Aston Villa and England player, was sacked by Wolves in his first spell in football management, as caretaker manager at Molineux in 1986.
He then worked as the third man on the management side at Middlesbrough, under Bruce Rioch and Colin Todd before joining Darlington, as they were heading for the GM Vauxhall Conference, three years ago.
EILEEN Walker is Middlesbrough's answer to Jane Asher — she makes the most amazing cakes.
Turtles, Bart Simpson or Garfield are all just run of the mill a piece of cake even.
What Eileen really enjoys is something a bit different.
Something like Dracula rising from a coffin, a thatched cottage, computer or a wonderfully realistic chip butty, complete with tomato sauce these are the challenges she enjoys creating at her Middlesbrough shop, Celebrations.
They're not just flat decorated cakes, but 3D creations, almost sculptures and certainly works of art.
The latest one was a chess set, a perfect board and all the pieces individually moulded from sugar paste.
They looked brilliant and you could always eat your way out of check, by devouring the opposition.
‘It's the first chess set I've done,’ said Eileen, who also does special orders for other bakers in the region.
‘I take things on and I say yes.
Then I panic and think ‘Eeh, I hope I can do it.’
But it usually works out.’
Eileen trained as a confectioner and once her family was grown up, started working for her brother, a baker.
‘But I knew I wanted to do more cakes and could do much more interesting things.
Most bakers can only offer a dozen or so cakes because it's just a small part of their business.
But it's all we do we don't even sell cake decorations or equipment.
We just concentrate on creating cakes.’
She took over the premises behind the bus station in Middlesbrough (opposite the car park and along from Macdonalds) and has hardly looked back.
Wedding cakes are, so to speak, her bread and butter, beautifully elaborate confections designed jointly by her and the bride.
She's even introduced a mini wedding cake, still three tiers, but with the cakes only eight, six or four inches across ‘looks much more special than one single tier but isn't too big for a small wedding.’
Complete with ornaments and pillars, that costs £45.
Full size three tier cakes are around £120.
Other cakes cost from between £6 and £30 that's for a computer with all separate keys, or a fairytale castle.
Most, such as a car or dragon or Cinderella doll are around £15.
Many of the cakes are ordered for men, and so wives or girlfriends always want cakes that reflect their interests a dartboard, snooker table, even a steak and egg dinner or a perfect replica of a Middlesbrough football shirt.
And yes, you can even order a curvy cake in the shape of luscious lady in basque and suspenders.
Much less embarrassing than a kissogram the perfect fantasy served up on a plate.
And definitely good enough to eat.
— Celebrations,,.
I REFER to the ‘appalled’ Ishamel Davies' remarks (HAS March 25) about the accents of soap stars appearing in Coronation Street and Emmerdale.
I was born and bred and grew up in Rossendale Valley and left at the age of 27.
I don't know which Lancashire he lived in, but it was not my Lancashire.
It is not a question of bad grammar, just dialect.
Lancashire people do speak like Rita Fairclough.
I suggest he gets Granada TV to run some old programmes showing the late Jack Howarth (Albert Tatlock) and listens because the worthy citizens of Lancashire do speak as such.
R.M. Eastham, 49 Loraine Crescent, Darlington.
CANOEIST:
Your front page carried a report (Echo March 31) on a dare-devil canoeist who is in hospital in Middlesbrough with a broken back following an attempt at a world record waterfall passage.
Are his hospital expenses paid by the tax-payer through the NHS?
If so, would any election candidate care to suggest that people attempting such risky activities should be legally bound to have sufficient medical insurance to avoid being a financial burden on the NHS and delaying hospital treatment for those needing it through no fault of their own?
John Hawgood, Crook Hall, Sidegate, Durham.
BRIDGE:
I can hardly forget the story about Devil's Bridge at Acklam (Echo March 26) which was told to me by my father and handed down to him by his father.
It would seem that a vicar exposed himself to a young lady of tender years on Devil's Bridge sometime in the 1800s.
The young lady in question told her parents who confronted the vicar.
The vicar said that indeed if this had happened then it must have been the Devil in disguise.
I do not know if the vicar was believed or not, but thereafter the bridge was known as Devil's Bridge.
Bryan Moore, Agincourt, 3 Belvedere Road, Thornaby.
STEVE Kirkup is back in the Durham City side for today's crucial National Division Four North match at home to Lichfield.
The scrum half has recovered from the injury which would have kept him out of the postponed Durham Cup tie against Horden on Wednesday.
Durham School captain Richard Elliott, who was to have replaced him, will be on the bench as City attempt to move away from the relegation zone.
Several clubs in the region will be hoping they succeed, as the knock-on effect of both City and Northern being relegated would reduce the number of promotion places available for North-East teams lower down the leagues.
Centre Andy Luke also returns, while Paul Rodgers is preferred at hooker to Mike Fenwick, who hasn't played for several weeks.
With three games left City are third from the bottom, while Lichfield are sixth.
Northern are as good as doomed.
They would have to win their remaining two games by big margins to have a chance of escaping, starting next week at Walsall, who are just above them.
Northern could discover today that life in North Division One will be no easier as they visit Middlesbrough.
The visitors include former Gosforth and West Hartlepool lock Kevin Westgarth, who is not eligible for league games for his new club.
Neither of his old clubs are in action today, but both could want him back next season, although Gosforth's two student locks, Simon Gibbs and Alistair Meadows, have both said they will be staying with the club.
Two of the postponed Durham Cup ties Blaydon v Darlington RA and Westoe v Consett will be played today.
Holders Stockton have no game, but will stage a special celebration in their clubhouse tonight to mark the 50th birthday of fourth team full back Jimmy Collins.
A former army boxer, he will don the No 15 shirt as usual today in the game against Hartlepool TDSOB thirds.
DARLINGTON golfer Warren Bell, the Durham junior strokeplay champion, is in hospital following a car accident.
He has a broken jaw and other facial injuries and is in the neurological ward of Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Bell, 18, had been elected vice-captain of the Durham Junior Golfing Society and was in the team to play the Durham senior side at Chester-leStreet on April 19.
He will be replaced by Garesfield's Jim Ward.
The team is: J Longstaff (capt), R Aisbitt (Bishop Auckland), D Sharkey, M Gudgeon (South Shields), G Couzens, S Armstrong, A Blyth (Eaglescliffe), S Ord (Hobson), T Gilmore (Beamish), J Gill (Brancepeth), L McCavanagh (Woodham), T Armstrong (Tyneside), J Ward (Garesfield).
The Durham Junior Golf Society Spring meeting at Crook tomorrow has been postponed until May 30 because of snow.
WHITBURN will be a hive of activity when the local season gets underway tomorrow.
The club is staging three preliminary round matches in the Durham and Northumberland inter-county foursomes as well as the Durham v NE and NW PGA match.
They are Billingham v Castle Eden (10.30), Houghton-le-Spring v Hobson (10.40) and Durham City v Blackwell Grange (10.50).
The winners will go to Boldon next Saturday, when the first and second rounds will be played, followed by rounds three and four at Seaton Carew the following day.
The semi-finals and final are to be held at Tynemouth.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Middlesbrough 10 Northern 9 NORTHERN are hoping to persuade David Johnson, the country's leading points scorer, to help them regain National League status.
As Newcastle Gosforth had opted out of their match at Saracens, the fly half took the opportunity to take his points total over 400 when he appeared as a guest for his old club at Middlesbrough on Saturday.
A penalty and a conversion took him to 403, still within sight of John Liley's record of 439 with three weeks of the season left.
Gosforth still have to play their Northumberland Cup semi-final against Tynedale on April 14, and if they win Johnson will be rubbing his hands at the prospect of a big score in the final against Novos or Seghill.
He had little to shout about on Saturday as his own standard slipped to match that of those around him.
He miscued a relatively simple penalty in the sixth minute and spurned the chance to have a go at three other kickable opportunities in the first half.
He also kicked badly out of hand until he settled down to play a more influential role after the interval.
But neither Johnson nor former Gosforth and West Hartlepool lock Kevin Westgarth could have been singled out as outstanding performers.
Former Harrogate player David Casado, who had switched to full back to accommodate Johnson, was Northern's most dangerous player, while Boro had the most effective forwards in prop Phil Wright and No 8 Tom McGrath.
Wright burrowed busily in the loose and he and Andy Vincent gave Boro the solid platform in the scrum which produced their victory.
Despite having the smaller pack, they were always on top in the scrums and scored two pushover tries, both touched down by McGrath.
The second came in the last minute of normal time and followed an impressive maul, in which Boro drove over the line but couldn't get the ball down.
Northern will be joining Boro in North Division One next season Durham City's win against Lichfield and Stourbridge's win at Walsall made certain of that.
There was some muttering among officials after the game that only nine players had turned up for training on Tuesday, but despite the defeat coach Bruce Liddle remained cheerfully optimistic.
‘We saw nothing today to convince us that we can't get out of North One at the first attempt,’ he said.
‘We are determined to stop the slide.
Obviously we are hoping David Johnson will join us, and we are confident Kevin Westgarth will stay.’
Former England coach John Elders has agreed to help Northern next season on his return from Australia, where he has been teaching.
But they will face a difficult task in getting back into the National Leagues, especially with the scrap for players in the North-East likely to intensify.
Boro will be among the clubs stepping up their recruitment as their mid-table finish in North One proved they are some way short of promotion standard.
They have drawn up a Strategy for Success, which will be outlined at a meeting on Thursday, when they are urging all members to attend.
Boro lost full back Ross Webber with a dislocated elbow after 35 minutes, and sent on Ian Bircham, who was home on leave from his job in Italy.
Both fly halves favoured high kicks, but Bircham fielded them with his usual aplomb.
When the ball was let out Northern's backs looked the sharper and after a scoreless first half, centre Paul Collins burst on to a short pass from Johnson and sent the speedy Casado racing over.
Johnson converted, but then struck a poor clearance, which was fielded at full tilt by Dave Kenyon, driving Northern back to their line.
Following a tap penalty Mark Willis and Wilkinson were both held up on the line before McGrath touched down and Mike Robson converted.
After Johnson restored Northern's lead midway through the half, Robson missed a chance to level the scores again.
ADVICE workers have warned that the abuse of prescribed tranquilisers is on the increase.
But they have said that the latest drug craze, involving the painkiller ketamine, has yet to reach the North-East.
However, a leading authority on the spread of ketamine or Special K has warned: ‘It's only a matter of time.’
Ian Wardle, of the help agency Lifeline, has seen the drug explode onto the Manchester rave scene and now it is known to have reached Scotland and Humberside.
‘I would be very surprised if we weren't getting referrals soon from the North-East,’ he said.
The drug is a safe and effective painkiller when used as an anaesthetic but can be lethal in capsule or tablet form.
‘At worst, it can lead to someone who has taken it stopping breathing,’ said Mr Wardle.
‘People who have called have told us of going into deep trances.’
Det Insp John Tough, of Cleveland Police drug squad, said: ‘Our intelligence has not yet revealed unauthorised use, but we cannot rule it out.’
And Sophia Chistie, general manager of the North-East's drug and alcohol problem service, added: ‘We have had absolutely no contact with anyone having problems with or about the use of Special K.
‘That doesn't mean it's not here.
We haven't seen an enormous amount of Ecstasy, but we are aware that it's being used in the region.’
She said she was far more concerned with the growing injection of benzodiazepines tranquilisers such as temezepan and diazepan.
‘They are being taken in massive doses without the supervision of a doctor.
The high dosage is incredibly dangerous and there are also the HIV risks.’
Ms Christie said injecting tranquilisers in large doses could lead to dependency, anxiety, depression and loss of control.
‘This is something we are seeing in increasing amounts,’ she added.
Mr Wardle said this could easily happen with ketamine, which was ‘very much in its infancy’.
He added: ‘The picture we are getting is that it is spreading nationally.
It's not just a North-West phenomenon.
It's part of the rave scene it's being sold as Ecstasy, but also as Special K or Vitamin K.
‘K has psychedelic side-effects, which cause dissociation.
People can have  difficulty controlling their limbs, they can black out, they have tunnel vision.’
But advice workers in Middlesbrough said they had only just heard of the drug and had no reports of its presence in the county.
Region's image is First Class NORTHUMBRIA Tourist Board, which wants to promote a more upmarket image for the region, has adopted a new logo carrying the slogan First Class.
As well using the message on literature sent to people outside the region, it will also be used within it to spearhead a drive for increased quality of service.
DARLINGTON manager Ray Hankin has agreed to put his boots on again for a testimonial game at Shildon later this month.
Hankin, who packed in playing three years ago, has agreed to appear in a testimonial game on Wednesday, April 29 at Dean Street for Shildon's late trainer Alva Caygill, who died last year.
The match features an old Shildon XI against an old Professional XI, and is being organised by former Shildon manager Billy Roughley.
The former England amateur international, who still plays himself in the Bluebell Over 40 league on a Saturday morning, has persuaded several ex pros to come along, including former Sunderland and Ipswich forward Eric Gates, Hartlepool manager Alan Murray, former Newcastle and Sunderland centre half Jeff Clarke, former Middlesbrough defender Dickie Rooks and former Newcastle striker Alan Shoulder.
Roughley says; ‘We have asked several ex pros, and are awaiting replies from some big names.’
He has had little difficulty in attracting many former Shildon players to turn out, including several of the side which won the Durham Challenge Cup in 1969.
Centre forward Alan Wegg, keeper Brian Dale and long serving defender Dave Calland have all said they will play.
MURTON can close the gap at the top of the Northern League to only one point when they play at Langley Park tonight.
Jeff Cranson's side is currently third in the table, and gained a great boost to their title hopes by wining 4–0 at Northallerton on Saturday.
Cranson says; ‘That was our best performance of the season.
It was something a manager always dreams of.’
Murton have only one injury doubt, midfielder Nigel Robson with a neck problem, while Langley, currently second off bottom and needing the points may be unchanged.
West Auckland can take a big step towards safety by taking points off Ferryhill.
West are without midfielder Dale Swainston, who is working, while midfielder Peter May is injured.
MIDDLESBROUGH manager Lennie Lawrence plans a shake-up at Bristol City tonight in a bid to regain a top-six place.
Forwards will be axed with a return to a packed midfield following the home defeat by Watford.
Lawrence said: ‘Playing four forwards is a ludicrous luxury.
It won't happen again this season, either home or away.
‘Playing four forwards puts too much pressure on the defence.
We were cut to pieces by Watford, though the defence did not help itself by defending too deeply.
‘Four wins from nine games would probably earn us a play-off place but I want to go for the No.2 spot.
‘We have to roll up our sleeves at Bristol and Tranmere Rovers this week before a run of three home games.’
Central defender Nicky Mohan has staged an amazing recovery from a foot injury.
Jon Gittens was all lined up to take over before Mohan trained with no ill effects yesterday.
Lawrence has demanded a battling performance after a Watford defeat that reminded him of the FA Cup knockout by Portsmouth.
‘Everyone, including myself, put that debacle down to team switches when Alan Kernaghan was ruled out.
‘I was conned into thinking that way.
Yet it was down to a collective lack of desire, which was the problem against Watford.’
Boro from: Pears, Fleming, Phillips, Falconer, Kernaghan, Mohan, Peake, Slaven, Pollock, Wilkinson, Hendrie, Ripley, Payton, Proctor.
Dutchman Ray Atteveld will start on the bench for Bristol.
The £250,000 signing from Everton went into a two-match suspension after one-game for his new club.
Team: Welch; Llewellyn, Bryant, Osman, Aizlewood, Scott, Mellon, May, Dziekanowski, Cole, Rosenior.
Subs: Allison, Atteveld.
Born: Edinburgh, May 6 1953.
1968: Joins Tottenham as apprentice.
1972: Moves to Middlesbrough.
1973: Makes debut, goes on to make 176 League appearances for Boro.
1978: Joins Liverpool for £350,000.
Makes 247 League appearances for them, winning five League championships, three European Cups and four League Cups.
1984: Joins Sampdoria for £650,000.
1986: Joins Rangers as player-manager for £300,000.
During next five years leads Ibrox club to three League titles and four Skol Cup wins.
April 1991: Takes over as manager of Liverpool.
Scottish international caps: 54.
SUNDERLAND are expected to announce a voucher system for the distribution of their FA Cup final tickets.
And their next four home matches could all be full houses as Roker fans, clamouring for tickets for the 80,000 sell-out final against Liverpool or Portsmouth, try to make sure of their Wembley places.
The Sunderland board met last night when the ticket distribution was the main item on the agenda.
And chairman Bob Murray, who made an embarrassing personal apology for the semi-final ticket sale fiasco, when supporters queued all night in freezing conditions, pledged that the directors would try to find the fairest way to sell the tickets.
A spokesman for the FA said yesterday that the final ticket allocation would not be decided until after the LiverpoolPortsmouth replay next Monday night.
But the finalists are likely to share 50 per cent of the available tickets about 40,000 and if Liverpool get through they might be given a slightly bigger share because of their 35,000 average home gates.
Sunderland could find themselves with only 18,000 tickets, and with 5,000 season ticket holders taking priority, it looks as though many fans are going to be disappointed, whichever method is adopted.
But there will certainly not be another overnight free-for-all.
I believe that the club will issue lettered vouchers at the turnstiles for Saturday's home game against Charlton, next week's games against Ipswich and Plymouth, and the Easter Monday derby game against Middlesbrough.
Then as in 1973 the lucky letters will be drawn and the tickets will be sold on a one-per-person basis.
Such a system would benefit Sunderland not only financially there would be full-houses for each match but also the big crowds would surely help the Rokermen to get the safety points they are looking for to climb above the Second Division danger zone.
As he prepared for tomorrow night's away game at Leicester, caretaker manager Malcolm Crosby, said: ‘We have to play 10 matches in 25 days and I think even Arnold Schwarzenegger would struggle to do that.
‘It is a tough run and our training will have to be limited you can't work players very hard with that sort of fixture list.
‘It would be nice to get big crowds for our next few home games and play well.
‘I think four victories would ensure our safety and I would like to get them early so we could be more relaxed.’
Crosby will be anxious to find out if there is any cup hangover at Filbert Street tomorrow night.
He said: ‘The players know how important our League programme is and it is a matter of whether they have recovered mentally and physically to go into the game at Leicester in the right frame of mind.
‘I will be looking for a good attitude from everyone.’
Sunderland's remaining League fixtures are: Wed April 8 Leicester (a) Sat April 11: Charlton (h); Tues April 14 Ipswich (h); Thurs April 16: Plymouth (h); Sat April 18: Grimsby (a); Mon April 20: Middlesbrough (h); Sat April 25: Brighton (a); Tues April 28: Blackburn (a); Sat May 2: Cambridge (h).
To be arranged: Swindon Town (h).
Middlesbrough, yesterday for a fast-paced lesson on ‘Kwik Cricket’.
Mayor Eddie Bolland and former England and Yorkshire all-rounder Chris Old also joined in to help launch the fastest game in town.
The council is organising distribution of 100 Kwik Cricket sets donated by National Westminster Bank, which is working with the National Cricket Association to promote the game as an ideal way of developing skills and interest in the ‘full-length’ version.
The Mayor of Middlesbrough's twin Zimbabwean town of Masvingo, Timoti Francis Aphiri, was also presented with two sets.
TELEVISION magician Paul Daniels waved his wand last night and dispelled some mumbo jumbo.
Paul, from South Bank, Middlesbrough, opened an exhibition at Kirkleatham Old Hall Museum, near Redcar, which exposes some of the tricks of his trade.
He is pictured with museum curator Phil Filo, centre, and Middlesbrough Magic Circle president John Archer.
DURHAM City overcame a tricky hurdle to reach the quarter-finals of the Durham Challenge Cup last night.
They trailed 6–0 to two penalties by Gary Ellis as they came under early pressure from Horden, who won a lot of good ball but kept it among the forwards.
City finally broke away after 29 minutes through centre Mark Potter, and following a scrum on the line flanker Rob Milton drove over to cut the gap to 6–4 at halftime.
Fly half Jon Bland kept City going forward after the break with some long wind-assisted touch kicks and within 12 minutes he had landed two penalties to put City 10–6 ahead.
They sealed victory with an excellent try when full back Kevin McCallum overlapped on the left wing to take the ball from Chris Mattison, then flipped it inside for Potter to race 20 yards to score.
Bland converted and although Horden ran with great enterprise they could not close the gap.
Cup holders Stockton have dropped winger Dave Turner for tonight's quarter-final at home to West Hartlepool TDSOB.
Turner, who scored over 300 points last season after joining the club from Acklam, has been unable to recapture the same form.
He is replaced by Paul Weston, who has recovered from a neck injury, in the only change from the side which beat Sunderland 46–0 last week.
The outstanding second round tie, Gateshead Fell v Ryton, will be played tonight, while Westoe, who beat Consett 22–3 on Saturday, will play their quarter-final against Hartlepool next week.
MIDDLESBROUGH plan to launch an assault on the National Leagues at a meeting tomorrow night.
All members are urged to attend the meeting, at 9pm in the Acklam Park clubhouse, to discuss the way forward.
With the help of a small committee, chairman of rugby Dave Waddington has drawn up a Strategy for Success, designed to improve the playing and financial structure of the club.
One of the topics for discussion will be whether Boro should take on a paid employee.
They have been stuck in North Division One for three seasons and lost five of their first six matches this season until four victories put them in mid-table.
Boro's second team lost the final of the North Yorkshire Trophy 28–14 to Wharfedale, for whom former West Hartlepool and Sale centre Glyn Harrison scored four tries.
With Ian Stallard and Ross Webber injured, Boro have selected Phil Davies at full back for Saturday's trip to Alnwick.
Simon Ward replaces Ewan Crouch at centre, Mark Jolly returns on the wing and Clive Freeman is at blind side with Ross McMillan switching to lock as Tony Wilkinson is unavailable.
Bristol City 1 Middlesbrough 1 MIDDLESBROUGH threw away the lead and two promotion points against ten-man relegation-fighting Bristol.
John Hendrie gave Boro an early lead and Bristol striker Leroy Rosenior was sent off in an explosive finish to the half.
In a moment of madness Rosenoir kicked Alan Kernaghan as he lay on the ground.
Middlesbrough have now picked up only two points from the last four games.
There must be improvement from this run, and the display at Ashton Gate, for a play-off challenge.
Boro did not impress against Bristol.
They defended in depth and allowed under-strength Bristol to dominate the second half.
With their numerical superiority, they should have shown more enterprise.
Boro striker Bernie Slaven looked angry before the kick-off after he was axed.
Andy Payton was in the starting line-up with Stuart Ripley on the substitutes' bench.
Midfield player Andy Peake was booked early in the game.
It looked a harsh decision, especially when the referee allowed late tackles to go unpunished.
Bristol brought on record club buy Ray Atteveld for the injured Martin Scott after 16 minutes.
Two minutes later Boro went ahead.
Hendrie moved on to a perfect Payton pass, went round goalkeeper Keith Welsh with ease, and shot into the empty net.
Stephen Pears denied Bristol with two brilliant saves before the game erupted with the Rosenoir-Kernaghan incident.
Rosenior must have had a rush of blood as he kicked Kernaghan.
The foul was committed with the referee only a few yards away and a red card was the inevitable punishment.
Bristol piled on fierce pressure and Middlesbrough paid for their lack of enterprise when Bristol equalised after 67 minutes.
Andrew Cole raced clear on the right and then cut inside to beat Pears with a brilliant goal.
Middlesbrough scrambled the ball off the goal-line seven minutes from time and were then unlucky not to be awarded a last-minute penalty when substitute Wayne Allison handled the ball.
MATCHFACTS Goals: Hendrie (18, 0–1), Cole (67, 1–1) Sent Rosenior (foul) Bookings: Peake (foul), Bryant (foul), Atteveld (dissent), Kernaghan (foul) Att: 12,814 Referee: J.
Carter (Christchurch) Bristol (5–3–2): Welch 7, Llewellyn 6 (Allison 57), Bryant 7, Osman 7, Scott 6 (Atteveld 16, 6), Mellon 7, Dziekanowski 7, Aizlewood 7, May 7, COLE 8, Rosenior 5.
Middlesbrough (4–5–1): Pears 7, FLEMING Mohan 7, Kernaghan 7, Phillips 6, Payton 7, Pollock 7 (Ripley 70), Peake 7, Falconer 6, Hendrie 7, Wilkinson 7.
Substitute (not used)
Gittens
Bristol C 1 Middlesbrough 1 MIDDLESBROUGH threw away the lead and two promotion points against ten-man relegation-fighting Bristol.
John Hendrie gave Boro an early lead and Bristol striker Leroy Rosenior was sent off in an explosive finish to the half.
He kicked Alan Kernaghan as he lay on the ground.
Boro did not impress.
They defended in depth and allowed an under-strength side to dominate the second half.
Boro striker Bernie Slaven looked angry before the kick-off after he was axed.
Andy Payton was in the starting line-up with Stuart Ripley on the bench.
Bristol brought on record club buy Ray Atteveld for the injured Martin Scott after 16 minutes.
Two minutes later Boro went ahead.
Hendrie moved on to a perfect Payton pass, went round goalkeeper Keith Welsh with ease, and shot into the empty net.
Stephen Pears denied Bristol with two brilliant saves before the game erupted with the Rosenoir-Kernaghan incident.
The foul was committed with the referee only a few yards away and a red card was inevitable.
Bristol piled on fierce pressure and Middlesbrough paid for their lack of enterprise when City equalised after 67 minutes.
Andrew Cole raced clear on the right then cut inside to beat Pears with a brilliant goal.
Middlesbrough scrambled the ball off the goal-line seven minutes from time and were then unlucky not to be awarded a last-minute penalty when substitute Wayne Allison handled the ball.
Slaven said after the game: ‘I could not believe I was not on the substitutes’ bench.’
Manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘Slaven was not picked tonight but he has as much chance as any other player of playing at Tranmere on Friday night.
‘I felt I had to make changes.
‘If I stick to 11 players we will not get promoted.
That's a certainty.
We may or not with the squad system but I intend to play all my cards.’
MATCHFACTS Goals: Hendrie (18, 0–1), Cole (67, 1–1) Sent Rosenior (foul)
Bookings: Peake (foul), Bryant (foul), Atteveld (dissent), Kernaghan (foul) Att: 12,814 Referee: J. Carter (Christchurch) Bristol (5–3–2): Welch 7, Llewellyn 6 (Allison 57), Bryant 7, Osman 7, Scott 6 (Atteveld 16, 6), Mellon 7, Dziekanowski 7, Aizlewood 7, May 7, COLE 8, Rosenior 5.
Middlesbrough (4–5–1): PEARS 8, Fleming 7, Mohan 7, Kernaghan 7, Phillips 6, Payton 7, Pollock 7 (Ripley 70), Peake 7, Falconer 6, Hendrie 7, Wilkinson 7.
Substitute (not used) Gittens
LIVERPOOL soccer manager Graeme Souness was last night recovering in an intensive care unit after five hours of heart surgery.
The private Alexandra Hospital at Cheadle, near Stockport, said the triple by-pass operation on the 38-year-old former Scottish international and Middlesbrough star had gone without complications.
A hospital spokeswoman said: ‘Everything so far has been straightforward.
Three grafts have been completed.
The first 24 hours are the most critical.’
She added that Mr Souness was not yet conscious.
The manager was admitted to the 181-bed luxury hospital for the £12,000 operation on Monday and the cost is understood to be being met by Liverpool's private health insurance.
World Cup referee George Courtney: ‘My first car was a blue Ford Consul.
I picked it up from a golfing friend of mine for £25 back in the early Sixties.
‘It had one of those passion benches — front seats which stretched like a bench across the front for the old intimacy job.
I shall never forget it.
Comedian Ken Dodd's first set of wheels belonged to an Austin 38 van from which he peddled household wares around Liverpool council estates in the Fifties.
His friends say the van, which he kept for two years until he turned professional in 1954, helped teach him more about comedy than anything else.
Wrestler Big Daddy, alias Shirley Crabtree, began his motoring days in a white open-topped Triumph TR3, which he bought around 1957.
Later, he got a battered old Mini which he nursed dearly.
The burly former Coldstream Guardsman is known as a ‘50 miles per hour man’ and now drives a Ford Granada.
Muriel Young, ITV's first announcer, bought a Mini, in 1961.
‘I bought it just after passing my test and had a little drive before realising, to my horror, that I couldn't park it.
So I left it up a side street and got a taxi back to the studio where I was due to appear.
I lost it in 1963 on the A30 west of Salisbury when I skidded on some diesel oil and rolled over and over.
The car was a total write off.’
I was around 20 years old when my mother purchased our first car.
It was a Swift two-seater with a ‘dickie’ at the rear, Richard to posh folks.
Our motoring days ended the day Istarted the engine up, there was an unholy clatter, and the big end came poking out through the sump bottom.
The car was bought secondhand for £15.
We got 30 bob for it as scrap.
— T.M. Sutherst, 11 Coronation Avenue, Colburn, Catterick Garrison.
My Hillman Minx convertible, bought second-hand in 1959, was the pride and joy of my life, until I wanted to drive to London.
In 1960 the route included every town between here and the metropolis, with traffic lights and crossroads, but no dual carriageways, roundabouts or flyovers.
Every time I stopped, the car refused to go again.
I covered 260 miles in 13 hours.
I solved the problem — vaporising petrol — shortly before I changed the car, but it was determined to go with a bang.
The day before the changeover, the exhaust pipe dropped off.
— Donald Miller, 9 Greenhills Estate, Wingate.
Our first car was an ex-WD Austin 8 and it cost us £25 in 1957.
It was beautifully hand-painted in black and cream with all the brushmarks going every which way.
The seats had been lovingly re-upholstered with old tapestry curtains and the instrument panel had been expertly covered with red and white sticky-backed plastic.
The heater was magnificent — a piece of copper tubing from the engine up between the two front seats meant regular stops for fresh air before we realised we were being poisoned by fumes.
Each celluloid window was two inches smaller all the way round than the gap it was supposed to fill and was held in place by fishing line.
To start the engine was a knack, and the choke once pulled out needed a matchbox slid in place to stop it sliding straight back in.
We cried when it went.
— Sheila Read, 8 Smithy Green, Appleton Wiske, Northallerton.
The first car I bought was the new Ford Anglia at Skippers, Darlington for just £500.
It did very well for 20 years; four adults in it and there was no trouble getting up Sutton Bank.
The sloping rear window was an excellent feature — it was always clean.
— A Marshall, 4 Bowes Grove, Bishop Aukland.
My first car was a twin-carburettor Singer sports car, bright red with a silvery grey hood shaped from part of a wartime barrage balloon; it was supported by two metal frames shaped like ice hockey goals.
When the car became an open tourer, the hood and supports were tucked away behind the leather-covered front seats and concealed by a sheet of green hessian.
The impression was undeniably sporty.
To tune the engine two brass screws which governed the flow into the carburettor had to be delicately adjusted.
The car once achieved a speed of 62mph on a straight stretch of moorland road.
Despite its peculiarities, the car was very reliable.
It widened my horizons with outings to international golf at Ganton, football at Roker Park, camping at Scarborough and several journeys between Barnard Castle and North Wales.
When I finally sold it and acquired a respectable saloon, some of the excitement went out of motoring.
— Alan Wilkinson, 15 Wellington Road, Barnard Castle.
I still remember the thrill of my first car bought in 1953 with my 21st birthday money.
It was a 1930 BSA XG 1718.
I bought it for £25 plus £3.10 for the tax and insurance from a taxi driver who had abandoned it at Middlesbrough station with a blown head gasket.
With the hood up, a half opaque windscreen, only one wiper and no indicators, it had the visibility equal to driving a tank.
The brakes consisted of two inefficient rear brakes and one transmission front brake, usually full of oil.
I sold the car for £45 and it ended as a write-off in the middle of a roundabout.
— Barry Chapman, 102 High Street, Norton, Stockton.
My wife had determined that I must swop my old bike for a car after I told her of an encounter with an old pupil of mine as I was toiling up the hill by the power station in Haughton Road, Darlington.
‘Still on your bike, sir?’
He was driving a huge Buick.
I grinned in reply, pretending I liked the exercise.
So we cashed an endowment policy and called at the Cleveland Garage where we bought a gleaming black and chrome palace on wheels, a Standard Vanguard, for £240.
I passed my driving test just in time for the holidays.
Our children were thrilled to see the glorious countryside of the moors and fells with trips to the coast and the Lake District as well.
Balding tyres did not daunt it, nor a dicky handbrake (we carried two bricks just in case) and we covered a hole in the floor with a board.
Mr Terry Kelly, 68 Maria Drive, Fairfield, Stockton.
Our first car was a pale green Morris 1000.
My father-in-law bought it for £26, did it up and gave it to us for a wedding present in June 1969.
We travelled thousands of miles in it over the next two years.
Our main memory is of trying to keep the inside of the windscreen free of ice (no heater) while queues of traffic built up beside us on the long haul up Shap Fell.
We eventually sold it in 1972 for £35 and bought an ancient wood-trimmed Morris Traveller, but no car as been as dear to us as Curtis.
— Sally Hoddy, 21 Mere Drive, Pity Me, Durham.
I bought a green 1953 Vauxhall Wyvern in 1959 when I was 17.
I paid £12.10s. for it, which had taken a year to save.
We had to tow it home because the clutch had gone.
The tow rope snapped twice on the way and was getting shorter and shorter before we eventually got to Darlington.
I bought a second-hand clutch for £3 and fitted it myself.
My father said the 17-horse power would use too much petrol, but it gave me a year's pleasure before I swopped it for an A30 van.
The Wyvern didn't last much longer, as the chap I swapped with drove into a large hole created by roadworks on the Northallerton road and the car snapped in two!
He bought a new suit out of the insurance money.
— Robin Hind, Middleston Road, Sadberge, Darlington.
Research by Colin Eshelly.
Sheila Read wins £10 for the best entry.
MIDDLESBROUGH will stage a British quarter-final of the World Championship next Thursday.
Daz Sumner, a heat leader at Cleveland Park, will be among the 16 competitors.
Duncan Champman, another Middlesbrough rider, could get a chance if there is a spate of injuries as he is fourth on the reserve list.
The following are due to line up at Cleveland Park: Sumner, Les Collins (Edinburgh), Wayne Carter (Wolverhampton), Carl Stonehewer (Belle Vue), Peter Carr (Sheffield), Neville Tatum (Eastbourne), Neil Evitts (Sheffield), Nathan Simpson (Eastbourne), Paul Bentley (Coventry), Andy Phillips (Poole), Scott Robson, Scott Lamb, David Blackburn, David Walsh (all Berwick), Paul Whittaker (Peterborough), Kenny McKinna (Edinburgh.)
Former Middlesbrough rider Gary Havelock is among five Bradford riders seeded to reach the semi-finals.
The top 20 scorers from last season will miss out on the early stages of the title chase, which begins at Stoke on Saturday night.
The 20 will be joined in the semi-finals at Cradley Heath and Ipswich on May 3 by the four top scorers from the qualifying rounds at Stoke, Exeter (next Monday) and Middlesbrough.
Seeded semi-finalists: K Tatum, G Havelock, S Wigg, P Thorp, S Wilson (Bradford), A Grahame (Eastbourne), M Dugard, D Barker (Oxford), M Cox, S Schofield (Poole), J Doncaster, D Mullett (Reading), C Louis (Ipswich), M Loram (King's Lynn), R Knight (Berwick), J Screen (Belle Vue), A Smith (Coventry), J Davis (Swindon), N Collins (Glasgow), G Jones (Wolverhampton).
Middlesbrough Bears will be seeking their first Gold Cup points of the season against Berwick Bandits at Cleveland Park tonight.
The Bears have had two of their scheduled fixtures washed out and suffered a heavy defeat at Edinburgh.
Manager Ken Knott is optimistic of an improved performance tonight.
The tremendous form of new skipper Steve Regeling has given Knott a boost and he is confident Dave Cheshire has got over his mechanical problems.
Berwick crashed at home to Newcastle last Saturday, but staged a quick recovery with a last-heat win at Glasow.
England international Richard Knight has teamed up again with Berwick on their return to the Second Division after being linked with leading First Division teams.
Scott Lamb is back in their ranks after a spell with Newcastle.
Teesside teenager Chris Readshaw, on loan from Middlesbrough for the rest of the season, will appear on his home track.
Steve Regeling, Mark Lemon, Sumner, Donny Odom, Dave Cheshire, Duncan Chapman, Paul Pickering.
Richard Knight, Robson, Dave Walsh, Lamb, Blackburn, Readshaw, Michael Lowrie.
STRIKER Bernie Slaven last night promised his full backing for Middlesbrough's promotion drive.
Republic of Ireland international Slaven said: ‘I don't want to rock the boat.
‘I can assure fans I will continue to give my best.
Promotion is important for the punters and the club.’
Slaven was involved in a pre-match row with manager Lennie Lawrence when he was axed at Bristol City on Tuesday night.
The Boro's second leading scorer felt he had been made a scapegoat for the home defeat by Watford.
Slaven added: ‘I was disappointed and hurt that I was not even on the bench.
‘I felt I could have contributed something, even as a substitute at some stage of the game.
‘After all, I am the club's leading Second Division scorer, despite missing games through injury and being on the bench at times.’
Lawrence denied Slaven was a scapegoat and stressed he would be considered for Tranmere tomorrow night.
The Boro boss added: ‘Forwards are at the sharp end, especially away from home, where it is harder for them.
‘I picked a team to do a job on the night.
I thought at half time I had got it exactly right.
We finished up with only one point because of events outside of my control.’
Lawrence stressed he would continue to use the squad system in the promotion finale.
Middlesbrough need a win at Tranmere to gain promotion momentum after taking only two points from the last four games.
Slaven described Ipswich Town's run as ‘unbelievable’ and reflected on the success of former Boro midfield player John Wark.
Wark struggled to find a club when released by Boro last summer, before he rejoined Ipswich on a weekly contract.
Slaven added: ‘Wark has figured in their drive towards the Premier League.
It proves age is no barrier if a player looks after himself.
‘Ipswich will win the title, but any team out of five could get the No.2 spot.
‘We are among the five.
Hopefully, we can take advantage of our home games next week.’
Middlesbrough face Barnsley (Monday), Oxford United (Wednesday) and Plymouth Argyle (Saturday.)
It is an important week for the club and an  expensive one for fans, who are certain to pick and choose unless the club make a cut-price gesture.
Souness is on the mend
LIVERPOOL manager Graeme Souness was ‘stable and making good progress’ yesterday after a comfortable night following major heart surgery.
Mr Souness, 38, a former Middlesbrough star, had a five-hour triple bypass operation on Tuesday at the private Alexandra Hospital at Cheadle, near Stockport, Cheshire.
THIS month Northern Achiever of the North award goes to 13-year-old Christopher Ross, from Stockton.
Christopher attends Ormesby Comprehensive School, Middlesbrough and takes part in a variety of sports.
He has had numerous sporting achievements recognised over the last year.
He trains weekly at the Cleveland Stadium and will soon become a member of Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harriers.
He was selected to represent BSAD Northern Region at the Junior National Championships in Blackpol in July, 1991, where he won the gold medal in the shot putt and the 100m sprint.
In February, 1992, he competed for the BSAD Northern Region team at the Junior National Swimming Gala held in the Dolphin Centre, Darlington.
He won three gold medals, all in personal best times, in 25m backstroke (26.64sec), 50m freestyle (59.86) and 25m freestyle (24.31).
His time in the 25m freestyle set a national record.
Christopher also does judo at the Stockton Judo Club and recently won a gold medal at the Judo Mini Mons at Willington Spectrum Centre.
His ambition is to gain his black belt.
Christopher is also going skiing next February with his school.
THE sons of former Middlesbrough footballers David Mills and Peter Creamer look set to follow in their fathers' footsteps.
Andrew Mills has signed schoolboy forms for Boro and Christopher Creamer will join the YT intake at Ayresome Park next season.
The 16-year-olds could play for the juniors at the same time as their fathers turn out for the club's over-35s team in a national competition.
A double father-and-son combination at one club could be a Football League record.
Andrew has played for Stockton and Cleveland County Boys as a winger but could develop into a midfield player.
His father, who at one time held the British transfer fee record, said there was no arm-twisting when Andrew signed for his home club.
‘I have tried to protect Andrew against comparisons.
He has not even seen my scrapbooks.
‘I want Andrew to progress with his own talent rather than on what I achieved in the game.
‘Middlesbrough have always had a reputation for encouraging young players.
Manager Lennie Lawrence has shown he believes in that policy by pushing Jamie Pollock this season.
‘It might not happen for Andrew for two or three years, but I know he will get a chance if he is good enough.
‘Middlesbrough fans are more tolerant these days.
The present players do not have to put up with the old ‘Chicken Run.’
‘Fans on the South Terrace really gave players flak in the old days.
At 18, I found it unfair.’
Christopher is a forward.
His father was a full back in his professional career before he joined the Northern League circuit as a manager.
Formerly on Aston Villa's books, Christopher was thrilled when invited to join an eight-strong YT intake.
‘I am also delighted,’ said his father.
‘Middlesbrough were a smashing club when I was with them between 1968–75.
The club is encouraging youngsters again and that's a good sign.
‘I am impressed by the present set-up.
‘Christopher was in the Durham side that lost to Northumberland in the National Boys’ Club Championship semi-final.
I think he has good potential.’
The ex-Boro players suffered a Cup blow when Wembley hopes were dashed on Sheffield Wednesday's training ground last weekend.
Middlesbrough lost 4–3 after extra-time in the over-35s quarter-final.
BERNIE Slaven's outburst at being left out in the cold could cost him a place in the starting line-up as Middlesbrough take on Tranmere tonight.
Striker Slaven blew his top after being axed from the side which grabbed a draw at Bristol City in midweek.
Manager Lennie Lawrence admitted: ‘The big hoo-ha has disappointed me greatly.
It's most unfortunate.
‘Stuart Ripley and Mark Proctor were left out as well and their reaction was as it should be.
‘I changed things around because I was convinced the same 11 players could not do themselves justice over the next three weeks.’
Slaven claimed he had been made the scapegoat and vowed to blast Boro to promotion given the chance.
But Lawrence would not confirm his Republic of Ireland international's returns tonight.
Lawrence will switch his side around.
Ripley looks certain to make a comeback and the Boro boss is ready to make one or two other changes as well.
Lawrence said he had sympathised with record signing Andy Payton, who has been in and out of the side since his move from Hull.
‘The problem with Andy is that he has played so rarely we have yet to get him into our pattern of play.
‘He has shown a lot of patience and he did OK against Bristol.
‘If we win this game it will be a good week for us.
We have to go for it.’
Meanwhile, Leicester City fans have claimed Middlesbrough star Jamie Pollock encouraged a pitch invasion after scoring the first goal of his career at Filbert Street.
Members of the Leicester Fosse sub-branch of the Football Supporters Association have written to Lawrence, complaining about the teenager's ‘excessive’ behaviour.
After scoring his spectacular debut goal, Pollock ran over towards Middlesbrough's travelling fans and did a somersault.
The 18-year-old had hit a magnificent 25-yard volley to equalise in the April 1 game, which Middlesbrough eventually lost 2–1.
A large number of jubilant Boro fans ran on to the pitch to congratulate Pollock, a gesture which is now a criminal offence.
A Leicestershire Police spokeswoman said no supporters had been arrested, although several had to be removed from the pitch.
But Joan Skinner, of Leicester FSA, insisted Pollock had gone ‘over the top.’
‘We had a branch meeting the night after the game and there were several complaints,’ she added.
‘He scored a very good goal, which gave just cause for celebration.
‘But then he avoided the congratulations of his team-mates to run quite a distance to the Middlesbrough fans.
‘We are doing our best to ensure that fans are well-behaved and I think players have a responsibility too.’
In her letter to Lawrence, Mrs Skinner wrote: ‘Our members felt the scorer's jubilant behaviour was somewhat excessive to the extent perhaps of being a contributory factor in the subsequent pitch invasion.’
Lawrence had no comment to make about the letter, but fans sprang to the defence of Pollock, who has emerged from nowhere as a midfield star of the future.
Stuart Downing, editor of the club's fanzine Fly Me To The Moon, was at Filbert Street, and said: ‘It was his first goal and it was natural he wanted to celebrate.
He did run towards the crowd, but so did Tommy Wright after scoring Leicester's winner.
‘Besides, the fans didn't have to run on to the pitch.
I think this is a bit of a silly complaint.’
67 years' service at age 56 A Bedale man has completed a total of 67 years in two branches of public service and he is still only 56.
Mr Reg Eden, of Benkhill Drive, has just retired after 33 years as a full-time postman in and around Bedale.
He had also clocked up 34 years as a retained firefighter when he retired from that job two years ago.
He joined the Post Office at Bedale in time for the Christmas rush of 1957, but two years of his service were part-time.
His uncle, Mr Bill Eden, was a postman at Northallerton when the young Reg followed in his footsteps.
Bedale was then a busy Crown office with a full staff, a sorting office and responsibility for many sub-offices in Wensleydale villages stretching to Hawes and the Cumbrian border.
Reg, who has hung up his mail sack early for health reasons, began his rounds with foot and pedal power but eventually graduated to one of the familiar bright red vans.
He was with the Post Office long enough to see the withdrawal and eventual reinstatement of the handy Sunday collections.
He also saw the Bedale office downgraded to a sub-office, the head office for the district concentrated at Darlington and most of the staff records kept at Middlesbrough.
He feels he has done his share of slogging through atrocious weather and will not miss getting up at 4.30am.
He said: ‘I am going to enjoy a bit of a lie in, but I shall miss the customers because they made the job so interesting.’
His local knowledge proved indispensable when he was a firefighter because he could guide his colleagues to the scene of a ‘shout’ as accurately as he could deliver a letter.
He knew roads, houses, remote farms and new developments so well that vital minutes could be saved.
He and his wife have a daughter married to a retained firefighter at Masham.
HARTLEPOOL United manager Alan Murray gave a vote of confidence to 17-year-old goalkeeper Steven Jones on the eve of his debut against Third Division leaders Stoke City.
The Middlesbrough teenager will join the full-time payroll in the summer.
Murray said: ‘Jones has worked hard at his game and has progressed by leaps and bounds.
‘Jones was at the club as a YTS player when I  arrived .
I admit I was not impressed at the outset.
‘The kid has made a dramatic improvement though, with a little help from Martin Hodge.
‘Hodge has been ruled out for the season after an appendix operation, but I am confident Jones will do a good job.
‘Jones handles the ball well and is a good shot-stopper.
He has been offered a full-time contract for July and has accepted.’
Brian Honour starts a two-match suspension after reaching 31 points and John Tinkler is rated doubtful with a groin strain.
Skipper John MacPhail could return after a three-match absence with a knee injury.
Team Jones, Tinkler, Nobbs, MacPhail, Cross, Southall, McCreery, Olsson, Thomas, Johnroe, Fletcher, Tupling.
Stoke are championship favourites and will be backed by a 2,500 following.
The Midlands team will be without top marksman Wayne Biggs at the start of a two-match ban.
Central defender Vince Overson has only a 5050 chance of being fit.
Former Manchester City forward Adrian Heath, a £50,000 transfer deadline day signing, could play alongside Mark Stein in attack.
Stoke have picked up 14 points from their last seven games.
— HOWARD Wilkinson yesterday turned on the pundits writing off Leeds United's championship chances.
‘The players, myself and the staff have come a long way together and are not about to let all the hard work go down the drain.’
Cricket By TIM WELLOCK GARY Wigham, Durham's top bowler on the tour of Zimbabwe, will have his first taste of first-class opposition this weekend.
The 18-year-old Bishop Auckland bowler is in the squad of 14 from which Durham will pick their sides for the two one-day matches against Essex at Chelmsford.
His selection ahead of John Wood is a measure of the strides he took on tour, when he topped the averages with 11 wickets at 22.27.
Wood missed the tour through injury, but is now fully fit and has been working hard in the nets over the last three days.
Paul Henderson, the 17-year-old Middlesbrough all-rounder, and Stewart Hutton are also in the squad.
Both played in the Joshua Tetley Trophy match at Scarborough last September, which Essex won by 154 runs, but the only other survivors are John Glendenen and Simon Brown, who won the man-of-the-match award.
Glendenen probably remembers the match best for having to face a 14-ball opening over from Essex's former Hampshire paceman Steve Andrew, who currently has a fractured shoulder.
He apparently tripped over his cat and fell downstairs and will be out for six weeks.
Otherwise the county champions are selecting from a full squad, with Mark Waugh keen to do battle against fellow Australian Dean Jones.
Essex have been practising outdoors at Chelmsford since April 1, which gives them a week's start on Durham, although they did not have a winter tour.
Durham practised outdoors at Boldon on Thursday and again yesterday morning.
Essex aim to give most of their 17-man squad a game in one of the two 55-over matches before selecting a side to play England A at Lord's on Monday.
Durham will meet up again with two Essex players they saw on tour seamer Don Topley, who was the Zimbabwe coach, and off-spinner Peter Such, who was the professional at Bulawayo.
The Durham squad is: D A Graveney (capt), W Larkins, J D Glendenen, S Hutton, P W G Parker, D M Jones, P Bainbridge, I Smith, C W Scott, P W Henderson, S P Hughes, P J Berry, S J E Brown, G Wigham.
TICKETS for Durham's opening home match against Lancashire next Sunday will go on sale at the University ground on Monday.
The club are to set up an office where tickets will be available from 9.30am-noon from Monday to Thursday.
With a ground capacity of 6,000, the intention is to make it an all-ticket match, with members being given the first option.
They have been asked to send in their applications by Tuesday.
‘Tickets will be on sale on the day only if the ground is half empty, in which case it would be wrong of us to shut the gates,’ said chief executive Mike Gear.
Tranmere Rovers 1 Middlesbrough 2 By RAY ROBERTSON A DRAMATIC 90th-minute goal from left back Jimmy Phillips snatched Middlesbrough three priceless promotion points at Prenton Park last night.
Phillips's 25-yard free kick screamed past the helpless Eric Nixon to leave Boro celebrating a double over Tranmere and a tremendous boost to their prospects of reaching the Premier League following a lean spell.
Middlesbrough are now in fifth place, level on points with Derby County, with an identical goal difference, though Derby have scored more goals.
Middlesbrough deserved their win after leading for a long spell, though manager Lennie Lawrence's heart must have sank when Tranmere snatched an 86th-minute equaliser.
Midfield player Mark Proctor celebrated his recall by putting Boro ahead after 15 minutes.
Paul Wilkinson headed an Andy Peake free kick out to the right where Proctor scored with a fine angled shot.
Five minutes later skipper Alan Kernaghan was carried off with a knee injury and Middlesbrough delayed the introduction of substitute Jon Gittens for five minutes.
John Hendrie was in fine form and prompted many Boro attacks.
Middlesbrough showed more controlled football against a side that was booed off at half-time by the home crowd but which stepped up pressure after the break, only to find Boro's defence holding firm.
Middlesbrough kept a tight grip on John Aldridge, but substitute Ian Muir crashed a late equaliser into the roof of the net.
Boro rescued the situation with Phillips's match-winner which should put Boro in good heart for three successive home matches next week.
The only black note was Wilkinson's booking for over-celebrating the winner.
Lawrence said: ‘I would have been happier with a 1–0 win.
We gave a very professional performance until the last ten minutes.
‘A great piece of Jimmy Phillips skill rescued us.
A jubilant Phillips said: ‘A win was great, because a draw would have been no good to us.’
MATCHFACTS Proctor (0–1,15min), Muir (1–1,86min), Phillips (1–2,90min) Wilkinson (ungentlemanly conduct) 8,842 R Poulain (Holmfirth) Tranmere Nixon 7, Thomas 7, Hughes VICKERS Nolan 6, Harvey 6 (Substitute Martindale 80min), Irons 6, Morrissey 6, Malkin 6, Steel 5 (Substitute Muir 66min) Aldridge 5 Middlesbrough Pears 7, Fleming 7, Mohan 7, Kernaghan 7 (Substitute Gittens 25min 7), Phillips 7, Ripley 7 (Substitute Payton 75min), Proctor 7, Peake 7, Falconer HENDRIE Wilkinson 7.
SUNDERLAND will use their next three home games to distribute FA Cup final vouchers.
And then there will be a draw to decide which gold card holders with all three vouchers will get tickets for Wembley.
Sunderland chairman Bob Murray outlined the distribution plan at the weekend and said: ‘We know it is an impossible job because there will be 100,000 people wanting Cup final tickets.
‘But we believe we will get this 90 percent right the thought that has gone into it has been enormous.’
Sunderland, he said, might get as few as 17,800 tickets for the final possibly more if Portsmouth beat Liverpool in tonight's replay.
And the Roker club's 5,000 season ticket holders are all guaranteed a ticket each.
The other supporters must collect vouchers at the turnstiles tomorrow night against Ipswich Town, Thursday night's game against Plymouth, and the derby game against Middlesbrough on Easter Monday.
Ticket sales for the all-ticket derby clash were suspended on Friday in view of the voucher decision.
Only 1,000 of Sunderland's 25,000 derby tickets have been sold and the remainder will be offered to gold card number 110,000 today, and 10,001–17,000 on Wednesday.
Card holders are guaranteed one ticket per person, per gold cards, and queueing, stresses the club, is unnecessary.
Arrangements for the sale of any remaining tickets will be announced on Thursday.
THE Hopper the Bopper banner will be out again tonight at the ABA British semi-finals at Gateshead Leisure Centre.
A fortnight ago at Bletchley it was pretty prominent as Michael Hopper, the 24-year-old Spennymoor super-heavyweight pounded Brighton's Craig Parsons to a second round stoppage in the English semi-finals.
Tonight Hopper meets an unknown quantity in Scotland's Colin Brown of Gartcosh.
‘No-one knows anything about Colin.
Even my coach Robert Ellis (who yesterday ran the London marathon) has not been able to find anything out,’ said Hopper, a Durham restaurant manager.
‘But I'm spot on.
I feel confident, and I feel good.
I'm sure I'm going all the way this year.
I didn't box all that well at Bletchley.
I was disappointed with my form, but I feel really good right now.’
Another North-Easterner on tonight's bill, the last stage before the finals at the Royal Albert Hall on May 6, is Sunderland flyweight Steve Parry.
He qualified at Bletchley by knocking down Hove's Justin Murphy twice in the first round, forcing him to hold on so much that the referee disqualified the Southerner.
Parry, 23, has twice reached the national quarter finals, losing each time to the legendary John Lyon.
Hopes are high Tonight he meets Keith Knox of Bonnyrigg, whose big hitting took him to the Scottish title.
‘Knox goes looking for a fight, but Steve likes it that way.
He prefers to have opponents come to him rather than go looking for them,’ said Lambton Street club secretary Frank Jardine, who will again be in Parry's corner.
‘Steve is excellent, right on form.
We've got him where we want him, and he's looking well.’
Tomorrow night, also at Gateshead, two other North-Easterners continue their quest for ABA gold when the English semi-finalists meet the Welsh finalists.
And again, hopes are high.
Hartlepool Welfare featherweight Alan Temple is taking things calmly.
The 19-year-old butcher who boxed for England in June and trains with the England camp, is due to meet Barry Jones of Highfields.
‘We've had no problems training is going normally,’ said his coach Peter Cope.
Cope saw Jones in action a year or so ago, when he narrowly beat Hartlepool's Kevin Crumplin in the national schools championships semi finals and repeated the victory just in a schools international.
‘I'm confident Alan will win,’ said Cope.
Certainly, Temple has looked impressive on his route to Gateshead, boxing with a calm patience and displaying an ability to take and hand out punishment.
The same can be said of Andy Green, of the Phil Thomas School of Boxing at Middlesbrough.
The 21-year-old England international lightweight has ploughed an entertaining, gutsy and impressive path through the championships.
Yet it nearly stopped when it started.
In his first North-East division fight he was rocked by a tremendous right hand from Hartlepool BC's John Kelly in the second round and looked out on his feet.
Yet he staged an amazing comeback to pound out a points win.
In the North-East divisional finals he had two bouts on the same night, but earned unanimous points victories over Grainger Park's Alan Graham and Newbiggin's Ivan Walker.
A third-round two-fisted torrent of punches got a tough James Phelan of Hull out of the way in the North-Eastern Counties finals, then Kirby's Alan Ryder and the RAF's Darren Rudd went the same way.
Green meets Mark Newton of Coed-Eva, a student PE teacher.
‘Newton is a very good boxer and very strong, but not a good puncher,’ said Green's coach John Lowe.
‘Andy is in good shape and I'm expecting him to go all the way this year’.
The chance is certainly there for the North-East's four.
Several of last year's champions, including flyweight Paul Ingle of Scarborough and Darlington light heavyweight Anthony Todd and Middlesbrough international light welter Peter Richardson did not enter because Olympic qualification bids clashed with the ABAs.
There is not now a reigning champion left in the event.
The field is wide open.
If the region's four are on top form, they could book a place on amateur boxing's biggest night at the Royal Albert Hall.
Tickets for tonight and tomorrow range from £9 to £7 (with a pound off for pensioners and youngsters) and are available at the door or by ringing 0914773600.
Boxing starts at 7.30 each night.
The line-ups are (England names first): Tonight (England v Scotland): Light fly: Mark Woodcock (Royal Navy) v Scott Robertson (Lanarkshire Welfare).
Fly: Steve Parry (Lambton Street) v Keith Knox (Bonnyrigg).
Bantam: Mike Aldis (Crawley) v Jim Albert (Royal Albert).
Feather: Marlon Ward (Newco-Repton) v Carlo Melluci (Calton).
Light: Dean Amory (Kingshurst) v Malcolm Gowans (Selkirk).
Light welter: Darren McCarrick (Boarshaw) v Stephen McLevey (Clydeview).
Welter: Mark Santini (Birmingham City) v Andrew Craig (Aberdeen).
Light middle: Glen Catley (Empire) v Stephen Morrison (Zetland).
Middle: Eric Noi (Moss Side) v John Connelly (Renton).
Light heavy: Paul Rogers (Penhill) v William Cane (Four Isles).
Heavy: Scott Welsh (Hove) v Andrew Caulfield (St Francis).
Super-heavy: Michael Hopper (Spennymoor) v Colin Brown (Gartcosh).
England v Wales Tomorrow (England v Wales): Light fly: Darren Fifield (Henley) walk over.
Fly: Michael Horobin (St Pancras) v Neil Swain (Gilfachgoch).
Bantam: Patrick Mullins (St Patricks, London) v Richard Vowles (Llanharan).
Feather: Alan Temple (Hartlepool Welfare) v Barry Jones (Highfields).
Andy Green (Phil Thomas School of Boxing, Middlesbrough) v Mark Newton (Coed-Eva).
Light welter: Adrian Stone (Empire) v Jason Williams (Gwent).
Welter: Paul Burns (Gemini) v Barry Thorogood (Highfields).
Light middle: Dean Francis (Basingstoke) v Joseph Calzaghe (Newbridge).
Middle: Lee Woolcock (Canvey Boys) v Carl Winstone (Pontypool).
Light heavy: Kelly Oliver (Bracebridge) v Derek Hitchings (Pontypridd).
Heavy: Chris Henry (New Enterprise, London) v Richard Fenton (Pentwyn).
Super heavy: Donovan Holness (St Pancras) v Kevin McCormack (Coed-Eva).
MICHAEL Hall of Darlington narrowly lost his European junior lightweight final in Edinburgh on Saturday.
Hall, who this time last year was fighting as a schoolboy found the experience of Russia's Sergo Chargakov, plus the burden of four  bouts in six days, just a shade too much.
LES Barrett, 15, of Lambton Street, lost to Liverpool's Colin Toohey in the NABC quarter finals at Manchester on Saturday.
His presence marked a remarkable return to the ring.
His previous round at Hull was his first bout for 18 months after almost severing his arm when he fell through a window at home.
Darlington's John Lee won his quarter-final, but clubmates Tucker Lee and Jim Smith went out, smith most unluckily catching flu and not competing.
The 24-year-old central defender was carried off at Tranmere Rovers on Friday night when his knee locked.
Hopes of a quick recovery have been dashed.
Should Kernaghan be ruled out of the final seven matches it will be a blow, because he has been a tower of strength and a model of consistency.
On-loan Jon Gittens and Willie Falconer could form a new central defensive partnership against Barnsley at Ayresome Park tonight.
Nicky Mohan serves a one-match ban after reaching 21 points.
Middlesbrough face an important week of three home matches, with the battle for second spot wide open.
Ipswich Town are running away with the championship, but six teams are involved in the race for runners-up.
Blackburn Rovers have crashed alarmingly with only six points from the last 11 games.
Middlesbrough will be in a strong position if they take full advantage of games in hand.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘Second place is very much on the cards if we do the job this week.
The picture will become a lot clearer by Saturday night.
‘Partly through circumstances with postponed matches, and partly through design, we have engineered this end-of-season programme.
‘The issue is simple.
If we cash in we can go up in second spot.
If we can't we will either be in the playoffs or just miss out.
‘If we miss out it will be our own fault.
‘Whatever happens, we will be involved in the scenario until the end of a momentous season.
There is a chapter or two yet to be written.’
Lawrence refused to discuss speculation that striker Bernie Slaven could be on the way out in the summer.
Slaven was involved in an astonishing touchline protest after being dropped at Bristol City.
Lawrence was unhappy over the outspoken challenge to his authority and axed Slaven from his Tranmere squad.
The Boro boss said: ‘I have better things to do than discuss idle gossip.
that seems to masquerade as news in some local papers.’
Even though his end-of-season future is in doubt, Slaven could win a recall tonight because Andy Payton has a hamstring problem.
Lawrence added: ‘Payton has never fully recovered from the FA Cup replay with Portsmouth.
Going on as substitute has not helped him.
‘We have been down to the bare bones before.
I had only 13 fit players against Manchester United in the Rumbelows League Cup.
‘Two games against Barnsley have been tight this season and we must be on our guard.
‘We cannot afford a hope-for-the best cavalier approach or we will be cut to pieces on the break.’
SWINDON Town's promotion play-off hopes suffered another setback with their ninth draw in their last 14 away games in a 1–1 encounter yesterday.
A 78th minute equaliser from Bristol Rovers defender Billy Clark undid much of Swindon's work after the visitors had gone in front three minutes earlier through Shaun Taylor.
Swindon needed a win to maintain their push for a play-off spot, but they were denied when Paul Bodin, who made nearly 150 appearances for Bath City on the ground they share with Bristol Rovers, fouled Ian Alexander.
Clark headed in Alexander's free-kick.
Swindon's 75th minute effort came at the end of a spell when they were getting on top of a hard-working Rovers side in a lack-lustre derby.
David Kerslake drove the ball across the face of goal from the right and unmarked Taylor scored with a low shot at the far post.
DARLINGTON Harrier Ruth Williams was just pipped for a hat-trick of victories in the Mandale Harriers Cyril Elliott Memorial meeting at Middlesbrough on Saturday.
The North-East 100 and 200 metres champion won the long jump with a leap of 5.65 metres and was prevented from completing a sprint double when City of Hull's Karen Buck just got home in the 100 metres.
North Shields Polytechnic's Simon McAree completed a double by winning the youth's 100 metres and 100 metres hurdles, while Mandale's Paul Lowe won the senior men's 800 metres and was runner up to teammate Martin Scaife in the 3,000 metres.
Results Senior 100m M Silcox (Middlesbrough and Cleveland) 11.7; 200m M Silcox (M&C) 23.5; 400m D Deacon (South Shields) 49.4; 800m P Lowe (Mandale) 1:56.1; 3,000m M Scaife (Mandale) 8.36.9; LJ D Gardner (Hartlepool Burn Road) 6.66; HJ J Wallace (Morpeth) 2.05; SP K Kaiser (M&C) 12.32; HT J Thompson (Sunderland) 50.24; PV I Moore (Houghton) 2.20.
Junior 100m S Markham (M&C) 11.4; 200m A Wood (M&C) 23.1; 800m V Wilson (J&H) 1:56.0; 3,000m M Morris (NSP) 9:04.4; LJ A Wood (M&C) 6.60; HT P Scott (M&C) 45.02; PV A Hall (HBR) 2.60.
100m S McAree (NSP) 11.6; 400m J Deacon (South Shields) 51.9; 1500m M Briggs (Washington) 4:16.4; 100mH S McAree (NSP) 14.2; 400mH R Mellor (M&C) 62.0; 1500mSC P Theakston (Mandale) 4:54.6; LJ B King (Sunderland) 5.82; HJ C Johnson (NSP) 1.85; SP B Watson-Jone (Gateshead) 10.60; HT W Gibson (M&C) 49.42; PV D WatsonJones (Gateshead) 3.10.
100m M Hudspeth (Gateshead) 12.8; 400m S Tate (Peterlee) 58.3; 1500m C Old (Houghton) 4:27.0; 80mH A Smith (Mandale) 14.1; HJ S Thwaites (Unatt) 1.60; LJ S Topping (NSP) 4.93; HT M Bulman (Mandale) 37.02; SP N Maddison (Sunderland) 11.65.
100m M Morton (M&C) 14.3; 200m K Allinson (Mandale) 29.7; LJ M Callaghan (Grimsby) 4.86.
Senior 100m K Buck (Hull) 12.7; 200m R Williams (Darlington) 25.75; 800m D Knox (M&C) 2:19.7; 3,000m J Scott (Darlington) 10:00.7; 100mH H Blanchard (darlington) 16.5; HJ C Scott (M&C) 1.55; LJ R Williams (Darlington) 5.56; HT K Thompson (Sunderland) 30.78.
100m A Fyall (J&H) 12.8; 200m D Kerr (J&H) 26.53; 800m H Todd (Gateshead) 2:23.01; 80mH S Pattison (Bedlington) 13.2; HJ C Sullivan (Copeland) 1.50; LJ A forester (Sunderland) 5.37; SP J Lavender (Sunderland) 11.16; HT J Lavender (Sunderland) 36.86.
100m S Musk (J&H) 13.7; 200m W Edmondson (J&H) 27.69; 800m S Gascoigne (HBR) 2:30.5; 75mH K Forsyth (NSP) 12.7; HJ D McInroy (Richmond and Zetland) 1.55; LJ K Durham (Seaton) 4.40; HT R Beverley (Mandale) 18.54.
Gazza set for return
PAUL Gascoigne could make a sensational return to the Spurs team in a game which could decide the League championship.
Spurs are due to face Manchester United at Old Trafford on the final scheduled day of the season, May 2, in a game which could be crucial to United's title hopes.
Gazza, improving fast after his latest knee operation, is scheduled to figure in a testimonial match in Newcastle on April 29, but a major league game is another matter altogether.
Meanwhile, QPR and Tottenham could both face an FA inquiry after a stormy match at Loftus Road on Saturday in which referee Gurnan Singh booked five players and sent off QPR's Northern Ireland international defender Alan McDonald.
Butch is back
ATHLETICS: World 400m record holder Butch Reynolds yesterday won permission from America's governing body to compete again after he was suspended for using a banned substance in 1990.
Cool Doohan MOTORCYCLING: Michael Doohan scored a cool-headed victory in front of his home supporters in the Australian 500c motorcyling Grand Prix in Sydney today.
Sean in charge
RUGBY UNION: Auckland hooker Sean Fitzpatrick was yesterday named as All Blacks captain in a squad containing 10 newcomers for three matches against a World XV this month.
Home James BOXING: James Toney retained his IBF middleweight crown in Las Vegas on Saturday by winning a 12round unanimous decision over fellow American Glenn Wolfe.
Pullin title
TENNIS: Julie Pullin, the Hove 16-year-old, captured her second title in three weeks with victory in the final of the women's satellite tennis tournament in Botswana yesterday.
Bottom spot
GRIDIRON: London Monarchs yesterday drew 17–17 with Birmingham Fire to leave them anchored at the bottom of the European Division of the World League.
Double win
TABLE TENNIS: Both England teams won their morning matches in the European table tennis championships in Stuttgart yesterday.
Boro award
FOOTBALL: Middlesbrough have won the Barclays performance of the week award for their 2–1 win at Tranmere on Friday.
Tough task
RUGBY UNION: England B will be without Nigel Heslop, Chris Oti, David Pears, Steve Bates and Tim Rodber on their difficult eight-match tour of New Zealand in June and July.
THE Bears suffered their second defeat of the season in Scotland and have now won just one of their opening three Second Division Gold Cup matches.
Boro provided seven of the 15 heat winners, with Daz Sumner having his best night so far with a 12-point return from his six rides.
He was the Bears' top scorer, a point better than his captain, Steve Regeling, who nevertheless maintained his excellent consistency.
The back-up wasn't strong enough, with the five other teams members managing only 14 points between them.
American Donny Odom was unplaced in every race, Dave Cheshire was still struggling and Mark Lemon didn't get the points his efforts deserved.
Boro were eight points behind after the first six seats and 12 in arrears two races later.
Scorers Neil Collings 13, Steve Lawson 10, Tim Corneliussen 9, Micky Powell 8, Robert Nagy 7, Robert Shellick 4, James Grieves 0.
Daz Sumner 12, Steve Regeling 11, Dave Cheshire 6, Mark Lemon 4, Duncan Chapman 3, Paul Pickering 3, Donny Odom 0.
Fishing trip hits angler in pocket
AN ANGLER landed a fine for fishing in a river where he thought he could catch big fish.
Magistrates at Whitby heard that water bailiffs netted Kenneth Barwick on the stretch of the River Esk between Sleights and Ruswarp.
Barwick, 40, of Cornforth Avenue, Middlesbrough, admitted poaching last October.
He was fined £50 with a further £25 costs.
In a letter to the court, Barwick said he was told that the part of the Esk  where he was caught was a free stretch and that there were some good catches to be had there.
YOUNGSTERS have the chance to follow in the footsteps of rugby Grand Slam greats Rob Andrew and Rory Underwood this Easter, courtesy of a council's sports programme.
Both England stars started their careers at Acklam Park, Middlesbrough, and youngsters, aged nine to 14, can now learn to run with the ball and line up for line-outs with the Rugby Union course on the same turf.
The course, one of 26 activities in Middlesbrough Council's programme, centres on ‘New Image Rugby’ which is low on physical contact and high on handling skills, passing and running.
Council sports officer Stephen Robson said: ‘Any youngsters excited by England's exploits in the World Cup will love New Image Rugby.
It's a chance to learn the skills of the game with qualified Rugby Union coaches to lead sessions and ensure everyone's safety and enjoyment.’
He said girls were also invited to take part.
Details can be obtained from Jennifer Meikle, Leisure Services Department, on Middlesbrough 245432, ext 3826.
REBEL sea captain Jack Lammiman set sail from Whitby on his  greatest journey yet to America but only got as far as Scarborough.
The 53-year-old captain and his crew began their epic adventure to sail in the wake of Colummbus, at 8pm on Wednesday evening, but an injured crew member forced them to land two hours later 21 miles down the cost.
Pat O'Keefe slipped and fell as the boat was setting off and injured his hand as he plunged six feet over the side of the harbour, and had to be rescued by the crowd of journalists who had gathered to see Jack off.
When they reached Scarborough Pat, 58, a steelworker from Middlesbrough, was taken to the town's hospital where nurses bandaged his bruised and swollen fingers and he vowed to carry on with the journey.
Now the 63-year-old Helga Maria and its nine crew members are ship-shape and ready to go.
They were expected to leave on the tide late last night and if everything goes according to plan will be back in Whitby by September.
CASH-STARVED South Bank Football Club have been refused a grant by Cleveland County Council.
Officials asked for money to help the Middlesbrough club survive after a series of fires at their Normanby Road ground.
Cleveland's community development committee said the kitty was empty but club secretary Les Crossman promised the Bankers would survive until the end of the season.
‘I wrote the letter in February when there was a real chance we might not make it.’
But a £250 grant from Langbaurgh Council had been a lifeline, he said.
SOCCER stars are joining the battle to help a coma victim regain consciousness.
Darlington FC and championship favourites Manchester United have agreed to record special tapes for 20-year-old Michael Gibson.
Michael, who lives in Moffatt Close, Darlington, is still critically ill in Middlesbrough Hospital after he was viciously beaten up in Darlington's High Row 12 days ago.
His family have maintained a constant bedside vigil and his mother, Patricia, said: ‘Michael's favourite teams are Manchester United and Darlington.
He absolutely worshipped them and I am sure the sound of the players’ voices could make a big difference.’
A spokesman for Manchester United said: ‘We are only too happy to help out.
If our club can make a difference, and it has in the past, we will send a tape straightaway.’
Brian Anderson, the Quakers' club secretary, added: ‘It's awful to hear of a young fan ending up this way.
If football can bring Michael back then so much the better.’
Michael, who had been looking forward to his 21st birthday next month, has recently been taken off a life support machine.
SUNDERLAND skipper Paul Bracewell last night underwent surgery on his broken nose and will miss the next four games.
The shock news came as Roker manager Malcolm Crosby was completing his preparations for tonight's visit of Second Dvision leaders Ipswich Town the first of four crucial games in seven days.
Bracewell, who received the injury in an accidental clash with Gavin Peacock in the derby game at Newcastle last month, played in the FA Cup semi-final victory over Norwich City, but missed the midweek defeat at Leicester last week when he had to have a slight blockage in his nose cleared.
A visit to a specialist yesterday revealed that Bracewell had developed a bloodclot, which required surgery and an overnight stay in hospital.
‘It is not what we wanted and he will be a big miss,’ said Crosby.
‘But we have to have confidence in the player replacing him and we won't make too big a thing of his absence.’
Bracewell will also miss Thursday night's home game against bottom club Plymouth, Saturday's visit to Grimsby, and Monday's derby game against Middlesbrough.
Crosby has already decided that Irishman Brian Mooney will play on the right side of midfield tonight a vote of confidence after the midfielder's mistake which provided Charlton with their winning goal on Saturday.
But he must wait for a fitness check on club record signing Don Goodman before finalising his line-up.
The defence will remain unchanged in the continued absence of central defender Kevin Ball, who is recovering from a knee injury, and if Goodman is available Crosby will have to choose between former England international Peter Davenport or young striker David Rush for the remaining midfield slot.
Sunderland have lost their last five League matches, and there is a growing danger that the FA Cup finalists might find themselves in deep relegation trouble if they do no concentrate on the matter in hand Second Division survival.
Crosby said: ‘It is never going to be easy because the FA Cup final is a big thing for everyone concerned.
‘But the League is vitally important and we have eight games left to sort it out.
‘I think the lads now definitely realise how important the situation is.
‘What has happened recently has been a big shock to them and they have now got to knuckle down.’
With FA Cup final vouchers being distributed tonight a big crowd is expected, and Crosby believes the fans can play their part in encouraging a matchwinning performance.
Sunderland (from): Norman, Kay, Bennett, Rogan, Hardyman, Mooney, Atkinson, Armstrong, Davenport, Rush, Byrne, Goodman, Sampson, Brady.
LEICESTER City chairman Brian George yesterday  dismissed growing speculation that former Darlington boss Brian Little was set to become the new mannager at Sunderland.
George insisted: ‘There has been no approach from Sunderland and I wouldn't expect one.’
MIDDLESBROUGH suffered a major blow to their promotion hopes when they spurned the chance to climb into third place.
Boro dominated the game but Neil Redfearn stunned the crowd with a 47th-minute match-winning goal created by former Boro striker David Currie.
Currie beat Willie Falconer with ease on the left to provide eight-club Redfearn with a close-range chance.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘I am deeply disappointed but not totally surprised.
‘Barnsley are a mediocre, well-organised side.
We had a lot of possession because Barnsley defended with 11 men at times.
‘We did not have enough heart or bravery around the penalty area where it matters most against a team that was committed and strong.
‘We failed lamentably to break them down.
Once again, we lacked finish.’
When Mark Proctor volleyed the ball against the bar in the first half perhaps it was a sign it was not going to be Boro's night.
Middlesbrough picked up the tempo after the goal and threw everything into attack.
Barnsley defended in depth and Lee Butler played well in goal.
His best save was from substitute Bernie Slaven.
Barnsley substitute Deniol Graham had a scoring chance within a minute of his introduction.
Graham's first touch let him down as Boro waited for offside and Stephen Pears was able to smother the ball.
Barnsley survived fierce pressure but Boro struggled to create real scoring chances, though luck was against them at times.
Slaven put the ball in the net in the dying minutes but the goal was disallowed for offside.
Then Wayne Bullimore wasted a great opportunity for Barnsley after he beat Gittens.
The result puts pressure on Boro to pick up maximum points from Oxford United tomorrow night and Plymouth Argyle on Saturday.
MATCHFACTS Goal: Redfearn (47 min, 0–1).
C Fleming (foul), Wilkinson (foul), Whitworth (foul), Graham (dissent), Taggart (foul).
Referee: Mr T.Lunt (Bryn).
12,743.
Middlesbrough (4–3–3): Pears 7, C Fleming 7 (sub Parkinson 80 min), Gittens 7, Falconer 6, Phillips 7, Proctor 7, Peake 7, Pollock 6 (sub Slaven 52 min, 6), RIPLEY 8, Wilkinson 6, Hendrie 7.
Barnsley (4–4–2): BUTLER 8, G Fleming 7, Whitworth 7, Smith 7, Taggart 7, Robinson 7, Archdeadon 6, Redfearn 7, Bullimore 6, Currie 7, O'Connell 6 (sub Graham 60 min).
Sub (not used): Rammell. — BORO skipper Alan Kernaghan has undergone an operation for a torn knee ligament.
The 24-year-old central defender will have his right leg immobilised for six weeks and will miss the play-offs should Boro qualify.
WHEN Albert Hanson became secretary at the Albion social club in 1989, he quickly made news for his new marketing idea to promote the concert room weekdays.
He wanted a bit of culture in there.
Drama of the kitchen sink kind he believed would go down well with the Middlesbrough crowd who regularly call South Bank Albion their own.
So Hanson went ahead and brought in outside touring companies that offered simple sets, and a cast of up to ten people, who could stage a place that found its own level in front of people who didn't think twice about live theatre apart from taking their youngsters to the pantomime at Christmas.
The Culture Club was born.
And 15 months later it now has the Club Mirror Innovation Award for the most successful marketing concept introduced into a social club nationally.
‘Nowhere else in the country has its own live theatre like the Albion.
We have had companies from Gloucestershire, London, Manchester and Belfast here.
I try to be selective on purpose so the productions are realistic like kitchen sink drama because people can relate to it,’ said Hanson.
‘The subject matter has been anything from police and street violence to bag women, housing issues, business and the role of women in society.
‘We get between 40 and 80 people into the concert room midweek now, because trying something different will always bring people in the club.’
Hanson had no theatrical background or natural inclination.
‘I was with British Steel before coming here and had never been to a live theatre show before except the pantomime as a kid.
‘This has developed my liking for theatre and I am much more aware of theatre issues than before.’
The concert hall capacity is 320, filled nearly to that figure at weekends or on special occasions but usually it stands empty on weekdays.
An educational spin-off from The Culture Club has been a developing liaison with local schools such as Eston Park in the town.
The drama group there has come to The Culture Club regularly.
In early March actor Gary Masterson took time out during the day to run a workshop in the school.
The Mandela Theatre Company from Edinburgh visiting on April 29 intends to develop the play The Dorm for school benefit and has great follow up potential.
It tells of a young offenders institution where five inmates have made a pact that if one commits suicide the other four can be freed ‘for psychological reasons’.
But the twist is who will be the one to die for the rest and the storyline comes from a real incident.
The Culture Club is held every six weeks at the South Bank Albion social club in Middlesbrough.
Performances start at 7.30pm, and admission is £2.50 (concessions £1.50).
Albert Hanson has details about future dates on .
MIDDLESBROUGH rider Daz Sumner hopes to win a top-four place in the World Speedway Championship British Quarter Final at Cleveland Park, tomorrow night.
Only four of the 16 riders will progress to the next hurdle en route to the final in Poland on August 29.
Sumner, before his home crowd, will compete with many Cleveland Park track specialists and riders who have made spectacular progress in previous World Championship tournaments.
Les Collins (Edinburgh) achieved a magnificent second place to legendary American rider Bruce Penhall in Los Angeles Coliseum ten years ago.
In three previous qualifying rounds at Middlesbrough, Collins has an impressive record.
He is hot favourite for a semi-final place.
Three of last season's popular Middlesbrough riders will return to the track.
Paul Bentley (Coventry), Kenny McKinna (Edinburgh) and Wayne Carter (Wolverhampton) are rivals on this occasion.
Line-up: 1 Sumner, 2 Collins, 3, Carter, 4 Carl Stonehewer (Belle Vue), 5 Peter Carr (Sheffield),, 6 Neville Tatum (Eastbourne), 7 Neil Evitts (Sheffield), 8 Nathan Simpson (Eastbourne.) 9 Bentley, 10 Andy Phillips (Poole), 11 Scott Robson (Berwick), 12 Scott Lamb (Berwick), 13 David Blackburn (Berwick), 14 Paul Whittaker (Peterborough), 15 McKinna, 16 David Walsh (Berwick.)
MIDDLESBROUGH manager Lennie Lawrence last night warned that victory against Oxford United at Ayresome Park tonight is vital if they are to stay in the running for an automatic promotion spot.
‘We cannot afford another slip-up,’ he said.
‘Without three points, it will be nearly impossible to finish in the top two.
‘If we beat Oxford and Plymouth on Saturday, we could still have a chance of automatic promotion.
‘But we have to show more punch, determination and heart where it counts.
If we don't, we won't even finish in the top six.’
Lawrence said the team had to deliver for fans who had been let down in recent years.
‘I can sense some fans are thinking ‘Here we go again.’
‘They have suffered so many times in recent years and some think disappointment is staring them in the face again.
‘I feel sorry for the fans.
They have endless patience.’
Middlesbrough struggled against Barnsley's defence-in-depth tactics and are hoping Oxford play a more open game.
But there will have to be more penetration against a side which forced a draw at Derby County last Saturday.
Central defender Nicky Mohan could return after a one-match ban, with Willie Falconer going back into midfield, though Lawrence has yet to decide on his line-up.
Middlesbrough will offer new contracts in the summer to full back Jimmy Phillips and midfield player Mark Proctor.
They are the only members of the first-team squad whose contracts expire at the end of the season.
DARLINGTON defender Mark Sunley yesterday revealed the reason why he turned down a move to Motherwell.
The 19-year-old was the subject of a £50,000 bid by the Scottish club recently, but he said: ‘I didn't fancy it.
Darlington are going to be a good team and I want to be a part of it.
Plus, I'm happy and settled in the area.
‘I prefer playing at centre half because I like to attack the ball in the air and I'm in the thick of it  more in the middle.’
However, Sunley made his full debut at right back, when Quakers were beaten 3–1 at West Bromwich Albion just before Christmas.
‘I didn't know I was playing until an hour before the kick off when Frank Gray told me.
I thought I did well, considering we were playing in front of a 14,000 crowd.
‘I played another eight games at full back until I was dropped, then Ray Hankin put me back in at centre half when he took over.’
Surprisingly, Sunley is now on to his sixth manager, after starting his career at Middlesbrough under Bruce Rioch, who also took him to Millwall.
‘I didn't get on well with Colin Todd at Ayresome Park and he kicked me out.
Bruce took me to Millwall and offered me a contract, but I didn't fancy living in London.
‘Jim Smith persuaded me to go to Newcastle, but he left within a couple of days.
Ossie Ardiles gave me a lot of games and said I was doing well, but he never offered me a contract.
That was when Frank Gray came in for me.
‘I got on well with Frank and I was disappointed to see him go.
‘But Ray Hankin really helps all the young players and they respond to him.
He put me in at centre half and I've played virtually every game since.
‘I feel I've played all right, despite our position near the bottom of the table.
The Third Division is a good standard, with teams like Birmingham and West Brom around.
‘I was tortured at Stoke, who are the best team I've played against.
I played against Wayne Biggins, who had a tremendous game, so I know how much I've got to learn to compete at the highest level.
And that's what I want to do.’
Manager Ray Hankin said: ‘Mark wasn't even interested in going to Motherwell he knows he has a good future here.’
A training injury has cost Darlington teenager Lee Ellison a first-team recall at Brentford on Good Friday.
Hankin planned to select Ellison until he picked up a hamstring injury.
Mick Tait and Nick Pickering could be fit for Friday, but Kevan Smith is struggling.
THE North-East had two contrasting results in the ABA semi-finals at Gateshead Leisure Centre last night.
Middlesbrough's Andy Green lost a controversial lightweight majority decision, expressed his disgust with the judging and said: ‘That's my last amateur bout.
I want to turn professional.’
Hartlepool Boys Welfare featherweight Alan Temple reached the Royal Albert Hall finals on May 6 and said: ‘There's no way I'll turn pro.’
Green was certainly unlucky, losing to Wales's Mark Newton in a bout in which he admitted he was drawn into a slugging match rather than using his skills.
He was given a questionable standing count in the second of three thrilling rounds, but he spent too much time battling rather than boxing and too much time on the ropes instead of using his footwork.
But after the 59–58, 59–58, 5859 decision in Newton's favour, he said: ‘The judging was disgraceful.
They not only took the title away, but took my dream away.
‘I did the better work inside.
He just leaned on me and when he caught me with a left hook I was given a standing count.
It was disgraceful.’
Temple, 19, in his first year in the ABA and who had been working in Fawcett's butchers shop since 5.30 in the morning was over the moon with his hard earned win over Wales's Barry Jones.
But afterwards he said: ‘There's no way I want to turn pro.
I enjoy the club atmosphere, I like amateur boxing, I'm employed and I don't want to turn professional.’
The Hartlepool southpaw boxed superbly against an aggressive opponent, scoring well with right jabs and left-right combinations.
It was a hard, harrying bout in which both gave and took punishment, but which was decided by Temple's better in and out tactics, evasion and aggression.
Yet the judging was a bit askew.
Two gave it 58–59 to each boxer, but the decisive score was 60–56 to Temple.
Results Light Daren Fifield (Henley) walkover.
Michael Horobin (St Pancras) bt Neil Swain (Gilfachgoch) majority points.
Patrick Mullings (London) bt Richard Vowles (Llanharan) referee stopped contest second round.
Alan Temple (Hartlepool Boys Welfare) bt Barry Jones (Highfields) majority points.
Mark Newton (Coed-Eva) bt Andy Green (Phil Thomas School of Boxing, Middlesbrough) majority points.
Light Adrian Stone (Empire) bt Jason Williams (Gwent) referee stopped contest second round.
Barry Thorogood (Highfields) bt Paul Burns (Gemini) majority points.
LIVERPOOL soccer manager Graeme Souness went for a drive with his girlfriend yesterday as he continued his recovery from a triple heart by-pass operation.
Karen Levy, 32, collected him from the Alexandra private hospital in Cheadle, Greater Manchester, for a two-hour trip after getting the go-ahead from his consultant.
Former Middlesbrough player Souness, 38, later returned to the hospital where he had his operation a week ago.
Sue Owen, director of nursing, said: ‘He had a short time away with his consultant's permission.
His condition is fine and he went out for a breath of fresh air.
He is progressing very well and there are no problems.’
Patients normally spend ten days in hospital after the by-pass operation.
Mrs Owen said a decision on his departure would be made by him and his consultant.
Souness watched Liverpool's FA Cup semi-final penalty shoot-out victory over Portsmouth on Monday on satellite television.
Middlesbrough 2 Oxford 1
Please refer to microfilm for complete text
Not cricket:
Cricket matches are not special occasions, according to Guisborough magistrates.
Both the Saltburn and Marske clubs have been refused exemptions to carry on drinking at club premises between 5–7pm.
Classic run:
Entry forms are now available for the Saltburn Victorian Week Classical Vehicle run on August 9.
Entries can be made to the parish council offices or to Doug Ineson in Marske telephone Redcar 481877.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
DURHAM CITY:
Plans have been unveiled to convert historic Aykley Heads House, which is derelict, into offices.
STOCKTON:
Checks will be done on 74 gardens following claims that top soil was delivered containing glass which cut a toddler's eye.
A fire attack has wrecked the Newham Grange Park pavilion.
Gardeners have called on Stockton council to let them run their allotments at Preston Lane.
Last year they campaigned against plans for a car park on some of the plots for a rail heritage centre in adjoining Preston Park.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Carsound, at the junction of Marton Road and North Ormesby Road, is offering £750 in a bid to catch burglars who raided the premises.
People living near a mosque at the corner of Bow Street and Princes Road appear to have resolved a dispute with the local Muslim community over plans to extend it.
SALTBURN:
Residents are complaining about the closure of the town centre public toilets.
Swinging date:
A Sixties night will be staged at the Comrades Club, Newbiggin, Richmond, on Saturday from 8pm.
Glass target:
Vandals smashed a stained glass window worth £100 at a house in Willow Road, Northallerton.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York 656476; Sian Roberts on Richmond 850407 and Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
NORTH-EAST swimmers are competing in three important events this weekend.
The Esso England Youth team for the annual six nations international contest in Nijmegen, Holland, includes Vicki Horner (Newburn), Susan Colling (Derwentside), Joanne Park and Joe Leveridge (Newcastle).
Laura Jackson and Grant Pearson (Derwentside) were also selected, but have withdrawn.
Laura has a strain and Grant a throat infection.
Ian Oliver (Newcastle), Ian Armiger (Bradford) and Paul Remmonds (Derwentside) are on the coaching staff.
The Esso England Junior squad goes to Stockholm for the annual eight nations international contest with Lee Dalzell (GatesheadWhickham), Susan Rolph, Anthony Day, Craig Eldred and Nick Sultman (all Newcastle) in the team.
The chief coach is Nick Juba (Helmsley) and Martin Mosey (Kirklees) is one of the coaches.
The medical officer is Alyson Jones, the former Hartlepool Commonwealth Games silver medallist.
Samantha Puvis (Stockton Aquatics) and Samantha Foggo (Newcastle) compete in the Grand Prix final at Edinburgh hoping to clock the Great Britain team's qualifying times for Barcelona.
Foggo heads the women's distance freestyle category with maximum points, her best event being the 800m.
Purvis is in the 100m and 200m butterfly with the latter, for which she is the British record holder, being her best chance of booking a place in her second Olympic team.
Among the other local competitors are Ian Wilson (Sunderland), who is already pre-selected for Barcelona, in the 200m butterfly, 400m individual medley, 400m and 1500m freestyle, and Stephen Davison (Stockton Aquatics), Caroline Kerr, Lucky Clarke Martin Douglas, Stuart Lane and Andrew Medleycott (all Newcastle).
Darlington has three of its younger members, Mark Monument, Mandy and Penny Baker, competing in the age group events at Edinburgh for experience.
Newcastle did well to finish third in the British women's club team championship at Sheffield with Samantha Foggo finishing first in the 800m freestyle.
The Great Britain junior (under 20) final water polo team trials are at Crystal Palace this weekend.
Paul Floyd and Lee Cooke (Middlesbrough) are in the squad of 16 from which the team of 13 will be selected for the four nations contest against Belgium, Holland and Tunisia in Charleroi, Belgium, on May 1–3.
Middlesbrough water polo team started its Wakefield and District Under-18 League fixtures with an exciting 8–8 draw at home to Dewsbury with Richard Williams scoring a hat-trick.
A STAGGERING 67 schools have entered The Northern Echo's Schools Cricket championships for 1992.
To coincide with Durham's entry into first-class cricket The Northern Echo invited schools throughout the region to take part in a tournament, backed by the club and its star players.
We have put up prize money of £8,000, all of which is to go to the schools.
There will be £5,000 for the winners, £2,000 for the runners-up and £500 each for the semi-finalists.
Plans are afoot to stage the final at a first-class ground in August.
There will also be medals and trophies for the winning teams and finalists.
The championships have the full backing of Durham County Cricket Club.
Durham's Director of Cricket Geoff Cook has said that it may be possible for players to adopt individual teams in the later stages.
‘It's a smashing initiative,’ he said.
‘It will greatly assist what we are trying to aim for in the development of the game in all quarters of the county.’
The Northern Echo will also be promoting a scheme to allow free admission to school parties for some of Durham's games.
More details later.
The full list of schools who have entered the championships is: Harton Comprehensive School, South Shields.
Ian Ramsey School, Hartburn, Stockton.
Sedgefield Community College, Sedgefield.
Boroughbridge High School, Boroughbridge.
Greencroft Comprehensive School, Stanley.
Lanchester St Bede's Comprehensive School, Lanchester.
Filey School, Filey.
Hermitage Comprehensive School, Chester-le-Street.
Ferryhill Comprehensive School, Ferryill.
Scalby School, Newby, Scarborough.
Brackenhole School, Middlesbrough.
Hedworthfield Comprehensive School, Jarrow.
Royal Grammar School, Newcastle.
Easingwold School, Easingwold.
St Leonard's RC Comprehensive School, Durham.
Ryton Comprehensive School, Ryton.
Northfield School, Billingham.
Richmond School, Richmond.
Durham Johnston Comprehensive School, Crossgate Moor, Wensleydale School, Leyburn.
Parkside Comprehensive School, Willington, Crook.
Whitburn Comprehensive School, Whitburn.
Tanfield School, Stanley.
Barnard Castle School, Barnard Castle.
King James I, Bishop Auckland.
St Francis Xavier School, Richmond.
Bedale High School, Bedale.
Norton Secondary School, Norton, Malton.
Hallgarth School, Middlesbrough.
Yarm School, Yarm.
Stokesley School, Stokesley.
St Aidan's, Harrogate.
Boldon Comprehensive, Boldon Kepier School, Houghton le Spring.
The Avenue Comprehensive School, Newton Aycliffe.
Red House School, Norton, Stockton.
Whitley Bay High School, Whitley Bay.
Lord Lawson School, Birtley.
Scariston Fyndone, Sacriston.
West Redcar School, Redcar.
King James St Bede's RC Comprehensive Bydales Comprehensive Brierton Carmel Woodham Comprehensive Newton Ripon Grammar Teesdale Barnard Seaton Burn Community High St Cuthbert's High Egglescliffe Durham Durham Nunthorpe School, Grangefield School, Spennymoor Wellfield Kings Manor School, Roseberry Comprehensive Easington Marden High Framwellgate Moor Hummersknott St Michael's RC Hurworth Our Lady and St Haughton George Stephenson Community High Killingworth. — The draw for the preliminary rounds and the first-round proper will be appearing in The Northern Echo in the next week.
MORE than 100 youngsters attended a day for middle distance athletes held at Cleveland County Stadium in Middlesbrough.
British record holder and Commonwealth champion Kirsty Wade joined the region's top coaches as the children learned how to steeplechase, race walk, run middle distance events and enjoyed a cross-country run in Albert Park.
During the lunch break Kirsty answered questions on a whole range of topics ranging from her experiences abroad to her favourite training sessions.
The highlight of the the Post Office Counters Development Day was the assault on Said Aouita's world record for 5,000m and one of the 25-person teams smashed the record by 12 seconds clocking 12mins 46.46secs for the 12 7-lap race.
Admittedly Aouita ran the race on his own.
The youngsters also received a commemorative Post Office Tshirt and an information pack about athletics clubs in the region.
ENGLAND Under-21 international Gary Owers, back in action after a three month injury lay-off, is determined to win a place in Sunderland's FA Cup final team against Liverpool.
The 23-year-old Tynesider, now recovered from a serious pelvic injury, came on as substitute against Ipswich Town on Tuesday night to lay on the second goal for record signing Don Goodman.
Owers helped Sunderland beat Port Vale at the beginning of their Cup run, but was substituted and then aggravated his groin trouble in the following 6–2 home win over Millwall in mid January.
At one time it was feared that the highly-rated midfielder, who attracted an unsuccessful £1.3m bid from Crystal Palace at the time of the Marco Gabbiadini transfer in September, would need an operation, but he has managed to recover thanks to special exercises under the close supervision of club physiotherapist Steve Smelt.
Now Owers, a frustrated spectator in Sunderland's last six FA Cup-ties, believes he can win back his first team place before the final on May 9.
‘I am dying to play at Wembley,’ admitted Owers.’
But he added: ‘I am not just trying to play now so I can force my way into the Cup final team.
‘I know it all depends on me how I stand up to games and how I play.’
Owers, a surprise choice as substitute against Ipswich, has done very little training, and his non-stop style will soon show whether he has fully recovered from his injury.
He said: ‘I am still not 100 per cent and it was a bit of a gamble playing against Ipswich, but it paid off.’
Owers knows that he cannot afford to take any unreasonable chances, SUNDERLAND still have a limited number of tickets available for Easter Monday's derby against Middlesbrough.
Tickets will be on sale to gold members who have not yet applied for tickets, from 9am today.
especially with Sunderland fighting for Second Division survival.
He admitted: ‘If I play three games in a week I will be very sore.
‘I know the problem and I don't want to be selfish.
‘But I feel fine in myself and I definitely want to play at Wembley.
Owers’ place on the right side of midfield has been occupied recently by David Rush, Peter Davenport and Brian Mooney, who naturally all have their own Cup final aspirations.
Caretaker manager Malcolm Crosby expects a tougher game against bottom-of-the-table Plymouth at Roker Park tonight than the clash with runaway Second Division leaders Ipswich Town.
Sunderland turned it on to win 3–0 against Ipswich and end their dismal sequence of five league defeats but Crosby expects an entirely different type of game against a side battling desperately for survival.
‘I think it will be harder because Plymouth will work their socks off they are struggling for points and will be totally committed to getting a result.
‘But we proved against Ipswich that we can be as good as anybody on our day and we will be looking for more of the same tomorrow night.’
The win over Ipswich hoisted Sunderland three places up the table, and they still have two or three games in hand on the clubs around them.
Crosby feels that two more victories will ensure safety but he stresses that his players must continue to battle.
Sunderland have minor injury worries about strikers Don Goodman and John Byrne, who finished with calf injuries against Ipswich, David Rush (hamstring) and Gordon Armstrong, who took a kick on the calf.
Sunderland (from): Norman, Kay, Rogan, Bennett, Hardyman, Rush, Mooney, Goodman, Armstrong, Byrne, Atkinson, Owers, Davenport and Brady.
CONSISTENT full-back John Kay will sign a new two-year contract after the Cup final, while Paul Hardyman, happy again after asking for a move earlier in the season, is considering a new deal.
PUT your wedding list with Mulberry Hall in York and they'll give you a wedding present too a small Stuart crystal rose bowl.
They have one of the widest ranges of tableware, crystal and cutlery in the country and prices range from reasonable to gulp.
For colour catalogue or for help with the wedding list, contact Mulberry Hall, Stonegate, York, tel.
620736.
STILL nervous of pressure cookers?
Next Friday and Saturday, 24th s nd 25th, at Binns in Middlesbrough you can watch a cookery demonstration using the latest top of the range Prestige pressure cookers.
There'll be free recipe leaflets, wall charts and maybe a chance to sample Tandoori Chicken or Bread and Butter pudding.
If you'd like one of the wall charts, which give useful hints, tips and cooking times, you can get one free if you are one of the first 100 readers to write to Prestige Pressure Cooker Wallchart Offer, Film House, 142 Wardour St, London W1V 3AU, enclosing sae.
TODAY'S one of the biggest fish eating days of the year and there are bargains to be had.
Safeway have whole Scottish salmon at £3.99 lb; skinned cod fillets down from £3.79 to £2.99 and Lemon Sole down from £5.59 to £3.99.
At Sainsburys whole fresh salmon is even lower at £1.98; smoked salmon is down by £1 to £5.85 for 8 oz.
There's a free leaflet on preparing, cooking and serving salmon too.
Over the weekend too, Sainsbury's have special prices on beef and Safeway on all sorts of ham.
THE new Cosmetics to Go catalogue is out a treat for all those who like a good read as well as nice things.
Their new delights this time include soaps where you can wash with the wrapping paper as well; Flax and Rosewater lotion and Man Mountain No Nonsense Deodorant.
They're also continuing their campaign against the use of mineral oil in cosmetics, claiming that not only is it the most animal tested cosmetic ingredient, but there are also fears it may be carcinogenic.
The've now launched a new range using almond oil, and the brochure uses pretty pictures of Californian almond farms set against descriptions of crude oil production and refineries.
The range includes Dry Skin Cleanser, face and back pack and Massage Oil.
For a copy of the catalogue tel. free  or write to CTG, Freepost, Poole, Dorset, BH15 1BR.
THE average household debt last quarter was £1,437.
Does this cheer you up?
SPRING clean with St Michael.
You don't usually think of buying washing powder at Marks and Spencer, but they pioneered concentrated laundry products two years ago, before other manufacturers realised that less packaging was eco friendly and easier to carry.
Now they even have four times concentrated products so you need only a quarter of the measure.
There's biological, biological with fabric conditioner, non-biological and non biological for sensitive skins, plus delicate fabric hand wash.
With more emphasis on household products, does this mean that Marks and Spencer is turning itself into a supermarket?
HOMEOPATHY is gaining in popularity as more people discover the benefits of alternative or complementary medicine.
The best way to buy them is usually from a trained homeopathist or a knowledgeable specialist shop.
But if that's not always possible you can now buy them by mail order from HealthMail.
For brochure write to HealthMail, 10 Lowes Lane Estate, Wellesbourne, Warwick, CV35 9BR.
Tel..
Kenny Davern: Middlesbrough Marton Way Hotel THIS was the first date in Middlesbrough Jazz Society's new season, a return visit by the American clarinettist Kenny Davern.
In recent years, despite his enormous success on soprano saxophone with Bob Wilber as part of Soprano Summit, Kenny has concentrated on clarinet and, as a result, he has emerged as one of the world's outstanding players on this rather unfashionable instrument.
He plays fluently across its full range but also has a very strong jazz feeling, stretching and bending notes for greater  expression .
Backed again by the Billy Harper Trio, Kenny spent almost the entire evening playing requests, ranging from slower tunes like Mood Indigo (including an exquisite unaccompanied section) and Poor Butterfly to up-tempo songs like Lady Be Good and the final Undecided.
For me, one of the highlights was Thelonious Monk's Blue Monk, perhaps less angular than originally written, but a very effective inspiration to Kenny this evening.
He was also in very entertaining form with his introductions and conversation with the audience and it was a treat to be able to hear the clarinet without any amplification.
Despite the fact that the venue had again to be switched to avoid a clash with football match crowds, there was still a full house.
There couldn't be a better way to start a season.
The next concert, by the way, is nine piece band John Brown's Bodies at the Inn Off The Part on May 31.
THERE will be unconfined excitement this weekend.
Riches beyond dreams await.
A few more days, a bit more luck and it will be hi ho Silver and away as the Lone Ranger had it.
The news dropped yesterday.
Put simply, I am two thirds of the way to a fortune.
Through a combination of skill and fortitude two stages of the arduous course to this pot of gold have been successfully negotiated.
In the first the computer threw up the names, in the second it allocated the numbers.
It was hard to believe at first, of course .
But the letter from Reader's Digest sounded more than genuine.
It was signed by the organisation's prize draw manager no less so it was not just case of anybody going round breaking the good news.
Apparently Reader's Digest do this kind of thing all the time, though nobody that anybody has ever known or met has won a brass halfpenny.
But this is probably envy.
There is an air of class about the whole scheme.
The prize draw manager is called Tom Champagne.
He is probably known as Champagne Tom in the office, always breaking open a bottle of bubbly to celebrate handing over a fortune to another punter.
Stage three will not be insurmountable but Tom was grittily honest.
It depends on the luck of the draw.
The lucky numbers (the ones won with skill and fortitude) will arrive in the next few days.
Having got so far it seemed appropriate to have a word with Tom yesterday, if not a glass of champagne.
There would be more chance of winning the £200,000 top prize.
It seemed that nobody at RD wanted to talk to a lucky winner.
All is not yet lost, however.
The numbers are on their way.
There are 758 prizes altogether.
Tom has promised a special reception to the big winner.
It was as though he had an inkling who it would be.
Of course, he and his colleagues are in a difficult position.
After all, why should they talk?
Send the money Tommy, send the money.
TWO North-East word wizards are hoping to reach the finals of the National Scrabble Championships.
Teacher Dave Dawson, from Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, and Cathy Anderson, a service scheduler from Newcastle, will compete against 46 others in the northern finals at Manchester on April 26.
The northern champion and nine other top qualifiers will take on other winners from across the country in London in June.
Winners from last year's northern finals went on to represent Britain in the first world championships in London.
‘With nearly two million television viewers a week becoming hooked on the World Scrabble Championships last autumn, interest in Scrabble is at its highest point ever,’ said Ray Perry, of Scrabble's makers Spear's Games.
‘Nowhere is this more apparent than in the northern final where competition is going to be red hot.’
Quiz time:
York Visitor and Conference Bureau is offering a £150 cash prize to the winner of an Easter treasure hunt in the city.
Entries should reach the bureau in Rougier Street by April 25.
‘Green’ show: Touring theatre company Jack Drum Arts and Entertainment visits North Yorkshire villages this summer, staging a ‘green’pantomime, The Wild Man of the Woods.
Organiser Rose Cuthbertson said the show would be followed up with teachers' action packs and practical workshop sessions on the environment.
The venture is being backed by the York based Yorkshire Rural Community Council.
Hours appeal:
The Walrus and Carpenter Restaurant st Church Street, Whitby, is appealing against Scarborough Council's refusal of permission to enable it to remain open until midnight, an hour longer than current planning permission allows.
Councillors supported residents who feared disturbances from late night revellers.
Today's wills
SCARBOROUGH:
John Andrew Battye of Ratten Row, Seamer, Scarborough, who died in October, left £558,432 net.
TADCASTER:
Reginald Clarkson of Ingleby Drive, Tadcaster, who died in January, left £141,403 net.
RIPON:
Mary Phillips of Kirkby Road, Ripon, who died in September, left £118,757 net.
YORK:
Peter Richard Penty of Greencliffe Drive, Clifton, York, who died in August, left £559,124 net.
WHITBY:
Mary Isabel Richardson of Dunstay Crescent, Whitby, who died in November, left £131,133 net.
She left £2,000 to St Hilda's Catholic Church, Bagdale and £500 to the priest there for Masses; £1,000 each to St Joseph's Convent, Whitby and the Ecclesiastical Education Fund Middlesbrough Diocese and £500 each to St John of God Hospital, Scorton, St Patrick's Roman Catholic Church, Whitby and Cafod.
HARROGATE:
Fred Williamson of Duchy Road, Harrogate, who died in January, left £213,632 net.
KNARESBOROUGH:
Florence Marjorie Alton of Braham Hall Farm, Plompton, Knaresborough, who died in August, left £258,868 net.
SCARBOROUGH:
Marjorie Isabel Arundale of Holbeck Road, Scarborough, who died in January, left £140,580 net.
THORNTON DALE:
Ethel Stewart Bolton of Priestmans Lane, Thornton Dale, North Yorkshire, who died in October, left £129,374 net.
HARROGATE:
Florence Mildred Oddy of Duchy Road, Harrogate, who died in January, left £129,650 net.
YORK:
Kate Lisa Morrell of Ingram House, Bootham, York, who died in January, left £840,799 net.
HARROGATE:
Thomas Herbert Bellamy of Walton Park, Pannal, Harrogate, who died in November, left £225,983 net.
HARROGATE:
Lilian Rose Margaret Tuff of Wysing Dene, Low Laithe, Wilsill, Harrogate, who died in August, left £215,216 net.
She left £250 to Hartwith Church, near Harrogate.
PICKERING:
Charles Herbert Crosier of Barnville, Wilton, Pickering, who died in December, left £150,133 net.
He left £1,000 each to Wilton Village Hall, the Patients' Amenity Fund at Scarborough Hospital; £500 each to Wilton Parish Church, Thornton le Dale Methodist Church, Scarborough Branch RSPCA and Ryedale Talking Magazine Association.
SCARBOROUGH:
Wilfred Blundell of Carlton Tower, Belmont Road, Scarborough, who died in November, left £136,278 net.
WHITBY:
Honor Maxwell Spaven of Bagdale, Whitby, formerly of Egton Road, Aislaby, Whitby, who died in August, left £331,218 net.
She left £1,000 to the Church of St Margaret, Aislaby.
YORK:
Alexander Forster of Hull Road, York, who died in January, left £160,907 net.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York 656476; Sian Roberts on Richmond 850407 or Richmond 825281 (answering machine), and Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Club barbecue:
Chester-le-Street Lions Club is holding a barbecue at Lumley Thicks on Friday, May 1, at 7.30pm in aid of the Council for the Protection of Rural England.
Bonnet parade:
An Easter Bonnet parade will be held during the weekly dance in Blackhall Community Hall on Saturday night.
Swinging Sixties: A Sixties Night is to be held at Gilesgate Junior School, Kepier Crescent, Gilesgate, Durham on Friday, May 15, from 7–10pm.
Easter walk:
Wearside Christians will lead a procession to Tunstall Hills in Sunderland today for an Easter service.
A large cross will be erected to mark the  crucifixion .
Charity fashions:
The Cancer Research Campaign in Durham will be staging a fund-raising fashion show at the Three Tuns Hotel in Durham City on Wednesday, May 13, at 7.30pm.
For tickets telephone 0388–602754.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout County Durham, Tyneside and Wearside to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mel Mason, Sian Thomas and David Taylor at Durham on 091–384–2261; Patrick Lavelle on 091–567–3422; Mark Summers on 232929; John Hayes and Anne Kostalas at Newcastle on 091–2328708.
Or you can reach us at head office on Dar-381313.
Three escape crash injuries
THREE drivers escaped injury after a crash in Northallerton.
The accident happened on Thirsk Road at the junction with Racecourse Lane.
It involved a VW Golf, Peugot 205 and Renault 5.
Publicity award:
Lightwater Valley theme park at North Stainley near Ripon is a finalist in the Institute of Public Relations Sword of Excellence Awards for the launch of its new ride, the Bullet, last year which boosted attendances by 40pc.
‘Green’ show: Touring theatre company Jack Drum Arts and Entertainment visits North Yorkshire villages this summer, staging a ‘green’pantomime, The Wild Man of the Woods.
Organiser Rose Cuthbertson said the show would be followed up with teachers' action packs and practical workshop sessions on the environment.
The venture is being backed by the York based Yorkshire Rural Community Council.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York 656476; Sian Roberts on Richmond 850407 and Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
THE best winning weight this year from Hemlington Lake came when Yarm's Ronnie Wilkinson proved a runaway victor during Saturday's Middlesbrough NFA team open, netting a level 8lb of quality fish.
Drawn just past the dolomite length, the Cleveland Angling Centre-sponsored star decided to try his luck on the waggler and with little wind to hinder presentation, the gamble paid off.
Two early carp and tench fell to double red maggot then switched to the feeder as the drift increased, added another two crucial carp.
Weights then dropped and a mere one and a half ounces separated the next three anglers as Middlesbrough Newman Scott's Alan Webb edged into runner-up position landing a mainly skimmer bream net of 3.3.8 to feeder and maggot off the grassy bank.
Others:
Kevin Smith (Mustad Stanley Vickers) 3.2.8; Phil Arnold (Middlesbrough Newman Scotts) 3.2.0.
Single fish decided the placings on County Durham's Aycliffe Pond as cold water temperatures again restricted sport during Aycliffe AC's second open fixture.
Ferryhill's Bob Freeman, ledgered worm to land a surprise winning pike which took the scales to 5.10.0 while the favoured ledgered luncheon meat approach rewarded Gainford's Peter Nicholson with a mirror carp of 5.1.0 for second place followed by Barry Rabjohn (Mustad Stanley Vickers) with a carp of 4.2.0.
Darlington Brown Trout's Baker Trout Cup attracted 53 contenders to the banks of the Tees last Sunday.
Unfortunately, strong winds curtailed the sport on a near perfect river level carrying about four inches extra, but fining off.
The event was spread between Coniscliffe, Blackwell and Croft, but not surprisingly, all of the trout action came from the most upstream section between Merrybent and the motorway bridge.
Darlington's Mark Burgess lifted the cup, fished to an 11ins size limit, netting nine brownies totalling 4.7.8.
Mark fished below the chalk hole and trotted a variety of baits including maggot, caster and redworm.
Further downstream at the car park swim Bert Watson (Sadberge) finished one fish short of victory when his seven brownie float-fished maggot haul grossed 4.1.0 at the scales.
Others: Paul Thompson (Darlington) 3.10.8; tying Ray Mudd (Darlington) and John Legge (Richmond) on 3.8.0.
Reservoir roundup Extreme changes in weather culminated in fly anglers at Leighton Reservoir taking great care in fly selection to keep in contact with the fish.
Wintery conditions disappeared and summer-like spells brought hatches of black gnat and sedge particularly towards the dam end of the reservoir.
Mr G New (Norton) and Mr Leyland (Bainbridge) both grassed rainbows of over 4lb as the 77 visitors landed 213 trout.
Black flash, black and orange taddy, black pennell, bibio and appetiser proved the most successful.
Fixtures: April 17: Middlesbrough AC presentation, buffet and disco Inn Off The Park, Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough.
Tickets cost £4 and are available from Steve Bland Tel Middlesbrough 850428.
April 18: Middlesbrough NFA team open, Hemlington Lake, fish 9am to 2pm.
April 19 Aycliffe AC open, Aycliffe Pond, fish 26pm.
Thornaby AA Peter Johnson Memorial Trout Cup, River Tees, Croft to Hurworth.
IPSWICH Town are red-hot favourites for the Second Division championship.
John Lyall's team have such a commanding lead that at least one leading bookmaker is no longer taking bets on the race.
With the Anglian team so far in front major interest is now centred on the battle for the No.2 spot that also guarantees a dream ticket to the Premier League.
Six teams are bitter rivals in what will be a fight to the finish.
The team that holds its nerve as pressure builds up will gain automatic promotion with the others plunged into yet more nailbiting in the play-off stakes.
Middlesbrough are in with a fine chance of that second automatic promotion spot, especially as they do not appear to have a difficult run-in.
Yet there can be no room for complacency after shock home defeats by Watford and Barnsley defeats that were all the more disappointing because they came after a long unbeaten home run.
Leicester City are the major threat to Boro's hopes, especially after a last-kick injury-time matchwinner against Tranmere Rovers.
Former Darlington  manager Brian Little has done a superb job in his first season, but Leicester face three promotion rivals in their four-match finale.
Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘Leicester have to play Blackburn, Cambridge and Charlton, before their final game against Newcastle United.
‘If they get more points than we do, they will deserve to go up.
‘We have been involved in the promotion race from the start and, hopefully, we will be there at the finish.
If we achieve our target, it will be a season to remember.
‘Yet whatever the outcome, it will be a momentous season in view of our Cup runs.
‘In promotion campaigns the first six games and the last six games are vitally important.
Fear and  fatigue will play their part in success or failure.’
Blackburn face a desperate battle to be involved in the playoffs after an alarming decline.
The Lancashire side recorded their 11th successive home win, and were seven points clear of Ipswich at the top, when they beat Newcastle United in February.
They are now sixth with supporters angered by the run of poor results  particularly as Rovers have lashed out £5.4m on a make-or-break spending spree.
The Rovers have failed to establish a team pattern and there are rumours the ‘old brigade’ resent the high wages of the imported expensive stars.
Manager Kenny Dalglish is aware knives will be flashing if his season collapses.
Dalglish said: ‘There are a lot of people who would like us to fail.
If we were unsuccessful, a lot of people would be happy.
‘That is down to jealousy.
It's something I have learned to live with during my career.’
Derby are another big-spending club.
They have spent £4.5m on new players since multi-millionaire Lionel Pickering took over as chairman.
Former Sunderland star Marco Gabbiadini has settled better at the Baseball Ground than at Crystal Palace.
He was a two-goal matchwinner at Brighton in midweek.
Sunderland and Newcastle could help their neighbours Middlesbrough on the final day.
The Roker side visit Cambridge on May 2 and Kevin Keegan's boys are at home to Leicester.
GOOD Friday.
Redcar.
Rain.
The three go together.
Like three coins in a fountain.
The Three Stooges.
The Three Degrees which is just about what the temperature is.
Blanketing everything is something which in other places is known as a sea fret but which in Redcar is called a Cleveland cocktail sling together two parts ICI, one British Steel and another of general fug and serve it up stirred not shaken.
There's no need to add ice.
The North Sea wind chills it nicely, thank you very much.
Over in France somewhere they are dancing Yankee Doodle Dandy with Mickey Mouse and the gang in the new Euro Disney.
There's every kind of treat imaginable to be had in this multi-billion dollar theme park.
The only pollution Euro Disney will suffer is of the uniquely French kind le snootiness (something almost as chilling as the North Sea wind).
But today on this most glorious of occasions an English bank holiday at a wet and windy seaside who gives a sacre bleu for the French and their pinched nez.
Or Disneyland for that matter.
We have our own animal magic at Redcar.
Noon and the beach is near deserted save for a mad dog who demands we play with him.
He fetches half a tree in his dripping mouth and insists on me throwing it for him to fetch.
Throw it I can barely lift it.
There must have been a shipwreck we don't know about.
The damned dog's found the main mast of an ancient schooner.
For all the kids care he could be Goofy, hamming it up for Mickey Mouse.
They love Redcar.
The beaches are wide and filled with interesting flotsam and jetsam from shells and seaweed to bits of broken fish boxes.
Half an hour on this beach (so fresh it could be arrested for harassment) and it's up to the slotties.
This is the best bit of all it's dry and warm for a start.
And the amusements, while no doubt something the Disney brigade would sneer at, are well, amusing.
And, what do you know, we have our own version of Disneyland here.
Somebody in a Bugs Bunny suit is going round dishing out little Easter eggs to all the toddlers in the place.
So what if you can spot his acne through the ill-fitting headpiece?
It's fun isn't it?
The place is getting busy now.
Maybe not as hectic as it would have been if the sun had got his hat on.
But busy enough so you feel like you're having a day out.
The tough lads are playing the electronic games, kung fu kicking their way through a horde of little screen bad guys.
All the while keeping an Embo Regal glued to their bottom lip.
I still admire this trick.
I tried it once and burnt my mouth so badly I looked like I'd been kissing superglue.
In the Bingo hall an Elvis Presley lookalike is calling the numbers for a score of old ladies dressed in coats that have the cut and style of old duvet covers.
The burger bar is doing a sizzling trade and Pacitto's, dear old Pacitto's the best ice cream you can buy for my money has a queue that stretches halfway back to Middlesbrough.
Cheeks dripping white, the kids walk back to the car, happy and contented.
Now that's what they call a bank holiday outing.
And just to round off the day the rain stops, the Cleveland cocktail lifts and a pale, weak sun sticks his nose out from behind the clouds.
Disneyland?
Give me Redcar any day.
Northern League FORMER Middlesbrough midfielder Gary Hamilton could make his debut for Whitby when they travel to Guisborough today.
The Scot was forced to quit the pro game because of injury two months ago, and Whitby boss Bobby Scaife has persuaded him to become part of the Turnbull Ground set-up.
One of his teammates will be former Darlington assistant manager Tony McAndrew.
Whitby, in third place, need maximum points to keep their slim title hopes alive, and will pick from a full squad.
Guisborough, in fourth place, slipped up in midweek, and cannot afford another lapse if they want to maintain their outside title chances.
Assistant manager Bob Dewhurst said: ‘Gretna are still in the driving seat for the title.
Both sides need the points if they want to finish in the top two.’
Midfielder Jason Lake will have a fitness test.
Gretna, meanwhile, are hoping to close the gap on leaders Murton by beating Ferryhill at Raydale Park.
Defender Kenny Goodrick could return to face his old club after missing the last three games because of injury, but striker Chris Pickford is doubtful.
Ferryhill, who have found themselves on the fringe of the relegation zone, are without four players, all injured, so Wayne Peachey is set to play.
Derek Green returns after suspension.
Easington desperately need three points from their last home game of the season against bottom club Whickham.
Peter Judson, Derek Middleton and Len Houghton are all injured, while Dave Stoker returns in goal.
Langley Park could find themselves relegated tonight if they lose at Brandon, who beat them 3–0 in midweek, and other results go against them.
Langley are hoping Gary Steadman can return, while Brandon could be unchanged.
Consett, who kick off at noon against Billingham Synthonia, are without keeper Tony Morris, so Chris Teesdale deputises.
Synners are without Chris Rooney, Dave Shearer, Tommy Connor and Andy Harbron.
Chester-le-Street and Durham meet in another top-of-the-table clash in the Second Division.
However, both lost form alarmingly in midweek, Chester losing 3–2 at home to Hebburn, while Durham threw away a two-goal lead before drawing at Bedlington.
Chester manager John Lang could give new keeper John Dunn, signed from Boldon CA, his debut, while Chad Bone and Joe Calvert are expected to return.
Durham, who are one point clear at the top, are without suspended pair Micky Taylor and Neil Shotton, while defender Billy Youern will have a fitness test.
Manager Billy Cruddas said: ‘We have two cup finals now, but I hope we don't conceded goals like those the other night.’
Second-placed Stockton, meanwhile, can go top of the table if Durham slip up if they beat Horden at Teesdale Park.
Defender Peter May is out injured for Stockton, whose manager Alan Robinson said: ‘The minute we take things for granted we will come unstuck.’
Dunston, still on the fringe of the race, are hoping their players avoid injuries in their Sunday football commitments, as Sunday teams catch up on matches.
Dunston manager Peter Quigley, whose side still has six games to play, is without David Wright for today's away game at Prudhoe.
DEBUT: Gary Hamilton
STRIKER Andy Payton could play a key role in Middlesbrough's final promotion push.
The club's record buy can put months of frustration behind him in a vital five-match fortnight.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘Payton has had a torrid time.
I don't often sympathise with footballers, but Payton has had a nightmare spell through circumstances.
‘Apart from his match-winning goal against Oxford United, I was pleased with his overall contribution when he came on as a second-half substitute.
‘We have not scored enough goals.
Most of our games have been tight.
We must be more ruthless.
‘Payton could be an ace in our pack.’
The £750,000 Payton could be in the starting line-up against Plymouth Argyle at Ayresome Park.
Payton is conscious of the fact fans have not seen the best of him since his debut injury against Bristol City in November.
His winning goal against Oxford United was a perfect pick-me-up.
Payton said: ‘I was bought to score goals and some people could probably say I have been a flop.
‘But that is not the case.
I have never had a run through injuries and through being cup-tied.
‘With Hull City and Middlesbrough, I have scored 11 goals this season.
Some players might settle for that but I am not satisfied.
‘Not after 25 goals last season.’
Payton scotched speculation he was unsettled at Ayresome Park.
‘I am perfectly happy and I would be thrilled to help the club achieve promotion,’ he added.
Payton has copied Stuart Ripley's pre-match warm-up routine to help cure a hamstring problem.
Plymouth have an appalling away record but they must be buoyant after their Roker Park win.
Player-manager Peter Shilton will take another step along the road to an incredible target.
Shilton, who makes the 965th Football League appearance of his career, aims to reach 1,000 before he hangs up his boots.
Middlesbrough hope for a good crowd despite it being the third home game of the week.
Lawrence said: ‘The crowd can play its part.
There has been a good atmosphere for our last four night games.
‘But our last afternoon game against Watford was a very low-key affair with no atmosphere.’
Middlesbrough (from): Pears, Fleming, Phillips, Gittens, Mohan, Proctor, Slaven, Payton, Falconer, Wilkinson, Hendrie, Ripley, Peake.
MIDDLESBROUGH skipper Alan Kernaghan has suffered a cruel end to his best-ever season.
The 24-year-old central defender will miss a promotion run-in and a breakthrough on the international scene.
After official clearance to play for the Republic of Ireland, Kernaghan could have been in the squad for a World Cup qualifying game and a United States tour.
Jack Charlton's team play Albania at the end of May, then leave the next day for a three-match tour of the States.
But Kernaghan has to wear a brace on his right leg for another five weeks after his knee locked against Tranmere Rovers.
‘I thought nothing of it at the time, because my knee has straightened after five minutes in the past.
‘On this occasion, a specialist ordered an operation.
‘After missing only one game through suspension this season, it was a blow.
I will have to be patient and then build up my knee for next season.
‘I could spend a week at Lilleshall.’
Kernaghan feels certain Boro face a dramatic last-match promotion decider at Wolves on May 2.
Ipswich Town could run away with the title but there is strong competition for the second spot.
Kernaghan added: ‘Teams like Leicester City and Derby County don't have an easy run-in.
‘Middlesbrough's programme is easier on paper, though games have to be won.
We cannot afford another Barnsley slip-up.
‘On the international scene, I am pleased about my Eire qualification.
Boro boss Lennie Lawrence has pushed my claims with Jack Charlton.’
Eire's central defenders are in the veteran class and Kernaghan should win a call-up next season
First Division championship chase GD Man +32 Leeds +33 Sheff +10 +27 +9 Man +5 Remaining fixtures: Man Utd: Luton (a), Nottm Forest (h), West Ham (a), Liverpool (a), Tottenham (h)
Leeds: Liverpool (a), Coventry (h), Sheff Utd (a), Norwich (h)
Sheff Wed: Southampton (a), Norwich (h), Crystal Palace (a), Liverpool (h)
Arsenal: Sheff Utd (a), Liverpool (h), Chelsea (a), Southampton (h)
Liverpool: Leeds (h), Arsenal (a), Man Utd (h), Sheff Wed (a)
Man City: West Ham (h), Everton (a), Notts County (h), Oldham (a)
Second Division survival scramble GD –3–15–16–6 –20–14–17 Remaining fixtures: Sunderland: Grimsby (a), Middlesbrough (h), Brighton (a), Swindon (h), Blackburn (a), Cambridge (h)
Grimsby: Sunderland (h), Ipswich (a), Watford (h), Middlesbrough (a), Port Vale (a)
Newcastle: Millwall (h), Derby (a), Portsmouth (h), Leicester (a)
Oxford: Bristol Rovers (h), Plymouth (a), Ipswich (h), Tranmere (a)
Plymouth: Middlesbrough (a), Oxford (h), Swindon (a), Blackburn (h)
Port Vale: Charlton (h), Cambridge (a), Grimsby (h)
Brighton: Bristol Rovers (a), Sunderland (h), Portsmouth (h), Ipswich (a)
Roker's broken-nose victim ready for crunch relegation battle SUNDERLAND skipper Paul Bracewell is in line for a dramatic comeback in this afternoon's crunch relegation encounter at Grimsby just five days after having a nose operation!
The former England midfielder underwent surgery to remove a blood clot on Monday and was promptly ruled out for ten days.
But the Cup finalists' plight they are one point above a relegation spot means acting manager Malcolm Crosby is considering plunging Bracewell into his side's battle against relegation.
Crosby admitted: ‘If we had beaten Plymouth on Thursday I don't think Paul would need to be involved at Grimsby.
‘He's playing so well that he's been a very big miss.
When he plays well, we play well.
‘Thursday was probably our worst performance since I took over, but I'm not looking for excuses.
‘The players are disappointed and realise they let everybody down including themselves.
‘Now we have to put that behind us and get the two wins we need to be safe.’
Bracewell visited a specialist yesterday and had a painful-looking array of tubes removed from his nostrils!
If the Roker captain can breath satisfactorily after training this morning, he has a very real chance of playing.
Highly-rated midfielder Gary Owers could also start a game for the first time in over three months, depending on Bracewell's condition.
He has recovered from a nightmare pelvic injury and is now forcing his way into Roker's Wembley plans.
While Sunderland struggle to get key players fit for the vital relegation run-in, there was good news yesterday concerning tough defender Kevin Ball.
The centre-half is making a good recovery from a knee injury and could be back in contention for a place in Monday's derby with Middlesbrough.
Striker Don Goodman is Sunderland's main fitness doubt today, still bothered by a persistent groin injury.
Sunderland (from): Norman, Kay, Hardyman, Bennett, Rogan, Sampson, Bracewell, Owers, Armstrong, Rush, Atkinson, Mooney, Hawke, Davenport, Goodman, Byrne.
Gary Childs and John McDermott may return for Grimsby.
McDermott has been given the all clear after missing last week's game at Portsmouth because of an eye injury and Childs out for a month faces a late check on an injured groin.
Goalkeepers Steve Sherwood and Paul Reece have had injury problems this week both are included in the squad.
Team from: Sherwood or Reece; McDermott, Jobling, Rodger, Lever, Cunnington, Ford, Childs, Gilbert, Mendonca, Dobbin, Woods, Smith.
BOXING /Swift fits in boxing around work while Richardson quits job in his bid for gold medal Boxing MIDDLESBROUGH light-welterweight Peter Richardson is quitting his job for four months to concentrate on his bid for an Olympic medal.
Now he is appealing for sponsorship to help him meet his expenses.
‘I have never asked for money before,’ said the 21-year-old van driver, of Middlesbrough's Phil Thomas School of Boxing.
‘My family has always helped me out, but it's getting hard, especially as I have to give up work for four months.’
Peter is a contender for a gold medal in Barcelona and has already beaten the reigning Olympic champion in the world championships in Australia.
When he fights for his country in Barcelona in July, Richardson will be only the second representative from Middlesbrough to compete in the Olympics.
His arduous training programme in the run-up to the Games means he has no choice but to quit his job as a driver with Middlesbroughbased civil engineers TPM McDonagh, though he has been told he can return afterwards.
The committed fighter is already making regular journeys to and from London for specialist training and will box in Canada next month to warm up for Barcelona.
In 12 years of boxing, he has won an impressive 103 bouts out of 115, winning seven national titles at different weights.
Anyone who can help Peter should call him on .
A HOST of talented musicians and singers from the North-East take part in a gala competition on Monday.
Bands including The Motive, Jumpcats, Electric Dream and singers Gina Pontone, Finton O'Rourke and Diane Blackmore compete in the Talent 92 competition at The Mall, Stockton, on Easter Monday.
The competition, co-sponsored by The Northern Echo, aims to give new talent a springboard to success.
Alan Smithson, promotions manager at The Mall, said: ‘We hope to encourage new talent and give them a chance.
They are very good acts and it has been a tough battle to get through.’
The winner will receive £500 and a trophy, second prize is £200 and third prize £100.
Prizes will be presented by compere Nick Wright from TFM Radio.
Tickets for the event cost £1.90 before 10pm or £2.50 after 10pm.
MIDDLESBROUGH Mayor Eddie Bolland is doing the can-can in the run-up to Environment City day.
He wants residents to help him gather a mountain of cans, aluminium or tin, to be recycled on May 6.
‘I want to hand my cans in as mayor to lead the way,’ said Coun Bolland.
‘I am fully behind the Environment City initiative.’
Middlesbrough FC footballers and Teesside-born TV star Paul Daniels are expected to join in the celebrations.
The acclaimed magician will join a celebrity phone-in on a giant telephone supplied by sponsors BT.
There will also be a parade through central Middlesbrough, and environmental displays.
The can collection will take place in Central Gardens, outside the Town Hall.
David Rigby, of Middlesbrough council's public protection department, urged people to wash and keep their cans until May 6.
‘Then bring them down to Central Gardens, where we hope to have the biggest can collection ever seen in the region or perhaps the country.’
They will be processed by Tomorrow 2000 for recycling.
— Plans to set up an Environmental Action Station at St Anthony's School, Cargo Fleet Lane, as part of Middlesbrough's City Challenge have been approved.
A CYCLIST underwent emergency surgery yesterday after a collision with a car in Middlesbrough.
The accident involving David Easby happened outside the fire station on Park Road South.
Firemen were quickly on the scene and Mr Easby was rushed to the town's General Hospital for immediate surgery.
He suffered internal injuries and fractures to his arms and ribs.
He was stable last night.
A police spokesman said driver Patrick Watson, 28, of Fleet House, Thorntree, who left the scene, had been traced and would be reported for possible summons.
He crashed into a lamp standard and a wall after the accident with Mr Easby.
SUNDERLAND have sensationally dropped goal-ace John Byrne for this afternoon's crucial full-house derby game with Middlesbrough at Roker Park.
And caretaker boss Malcolm Crosby is ready to gamble on 21-year-old Warren Hawke best remembered for his part in the 1990 play-offs victory at Newcastle.
Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence also plans changes to his line-up with one alteration already confirmed Andy Peake returning in midfield after being rested for Saturday's win over Plymouth.
Roker crowd favourite Byrne, who shot Sunderland to the FA Cup Final by scoring in every round, is the club's top goal-grabber with 14 to his credit since his bargain £225,000 transfer from Brighton in October.
But the Republic of Ireland international has not hit the net in Sunderland's last eight League games and Crosby has decided that the 31-year-old needs a rest.
‘I will give Byrne a breather he has lost his sharpness and is only a shadow of himself,’ said Crosby yesterday.
‘I have spoken to the player and he accepts the situation.
‘Perhaps we have been a bit unfair on John Byrne recently we expect him to keep scoring goals all the time.
‘This is such a big game and we need fresh legs.’
Crosby, who still has no guarantees of landing the job on a permanent basis even after guiding the club to the FA Cup Final, was concerned to see uncertainty show itself during the 2–0 defeat at Grimsby.
‘For the first time I saw fear creeping in at Grimsby,’ he said.
‘You could see it in their play even experienced players were showing it.
‘Players should not be thinking they might be beaten.
‘We have to battle and get people to have a go.’
Crosby also has injury worries to add to his team selection problems, and he will not name his line-up until just before the start.
Striker Don Goodman is rated as doubtful with a recurring groin injury, and if he has to stand down again Hawke is likely to come in for his first game of the season probably as a partner for ex-England and Boro man Peter Davenport.
Also rated only as 50–50 is central defender Kevin Ball, who had to be helped off the field in the FA Cup semi-final victory over Norwich.
Ball was able to do some training at Roker Park yesterday, but the game might be a little too soon for him.
Central defenders Gary Bennett and Anton Rogan both took knocks at Grimsby, but are expected to play in a very important all-ticket clash.
Crosby admitted: ‘It will be a very tough game and what we need to do is have people fresh.
‘All credit to Middlesbrough they have bounced back with two wins after losing to Barnsley.
‘We still need two wins to get clear of trouble.
‘We have to get them from five games, while other teams only have three.
‘It is in our own hands we have to stop worrying what other clubs are doing.’
Sunderland (from): Norman, Kay, Hardyman, Bennett, Rogan, Owers, Bracewell, Atkinson, Armstrong, Mooney, Rush, Davenport, Hawke, Goodman, Sampson and Brady.
Boro boss Lawrence, meanwhile, is not lined up for a summer move to Spurs despite rumours sweeping the NorthEast.
Lawrence is settled at Middlesbrough and has been pleased with the progress of his first season.
The former Charlton Athletic manager has been linked with Spurs, with Peter Shreeves under pressure and fans calling for a new manager.
Promotion would be a perfect end-of-season bonus for Lawrence after an action-packed season.
Lawrence will hope to complete a 100 per cent North-East derby record against Sunderland this afternoon.
He plans changes for the Roker Park battle.
Lawrence said: ‘Derby games are always competitive, but this one has an extra cutting edge.
‘We want to go up and Sunderland want to avoid being relegated.
‘Entertainment will be the last thing on people's minds.
What matters most is the result, so entertainment will not be the highest priority.
‘Results mean more than performances at this stage.
One point for each would not be a total disaster, but obviously both of us will want three.
‘Sunderland have become increasingly desperate in a few departments.
They have had a lot of games in a short time.
‘We have also had a lot of games and one or two have played in every game.
I am hoping the atmosphere will lift tired legs.’
The first 20 minutes will be a crucial period for a derby that will have a strong bearing on promotion and relegation issues.
Lawrence said: ‘Sunderland are good at getting a lot of bodies into the box.
The last thing we want is for someone to pop up unmarked and score a goal.
‘Sunderland, however, are vulnerable on the counter-attack.
‘We have done well in big games this season and I am pleased there will be a good atmosphere.
‘It will be great for our fans if we complete four derby wins this season, but three points are more important for their own reasons.
‘I wish Sunderland had an extra six points, because they will be desperate for points.
On the other hand, that might work to our advantage.’
Lawrence will switch to his away formation.
Apart from Peake definitely returning in midfield, there is also the prospect of Jamie Pollock and Gary Parkinson being involved.
Middlesbrough (from): Pears, Fleming, Parkinson, Phillips, Gittens, Mohan, Proctor, Hendrie, Falconer, Pollock, Wilkinson, Payton, Ripley, Slaven.
Middlesbrough 2 Plymouth Argyle 1 ON a day when former England goalkeeper Peter Shilton was on top form it took a top goal to beat him.
That spectacular strike came from Boro midfield player Willie Falconer who was thrilled with his fifth goal of the season.
Falconer, out of action for six months after a knee operation, said: ‘I think I was due a goal.
‘Shilton played out of his skin.
His save from Jimmy Phillips’ free-kick in the first was  unbelievable .
It needed something special to beat him’.
Despite his goal, Falconer could be left out against Sunderland today.
Manager Lennie Lawrence hinted Falconer was in need of a rest after a hectic comeback spell.
Striker Paul Wilkinson must also be suffering fatigue as the only ever-present outfield player.
Wilkinson has battled hard and taken a lot of knocks this season.
John Hendrie was the star man for the Boro.
He continued his impressive end-of-season form and played a key role in Stuart Ripley's equaliser.
Middlesbrough needed a quick goal after unmarked Dwight Marshall headed Argyle into the lead and Hendrie responded.
The winger broke down the left and pulled the ball back from the byline for Ripley to sidefoot the ball into the net.
With the stakes so high, the lack of atmosphere on the terraces in the first half was a complete mystery.
There was an improvement after the break, but a neutral would not have guessed the home team are within striking distance of the Premier League.
Middlesbrough will go into second place if they win at Roker Park today.
Referee Neil Midgley (Bolton), who retires in a fortnight's time, pulled a calf muscle in the first half and was replaced by senior linesman Graham Bradbury (York.)
Bradbury must have been a little miffed that the Sunday Press named the other linesman as the replacement.
The new man was called into quick action sending off Plymouth's Kevin Hodges after he fisted a goal-bound Wilkinson shot over the bar.
Bradbury had no option but to produce the red card.
Lawrence sympathised with a player he signed for Plymouth many years ago.
Andy Payton wasted the penalty, saved by Shilton, and Middlesbrough once again struggled against ten men.
Middlesbrough looked nervy in the closing stages
Lewis beaten
ATHLETICS: Six-time Olympic champion Carl Lewis's 1992 outdoor season started with a surprise defeat to Santa Monica Track Club teammate Mike Marsh in the men's 100 metres at Walnut, California on Saturday.
Third time lucky
BOXING: Chris Eubank may face a third choice opponent in next Saturday's WBO super middleweight title defence at Manchester's G-Mex centre.
Florida's Ron Essett, a replacement for Paraguay's Juan Carlos Gimenez, is suffering with an ear infection.
Ally's top man
FOOTBALL: Rangers and Scotland striker Ally McCoist celebrated his club's fourth successive title yesterday by being named Player of the Year by the Scottish Football Writers' Association.
Roker joy
FOOTBALL: Sunderland Juniors beat Newcastle Juniors 3–2 to maintain their Northern Intermediate League title challenge.
Shotton shine FOOTBALL: Shotton Boys Under-13s completed a Russell Foster Tyne and Wear League and cup double when they beat Waldridge Boys U-13s 3–1 in the final of the League Cup.
Tragedy strikes FOOTBALL: Romanian first division players Gabriel Nastase and Bogdan Banuta died when their Inter Sibiu club coach crashed on the way to a league game at Gloria Bistrita yesterday.
The rest of the team escaped without serious injury.
Boro signing FOOTBALL: Middlesbrough have signed Stockton Boys forward Andrew Howarth, from Sedgefield, on associate schoolboy forms.
IN what might have been an excellent weekend for North-East sport there was one predictable blackspot.
Newcastle United.
While Durham Cricket Club got off to a resounding start, Sunderland brought a respectable gap between themselves and Division Three and Middlesbrough remained in contention for an automatic promotion spot, Newcastle moved into the bottom three of Division Two in remarkable circumstances.
They had three sent off, the assistant manager Terry McDermott was apparently cautioned, there was a bomb scare and a pitch invasion was averted by police.
The disappointment for Newcastle, and for the North-East, is that what might prove to be one of the most crucial games in the club's history has been decided not by skill, flair and courage — but by dubious refereeing decisions.
But poor refereeing is part and parcel of football and cannot be used as an excuse for Newcastle's plight.
The truth is, if we were looking for people to blame for the fact that the once-great club are now Division Three favourites, referee Brian Coddington would come a long way down the list.
I WAS privileged last week to be in the company of the Duchess of Hamilton, the Duke of Gloucester and the Duke of Kent.
The latter looked admiringly at the other two who have been preserved long past their life expectancy.
The Duke of Kent was doing the ribbon-cutting at the National Railway Museum where there are locos by every name except, it seems, his own.
However, I'm sure it didn't spoil his day.
He also didn't have to queue outside in the cold like the rest of us.
The re-opening of the NRM, after getting its new roof, restores one of Britain's best museums to public duty after a long lay-off.
Among the new exhibits is a footbridge that once stood at Percy Main and a segment of the Channel Tunnel.
The latter shows the  immensity of the structure and lets you ‘walk though the Tunnel’.
As it is only about two or three feet wide, this is a little demanding on the imagination.
Sir Austin Pearce, one of the NRM's guardians, told us via muffled a Tannoy (uncannily similar to a real station announcement) that the NRM would not merely look to the past, but also to the present and the future of rail.
He must be planning to close the museum buffet at busy times and cut the electricity cables to make sure  everyone's home five hours late.
At least if it were pitch black we could really get an idea of what it will be like to ‘walk through the Channel Tunnel’.
Meanwhile, as railways past prepared to renew their acquaintance with York's tourist hordes, railways present and future are planning to divert a few onto the TransPennine service into which Teesside is now linked.
BR's latest class 158s are distinctly unglamourous coaches-come-locomotives but fitted with all mod-cons including baby changing facilities.
Mallard may have been the fastest steam train in the world, but how many mothers must have complained about the journey?
BR is hoping more travellers in Teesside catch the train to Leeds, York and the North-West.
‘Liverpool becomes a viable day trip from Middlesbrough,’ enthused TransPennine chief Roger Cobbe.
Now, it seems, you can leave your troubles behind in Grangetown and see how they queue for jobs in Merseyside.
TOP mountain bike riders from all over the country battled it out in North Yorkshire at the weekend.
The two-day event was the first in a series being staged by the North of England Mountain Bike Association (Nemba).
A variety of races attracted a range of talents, from complete novices to professionals.
Courses had been marked out at Gandale Bivouac Camp, which is part of Catterick Garrison's training area.
Races included downhill, slalom and cross-country for men and women, juniors and veterans and novices and professionals.
Among the top riders invited were world uphill champion Tim Gould, his team mate Fred Salmon, the men's Raleigh team and team Raleigh lady professional Caroline Alexander.
Nemba events are staged all over the North of England with the final held at Eston, Middlesbrough.
THERE was no world record, no sleep and plenty of pain for a County Durham darts charity marathon team at the weekend.
But a visit from one of their sporting heroes, ex-world champion John Lowe, helped ease the disappointment and the aching muscles after the gruelling 24-hour stint at the Bridge Hotel, Croxdale, near Durham City.
And of course there was the small matter of £2,000 raised for the Guide Dogs for the Blind to comfort the eight shattered darts players.
They reckoned to have walked 18 miles each to and from the board as they tried to beat the world record of 510,625 scored in 25s and bullseyes in 24 hours.
In the end the team of players from Croxdale, Spennymoor, Ferryhill and Middlesbrough managed a total of 449,350 more than 312 points per minute, but short of the 350-plus average they needed to beat the record.
As the event ended, they were on course to reach the £2,000 target needed to sponsor two guide dogs.
John Lowe, who donated £100 to the charity fund, said: ‘It's a brilliant effort, just getting through the 24 hours was an achievement.
The most I have played at one time is probably seven hours and it becomes agonising, it tightens your arm up terribly.’
Now the charity team aims to set up a league team based at the Bridge Hotel and have already vowed to make another record attempt next year.
FORMER Middlesbrough goal king John Hickton got stripped for action again on Saturday.
The Boro star made a welcome appearance at Ayresome Park wearing a club replica shirt from the Seventies, launched by the club with Leisureco (Leeds).
The shirt has a distinctive white hoop and an embroidered old-style rampant lion MFC badge.
Marketing manager Mitch Hatfield said the 1970–71 season shirt had been produced after careful research.
Picture: STAURT BOULTON
EIGHT darts players from Croxdale, Spennymoor, Ferryhill and Middlesbrough just failed to beat the world record of 510,625 scored in 25s and bullseyes in 24 hours but still raised £2,000 for Guide Dogs for the Blind.
Lunch clubs need new volunteers
LUNCHEON clubs for the elderly in Skelton and Redcar want volunteers to take over when students of a Skelton catering course have to give up the running of the service when their training course is cut on May 1.
Age Concern Cleveland wants volunteers to cook, shop or help in the kitchen.
Janice Craig, ACC team leader, said: ‘We will provide the opportunity to complete an essential food hygiene course.’
If you can help, please call Age Concern on  or call into 150 Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough.
Fit charity:
Staff at Guisborough's Boots store are taking part in a 100-  minute exercise charity ‘aerobathon’ at Darlington's Dolphin Centre next Sunday to raise cash for the Royal Marsden Hospital Cancer Appeal.
Hospice help:
The Teesside Hospice Care Foundation holds a fundraising wine and cheese evening on Wednesday April 29.
For tickets and more details call .
Barn dance:
Stockton Folk Dance Group hosts a barn dance in the Corporation Hall, Prince Regent Street, Stockton, on Saturday May 9.
Tickets are available from Doug Hyde on .
Benefit talk:
The West View Resource Centre, Miers Avenue, Hartlepool, holds a free information session on disability benefits following recent changes at 2.30pm on Wednesday.
Open college:
Marton Sixth Form College holds an open evening on Wednesday, May 6 for year 9–11 pupils from any 11–16 school.
Expert advice on courses, careers and further and higher education will be available.
A representative from the new joint university college on Teesside will be on hand to answer questions.
John's show:
The work of artist John Bratby is on show at Hartlepool's Gray Art Gallery and Museum.
He came to prominence in the early 50s and has become the best-known member of the ‘kitchen sink school’ of realist painters.
Footbridge work:
Work on a new wooden footbridge between Mainsforth Terrace and Coronation Drive in Hartlepool is to begin soon.
Hartlepool Council expects the bridge to be open for public use in weeks.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Meanwhile The same issue of The Northern Echo that reported the loss of the Titanic, and provided the headlines which asserted that all aboard were safe, dutifully reported the day's events in the North-East.
These included:— unrest in Sunderland against a colony of Mormons whose church was attacked with ‘volleys of stones’— an exciting river rescue in South Park, Darlington, where an old man almost drowned — worries in Middlesbrough about dogs running loose and unmuzzled which were referred to in the Commons — the Guardians in Tynemouth were engaged in clearing out the workhouses, putting children in institutions or ‘scattered homes’— a picture hall in Consett was fined for overcrowding;— the oldest inhabitant of Coundon, Ralph Goundry, had died aged 97.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout County Durham, Tyneside and Wearside to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mel Mason, Sian Thomas and David Taylor at Durham on 091–384–2261; Patrick Lavelle on 091–567–3422; Mark Summers on 232929; John Hayes and Anne Kostalas at Newcastle on 091–2328708.
Or you can reach us at head office on 381313.
Sunderland 1 Middlesbrough 0 EX-ENGLAND striker Peter Davenport produced one of the best goals of his career to dent the promotion hopes of his old club, Middlesbrough, and give Sunderland a victory which could ensure their Second Division safety.
But the hero of a rip-roaring derby match was Sunderland goalkeeper Tony Norman, who made two incredible second half saves to keep Boro at bay.
It was one of the best games between the North-East rivals for many a year and the 25,093 fans applauded both teams off the field after a nailbiting battle which hardly included a dull moment.
Only one goal separated the teams, and what a strike it turned out to be.
Davenport took a pass from stand-in central defender Ian Sampson deep in the Boro half and moved on menacingly towards the edge of the box where he unleashed an incredible right-foot shot which flew, true as an arrow, into the top left hand corner of the net, inches outside the despairing hands of goalkeeper Stephen Pears.
For Davenport it represented a personal triumph, following the miserable time he endured while with Boro.
It was a 21st minute moment of magic which delighted the home fans and seemed to stun Middlesbrough, who had started the game with more purpose and menace.
But if the quality of the goal generated spontaneous applause from the home fans, the two crucial saves from Norman brought gasps of disbelief from both sets of supporters.
Middlesbrough had tested Norman's reflexes just before half-time when he managed to get his knees in the way of a hard, low shot from Jon Gittens, which might have levelled the scores.
And the Roker goal had another close call when Middlesbrough's influential midfielder, Andy Peake, struck a powerful drive which Owers managed to scramble away.
The Teessiders seemed to sense that the Rokermen were starting to wilt and in the 62nd minute it looked as though Middlesbrough had finally found a way through.
Hendrie centred perfectly from the right to find Stuart Ripley unmarked only eight yards out.
He fired his shot hard and low but somehow Norman got his legs in the way and the ball flew over the bar into the sea of incredulous Middlesbrough supporters behind the Roker goal.
And the Welsh international keeper was to deny Middlesbrough again in the 88th minute when Gittens rose high to the right of goal to power in a close-range, angled header which Norman kept out with one hand.
Sunderland, playing their fourth match in seven days, made four changes as caretaker manager Malcolm Crosby tried to find fresh legs and a reserve of stamina from his injury-hit first team squad.
He gambled with 21-year-old Warren Hawke, making his first appearance of the season, and gave England Under-21 international Gary Owers his first start for three months.
The reshuffle served its purpose, for after a 15-minute rather uncomfortable settling-in period Sunderland, inspired by Davenport's goal, gradually assumed control and there was no indication of tiredness as the Rokermen, superbly served by Anton Rogan in defence and the non-stop Brian Atkinson in midfield, hustled Boro at every opportunity.
Middlesbrough tried everything to complete a grand slam of derby wins, but the midfield prompting of Peake and the dangerous flank attacks of John Hendrie, failed to wrest victory from Sunderland's unyielding grasp.
And while Boro could point to Norman's two brilliant stops as the reason for coming away empty handed, they had to thank Pears for saving the day in the 71st minute when he saved point-blank from Mohan to prevent an own goal.
Sunderland again rose to the occasion against better opposition and just about deserved to get the points to ease their relegation worries considerably.
But Middlesbrough showed that they have the skill and fighting spirit to fulfil their Premier League dream and make this only a temporary set-back.
MATCHFACTS Goal: Davenport (21 mins, 1–0).
Referee: George Courtney (Spennymoor).
Attendance: 25,093.
Sunderland (4–4–2): NORMAN 9; Kay 6, Bennett 7, Sampson 7, Rogan 8; Owers 6, Bracewell 7, Atkinson 8, Armstrong 6 (sub Hardyman 58 mins, 6); Davenport 8, Hawke 6 (sub Rush 75 mins, 6).
Middlesbrough (4–5–1): Pears 7; Fleming 7, Mohan 6 (sub Slaven 73 mins, 6), Gittens 6, Phillips 6; Ripley 7, Proctor 6 (sub Payton 58 mins, 6), Falconer 6, PEAKE 8, Hendrie 8; Wilkinson 6.
SUNDERLAND Football Club will announce their distribution plans for FA Cup final tickets at 11am today.
The club has been given an allocation of 17,800 by the Football Association, and after season ticket holders and club commitments there will be about 12,000 tickets left for Gold Card holders who have collected the three vouchers at the home games against Ipswich, Plymouth and Middlesbrough.
The attendance against Middlesbrough yesterday of 25,093 was lower than expected and its seems that most supporter with the necessary three vouchers and Gold Cards will qualify for Cup final tickets.
Darlington 0 Wigan 1 CRIES of ‘what a load of rubbish’ were heard around Feethams again as Quakers slumped to their tenth successive match without a win.
And there were shouts too for the resignation of manager Ray Hankin, who, according to the many rumours sweeping the ground before and during the match, is to be replaced by former Middlesbrough and Millwall boss Bruce Rioch.
Apart from the usual ‘we'll let you know’ comments from the club about this and other matters like who is the new chairman; who are the new directors?
Hankin, as well as the players, press and supporters, do not know what the future holds.
Whether that uncertainty affected the players cannot be assessed, but this match sank below the fare served up in the last home game against Swansea, and that was bad enough.
The paltry crowd of 1,223 had very little to cheer as Quakers failed to show any sign of breaking down the visitors.
The match barely rose above mediocrity in the opening stages, with Darlington's main tactic of pumping balls forward to Steve Mardenborough constantly breaking down, while Darren Patterson and former Feethams striker Gary Worthington were well wide with left foot shots at the other end.
In fact it was Worthington, Quakers' leading scorer in their last relegation season three years ago, who livened the game up after 25 minutes, but once again it was laid on a plate by the Darlington defence.
Kevan Smith completely missed a right wing corner from Phil Jones at the near post, allowing Worthington to bundle the ball home for the 87th League goal against Quakers this season.
Steve Gaughan mustered his side's first real effort after 35 minutes, a long range shot which Nigel Adkins saved at the foot of his post, but two minutes later they were almost level when a powerful Nick Cusack header from an Andy Toman cross was going into the bottom corner until Adkins somehow pushed the ball away.
Steve Mardenborough then broke through with a clear run on goal just before the whistle, but his control let him down and Adkins saved at his feet.
Wigan almost added to their single goal after the break.
Everybody's player of the season, Mark Prudhoe, saved from Alan Johnson and Andy Pilling, but Quakers thought they were worth a penalty after 71 minutes when Mardenborough appeared to be pulled down by Jones, but referee Burns, who up to that point had been whistle happy, turned the appeals down.
Smith and Cusack then had shots blocked in another goalmouth scramble, but there were to be no more real goal attempts by Darlington after that.
Prudhoe, however, once again shone by somehow blocking Worthington's close range shot with his foot.
Hankin was remarkably candid with his after-match comments.
‘We are dying a slow death,’ he said, ‘and the players are frustrated and confused.
‘They don't know where the next win is coming from and they cannot wait until the season finishes.
‘I know which players I want and which ones to release, but I don't know what's going on in the boardroom.’
Nor, it seems, does anyone else.
On the supporters' calls for his removal, he said: ‘The supporters won't change my opinion of what I'd like to do at Darlington.
‘I've got broad shoulders and I've been through it as a player.
‘No matter what they think, I will do the job to the best of my ability.
Some will hate me and some will like me, but that's life.’
MATCHFACTS 1,223.
Toman (Darlington) Pilling (Wigan).
Worthington 25 mins.
W C Burns (Scarborough).
Darlington (4–4–2): PRUDHOE McJannet 5, Coverdale 6, Gregan 6, Smith 5, Isaacs 7, Gaughan 6, Toman 6, Cusack 5, Cork 6, Mardenborough 6.
Subs not used; Tucker, Borthwick.
Wigan Adkins 7, Parkinson 6, Tankard 7, Johnson 6, Skipper 7, Langley 6, Jones 6, Pilling 7, Daley WORTHINGTON Patterson 6.
Subs not used; Powell, Doolan.
John North page 12.
SUNDERLAND matchwinner Peter Davenport last night forecast: ‘One more win will keep us up.’
The former Middlesbrough forward grabbed the only goal of the game in yesterday's Wear-Tees derby at Roker Park.
And he classed the strike which dented his old club's promotion challenge as one of the most important of his career.
Davenport said: ‘We desperately needed three points.
There have been tired legs recently but this win gives us some breathing space.’
Sunderland could virtually clinch safety at Brighton on Saturday, but Middlesbrough could face final-day drama at Wolves after losing the initiative to Leicester City in the battle for second spot.
Davenport added: ‘There is no doubt we have been affected by the FA Cup success and a hard schedule.
We cannot peak every couple of days.
‘Everyone has been affected.
But there has never been self-doubt.
‘I thought our defence was magnificent.
Every time the ball went into our penalty area a Sunderland headed clear.
‘It is the first time I have played up front since the FA Cup semi-final.
Centre forward is my best position.’
Boro manager Lennie Lawrence was disappointed that his side had missed the opportunity to move into an automatic promotion place.
‘That is why we will have to change the squad in the summer,’ he said.
‘We applied relentless pressure but Tony Norman only made two saves.’
‘Therein lies Middlesbrough's dilemma.
It has been with us all the year.
With the existing squad it will remain with us.
‘I could not fault my players for commitment.
They put in a tremendous physical effort in the second half.
‘We have lost the ability to keep a clean sheet.
The inability to convert our possession into goals has remained since I walked through the door.’
Lawrence praised Davenport for his goal but was critical of his defence.
‘Davenport does not score many goals with the outside of his right foot from 25 yards.
It was a great strike but I could have driven a bus through the gap in our defence.
‘The best we can hope for is to go to Wolves on May 2 in need of one or three points.’
Sunderland caretaker manager Malcolm Crosby believes his side still needs one more win to avoid going to Wembley to take on Liverpool as the only Third Division side to contest an FA Cup final.
‘That was a very important win for us after our last two games when we lost to Plymouth and Grimsby,’ said Crosby.
‘I have told Peter Davenport that if he was a bit greedier he would score a lot more goals.’
Dealing with injured bats, unwanted newts and cats with bad breath is all in the line of duty for Christine Hall — and it's a job she wouldn't want to swap for a million pounds.
Christine, who lives in Fairfields, Stockton, spends her time working voluntarily as an equivalent of Marje Proops or Claire Rayner — only in the world of animals rather than humans.
‘Sometimes I can relate to animals much better than people’ she says.
‘They can be much more loyal and they also know when people are being genuine towards them.’
No matter what the problem is Christine will do her best to find a solution.
She recently celebrated her first anniversary as Cleveland's only agony aunt for pets.
It hasn't been an easy year for the mother of two grown-up children, as anxious pet-owners have been known to telephone at four o' clock in the morning to ask about their cats or dogs.
Even at Christmas, there was no respite as the calls kept flooding in.
One in particular resulted in Christine gaining a ten-year-old pen pal.
‘A little girl called Amy from Chester contacted me as I was providing cover for the whole of the North,’ she says.
‘Apparently, her cat had very bad plaque on its teeth and she was really concerned, so I gave her some advice and Amy has been in touch ever since.
‘Although she told me she can only ring when her daddy is out as he doesn't like animals…
I think he'll like them even less when he gets his phone bill.’
Cynics may dismiss Christine as just another fanatical animal lover but her dedication to helping feathered and furry friends goes beyond this.
Even as a child growing up in the Fifties, she and her sister, Marlene, preferred to spend their sixpence pocket money on animal welfare classes run by a local RSPCA inspector rather than go to the cinema.
‘He used to bring along his pet Alsatian, who sat patiently while we practised bandaging paws,’ she recalls.
‘This was to prepare us should we come across animals that had been knocked down by cars.
‘It's funny that after all these years I still haven't forgotten what I've been taught — so it must have been money well spent.’
On leaving school, she spent a few years working in the British Transport Police.
Shortly after leaving the police she met her husband, Bernie — who is both a policeman and an animal lover.
‘I don't think I could have married anyone who doesn't like animals,’ she admits.
‘On our first date we were driving through the countryside when we spotted some sheep out in a field.
‘I said to Bernie if they were mine I'd want to take them inside on a night.
His reply was he'd do the same — so I knew from that moment onwards he was the man for me.’
Since the day the couple got married literally hundreds of different animals, from tortoises to chameleons, have shared their home.
The Hall family residence has recently provided accommodation for five dogs, five cats, five tortoises…and nine hedgehogs.
‘Last year I had dozens of calls about injured hedgehogs,’ she says.
‘In the end I was acting mum to six orphaned baby hedgehogs — getting up to feed them every three hours, which isn't much fun.
Still, it was great to see them go back into the wild when they were old enough.’
As well as acting as a surrogate mum to the hedgehogs, Christine has also given physiotherapy to tortoises and given the kiss of life to a pet rabbit, which everyone thought had gone to the great hutch in the sky.
‘The rabbit had developed pneumonia.
I blew over its mouth and nose to revive it even though my tears were rolling onto its face.
Nothing happened so I put it in a box without a lid and went shopping.
When I came home there was the rabbit, hopping around the room — it was an amazing sight,’ she says.
Another achievement, which both Christine and Bernie are proud of, is the ban on hunting on council-owned land that they successfully campaigned for back in 1982.
The couple were founder-members of the North-East branch of the League Against Cruel Sports and also belong to the National Anti-Vivisection Society.
‘We went to local council meetings to ask for support from the councillors rather than try to stop the hunt meetings,’ she adds.
‘We felt it was a worthwhile cause as we can't stand cruelty to animals of any sort.
Langbaurgh, Middlesbrough, Hartlepool and Cleveland councils all agreed to support us.’
Nowadays, it's the Pet Care Helpline which takes up most of Christine's time and she has no plans of stopping.
The English are sometimes accused of caring more about animals than fellow humans but it is not an accusation that can be levelled at Christine Hall.
For the busy housewife has also found time to help with the Romanian Convoyaid, sending special parcels to thousands of orphans.
‘Not only do Bernie and I love animals but we also love children and have recently sponsored two Romanian babies,’ she says.
‘After the last trip we were given a video of our babies receiving their individual parcels.
Their reactions were unbelievable — so little to us meant so much to them.’
The Friskies Pet Care Helpline:.
MIDDLESBROUGH'S adopted ship sails into the town for the last time this week.
HMS Jupiter pays the last of many visits to Cleveland on Friday.
After a series of celebrations, it will leave Middlesbrough for the last time next Tuesday and head for Portsmouth to be de-commissioned.
Middlesbrough adopted HMS Jupiter in 1975 and the 17-year relationship  will come to an end with a ceremonial farewell.
Officers and crew will parade through the town centre, with ensigns flying and bayonets fixed.
Mayor Eddie Bolland will take the official salute outside the Town Hall.
Coun Bolland said: ‘It is always a great pleasure to welcome the HMS Jupiter to Middlesbrough, but this visit will of course be tinged with sadness, as it is the last.
‘I am sure the town will do everything it can to make the officers and crew feel at home and join me in wishing them all the best for the future.’
During its years of association with Middlesbrough, the Jupiter saw active service in the Falklands and The Gulf.
HRH Prince Charles also spent part of his Royal Navy service on board.
Going back:
Schoolchildren will take a trip back in time to the 1930s in an exhibition at the Laing Art Gallery in Newcastle from April 28 to May 1.
The project has been organised by Newcastle City Council's education department.
Fun run:
The Barnardo's Relay Marathon charity fun run, which aims to raise thousands of pounds, will take place on Sunday May 17 at Corbridge, near Hexham, Northumberland.
Family fun:
The Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust at Washington is staging a family fun day on Sunday, April 26, including a prize treasure hunt.
For information about family tickets, contact Pam Lovell on 091–416 5454.
Carmen date:
Durham County Opera will perform Carmen at the Garland theatre, New College, Framwellgate Moor, Durham on May 7, 8 and 9 at 7.15pm, Tickets are £7 and £6 with a one-day concession price of £4 for school pupils, pensioners and students.
Spring fashion:
The Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust will hold a spring fashion show at its centre in Washington on Tuesday, April 28 at 7.30pm to raise cash towards its conservation work.
Children cheque:
The regional coordinator for charity Unicef, Margaret Robinson, collected a cheque for £3,130 from the Nuffield Hospital in Jesmond, Newcastle, which will pay towards immunising 500 children in developing countries.
The cash was raised by hospital staff.
Riders ramp:
Tyneside Elswick Young Farmers' group has donated £141 to the Penshaw Riding for the Disabled Association to help buy a mounting ramp for disabled riders.
Clean fun:
Dry cleaning staff from Hartonclean and Dale Cleaners on Tyneside played a men versus women football match yesterday to raise cash for the neo-natal unit at Newcastle's RVI.
Scout's award:
Norton Venture Scout, Kevin Brown, 18, has received the Queen's Scout Award from chief scout Garth Morrison.
He will attend a St George's Day Parade at Windsor Castle.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout South West Durham and Darlington to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland 602232; Gavin Engelbrecht at our Barnard Castle office on Teesdale 38628; Martin Shipton, Nigel Burton, Christine Fieldhouse, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier, Margaret Hussey and our news desk and specialist writers on Darlington 381313.
SUNDERLAND crowd favourite Kieron Brady and £225,000 winger Brian Mooney have been left out of tonight's reserve game against Sheffield United at Roker Park for  disciplinary reasons.
Second team coach Roger Jones is unhappy that Republic of Ireland Under-21 international Brady has ignored orders to lose weight, and he was not satisfied with Mooney's attitude in training yesterday.
‘The reserves are still in bother and I need people to go out and work and graft,’ said Jones.
‘If they don't do it in training I can't see them doing it on the park.’
Brady was ordered to shed half a stone but still weighs in at 12 stone 8lb.
Jones said: ‘He has been told to lose weight since Christmas but he hasn't bothered himself.’
Mooney was left out of the derby game against Middlesbrough on Monday and would have been expected to play in the Pontins Central League game.
But Jones said: ‘He was moping around in training this morning whether it was because he was left out of the first team I'm not sure.
But everyone should be fighting for first team places, especially as we are going to Wembley.
‘Some people seem to think they will be picked regardless.
I think one or two have a shock coming.
If they are not doing it in training they can't expect to come into the side.
‘It should be every professional's dream to play at Wembley but if players don't have the right attitude in training you can't consider them.
‘I think we have done in the past, but the time has come to say enough is enough.’
Mooney played four games in a row before being left out of the derby game, while Brady was substitute in the FA Cup replay against West Ham, the two games against Chelsea and the semi-final against Norwich City.
Now there is additional competition for places in the FA Cup final, following the return to first-team duty of England Under-21 midfielder Gary Owers after a three months absence with a severe pelvic injury, and Welsh international Colin Pascoe, who makes his return after injury in tonight's reserve match.
The facial swelling received by midfielder Gordon Armstrong in a derby match clash of heads with Middlesbrough fullback Curtis Fleming has subsided, but he is having treatment for a knee injury.
BROUGH PARK is bringing the best out of former Sunderland grader Packies Boy, which has four wins and three seconds to his credit since switching to the Tyneside circuit.
Now trained by Gordon Rooks, Packies Boy started racing in A2 grade at Brough, but the bridle and black has been promoted to A1 by racing manager Jimmy Nunn after his recent impressive improvement.
Brough Park, which last night hosted the final of the 2,000 Guineas, is now preparing for next month's Northumberland Puppy Cup, which offers prize money of £2,000 for the winner.
BRITAIN'S leading open racer, Lets All Boogie, is the star attraction at Sunderland Stadium on Saturday night.
The Walthamstow-based flyer, which has won 14 of his last 19 races, scooping prize-money of £6,000, will be chasing the Regal Stayers Trophy and a jackpot of £2,000.
Trained by John Coleman, the January 1990 Carters Lad-Princess Alucard brindle has raced over distances between 640 and 660 metres and will drop down to 631 metres at the East Boldon circuit.
Lets All Boogie's latest success was the ADH Steels Stewards Cup at his home track on Saturday night.
The main threat to the southern raider looks like being Irish import Black Parachute.
Prepared by former independent trainer Jim Gibson, this will be Black Parachute's first official run in England, and his last contest in the Republic was a match on Irish Derby night at Shelbourne Park, Dublin, when losing to Avoid The Secret.
The main local interest looks like being New Marske-based Tom Farrell's open racer In The Secret, which clocked a useful 36.98 secs winning a three-dog 580 metres trial by 6 7 lengths at Sunderland, finishing very strongly.
Sunderland's Easter Handicap reaches  the quarter final stage on Friday night at a meeting hoped to raise £1,500 for the Motor Neurone Disease Association.
Hot favourite after the first two races is Witton-le-Wear-based Harry Williams' Pond Curlew, which is unbeaten off 8 metres, winning by 5 9 and 7 lengths, with a best time for the 450-metres trip of 27.44 secs.
Williams has another fancied runner in Donals Delight, which receives 4 metres, winning on Monday night in a time of 27.96 secs.
Graham Calvert has three useful performers left in the competition, Chessmen, which has clocked 27.77 secs off 7 metres, Ruffside Hall (27.76) and scratch dog Dozy Court, which won in 27.64 last Thursday and finished third on Monday night after hitting trouble on the third bend.
The quarter final draw will be made tonight.
The exciting newcomer New Level, bought unraced in Ireland by Wittonle-Wear farmer Dave Johnston, will contest the Mistley Trojan Puppy Stakes at Walthamstow on Saturday night following his open debut success in the Heineken Puppy Cup at Sunderland earlier this month.
Sunderland's BAGS meeting tomorrow starts at 2.10pm, with no charge for entry.
MIDDLESBROUGH stages the final of the Wafcol Sweepstakes tonight.
Two owner-trainers, Dave Smart and Billy Long, are both double handed in the final, with Bridies Ragatag and Ballitore Squire and Glowpaws Jimmy and Bobbys Patsy.
Dave Ward's Office Shreddrr and Phil Wood's Leah Car complete the lineup.
Bobby Patsy, sitting off the top of the handicap, could claim the trophy with a repeat of her earlier round performance.
Cleveland Park's mew professional trainer, Bruce MacDonald, scored a debut double on Saturday night with Yes Slippy (4–1) and Dicks Idea (5–2f).
On Monday night Norman Dixon's Headford Arms won his first competitive race in England after being bought as top lot in Cleveland Park's recent auction.
Despite an unfavourable trap 4 draw the Dave Connor-trained dog missed first bend trouble, leading at the third to score by 4 7 lengths in 28.85 secs.
A shot at next month's Carling Black Label Stakes at Cleveland Park next month, now looks to be on the agenda.
YORK City goalkeeper Chris Marples and midfield Shaun Reid, two of the club's mainstays in the last two seasons, are likely to have played their last games for the club.
Marples has been given a free transfer by manager John Ward, even though he still has a year of his contract to go.
As Ward has signed Lance Key on loan from Sheffield Wednesday until the end of the season, Marples is on the sidelines and will play again only if first choice Dean Kiely is injured, Key being unavailable for Fourth Division fixtures as he was signed after the transfer deadline.
Reid, who has a hairline double fracture of his leg, has had a further X ray and although this shows slight improvement he won't play again this season, although it won't be long before he is fit again.
Reid is at the end of his contract with City and could join Rochdale, though Scarborough are also likely to show interest in him as it is known that manager Ray McHale wants to sign experienced players in the goalkeeping, central midfield, centre back and striking positions.
Ward said: ‘I know the capabilities of Chris Marples, but I don't yet know enough about Lance Key.
I am going to play him in the remaining reserve games so that I can get a good look at him.
‘I am likely to need another goalkeeper for next season if Marples joins another club and I want to see if Key fits the bill.’
Ford kept waiting SCARBOROUGH manager Ray McHale praised trialist keeper Stuart Ford for an outstanding display in the 1–1 draw at Fourth Division title favourites Burnley on Monday.
But a cautious McHale yesterday refused to be drawn on Ford's chances of landing a contract for next season.
Ford's watertight performance prevented big guns Burnley from running up a cricket score against McHale's men.
The Clarets only once managed to get past Ford during a frenzied 90 minutes in which Burnley bombarded the Seasiders' goal.
‘I was pleased for Stuart because he works hard in training and he deserved the result for his performance,’ said McHale.
‘I don't want to put extra pressure on him now though, I just want him to keep things going as they are.’
Ford, 20, is technically on loan from Rotherham until the end of the season, but the Millmoor club are giving him a free transfer.
He played only once for the Millers and was understudy to former Middlesbrough keeper Kelham O'Hanlon and current keeper Billy Mercer.
But his sparkling display at Turf Moor is likely to net the Yorkshireman a contract, although McHale also plans to recruit another keeper during the summer.
TWO years ago a serious knee injury nearly forced Wayne Sleep to hang up his dancing shoes for good.
But now the diminutive hoofer is hot-footing it around Britain on a marathon tour with Lorna Luft, Judy Garland's singer daughter.
The 43-year-old dance king who grew up in Hartlepool, says: ‘I was in plaster for five weeks when I injured my knee ligaments.
I couldn't even raise my leg behind me and I thought it was a sign to give up.
‘But I went back to my first dancing teacher who taught me when I was 12 and it was like five hours of  physiotherapy every day.
I had to re-learn everything all over again.
‘I thought if I could still do all this I must be allowed to continue.
Now I think if my body still moves and people enjoy it that's OK.’
But the performer was a bit frightened by the three-month-long 48-city tour he is undertaking with Lorna.
Hollywood And Broadway: The Musicals In Concert celebrates the golden stage and screen era of the Forties, Fifties and early Sixties.
It includes medleys from such shows and movies as South Pacific, Cabaret, West Side Story, 42nd Street, High Society and Top Hat.
Sleep, who choreographs the show, says: ‘I thought it was a great idea.
Something I've always wanted to do and rather daunting as everyone knows the original movies and shows and the people who sang and danced in them.
But I think Lorna and I have a great rapport so we'll pull it off.’
Although Sleep became principal dancer of the Royal Ballet, he decided to diversify because of his height and created his own TV series The Hot Shoe Show in the early 1980s.
He also starred in the original productions of Cats and Song & Dance and acted in a stage version of The Tempest.
His film roles include The Virgin Soldiers and The First Great Train Robbery.
He captured the headlines six years ago when he danced with the Princess of Wales to the music of Billy Joel's Uptown Girl during a charity performance at the Royal Opera House.
Dance has always been his first love and in recent years he's been on tour six times with his own company.
At times his fingers and toes have been burnt.
He once lost £80,000 when a tour of Japan was cancelled suddenly and he had to pay the cost of transporting the show's equipment back to Britain out of his own pocket.
He does get angry that dancers aren't treated as well as actors or other performers in Britain and is upset that there aren't more dance shows on TV.
He moans: ‘It took three days to record one 30 minute Hot Shoe Show, whereas it takes one day to film a game show.
They just aren't willing to pay for this type of product as it takes to long to film.’
As for the future, Sleep isn't planning to retire just yet.
He went on: ‘I could get more money if I gave up performing for master classes but I don't continue working for the money.
‘This is the life I've been trained for and I want to carry on for as long as possible.
When I stop I want to pass on my skills to youngsters.’
—Hollywood and Broadway: The Musicals is at Sunderland Empire on April 26 and Middlesbrough Town Hall on May 7.
REDCAR'S bid for City Challenge funding started its journey to London 24 hours early yesterday.
The document left Redcar Station in the morning to be in Darlington for 9am today, when it will be taken to London.
There a flotilla of sailing dinghies will accompany the boat taking the document together with Langbaurgh councillors Len Douglass and Brian Roberts and Redcar MP Marjorie Mowlam to Westminster Pier.
Coun Douglass, leader of the Conservative group, and Coun Roberts, chairman of the policy and resources committee, will hand the document to an official from the Department of the Environment.
It will be studied by the DoE before the council gives a presentation of its plans in the summer.
Redcar's City Challenge co-ordinator Dave Bottomley said: ‘We started out on a confident basis with well-prepared plans which have resulted from the last five years of work under the Regeneration of Redcar banner.
‘City Challenge provides us with an opportunity of getting the funding we need to turn the plans into bricks and mortar.’
Middlesbrough sends its second City Challenge bid to London today.
Its first bid to revitalise the eastern side of the town was approved.
Now its looking for £37.5m over five years to regenerate the town centre an tackle unemployment, housing, health and social problems.
Cheese please:
Wendy Huggins, of Ash Hill, Coulby Newham, Middlesbrough, is in the running for a prize in a national competition to find Britain's champion cheese dish with her Northallerton leek pie.
Carry on is message to tourism success story Tees Valley Tourism, a partnership between the public and private sectors, has been saved by its own success.
Set up under a special government programme in 1989 with funding for three years, it has done so well it is to carry on in a slimmed down form under a new name Tees Valley Conference and Visitor Bureau under the control of the Northumbria Tourist Board.
It will be funded by what funds Tees Valley Tourism has left, plus contributions from hotels in the area.
Ms Claire Norminton, who will manage the organisation, said last night Tees Valley Tourism had brought £379,000 of business into the area in the last six months and had 5,000 interested holiday contacts on its data base.
‘We have everything in this part of the world.
There has been so much interest in the industrial side, while you just have to go a few miles out of Middlesbrough to get to the coast or the middle of the moors.’
Planned tourist features like the Tees barrage, the Hartlepool marina and the Wynyard park business and leisure development were considered by Tees Valley's board of directors, along with its existing achievements, strong reasons to retain at least some of its role in the future.
The bureau will be launched by Mr John East, chief executive of the English Tourist Board, today.
AWARDS AND COURSES:
Closing date for this year's writers' bursaries from Northern Arts, buying time or a bit of peace and quiet to write at the Tyrone Guthrie Centre, is May 29.
This year's regional writers' course, organised by Northern Arts and Newcastle University, is planned for August 24–28 at Higham Hall, near Cockermouth.
Tutors will be Carol Clewlow and Stan Barstow.
Registration fee will be £50, contact Northern Arts for further details,.
MIDDLESBROUGH Bears, facing their first Homefire League match of the 1992 season in only two weeks' time, need another good result against Glasgow at Cleveland Park tonight to fire them up for a long and hard campaign.
They have a 12-point deficit to claw back from the first Gold Cup leg at Glasgow, and judging from Sunday's encouraging performance against Edinburgh, they should be able to clinch the bonus point for an aggregate victory.
One or two of the Middlesborugh squad, however, have not yet showed their best form and manager Ken Knott will be looking for improvement in certain departments.
Glasgow's Clyde 2 Tigers are a much changed side and they too have experienced settling-in problems.
Their big new signing, Neil Collins, has quickly slipped into a high-scoring groove but Hungarian international Robert Nagy and Robert Csillick have found the points hard to come by.
Both, however, have previously raced at Middlesbrough and Csillick in particular was impressive, when they toured here last season with the Hungarian national side.
Long-serving Steve Lawson, a former Cleveland Park track record-holder, has been racing since 1974 but he has proved on numerous occasions that he's a hard man to beat on the tricky Middlesbrough track.
The only other survivor from last year's Glasgow team, Australian Mick Powell, is now in his fourth UK season and this one looks likely to be his best.
Middlesbrough's Reserve League side will also take on the Glasgow juniors over six heats in the second half of tonight's programme.
1.
Steve Regeling (capt) 2.
Mark Lemon.
3.
Daz Sumner.
4.
Donny Odom.
5.
Dave Cheshire.
6.
Duncan Chapman.
7.
Paul Pickering.
1.
Steve Lawson (capt).
2.
Mick Powell.
3.
Neil Collins.
4.
Robert Sdillik. 5.
Robert Nagy.
6.
Tim Korneliussen. 7.
James Grieves.
SUNDERLAND yesterday relented to the rule book in the tug-of-war over the international services of Anton Rogan next week.
Malcolm Crosby, Sunderland's caretaker manager, withdrew the 26-year-old central defender from the Northern Ireland squad for Tuesday's World Cup qualifier against Lithuania in Belfast because of league matches at home to Swindon on Monday and at Blackburn on Wednesday.
He was obliged to reverse his decision yesterday, however, when the Northern Ireland Football Association pointed out that FIFA rules insist that international managers have first claim on players for World Cup matches.
‘Anton will have to go,’ said Crosby, whose Wembley-bound side still need points to guard against the threat of relegation.
‘I can't argue with the rules.
Anton's likely to play at Brighton on Saturday but he'll probably be away on Monday and it would be difficult to play him on Wednesday.’
‘There's not much we can do.
We've just got to accept it.
It's not worth falling out about.’
David Bowen, secretary of the Northern Ireland FA, said earlier in the day that the matter would be referred to FIFA if Sunderland failed to relent.
He added, however, that former Sunderland player Billy Bingham, the Northern Ireland manager, might be prepared to reach a compromise with his old club possibly allowing Rogan to play for at least part of the match against Swindon and then link up with the rest of the squad on the day of the international.
Meanwhile Gary Owers has launched himself back into Wembley contention for the Rokermen.
Owers played his first full game for three months in the derby win over Middlesbrough and then gave boss Malcolm Crosby a welcome cup final headache.
‘I was gasping for air in the final 20 minutes, but apart from some stiffness I feel fine,’ declared the 23-year-old schemer.
Owers only cup appearance was in the third round win over Port Vale.
But now Roker's £1m midfielder is back on course for a sensational climax to the season.
His return and the improved fitness of defender Kevin Ball has increased the pressure on places for the club's remaining five games.
And that's just the competition Crosby wants to shoot the club away from lingering relegation danger.
Admitted Owers: ‘There were times when I thought I might not play again this season because of pelvic trouble.
Now I hope I can leave Malcolm with a difficult selection decision.
‘At least I have given myself a fighting chance of getting to Wembley.
The rest is up to the manager.
He'll have one of the hardest jobs in football to chose.’
JONATHON Waters and Brian Higgens were the stars at the second round of the 125 and 250 ACU junior moto cross championships organised by the Pickering Motor Club on the Northern off-road site South Bank on Sunday.
Results:
First leg 125 junior challenge: J Waters (Barnsley) Suzuki; K Ellison (Newbury) Suzuki; M Baldwin (Acrington).
Second leg: Waters, Ellison, M Heaven (West Thurrock) Honda.
First leg of the 250 junior challenge: B Higgens (Stoke) Honda.
C Scott (Malton) Kawasaki.
S Burrell (Rochdale) Honda.
Second leg: Higgens, Jason Edgar (Cumbria) Kawasaki.
R Church (Risco) Yamaha.
The support races had three individual winners.
Andrew Bennett (Middlesbrough) Kawasaki, Scott Gordon (Sedgefield) Kawasaki), P Hugill (Durham) Honda.
FOUR West Hartlepool players face a busy weekend.
Scrum half Jonathan Wrigley and the entire front row of Phil Lancaster, Paul Whitelock and Simon Mitchell have been selected for a North Select XV to face a Cumbria President's XV at Keswick on Sunday.
The previous day they will play for West in a Courage League Division Two match away to bottom club Liverpool St Helens.
West will again have Paul Pook at lock, with Peter Robinson in the back row, and they expect winger Dave Cooke to have recovered from an injury he suffered while guesting for Middlesbrough last Saturday.
FORMER Redcar and West Hartlepool winger Rob Bryce is in the England under 21 team to face the French Armed Forces in a curtain-raiser to the Pilkington Cup final at Twickenham on May 2.
The team also includes Leicester's Sedgefield-born prop Graham Rowntree.
Another England under 21 team will play Holland at Leiden the following day, when Newcastle Gosforth lock Alistair Meadows will be in the side, with Blaydon flanker Phil Urwin on the bench.
MIDDLESBROUGH, who have appointed former England fly half Alan Old as their first team coach for next season, introduce Scot Duncan McNaughton for their final game at Wharfedale on Saturday.
McNaughton, from Dundee, will play at lock, while Paul Manders returns at No 8 after injury and Alan Louden deputises at scrum half for Phil Hudson.
North Yorkshire and South Durham THE proven consistency over recent seasons of Redcar, Darlington and Guisborough make it impossible to look elsewhere for this season's champions.
Darlington have chosen largely unknown Queensland pace bowler Scott Muller as their professional partly because of his qualifications as a coach but if former Lancashire player, Jack Simmons' opinion proves correct they could be challenging for the title yet again.
Redcar have replaced the unavailable Ejaz Ahmed with Clayton Lambert so there is no weakening in the professional department.
Northants have signed up Mark Bowen but mainly for their Sunday League matches so he should be available for most of the Seasider's Saturday games.
Guisborough have snatched all rounder Umir Rashid from Middlesbrough.
Saul Clifford has joined them from Stokesley.
Kevin Welch has been appointed skipper because Richard Smith has declared his intention to retire.
Stockton finished third from bottom in the A Division last season but with the signing of left arm spinner Masood Anwaar as their professional for 1992 they could well be vying for a place in the top five in September.
Bishop Auckland have also moved heaven and earth to  improve their standing.
West Indian Tony Gray has been signed at great expense while former Durham County stalwart, Johnnie Johnston, is set to return to the club for one final fling.
Hartlepool have lost three of their main bowlers, Tom Fountain, Dean Burrows and Ashley Day but with skipper Andy Holland, Dave Alsopp, Gerry Boyd, Ian Jackson and Glen Tebbitt their attack is still promising.
Although he has Aussie Mike Farrell returning to grind out a certain 1,000 league runs for him, new skipper of Marske, Alan Hugill, faces an uphill struggle having lost the valuable services of all-rounder John Drake who will be studying at Chester College and wicket keeper Graham Foggin who is working in the Bahamas.
Northallerton are strengthened by the acquisition of opening batsmen Nicky Mudd from Harrogate and Paul Sunley from Thirsk.
Tony Bell has taken up the reigns of captaincy at Middlesbrough once more.
The club have opted for a left arm spinner Jamie Stewart from Western Australia as their pro.
Wicketkeeper David Moore takes charge at Norton who have signed South African Mike Rindel, a left handed batsman and left arm medium pace bowler.
Playing for Border in his native South Africa, Brad Osbourn hit a 130 off just 80 balls.
Thornaby skipper Mike Priestley will be hoping he can repeat that feat for him a few times this season.
Blackhall have retained the lively Colwyn Cort as their pro and are further strengthened by the return of John Darby from Tudhoe and spinner Brian Lewins from Easington.
Striving to make up for the considerable loss of all-rounder Jonathan Barnes, who is now a County League professional, Darlington RA have signed Australian Troy Dixon as their professional.
West Indian pace bowler Ken McLeod has signed up for a second stint at Synthonia after being absent from the league for three years.
Saltburn are confident that in new professional Mukund Parmar they have a player who will get them lots of runs and wickets.
1I'm ready to play says eager Armstrong GORDON Armstrong had a ‘count me in’ message for Sunderland yesterday.
Armstrong hasn't trained since an elbow in the face from Curtis Fleming in the derby win over Middlesbrough.
But the experienced midfielder will ignore a black eye and damaged cheekbone to battle on at Brighton tomorrow.
‘It won't keep me out,’ he vowed.
‘League points are still important to us and nobody wants to miss out at this stage of the season.’
The FA cup finalists need one more win to be sure of safety and victory would enable Malcolm Crosby's men to enjoy the Wembley buildup.
Kevin Ball, who has not played since being  carried off injured in the semi-final win over Norwich, is back in contention for a place.
He is expected to return for either the home game with Swindon next Monday or the visit to Blackburn 48 hours later.
Crosby has 18 players in his squad all fighting to make a Wembley impression in the remaining four league games.
Don Goodman and Brian Mooney are also included in the squad but there is no place for Kieron Brady.
Cup hero John Byrne meanwhile was back in training yesterday after being pulled out of Monday's derby game to give him a rest.
THE Bears turned on the power to grab one of their most satisfying wins of the season at Cleveland Park last night.
It was their third Gold Cup victory, their second in five days and maintained their outstanding record against the Scots, who have still won only once in 21 visits.
But there were times when Boro looked vulnerable with the Tigers so close to providing the unexpected.
The Bears were never headed but with just four heats left were still looking for extra inspiration.
They were just two points in front after a surprise defeat for Daz Sumner when suddenly the team found it's real fighting spirit.
A series of four wins gave them 12 more points at the most important time to guarantee not only the victory but a bonus for top scoring over the two legs of the match.
Beaten just once, Boro's in-form skipper Steve Regeling again proved a match winner.
But Dave Cheshire's best return of the season included a brilliant double win against Glasgow's top duo, first leaving the high-scoring Steve Lawson shell-shocked as he chased and overtook him, then heading the former international star Neil Collins in the crucial last race.
Unfortunately, Mark Lemmon was again a big disappointment, but the American Donny O'Dom got over an unlucky early disqualification to win two of his next three races.
Middlesbrough: Steve Regeling 13, Dave Cheshire 11, Daz Sumner 8, Donny O'Dom 7, Mark Lemmon 6, Duncan Chapman 6, Paul Pickering 1.
Glasgow: Neil Collins 14, Steve Lawson 9, Mick Powell 6, Robert Nagy 4, Robert Csillik 2, Tim Korneliussen 2, Jason Straughan 1.
FLYING wingers John Hendrie and Stuart Ripley swapped starring roles in Middlesbrough's promotion push for rolls of wallpaper yesterday.
Paste not pace was the order of the day as the flankmen brushed up on their decorating skills.
The duo were helping launch Middlesbrough FC wallpaper at the home of some of their biggest fans.
The Garland family, of Cypress Road, Redcar dad Ray, mum Liz and children Tracey, 13, Angela, ten, and seven-year-old Paul are all Boro season ticket holders.
Paul has become one of the first fans to have his room decorated with the wallpaper.
He insisted that the stars autographed his wall, exasperating his mum.
‘We tell him not to write on the wall, then he gets them to sign it,’ she said.
‘The girls want their room doing the same now but I draw the line at our bedroom.’
The family won a NISA/Today Dedicated Family Supporters award earlier this season for their devotion to the Boro.
They gave up a holiday to watch Boro play away.
‘They are such good supporters, we decided to make them an introductory offer on the new wallpaper and give them a helping hand to put it up,’ said Boro marketing manager Mitch Hatfield.
The paper £4.99 per roll and £1.99 for a border roll is produced by Cut Price Wallpaper of Stockton.
It is on sale at the club shop and the four Teesside branches of Cut Price.
THE Mayor and mayoress were all smiles and kisses during a grand ceremony to hand them their chains of office.
But within hours, police were called in when a row between the couple got out of hand.
Stockton's Tory first citizen Bill Woodhead was arrested and ended up in court yesterday charged with assaulting his wife Doreen.
And the couple are now taking an early-break break from their civic duties to patch up their differences.
Mr Woodhead, 62, announced he and the mayoress were taking a week off after he appeared before Teesside magistrates in Middlesbrough.
His 60-year-old wife called in police, claiming he had punched her during the early hours after the ceremony to install him as the 18th civic leader at Stockton.
He was arrested by a uniformed PC and charged with assault causing actual bodily harm.
Magistrates adjourned the hearing until May 14.
The mayoress appealed to them to drop the case and this is now being considered by the Crown Prosecution Service.
The couple spoke briefly from their home at Gwynn Close, Fairfield, Stockton last night.
The Mayor said: ‘It was a domestic tiff which was blown up out of all proportion.
As far as I'm concerned that's all it was and it's all a big mistake.’
His wife Doreen said: ‘I don't want to comment for obvious reasons but I'm happy with what my husband says.’
Later the couple issued a statement through Conservative agent Robin Baldry.
‘Mr and Mrs Woodhead had a domestic argument after returning to their home after the mayormaking and the police were called.
‘Neither side wishes to press charges.
Both of them wish the matter to be dropped and neither will be making any further comment.
‘We have advised Mr and Mrs Woodhead to take a week's leave of absence during which the mayoral duties will be undertaken by their deputies.’
GATESHEAD Harriers, spearheaded by Commonwealth Games steeplechase bronze medallist Colin Walker, send a powerful team to the National 12-stage Road Relay Championships at Sutton Coldfield this afternoon.
And the Tynesiders could be among the medals for the first time since they won the event in 1987 and 1988.
Four of the championship-winning team Walker, David Miles, Geoff Wade and Steve Parr are in today's line-up.
Gateshead finished fourth in the Northern 12-stage Championships at Sunderland and Walker was in scintillating form at Silksworth, setting a course record.
Gateshead's team has been strengthened by the inclusion of former Olympic Games 1500 metres runner Ray Smedley and the return from holiday in Canada of Miles.
They replace John Larkin and Craig Stewart, and Gateshead are able to switch two of their normal long-stage runners, Steve Parr and Gerard Hargreaves, to strengthen their team on the shorter legs.
Gateshead will certainly be looking to finish first North-East team, avenging their defeats by Sunderland and Morpeth, who finished second and third in the Northerns.
The Gateshead team David Miles, Gerard Hargreaves, Michael Thompson, Justin Reid, Colin Walker, Rob West, Ray Smedley, Phil Wadge, Mark Smith, Stuart Kell, Geoff Wade and Steve Parr.
Sunderland recall club captain Ritchie Tough, Martin Armstrong, Colin Abbott and Paul Taylor.
And Great Britain international Brian Rushworth, Sunderland's leading athlete, will be back in action after missing the Elswick Relays on Good Friday with a stomach bug.
Sunderland's team will Chris Naisbitt, Tim Field, Malcolm Price, Dave Grover, Dave Wyatt, Brian Rushworth, Brian Bewick, Tough, Armstrong, Abbott and Taylor.
Morpeth Harriers, who bring in Stephen Priest and Eric Hurrell, are hoping for a top-ten placing.
The Northumbrian club's best-ever performance was 16th in 1973, but with the Hudspith brothers, Mark and Ian, as well as the fast-improving Ian Archbold, in their line-up they should easily beat that.
Mandale Harriers, ninth in the Northerns, are without middle-distance man Paul Lowe and Scottish cross country international Don Bain.
Elswick Harriers are led by former Olympic 10,000 metres silver medallist Mike McLeod.
The Woolworths Young Athletes League gets underway tomorrow, when Middlesbrough and Cleveland travel to Sheffield.
There is a Northern Division 2 Tyne fixture at the Cleveland County Stadium, while Jarrow's Monkton Stadium hosts a Northern Division 1 East fixture.
FOOTBALL/ Make or break for Newcastle/ Boro still hopeful of number two slot BORO boss Lennie Lawrence issued a rallying call to the troops last night with the cry: ‘We haven't lost ground with Leicester yet’.
Lawrence insisted that the Ayresome Park outfit could still catch second-placed Leicester and snatch the second automatic promotion spot.
On the eve of the home game with Bristol Rovers, a  buoyant Lawrence said: ‘I believe there will be one final twist in the tail.
‘I don't know whether or not it will involve us, but we must go flat out and hope Leiceser slip up.
‘Leicester have won five games on the trot.
If they extend it to seven they will deserve automatic promotion.
‘I think Middlesbrough's club record is seven wins on the trot.
Ipswich hit a similar run earlier in the season.
‘Ipswich and Leicester lead the promotion race but this does not necessarily mean they are the best teams.
They have put good runs together at crucial stages of the season.
‘I will be amazed if Leicester beat Charlton Athletic and Newcastle United.
Charlton are desperate for play-off points and Newcastle will have 10,000 screaming Geordie fans at their final game.’
Middlesbrough are the only side who could pip in-form Leicester for second spot.
But they must beat Bristol Rovers and sign off with a flourish against Grimsby Town and Wolves.
Lawrence plans a settled team and formation for the run-in.
He will revert to a 4–4–2 formation after the 4–5–1 lineup at Roker Park.
Injured Mark Proctor is ruled out today.
Bernie Slaven or Andy Payton, second-half substitutes at Roker Park, will return to the side.
Jamie Pollock will be on the bench with the striker who does not have a starting role.
Lawrence warned: ‘Bristol will be relaxed because they cannot be promoted or relegated.
‘We have gone a goal down in our last four games, so there is no easy game at this stage.
I hope we regain the fluency of our pre-Christmas football.’
Team: Pears, Fleming, Mohan, Gittens, Phillips, Hendrie, Peake, Falconer, Ripley, Wilkinson, Slaven or Payton.
KEVIN Keegan came out fighting yesterday as D-Day loomed for stricken Newcastle.
‘We've got the players to save this club,’ he said on the eve of the survival clash with Portsmouth.
They've certainly got the fans Newcastle are likely to be backed by the biggest crowd in the country today.
More than 27,000 Geordies are expected to will them to victory and avoid a first ever drop into the third division.
Keegan said: ‘It's all hands to the pump now and that crowd will help keep us up.
‘I believe that the side I put out will do the job.
You don't need a team talk for this game.
You've only got to look at the table.
They know what's required.’
Keegan has even been promised a taxi ride anywhere he wants if his players deliver the goods.
He revealed: ‘A taxi driver gave us his card today and promised to take us anywhere we wanted to go if the club survived.
‘That's the attitude I have experienced every day since we came here.
It's a tremendous tribute to the Geordie.
He doesn't give up and neither will we.
The will of the people of Newcastle will see us to safety.’
Keegan brings back Ray Ranson and Alan Neilson at fullback and pins his faith in Franz Carr up front.
But the man would could win it for them is Mick Quinn substitute against his old club.
Said Keegan: ‘I've got a wealth of experience in the side players who have played in cup finals, international matches and big games.
‘But they won't come any bigger than this.
If they come through it will leave a tremendous mark on them.
They have to learn what football means in a city like this.
‘I have no frayed nerves because I firmly believe we are good enough.
I won't con people.
I believe we will beat Portsmouth and stay up.
All we need is a little smile from lady luck.’
Keegan's job almost certainly hinges on the outcome of today's crunch clash.
The former England idol is fully committed to the Geordie rescue mission.
But there's a big question mark over whether they could afford to keep him in the Third Division.
Team: Wright, Ranson, Scott, Kilcline, Neilson, Carr, Brock, O'Brien, Sheedy, Peacock, Kelly.
Subs: Quinn, Watson.
Keegan: ‘We'll win and stay up’ Lawrence: ‘We can still catch Leicester’
LENNIE Lawrence is no fan of the Wembley play-off system.
The Boro boss said: ‘Wembley finals are showbiz and motivated by finance.
‘I have been involved in play-offs and so have Middlesbrough.
They are fraught affairs.
‘A final should be over two legs.
It is nonsense for a team to miss out at Wembley after 48 games.
‘I don't agree with play-offs in the first place.
If my team finished with 77 or 78 points I would be extremely disappointed not to go up automatically.
‘Sheffield Wednesday were automatically promoted last season.
Look where Wednesday are now.
Yet they could have missed out last season if the third team had been involved in play-offs.’
Lawrence did, however, acknowledge that play-offs generated interest and finance.
MIDDLESBROUGH stockbroker Wise Speke has pulled ahead in this year's Share Race.
Its original notional £10,000 investment in the Stock Exchange is now worth £10,719.
This represents a 6pc rise in value for the broker.
The Northern Echo's business staff have faired less well.
Their original £2,000 investment in chemical company MTM has sunk with the Cleveland-based business.
That £2,000 is now worth just £386.
The Echo's £10,000 portfolio is now worth only £9,801.
SmithKline Beecham one of Wise Speke's six companies in this year's Share Race announced its first quarter figures last Thursday.
The company reported a 10pc increase in profits over the same period with figures up from £253m to £278m.
However, the results failed to stop the fall in the share price that began when the Stock Market returned from the Easter break.
Last year the pharmaceutical sector in both the UK and America provided investors with significant profits following the strong price rises seen in the last quarter of 1991.
This years fund managers are looking for gains in order to diversify into those cyclical sectors which benefit from an economic recovery.
In the case of the SmithKline Beecham analysts are no longer concentrating upon the strong defensive qualities of the company but upon the potential for the future growth of its stable of drugs.
SmithKline's growth potential is poor at present and the share price is suffering.
Across its entire pharmaceutical division, which provides 56pc of turnover, sales grew by only 5pc.
Scouts' parade:
Brotton Scouts will be holding their annual St George's Day parade through the town tomorrow.
A LARGE crowd set the seal on a highly successful stamp convention on Teesside at the weekend.
More than 400 visitors passed through the doors of Brackenhoe School, Middlesbrough for the 43rd Annual Convention of the North of England Philatelic Association on Saturday.
And one lucky spectator who pulled out the winning raffle ticket for a copy of the world's earliest stamp, The Penny Black, valued at £45, was Tom Pickering of Tyne and Wear.
Keith Hayes, treasurer of Middlesbrough and District Philatelic Society, which hosted this year's convention, said it had attracted dealers from all over the North from the Tweed to the Humber.
‘It was immensely successful.
Half the visitors were from societies all over the North but the other half were people who came out of interest and curiosity.’
The Middlesbrough society has about 19 members at present and is keen to attract more of every age and beginners especially.
Guest speaker at the convention was Alwyn Peel, of the Yorkshire Philatelic Association, who gave a display about captain Cook.
Mr Hayes said: ‘We thought of the idea because he came from just up the road from the school and was later brought up and schooled at Great Ayton.’
THE disgraced Mayor of Stockton is expected to resign today, after only five days in the role.
It is understood Tory Councillor Bill Woodhead will step down as the borough's top civic dignitary after being charged with hitting his wife just hours after being elected.
Councillor Woodhead was arrested a short time after his mayor-making ceremony at Billingham Forum last Wednesday and charged with assaulting his wife Doreen.
He appeared before Teesside magistrates on Thursday after spending a night in a police cell.
The Crown prosecution service is considering a file on the incident.
Councillor Woodhead and his wife, who was chosen Mayoress, are away from their home in Gwynn Close, Fairfield, Stockton, and are not available for comment.
Telephone calls to their home have been diverted to the Stockton Conservative Association office in Russell Street, but no one was answering yesterday.
Members of the Tory group on the council were also not available and have refused to say if they have urged him to resign.
However, Tory leader Coun Lawrie Wild has said he expects Coun Woodhead to do the ‘honourable thing’.
Coun Wild said a statement would be issued today.
He has had talks with Counc Woodhead over the weekend.
Counillor and Mrs Woodhead have been married for 39 years.
Meanwhile the deputy Mayor and Mayoress, Coun Jim Vaughan and his sister Eva Bell undertake a busy three days of civic engagements in place of the Woodheads.
Tomorrow they are expected to visit Stockton Anchorage Drop-in Centre, Dovecot Street.
On Wednesday they attend the launch of BBC Radio Goes to Town at the Town Hall, followed by the John Butterwick Trust annual ecumenical thanksgiving service at Stockton parish church.
On Thursday they are at the annual meeting of the British Red Cross, Cleveland County branch, at Cleveland Scientific Institute, Middlesbrough.
KEY DEFENDER Anton Rogan flew to Belfast yesterday to link up with the Northern Ireland squad and will miss Sunderland's home game tonight against Swindon Town.
The Rokermen still need a point to be mathematically safe from relegation and Rogan said: ‘If it was up to me I would rather be here helping make certain we are safe.
‘But it is a FIFA ruling and it is out of my hands.’
Northern Ireland play Lithuania in a World Cup Qualifying game at Windsor Park and the FIFA direction is that clubs must release selected players for such important internationals.
Sunderland, who travel to Blackburn on Wednesday night for their penultimate game of the season, had hoped to come to a compromise arrangement which would have enabled them to use Rogan against Swindon and then let him travel to Belfast before tomorrow night's game.
But Northern Ireland manager Billy Bingham, who has ignored Rogan for 13 months, has insisted the in-form defender links up with the squad as soon as possible.
And Sunderland manager Malcolm Crosby said: ‘If Anton plays for Northern Ireland on Tuesday he will not play for us at Blackburn the next night.’
For the FA Cup Finalists to go down Sunderland would have to lose their last three matches, with Oxford winning their final game at Tranmere and making up for their inferior goal difference, Plymouth and Newcastle also winning, and Grimsby getting at least a draw.
‘I think we are already safe, but I would have liked to help make sure,’ said Rogan.
Rogan has not been picked for Northern Ireland since he was booked for arguing with a linesman in a 4–1 European Championship defeat in March of last year.
He said: ‘I have been out for nearly 14 months and now there is a great rush to get me back in the squad.
‘It is hard to understand what the panic is all about.
‘I heard from a third party that Billy Bingham had left me out because of indiscipline, but there was nothing said at the time and he has not spoken to me  since .’
Rogan, who has been Sunderland's discovery of the season since being switched to the centre of defence by Crosby three months after his £350,000 transfer from Celtic, reverted to left back in the 2–2 draw at Brighton, when his first goal for the club salvaged a priceless point.
He looks more effective, however, in a central role, and this is where he is expected to be used against Lithuania.
Crosby, meanwhile plans to make changes against Swindon tonight.
He explained: ‘I want to share the workload.
‘It is not easy playing game after game even for fit players it becomes a chore and you tend to pick up knocks.
‘But we need a point to be safe and it would allow us to be more relaxed against Blackburn and Cambridge.
‘I would like us to put a run together until the end of the season we have three games left and we have to try to be professional and win them all.’
Leading scorer John Byrne received a kick on the ankle against his old club and he may be forced to stand down tonight, providing an opening for former England striker Peter Davenport, who was substitute at Brighton.
Brighton 2, Sunderland 2 THIS HARD-WON point should ensure the battle-weary FA Cup Finalists Second Division safety.
Sunderland have a better goal difference than third-bottom Oxford United, who are three points behind, and only a catastrophic series of results in their last three matches and upsets by the other teams below them, would produce a nightmare eve-of-Wembley relegation scenario.
Malcolm Crosby's men will be trying to make their survival mathematically certain against Swindon tonight, and if they can produce the gritty determination they showed at the Goldstone Ground and eradicate silly defensive errors any lingering doubts should soon be over.
‘We did well to battle our way back after twice being a goal behind,’ said Crosby, relieved to end a dismal run of six consecutive away league defeats.
‘We made some bad defensive errors we sometimes make it hard for ourselves with some naive defending as a team and this is something we have to improve on.’
Kevin Ball, making his first appearance since being helped off the field in the FA Cup semi-final victory over Norwich with a knee injury, started tentatively but gradually settled down to come up with his usual solid, no-nonsense performance.
Once again Sunderland had to thank goalkeeper Tony Norman for some inspired saves but at first it seemed that he might be the villain of the piece after gifting bottom-of-the-table Brighton an 11th minute lead.
Norman seemed to have hold of a headed back-pass from central defender Gary Bennett, but he allowed the ball to slip from his grasp and challenging striker Mark Gall could hardly believe his luck as he dribbled towards an empty net to tap home.
But Norman, left despairing on the ground, lifted himself up to later deny Brighton victory with two brilliant saves late in the game from Barnham and Chivers.
Sunderland reacted quickly to the set-back, with club record singing Don Goodman calmly picking his spot to equalise a minute later.
Brighton, always eager to push forward, took advantage of poor marking in the 19th minute when Codner, completely free at the back post, headed in a free kick.
But Anton Rogan scored his first goal for the club with a perfectly-hit volley from the edge of the box in the 31st minute after goalkeeper Digweed had punched away a corner from a jaded-looking Atkinson.
In contrast midfielder Gary Owers produced all his old running power and, now that his serious pelvic injury is a thing of the past, must be favourite to win a place at Wembley.
But the nearest Sunderland came to producing a third goal was the result of a dreadful 68th minute blunder by Digweed.
He completely misjudged a hopeful up-and-under from Bennett, the ball bounced over his head and was prevented from crossing the line by a desperate clearance by fullback Munday.
Both teams were applauded for the way they kept going forward, and there was only one distasteful moment when Goodman went in far too late on Chivers and was deservedly booked.
There was a special ovation at the end from the Brighton fans for their former striker John Byrne, who still looked jaded after being left out of the derby victory over Middlesbrough, and a painful knock on the ankle early in the game did not help his mobility.
LIKE any good revivalist, Kevin Keegan is confidently spreading the good word as he faces the final leg of his salvation mission at St James's Park.
Newcastle United must beat Brian Little's promotion-pushing Leicester City side at Filbert Street on Saturday to be sure of Second Division safety.
Port Vale are the only team certain to finish below Keegan's men and, although Brighton would be another if they failed to beat Portsmouth at the Goldstone Ground on Wednesday, last day wins by Oxford (at Tranmere) and Plymouth (at home to Blackburn) would condemn Newcastle to Third Division football even if they drew at Leicester.
But Keegan is convinced they will stay in the promised land.
‘I believe,’ he said.
‘The fans believe.
And the players believe.
‘With the effort we showed against Portsmouth, we'll get something at Leicester.
We'll survive.
And then we can start looking at how we turn this magnificent club around.’
The football gospel according to Kevin does not, however, have a unanimous flock of followers.
After the contract stalling of skipper Kevin Scott and leading scorer Gavin Peacock, and the midweek mumblings of discontent from talented teenage midfielder Lee Clark, striker Mick Quinn went public with his reservations about the Keegan regime yesterday.
If he suffers the same fate as Clark, it could well cost him a place in the squad for the most vital game in Newcastle's 100-year history.
Newcastle Utd 1 Portsmouth 0 THEY call him ‘Ned’ Kelly.
And, just like the Aussie original, Newcastle United's number nine relishes nothing better than a backs-to-the-wall shootout.
Nobody has responded more positively to Newcastle United's desperate plight than the striker who drew blanks on the big stage with West Ham and huffed-and-puffed little more than powder puff stuff at Leicester.
‘I love these type of games,’ said the 26-year-old Kelly, after his eighth goal in Keegan's fifteen matches.
A strike rate of just over one goal every two games is exceptional by any standards, even more so considering they have been scored in a struggling team.
With three in ten games under Ossie Ardiles, who signed him for £250,000 for Leicester in December, Kelly's acquisition looked like another dud deal by the Magpies until Keegan's celebrated second coming on Tyneside.
His winner  against Portsmouth was clinically-executed, an angled shot from twelve yards after substitute Mick Quinn flicked on a long ball from Ray Ranson.
‘It was good enough to win the European Cup,’ enthused the relieved Keegan.
It was also the first clear opening afforded to Kelly in 86 minutes of nonstop seeking.
With the lightweight Kevins, Sheedy and Brock, to carry in midfield and the dubious luxury of Franz Carr disappearing up blind alleys of his own making out on the wing (without much of a prayer, unfortunately), the burden of battling for central control fell to the overworked Liam O'Brien.
Openings, as a result, were scarce.
As Jim Smith rued afterwards, the game was there for Portsmouth to take.
Their tired legs couldn't quite carry them, though, to their first win on Tyneside since the opening day of the 1949–50 season.
Newcastle's fate is now at their own feet, but to be sure of safety, they must go to Leicester with victory in their sights.
‘We can't think we've cracked it now,’ said Kelly.
‘We could still be in the Third Division in a week's time.
‘We're quite capable of going to Leicester and winning.
The pressure will be on them, as if they don't beat us they'll have blown promotion to the Premier League.
I wouldn't fancy their chances in the play-offs.’
Newcastle will be restricted to a skeleton crew of 1,800 supporters in the all-ticket crowd at Filbert Street.
But they'll have one man with the nerve needed for a D-day showdown.
He hit three when Newcastle lost 5–4 there last season.
This time, though, ‘Ned’ Kelly will be wearing black and white stripes.
NEWCASTLE keeper Tommy Wright will miss Northern Ireland's opening World Cup qualifying game against Lithuania in Belfast on Tuesday night as he aggravated an old shoulder injury during the win over Portsmouth.
Sunderland defender Anton Rogan is linking-up with the squad after his club bowed to pressure from the Irish FA that they have first call on him under FIFA's World Cup rules.
SECOND DIVISION RELEGATION ZONE pld pts GD max pts poss Sunderland 43 50–4 (59) Grimsby 44 50–14 (56) Newcastle 45 49–19 (52) Plymouth 45 48–20 (51)— Oxford 45 47–8 (50) Port Vale 45 45–16 (48) Brighton 44 44–20 (50)
MATCHES REMAINING Tonight: Sunderland v Swindon.
Tomorrow: Middlesbrough v Grimsby.
Wednesday: Blackburn v Sunderland; Brighton v Portsmouth.
Saturday: Ipswich v Brighton; Leicester v Newcastle; Plymouth v Blackburn; Port Vale v Grimsby; Sunderland v Cambridge; Tranmere v Oxford.
GREAT BRITAIN international Paul Cuskin was in sparkling form as he gave Valli Harriers a storming anchor-leg victory in the Ernie Thompson Memorial Road Relay at Gosforth Park on Saturday.
Cuskin took over in third place, with a deficit of 1 min 21 secs for the final 3 miles 80 yards circuit and he hit the front with a mile remaining, recording the fastest time of the afternoon to win by 23 secs.
Earlier, another Valli international, Geoff Turnbull, had hoisted the Tynesiders into a 34second lead on the second leg after taking over in fifth position.
But Valli then dropped back to third when club secretary and veteran runner Brian took over on the penultimate third stage.
Results Men (4 x 3 miles): 1 Valli (S Beattie 15.13, G Turnbull 14.44, B Cook 16.49, P Cuskin 14.24) 61.10; 2 Wallsend (P Morgan 15.06, L Morgan 15.38, S O'Gara 15.41, J Lucas 15.08) 61.33; 3 Blaydon (S Webb 14.51, T Wade 15.49, K bell 14.45, P Robinson 16.39) 62.04; 4 Chester-le-Street 62.55; 5 South Shields 63.09; 6 Border 63.20; 7 Gosforth 64.02; 8 Crook 64.20; 9 Jarrow and Hebburn 64.26; 10 Morpeth 64.47.
Fastest times: 1 P Cuskin 14.24 secs; 2 G Turnbull 14.44; 3 K Bell 14.45.
Veterans (4 x 3 miles): 1 North Shields Poly (J Peacock 16.08, P Lancaster 15.50, S Cawle 17.03, A Catley 15.45) 64.46; 2 Sunderland (E Maddison 16.07, R Donkin 17.06, D Dixon 16.16, P richardson 16.12) 65.41; 3 Jarrow and Hebburn (J McGinley 16.34, W Robertson 16.35, L watson 16.59, P Page 16.44) 6.52; 4 Morpeth 67.16; 5 Tynedale 68.32.
Fastest times: 1 A Catley 15.45; 2 R Highnam (Tynedale V50) 15.47; 3 P Lancaster (NSP V50) 15.50.
Boys (3 miles): 1 R brown (Heaton) 17.07; 2 G Ridley (Peterlee) 18.14; 3 D Swinburne (Cramlington) 18.18; 4 M Crawford (Peterlee) 18.41; 5 A Henderson (washington) 18.45.
Team: Peterlee 12 pts.
Senior Women (3 miles): 1 L Marr (Tynedale) 17.31; 2 M Stansmore (Middlesbrough and Cleveland) 18.51; 3 S Kirkup (Durham City V40) 19.30; 4 J Vousden (Claremont) 19.58; 5 A Robson (Gosforth) 20.48. teams: 1 Middlesbrough and Cleveland 25; 2 Gosforth 26; 3 Shildon 71.
MIDDLESBROUGH face a final day of high drama in the battle for Premier League status.
Ipswich Town are Second Division champions but three teams are involved in the race for the No 2 spot.
The issue is so delicately balanced that goal difference could even decide who goes up.
Middlesbrough will gain automatic promotion if they beat Grimsby Town and Wolves on Saturday.
But if they drop points, Leicester City or Derby County could triumph in a nail-biting finish.
Whatever the result of tomorrow night's game with Grimsby at Ayresome Park, Boro's destiny will not be decided until around 4.40pm on Saturday.
Derby have emerged as a major threat after the signing of former Sunderland star Marco Gabbiadini.
Gabbiadini was on target again in the 2–1 win at Bristol City on Saturday.
Middlesbrough will hope for a favour from Newcastle United when Kevin Keegan's side visit Leicester on Saturday.
Newcastle will fight just as hard for relegation-safety points as the Midlands team will for promotion.
Derby, who are at home to Swindon, will be hope goal difference counts against their rivals.
Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence has to prepare his players for a final push after a gruelling season.
Lawrence said: ‘I will not get too excited.
I will have to keep my wits about me to get my team selections, and my substitutes, right.
‘I have to make sure that whatever happens by next Saturday night we will have done all we can.
‘There could be a final twist in the promotion trail and we don't want to be on the receiving end.
‘The pendulum has swung back to us but we must be on our guard.
It will not be just a matter of turning up to beat Grimsby and Wolves.
‘We could finish second or seventh.
At this moment, we have not even confirmed a play-off place.’
Jamie Pollock could be promoted from the substitutes' bench tomorrow night.
Lawrence added: ‘I thought Pollock and Bernie Slaven showed good composure as second-half substitutes against Bristol Rovers.
‘It was a vital factor on a day when we needed all 13 players.’
Middlesbrough 2 Bristol Rovers 1 MIDDLESBROUGH manager Lennie Lawrence shrugged off the controversy surrounding Paul Wilkinson's first goal to salute a player who has battled through a 58-match marathon.
The 22-goal Wilkinson and goalkeeper Stephen Pears are the only players with ever-present records.
Lawrence said: ‘Wilkinson is not a £3m player but he has worked tremendously hard throughout the season.
‘With a suitable replacement, I would have rested Wilkinson ages ago.
I thought about it three or four times but no-one else can do his job.
‘Now there's no chance of him being left out.’
Wilkinson was accused of being a ‘cheat’ by Bristol goalkeeper Brian Parkin after his first goal in an exciting second-half comeback.
Parkin claimed Wilkinson handled the ball when he dived and scored.
‘It was not even close to his head.
The referee bottled it,’ he said.
Wilkinson was reluctant to get involved in the controversy but countered: ‘It was a goal from my head.’
The former Watford player finished the game with an egg-size lump on the side of his head after a clash in the opening minutes.
He suffered a similar injury against Leicester City earlier in the season when he also scored two goals.
Middlesbrough were edgy and frustrating in the first half against a Bristol side without promotion or relegation pressure.
Pears and a square defence must share the blame for John Taylor's shock early goal.
The former Cambridge United striker was completely on his own when he moved on to a Billy Clark lob.
Pears failed to react to the danger, expecting offside, but Taylor got the ball under perfect control and shot into the net.
Middlesbrough would have been dead and buried if Taylor had taken other scoring chances before the break.
A half-time message from club captain Mark Proctor lifted the players' spirits.
Proctor passed on the news Leicester were 2–0 down against Charlton Athletic and urged the players to ‘go out and get at Bristol’.
Lawrence admitted Proctor's words were more important than his team talk and Middlesbrough certainly showed more urgency after the interval.
Bristol were angry over Wilkinson's first goal but there was no dispute with his matchwinning effort.
Substitutes Jamie Pollock and Bernie Slaven combined, with John Hendrie, for a perfect diving header by Wilkinson.
The end of a lean spell for Wilkinson has put Boro back on course for the all-important second spot.
LEICESTER boss Brian Little knows all about tense finishes.
The former Darlington manager who played for Aston Villa and England is set to take a team to promotion for the third successive season as long as his Leicester team keep their nerve in next Saturday's crucial last game at home to Newcastle.
Leicester could have gone up behind Ipswich on Saturday in the second automatic promotion spot in Division Two had they won at Charlton and Middlesbrough lost at home to Bristol Rovers.
Instead, the opposite happened.
Leicester, in front of nearly 10,000 travelling fans, crumbled feebly 2–0 at play-off rivals Charlton, and Boro, managed by ex-Charlton boss Lennie Lawrence, triumphed 2–1 against Rovers after being a goal down.
Now Leicester need a win in their last game, and they have to hope Boro slip up in their last two, at home to Grimsby on Tuesday and at Wolves next Saturday, if they are to keep hold of second place and avoid the nerve-wracking play-offs.
Little lead Darlington to promotion from the GM Vauxhall Conference two years ago with a win on the last day of the season thanks to an 87th minute winner in their final game.
Last term, he took the Quakers into Division Three by storming to the fourth division championship.
This time, he knows it is going to be tight but he is ready.
‘It's a pretty tight situation to be in but that is the way the game goes,’ he said.
‘Three weeks ago we would have settled for a situation like this.
‘If I look at my last two years in football it's been virtually to the last kick of the game in the last two seasons, so it will be the same again.
It hasn't surprised me that it's happened again.
‘Whatever happened at Charlton we were going to have to win our last game.
The only thing that's different now is that if Middlesbrough win their last two, we're not in the driving seat.’
Charlton's excellent win still left them needing two victories from their last to games to be certain of left a play-off place.
But they are set to be without injury victims Robert Lee and Carl Leaburn for Tuesday's game against Tranmere at Upton Park.
All the play-off candidates won, leaving the race wide open.
Blackburn's first win in eight matches, 2–1 over Millwall after being a goal down, kept them in the play-off hunt but a Swindon win at FA Cup finalists Sunderland tomorrow could see them right back in contention.
THERE was a carnival atmosphere as the sun shone on Darlington Rugby Club's 20th junior festival at the weekend.
A scene of organised chaos greeted visitors to the festival, with games going on amid much cheering and urging from excited parents and coaches, many apparently enjoying the occasion as much as the players themselves.
Organiser John Morgans said it was the biggest and best ever and confirmed the festival will go ahead next year, though where is not certain as Darlington prepare to move from McMullen Road to start what they hope is a new era of success.
If the scenes yesterday are anything to go by, the future of the junior festival is a very bright one indeed.
Saturday, Under-19: Semi finals: Blyth 3, Darlington 0; Ponteland 8, Blaydon 3.
Final: Ponteland 16, Blyth 4.
Plate final: Blaydon 28, Darlington 0.
Sporting award: Mowden Park.
Under-16: Semi finals: Stockton 4, Middlesbrough 0; Newcastle Gosforth bt Hull Ionians.
Final: Newcastle Gosforth 15, Stockton 0.
Plate: Middlesbrough 4, Hull Ionians 10.
Sporting award: Newcastle Gosforth.
Sunday Under 12: Semi finals: Durham City 4, Houghton 0; Middlesbrough bt Tynedale 9–8 on kicks.
Final: Durham City bt Middlesbrough.
Plate: Hull I 18, Acklam 6.
Sporting award: Durham City.
Under-11: Semi finals: Hull I bt West Hartlepool; Stockton bt Durham City.
Final: Hull I 10, Stockton 0.
Plate final: Newcastle Gosforth 22, Middlesbrough 0.
Sporting award: Ryton.
Under 10s: Semi finals: Durham City 4, Doncaster 0; Tynedale 12, West Hartlepool 4.
Final: Durham City and Tynedale share the trophy after a draw.
Plate final: Baildon 16, Stockton 8.
Sporting award: Darlington.
Under 9: Semi finals: Tynedale 8, Stockton 0; Hull I 8, Darlington 8.
Final: Tynedale 28, Hull I 0.
Plate final: Egremont 4, Doncaster 28.
Sporting award: Whitby.
DARLINGTON BUILDING SOCIETY NYSD LEAGUE
AMATEUR opening bowlers, Mike Hatch and Johnny Johnston, both made sensational comebacks after missing the whole of last season through injury.
Hatch proved his recovery from a spinal operation by taking seven for 56 including a hat-trick which polished off the Normanby Hall tail-enders leaving his club Darlington just 135 for victory.
The home side's West Indian professional George Ferris made the visitors struggle knocking back the stumps four times and taking five for 75 but Darlington won by four wickets.
In 1990 Johnston and Hatch had been a most feared combination but now the former has returned to his old stamping ground at Bishop Auckland for one final fling before retiring.
On Saturday, after watching West Indian pro Tony Gray blast 81 out of an Auckland total of 200 for five at Synthonia, Johnston stepped forward to take five for 22 to dismiss the home side for 102 and clinch a 98-run win.
Saltburn struggled last season but they restricted hosts Middlesbrough to a total of 163 for six and then Mark Walker, whose 90 included 13 fours, and Indian professional Mukund Palmar (65), shared an unbroken partnership of 137 to snatch a nine-wicket away win.
Thornaby won by eight wickets at Stockton.
Albert Shutt (4–17) helped to dismiss the home side for 107.
Thornaby skipper, Mike Priestley, was 46 not out at the finish.
Redcar veteran left-arm spinner, Colin Bainbridge, proved most effective at Guisborough.
He took five for 51 and the opposition were all out for 155, Saul Clifford making 41.
The Seasiders' new professional, Clayton Lambert, then raced to 96 and then in typical theatrical fashion, hit a six to reach his century and achieve a nine-wicket win at the same time.
There were three centurians yesterday.
Norton's David Kennedy hit an unbeaten 105 including six sixes and eight fours at Darlington.
His team declared on 235 for four and the home side were 202 for five at the close.
Darlington RA's professional Troy Dixon also made 105 not out and his side set a target of 216 for seven at Blackhall but the game was drawn.
Saltburn's professional Parmar scored 122 at Stockton.
Facing 211 for seven the home side managed a modest 109 for four.
Champions, Redcar, became the only side to take maximum points over the double weekend.
Andy Pearson (4–34) and Colin Bainbridge (3–19) dismissed visitors Synthonia for 124.
Then professional Lambert raced to 79 not out off 71 balls including three sixes and eight fours.
This brought the West Indian's aggregate for the two matches to 181 without being dismissed and it enabled his side to seal their second impressive nine-wicket win.
Nobody's friend
I REFER to the lament (HAS April 15) of Miss C. Price, PRO of the Canine Defence League.
When will this lady and her followers face facts?
It is the vast number of irresponsible dog owners which has roused public indignation and demands for tighter controls.
It is not just the owners who turf out their dogs daily, it is also those who blissfully believe everyone is a dog lover and that we don't mind the unpleasant and unhealthy filth their pets create in every park, play area, beach and common, nor the way many out-of-control large dogs are allowed to harass the hapless walker who crosses their path.
Instead of crying over the restrictions that are being (thank goodness) imposed, maybe they should take a good hard look at themselves and clean up their act, using aids like ‘poop scoops’ and long controlling leads.
Then maybe Rover will become man's best friend once again.
Mrs Shelagh Harnby, 31 Kipling Grove, Fairfield, Stockton.
Winning post
AS WAS fervently desired the lucky numbers from Readers Digest have arrived.
They have been duly sent back for inclusion in the prize draw.
They would have gone in the bin until Tancy Evans emerged the other day to say that she was the living proof that the RD draw had winners.
She received £20, years ago.
Apprised of this information, the computer print-outs (’ it's all down to you, the draw will be made by the same computer that picked you to join the two out of every 100 households in the Barnard Castle area’) are on their way by first-class post to Tom Champagne.
Not that it will alter the computer's mind of course but an order for the book which is being promoted along with the prize draw has gone off too.
WEST will not have to replay their Courage League game against Morley.
The original game was abandoned when lock John Howe collapsed and died and a replay was arranged for Wednesday night.
But the result no longer has a bearing on the National Division Two relegation situation after Morley beat Newcastle Gosforth on Saturday to go clear of trouble, while West have forfeited the chance to go up to National Division One as champions, settling for second spot and promotion.
Saturday's expected points spree for West at relegated Liverpool St Helens never materialised as they signed off their highly successful season with a 32–0 win.
West led 12–0 at half-time through a penalty try converted by John Stabler, who also kicked two penalties.
With Liverpool thwarting the West forwards' thrusts, the visitors switched tactics to run the ball and there were tries for Jon Wrigley (2), flanker Alan Brown and Stabler, who added two conversions.
Newcastle produced a lacklustre display at Morley, going down 26–20 after being 19–3 down at half-time with only a David Johnson penalty to show for their efforts.
Arnold, Williams and Douglas scored second half tries for Gosforth, Johnson adding a conversion and a penalty, but Morley were always in control.
Durham were saved from relegation despite losing 23–3 at home to Stourbridge as other results in National Division Four North went their way.
City were well in contention when Jon Bland kicked a penalty to make it 6–3 but they fell away badly in the second half.
already certain of relegation, signed off with a 13–6 win over Towcestrians.
found some form with a 33–16 defeat in a club game.
Beattie put them ahead after two minutes with an opportunist try but Dungait replied for Morpeth.
Turner and Fourie exchanged penalties before stockton strode away with back row tries from Howe and Daley, Turner converting one.
Fourie kept Morpeth in touch with a penalty but further Stockton tries from Beattie, Todd and Turner, who converted two of them, settled the issue.
Mowden produced one of their best performances of the season in holding full-strength National Division Four North side Kendal 13–13 at home.
The match had a thrilling finale when, with Kendal leading 13–7 and only seconds to go, Greg Young went over in the corner and Andy Craggs kicked the conversion to share the honours.
Earlier, Craggs had kicked a penalty and then hit the post when attempting to convert Steve Towns' try.
A Mowden Park Select XV entertain the Police in the annual Harry Garnham Memorial match on Wednesday (6pm).
Darlington Winlaton tough opposition but ran out 34–12 winners.
Tries by Paul Leadbetter and Paul Carter were converted by Mark Taylor in the first half, Carter going on to complete his hat-trick, Leadbetter crossing again and Keith Bolland also scoring, with Taylor adding three conversions.
Bishop were 17–13 winners in a tight game.
A tap-penalty try by Ian Campbell, who then kicked a penalty, put Bishops 7–0 ahead but the visitors scored a try before half-time to make it 7–4.
A converted try put Rockcliffe 10–7 ahead but Campbell converted Duncan Gill's try to make it 13–10 to Bishops.
Another penalty pulled the visitors level but Dave Bartle's try settled it.
Results COURAGE LEAGUES National Division Two Liverpool St Helens 0, West Hartlepool 32; Newcastle Gosforth 20, Morley 26.
National Division Four North Durham City 3 Stourbridge 22; Northern 16, Towcestrians 6.
CLUB GAMES Roundhegians 58, Northallerton 4; York 23, Westoe 10; Ripon 9, Novos 9; Wharfedale 18, Middlesbrough 14; Gateshead Fell 32, Redcar 7; North Durham 8, Acklam 4; Morpeth 16, Stockton 33; Ashington 33, Consett 4; Darlington RA 34, Winlaton Vulcans 12; Mowden Park 13, Kendal 13; Bishop Auckland 17, Rockcliffe 13.
NEWCASTLE romped to their biggest win of the season last night proving far too strong for their neighbours.
Victory sent the Debmat Diamonds back to the top of the Gold Cup Northern Section, one point ahead of Berwick while Boro now have no chance of qualifying for the final.
Inevitably, New Zealand duo Mark Thorpe and David Bargh led the way for Newcastle, the former reeling off a 15point maximum while his skipper was paid for the same total.
The dynamic duo received solid support from all their team mates, in particular in-form reserve Rich Juul who had one of his best meetings for the Diamonds.
Juul was undefeated by an opponent in his four scheduled rides although in heat 13 when he came out for an extra race he was disqualified for unfair riding when bringing down Donny Odom and Steve Regeling.
The match looked set to be a close affair when the two neighbours were level pegging after three heats but then a run of four successive 5–1s for the home side virtually settled the issue.
There was controversy in heat seven when after Bargh and Juul had beaten off the challenge of Dave Cheshire and Odom, Boro's Australian complained to the referee that a lighting fault had affected his vision.
The official agreed and the race was rerun.
At the next attempt, Odom excluded and when Cheshire had to take on the two Newcastle riders on his own, the result was just the same as in the initial race.
Tacitical substitutions by Boro' in heats eight and ten stemmed the Diamonds' surge although the result was never in doubt.
Thorpe's fourth win of the night with Scott Norman taking third place in heat 12 secured the points and Newcastle rubbed salt into Boro's wounds with successive 1–2s in the last two races.
It was a disappointing performance by the Bears for whom only Mark Lemon and the determined Odom took the chequered flag.
Newcastle: M Thorpe 15, D Bargh 14, R Juul 10, S Norman 8, W Garatt 4, M Schfield 4, P Jeffrey 3.
Boro: M Lemon 8, D Odom 8, D Sumber 6, S Regeling 4, D Cheshire 4, P Chapman 2, T Pickering 0.
Berwick Bandits 59 Middlesbrough Bears 31 THIS was a bad start for Boro to their double race weekend but few opponents leave Berwick with much to shout about.
The tiny circuit is a paradise for fast starters and with odd exceptions this is not one of the Bears' strong points.
They won only three of the 15 races although they held their own until just past the halfway stage.
Then Berwick turned up the power to land five 5–1 heat victories in a runaway finish.
Daz Sumner, who became one of the few riders to beat Berwick's powerful Richard Knight on his own track this season, tried to inspire his colleagues but even skipper Steve Regeling struggled for points.
American Donny Odom had one of his best away meetings but in contrast Dave Cheshire had his worst.
Team manager Ken Knott said: ‘We failed to make the gate first so in many races we got hammered for it.’
Richard Knight 14, David Welsh 13, David Blackburn 9, Scott Robson 8, Scott Lamb 6, Chris Readshaw 5, Michael Lowrie 4.
Daz Sumner 9, Donny Odam 6, Steve Regeling 5, Mark Lemmon 5, Duncan Chapman 3, Paul Pickering 2, Dave Cheshire 1.
IN football parlance ‘doing the business’ on the field has always been important in the game.
Now doing it outside the parameters of 90 minutes on a Saturday afternoon is equally and probably more important.
Yet traditionally football and business have not lived happily together.
Both existed in isolation of each other; business merely an adjunct of the game, the means of administering a club.
The change came about in April 1989 after the Hillsborough Stadium disaster, according to Peter Cawforth of sporting consultant Jackson Cantor.
‘Post-Hillsborough, the game realised it had to become more professional in its business outlook.
Lord Justice Taylor said pretty much the same thing in his report into the disaster, although he was concerned in the main with the safety aspect.
‘Before this the only financial matters some of the clubs had experience of, or wanted to have experience of, was balancing the books by buying and selling players.
As long as they did that they were happy.’
John Major, in his term as chancellor, forced the clubs to at least partly face up to their business responsibilities.
In 1990 he reduced the levy payable to government by the football-pools operators, on condition that the windfall of £100m went on improving the grounds of the Football League clubs.
‘Through the forced upgrading of their stadia the clubs got the chance to change their market, from a mixed business economy working and middle class fans to a single economy attracting the the middle classes,’ says Alex Fynn, an adviser to the Football Association and head of sports marketing at advertising agency Saatchi & Saatchi.
Taylor has stipulated that third and fourth division clubs have until the end of the decade to become all-seater, while those in the first and second divisions have just two close seasons.
The pools cash to transform them, however, is administered by the Football Trust on behalf of the clubs.
In the region this season Middlesbrough has been given around £45,000 for safety measures.
Newcastle has seen a massive £1.4m in major project grant aid for the construction of a new North stand.
Sunderland was offered £437,000 and even the smaller clubs have cashed in.
Hartlepool has received over £35,000, Darlington more than £20,000.
But even more is needed to comply with Taylor and some creative and  entrepreneurial business measures needed to throw up the cash.
But according to Fynn, again in the argot of the game, the clubs have ‘bottled it’.
They make simply rotten businessmen, he argues.
‘The only way most clubs aim to boost revenue is through playing more matches or increasing its merchandising activities.
‘They don't know their audience and don't bother asking.
The fans should be given relevant football at an affordable price in a degree of comfort.
The clubs would also be able to earn more revenue than they do now.
‘Any other business would give their customers what they want, but not football,’ he says.
What it has given them are initiatives such as the bond scheme, a move to generate cash by a one-off payment, guaranteeing the right to buy a season ticket for life.
Its unpopularity is staggering amongst the fans.
Unsurprisingly since the bonds are pitched at prices up to £1,500.
Relatively successful at Glasgow Rangers, the move has met with stiff opposition at Arsenal and vociferous action at West Ham, a flurry of red cards waved at every opportunity.
Despite both Arsenal and West Ham's schemes being underwritten so they will get their money in the form of a loan even if their supporters turn them down, the ill-will towards the schemes means other clubs will think hard about implementation.
Mitch Hatfield, marketing manager at Middlesbrough is hesitant about dismissing the scheme out of hand for his club but says there are no plans at present.
Instead he puts great faith in the traditional revenue earners of sponsorship and perimeter and programme advertising.
The figures are mundane, but valuable.
A maximum of £3,300 for a perimeter board facing the television cameras and £2,600 for a season's worth of full-page advertisements in the match-day programme.
But none of the regional clubs will quantify how much they earn from the lucrative Clubcall telephone commentaries.
Owned by Ladbrokes, the service charges up to 44 pence a minute.
Bigger windfalls also occasionally come along.
This season Middlesbrough took about £175,000 from ITV for televising its home game with Manchester United in the semi-final of the Rumbelows League cup.
And if, as seems extremely likely, Middlesbrough make it into next season's premier league, an initial payment of at least £2m from television rights could be expected.
More traditional business ways of making cash through stock market flotations have not proved successful.
Tottenham Hotspur and Millwall have both discovered life bumpy as a listed company.
Although 2,000 shareholders recently subscribed to the club's latest share issue despite them being priced at up to 30pc above the market price.
It is proof, says Fynn, that some fans will take anything the club offers, be it replica shirts or shares.
But many fans have said no to perhaps the biggest potential moneyspinner a club can indulge in, relocation.
In the region only Sunderland admit to viewing sites away from Roker Park.
Scarborough was stopped from relocating to an out-of town site and selling its current McCain Stadium on planning grounds.
Hartlepool chairman, Garry H Gibson, says the future of H football is on the greenfield site even though he has no plans to relocate away from the Victoria Ground.
Controversially he also believes the government should stand the £3m cost of a 10,000-seater stadiums for third and fourth division clubs.
For clubs in decent pitches though, offices or leisure complexes on part of their land can also provide cash.
The Royal Town Planning Instiutute has found 69 of the 92 League clubs either planning a relocation or some form of commercial scheme on the same site or adjacent land.
Lucrative for the clubs they may be but the omens for  their success are not good.
At a recent Royal Institute of British Architects' conference, author Simon Inglis summed up the mood of many anti-relocation fans, unswayed by the clubs' need for cash.
‘We don't want to be Americans,’ he said.
‘We don't want to get in our cars and drive 40 miles to the ground, let down the back and have a barbecue.
Not in Hartlepool, not in winter.’
A MIDDLESBROUGH man struck out with a hammer at a man who was attacking his 65-year-old friend, a court heard.
Colin Youngs had been in his garden when he saw William Wray approach his friend and a scuffle start.
Youngs, 60, ignored the fact he had recently suffered a heart attack and was an invalid to help his friend and neighbour.
But when Mr Wray punched him, Youngs picked up the hammer and struck him across the cheek.
Mr Wray suffered a dislocated fractured cheek bone.
Yesterday, Youngs, of Otley Avenue, Park End, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted wounding.
Recorder Guy Whitburn, QC, gave Youngs a conditional discharge for 12 months.
Keith Miller, prosecuting, said Mr Wray had returned home from the pub on a Sunday afternoon and approached Youngs' friend to discuss a damaged fence.
There was an argument which led to a scuffle and Youngs joined in to calm things down.
Mr Miller said: ‘The violence was renewed and during the course of it Mr Wray was struck on the side of his face by Youngs who had in his hand a heavy hammer.’
Mr Wray had to undergo an operation.
He has now moved over a mile away from Youngs' home.
Barry Stewart, defending, said Youngs only struck Mr Wray after he had been punched first.
The hammer had been lying in the garden and Youngs had just picked it up.
Mr Stewart said: ‘Wray was the author of his own misfortune.
This was not an attack upon Wray but first of all a defensive action to prevent Wray from causing really serious injury to his friend.
‘In coming to his friend's assistance so soon after he himself had suffered a serious heart attack he put his health at risk.’
RAF farewell: Warrant Officer Eric Day of Catterick RAF Station, who is retiring as Royal Air Force liaison officer with the Durham Region of the Royal Air Forces Association after five years service, was presented with an inscribed tankard at the region's monthly meeting at Hartlepool.
He has been succeeded by Squadron Leader Chris Gilding of Catterick RAF Station.
McLure claims Salver first
TONY McLure hit top form in the second round of the Seaton Salver to lift the trophy for the first time.
The former double Durham County Champion from Whickham posted a one under par 72 in wild and windy conditions to finish one shot clear of Arcot's Graham Pickup.
McLure, the Spons-A-Tee Northern Amateur Masters Champion picked up valuable points towards retaining the title thanks to his win at Seaton Carew, but he looked out of it after a first round 79, despite a birdie at the 18th.
It put him five shots behind South Shields' Jimmy Dryden, who chased him all the way last season in the Northern Masters, but when Dryden crumbled to an 81, McLure moved to the top of the leader board by covering the open seven holes in level par in his second round and played superb golf to finish with a 72.
Cleveland's Clark Windross, the son of former Middlesbrough footballer Dennis had two creditable 78s.
151 A J McLure (Whickham) 79 72; 152 G Pickup (Arcot Hall) 77 75; 155 J Dryden (South Shields) 74 81; 156 C Windross (Dunes) 78 78; 157 J Surtees (Tyneside) 79 78; 158 J Handy (South Moor) 79 79, D Golightly (Castle Eden) 81 77, I Turner (Bedlington) 80 78, C Marshall (Hartlepool) 77 81, A K Green (Darlington) 78 80; 159 S Bolton (Westerhope) 83 76, D Olaman (Castle Eden) 79 80, N A R Hall (Seaton Carew) 80 79, J Ellison (Seaton Carew) 85 74, S Twynholm (Morpeth) 80 79.
Dryden  bounced back 24 hours later to lift the Cleveland Salver, just to remind McLure that he won't have the Masters all his own way.
Dryden led from start to finish opening with a 75 and then roaring him with a 71 to win by six shots from Blyth's Gary Wilson.
Dryden was in superb form hitting 31 greens despite near gale force winds.
146 J Dryden (South Shields) 75 71; 152 G Wilson (Blyth) 77 75; 155 R Roper (Catterick Garrison) 79 76; 156 N King (Tynemouth) 76 80; 157 M McKee (Whitwood) 79 78, G Charlton (Darlington) 81 76, A J McLure (Whickham) 79 78; 158 D Conway (South Shields) 79 79; 159 G Bell (Hartlepool) 78 81, C Marshall (Hartlepool) 81 78, P Tunstall (Cleveland) 81 78, V Guest (Teesside) 85 74.
Durham had narrow one point win over Durham Ladies at Hartlepool yesterday.
Giving the ladies three courtesy shots and allowing them to play off the front tees.
Durham won 4–3 with one halved.
Mark Hodgson and late reserve Edward Bunting won the two last matches to make sure of victory.
Results (Durham Ladies first): L Still (Eaglescliffe) bt J Handy (South Moor) 4 and 2; M Moore (Brancepeth) lost to D Moralee (Boldon) 4 and 3; A Carter (Dinsdale) lost to J Kennedy (Consett) 2 and 1; P Dobson (South Moor) lost to P Cain (Seaton Carew) 1 down; R Lindley (Hartlepool) bt C Chalk (Seaton Carew) 3 and 2; K Lee (Garesfield) halved with J H Walton (Wearside); L Keers (South Moor) lost to M Hodgson (Woodham) 6 and 5; C Palmer (Hartlepool) lost to E Bunting (Seaton Carew) 1 down.
VAUXHALL Motors are paying £250,000 to give Gateshead International Stadium a pre-Olympic fly-past of Britain's top track and field stars on Friday, July 17.
The televised IAAF meeting is the last major European event before Barcelona, and will be the Tyneside stadium's most prestigious gathering of international athletes.
‘It will be one of the top 25 meetings in the world this year and will attract all the top athletes before the Olympic Games because it will be their last big test before Barcelona,’ said Andy Norman, the British Amateur Athletic Board promotions officer.
The BAAB will encourage all its athletes selected for the Olympic Games to use the Vauxhall Invitation and it is expected that top Americans, already in Europe for the Grand Prix meets in Lausanne on July 8, Crystal Palace (July 10) and Nice (July 12), will also head for the North-East.
The BAAB, however, will carefully prepare the programme, and could try to avoid major head-to-head clashes before Barcelona like a javelin confrontation between world record holder Steve Backley and his great rival, Jan Zelezny, of Czechoslovakia.
‘Zelezny is likely to be Backley's biggest challenger in Barcelona, and if he wants to compete at Gateshead do we help him? asked Norman.
‘It is a decision we would have to make bearing in mind the best interests of British athletics.
‘It might be good for Gateshead, but would it help Steve Backley in Barcelona?’
The meeting has already attracted great interest from smaller nations which will be sending teams to the Olympics, and they will be accommodated in a one-and-a-half hour ‘warm-up’ before the principle events get under way at 7.30pm and are beamed out live to a world-wide audience by Screensport.
Norman paid tribute to Gateshead, which hosted the Europa Cup three years ago, when Britain won their way to the World Cup in Barcelona.
He said: ‘The reception, professional way the meetings are organised and the help we receive from the local authority makes us return here time after time.
‘It is now our number one venue when we make application for world events.
‘I am more than confident that the standard of athletics we will see in the Vauxhall Invitation meeting will be better than we have ever seen here before.’
The athletes are expected to include Backley, Linford Christie, Colin Jackson, John Regis, Anthony Jarrett, Roger Black, Kriss Akabusi, Liz McColgan and Yvonne Murray.
The meeting is followed by the two-day Under-23 Europa Cup on July 18 and 19.
MIDDLESBROUGH and Cleveland got off to a great start in the Woolworths Young Athletes League, winning their Northern Premier match at the Don Valley Stadium, Sheffield.
The match result was: 1 Middlesbrough and Cleveland 228 points; 2 Barnsley 189; 3 Wakefield 157; 4 Rotherham 142.
1ACKLEY: Gateshead clash with Olympic rival Jan Zelezny may be avoided
MIDDLESBROUGH manager Lennie Lawrence feels his players deserve promotion as a reward for a gruelling season.
On the eve of the final home game against Grimsby Town, Lawrence said: ‘The players have put in a tremendous effort.
‘The Rumbelows League Cup semi-final defeat by Manchester United at Old Trafford would have knocked the stuffing out of a lot of teams.
‘But the players have battled hard and, hopefully, they will crown a memorable season with a Premier League place.
‘In Cup competitions we have lost only once against five teams in the top six of the First Division.
‘We have lost only twice at home in the Second Division.
Professionally, we let ourselves down away from home before Christmas.’
Boro will win automatic promotion if they beat Grimsby and Wolves, a situation Lawrence would have settled for when he arrived at Ayresome Park last summer.
Lawrence said: ‘We are quietly optimistic.
There is some experience in the side and we know what we have to do.
‘The key factor is that promotion is in our hands.
Leicester City face a tough match against Newcastle United on Saturday.’
Lawrence could recall Jamie Pollock to midfield tonight.
A final decision rests between Pollock and Andy Peake.
The player not in a starting role will be on the substitutes' bench alongside Bernie Slaven.
Middlesbrough's hopes of a promotion boost will improve if they don't repeat their recent habit of giving the opposition a goal start.
Lawrence added: ‘I know it has been an expensive season for fans, but I hope they will dig deep to back the team in their final home game.’
Leading scorer Paul Wilkinson expects a tough match against his first professional club.
Wilkinson said: ‘Grimsby have been playing with five at the back and gave Ipswich a tough last match.
‘Ipswich wanted a win to clinch promotion but Grimsby forced a goalless draw at Portman Road.
‘I hope we can keep a clean sheet and get revenge for our 1–0 defeat at Grimsby earlier in the season.’
Team from: Pears, Fleming, Phillips, Gittens, Mohan, Pollock, Peake, Hendrie, Falconer, Wilkinson, Payton, Ripley.
Bobby signs off in style
FOOTBALL: Bobby Robson's PSV Eindhoven retained the Dutch league title with a 3–0 win at FC Groningen.
For Groningen coach Hans Westerhof defeat was bittersweet.
He has signed to coach PSV next season, replacing former England manager Robson who is moving to Portugal's Sporting Lisbon.
Robson said: ‘I'm delighted I've left the championship in the hands of PSV.’
Krabbe snub
ATHLETICS: Organisers of Europe's major athletics meetings could snub drugs row sprinter Katrin Krabbe this season.
The matter will be raised at the regular spring meeting of European grand prix organisers taking place in Stockholm this weekend.
Ackford aid
RUGBY UNION: England World Cup star Paul Ackford will come out of retirement on Saturday to help Harlequins in the Pilkington Cup final against Bath after their pack was more than halved by injury, sending-offs and withdrawals.
Top rankers GOLF: The Sony rankings top 10 1 F Couples (US) 18.31pts av, 2 N Faldo (GB) 15.22, 3 J M Olazabal (Spain) 15.21, 4 I Woosnam (GB) 14.64, 5 S Ballesteros (Spain) 14.50, 6 B Langer (Ger) 12.23, 7 G Norman (Aus) 12.00, 8 D Love III 10.78, 9 P Stewart (US) 10.70, 10 P Azinger (US) 10.00.
Wembley date
FOOTBALL: Referee James McCluskey and Scotland colleagues Hugh Williamson and William Young take charge of England's international against Brazil at Wembley on May 17.
Strip show
FOOTBALL: Nearly 400 Wolves' fans have signed a petition protesting at the design of a new kit to be worn by the club next season and launched at Saturday's final home game against Middlesbrough.
Waddle goes
FOOTBALL: England's Chris Waddle is one of several stars leaving French champions Marseille, who won their fourth successive first division title at the weekend.
Aldo double act
FOOTBALL: John Aldridge will play for club and country in 24 hours to strengthen the Republic of Ireland's decimated squad for the friendly with the United States on Wednesday.
He is needed by Tranmere Rovers for tonight's Second Division game against Charlton Athletic.
Gregory doubt
RUGBY LEAGUE: Andy Gregory checked into a top London clinic yesterday in an attempt to cure a worrying groin injury which is threatening his chances of a record breaking eighth Wembley appearance in Saturday's Challenge Cup final against Castleford.
1inter gets a League call-up THE Football League's newest referee yesterday paid tribute to his colleagues in the NorthEast.
Middlesbrough whistler Jeff Winter has been given the good news that he has been promoted to the Football League middle for the start of next season a distinction held by only 90 referees in the whole of the country.
Winter, a self employed financial consultant, says: ‘The interview in London went smashing, and was very laid back and friendly.
Even though it looked good, it was still rather nerve racking until the letter landed on the doormat.’
The 37-year-old is quick to thank the other Football League refs in the region who have given advice and help along the 13 year path from the grass roots.
‘They have all given me a tremendous amount of help, and I know that any help or guidance I want in the future will be there.
‘The refs up here are among the best in the country.
North-East refs have a very good reputation, and give a lot of help to people coming through maybe that's why some have gone right to the top.
‘George Courtney is special and sent me a letter congratulating me and saying if I need any help, just to give him a ring.
The others are also special in their own way.
For instance, when I was promoted to the Football League line, Alan Dawson was on the phone immediately welcoming me.
‘Knowing the attitude of these men, they won't let me fail.
With all that help, it will be difficult not to succeed.’
The promotion means farewell to the Northern League middle, in which Winter has officiated for six years.
‘I shall miss the Northern League,’ he says.
‘It obviously gave me a very good grounding and without it, I wouldn't be where I am today.
His last game is expected to be next week's Division Two game between Billingham Town and Cleveland Bridge.
So now Winter, who was fourth official for the 1989 FA Cup final, can look forward to the ‘delights’ as the fans would call them of places like Rochdale, Bury, Halifax and Preston.
‘I don't mind going to places like that.
Being involved at Wembley that time whetted my appetite to get to that stage on a more important basis.
‘I'm starting a new career in a sense now, and I'm really looking forward to it.
I might be starting at Crewe or Rochdale, but I might end up at the top.’
— Retiring ref George Courtney of Spennymoor has two special mementoes from his final League game between Sheffield United and Leeds United.
Sheffield presented an inscribed crystal whisky decanter and Leeds handed over an autographed shirt.
Courtney said: ‘It was an excellent day all-round.’
MIDDLESBROUGH will seek to salvage some pride against Gold Cupholders Newcastle in the return leg at Cleveland Park tomorrow night.
The Bears suffered a crushing 58–32 defeat at Brough Park on Sunday and there has been frantic activity in the Bears' camp to get machines and riders ready for revenge.
Australians Mark Lemon and Dave Cheshire have been slow to recapture last season's form but hope to hit fresh form.
Newcastle, unbeaten at home, have won at Berwick and Glasgow, and snatched a dramatic draw at Edinburgh.
New Zealand duo David Bargh and Mark Thorpe are being chased hard for the top slot by Australian Norman Scott.
Middlesbrough: 1 Steve Regeling, 2 Mark Lemon, 3 Daz Sumner, 4 Donny Odom, 5 David Cheshire, 6 Duncah Chapman, 7 Paul Pickering.
Newcastle: 1 Mark Thorpe, 2 Wayne Garratt, 3 David Bargh, 4 Scott Norman, 5 Phil Jeffrey, 6 Richard Juul, 7 Max Schofield.
PRIZE Money totalling £4,000 will be won at Sunderland Stadium this week.
The East Boldon circuit is tonight staging the semi-finals of the £1,000 Easter Handicap, and heats of the Regal Standard and Puppy Trophies, both worth £500 to the winners, with the finals on Saturday, when the £2,000 Regal Stayers Trophy will also reach a conclusion.
Heat one of the Regal Standard Trophy promises an interesting clash between Dawn Milligan's in-form Amazon Chief, fresh from open sprint race victories at Nottingham and Shawfield, and Peter Beaumont's Sheffield-based Ragus, which is no stranger to the Sunderland track.
Another recent open winner, Harry Williams' Derby hope Pond Pavarotti, whose victory at Brough Park last week helped Sunderland win second place in the inter-track competition, setting a new sectional record of 3.71 seconds, takes on the well known Yorkshire-based open racer Mandys Supreme, which is trained by the unattached Derek Tidswell.
The latest Williams-trained discovery, New Level, looks outstanding in the first heat of the Regal Puppy Trophy, having won his first three races and never being headed to the first bend.
The £750 Heineken Puppy Trophy winner has an average sectional time of 5.26 and usually flies out of the boxes and has been given an ideal trap six draw.
The biggest danger to New Level looks like being Tom Robinson's Just Right Kyle, which races from trap two.
The second heat sees Beaumont's Spring Corn taking on Tom Robinsontrained Kyle Alex, which trialled at Sunderland last week in 27.64 secs for the standard 450 metres trip.
Another Williams-bred youngster, Pond Curlew, which receives start of eight metres, looks like being favourite for the Easter Handicap after clocking the fastest time of 27.44, though he takes on Florida Bill, unbeaten in three rounds of the competition, also off eight metres, tonight.
Another winner of its three heats, Watabid (10 metres) also faces a stiff challenge against one of the remaining back markers, Ah Jaycee, which wears the stripes and receives three metres in the first semi-final tonight.
In the second semi-final Docklands Rover will be hoping for a clear run out of trap three, receiving five metres start from six-dog Ruffside Hall, which has won two of its three races from one metre.
Sunderland, incidentally, have arranged an inter-track meeting at Wembley on Friday, May 10, the eve of the FA Cup Final, and are hoping that they will have the support of Roker fans who are in the capital that night.
BROUGH PARK regulars will be watching the progress of a new puppy, Farloe Kilt, with great interest.
The January 1991 fawn bitch, by Airmount Grand out of Mineola Tina, has been graded A2 after three trials, producing an eye-catching time of 31.40 secs.
Racing manager Jimmy Nunn said of the Northern Ireland bred racer: ‘She looks like being one to watch.
‘Doing that sort of time at 15 months she could turn out to be anything.’
MIDDLESBROUGH stage the heats of the National Pet Week Trophy tonight, with the final at Cleveland Park on Saturday.
The event is sponsored by Redcar  veterinary surgeon James Haddon, and the owner of the winning greyhound will receive the trophy at the Pet Week Show at Kirkleatham, Redcar, on Sunday morning.
THE Olympic hopes of a top Teesside boxer have been rescued.
It looked as though former ABA light welterweight champion Peter Richardson's road to gold had been blocked when an appeal for £2,000 in sponsorship to cover the Middlesbrough 21-year-old's £2,000 training and travelling expenses met with no response.
But yesterday Dunnes Stores (Billingham) made a £1,000 offer and a former Oxford blue promised a £50 cheque to end worries that Richardson's build-up would be affected after taking ten weeks' unpaid leave from work.
Middlesbrough's Beechwood and Easterside Social Club have also stepped in to help by staging a gala night, and the local Robin Hood Hotel will boost funds with a snooker tournament.
Boxing fans from Hull have already sent him £50.
Richardson trains at the Phil Thomas School of Boxing in the town, and Thomas said last night: ‘Peter will be thrilled with the tremendous offers of help.
‘We had been worried because he was the only British boxer who was not sponsored and the lack of cash could have forced him to return to work.
‘Peter has already beaten the Olympic champion.
He has all-round skill and good prospects of a medal in Barcelona.
He could even strike gold.’
Richardson's coach, Ronnie Cave, said: ‘Peter has already spent all his own money to fight in the world championships and the club have helped as much as they can.
‘He is embarrassed to ask for money, but he must train full-time if he is to do himself justice.
‘We are not talking about someone who is going to Barcelona just to make up the numbers.
‘He is a genuine medal hope and he is representing the people of Middlesbrough.’
Richardson is currently training with the British squad at Crystal Palace and is due to fly to Canada next month as part of the team's build-up.
Anyone else who is interested in sponsoring Richardson should contact Phil Thomas on Stockton 607865.
A NIGHT when Middlesbrough grabbed two vital promotion points was marred when goalkeeper Stephen Pears was taken to hospital wit h a gashed knee.
Pears was whisked off still wearing his goalkeeper's jersey and limping heavily after being hurt in the final minutes.
Accompanied by club doctor Laurie Dunn, Pears said: ‘I will need stitches.’
His injury curbed celebrations of a win that guarantees Boro a promotion play-off place.
Fans will anxiously await a fitness report on ever-present Pears before their crunch game at Wolves on Saturday.
It would be a tremendous blow if Boro lost Pears for a game that could guarantee a Premier League place.
Boro climbed above Leicester City and Derby County thanks to Jimmy Phillips's first penalty goal for Boro and Paul Wilkinson's 23rd goal of the season.
Grimsby frustrated Middlesbrough in the early stages with their sweeper system and repeated back passes to their goalkeeper.
But the breakthrough came after Stuart Ripley and John Hendrie switched wings.
Hendrie was brought down by a clumsy Kevin Jobling challenge just inside the area.
Referee Lawrence Dilkes immediately pointed to the spot then brushed aside Grimsby's protests.
After Andy Payton's failure against Plymouth Argyle ten days ago, stand-in skipper Phillips took responsibility for the spot kick and calmly sent Paul Reece the wrong way for his third goal of the season.
A minute later Payton moved on to a sloppy Jobling pass and shot into the side netting as fans jumped to their feet in anticipation of a goal.
Wilkinson increased the lead with a brilliant header into the roof of the net from an inch-perfect left-wing cross by Ripley.
But just before the break Wilkinson was booked for a foul and Jamie Pollock was shown the yellow card seven minutes into the second half.
Middlesbrough threatened with Wilkinson on the end of two moves.
He headed wide at the far post and then forced Reece to push his angled shot round a post.
Grimsby's Tom Watson was booked for throwing the ball down in anger at the award of a corner for Middlesbrough.
Grimsby, despite being two goals down, struggled to change their pattern of play.
They lacked adventure and their first corner came in the 75th minute.
In the 79th minute Pears was injured after he saved from Neil Woods.
Play was held up as the goalkeeper's knee was strapped up.
Pears carried on bravely but was forced to throw the ball out or kick with his left foot.
Support from afar for talent contest
ORGANISERS of a talent competition in Whitby have won civic support from Canada.
Tom Edwards, the Mayor of Whitby, Ontario, has put November 7 in his diary for an appearance at Whitby Now, an event which gives local performers a stage.
In his home town, Mr Edwards is a noted singer and says that he wants to go down in the programme as performing a selection of songs from Carousel and also Holy City.
Martin Verrill, the chairman of Whitby Now, says Mr Edwards is the first to respond to an approach to all Whitby's twin towns, ranging from Anchorage in Alaska to Port Stanley, the capital of the Falklands Islands, and also taking in Tonga, two places in Australia and Kauai, Hawaii.
PROMOTION for Middlesbrough Football Club from the Second Division to the new Premier League could prove costly.
The Ayresome Park club took out insurance policies at the start of the season against the possibility of being promoted, which would mean having to pay out large players' bonuses and salaries.
But the London-based insurance company which underwrote the deal has crashed.
Continental Assurance Company went into liquidation last month with estimated debts of £6.8m.
Ground improvements demanded by the Premier League were also covered by the specialist policies.
Middlesbrough was one of ten clubs which had taken out promotion policies totalling £2m.
Rival promotion contenders Blackburn, Cambridge and Swindon were also hit by the collapse of Continental.
Keith Lamb, chief executive of Middlesbrough, yesterday refused to comment on the potential loss to the club.
‘We don't wish to comment on it.
We never comment on private affairs of the club,’ he said.
A spokeswoman for the liquidator of Continental, Cork Gully, said: ‘It's not true to say that the club won't get any money but at the moment we don't know how much any pay-out will be.’
Estimates of Middlesbrough's potential loss are being put as high as £200,000 by some insurance sources.
It is likely that the club has paid premiums of between 2.5pc and 5pc of the total sum.
Last season Hartlepool took out insurance against promotion into the Third Division from the Fourth.
Stuart Bagnell, assistant to chairman Garry Gibson declined to say how much the club got on winning promotion.
‘But for clubs going from the fourth to the third sums between £50,000 and £100,000 are about the going rate so £200,000 from the second to the Premier doesn't seem unlikely,’ he said.
MIDDLESBROUGH'S adopted ship HMS Jupiter sailed out of the town for the last time yesterday.
The Leander class frigate headed for Portsmouth to be decommissioned after paying a final farewell to Teesside.
Middlesbrough's Mayor Eddie Bolland was on board the 3,200ton ship, keeping alive the links which begun in 1975 until the last possible minute.
Lieutenant Nick Day said the final farewell was ‘a very sad occasion, rather like a funeral’.
The relationship between town and ship ended spectacularly with a weekend of celebration, including a ceremonial parade through the town.
Teessiders had a final chance to visit the Gulf War veteran when she opened her hatches on Sunday.
The ship's future is uncertain.
Once stripped of her Seawolf missiles, the 25-year-old vessel will be put up for sale to Third World navies.
But without the missiles, it may be difficult to find a buyer and Jupiter could meet a sad end as a target ship or scrap.
FOOTBALL is probably not a F subject Darlingtonians F would care to be reminded of at this stage in a trying season.
So the words relegation and Feethams will be avoided as much as possible this week, even though Echo Memories is returning to Darlington's most famous (albeit adopted) footballing son.
That man is Alfred Common, who retired to the town in 1919 after a glittering soccer career that was not without a hint of scandal.
His granddaughter Ann Parker still lives in Darlington, and has a collection of footballing photographs, medals and newspaper cuttings, but would still like to know more about her talented forebear.
Alf was born in 1880 at Millfield near Sunderland, and the Wearsiders were his first big club before a £325 transfer to Sheffield United in 1901.
The following year he became the youngest player ever to win a FA Cup winners' medal (a record which has since been eclipsed).
In the summer of 1904 Alf returned to Roker Park for a club record fee of £520 (a record which has since been eclipsed), but he only stayed at Sunderland for seven months.
Fellow First Divisioners Middlesbrough were enduring the sort of season Newcastle United are currently experiencing.
Rooted near the bottom of the table, they had not won away from home for nearly two years.
In January 1905 they approached their bitter rivals and asked if Common was for sale.
After two months of protracted negotiation, Alf arrived at Ayresome Park, and chalked up a record which can never be eclipsed: he became the first £1,000 footballer.
This exorbitant sum was considered scandalous by the whole country.
Questions were raised in the House of Commons.
Middlesbrough were portrayed as extravagant young upstarts (the club had only been in the Football League since 1899), and Sunderland were reproached for daring to ask for such a sum.
The Athletic News snorted indignantly: ‘As a matter of commerce, ten young recruits at £100 a piece might have paid better, and as a matter of sport, the Second Division would be more honourable than retention of places by purchase.’
Harsh words indeed.
Presumably the footballing establishment thought Middlesbrough should simply sit back and accept their dismal fate.
They didn't, and the ploy worked.
Common's first game for the Boro on February 25 was on a ground he had graced earlier in his career: Bramall Lane, the home of Sheffield United.
United were awarded a penalty in the first half which was put high over the bar.
Three minutes into the second, Boro's winger was tripped in the area, and Alf stepped up and calmly scored.
For 42 desperate minutes Boro defended stoutly, but held on.
Back home 2,000 fans greeted the news of the victory by throwing their hats into the air.
The revival continued, and Middlesbrough staved off relegation.
Common was 5ft 8ins tall and weighed 13st.
He was an aggressive forward, deceptively quick and ‘brawny and full of stamina’.
His best season was 190506 when he scored 19 goals in 36 appearances.
Middlesbrough at the time was a club hot with scandal.
They were accused of attempting to bribe opponents into losing so their chairman would win an election the following day; illegal signing-on payments were made; they were accused of ‘trafficking in players’; their books never tallied, and they seemed constantly on the verge of bankruptcy and relegation.
Alf himself was stripped of the captaincy and fined £10 in September 1907 for an episode of ‘drunkenness and violent behaviour’.
In August 1910 the Boro were short of cash.
Even though Common had returned to the team for the last month of the previous season and kept them up when relegation seemed inevitable, the club chairman offered him a free transfer providing he didn't claim the £250 benefit money promised to him earlier.
In the interests of the club, he accepted the deal, and moved to Woolwich Arsenal leaving behind him a respectable record of 65 goals in 178 appearances.
His career, which included three England caps, had a final honour to come: the Second Division Championship with Preston just before the war.
And so he retired to Darlington.
As Echo Memories readers know, he was landlord of the Alma Hotel (now the Brown Trout) in Cockerton from 192533.
He was a celebrated folk hero in his adopted Darlington from his arrival in 1919 to his death in 1946.
The Pip cartoon from Darlington's Evening Despatch dated September 16, 1937, is testimony to that.
Alf had married quite early in his career, and it is said that his son, also Alfred, was an even more talented player.
Aged 18 in 1932, Alf Jnr was on Sunderland's books when a motor accident put an early end to his career.
Alfred Snr would have looked at the Quakers' current predicament without much surprise.
Throughout his time in Darlington he maintained that the football club would never succeed while it played at Feethams.
AS market day entered its stride in Masham yesterday there was an incident.
Not long after the sun had creaked with watery weariness over the yardarm a man of the country ambled into the police station.
For the purposes of sensationalism and drama it would be pleasant to report that he burst in with a look of alarm and a shout of excitement, or some fancy combination of both.
He did not.
Having ascertained that the constable was interested in what he had to say, and the constable was, he related the incident.
A female driver had reversed into his car in the market place despite his warning cry.
She had then driven off.
Now, his car had been unscathed in the wee knock but he felt aggrieved that she had not checked.
He had taken her number which he handed to the officer.
He departed satisfied and perhaps even as content as before the incident.
The world would remain unshaken over this but maybe the constable would have a gentle word with the unthinking reverser.
Had Masham police station been shut, however, the man of the country would undoubtedly have left the matter unreported and driven home more disaffected with his fellow man.
It was a small example of the place of rural policemen and stations.
They are not quite community workers and centres but they are not far off.
Police Constable Philip Coupland was on duty in Masham yesterday.
The establishment is open but once a week at present and is then usually manned by a civilian worker.
The village's new beat bobby will begin duties shortly, though he will not live in the police house which adjoins the stone-built 101-year-old station.
Chatting to PC Coupland, an avuncular, agreeable man of 39 with the sort of handshake which suggests it would be unwise to give him occasion to put you in an armlock, was to realise that the rural bobby's function remains essentially unchanging.
He is friend, comforter, neighbour and guardian of right in a way that his urban counterpart can perhaps never be again.
‘It's a difficult question,’ he said, ‘but I suppose we would assess a situation differently.
Take a public order offence.
If we saw two blokes coming out of a pub rolling drunk we might wait to see what develops before acting.
A town bobby would probably be on the radio straightaway.
He would have back-up.’
There might too be a difference  between a town drunk and a country drunk.
But if a pay rise of 20 per cent was announced for town policeman tomorrow he would say only that they deserved it.
PC Coupland has been a country bobby for 20 years.
It is a job whose profile has been suddenly heightened by the advent on television of Heartbeat, an adaptation of the Constable books written by the North Yorkshire author and former policeman, Peter Walker alias Nicholas Rhea.
PC Coupland has watched the programme and enjoyed it.
He neither scorned it nor passed it off as ludicrous fiction as many policemen would and do about the way they are portrayed on screen.
Taking account of the fact that things had to be exaggerated and enhanced it was, he said, a true depiction.
There were, there are people like that in the villages of North Yorkshire today, the omniscient copper, the shrewd wiseacre, the rogue.
‘I like nothing better than getting out on foot on my shift,’ he said.
‘I think in any rural town it ought to be possible to find an hour or so to stroll round, just to talk to people about this and that.
You've got to get on, but you've got to know when to be firm.’
It is not a frenetic life, being a village bobby.
The travelling burglars are worrisome because they are hard to catch.
He could not see too much that could be done quickly about the criminals who travelled from Wearside and Tyneside to burgle.
They were in and out, quite sort of professional.
But he did not disagree that it was a life of tiny incidents, of often petty crime and indiscretion, of being an integral part of the community.
Yesterday morning at Masham there was more to report than the poor reversing.
A shopkeeper had a dispute with a customer, a woman who had been waiting for a bus had popped in to mention parking on the footpath at weekends, the school had organised some Maypole dancing and wondered if part of the car park could be cordoned off, somebody else wanted vehicle watch forms.
Constable Coupland is the type of fellow you would want handling these matters.
He is unhurried but listens.
He would feel lost in somewhere like Darlington or Middlesbrough.
Well, not lost, but strange certainly.
He lives in Londonderry and began his career in Richmond.
He came to Bedale and after 12 years was transferred to Ripon.
He returned late last year and was glad of it.
The biggest incident in which he has been involved was tragic double fatal accident in which two young girls died.
But there was the tale of the Hells Angels too.
Masham had its own chapter once, called the Gravediggers.
A chapter from Harrogate came down to do battle in Bedale.
The difference between a town Hells Angel and a country Hells Angel was epitomised when a Gravedigger went round to get a colleague to assist in the  ensuing skirmish.
The mate would have gladly helped but his mum would not let him out.
The Angels were rounded up.
The radio went suddenly and PC Coupland was called away.
There was a suspicious car in Aiskew and a Bedale garage till had been robbed.
Out in Masham market place the biggest mischief looked like coming from two handsome, middle aged women at the cassette tapes stall.
They looked at an album by Howard Keel and one of them said: ‘Oh, he could put his shoes under my bed any time.’
To which her friend replied: ‘But you're a pensioner.’
‘So's Howard Keel,’ she said.
There looked to be no itinerant thieves about and Masham ticked on under its watery sun.
SIXTY seven schools are squaring up to compete for £8,000 prize-money in The Northern Echo Schools Cricket Championships.
To coincide with Durham's first season in the top flight we invited all of the region's schools to enter an under15 side into the prestige new championships.
The response astounded us and delighted Durham County Cricket Club, who are backing the tournament.
The club's Director of Cricket Geoff Cook will be following the results closely, watching for talent for the future.
The knockout competition begins in the next few weeks with the ultimate winners standing to collect £5,000, plus a trophy and medals.
There is also £2,000 for the runners-up and £500 each for the semi-finalists.
There is also the chance of a lifetime for the talented teams who win through to the final.
They will play at one of the county's first-class grounds, watched by some of cricket's big names.
In addition, the 16 teams to go through to the third round will each receive an illustrated copy of The Guinness Book of Cricket Facts and Feats.
Compiled by Bill Frindall, it is a book guaranteed to amaze, amuse and inform.
You will be able to follow the championships only in the pages of The Northern Full scorecards, batting and bowling averages and photographs will be published after each round.
The full draw for Round One and the Preliminary Round is as follows: PRELIMINARY ROUND (matches to be played by May 16) St Cuthbert's High School, Newcastle v Ryton Comprehensive.
Carmel School, Darlington v Ferryhill Comprehensive.
St Michael's RC Comprehensive, Billingham v Grangefield School, Stockton.
FIRST ROUND (matches to be played by June 6) St Cuthbert's Newcastle or Ryton Comprehensive v Kepier School, Houghton-le-Spring.
Lord Lawson School, Birtley v Lanchester St Bedes Comprehensive.
Boldon Comprehensive, Boldon Colliery v George Stephenson High School, Killingworth.
Greencroft Comprehensive, Stanley v Tanfield School, Stanley.
Hermitage Comprehensive, Chester-le-Street v Seaton Burn High School, Newcastle.
Harton Comprehensive, South Shields v Marden High School, Tynemouth.
Hedworthfield Comprehensive, Jarrow v Whitburn Comprehensive.
Whitley Bay High School v Royal Grammar School, Newcastle.
Sacriston Fyndone v St Leonards RC Comprehensive, Durham.
Carmel School, Darlington or Ferryhill Comprehensive v Richmond School.
Durham Johnston Comprehensive, Durham v Hummersknott Comprehensive, Darlington.
Durham School v Barnard Castle School.
The Avenue Comprehensive, Newton Aycliffe v Haughton Comprehensive, Darlington.
Spennymoor Comprehensive v Parkside Comprehensive, Willington, Crook.
Teesdale Comprehensive, Barnard Castle v Roseberry Comprehensive, Chester-le-Street.
Hurworth School, Darlington v King James I, Bishop Auckland.
St Francis Xavier School, Richmond v Woodham Comprehensive, Newton Aycliffe.
Framwellgate Moor Comprehensive, Durham v St Bede's RC Comprehensive, Peterlee.
St Michael's Billingham or Grangefield, Stockton v Easington Comprehensive, Easington Village.
Sedgefield Community College v Nunthorpe School, Middlesbrough.
Northfield School, Billingham v Our Lady and St Bede's, Stockton.
West Redcar School v Yarm School.
Brackenhole School, Middlesbrough v Egglescliffe Comprehensive, Eaglescliffe.
Ian Ramsey School, Stockton v Red House School, Norton.
Brierton School, Hartlepool v Wellfield Comprehensive, Wingate.
Bydales School, Marske v King's Manor School, Acklam.
Stokesley School v Hallgarth School, Middlesbrough.
Bedale High School v Boroughbridge High School.
Filey School v Scalby School, Scarborough.
St Aidan's, Harrogate v King James School, Knaresborough.
Ripon Grammar School v Wensleydale School, Leyburn.
Easingwold School, York v Norton Secondary School, Norton, Malton.
While our photographers will endeavour to attend selected games we are unable to cover all ties.
We will however be publishing a special feature on the preliminary and first rounds, carrying score-cards and photographs wherever possible.
If you would like your team picture published in this feature please send a black and white or colour print, with names, to The Editor, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington, DL1 1NF.
Could all teams also inform us of the proposed date and venue of their tie so that we can send a photographer when possible.
All games to be played according to pre-arranged rules.
Score sheets must be returned immediately after game.
Any queries, please contact Eddie Cavill, Promotions Manager, on .
MIDDLESBROUGH goalkeeper Stephen Pears faces the heartbreak of missing a match with a Premier League place at stake.
The odds are heavily stacked against Pears for the final game at Wolves on Saturday.
Pears has had over 20 stitches under anaesthetic to close a deep gash in his right knee following the 2–0 win over Grimsby Town.
The fact Pears could be ruled out of the crunch game at Molineux is a cruel blow after his superb season.
Manager Lennie Lawrence said: ‘Pears suffered a terrible gash and was brave to continue after being caught by a player's studs.
‘Pears has been discharged from hospital and a decision on his fitness will be delayed until Friday at the earliest.
‘Obviously, Pears is doubtful.
No doubt he will want to play but we will have to check on whether his injury restricts his movement.
‘Ian Ironside will take over if necessary and I am sure he would not let the side down.’
The former Scarborough player has yet to make his first-team debut for Boro following a £40,000 transfer last summer.
Ironside had a seven-match loan spell at Scarborough before the transfer deadline.
Middlesbrough have sold their full 4,000 allocation and Wolves expect a 20,000 crowd.
Former England international Steve Bull is an obvious threat to Boro's automatic promotion hopes.
Bull has hit 22 goals this season on the way to the 200th League goal of his two-club career.
The striker has also passed John Richards' all-time 195-goal record at Wolves.
Former Middlesbrough midfielder Mark Burke could line up for Wolves.
Burke, who joined the Midlands club two years ago for £15,000, has had an inconsistent season.
The former England youth international was at Ayresome Park when Leicester City spoiled Boro's promotion party four years ago.
Burke said: ‘Middlesbrough froze on that occasion.
The same thing might happen at Molineux.
‘Wolves are in a similar position to Leicester, with nothing to lose.’
SCARBOROUGH manager Ray McHale was last night starting the tough task of rebuilding his squad for a promotion push next season.
At a crunch board meeting, McHale was informing the club's directors of his plans for next season.
The immediate futures of trialists Owen McGee, Stuart Ford and Chris Curran were among items on the agenda.
Former Middlesbrough utility player McGee and on-loan Rotherham keeper Ford look likely to be offered contracts, while defender Curran's position was in the balance.
McHale has been told that he must put together a side capable of reaching at least the play-offs next season.
Supporters who buy season tickets before August 15 will be handed free passes for the following season if the Seasiders fail to make the play-offs or gain automatic promotion.
McHale's long-term position was also being discussed.
His present contract has 12 months to run.
Scarborough entertain Northern League Northallerton Town tonight in the semi final of the North Riding Senior Cup.
Pears, 30, virtually ruled himself out of the crucial Wolves game when he said: ‘Time is against me.
I would love to play at Molineux, but at the moment I don't have even a slight hope.
‘My right knee is twice as large as the other one.
I had over 30 stitches in a deep gash, including seven or eight internal stitches.’
Pears said there was a four-inch flap when Grimsby Town striker Neil Woods cut open his knee with his studs on Tuesday night.
‘Obviously, I knew straight away it was a bad injury.
Ironically, up to that stage I had virtually nothing to do.
I did not want to come off, because the points were so important.
It would have been a crying shame if we had drawn or lost the game.
‘So I decided to carry on with my knee heavily strapped.
After the game I immediately went to hospital, where I was detained overnight.
‘I have played in every game this season and would like to complete a 100 per cent record.
But I could not play at Wolves without knowing I could do a reasonable job.’
Manager Lennie Lawrence has delayed a final decision but he cannot take a risk for a game that could clinch Boro automatic promotion.
Lawrence admitted: ‘I have not yet ruled Pears out but it is unlikely he will play.
There would be no point in putting reserve goalkeeper Ian Ironside on the substitutes’ bench as a precaution.
‘Pears would have to be in a position to do himself justice.
It is too important a game to play anyone who is not fit.’
Ironside looks set to lose his understudy tag after a patient wait in the background since he joined Boro last summer.
Striker Paul Wilkinson hopes Boro can snatch automatic promotion and avoid a marathon season going into extra-time.
Wilkinson was involved in promotion playoffs when Watford lost to to Blackburn Rovers over two legs three seasons ago.
He said: ‘The fact that we are guaranteed a play-off place gives us a solid base to go to Molineux.
‘We may be underdogs on the day as Leicester and Derby are at home.
But we could go up even if we don't win at Wolves, depending upon on other results.’
MIDDLESBROUGH Mohawks face a nervous wait for the safe arrival of Norman Findlay from the United States to boost their chances of lifting the Second  Division championship at Wembley on Sunday.
The six-foot-six-inch England forward returned to America after helping the Mohawks gain a place in the play-offs with a victory at Cardiff in their last league game of the season before also being outstanding in the first game of the play offs when Middlesborugh pulled off the shock of the season by winning at second  division league winners Oldham.
Steve Appleyard's men were then rewarded by a home tie with Brixton which they duly won, without Findlay, to earn the right to play Bury in Sunday's final.
Findlay, is due in today and providing he overcomes his jetlag, he could again prove the trump card and give his team a rare victory over Bury, who have already beaten them on all four occasions the two teams have met this season.
‘It's fair to say that there is already a little bit of needle between the sides,’ said Middlesbrough mananger Trevor Hawkins.
‘The last time we met they were frustrated by our tactics.
That spilled over to their behaviour towards the match  officials .
The commissioners reported the incident and they have subsequently been fined by the EBBA.
‘Norman's presence adds just that extra edge.
We've been criticised for bringing him in so late but we tried to bring him in earlier.
He wasn't available, so we then covered ourselves by signing him before the January deadline with a view to playing him when he became available.’
The teams are in a confident frame of mind knowing that their starting five of Findlay, Tony Hanson, Patrick Sellers, Ian Burlison and Rob Harland can match any line up in the second division.
Wembley is a virtual sell-out with the Mohawks game being followed by the first division championship final.
Middlesbrough have sold their full allocation of tickets.
YOUNG children in Middlesbrough could enjoy a second series of champion coaching sessions if the council is successful in securing another government grant.
Last year the Government allocated £700,000 to the National Coaching Foundation to establish Champion Coaching.
The aim was to encourage local authorities, schools and sports clubs to develop an after-school sports programme for young people.
Middlesbrough had one of only 24 Champion Coaching Schemes nationwide.
The Government has confirmed it intends to proceed with a Phase 2 scheme and, subject to approval from the its leisure sub-committee next week, the council hopes to build on last year's success.
MIDDLESBROUGH goalkeeper Ian Ironside faces the biggest challenge of his career against Wolves at Molineux.
The 28-year-old reserve will be thrown into a pressure-cooker game for a dramatic debut after a season of Central League football and a seven-match loan spell with former club Scarborough.
With Stephen Pears injured, Ironside has a chance to share in a momentous day in the club's history.
The prize at stake is an automatic place in the Premier League and a £2m jackpot.
Before he boarded the team coach for the Midlands, Ironside said: ‘I never expected I would get my chance in the last game of the season.
‘I am a laid back character and I don't think I will be affected by the occasion.
I have nerves at the start of every game but they soon disappear.
‘An exciting game offers the chance of me being a hero and I am looking forward to it.
I think my last League game for Scarborough was in early March against Halifax.
‘It has been a frustrating season for me at times, because of the brilliant form of Pears.
But I knew the score before I moved to Ayresome Park last summer.’
Manager Lennie Lawrence said he was not throwing Ironside to the wolves at Molineux: ‘Ironside is 28, not 18, and has played a lot of games.
I am sure he will do himself justice.
Only Pears’ consistency has kept him in the background.’
Middlesbrough fans share something in common with Lawrence.
They are used to nerve-wracking finales.
Boro have been involved in photo-finishes since the 1986 liquidation crisis, while Lawrence performed a permanent highwire act at Charlton Athletic.
Lawrence is a good campaigner to have around when nerves are fraught.
‘I have been there before and it has often worked out well for me.
I think this will be the sixth time of my career that a promotion or relegation issue has reached the final day.
‘Someone once said the most important quality of a manager was temperament.
If you live on your nerves sooner or later you get punished.
I try to ease the tension for players.
I am not prone to emotional or temperamental reactions in victory or defeat.
If I get angry, or I criticise people, it is a calculated thing.’
Lawrence promised a positive approach with a 4–4–2 formation for three points that would guarantee the No.2 spot.
‘We have a safety net in that we are guaranteed a play-off place if we lose, but I won't play five in midfield.
We want to win the game.
‘Middlesbrough deserve to be second after 45 games.
We have to make sure we deserve to be second after 46 games.
The good thing is our destiny's in our own hands.
If we had to rely on other teams slipping up I wouldn't be quite so relaxed Kevin Keegan
NEWCASTLE United face their day of reckoning at Leicester City.
Salvation and possible collapse stand either side of the result at Filbert Street this afternoon.
Only a win will guarantee Second Division football at St James's Park next season and relegation would wreck the £13m rescue package chairman Sir John Hall has formulated to clear debts of £6m and build for the future.
It is, without doubt, the most vital match in the club's 100-year history and quite possibly their last under Kevin Keegan's management, whatever his side's fate.
Keegan, who guided United to the First Division in the twilight of his playing career, has put the terms he'd want for a three-year contract to Sir John and his fellow directors.
They would be unable to meet them with Third Division gates, and possibly not even with the added revenue Second Division status would guarantee.
Keegan, though, declined to look beyond this afternoon's match when he left St James's Park with his 14-man squad yesterday.
He knows Newcastle could draw and still be relegated if two from Oxford, Brighton and Plymouth win.
They could even lose and stay up providing two of their lower-placed rivals lose.
Only two things are certain.
They will be safe if they take three points.
And they can't rely on goal difference, which saved them from Third Division football in 1938.
‘The good thing is our destiny's in our own hands,’ said Keegan.
‘If we had to rely on other teams slipping up I wouldn't be quite so relaxed.’
Keegan is likely to name the same starting eleven which beat Portsmouth at home last week, although he won't confirm his team until lunchtime today.
His main concern yesterday was Leicester's decision to allocate Newcastle just 1,800 tickets in the sell-out 22,000 crowd.
‘It's a shame,’ he said, ‘but the lads have got to make sure the supporters won't be missed.
They've done as much as they can anyway and even 1,800 Geordies will make more than enough noise, I'm sure.’
Leicester, of course, will claim an automatic place in the Premier League if they win and Middlesbrough lose or draw at Molineux the same dramatic last day scenario from which Brian Little, their manager, emerged with promotion honours at Darlington the previous two seasons.
The irony for him now is that a third success could relegate the club he supported as a boy.
‘I grew up a United fan,’ said Little.
‘I'll be very sad if they go down.
‘I know we have to beat them but I hope we win and get promotion and they still stay up.’
But Keegan has the man who could poop Leicester's promotion party, the man Little sold to Newcastle for £250,000 in December.
David Kelly has scored 11 goals in the 15 matches of the Keegan regime at Newcastle and the 26-year-old Republic of Ireland international relishes the high stakes riding on his return to Filbert Street.
‘I just think it's great to play in big game with so much riding on it,’ he said.
‘I certainly don't think I've got anything to prove.
I think I've done that with the eleven goals I've scored for Newcastle.
‘I had no hard feelings about leaving Leicester.
I could have won my place back and been in the Leicester side tomorrow, but I've got no regrets about coming to Newcastle.
You can't look back in football.
Kelly planned to give his teammates a run-down on the Leicester players at a team-meeting last night.
‘We've just got to win,’ he said.
‘I've played in the Third Division with Walsall and I don't want to go back to it.’
Kevin Sheedy is the only other member of the Newcastle team with experience of third-class English League football; he played for Hereford as a 17-year-old before joining Liverpool.
Keegan's likely side is: Wright, Ranson, Neilson, O'Brien, Kilcline, Scott, Carr, Peacock, Kelly, Sheedy, Brock.
Subs: Clark, Watson.
Leicester will be without former Middlesbrough keeper Kevin Poole and left back Mike Whitlow, who are both injured.
Their side is: Muggleton, Mills, Platnauer, Hill, Walsh, Grayson, Thompson, Oldfield, Wright, Ormondroyd, Gee.
Subs: Russell, Gordon.
THE unholy tangle that is the Second  Division promotion and relegation saga will be resolved today and it could mean heartbreak for three of football's biggest names.
Middlesbrough, with goalkeeper Ian Ironside making his first-team debut at Wolves, are hoping that local rivals Newcastle United can do them a big favour.
United, managed by Kevin Keegan, will be fighting to avoid a first-ever drop into the Third Division when they visit Leicester City.
Victory for Leicester and anything less than three points for Lennie Lawrence's Middlesbrough would see the Teessiders consigned to the play-offs and the Midlands club clinch the second automatic promotion spot behind Ipswich.
Peter Shilton battles to ensure Plymouth's Second Division survival at the expense of the play-off ambitions of Kenny Dalglish's £5 million Blackburn side at Home Park.
Rarely can such a clutch of famous names have faced the stark and unfamiliar spectre of failure on one afternoon.
Dalglish's mutli-million pound crusade for a Premier League place could come off the rails if his side do not win.
Dropped points could allow Charlton or Swindon to overtake his team, and pinch a play-off spot, if they win at Bristol Rovers or Derby respectively.
Dalglish's first game in charge at Blackburn last October was against Plymouth, when in a blaze of publicity his new side won 5–2.
Argyle player-manager Shilton is looking to the fans to help his side in their last ditch bid for survival.
Plymouth need a win, but could lose and still survive if the three teams below them, Oxford, Brighton and Port Vale, lose.
Keegan takes his team to Leicester knowing defeat could mean the drop if those below win.
Keegan keeps the team which produced a last-gasp win over Portsmouth last Saturday after five successive League defeats.
NEWCASTLE United face their day of reckoning at Leicester.
 Salvation and possible collapse stand either side of the result this afternoon.
Only a win will guarantee Second Division football at St James's Park next season and relegation would wreck the £13m rescue package chairman Sir John Hall has formulated to clear debts of £6m and build for the future.
It is, without doubt, the most vital match in the club's 100-year history and quite possibly their last under Kevin Keegan's management, whatever his side's fate.
Keegan, who guided United to the First Division in the twilight of his playing career, has put the terms he'd want for a three-year contract to Sir John and his fellow directors.
They would be unable to meet them with Third Division gates, and possibly not even with the added revenue Second Division status would guarantee.
Keegan, though, declined to look beyond this afternoon's match yesterday.
He knows Newcastle could draw and still be relegated if two from Oxford, Brighton and Plymouth win.
They could even lose and stay up providing two of their lower-placed rivals lose.
Only two things are certain.
They will be safe if they take three points.
And they can't rely on goal difference, which saved them from Third Division football in 1938.
Leicester, of course, will claim an automatic place in the Premier League if they win and Middlesbrough lose or draw at Molineux the same dramatic last day scenario from which Brian Little, their manager, emerged with promotion honours at Darlington the previous two seasons.
But Keegan has the man who could poop Leicester's promotion party, the man Little sold to Newcastle for £250,000 in December.
David Kelly has scored 11 goals in the 15 matches of the Keegan regime at Newcastle and the 26-year-old Republic of Ireland international relishes the high stakes riding on his return to Filbert Street.
Keegan's likely side is: Wright, Ranson, Neilson, O'Brien, Kilcline, Scott, Carr, Peacock, Kelly, Sheedy, Brock.
Subs: Clark, Watson.
Leicester: Muggleton, Mills, Platnauer, Hill, Walsh, Grayson, Thompson, Oldfield, Wright, Ormondroyd, Gee.
Subs: Russell, Gordon.
Kevin Keegan
An exciting game offers the chance of me being a hero and I am looking forward to it.
Ian Ironside IAN Ironside faces the biggest challenge of his career against Wolves at Molineux.
The 28-year-old Middlesbrough reserve will be thrown into a pressure-cooker game for a dramatic debut after a season of Central League football and a seven-match loan spell with former club Scarborough.
With Stephen Pears injured, Ironside has a chance to share in a momentous day in the club's history.
The prize at stake is an automatic place in the Premier League and a £2m jackpot.
Before he boarded the team coach for the Midlands, Ironside said: ‘I never expected I would get my chance in the last game of the season.
‘I am a laid back character and I don't think I will be affected by the occasion.
I have nerves at the start of every game but they soon disappear.
‘An exciting game offers the chance of me being a hero and I am looking forward to it.
I think my last League game for Scarborough was in early March against Halifax.
‘It has been a frustrating season for me at times, because of the brilliant form of Pears.
But I knew the score before I moved to Ayresome Park last summer.’
Manager Lennie Lawrence said he was not throwing Ironside to the wolves at Molineux.
Lawrence added: ‘Ironside is 28, not 18, and has played a lot of games.
I am sure he will do himself justice.
Only Pears’ consistency has kept him in the background.’
Middlesbrough fans share something in common with Lawrence.
They are used to nerve-wracking finales.
Boro have been involved in photo-finishes since the 1986 liquidation crisis, while Lawrence performed a permanent highwire act at Charlton Athletic.
Lawrence is a good campaigner to have around when nerves are fraught.
‘I have been there before and it has often worked out well for me.
I think this will be the sixth time of my career that a promotion or relegation issue has reached the final day.
‘Someone once said the most important quality of a manager was temperament.
If you live on your nerves sooner or later you get punished.
‘I try to ease the tension for players.
I am not prone to emotional or temperamental reactions in victory or defeat.
If I get angry, or I criticise people, it is a calculated thing.
‘I have been lucky when it has come to the crunch but in life you make your own luck.
In life, and in football, you get what you deserve, by and large.’
Lawrence promised a positive approach with a 4–4–2 formation for three points that would guarantee the No.2 spot.
‘We have a safety net in that we are guaranteed a play-off place if we lose, but I won't play five in midfield.
We want to win the game.
‘Middlesbrough deserve to be second after 45 games.
We have to make sure we deserve to be second after 46 games.
‘We have battled well in recent games but I was heartened by some of our football in the midweek win over Grimsby Town.
‘Perhaps we are striking form at the right time, especially among the forwards.
Wilko is scoring goals.
John Hendrie is playing out of his skin.
Andy Payton is getting more involved.
‘Jamie Pollock has come back well.
For a young lad, he has surprised me.
I had more or less written him off for the season.’
The local teenager holds his place today, despite the challenge of the more experienced Andy Peake.
Peake and Bernie Slaven will be on the substitutes' bench.
Team: Ironside, Fleming, Mohan, Gittens, Phillips, Ripley, Pollock, Falconer, Hendrie, Wilkinson, Payton.
Molineux is not one of Middlesbrough's favourite grounds.
They have not won there since 1980, when David Hodgson scored twice in a 2–0 win, and supporters recall the 1981 FA Cup quarter-final replay defeat that crushed Wembley hopes and led to the breakup of a brilliant side.
That belongs in the past.
Three points today will herald a bright future, and a new challenge, in the Premier League.
MIDDLESBROUGH Football Club's success in achieving promotion to the new Premier League ensures the North's representation in what will become the game's senior competition next season.
Football fans in this region are often said to the most fanatical in the country and so deserve teams among the elite.
The Premier League, however, is not without its critics.
For Middlesbrough, it offers a guarantee of greater riches.
But what else?
It does not necessarily guarantee premier football.
The possibility of Wimbledon playing Cambridge United in a near-empty stadium is hardly what the Premier League creators would have had in mind when they were formulating their ideas.
It is a religiously-guarded principle that small clubs can still make it to the top flight.
But if nothing really changes, what is the Premier League for, except to hog the money previously on offer to football as a whole?
More cash from exclusive sponsorship and television deals certainly looks to be the only major difference.
At least initially there will be the same number of clubs as presently in Division One, the same relegation and promotion and even the retention of the fixture-clogging Zenith Data Systems Cup.
Hence, there will not even be fewer games one of the motivating factors supposedly behind the formation of the new league.
Apart from more money, the Premier League merely means irritating changes to the footballing language.
‘The League’ will no longer refer to the family of 92 clubs; there will be two leagues and two league championships.
The statisticians and historians will have to cut through all this and the added confusion of teams moving up a division without being promoted.
For the good of the game the Premier League must succeed.
But it was born out of frustration with the intransigent Football League and greed among the bigger clubs.
They are not good reasons for change.
The creation of the Premier League is therefore irrelevant and potentially harmful.
If in five years time Middlesbrough are the richest club in the North but Darlington, Scarborough and Hartlepool have gone to the wall, we might reflect on the formation of the so-called superleague with some bitterness.
MIDDLESBROUGH'S annual ten kilometre road race will almost certainly be an event on its own this year and is expected to attract 700 runners.
Until now the race has been organised as part of the larger Middlesbrough Festival, but the council has not yet determined the date of that event.
Since its inception in 1984 the Middlesbrough 10k Road Race and Fun Run has proved itself one of the premier events of its kind in the North-East.
This year's event on Sunday July 5 will start and finish at Southlands Centre, rather than Albert Park and Middlesbrough and District Harriers are co-organisers with the council.
The route will be presented to the leisure services sub-committee tomorrow with a recommendation for approval.
MIDDLESBROUGH's triumphant footballers are celebrating their dramatic elevation to the ranks of soccer's new Premier League.
The team snatched victory in Saturday's away match at Wolverhampton Wanderers and become the North-East's only representative in football's top flight next season.
That sparked off celebrations with manager Lennie Lawrence being given a good soaking as his team showed how they felt about the end to a successful season.
North-East football joined in the celebrations with Newcastle United victorious at Leicester City ending any lingering doubts they might drop into the Third Division for the first time in their illustrious history.
Both the Middlesbrough and Newcastle games were dramatic for other reasons.
At one point, it seemed the Middlesbrough game might not go ahead because fire had badly damaged a stand and shotgun cartridges were found buried in the pitch.
Newcastle's match was marred by crowd trouble as Leicester fans angry as their team's hopes of automatic promotion to the Premier  Division slipped away clashed with Newcastle supporters.
Riot police were needed to quell pitch invasions.
— More than 200,000 ecstatic Leeds United fans took part in a carnival-style street party yesterday as their team paraded the League Championship trophy.
Leeds United had waited 18 years for success following their domination of English football in the early 1970s.
From their Elland Road stadium, the team that topped soccer's First Division were cheered and applauded every inch of their 1.7-mile journey by open-topped bus into the city centre.
AMATEUR wine maker Tom Hutton, 79, known throughout the North-East as an expert in his field, has died.
In a fitting tribute at his funeral reception, members of his family toasted his memory in peach wine.
Mr Hutton of Springfield Close, Thirsk, who taught wine-making, spoke on local radio on the subject and was in demand as a judge, once said: ‘I love wine — it oozes out of my ears.’
A member of the North Yorkshire and South Durham Winemakers Federation, he made wine for many of his grandchildren's weddings up to 120 bottles at times.
Mr Hutton, who came from Stockton, served in the Royal Signals in the Far East during the Second World War, retiring in 1955 with the rank of captain.
He took over the White Horse Hotel in Thirsk until it closed in 1961.
Mr Hutton worked as shops controller Winterschladen's, in Middlesbrough, until he retired in 1977.
He leaves a son and five daughters.
THE postponed replay of a battle over a five-a-side football complex has kicked off in earnest.
Middlesbrough Council is distributing 2,000 leaflets telling the ‘real facts’ about its plans for the floodlit development on Clairville Common.
The authority is sure the £1.5m Anchor International scheme will be a boon for the town.
But protesters accused the council of ‘using poll tax-payers money for its own ends’.
Opponents claim the development is too near residential areas.
They won the day in December when magistrates refused a licence for the premises.
The same bench deferred a second application last month and will make a final decision on May 13.
Around 1,000 residents have signed a letter of objection.
But Middlesbrough Council is confident that most residents will support the scheme when they hear the full story.
Leader Mike Carr said: ‘The leaflet clearly shows the development will be an asset.
‘The council has negotiated more than 250 hours a week free court time for young people and community groups and the firm itself operates an ‘open door’ policy, allowing local people access when the courts are unused.’
‘It will be a community facility which will bring with it 30 much-needed jobs.
We are being asked to forgo all these advantages because the centre will have a bar.
We don't think that it's unreasonable for players to enjoy a drink not necessarily an alcoholic one.’
Leading opponent, Tony Coleman, claimed the 30 jobs were a myth he could nail.
A similar venture in Scotland had only four full-timers in a staff of 20.
He accused the council of riding roughshod over the views of Middlesbrough people.
‘They care about their promises to Anchor International more than their duty to the people,’ he said.
Mr Coleman asked where the money to produce and distribute the leaflet was coming from, adding: ‘They are using poll taxpayers money for their own ends.’
Council spokesman Doug Allan said the leaflets cost no more than £200 and were being distributed free by supporters.
KEEN cyclist Karen Mayers is hoping her pedal power will help to raise over £30,000 to help  impoverished village farmers in Romania.
The 27-year-old teacher is joining 29 other riders on a 650mile charity trek across Romania and is looking for sponsors.
The money will help poor village farmers, agricultural associations and self-help projects in applying better techniques to get the most produce from the land.
Karen, from Hall Drive, Acklam, Middlesbrough, visited Romania in 1987 and saw how village people were barely surviving on their failing  subsistence agriculture.
‘Some friends who were with me on holiday in Romania talked about the idea and when they contacted me this year saying they were going to do the ride I told them I was more than willing to join them,’ said Karen, who teaches at Applegarth Primary School, Northallerton.
The sponsorship money will go to a group of charities who are already working in Romania trying to improve conditions for the village farming communities.
Each member of the cycle team will have to pay their own fare to Romania to start the ride on August 8.
They set off from Turnu Severin, on the River Danube near the Yugoslav border and pedal through some of the highest passes almost to the Moldavian border, in what was formerly the USSR, and on to the Negreni villages.
The cyclists hope to complete the ride in ten days covering 60to-70 miles a day.
‘I cycle around quite often and I expect I'll be doing some cycling in the North Yorkshire Moors during the next two months,’ said Karen who is a member of the Tandem Club and has been a member of various Cyclist Touring Clubs.
Karen is hoping local businesses will lend their support to the venture.
‘I know its always difficult with things like this where companies are not getting a lot out if it,’ she said.
‘But there will be, hopefully, a video and an exhibition when we come back so that the people who sponsored us will at least have their names mentioned.’
TEENAGE karate champion Nicky Pearce has officially retired from fighting competitions due to an old elbow injury and is now passing on his talents to his team.
The 15-year-old 2nd Dan from Marske Lane, Bishopsgarth, Stockton, is the reigning Northern champion of the British All Stars Karate Association and a British Amateur Martial Arts Association squad member.
He took on his new role supervising a training and selection course on Saturday at Jow Walton's Youth Centre, Berwick Hills, Middlesbrough.
He is also a National junior squad coach but until he is 18 he will have to fulfill that position under the supervision of chief instructor Andy Sheridan, 4th Dan, for insurance purposes.
But he will be given free reign over the selection and training of his team.
Nicky, a pupil at Bishopsgarth comprehensive school, Stockton, will also continue to instruct at his home club, Stockton Freestyle.
Publicity officer Steve Thompson, said: ‘Nicky had been fighting for over four years with an injury he didn't know about until six months ago.
He is a very sensible 15-year-old and does not allow his sport to interfere with his school work.’
Nicky said: ‘I suppose I'll get a lot of enjoyment out of teaching and hope I hope I can pass on some useful advice.’
MIDDLESBROUGH striker Paul Wilkinson has finished his first season at Ayresome Park as leading scorer with 24 League and Cup goals.
Yet Louth-born Wilkinson was a midfield player as a schoolboy and only became a forward by accident.
Wilkinson was switched when a player in a Grimsby junior team was injured.
He grabbed two goals and signed as an apprentice for his home club.
Wilkinson made his League debut for Grimsby as a teenager and scored after five minutes against Charlton Athletic.
Charlton boss Lennie Lawrence made a mental note of the raw youngster and tried to sign him two seasons later.
The lure of Everton was too great.
The Merseyside club were top of the First Division, heading towards the FA Cup Final, and in the European Cup semi-final.
Wilkinson was a hero and a  villain on his debut in a Merseyside derby.
He scored the only goal of the game and immediately endeared himself to half the city's fans.
The relatively unknown signing from homespun Grimsby was elevated to star status over a week-end.
Competition was fierce at Goodison.
When manager Howard Kendall signed Gary Lineker, Wilkinson knew the writing was on the wall.
Wilkinson joined Nottingham Forest after being ordered to get a haircut by manager Brian Clough.
He enjoyed Forest's style of play and respected Clough's brand of management.
The third £300,000 transfer of his career followed.
It was a sound investment by Watford, because Wilkinson topped the club's scoring charts for three successive seasons.
Wilkinson was ready for a move at the end of last season.
He was also keen to return North and Lawrence wasted no time when he took over at Ayresome Park.
A £500,000 deal was eventually agreed to bring his scoring talents to the North-East.
Wilkinson has become Boro's No.1 marksman in a 60-match marathon.
He has also worked tremendously hard in helping out in defence, especially at set-pieces.
No Boro player is more deserving of a summer rest.
FACTFILE Name: Paul Wilkinson Born: Louth 30.10.64.
Height: 6ft Married: To Susan.
Two daughters, six-year-old Jade and 11-month Jasmine League appearances: Grimsby 71 and 27 goals, Everton 31 and 7, Nottingham Forest 34 and 5, Watford 134 and 52, Middlesbrough 46 and 15.
MANAGER Lennie Lawrence aims to make Middlesbrough a force in the Premier League.
The inspiring influence behind an automatic promotion triumph is determined Boro will not just make up the numbers in the top flight.
Lawrence looked ahead to a new challenge within minutes of celebrating a dramatic ten-man two-goal comeback at Wolves.
After fitting reward for a gruelling season, Lawrence said: ‘I don't want to hear about consolidation.
The next word to consolidation is relegation.
It would be silly to say Middlesbrough could win the Premier League.
But we don't just want to scratch about.
‘We want to make an impact.
We want to establish a position in the top half of the table.
You cannot afford to stand still in football.
Middlesbrough went down straight after promotion four years ago.
A lesson has to be learnt.
‘I will look to strengthen the squad with at least two new players.
We might have a top-heavy squad to start with but we will see what happens after that.’
Lawrence hinted he could be prepared to pay a record club fee for the right player.
‘I would not spend £1m on a 29-year-old.
But I might be ready to sign a 23-year-old for such an investment.
I shall sit down to discuss my plans this month and not in June.’
A permanent deal could follow for Southampton central defender Jon Gittens after his three-month loan spell.
Lawrence added: ‘Gittens is not a world-beater.
But he is an honest-to-goodness player who has done well for us after a shaky start.
‘Gittens has helped us out and has scored the crucial equaliser against Wolves.
You cannot just say ‘Thank you and push off.’
You have to do right by people.’
Lawrence promised full commitment in his drive to make Middlesbrough the most successful club in the North-East.
‘I gave myself two years to win promotion when I arrived at Ayresome Park last summer.
After that, despite any hard-luck stories, I might have thought of quitting.
‘Promotion has been achieved ahead of target.
We now have to march on.
I have never had any doubts about my decision to move North.
I signed a two-year contract and would have honoured that, even if we had missed the play-offs.
‘A contract does not make a great deal of difference.
You do a job to the best of your ability.
I would not be interested in leaving Middlesbrough until I have got Middlesbrough as far as Middlesbrough can go.’
Lawrence added: ‘It was important not to let our fans down at Molineux.
That was my biggest motivation.
When Nicky Mohan was sent off all thoughts flashed through my mind.
The main worry was whether I would have many players left for the play-offs through injury and suspension.’
Chairman Colin Henderson reflected on the club's six-year rise since Ayresome Park gates were padlocked by the Official Receiver.
‘You could never have imagined the club would be where they are now when you look back on the liquidation crisis,’ he said.
‘Promotion to the Premier League was absolutely vital.
‘We have had dramatic finishes but nothing as dramatic as this season.
Someone must be writing a book.
I am confident we can develop and become even stronger.’
Nicky Mohan will miss the opening game of the Premier League after being sent off at Molineux after being sent off for trying to break up a fight!
‘Wolves forward Paul Cook spoke up for me and said he was out of control.
But the referee booked us both.
I'm not sure whether he would have taken action against me if I had realised I was already in his book.
‘When I left the field it was a terrible feeling.
I felt I had let the team down.
‘I was close to tears in the dressing room when Wolves scored.
Fortunately, everything worked out all right in the end.’
N-E clubs honoured MIDDLESBROUGH and Sunderland received special presentations at the North-East Football Writers' Association annual dinner at the Three Tuns, Durham, last night.
Silver salvers were presented to recognise Midlesbrough's automatic promotion to the Premier League and Sunderland's success in reaching the FA Cup Final.
Middlesbrough goalkeeper Stephen Pears (above) received the Player of the Year award from chairman Jeff Brown after an outstanding 59-match season.
Presentations were also made to retiring Football League referee George Courtney and Newcastle United defender John Anderson.
Anderson has been forced to retire from the game through injury after ten years' loyal service at St.James's Park.
Wolves 1 Middlesbrough 2 THE final 25 minutes of this nerve-wracking game must have been as dramatic as any in Middlesbrough's history.
Certainly they were the most important.
Middlesbrough fans feared the worst when central defender Nicky Mohan was sent off for a second bookable offence.
A Wolves goal immediately afterwards was another shattering blow to automatic promotion hopes.
With Derby County ahead against Swindon Town, the odds were stacked against Middlesbrough.
But then Boro boss Lennie Lawrence gambled with three men at the back and his team found true Teesside spirit battling back to snatch the crucial win against all the odds.
John Hendrie, the 28-year-old ‘veteran’ of the side, is convinced Mohan's sending-off was the turning point of the game.
‘I am sure the game would have finished a goal-less draw but for that incident.
With the chips down, we had to dig deep.
It often happens for a ten-man team.
We have discovered that to our cost this season.
‘I have shared in three promotion triumphs in my career.
This ranks among one of my greatest days.
The only thing that concerned me was that, with Stephen Pears injured, I was the oldest player in the team.
That has never happened to me before in my career!’
Wolves faced neither promotion nor relegation pressure.
Yet they were caught up in the atmosphere and importance of the occasion.
Their jubilation over Andy Mutch's goal in the 67th minute showed just how much they wanted to win.
Six minutes later Middlesbrough snatched an equaliser through Jon Gittens following a Hendrie corner.
It suddenly raised hopes that all was not lost.
With 12 minutes to go, the determination of Jamie Pollock won a chance for Paul Wilkinson to score his 24th goal of the season and the most important of his career.
Wilkinson thought it was the worst header of his career!
‘It took ages to cross the line, but overall I thought we deserved to win for our battling spirit,’ he said.
‘It was a great finish to a memorable season.’
Middlesbrough kept their composure in a tense finale, though skipper Jimmy Phillips was a little confused with messages of how long there was to go.
Phillips said: ‘The bench told me two minutes, the referee seven minutes.
The final whistle was a great relief.
Ian Ironside had a super game.
I thought he was our Man of the match in many ways.’
The former Scarborough goalkeeper certainly acquitted himself well on his debut.
There was an anxious moment in the first half when he caught the ball at the third attempt, but overall he was sound.
Ironside said: ‘I will probably never play in such an important game as that again.
It was brilliant.
I had no nerves.
I knew I would be either be a hero or a villain.
I think I played my part in helping Middlesbrough into the Premier League.’
The most touching moment of the ecstatic after-match celebrations was when Boro players presented their shirts to disabled fans.
Paul Wilkinson was one player who rushed across to the wheelchair fans alongside the pitch.
The matchwinner threw his boots among the 4,000 fans who would not go home until manager Lennie Lawrence and players returned from the dressing room.
Lawrence was lifted shoulder-high by fans as he acknowledged the applause and the delight of the assembled Boro faithful.
It had been a gruelling season but the final result made it all worthwhile.
And now the Premier League beckons.
SUNDERLAND Harrier David Clark scored a unique double yesterday when he won Durham City Nike Destiny Run for the second year running and became the first to break 20 minutes for the four-mile race.
Yet the 16-year-old English schools cross-country international didn't know he was eligible to run until 24 hours before the event.
Clark thought he was over-age, but his coach, Stan Long discovered his protege had beaten the deadline by 18 days.
The Sunderland fifth-former, who helped his school, St Aiden's, win an 800 metres track relay championship on Saturday, went into the Durham City event as a late entry without any special training.
But he was much too strong for the opposition, breaking clear on a short, testing climb through Sherburn House after 1 7 miles to beat another Long-trained runner, James Walker, of Cramlington, by 47 seconds.
Clark was surprised to be told he had broken the course record by 26 seconds.
‘I thought I was too old to run this year and I didn't train for it,’ he said.
‘But I felt really good early on and I went to the front and tried to keep a steady pace.
‘I'm surprised to have broken the record because I didn't push it until near the end.’
Long has great hopes of Clark, who will be making the English Schools youth 1500 metres championship his main target this summer.
‘He is going really well at the moment and he will be the one to beat over 800 and 1500 metres in the NorthEast championships.
He has a long way to go but he has the right attitude.’
Chester-le-Street's Lindsay Hardy, 15, also won the girls race for the second year in succession, finishing 12th overall, and was surprised to beat Middlesbrough and Cleveland's Kerry Matthew by over a minute and a half.
‘Kerry was in front of me at the start and I went past her on the second mile,’ she said.
‘I thought she was nearer than that.’
Hardy, who ran the fastest intermediate ladies lap in the Northern relay championships at Derby a month ago, said: ‘This must rate as my best-ever road race victory.’
Results: 1 D Clark (Sunderland) 19 mins 59 secs; 2 J Walker (Cramlington) 20.46; 3 E Sharp (Birtley) 20.48; 4 P Bentley (Middlesbrough and Cleveland) 21.05; 5 S O'Donnell (Jarrow and Hebburn) 21.24; 6 M Briggs (Washington) 21.32; 7 S Thorogood (Durham City) 21.50; 8 M Osborne (J&H) 22.14; 9 P McVitie (Chesterle-Street) 22.18; 10 M Lunn (Leeds) 22.38.
Girls: 1 L Hardy (ClS) 23.27; 2 K Matthew (M&C) 25.03; 3 L Matthew (M&C) 25.59; 4 A Watson (ClS) 26.13; 5 L Robson (Shildon) 26.30.
MORPETH Harrier Paul Johnson defied stinging hailstones to win the Nike Croxdale 10.
The icy missiles bombarded the runners for the first two miles, and when the aerial attack subsided Johnson pulled away at the head of the field, and only Steve Webb, of Blaydon Harriers, responded to the quickening pace.
Johnson passed the halfway mark in 25 mins 26 sec, holding a three-second advantage on Webb, but the Northumbrian gradually extended his lead in the second half of the race to win by 49 seconds.
Scottish international Lynn Harding, preparing for the Stockholm Marathon at the end of the month, set a course record when she won the women's race by over four minutes from Durham City veteran Julie Coleby.
Results: 1 P Johnson (Morpeth) 51.31; 2 S Webb (Blaydon) 52.02; 3 G Hetherington (Durham City) 52.29; 4 K Chapman (Durham Un) 52.45; 5 A Catley (North Shields Poly V40) 53.27; 6 P Simms (New Marske) 53.32; 7 I Horrocks (Durham Un) 54.03; 8 B Forbes (Chesterle-Street) 54.04; 9 B Addison (Kendal) 54.12; 10 S Everett (Durham City) 54.30.
Other vets: O/45 M McNally (Saltwell) 54.41; O/50 P Lancaster (NSP) 55.46; O/55 I Barnes (Darlington) 59.35; O/60 H Gamble-Thompson (New Marske) 62.40.
Teams: 1 Durham City 30; 2 Durham University 37; 3 Crook 49.
Vets Team: 1 North Shields Poly 53.
Women: 1 L Harding (Houghton) 56.49; 2 J Coleby (Durham City V35) 61.03; 3 G Beedle (Heaton V35) 61.36; 4 H Humphrey (New Marske) 64.19; 5 S Laws (Derwentside V35) 65.19.
Vets O/40 S Kirkup (Durham City) 66.43.
ENGLAND international Ian Archbold was in scintillating form yesterday as he clipped nearly minute off the course record in winning the Red House six mile road race at Sunderland.
Morpeth Harrier Archbold, who will go for the five-race Wearside Grand Prix title, made his break at the two mile mark and went on to beat Sunderland's Martin Armstrong by a comfortable 30 seconds.
Seaham policewoman Anne Pearson, of Darlington Harrier, was also in record form, taking over three minutes off the previous best time when she finished in 37 mins 13 secs, over a minute ahead of Houghton veteran Maureen Dodsworth.
Results: 1 I Archbold (Morpeth) 29.36 (rec); 2 M Armstrong (Sunderland) 30.06; 3 D Mullen (Houghton) 31.00; 4 J Stephens (Sunderland) 31.03; 5 T Field (Sunderland) 31.31; 6 W Johnson (Sunderland) 31.37; 7 G lancaster (Sunderland) 31.45; 8 B Kershaw (Crook) 31.50; 9 C Griffiths (Billingham Marsh House) 32.00; 10 P Richardson (Sunderland V40) 32.02.
Other vets: O/45 J Robinson (Richmond and Zetland) 33.11; O/50 P Lancaster (North Shields Poly) 32.36; O/55 E Appleby (Heaton) 36.20; O/60 D Hall (Houghton) 39.53.
Women: 1 A Pearson (Darlington) 37.13 (rec); 2 M Dodsworth (Houghton V35) 38.35; 3 S Allen (Unatt) 38.52; 4 A Irving (Houghton V40) 41.38; 5 J Sails (Gateshead) 41.58.
Pears takes top award FOOTBALL: Stephen Pears has been named the North-East Football Writers Association player of the year.
The Middlesbrough goalkeeper received his award from Association chairman Jeff Brown at the annual dinner at the Three Tuns Hotel, Durham.
Revenge match
BOXING: A revenge match is on the bill at Spennymoor Amateur Boxing Academy's dinner show at Spennymoor Leisure Centre on Friday.
During the North-East ABA Select v London and Home Counties match, Spennymoor's Stephen Hodgson will meet London's Barney Doherty, who pipped Hodgson on a majority points decision for the national schools title in the finals at Derby recently.
Swift cure BOXING: Wally Swift, the British light-middleweight champion, is seeking specialist advice in an attempt to cure an eye problem that is hampering his career.
Young Eagle FOOTBALL: England boss Graham Taylor named Nottingham Forest's whizzkid Roy Keane the Barclay's Young Eagle of the Year.
Flexible friend FOOTBALL: MPs are to meet National Heritage Secretary David Mellor to seek ‘a show of flexibility’ over the implementation of the Taylor Report.
Cup winner YACHTING: Bill Koch's America 3 won the right to defend the America's Cup by beating Dennis Conner's Stars and Stripes in San Diego, California.
Second best EQUESTRIAN: Britain finished a close second to Belgium in their first Nations' Cup contest of the season in Kiskunhalas, Hungary.
Chain reaction
ON May 1 someone sent us a chain letter (from Gatwick Airport) promising a run of good luck.
‘Your life will improve dramatically and unexpectedly,’ it said.
On May 2 our beloved Shildon were relegated, sepulchrally, to the Northern League second division.
The letter has suffered a similar fate.
Bank note
SATURDAY'S defeat was against South Bank, whose own future is gloomier still.
Ground, facilities and ambitions wrecked by four arson attacks, they play home games at Guisborough.
Long serving officials Les Crossman and Steve Rock have resigned out of frustration and despair, team manager Jimmy Wattis may follow.
‘It's difficult to see any light at the end of the tunnel,’ says Crossman.
Formed in 1868 the first English club North of York the Bankers are the only club in continuous, 102 year Northern League membership.
They also hold the League's record score a 21–0 win over North Skelton Rovers in 1895.
The future now seems in the sway of Keith Randall, chairman of the parent club.
Though his engineering company advertises ‘five lines’ in the club programme, League officials have had no response on any of them.
Their final game this season is against Newcastle Blue Star at Guisborough tomorrow night.
Tragically, it could well be the last of all.
Knocking story
OFF to a good start on the field, Crook's cricketers are faring less well in the clubhouse.
We have to report that Friday night's domino handicap was won by Ian Mangles, who beat Les Thompson (the chairman's dad) in the final.
Les Thompson is 81; Ian Mangles is 11.
Up hill struggle
THE season's last issue of Darlington's great value fanzine Mission Impossible re-titled Mission Mathematically Impossible for the gloomy occasion concurs with our long-held view that Ferryhill's is the best of the non-leaague fanzines.
What a pity that ‘The Hill’ has been barred from its own clubhouse.
Trimdon united — and finally, a sportsman's dinner for Trimdon United Juniors on May 29 promises a rare gathering of local lads made good.
Seven Football League players from the same Trimdon Village housing estate will share a table.
They're Colin Cooper (Middlesbrough), Mickey Heathcote (Cambridge), John Tinkler (Hartlepool), Paul Ward (Scunthorpe), Andrew Strong (ex-Middlesbrough), Michael Trotter (Leicester) and David Young (ex-Darlington.)
Jackie Blanchflower and Kevin Connelly speak at the Ramside Hall do.
Tickets are £20 from Owen Willoughby (Wellfield 880473).
The Trimdon seven, incidentally, are joined by Hartlepool's Keith Nobbs who like them went to Sedgefield Comp but is definitely a foreigner.
He's from Bishop Middleham.
HE is the Cockney boy who came North to become a Boro lion and won the hearts of Teesside.
Lennie Lawrence, in his first season with the Teessiders, took the club back to the top and to mere minutes away from Wembley in the Rumbelows Cup.
Now that the dust has settled on this epic season Boro fans are beginning to realise just how lucky they are to have Lennie Lawrence at the helm.
Fortunate indeed for the club for I rate Lawrence the best all-round manager Boro have had in my 32 years on the Ayresome Park beat.
Jack Charlton was a superb tactician who got the best out of his players in a four-year spell.
Big Jack won the Second Division championship.
But he lost out on the First Division title because he was reluctant to strengthen the team.
Lawrence is far happier at wheeling and dealing on the transfer market than Jack Charlton and after managing on a mean budget with Charlton Athletic it must be a joy to him to have money to spend.
This is a shrewd operator equally at home on the training ground or at the office while Big Jack hated life behind a desk.
But Lennie Lawrence is shaping up to be the complete club manager.
Very few people without a Football League background as a player succeed in management.
Lawrence is an exception.
What's more, he commands the respect of professionals for his knowledge and motivating powers.
There is always an element of luck when a club selects a manager.
A player with a cupboard full of medals is often ill-equipped for the hazards of the profession.
He finds it difficult to cope after being at the top as a player through natural talent.
But Middlesbrough struck lucky when they choose Lawrence last summer following the departure of Colin Todd.
Lawrence had spent so long at Charlton Athletic that people regarded him as part of the fittings.
Very few imagined he would leave the club.
So it was a shock when Middlesbrough announced the former Croydon, Carshalton and Sutton United player as their manager.
To Charlton officials, it was a bombshell.
The London club were stunned when Middlesbrough paraded Lawrence at Ayresome Park for a photo-call.
One irate Charlton official barked over the telephone: ‘Get him off the pitch.
He is our manager.’
When the hue and cry died down, there was nothing Charlton could do to prevent Lawrence taking on a new challenge.
And Lawrence wasted no time responding to that challenge and clearing the decks at Ayresome Park.
He asked transfer-listed players one question ‘Do you want to stay or go?’
Any player not committed to the cause was soon on the way through the exit door.
Chairman Colin Henderson said: ‘What struck us in our interview with Lawrence was that he definitely wanted the job and was ready to move North straightaway.
He was ambitious and he regarded Middlesbrough as a big club.
We were happy to take him on board.
‘He has brought harmony to the club and that is of vital importance.
A club cannot be successful without everyone pulling together.’
Henderson is aware that there has been talk of Lennie being lured away but he is confident that the Boro boss will stay and see the Boro into a new era of success.
‘I am sure Lennie was quite embarrassed by all the speculation linking him with Spurs,’ Henderson said.
Lawrence has proved a master of communication and a breath of fresh air to North-East sportswriters.
Members of his profession are often economical with the truth.
Lawrence is straightforward and honest.
Lawrence, unlike many other top managers, also keeps the fans informed.
He attends post-match  interviews whatever the result.
He does not wear rose-coloured spectacles.
Striker Paul Wilkinson played for two big-name managers earlier in his career.
And he is no doubt that Lawrence is up there with the best of them.
Twenty-four-year-old Wilkinson said: ‘Brian Clough was one in a million at Nottingham Forest.
Howard Kendall was also a great manager at Everton.
Lawrence ranks alongside them.’
And for Lennie Lawrence the prospects at Boro look good.
Middlesbrough will share in the Premier League jackpot following automatic promotion.
There is talk of £2m at least for every club from TV and sponsorship.
That means that after years of scrimping and saving at Charlton Lawrence should enjoy the luxury of preparing for the big time with money to spend.
Boro lose bonus cash
FOOTBALL: Promotion to the Premier League will cost Middlesbrough £400,000 in bonuses following the collapse of a London-based insurance company.
The club will also lose the £80,000 premium they paid to cover the bonuses.
Continental Assurance Company went into liquidation in March with estimated debts of £6.8m.
Meanwhile, Middlesbrough have called off a proposed tour to Australia and New Zealand because players were unhappy about a long-distance tour after a gruelling season.
Angry Cruyff FOOTBALL: Barcelona coach Johan Cruyff yesterday accused his players of throwing in the towel and lacking the heart to defend their Spanish League title after his side dropped a point with a poor performance in a 1–1 draw at home to Real Burgos yesterday.
Jenkins off
RUGBY UNION: Pontypridd's Welsh international outside-half Neil Jenkins was sent off minutes before half-time in the first Schweppes semi-final at Cardiff Arms Park today which his team lost 27–6 to Llanelli.
Froggatt out
FOOTBALL: Steve Froggatt, Aston Villa's teenage winger, has withdrawn from the England under-21 squad to play in Hungary next week with an ankle injury.
Stefan stars
TENNIS: Three-times Wimbledon champion Stefan Edberg heads a strong field for the £300,000 Stella Artois tournament at Queen's Club, London, from June 8–14.
Frankie banned
RACING: Frankie Dettori was banned for four days due to careless riding on the favourite Karamoja at Kempton yesterday.
A 500 fan
MOTOR SPORT: Max Mosley, president of the International Federation of Motor Sports (FISA), wants the Indianapolis 500 to rejoin the Formula One racing circuit after an absence of three decades.
dad start for Bears Speedway Exeter Falcons 54 Middlesbrough Bears 36 BORO battled hard enough but this proved to be just about the worst venue on which to open their League programme.
The South-West circuit is where few visiting teams do well and Boro had to rely too heavily on their new captain, Steve Regeling, and his fellow Australian Dave Cheshire.
Unhappily, Daz Sumner showed his dislike for the big, unwelcoming track with his poorest return of the season, while Mark Lemon's lack of form continued.
Regeling, who was an Exeter rider last season, showed he had lost none of his flair for what has always been a happy hunting ground for him, top scoring for his new club.
Cheshire was unlucky not to have his best day of the season.
He would have finished just a point short of an 18 maximum if he had not suffered engine failures in two races.
Steve Regeling 13, Dave Cheshire 11, Mark Lemon 7, Daz Sumner 2, Donnie Dorm 2, Duncan Chapman 1, Paul Pickering 0.
Middlesbrough race at Milton Keynes tonight with an unchanged team.
Rate cut hopes
JUST before Budget Day we told the story of the Brentford Football Club fan who occupies a senior post at the Treasury and we expected a giveaway Budget if Brentford were leading the Third Division table at the time.
But they lost 3–2 at Preston the Saturday before and there was no giveaway Budget.
Last Saturday, however, Brentford won at Peterborough and clinched the Third Division championship.
There is now talk of an interest rate cut some time this week.
THE millionaire owner of Wolverhampton Wanderers yesterday offered a £10,000 reward in a bid to trap arsonists who have mounted two attacks in 48 hours at the club's Molineux ground.
Sir Jack Hayward who is also the club's president announced the reward just before flying to the Bahamas.
‘I am offering this reward on behalf of the club because we are obviously very anxious to put an end to these recurring, despicable acts,’ he said.
The first fire, on Saturday, just before the game against Middlesbrough, caused damage amounting to £100,000 to the derelict Waterloo Road stand.
The arsonists also buried 32 shotgun cartridges in the pitch.
In the latest attack, just before 4am yesterday, a brick was thrown through the window of the club secretary's office and flammable material was pushed through the broken glass, setting light to carpets and furniture.
The alarm was raised shortly afterwards by a milkman and officers in a passing police car who spotted the smoke and flames.
Firefighters managed to prevent the blaze spreading to other parts of the building.
Club secretary Keith Pearson said: ‘We cannot understand why these people want to harm us.
Everyone is just shell-shocked about it.’
Police were also examining video tapes which may help them find those responsible.
Security and crowd control video cameras were recording at the time of Saturday's attack, but cut out when the fire blew the electricity supply.
Police have appealed for any witnesses who may have been in the area in the early hours of Saturday.
There was no apparent explanation for the attack.
FORMER Newcastle manager Ossie Ardiles wants the chance to transform West Bromwich Albion with his Latin-American flair.
Ardiles, eager to bounce back after losing the Newcastle job to Kevin Keegan, declared an immediate interest in the Hawthorns' vacancy before the dust had settled on Bobby Gould's departure.
Gould was sacked after a stormy 14 months following Albion's failure to at least make the Third Division promotion play-offs.
Chairman John Silk also stood down, with successor Trevor Summers saying: ‘If Bobby Gould is honest he knew he had to win something this season because he didn't have a hope of staying if he didn't.’
And Summers conceded: ‘His style of play at times was not what the fans wanted.’
Ardiles, who helped Argentina win the World Cup in 1978 before carving out a successful playing career at Tottenham, could have the answer.
He established Swindon as one of the most skilful sides outside the top flight before a frustrating switch to Tyneside.
But Ardiles left Albion in no doubt about his appetite, saying: ‘I'm very interested in the West Bromwich job.
And I'm very keen to get back into soccer management.’
Summers will not waste much time over the appointment.
‘We've got 19 players with contracts up for renewal and want a new manager installed as quickly as possible,’ he said.
‘We will be going for a named manager with the right type of experience.
It is not a time to gamble.’
Former Middlesbrough boss Bruce Rioch, Dave Stringer, Chris Nichol and Stuart Pearson are other possible contenders.
Gould said: ‘I've recommended they offer the job to Brian Clough.’
NEWCASTLE United striker Gavin Peacock could be a target for promoted Middlesbrough.
Twenty-two goal Peacock is out of contract in the summer and though Boro boss Lennie Lawrence has made no approach, he could soon show his hand.
Peacock is unsettled at St James's Park and confused about the managerial situation.
The former Bournemouth player said: ‘I did not discuss my contract while Newcastle were fighting a relegation  battle .
‘I am uncertain about my future as at the moment it seems we don't have a manager.’
Republic of Ireland B international Tony McCarthy is one of three Irish players on trial at Ayresome Park this week.
McCarthy is a 21-year-old central defender from Sherbourne, while Barry Ryan and Michael Curley are both from first division champions Limerick.
Boro goalkeeper Stephen Pears has completed a notable double.
The North-East Football Writers' Player of the Year topped the voting for the Hennessy Player of the Year.
Pears was honoured at a dinner at Newcastle's Civic Centre last night.
Hail the conquering heroes.
d THE triumphant Middlesbrough football team is to get a civic reception on Thursday at 12 noon.
An open-topped bus carrying players and officials will be arriving on the Boulevard outside the Civic Centre on Russell Street around midday.
The Boro party will then go inside to meet the Mayor, Coun Eddie Bolland, and councillors to enjoy the official welcome.
But there's a plea to the public wanting to come along and cheer on their promotion-winning heroes to stick to the areas for their use.
After consultation with the police the council is asking people to gather on the Boulevard and the nearby Gloucester Street car park, at the rear of the library, which has been reserved for them.
Members of the public are expressly asked not to gather on Albert Road or Russell Street, or to climb on buildings to try to see inside the Mayor's parlour.
A council spokesman said this  occurred when the last civic reception was held for the club and caused great concern.
At the reception the Mayor will be presenting a personal gift of a salver to the team.
Celtic clash for Tony MIDDLESBROUGH are to play Celtic in a Tony Mowbray testimonial match at Ayresome Park on Sunday, July 26.
The match should be the main attraction in a programme of pre-season friendlies.
Celtic agreed to provide the opposition when Mowbray joined Celtic in a £1m deal last November.
Big names out
TENNIS: Ivan Lendl and John McEnroe were bundled out of the German Open in the second round yesterday by Italians who were still schoolboys when the pair were in their prime.
Lendl's 7–6 6–2 defeat by Omar Camporese follows his opening match loss at last week's Madrid Open.
McEnroe, who lost a tough match with Stefano Pescosolido, 7–6 1–6 6–4, said he was losing his mental edge.
Lyle confident GOLF: Super-confident Sandy Lyle, buoyed by his victory in Italy on Sunday, believes he can repeat the success in the Benson and Hedges International at St Mellion starting today.
KEVIN KEEGAN has had secret talks with Newcastle directors in a bid to keep him at St James's Park.
The meeting took place following the collapse of chairman Sir John Hall's £13m rescue package at the fallen Second Division giants.
Keegan is understood to have met with Hall, vice-chairman George Forbes and director Freddie Shepherd at a secret destination following a crunch board meeting at the club.
The likely outcome is the offer of a three-year contract for the former England skipper and his no.2 Terry McDermott.
Keegan is desperate to stay after savouring his first taste in management by keeping United in the Second Division.
And Newcastle are equally keen to keep him.
Keegan is demanding nothing like the £4,000 a week figure that has been bandied about.
He will be happy with the £125,000 a year earned by his predecessor Ossie Ardiles coupled with bonuses for success.
Hall still appears ready to pull out and spark another power switch.
Former chairman Forbes is the key man in the latest boardroom power tussle.
He is set to front a new rescue package, with a mystery backer ready to invest a substantial sum.
Current sponsors Newcastle Breweries could be involved in the shares shake-up if Hall walks away.
No statement is expected from the club for another week but concerned fans were more optimistic last night that Keegan would be at the helm for the start of next season.
Deputy chief executive Freddie Fletcher reissued a news release from the club yesterday stating that an alternative form of financial restructuring was under review.
MIDDLESBROUGH manager Lennie Lawrence wants to sign a striker and a midfield player to boost scoring power for the Premier League.
Lawrence said: ‘We don't score enough goals, especially from midfield.
The situation needs looking at.’
Newcastle United's leading scorer Gavin Peacock will be a summer target.
Lawrence added: ‘I am not denying interest but nothing concrete has occurred.’
Negotiations have opened with Southampton over the permanent transfer of Jon Gittens to Ayresome Park.
Gittens rounded off his loan spell with a crucial equaliser in the final-match decider at Wolves.
Lawrence hopes Southampton will report back with a ‘sensible’ fee.
There was talk of a £300,000 deal when Gittens first joined Boro but Southampton will have to lower their sights to do business.
Lawrence will announce a series of pre-season friendlies next week, with the standard tougher than last year.
DARLINGTON plan to draw up a short-list of applicants for the manager's job early next week.
There has been an encouraging response since the club advertised a few days ago.
Ray Hankin, who took temporary charge when the team were heading towards the Fourth Division, was the first applicant.
Darlington have made it known Hankin will be on the short-list.
Chief executive Tom Hughes said: ‘We need to prepare a shortlist, interview, and make an appointment before the end of May.
‘A football club does not close down at the end of a playing season.
‘For a start, important decisions have to be made over players, pre-season friendlies and youth training.’
Hankin is certain to announce a clear-out when he presents his retained list next week.
Negotiations are continuing aimed at strengthening a two-man board.
Hughes added: ‘The door is still open to prospective board members.
We are quite prepared to talk to anyone in confidence
THE NORTH-EAST is gearing up for a bumper celebration of European arts and entertainment.
Dozens of events have been organised throughout the region as part of the nationwide European Arts Festival from July.
Everything from flamenco dancing to French theatre will take place, as well as Europe's largest kite flying festival in Sunderland.
The events will mark Britain's Presidency of the European Community from July to December.
David Mellor, Secretary of State for National Heritage, said: ‘The festival is remarkable in its breadth, range and balance of events.
The aim is that there should be something for everybody in all parts of the country and that everyone should have an opportunity to try something new and widen their horizons.’
Other events in the region include: street theatre and circus in Bishop Auckland; folk weeks in Stanley and Consett; European folk music, a French company's production of Jungle Book and Marivaux's Game of Love and Chance at Darlington Civic Theatre; European Family Sculpture Day in Gateshead; craft workshops in Middlesbrough and Stockton; and flamenco dancing in Newcastle.
BEAT bobby PC Ged Kirkbright has been voted man of the match by a group of schoolchildren on his patch.
When Marton Grove Primary School's football strip was stolen, he approached Middlesbrough FC and Cheetah Sports of Bridge Street, Middlesbrough.
The club donated 11 shirts and the company added the shirts and shorts.
Yesterday PC Kirkbright presented the children with their new kit.
Among the happy school soccer players were, from left, Paul Chamberlain, 11, Craig Porritt, 11 and Anthony Walsh, 10.
Info centre to stay shut on Saturdays A TOURIST information centre will remain closed on Saturdays after Middlesbrough councillors decided they could not afford to open the Corporation Road office for a sixth day, despite a campaign to increase tourism.
Council information officer Doug Allan will now approach other possible sources of finance, including local hotels.
THEY might be the underdogs but Sunder land have proved in the past that when it comes to Wembley finals they can rise to the occasion.
And they have the players who can match the big time.
Take goalkeeper Tony Norman.
In previous Wembley appearances Norman has proved what a tremendous asset he is to the team.
The Welsh international has played out of his skin throughout the FA Cup campaign and just as John Byrne's goals have carried Sunderland through Norman's saves have undoubtedly kept them in.
And the rest of the Roker lads have played their parts in getting to this fairytale final.
The sadness is that for some past efforts have not been quite enough.
John Kay, the Sunderland Supporters Association's Player of the Year has been a model of consistency over the season tough, dependable and never over-awed by the occasion.
But a calf injury ruled him out of the final just two days ago.
John will play his part shouting the lads on from the bench.
Paul Hardyman (full back): A few months ago Hardyman was down in the dumps Sunderland had shelled out £350,000 for another left back, Anton Rogan, and his days at Roker looked numbered.
But he grabbed his chance when Rogan was switched to the centre of defence and has played an important role on the way to Wembley.
Anton Rogan (central defender/full back): Brought a few smiles when he revealed his ‘grandad’ vest at Stamford Bridge, but his switch to the heart of defence has proved to be an inspirational decision by Malcolm Crosby.
Strong in the air, alert and mobile Rogan has been outstanding.
Kevin Ball (centre back): A knee injury received in the semi-final victory over Norwich threatened to wreck his Wembley dream but he has recovered and must be the leading contender to partner Anton Rogan in the centre of the defence.
Determined, reliable, can use both feet and surprisingly powerful in the air.
Gary Bennett (centre back): Only five short of 300 appearances for Sunderland since signing from Cardiff for a bargain £80,000, Bennett has been a great servant to the club.
The former skipper had the misfortune of conceding the own-goal which gave Swindon a play-off victory at Wembley two years ago but he still led the team out in the First Division the next season.
Gary Owers (midfield): Back in contention for a place at Wembley after a serious pelvic injury kept him out of action for three months, the England Under-21 international's non-stop running could be a great asset.
David Rush (striker): The young striker's seemingly inexhaustible store of energy has been an important factor in the Cup run.
Helped make the winning goal in the semi-final against Norwich City and was certainly not overawed by the occasion Paul Bracewell (midfield): Captain and midfield director-of-operations, Bracewell knows all about FA Cup finals.
He was on the losing side with Everton three times twice against Liverpool and he is determined to get his hands on the trophy this time.
Brian Atkinson (midfield): The fresh-faced youngster from Darlington got his big chance when Malcolm Crosby took over and has never looked back.
Plenty of stamina and loves to break forward.
Gordon Armstrong (midfield): Sunderland's longest serving player, Armstrong will best be remembered for his superb match-winning header against Chelsea in the quarter-final replay.
Could have been transferred to Norwich City at the start of the season for a big fee, a much admired left-sided midfielder.
John Byrne (striker): Bargain £225,000 buy from Brighton, the Republic of Ireland international has scored in every round, and he will be out to add to his seven-goal haul against Liverpool.
Peter Davenport (striker): The ex-England international striker has loads of experience, and the ability to score cracking goals, as he proved in the derby game against Middlesbrough.
Could shine on the big occasion.
ALMOST 1,000 swimmers took a weekend plunge as part of Cleveland's biggest annual community fundraising event.
Superswim ‘92 attracted swimmers of all ages and abilities to Eston Baths.
Organisers hoped to break last year's £22,000 record but a cloud hung over the event.
Eston Baths would be one of the centres under threat if Langbaurgh Council finds itself charge-capped by the Government.
A decision is expected this week.
Superswim organiser Shiela Joplin said: ‘We have had no indication that we will have to take the Superswim away from Eston Baths.
Langbaurgh Council has always been very supportive.
‘But whatever happens, we would try to keep the event going because so many people support it and come back year after year.’
Community groups, schools, pub and clubgoers, work colleagues, scouts and guides formed teams to swim in relay for 55 minutes per team.
Superswim won acclaim last year when it was honoured by Rotary International.
The Rotary Club of Middlesbrough Cleveland joined forces with the Cleveland Community Foundation and the Cleveland Council for Voluntary Services to organise the event.
Flag cash:
Fund-raisers collected £393 for Finchale Training College for the Disabled in Durham at their recent Flag Day in Darlington.
Safe house:
A grant from the Theatre Trust should ensure plays put on in the former church now Saltburn's Community Centre no longer literally bring the house down.
Fund-raising for renovation of the crumbling ceiling above the stage raised £44,000 but more work was needed so the Theatre Trust handed over £1,500 towards repairs.
No barrier:
Ram-raiders used a stolen van to break into the Wineways store in Edgehill Road, Scarborough, just two months ago after bollards had been erected at the store to prevent such attacks.
Star prizes:
Middlesbrough Football Club manager Lennie Lawrence has presented prizes to two of ICI's star performers on Teesside.
Mark Kenworthy, 21, and Michael Hattan, 18, won the Sir Ewart Smith Awards, which go to the best first and fourth year apprentices.
Five alive:
Cleveland County Council's open learning unit has achieved a first validation for five Higher National Certificate courses at the same time.
Veteran returns:
An aid convoy veteran is making his 14th trip to Poland in the last three years.
Colin Appleyard, of Thornaby and Yarm Rotary Club, will lead a nine-strong team which sets off tomorrow.
Tennis trophies:
Redcar MP Marjorie Mowlam served up the trophies after the North-East Junior Tennis Tournament for Hearing Impaired Children.
The third tournament attracted a record entry of 40-plus and kick-started National Deaf Children's Society Week.
Winners at the Topspin Leisure Centre were: under-16s boys, Robin Calvert, girls, Michelle Gait; under-12s boys, Ian Spraggon, girls Katrina Scanlon.
Keeping fit:
Cleveland Ambulance NHS Trust has signed up for a Department of Health initiative which encourages healthy living for all staff.
Full treatment:
Members of Hartlepool Inner Wheel have presented a fully-equipped paramedic case to the Cleveland Ambulance NHS Trust.
Soccer gift:
Former England football manager Bobby Robson has donated a signed football shirt to auction for Hartlepool Hospice funds.
Old arts:
Visitors to Cleveland's Thorpe Wood learned about the art of charcoal production, bodging and basket making this weekend.
The Castle Eden Walkway Country Park was the setting for a woodcrafts weekend.
Mural unveiled:
A large-scale mural design at a Hartlepool restaurant is to be unveiled on May 20.
The mural by artist Oscar Romp is painted on the double gable end of the Il Ponte restaurant, Northgate, Headland, and is designed to act as a celebratory entrance piece to the Headland area of the town.
Bowls chance:
Teenagers have the chance to learn to play outdoor bowls with a new season of courses organised by Hartlepool Council.
The courses run by the Hartlepool and District Outdoor Bowls Association begin on Thursday at the Staby House Bowling Green between 6pm and 8pm.
Record-breakers:
Another record-breaking year has passed at the Oak Leaf Sports Complex in Newton Aycliffe.
After an increase of 25pc in customers during 1990, they achieved another 10pc increase in 1991.
Today Paintings, Etchings and Drawings by David Stubbs, Cleveland College of Art & Design, Green Lane, Linthorpe, 10am-8pm.
Until 22nd May.
Cleveland Outlook social activities group, meet at the Treebridge for a bar meal, 8pm.
Details, tel.
Guis 635898.
Entertainment from Brocade, a Guisborough Harmony Group, The Victoria, Dundas Street, 8.30pm.
All welcome.
Today Tuesday's Folk, singaround, meet Tap & Barrel, Newport Road,, 8.30pm.
Middlesbrough Barbershop Singers meeting, Methodist Church Hall, The Grove,, details, tel.821908.
New members welcome.
Our Offices NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
THE new Football League Managers' Association Achievement award is an excellent idea.
Managers of championship-winning teams have dominated the annual awards for too long, with no recognition to those who have worked miracles with limited resources.
Former Middlesbrough boss Bruce Rioch was the influential figure behind a double promotion triumph.
From padlocked gates at Ayresome Park, courtesy of the Official Receiver, to the First Diviion in two years was a magnificent achievement.
Yet there is nothing to show in the trophy cabinet of his Harpenden home to commemorate a romantic chapter in Middlesbrough's history.
Current Boro boss Lennie Lawrence performed an annual miracle in his Charlton Athletic days.
So it was ironic that Lennie was not in the running for the new Barclays-sponsored prize.
Sheffield United's Dave Bassett was a clear-cut winner in the voting of the Managers' Association.
Despite Lawrence guiding Boro into the Premier League in his first season at Ayresome Park, Bassett won the award for lifting a relegation-threatened side into the top half of the First Division.
Bassett was closely involved in the success of Wimbledon's Crazy Gang, so he is no overnight success.
YET he was caught completely unawares as the first recipient of the Barclay's Eagle Trophy and a £1,000 cheque.
Bassett has a reputation as a fast-talking Cockney.
Yet he struggled for words, and was quite emotional, at the awards ceremony in the  chandeliered splendour of London's Savoy Hotel.
The Managers' Association is a worthwhile organisation.
For too long managers have had no  authoritative body to express their views or air their grievances.
Howard Wilkinson should prove a forthright leader as chairman.
He admires the work of the PFA and wants his association to win the same respect.
No-one could blame Wilkinson for wanting the new body to play an important part in the future development of the game.
The Leeds United manager was not content to pocket a £5,000 cheque and bask in the glory of his Manager of the Year award.
Wilkinson told fellow members, and top-ranking League officials, at the awards ceremony there has to be greater understanding between players, managers and referees.
The emphasis has to be on quality not  quantity , otherwise the game will drift down a cul-de-sac of mediocrity.
Closer co-operation is needed to check an alarming trend.
SCARBOROUGH manager Ray McHale completed two key close season signings before jetting off for a week's break in Greece yesterday.
Former Middlesbrough utility player Owen McGee and central defender Chris Curran from Crewe Alexandra have both signed one-year contracts at the McCain Stadium.
Both players were brought in for the last six weeks of the season as McHale began to look ahead to next season when the Seasiders hope to mount a serious promotion push.
McGee looked the part from the word go, playing an important role in the right-back position which caused Scarborough problems all season.
Curran formed a useful partnership with centre-back Lee Hirst and with Adrian Meyer expected to be out through injury until Christmas, Curran could well start next season in the first team fray.
McHale will not find out whether goalkeeper Stuart Ford will be able to accept a one-year deal after returning from a loan spell to Rotherham.
The Millmoor club were due to give Ford a free transfer but have now indicated that they may have a change of heart following the keeper's fine run at Scarborough.
Meanwhile, Scarborough have sacked groundsman John Carter after being unhappy with the state of the McCain Stadium pitch.
DARLINGTON boss Ray Hankin last night denied that he is about to sell star keeper Mark Prudhoe and striker Nick Cusack.
Hankin's denial follows a weekend report that the popular Prudhoe and recent signing Cusack will be the next to go, for £100,000 and £50,000 respectively, following on Friday's news that ten other players have been released.
Caretaker Hankin, one of 20 people to apply for the manager's job at Feethams, stormed: ‘Those two players are the last I want to sell, because they will be forming the basis of next season's side.
‘I don't want to sell them, but if an offer came in that was right for the club and right for the player, then we would consider it, just as any club would in the lower divisions in the same position.
Besides, I value Prudhoe at £200,000 and Cusack at £100,000.
‘Anything less than that would be stealing.
Talking of those other prices is ludicrous.’
Hankin also responded to weekend criticism of his clear out of experienced players.
‘Where were the old heads when we needed them when the chips were down?
The reason that a lot of the older players are going is because they didn't produce the goods when the club needed it most at least the kids were going out battling.
They guarantee the supporters commitment.’
DARLINGTON skipper Kevan Smith wants the manager's job at Feethams.
The 32-year-old central defender will hand in his application this week to a club he has served for nine years in two spells.
Smith said: ‘I am ready to throw my hat into the ring.
My heart and roots are at Feethams.
‘I am ambitious and feel I am at the right age to go into management.
I have served under some great managers and Brian Little taught me a lot.
‘It is important to get the team back on the right track as quickly as possible.
‘Last season was a horrible time for the team and for me personally, especially after two championship-winning seasons.
‘Next season will be very crucial.
‘I believe I know what the club need to check the slide.
I also believe I have the respect of the Darlington public.’
Smith dismissed speculation he would recruit former Middlesbrough coach David Nish as his right hand man if he took over the hot seat.
Chairman Alan Noble said a short-list would be drawn up this week.
Noble added: ‘We face a very important decision.
It would be great to bounce back from a temporary aberration and get into the Third Division.
‘Everything else is falling into place and we need a strong manager for next season.’
Darlington hope to recruit three new directors
MIDDLESBROUGH offshore business Northern Ocean Services has won its first major contract in seven years of operating from the former Smiths Docks site.
NOS will supply pipelines and cables to Norske Shell in a deal worth £22.5m.
They will be laid in the Draugen oil field, off the West coast of Norway, in 1993, while engineering work will be undertaken over the next six months.
Charles Tompkins, managing director of NOS, a subsidiary of Cable & Wireless, said the contract has come as a major breakthrough for his company, propelling it into the major league of offshore suppliers.
‘Last financial year we had a turnover of about £16m so it is apparent how significant the contract is,’ he said.
‘We beat off intense competition to win and one of the reasons we did was because of the high level of investment made in equipment by NOS.’
Five other competitors are believed to have pitched for the Norwegian work.
The work will not mean any new workers being taken on by the developer of the Tees Offshore Base, housed in the former Smiths Dock.
’ But the 100 workers at Middlesbrough will be engaged in the scheme, and also helping to develop the company as a major presence in the offshore sector,’said Mr Tompkins.
They will supply about 42 miles of pipeline and 22 miles of control cables, connecting five sub-sea locations to a main oil platform.
Further contract wins of a similar size are also being pitched for, said Mr Tompkins.
A TRIO of Cleveland pensioners have set off on the trip of a lifetime to the bulbfields of Holland.
Rose Roberts, 70, Ann Hetherington, 64, and Rene Tonner, 61, are among 250 senior citizens on the trip, organised by the Bradford and Northern Housing Association.
All three live in a Bradford housing scheme in Middlesbrough.
The trippers were given a civic send-off by Middlesbrough's deputy Mayor, Coun Frank Platt.
Botanical show:
An exhibition of botanical paintings by Mary Boreham is currently on display at the Botanical Gardens visitor centre, Durham.
Girls' sports:
A sports club has been set up at Cleadon Park Community Centre in South Shields for girls aged 10 to 16.
Those interested should attend on Tuesday nights from 6.30 until 8.30.
Charity cash:
Mayor of Middlesbrough Coun Eddie Bolland is pictured handing over cheques totalling more than £8,000 to Tony Griffiths of Middlesbrough Mencap and Moira Flaherty of the Middlesbrough Catholic Handicapped Trust yesterday.
The  money has been raised during the last year by the Mayor's charity.
MIDDLESBROUGH full back Jimmy Phillips and midfield player Mark Proctor have been offered new contracts.
They are the only senior players whose contracts expire this summer.
‘I have had preliminary talks with both and hope the situation will soon be resolved,’ said manager Lennie Lawrence.
‘Phillips has had a very consistent season.
I rated him as good a left back as any in the Second Division.
‘Proctor played well when I brought him into the team.
His experience will be a help next season.’
The permanent transfer of central defender Jon Gittens could also be completed.
Southampton have agreed a ‘sensible’ fee.
Lawrence said: ‘I want to increase a 17strong squad to at least 19 or 20 players for the Premier League.
I will be surprised if more than two or three players will be able to perform to the standard required in a 42-match programme, so it is essential we have a strong squad.’
Former Newcastle reserve full back Andrew Cole has been offered a one-year contract.
Reserve strikers Ian Arnold and Paul Hanford have been given free transfers.
Three other reserves, Robbie Lake, Michael Young and Nicky Peverell, have been retained as non-contract players.
Former Nottingham Forest reserve Stephen Bell can stay as a non-contract player after a late-season trial period.
—DARLINGTON could appoint a manager by the weekend.
Four more applications were received yesterday and the total of 15 is expected to increase over the next day or two.
Current boss Ray Hankin is waiting and hoping he will land the job on a permanent basis.
He said: ‘The board gave me a free hand with the retained list and backed me all the way.
I know I can do the job but I don't want to put pressure on the board.
They will make what they feel is the right decision.’
GATESHEAD Harrier Jonathan Edwards, the NorthEast's leading male challenger for an Olympic track and field medal this summer, opens his season in the North-Eastern Counties Championships at Middlesbrough this weekend.
The World Cup triple jump bronze medallist has decided to run in the 100 metres at the Cleveland County Stadium on Saturday instead of going through the motions in what would have been a practice trial in his specialist event.
‘I was going to jump,’ said Edwards, ‘but I was the only entrant and the triple jump was cancelled.
It's not a problem, though.
I'm looking forward to the 100 metres.’
Edwards won the NorthEast 100 metres title in 1990 and is likely to start as favourite after spending two months training in Fountain Valley, California, with John Regis, Roger Black, Kriss Akabussi and Marcus Adam.
‘I towed along behind them in my sprint work,’ he said.
‘It was better than trying to run 22 seconds for 200 metres on my own in the wind and rain at Gateshead.’
Edwards clocked his best 100 metres time, a wind assisted 10.63 seconds, while preparing for the Commonwealth Games in New Zealand two years ago.
Edwards, who celebrated his 26th birthday on Sunday, missed the World Championships in Tokyo last year because he refuses to compromise his religious believes by competing on the Sabbath.
He nevertheless ended the year ranked ninth in the world, with 17.43 metres, and can prepare for the Olympics safe in the knowledge that his event won't be held on a Sunday in Barcelona.
His first triple jump of the year is likely to be in Jena, Germany, on May 28. — FORMER Inter Counties cross country champion Paul Cuskin has resigned from Valli Harriers to join Sunderland Harriers.
SIR JOHN HALL emerged from the latest bout of boardroom battling at Newcastle United yesterday with a controlling stake in the club and plans for a complete takeover.
The millionaire property developer looked poised to cut his losses and quit the Second Division club after the failure of his proposed £13m rescue package last week.
Instead, he strengthened his stranglehold at a board meeting yesterday, buying out one of his rival directors, mining magnate Bob Young, to take the shareholding controlled by himself and his son, Douglas, from 41pc to 51pc.
In doing so, the Halls declared their intention to attempt an overall boardroom coup by acquiring the shares of their four remaining fellow-directors, George Forbes, Peter Mallinger, Derek McVickers and Freddie Shepherd.
‘There are another 49pc of shares,’ said Sir John, 59, who launched his bid for boardroom change at Newcastle with the Magpie Group four years ago.
‘We are making a takeover bid and putting an offer to the rest of the shareholders.
I can't say any more than that.
I've got to go through my advisers and put it before the other board members in the proper manner.’
Sir John, however, is certain to meet strong opposition.
The offer he made to his boardroom colleagues yesterday was 20p a share, 30p less than their original value.
‘They're worth a lot more than that,’ said one director, who indicated that a counter move could yet be made by opponents of the Halls.
What effect such opposition could have remains doubtful now that the Halls, through Cameron Hall Developments, have a controlling interest in the club.
It also remains to be seen what the Halls can do to reduce the club's debts of £6.5m.
A new business plan is expected this week and it is likely to include the sale of leading players, among them Gavin Peacock, who has attracted interest from Aston Villa and Middlesbrough, as well as a tight budget for team building.
That would, almost certainly, rule out the return of Kevin Keegan, who ended his short-term managerial contract two weeks ago by demanding the £2m he says Sir John promised him as a condition of a three-year contract.
It is understood, in any case, that Keegan would not want to work at St James's Park with Sir John holding control in the boardroom.
Sir John may further strengthen his position by appointing Malcolm Dix, his former Magpie Group colleague, as a fellow director.
Dix last night resigned his post as chairman of the board of management at Newcastle Gosforth rugby club but said: ‘It's a little early in the day to say whether I'll be joining Newcastle United.
I'll just await events.’
THE BOSS: John Hall out to take over Newcastle United
Needlecraft demo:
Members of the York branch of the Embroiders' Guild will demonstrate different styles of needlecraft at the city's Treasurer's House over the weekend.
Admission costs £2.60.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York 656476; Sian Roberts on Richmond 850407 or Richmond 825281 (answering machine), and Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
THE rival teams in the Clairville Common soccer complex row warmed up for their final pitch battle yesterday.
Residents supporting the £1.2m Anchor International scheme backed by Middlesbrough Council clashed with the project's opponents on the common.
Licensing magistrates were visiting the site before making a final decision today.
Chairman of the bench Lawrie Wild told vociferous protesters: ‘We are not here to hear your objections, we are here to look at the site.’
But opponent Tony Coleman insisted that boundary markers were incorrectly-placed.
FRANK Platt became Middlesbrough's 129th mayor at a ceremony in the town hall.
The 68-year-old Merseysideborn councillor arrived in Teesside in 1947 and met his Middlesbrough-born wife, Lillian, whilst serving in the Royal Navy.
He was elected to Middlesbrough Council in 1983 to represent Hemlington and has done so ever since.
At yesterday's installation ceremony he told the audience: ‘I adopted Middlesbrough and it now turns out Middlesbrough has adopted me.’
He said the catchword in local government at the moment was ‘challenge’.
He added: ‘To many of us involved in council business simply surviving, keeping local democracy intact, is a challenge.’
But he reminded people that Middlesbrough was successful in meeting and winning the City Challenge which gave the go-ahead for £37.5m investment in the town.
The town was also successful in attaining Safer City status and beat off competition from all over the United Kingdom to become Britain's second Environment City, he said.
‘My predecessors have set very high standards and I will do my best to maintain the dignity of the office, carrying out my duties with appropriate taste and decorum but perhaps with a little fun, too,’ he said.
Coun Platt's charities during his year of office will be Guide Dogs for the Blind and the RSPCA.
His wife, Lillian, was invested as mayoress.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
BY the time Mark Wright lifted the FA Cup on Saturday even those outside the North-East were becoming sick of the spoon-fed memories of 1973.
Here, in the region, there had been as much talk of Stokoe's stars in the Wembley build up as there had been of the side Malcolm Crosby led out against Liverpool.
Since the last of Newcastle United's cup wins, in 1955, that success by Sunderland is the sole domestic honour won by a club from the region.
That's one trophy in 37 years, none in the last 19; hardly sufficient to warm the cockles of what once cared to call itself the hotbed of soccer.
The temperature could be gauged in the second half at Wembley on Saturday.
Liverpool turned up the heat with their crisp, passing game; Sunderland's hope melted, and their players froze.
The North-East remains, for the time being at least, an outpost on the top class English football map.
Yet, in the context of 19 barren years, the season just ended has been one of note in these parts.
Sunderland ultimately stole the spotlight with their cup final appearance the first by a club from the region since Liverpool licked Newcastle 3–0 in 1974.
The 2–0 defeat was no disgrace.
The gulf in class was as wide as the Mersey after the break but the first-half belonged to Sunderland.
They got the losers' medals, in the end, though someone at the FA should get round to re-naming them the runners-up medals.
They should, for that matter, hand out a runners-up trophy too a replica of Wembley would do so the beaten finalists would have more than forced smiles to parade on homecoming day.
Sunderland, at least, earned their place in the final with a conventional semi-final win, which is more than their victorious rivals could say.
Liverpool had to rely on the lottery of a penalty shoot out.
Nothing raises the football passions in an area quite like an FA Cup run; though not since 1936 has the North-East had the luxury of a Football League championship success for comparison.
Sunderland's was no exception.
It brought a memorable night to Roker, the quarter-final replay thriller against Ian Porterfield's Chelsea, and headed down Wembley Way after a gripping semi at Hillsborough.
It put John Byrne's goals in the national spotlight and Tony Norman's conquering saves too, along with the fairytale story of Malcolm Crosby, the fan who became king for a day under Wembley's Twin Towers.
It matters little now that Sunderland finished the season 18th in the Second Division.
They might as well have ended there as seventh, the place below the play-off zone.
The cup run aside, Sunderland proved their pedigree at peaks in league form; they outclassed Ipswich, the runaway champions, home and away.
Consistency will be the key note when the Crosby show re-opens for another season.
It's ironic that events up the A19 should steal some of the thunder from Ayresome Park, home of the North-East's team of the season.
Middlesbrough, it seems, are doomed to be dwarfed by the sleeping giants on their doorstep.
Many theories have been advanced as to why this should be so, but the most vital one overlooked.
Middlesbrough don't have a 1973 in their closet, or anything of substance in the trophy cabinet.
Sunderland and Newcastle have their tradition, as winners on the national stage, no matter how historical their claims to ‘big club’ status may have become.
What they don't have, though, as English football enters its new era, is the key to the Premier League door.
Boro can take pride in being the sole North-East members of the exclusive club.
They earned their promotion the hard way.
Lennie Lawrence, like Malcolm Crosby, has been a breath of fresh air to North-East football, which for too long has clung to the misguided belief that only the big name managers (Big Lawrie, Big Jack and co.) can bring big time success.
Shrewd in the transfer market and refreshingly frank in his public pronouncements, Lennie has been the signing of the season.
And for that, Colin Henderson, the Middlesbrough chairman, must take a well-deserved bow.
Boro have the backbone of a tidy top flight side, with Steve Pears in goal, Alan Kernaghan at the heart of defence, an industrious midfield department and the razor-sharp Paul Wilkinson in attack.
They proved their collective worth in the two-legged Rumbelows Cup semi-final against Manchester United.
Without question, they deserved to claim the club's first place in a major cup final.
Some say Newcastle deserved to drop into Division Three at the end of another season of turmoil at St James's Park.
They didn't in the end not because Kevin Keegan refreshed parts Ossie Ardiles couldn't reach but because their players were too good.
It's a wonder any parts are left at all, what with debts of £6.5m and Sir John Hall still waging the boardroom battle that has very nearly claimed the club itself as the ultimate, ironic, victim.
There can be little hope for Newcastle's future until some form of stability is achieved.
Three managers and three chairmen in 18 months is a recipe for football disaster.
And there's more to be cooked up yet.
Hartlepool, in contrast, have found an even keel under Garry Gibson's unique brand of chairmanship and Alan Murray's most accomplished brand of management.
They lost Joe Allon and Rob McKinnon, yet they ended the season in better shape than they started it: a comfortable 11th in the Third Division, the highest Football League placing in their history.
Darlington, however, have it all to do again.
The boom years brought by Brian Little have gone.
A rebuilding job is now required and Alan Noble, as chairman, has the task of laying suitably firm foundations off the pitch and finding the right man for the construction work on the other side of the fence at Feethams.
It won't be easy, not with the coffers bare and momentum now turned in the downward direction.
While Hartlepool are looking upwards, towards Newcastle and Sunderland in the new First Division, the Quakers are back in the basement, scraping for scraps of hope with York and Scarborough.
Still, they could be worse off.
They could have a £6m overdraft and a battleground instead of a boardroom.
FORMER Sunderland first-team coach Viv Busby hopes Darlington will offer him the chance of a full-time return to the game.
Busby, 42, is among the applicants for the manager's job.
Busby said: ‘I would like to be a No.1.
I served a good ten-year apprenticeship under Denis Smith at York City and Sunderland.
‘I am ready for the challenge and a chance to stamp my own authority on a team.
‘Smith gave me my head with coaching at Bootham Crescent and Roker Park.
I shared an office with Denis, so I know all about negotiating contracts.
‘I am confident of my own ability.
All I want is a chance to prove myself.
‘Football management is not an easy job.
It is difficult whether you are in charge of Manchester United, Darlington or a Vauxhall Conference side.
‘If there are financial restraints, you have to work within those limits and get the best out of players.
‘I am the type who likes to be to be on the training ground every day.’
Busby was sacked by Sunderland when Malcolm Crosby was promoted to first-team coach last December.
He had a scouting role with Manchester City in the final months of the season.
Busby added: ‘Peter Reid offered me a chance to be involved in the game, and I appreciated his helping hand.
‘I covered matches all over the North, ranging from Everton to Darlington, watching individuals or preparing team reports.
‘Mick Martin also contacted me on behalf of Celtic.
He promised scouting work if ever I was not needed by Manchester City.
‘Gestures like that are magnificent when you are out of work.’
Busby had five years' experience in the lower divisions with York and helped lift the club out of the doldrums.
‘York had applied for reelection three times in the four previous years before Denis and I joined the club.
Busby helped to groom several young players at Sunderland, including Brian Atkinson and Warren Hawke, who were in the FA Cup final line-up last Saturday.
A Wembley spectator, Busby thought Sunderland were outclassed in the second half but not disgraced.
‘I know the players were gutted after the game.
But no side in the country would have survived against Liverpool on that form.
‘The Sunderland lads have the consolation of knowing they played at Wembley.
‘I was in the Fulham side that lost 2–0 to West Ham in the l975 final.
That day still stands out as the greatest day in my football life.’
LENNIE Lawrence has promised to be ruthless in his Middlesbrough team selection in a bid to live with the best in the Premier League next season.
‘No mercy will be shown to players who do not produce the goods,’ said Lawrence.
‘The club cannot afford a repeat of their last promotion success.
‘The club was struggling 18 months later and players were in a cushy position.
‘Middlesbrough will reward players for success, but there will be no long-term contracts.’
Lawrence will change his policy next season when players left out of the first team will play in the reserves.
The visit of Celtic for Tony Mowbray's testimonial match on July 26 will be Middlesbrough's only pre-season friendly at Ayresome Park.
Boro plan to visit York City, Leyton Orient and Gillingham.
SCARBOROUGH hope to get down to the problem of tackling their much-maligned McCain Stadium pitch with the appointment of new ground consultants.
The Fourth Division club is having talks with three companies interested in acting as ground consultants.
Scarborough chairman Geoffrey Richmond yesterday admitted the pitch had been the subject of numerous complaints from managers and players alike last season.
ANGRY skipper Paul Bracewell last night blasted FA Cup finalists Sunderland and declared: ‘I'm off.’
The Wembley midfielder launched a sensational attack on the ‘Caring Club’ and accused them of not caring enough in their bid to keep him at Roker Park.
Bracewell, 29, claimed the directors backed out of a promise to give him a two-year contract by offering him only a 12-month deal to stay.
And he said: ‘I'm disgusted with the way they've gone about doing business.
‘Malcolm Crosby is stuck in the middle.
He wants to give me two years, but the board only want to give me one.
‘You only stay where you're wanted and it doesn't seem as though I'm in Sunderland's long-term plans.’
Bracewell's bitter blast came just 72 hours after collecting the fourth loser's FA Cup medal of his career.
The former England star played a key role in getting Sunderland to Wembley, playing with 12-stitches in a shin wound and with a broken nose late in the season.
But he insisted: ‘For once this season, I'm doing what's best for Paul Bracewell not Sunderland.
‘They kept putting our talks off, saying they would discuss it after the final.
‘But the board know when contracts are up and now they expect me to just sign for a year.
It doesn't work like that.
‘I could understand their decision if I was 34 or 35.
But it is up to them what they want to do.
If they only want me to stay for a year then I'm entitled to do what I want under freedom of contract.
‘The ideal thing would have been for them to keep to their offer of a two-year deal and I would have signed it before the final.
That would have been a boost to everybody.
‘But it hasn't worked like that.’
Bracewell's position has already been noted by neighbours Middlesbrough.
And his loss would come as a big blow to new boss Crosby who is bidding to take the club into the Premier League next season.
Only 24 hours before Bracewell's outburst, defender Paul Hardyman declared he is thinking hard about his future after being left out of the Cup final side.
SUNDERLAND'S retained list held no surprises yesterday, with four reserve players being freed.
Winger Tony Cullen, involved in only two first team games, is the only player with first team experience to leave.
Youngsters David Wales, Paul Moore and Jonathan Trigg are the others to have their contracts cancelled.
STEPHEN PEARS, the North-East's footballer of the year, is The Northern Echo Matchfacts Merit Table player of the season.
The Middlesbrough goalkeeper, an ever-present in the side until the promotion-clinching last match of the season against Wolves at Molineux, has enjoyed a memorable year.
He received international recognition from England manager Graham Taylor, and figured in Boro's Rumbelows League Cup run to the semi-finals which so nearly ended in glory.
A knee injury denied Pears a piece of the action as Boro celebrated promotion at Wolves, but that could not detract from the elation he and his teammates experienced in reaching the Premier League.
The fact that Pears is one of four Boro players in the top 12 in our final merit table is a measure of the consistency of Lennie Lawrence's side.
THERE was something congenial about being in the company of Barbarians yesterday.
It was considerably more civilised than visiting the average English town centre of a Friday night which shows how far we have come.
The Barbarians were knocking round Britain for 1,000 years or so, beating up each other and generally being barbaric.
Their hash was settled by the advent of the Romans who are credited with being cultural, organised and generally smart Alec.
They are probably also the reason the old Barbarians get such a bad Press.
‘It's surprising isn't it?
They were obviously quite a skilful lot,’ said Hilary Wade.
‘It's true the tribes were always warring but they were good craftsmen.’
This craftsmanship went beyond making weapons too.
They had looms and ploughs and pots and pans.
Most of these were used by womenfolk who tended to keep things going.
They cooked, made clothes and were generally responsible for the upkeep of the family.
It was probably a Barbarian female who tried to make out that a woman's work is never done.
The Barbarians are in Middlesbrough till August attempting to restore their lost reputation.
Hilary Wade, the curator of the Dorman Museum, is happy to have them, convinced of their drawing power.
‘The first group of children we had in this morning had to be dragged out,’ she said.
When the Romans came across in 43AD with their fancy dan armies the whole of British tradition was killed with them.
Everybody had lived in villages, the Romans had to go and build towns.
The Barbarians, who were actually Celts and were given their cruel name by their invaders, transported their stuff by sea or by horse and cattle (and had links with Europe, incidentally), the Romans built roads.
The Barbarians were knocking about in the late bronze age and iron age.
In the North-East they were represented by the tribe known as the Brigantes.
They worshipped gods every stream, every tree had a spirit and had chiefs and peasants and warriors and druids.
‘The farmers probably tried to get on with farming and making a living while all the fighting was going on,’ said Hilary Wade.
‘Warriors were a special breed.’
The fighting was caused for three reasons: different sides kept stealing cattle; everybody was  searching for new land; and according to the Romans the Celts liked fighting.
They whitewashed their hair which then went spikey, they invented soap, were keen on their appearance.
Any young man whose waist went beyond the standard belt length was fined.
This presumably discouraged a liking for beer.
Hilary Wade was taken by the question about what might have happened on these islands had the Romans left us alone.
The severed heads might have continued being put on spikes as trophies for a start.
‘Somebody would have come in the end,’ she said.
‘After the Romans went it was the turn of the Vikings.’
Still we might have been very different.
We might have all insisted on living in small settlements.
The Barbarians did not get their name because they were wild and indisciplined.
It was either because they were non-Greek speakers or because the Romans had trouble understanding the Celtic tongue.
To them it was all bar-bar-bar.
Not much remains of them, not much of their songs and dances and stories, ‘the things,’ as the Dorman says, ‘which make human life worth living.’
But the Barbarians were all right, something to be remembered when you espy pot-bellied, spikey-haired British youth this Friday.
About face
AN old friend came up in the street yesterday and said: ‘My, you look well, have you been on holiday, you've got a tan.’
What she saw was a ruddy face not associated with the effects of the sun, but it was still difficult to know whether to be flattered or annoyed.
A manufacturer of sun care products has just issued a report showing that the view on tanning has come full circle.
There has been, as it were, an about face.
Years ago when nobody went abroad because nobody could, a tanned face was seen as the preserve of the hoi polloi, the grafters who had to work outside.
It was obvious from their colour that they were manual labourers.
The sought-after colour was pale.
This represented elegance and distinction.
Come holidays abroad it became the thing to sport a deep tan.
It exuded class.
Not any longer.
The report says that tan begun in Torremolinos and beginning to fade on re-entry to the UK, is  decidedly downmarket.
Tans were becoming associated with the real Sharon territory which could lead to their demise as a coveted status symbol.
Not that pale faces are making a comeback.
The colour to possess is a golden glow for six months a year.
This is fairly essential information to have.
You should also know that the people of the North remain keen on tanning.
This is obviously because here the sun always shines.
WINNERS of the Sid Chaplin short story competition named after the Shildon-born writer were announced at the town's civic centre.
Middlesbrough author Derek Gregory won the adult section; joint junior winners were Catherine Daniels, 12, from Maltby in Cleveland, and 15-year-old Sagarika Chattergee, of Darlington.
This year there were a record 220 entries, 53 in the under-seventeen section, with the youngest entrant aged ten.
Judging was by former Durham county librarian Stanley Dean and his wife, author Doreen Dean, both from Darlington.
The competition was started five years ago by Shildon Town Council, supported by Durham County Council and Northern Arts, to honour the memory of Sid Chaplin, the pitman who went on to become one of the North-East's most respected authors and playwrights.
Reporter MARGARET HUSSEY spoke to this year's winners about what makes them write.
CATS have been an inspiration for 12-year-old CATHERINE DANIELS.
Her three pet moggies gave her the idea for her prizewinning story.
Catherine, of Lea Close, Maltby, Cleveland, said: ‘We all like cats at home.
We've got three in total two we got as strays and another from a friend.
‘I decided to write a mystical story about cats.
My story was about a girl who finds a bedraggled kitten who is really a king.
She then goes to a cat country far away which is taken over by bandits.’
Catherine has entered a few poetry competitions and written other short stories.
And it is not the first time she has been successful.
Last year she took part in an environmental project and won a holiday in Dorset and a day at the Dorchester in London A pupil at Conyer School, Yarm, Catherine said she would like to continue writing, particularly as a career.
‘But it is very competitive,’ she said.
In her spare time she also plays the piano and harp and goes horse-riding.
IT WAS a first-time success for SAGARIKA CHATTERGEE when she entered the  competition .
Sagarika, of Leith Road, Darlington, wrote a modern piece Happy Families, about the break-up of a marriage ‘I suppose it is a feminist piece,’ said Sagarika, 15.
‘It's about a woman who liberates herself from her overpowering and dominant husband.
‘I like to write modern pieces and my favourite authors are Fay Weldon and Slyvia Plath.
I write mainly for school course work and this was the first competition I entered.’
A pupil at Hummersknott School, she is studying for GCSEs and hopes to go on to do A levels in politics, economics and English and eventually a degree.
Sagarika is also keen on public speaking and has taken part in inter-school championships.
DEREK GREGORY's story revolved around a punch-up in a Middlesbrough pub between some macho men and an African poet.
And he swears it was true.
Derek, of The Avenue, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough said: ‘Death Of A Gasholder is about a poetry gang who get a grant from the local authority.
They invite a poet from Africa to give a reading in a pub during the World Cup.
‘Some of the regulars are invited to listen to the poems and being macho Middlesbrough a fracas ensues, the poet is assaulted and the grant withdrawn.
And it is all based on a true story.’
Derek, 63, was runner-up in the competition last year.
He has written several articles and short stories and is now working on a novel.
He said his main influences are Franz Kafka, Ernest Hemingway and John Updike.
Derek, who edits the Tees Valley Writer, has just finished a book on statistics.
MIDDLESBROUGH face a tough challenge to end a losing run when they entertain Coventry in the British Speedway Promoters' Association first round tomorrow night.
Bears have suffered five successive defeats, including a 47–43 home defeat by Peterborough last week.
Four former World finalists, and the reigning World Under-21 champion, will be in action against the Bears.
Coventry's line-up includes three Danish internationals and an American.
York-born Andy Smith, who has qualified for this year's British final at Coventry, will make a rare appearance at Cleveland Park.
Former Boro rider Paul Bentley, who won the recent World championship qualifying round on his old track, is a reserve.
The rules have been changed this season to give fans of Second Division sides the opportunity to see first-class opponents.
Admission prices have been pegged, despite Coventry's star-studded lineup.
Middlesbrough: 1 Steve Regeling, 2 Mark Lemon, 3 Daz Sumner, 4 Donny Odom, 5 Dave Cheshire, 6 Duncah Chapman, 7 Paul Pickering.
Coventry: 1 Andy Smith, 2 Brian Anderson, 3 Tommy Knudsen, 4 Rick Miller, 5 John Jorgenson, 6 Paul Bentley, 7 Michael Warren.
SUNDERLAND striker John Byrne has been withdrawn from the Republic of Ireland squad for the World Cup group three qualifier against Albania in Dublin on May 26.
The 31-year-old needs an operation on a calf injury which dogged him in the weeks before Saturday's FA Cup final defeat by Liverpool.
Byrne will also miss the Republic's three match tour of America from May 30-June 7, when they meet the host nation, Italy and Portgual.
Wingers Brian Mooney and Colin Pascoe head Sunderland's list of summer sales.
Manager Malcolm Crosby wants to drastically trim the Roker wage bill before launching into the transfer market.
And Pascoe, Mooney and reserve keeper Tim Carter could all have played their last game for the club.
Despite Mooney's involvement in Sunderland's final League games of the season, Crosby is prepared to cut his losses over the Irish B international signed for £225,000 from Preston by Denis Smith.
Welsh international Pascoe is unsettled at Roker and Stoke City are waiting in the wings if Sunderland drop their original asking price of £500,000.
Carter enjoyed a successful loan spell at Birmingham late last year and the Midlands club have maintained their interest in the 23-year-old keeper.
Meanwhile, Paul Bracewell's future will not be sorted out until a board meeting next month.
SCOTTISH manager Andy Roxburgh has put Middlesbrough midfield player Willie Falconer on standby for the European Championships in Sweden.
An injury on Scotland's current tour of America and Canada could win Falconer a call-up for the June 10–26 championships.
Falconer said: ‘I have been told to keep myself fit.
I can only wait and see what happens.
‘I felt good when I returned in March after a long absence from the game with a knee injury.
‘A packed five-match programme tired me but I felt stronger afterwards.
‘The Wolves game in which we clinched promotion was one of the strangest games I have ever played.
‘Obviously, I was thrilled with the result.
But it took some time for our achievement to sink in.
‘If I am lucky enough to be chosen in the Scottish squad it would cap a memorable end of season.’
Falconer has represented his country at schoolboy, youth and Under-21 level.
At the age of 26, it could be only a matter of time before Falconer completes the full set of international honours.
Roxburgh will select his European squad at the end of this month.
ASTON Villa, Middlesbrough and other clubs chasing Newcastle prize guy Gavin Peacock will have to wait.
Peacock plans no decision on his future until he knows what's happening to boss Kevin Keegan.
The out-of-contract midfielder is still waiting for the offer of a new deal from the Geordies and could be heading for a £1m-plus move.
Newcastle will bid to keep him but they need the cash and the 22-goal schemer is their most saleable asset.
But Peacock, 24, is in no rush to quit Tyneside.
Goalkeeper Stuart Ford is poised to join Scarborough on a one-year contract after being granted a free transfer by Rotherham United.
SCOTTISH manager Andy Roxburgh has put Middlesbrough midfield player Willie Falconer on standby for the European Championships in Sweden.
An injury on Scotland's current tour of America and Canada could win Falconer a call-up for the June 10–26 championships.
Falconer said: ‘I have been told to keep myself fit.
I can only wait and see what happens.
‘I felt good when I returned in March after a long absence from the game with a knee injury.
‘A packed five-match programme tired me but I felt stronger afterwards.
‘The Wolves game in which we clinched promotion was one of the strangest games I have ever played.
‘Obviously, I was thrilled with the result.
But it took some time for our achievement to sink in.
‘If I am lucky enough to be chosen in the Scottish squad it would cap a memorable end of season.’
Falconer has represented his country at schoolboy, youth and Under-21 level.
At the age of 26, it could be only a matter of time before Falconer completes the full set of international honours.
Roxburgh will select his European squad at the end of this month.
ASTON Villa, Middlesbrough and other clubs chasing Newcastle prize guy Gavin Peacock will have to wait.
Peacock plans no decision on his future until he knows what's happening to boss Kevin Keegan.
The out-of-contract midfielder is still waiting for the offer of a new deal from the Geordies and could be heading for a £1m-plus move.
Newcastle will bid to keep him but they need the cash and the 22-goal schemer is their most saleable asset.
But Peacock, 24, is in no rush to quit Tyneside.
He said yesterday: ‘I won't decide anything until I get Newcastle's offer and also see what's happening with the boss.’
Newcastle's retained list will be announced at the weekend.
SUNDERLAND striker John Byrne has been withdrawn from the Republic of Ireland squad for the World Cup group three qualifier against Albania in Dublin on May 26.
The 31-year-old needs an operation on a calf injury which dogged him in the weeks before Saturday's FA Cup final defeat by Liverpool.
Byrne will also miss the Republic's three match tour of America from May 30-June 7, when they meet the host nation, Italy and Portgual.
Wingers Brian Mooney and Colin Pascoe head Sunderland's list of summer sales.
Manager Malcolm Crosby wants to drastically trim the Roker wage bill before launching into the transfer market.
And Pascoe, Mooney and reserve keeper Tim Carter could all have played their last game for the club.
Despite Mooney's involvement in Sunderland's final League games of the season, Crosby is prepared to cut his losses over the Irish B international signed for £225,000 from Preston by Denis Smith.
Welsh international Pascoe is unsettled at Roker and Stoke City are waiting in the wings if Sunderland drop their original asking price of £500,000.
Carter enjoyed a successful loan spell at Birmingham late last year and the Midlands club have maintained their interest in the 23-year-old keeper.
Meanwhile, Paul Bracewell's future will not be sorted out until a board meeting next month.
GUISBOROUGH-based Associated Power Services was the first small business award winner on the newly introduced Teesside Training and Enterprise Council Training Awards.
The award is worth £10,000 and Associated Power Services earmarked the entire amount for equipping its new training centre at Tees Dock, Middlesbrough.
The company only began trading in 1988 for the refurbishing of high voltage equipment and its installation and commissioning.
Directors Alan Playle and Barry Thomas have seen the company's turnover grow since its launch in 1988 to almost £1m.
The Teesside TEC awards are sponsored by nine companies, including British Steel (General Steels) Teesside Ltd, Sanyo UK Ltd., McMillan Photography, IDAS, Gordian Print, Ceriph, Cunningham Print, Print and Promotional Services Ltd and The Image Group.
Nominations in the various categories were considered by a panel of independent judges and shortlisted candidates were interviewed about aspects of their training.
For the business award the judging panel examined factors such as creation and maintenance of job levels, increased market share, innovative new products and new training programmes.
I'D never heard of Mike Harding until I moved to Sedbergh, a little town not too far from Hawes, but a long way away from anywhere else.
Mike's cottage hovers high above the dale.
But seeing him for the first time was like when you buy a new make of car you never noticed that kind before, then you realise they're all over the place.
First there was the illustrated slide show he gave in the village hall about walking in the dales where, sensitive to the good burghers of Sedbergh, he modified his  vocabulary .
Then a few months later he hosted the local natural history club's wildlife question time.
Closely followed by his play The Witch That Nearly Nicked Christmas in the village hall and his launching of the local Friends of the Earth with Jonathan Porritt.
But his fame stretches far beyond Sedbergh and the Moorcock Inn and tonight he's donning his showman's hat for fans at the Tyne Theatre Newcastle.
‘People ask me what I do,’ he says.
‘The simple answer, I suppose, is that I take a look at myself and at the world around me.’
Sometimes that world can seem unfair, but even when he lost his driving licence for a year for failing to give a breath test, he quipped: ‘I really tried to blow into that machine but I'm a singer not a bugler.’
AND sometimes it's tragic.
When I spoke with him yesterday he had just returned from the funeral of his father-in-law, who had died after months of cancer.
But he bravely put his grief to one side last night and donned his funny hat for the fans.
‘It's just something you learn how to do.
You've got 1,800 people in a theatre you can't just let go to your grief, you learn to cut yourself off.
You put yourself in the right mental state and adopt the persona that's needed.’
But Harding makes room in his show for some songs which portray the more sensitive side of his nature.
Bomber's Moon is about his father who died on a wartime bombing mission before he was born.
Another song describes the trapped feelings of a steel factory worker who in the end sees the freedom of Pennine hills through a window.
In fact, behind the gags there's a torrent of strong feelings.
Harding's fame as a comic, musician and writer (Daddy Edgar Pools, a book of poems about his childhood in Manchester and his life in the Dales, will be published in the Autumn) is now being overtaken by his reputation as an outspoken critic of those trying to forge the earth's beauty into power.
This is Harding in crusader's hat.
When what is arguably the most beautiful and tranquil corner of the Yorkshire Dales National Park got planning permission to be turned into a golf course it was Mike Harding's protests that summoned the ombudsman.
Others who also cared that some of the few remaining oak trees would be felled, stone walls and hedges destroyed, and that the dippers on this stretch of the river Dee would be driven off by low flying golf balls, ducked the issue and remained silent.
‘There's an old Irish saying: ‘You've got to watch the cotton mouthed ones’ the ones who agree with you in private but keep quiet in public.
You can stand on a stage grinning like a fool but sooner or later you've got to stand up for what you believe in,’ says Harding.
‘When you have what is effectively a one party Government for 13 years working hand in hand with the developers they believe they can do whatever they like.
I'm beginning to feel that direct action is the only way forward like Earth First, who in Canada lie down in front of loggers and generally sabotage development.
‘It's been terrible watching the change in this country over the past 20 years from a time when the consensus was that the public good was what mattered, to today when people only care about shopping.
It's true 12 million people go to DIY and shopping centres every Sunday while only 1.2 go to church.
It's the new religion spend, spend, spend.’
Not surprisingly he makes the odd enemy.
For weeks his local paper the Westmorland Gazette was full of outraged letters from Sedbergh businessmen who saw their profits threatened by Harding's opposition to the golf course.
And he's not the best of chums with the Yorkshire Dales National Park, who he criticises for favouring the car driving tourist over the locals with the absurd blocking of planning permission for goal posts on Dent's football pitch.
When he was invited to switch on the Christmas lights in Settle, he needed a police escort because of a bomb threat believed to be from workers at a local quarry.
‘The quarry at Horton in Ribblesdale is not only destroying the landscape but its lorries are turning the neighbouring villages into death traps,’ he says.
Then there's Harding in his more peaceful hat.
Having rebelled against his childhood religion he describes himself as a ‘prolapsed’ Catholic.
BUT months spent trekking through Himalayan monasteries and his love of Brigflatts (a rural Quaker meeting house near Sedbergh) have rubbed off on him.
‘I used to be angry about the hypocrisy and the cruelty of religion.
I still don't believe in God but now I'm something of a cross between a Buddhist and a Quaker with pantheist leanings.’
So can we expect the silence of the Buddha from Mike Harding?
Not likely when it comes to being a tireless spokesman for everything the Rochdale Cowboy's not thinking of hanging up his spurs.
But for now the crusader's quiet.
The Buddhist is banished, the meditative soul sent temporarily packing.
And Harding dons his showman's hat again ready for tonight's performance.
Mike Harding, Stand Up Comic, at Newcastle's Tyne Theatre tonight; Middlesbrough Town Hall tomorrow and Saturday.
Bully off:
A new girls' hockey tournament bullies off next month at Stockton sports centre.
Open to under 14s, the competition is scheduled for June 3 and 5.
Schools can obtain further details from the sports centre, Talbot Street.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa MacKenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York 656476; Sian Roberts on Richmond 850407 or Richmond 825281 (answering machine), and Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Theatre cash:
The Theatres Trust has donated £1,500 to Saltburn Community Theatre to help pay for renewal of the ceiling above the stage.
Women's leader:
Barbara Shaw has succeeded Margaret Palmer as president of Middlesbrough Soroptimists.
A post-mistress, she has been a member of the Middlesbrough club for a number of years.
Open doors:
Teesside's new £20m law courts complex is having an official open day on June 27.
Official guides will explain the functions of the various parts of the building and children will be able to see the court's family of ducks.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
DID you know well, yes, because everyone's banging on about it that the FA Cup Final programme cost a fiver?
But did you know that the preposterous programme had a ‘Did you know’ section that in the currency of football trivia proved rather less fraudulent.
We exclude from that cautious commendation the fact little known and less needed that 5ft 4in Bobby Kerr was the final's smallest captain, but throw one or two other coins into the fountain.
Liverpool's 1986 Wembley team contained no one qualified for England; Ian Callaghan, with 88, has most FA Cup appearances; Jackie Milburn's 45 second opener for the Magpies against Manchester City in 1955 remains the final's  quickest goal.
And who was the youngest FA Cup final referee, a question we repeated to Referees Association president Peter Willis who handled the 1985 final.
(Clue: it sure as eggs wasn't Peter.)
The president vainly suggested Courtney, then Partridge, though like all three of them the record holder is from the North-East.
It's Kevin Howley, whose profile both in feet and inches and column inches is now very much lower than that of the towering P N Willis.
(Peter should have remembered because Howley sent him a six word telegram before his own big day.
‘What kept you, you big bugger?’ it said.)
Since retiring as a Football League assessor in 1981 Howley has seen just eight matches, three of them at Wembley and the last at Middlesbrough as guest of a brewery.
‘Players are overpaid, pampered prima donnas,’ he says, with a bluntness once very familiar to League secretary Alan Hardaker who in 1970 suspended him for ten weeks.
The youngest FA Cup final referee, in truth, was something of an enfant terrible and remains no less vociferous.
‘Hardaker was a good friend but he always said he'd get me one day and eventually he did.’
The reason England hasn't produced a heavyweight champion of the world, he adds  casually , is that most of the contenders have gone into football.
Throughout his career he neither drove nor installed a telephone, though the Daily Express offered to pay his phone bill.
‘If I had something to say I said it,’ he recalls, ‘but I didn't want you lot ringing me up at three o'clock in the morning.’
Though connected now, he is adamantly ex-directory.
We found him, as several people suggested we might, in the lounge of Billingham Constitutional Club with a pint of Tetley's and a Royal Line cruise brochure for company.
He is a widower, a merry widower even, who will be 68 on Sunday.
‘I take a lot of holidays,’ he said.
Middlesbrough-born, though long since moved to Billingham, he began refereeing in 1944 aboard HMS Nelson.
‘There were 2,800 men and only four teams ashore.
I couldn't kick a door if I was sat on the bloody latch so I had to do something else.’
He'd learned the laws of the game (’ the first seven you don't even kick a bloody ball’) through being an Ayresome Park regular since he was five.
By 1948 he was a class one ref.
In the League five years passed before he sent anyone off a Bury player for thumping a spectator.
‘Mind when I cautioned the buggers they stayed cautioned,’ he insists.
‘They never went near me again.’
As well as the FA Cup final he refereed a EUFA final, three European Cup semi-finals and was linesman his last game in the 1971 European final at Wembley.
Pat Partridge, who lived five miles away, was on the other line.
Jack Taylor was referee.
Howley, an ICI man, also took charge of two South American club finals our splendid 1964 photograph shows him setting off from Darlington station for Montevideo.
Those days he was rather slimmer, too.
‘I was always fighting my weight,’ he says, though now the battle seems lost.
None doubted his ability, but Hardaker frowned upon his frankness.
In 1970, when Howley decided to speak his mind about League bureaucracy (another interview in the Cons Club lounge) the secretary brought his top referee to book.
‘It was the time they started sending memos out to referees, and I said straight why didn't they just get on with administration and leave us to do the bloody job on the field.
‘They acted as judge and jury and suspended me for ten weeks without a trial.
Nowadays referees are interfered with just as much memos on this, that and everything.
It's referee abuse, really.’
Above all, he believed in the three match officials working as a team, an improbable example of which is recalled by Peter Willis.
It was at Workington near the end of Howley's long career, when the linesmen were Willis and fellow policeman Derek Mapp, from Crook.
‘Kevin had broken his ribs or something and me and Mappy had virtually to carry him onto the field.’
He never left the centre circle but the People reporter gave him nine out of ten and he deserved it.’
Willis also remembers a game at Carlisle at which Howley broadcast an abandonment threat because of crowd trouble.
‘The decent people clapped like hell, and the rogues behaved themselves.
It turned out to be a great game and he was a great referee.’
For Kevin Howley, the highlight remains the 1960 Cup Final Wolves 3 Blackburn 0 despite controversy over one of the goals and an injury to Whelan, the Rovers full back.
Slater, the Wolves captain, was booed when he received the Cup ‘a deplorable display of bad manners’ reported The Northern and Howley and Wanderers manager Stan Cullis were pelted with orange peel, Munich, he thinks, marked the end of one era; Wembley 1960 signalled the beginning of another.
‘There's far too much abuse from players and managers and a lack of honesty about them.
Then look at the scowling look at Manchester United it makes me sick.
‘I don't think anyone will ever beat my record, but I very much hope that they will.
If there's a younger referee than me it'll prove that someone has got real guts.
That's what you need to be a referee today, guts.’
Roll on.
WALLPAPER king George Carpenter knows this column covers everything: he's been on about his latest water polo exploits.
A goal scoring England international and chairman of the Darlington based Carpenter's home decorating chain, he continues to make waves at 34.
The company, incidentally, was founded by his Evenwood born dad also George a former ABA boxing champion.
Since last we featured him in April 1989 he's left Durham for Sheffield Dolphins and has been chosen for the Great Britain masters (over 30) squad for next month's world championship in Indianopolis.
‘It might make interesting reading for the over 30 sporting population,’ he says.
Young(ish) Carpenter, more of a walrus really, wants publicity for the sport, too.
‘We're still very low key in Britain,’ he says, ‘Cinderellas in water.’
THE counter attraction of racing against Tatyana Dorovskikh, the world 3,000 metres champion, has persuaded Kirsty Wade not to launch her Olympic season racing schedule in the three-day NorthEastern counties championships, which open at the Cleveland County Stadium in Middlesbrough tonight.
Wade, whose sixth place in the 1500 metres was the best showing by a North-East athlete at the World Championships in Tokyo last year, has decided to head for Aberdeen instead to face Dorovskikh in this summer's first major televised event, the Grampian Festival of Road Racing.
The 29-year-old Blaydon Harrier lines up in the international women's road mile with Dorovskikh, the Ukranian who took the 3,000 metres title ahead of Yvonne Murray in Tokyo last summer and also finished second in the 1500 metres.
The former Soviet international has established herself as the world's leading female middle distance runner in recent years she won the 1500 metres and 3,000 metres at the inaugural World Championships in Rome in 1987 and finished third and first respectively in the same events at the Seoul Olympics a year later.
One of her rare big-race defeats was inflicted by Wade, in the 1987 Europa Cup 1500 metres, and the pair have become close friends as well as rivals.
‘I'm glad of the chance to race against her at Aberdeen,’ said Wade.
‘I like to support the NorthEasterns, but I don't want to be a big fish in a little pond.
I'd rather run against the world champion and finish sixth in a good race in Aberdeen than win by 50 metres and not be pushed at Middlesbrough.’
Wade, the Commonwealth 800 metres record holder since 1985, has her sights set on the 1500 metres in the Olympic trials meeting in Birmingham at the end of next month and is ready to test her form against top-class opposition after recovering from a knee injury which threatened to ruin her summer plans.
It was in the corresponding race last year, held at Gateshead, that she returned to top class competition for the first time since giving birth to daughter Rachel.
Ann Williams pipped her on the line and the Sale athlete is among her rivals again, along with Yugoslav Snezana Pajkic, the European 1500 metres champion, and Gateshead Harrier Chris Cahill.
Meanwhile, places in the North-East team for the Inter Counties Championships at Corby on Monday week will be up for grabs in the North-Easterns tonight, tomorrow and Sunday.
FORMER Middlesbrough boss Bruce Rioch is understood to be on a shortlist of six for the manager's job at Darlington.
Rioch could be keen to return to the North-East after resigning at Millwall last season.
Quakers' chief executive Tom Hughes said: ‘Interviews will take place shortly.
Names on the short-list are confidential and I cannot comment at this stage.’
Rioch's name has been linked with Darlington for some time.
There was speculation on the Feethams terraces even before Alan Noble took over as chairman.
The speculation might have been premature but Rioch has since applied for the job.
The former Scottish international captain, who lives at Harpenden, near Luton, was not available for comment last night.
Rioch lifted Middlesbrough's fortunes after the liquidation crisis of 1986 and could relish another rebuilding job at Darlington.
The ex-Derby County and Everton midfield player inspired a double promotion-winning triumph at Ayresome Park, but was sacked in March, 1990.
Ironically, he was axed less than three weeks before Boro's first Wembley appearance.
Colin Todd was promoted from first-team coach and Boro were saved on the final day of the season when they beat Newcastle United at Ayresome Park.
Rioch joined Millwall but the scene turned sour for him last season.
He resigned after a fans' demonstration at a reserve team game.
Former Hartlepool and York City manager John Bird and Billy McEwan, ex-Sheffield United and Rotherham United, were also among Darlington's applicants.
Current Darlington boss Ray Hankin is on the short-list.
Hankin was promised an interview at the end of the season when the board made it clear he was not blamed for relegation.
And veteran player David McCreery could also figure in Feetham's future after announcing last night he has played his last game for Hartlepool United.
The 34-year-old has been given a free transfer after turning down the offer of a new contract.
McCreery wanted a two-year deal after an impressive season on the field and his first taste of management.
The former Newcastle United player made over 30 appearances and was manager Alan Murray's right hand man at Victoria Ground.
McCreery is keen to continue with dual responsibilities in the future.
Polite win for Pompey FOOTBALL: Portsmouth, who went so close to a promotion and Wembley double, have finished the season with a trophy after all.
Jim Smith's Second Division outfit are the first non-Division One winners of the Professional Footballers' Association Fair Play Award.
Portsmouth accumulated just 55 disciplinary points despite the added pressure of chasing twin honours.
Elbowed out FOOTBALL: Ajax Amsterdam's Swedish striker Stefan Pettersson looks set to miss the European Championships after dislocating his elbow in the UEFA Cup final victory over Torino.
Burnley have beaten Britain's biggest clubs to arrange a prestige home friendly with Ajax on Tuesday.
Mac's back GOLF: Peter McEvoy, who 12 years ago tied with Ronan Rafferty for the English strokeplay title, tries to get both hands on the Brabazon Trophy at the Hollinwell club today.
McEvoy, 39, is back on the amateur circuit after being chosen as England captain, and has been having lessons for the first time ‘to stimulate my game.’
Biba banned ATHLETICS: Marathon runner Iris Biba was yesterday banned by the German athletics federation after she tested positive for muscle-building steroids during training.
Boys' night
BOXING: Newcastle's Mayfair ballroom hosts the National Association of Boys Clubs class A finals tonight.
The programme includes Guy Corbin (Phil Thomas SOB, Middlesbrough) v Michael Bush (West Ham) at 48kg, and at 54kg William Tyrell (Sunderland) v Andrew Moss (Suffolk).
Mutual aid
BOXING: Manchester trainer and manager Phil Martin yesterday signed up his Champs Camp stable with promoter and manager Mickey Duff.
The duo agreed a deal that gives Duff access to some of the country's finest prospects, and gives Martin's camp TV time.
In the dark
FOOTBALL: Barnet players are seeking a meeting with chairman Stan Flashman after more speculation over the future of manager Barry Fry.
Fry claimed he was sacked by Flashman but the latter responded by saying Fry has a job at Underhill for as long as he wants it.
PETER Shreeves was sacked by Spurs for the second time in six years yesterday.
A desperately disappointed Shreeves, currently in Cardiff helping Wales prepare for next week's World Cup qualifier against Romania, was told on Tuesday that he was no longer required at White Hart Lane.
‘Mr Venables informed me that the club did not intend to renew my contract beyond the one year agreement,’ said Shreeves yesterday.
‘I was obviously disappointed, but as always in football, I must look forward and hope I can quickly get back into the game.
‘Spurs have always been ‘my club’ and it was great working there again and I wish Terry and the club every success in the future.’
It was a dignified response if not departure with Spurs chief executive Terry Venables forced to come clean over the Shreeves situation after a media leak.
Venables said that it had been the intention to make the decision public on Shreeves's return from Bucharest next Thursday.
Venables thanked Shreeves ‘for his services and dignity shown through a very tough year with the club’.
Shreeves, meanwhile, added: ‘My main aim at the moment is to help Wales in their World Cup qualifying campaign.
‘I'm a football man, and I'm working with footballers at the moment that's my job.’
Shreeves, who had two years in charge during the mid-Eighties, had been a surprise reappointment as team manager after Venables moved upstairs last summer.
But with Paul Gascoigne ruled out after his knee operation and Shreeves working under severe cash restraints, Tottenham's bright start flattered to deceive.
Fans barracked Shreeves as the club slumped to a club record 11 home first division defeats and the club also experienced disappointment on the cup front.
There were calls for former White Hart Lane favourite Glenn Hoddle, currently managing Swindon, to be put in charge.
However, Shreeves's departure could mean Venables taking a more active part in team affairs, with Doug Livermore possibly promoted from his current position as first team coach.
It also once more raises the question of whether Middlesbrough boss Lennie Lawrence could be the man Spurs want to take over.
At the end of last season Lawrence was repeatedly linked with the London club links he finally denied on the day the Boro won at Molineux to secure automatic promotion to the Premier League.
Lawrence has insisted he wants to stay and honour his contract at Middlesbrough and make them a force in the Premier division.
FORMER Arsenal winger George Armstrong has turned down the chance to become Malcolm Crosby's assistant at Sunderland.
Armstrong, who was born in Hebburn and worked with Crosby in Kuwait, was reluctant to leave a secure coaching job at Highbury for a one-year contract at Roker.
Crosby, however, has an alternative choice in mind an out-of-work manager and will act when he returns with his players from an end of season holiday in Spain next week.
— KEVIN SCOTT wants to stay with Newcastle United, despite all of the turmoil and uncertainty at St James's Park.
The 25-year-old central defender, who captained the troubled Second Division club in the season just ended, made his feelings clear yesterday after opening negotiations for a new contract with chief executive Freddie Fletcher.
‘I still want to stay,’ said Scott.
‘I don't want to play my football anywhere else.’
Newcastle, however, may be unable to afford to hold on to Scott, the only player still at the club from the team which won the FA Youth Cup in 1985.
Their debts are now more than £6.5m and chairman Sir John Hall says he needs at least a week to draw up another rescue package before he and his fellow directors will be in a position to open talks with Kevin Keegan about the vacant manager's position.
Manchester City have shown a strong interest in Scott and United could be forced to sell him to help ease their dire financial plight.
Gavin Peacock, their leading scorer, is another highly saleable asset without a contract and he is less keen to commit himself to the club.
Fletcher, in charge of negotiations in the absence of a manager, expects to release a list of retained players this weekend.
Winger John Gallacher has been given a free transfer but improved one-year contracts have been offered to talented teenagers Matty Appleby, Alan Neilson and Lee Makel. — FORMER Middlesbrough goalkeeper Kevin Poole will miss Leicester City's Wembley date with Blackburn Rovers.
Poole will not recover from a groin injury in time for the Second Division promotion playoff final next weekend.
It is a cruel twist of fate for a player who has been Leicester's first choice since his £50,000 move from Ayresome Park last summer.
DBS NYSD LEAGUE
REDCAR'S West Indian professional Clayton Lambert likes batting at Northallerton and with a fine day forecast the Seasider's should get no less than 15 points from this contest despite the absence of seam bowler Mick Smallwood, who is injured.
Andy Pearson deputises.
Realistic as ever skipper Peter Wilson will not accede to the pundits who say the championship is his already.
Their hosts today welcome back David Plews who has been ruled out by a hamstring injury sustained at Norton in the opening game of the season.
The South African professional Scott Mitchley, has taken 16 league wickets so far with his medium pace bowling.
The best game of the day could very well be at Hartlepool where a hard fast track awaits the stroke players of both sides and two top class spinners will be on display.
Ian Jackson returns to the home team's attack and will open the bowling with off spinner Clyde Butts.
Third placed Middlesbrough are playing two spinners.
Their Australian professional Jamie Stewart, who already has 18 league wickets, will get pace and bounce to help his left arm  orthodox spin and, if necessary skipper Tony Bell can call on young leg spinner, Paul Davison.
MILBURNGATE COUNTY LEAGUE KIMBLESWORTH are looking to complete a hat trick of wins when they take on Leadgate today.
The league's newest club, who switched from the North West Durham League during the winter, lost their first two games of the new campaign, but have bounced back in recent weeks with wins against Mainsforth and Hetton Lyons.
Even though their main aim has been consolidation in the league, a win today could even make them title outsiders.
All rounder Kevin Dixon has made a big impact, hitting two half centuries and also taking wickets.
Leaders Esh Winning, meanwhile, travel to Mainsforth, while Crook, five points behind, should defeat strugglers Langley Park at home.
Lanchester, who have been rained off in two matches this season, are at Ushaw Moor, while Sedgefield take on Tudhoe.
In the other game, Shildon Railway face Evenwood.
VAUX DURHAM COAST LEAGUE SUNDERLAND footballer Richard Ord is still missing from Murton's side but a former Roker Park employee makes his debut in today's home game against Easington.
Gary Ventress, who used to be on Sunderland's ground staff, has moved from Whitburn and should add stability to Murton's early batting order.
Murton, among the favourites for the championship, will look for a win against Easington who have struggled so far without the influential batting of John Glendenen.
Another side finding life difficult is Eppleton and they leave out Andy Shilling for the visit of high-riding Boldon.
Colin Wilkinson comes into the side and Eppleton will be hoping that newcomers Stephen Elliott, Dave Maurice and Stephen Whitehead will give them a lift.
Boldon, on the other hand, have made a great start with three successive wins.
Last season Boldon struggled throughout but they are a different proposition this time after signing several leading players during the winter.
The match of the day is between reigning champions Silksworth and hopefuls Houghton.
Both teams have won twice in three outings and a keen, tightly contested struggle is in prospect.
Silksworth professional Keith Trotter is off to a good start while Houghton are thankful that they injury to Neil Bainbridge is not as serious as first thought.
He is included in a full strength line up.
WEBSTERS YORKSHIRE LEAGUE THERE are two excellent derbies in store this weekend.
York take on their arch rivals Harrogate at Clifton Park today and Pickering entertain Scarborough in the East Yorkshire Cup.
Harrogate's in-form Jim Love and his former Yorkshire team mate Colin Johnson will find the bone hard wicket at Clifton Park to their liking while York's batsmen, with Alex Backhouse back in action after illness, will need to produce high scores.
Pickering have their wicket keeper Richard Gray available for the first time this season on recovering from a hand injury for the visit of Scarborough in the EYC while Whitby are unchanged for the visit of York in the same competition.
Right arm opening bowler, Stephen Harland, however, is still unavailable for Whitby as the Northern League football player is still out injured.
SUNDERLAND ambulanceman Ian Archbold played it by ear last night to win the North-East Championships 10,000 metres in convincing style at the Cleveland County Stadium, Middlesbrough.
The 26-year-old England international was content to track Sunderland Harrier Malcolm Price for most of the race, kicking away with 1,400 metres remaining and gradually extending his lead to win by 70 metres.
Now Archbold might try for a double in tomorrow's 5,000 metres event, though he is also hoping to break the course record in the Vaux Old Pit races 10K at Sunderland on Wednesday night.
‘I'm chuffed to bits,’ said Archbold, who clipped 17 seconds off his personal best time, clocking 29 mins 49.0 secs.
‘I read that Malcolm had a plan, so I just let him get on with it.
Running behind him just seemed effortless and when I kicked he didn't go with me and he gradually dropped back as I kept the pace up.’
There was a tremendous finish in the boys 1500 metres, with Matthew Knowles, of Sunderland Harriers, beating Houghton Harrier Chris Old almost on the line, the winning margin being only a fifth of a second.
The championships continue today and tomorrow (11am start).
Results: Senior Men: 10,000m 1 I Archbold (Morpeth) 29:49.0; 2 M Price (Sunderland) 30:00.4; 3 M Smith (Gateshead) 30:28.4. 400mH: 1 N Baker (Mandale) 56.7; 2 D Wright (Moughton) 57.6; 3 A Smith (Mandale) 58.7.
Junior Men: 1500m 1 V Wilson (Jarrow and Hebburn) 3:54.9; 2 L Morgan (Wallsend) 4:04.0; 3 M Philipson (Gosforth) 4:05.6. 400mH 1 J Bell (North Shields Poly) 56.2; 2 J Scott (Gateshead) 60.8; 3 C McConvill (J&H) 61.6.
Youths: 400mH 1 R Mellor (Middlesbrough and Cleveland) 61.0; 2 P Whitelaw (NSP) 62.8; 3 A Gallon (Gateshead) 65.9.
HT 1 D Waller (M&C) 43.12; 2 J Hine (Mandale) 32.70.
Boys: HT D Robinson (Sunderland) 37.14; 2 N Maddison (Sunderland) 34.86; 3 N Bulman (Mandale) 34.44.
DARLINGTON have decided on the man they want to revive their fortunes and will name him this week.
The Quakers have interviewed six candidates for the manager's job, among them Ray Hankin who was in temporary charge until the end of the season.
Chief executive Tom Hughes said the reason for the delay was to inform the unsuccessful candidates before a public announcement was made.
Hughes added: ‘We want to do that as a matter of courtesy.
A Press conference will be held later.’
Several people with North-East connections have been linked with the job former Middlesbrough manager Bruce Rioch, ex-Sunderland chief coach Viv Busby, one-time York boss John Bird, David McCreery, who has been released as Hartlepool's player-assistant manager, and Billy McEwan, once with Scarborough in a coaching and scouting capacity.
And Darlington skipper Kevan Smith is keen to break into management.
Hankin was in charge at Feethams following Frank Gray's sacking in February.
Whoever is in charge next season faces a tough rebuilding job after the nightmare of relegation.
Hankin cleared the decks when in temporary charge and team-strengthening is essential.
New recruits for the board are equally important and negotiations have continued since former director Alan Noble took over as chairman.
COMMONWEALTH Games bronze medallist Colin Walker clipped nearly ten seconds off the North-East Championships 3,000 metres steeplechase record yesterday and the described his performance as ‘rubbish’.
The Gateshead Harrier clocked 8 mins 38.7 secs to eclipse Dennis Coates' time of 8:48.0, set in 1981.
But Walker, who is contender for Great Britain's Olympic team, was clearly hoping for a much better time on what amounted to a solo run.
Walker recorded a time of 8 mins 26.50 secs in Auckland two years ago, and after a highly successful, injury-free winter, had hoped for a better opening to his steeplechase season.
But he stressed afterwards he is now running for his own enjoyment.
‘I have never given the Olympic Games a thought I am just plodding my way through the season, racing here and there,’ he said.
Walker, however, could try to peak this summer for the steeplechase or the 5,000 metres.
Walker made it obvious from the gun yesterday what his intentions were, striding straight into the lead from New Zealander Wayne Egeler, who runs for Jarrow and Hebburn, and Gateshead clubmate Justin Reid.
At the end of the first lap Walker was 30 metres clear and eventually came home 200 metres ahead of Reid who finished on 9:6.8, 28 second adrift with Egeler finishing third further eight seconds in arrears.
ENGLISH Schools 800 metres intermediate girls champion Tracy Ashcroft, suffering from the  after-effects of a typhoid jab, was still too strong for her rivals in the two-lap event.
But she, too, was dissatisfied with her run.
The 15-year-old South Shields schoolgirl described it as ‘pathetic’, even though she was only a second away from the record.
Ashcroft, one of the brightest young middle distance runners in Britain, had the injection in case she is selected for the World Junior Championships in Seoul in September.
Under the weather or not Ashcroft clocked 2 mins 13.8 secs, almost a second faster than her winning time last year.
SCOTTISH international Joss Kirby, who hung up her racing spikes two years ago, came out of retirement to win two gold medals at the Championships.
The 34-year-old Peterlee financial consultant won her specialist event, the 100 metres hurdles, on Saturday, and then followed up by taking the gold medal in the 100 metres yesterday.
The former North Shields Polytechnic runner, who has now joined Middlesbrough and Cleveland, took full advantage of the late withdrawal through injury of Great Britain international Louise Stuart, to win the sprint.
Kirby, who will join the veteran ranks in November, said: ‘I never dreamt I would be going away with two gold medals.’
ENGLAND international Mark Hudspith celebrated the end of his second-year accountancy examinations with a runaway victory in the 5,000 metres.
The 23-year-old Nortumbrian went off hard with South Shields Harrier Dave Beris and looked to be on record-breaking pace.
But the pace was much too hot for Beris, and when he peeled off after five laps Hupsith toiled on alone, slowing noticeably to finish in a modest 14 mins 20.3 secs.
‘I didn't intend running so quickly early in the race,’ admitted Hudspith, whose training had taken second place to his studies.
‘It was my first race for three weeks and it was very hot out there, so I'm very happy with that.’
BLAYDON Harrier Catherine Allsopp, an 18-year-old A level student, completed a senior women's double in the 800 and 1500 metres.
Causier wins
BILLIARDS: David Causier, 18, of Middlesbrough, became the new English amateur billiards champion at Leamington Spa tonight.
He defeated 59-year-old Denis Watson of Leeds by 32592072.
His 17-year-old Middlesbrough colleague Lee Lagan won the under-19 title.
ENGLISH Schools intermediate 300 metres hurdles champion Allison Curbishley is set to bounce back after a knee injury ruined her start to the season.
The 15-year-old Stockton fifth former ended in hospital when she made her track debut in the 400 metres hurdles at York last month.
Curbishley won the senior women's race in an encouraging 63.7 seconds, even though she tore a ligament at the side of her knee at the halfway mark.
‘I felt something go about 200 metres out,’ said the Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harrier.
‘I wasn't under any pressure so I kept on going, but I could have gone miles faster.
‘But at the finish I couldn't stand up.’
Curbishley returned from hospital on crutches to take the  pressure off her knee.
‘I didn't want to stop during the race because it was my first attempt at the 400 metres hurdles and I wanted to get into the junior rankings,’ she said.
‘I think I can go under 60 seconds.’
Curbishley is still receiving treatment after having two weeks complete rest and could run in the Stockton district schools championships at the Cleveland County Stadium on Thursday.
‘I am thinking of doing the full range of events, including the shot and the relay because I don't want to let the school down.’
Curbishley, UK intermediate 300 metres hurdles record holder with 42.91 secs, hopes to become the first in the agegroup to dip under 42 seconds.
Her next test will be in the UK championships in Sheffield on June 6 as she prepares for the defence of her English Schools title at Hull on July 10/11.
Another up-and-coming Middlesbrough and Cleveland athlete, Jeffrey Anderson, is recovering from a hamstring injury received in last month's Mandale Open meeting.
The 17-year-old English Schools youths 200 metres bronze medallist has now joined the senior boys ranks.
He is likely to concentrate on the 200 metres this year before moving up to 400 metres as a second-year senior boy next year.
MIDDLESBROUGH'S success in being chosen Environment City has won the town a prime time slot on national radio.
Town Mayor Coun Frank Platt will be talking on today's BBC Radio 1 Simon Bates Show, spelling out what the success has meant to the town and how the council and its partners plan to promote environmental awareness.
He will be joined by assistant chief public protection officer David Rigby, who is also a representative of the Neighbourhood Energy Action organisation.
ARMCHAIR soccer fans will miss out on live TV coverage of the new Premier League matches.
unless they have a satellite dish.
BSkyB yesterday won exclusive rights to the live games as part of a £304m joint bid with the BBC.
Under the five-year deal, the BBC will be allowed to reintroduce its Saturday night Match of the Day recorded highlights programme and Saturday lunchtime Football Focus.
Sky will broadcast live Premier League matches on Sunday afternoons and Monday evenings.
The news that Sky had beaten a rival last minute ITV bid of £200m was greeted with anger by MPs and sports viewers still smarting at being deprived of cricket World Cup live coverage by the satellite station.
And there were fears too that even if the armchair fans fork out the £250 for a satellite dish they may then have to pay extra to enjoy the privilege of watching the best games live.
Premier League and Sky bosses are not saying exactly when it will happen and exactly what form any ‘pay-by-view’ scheme will take.
Under the new deal, the BBC will pay £22.5m.
According to the BBC, Sky came up with the lion's share of the package, some £190m.
The remaining £91.5m will be made up by sponsorship and foreign TV rights.
Labour MP Bryan Davies, an Oldham Athletic fan and organiser of the parliamentary soccer team, said: ‘Coming on top of the World Cup cricket fiasco.
we have the country's major sport similarly put under ridiculous constraint.’
Craig Brewin, chairman of the Football Supporters Association, said fans who could not get tickets for big matches would face ‘frustration’ if they could not afford satellite dishes.
He was critical of the way Premier League clubs would be earning ‘obscene’ amounts of money from the deal a guaranteed £1.5m a season.
Middlesbrough will be the only North-East club to benefit from the bonanza.
Chairman of ITV Sport Greg Dyke said that now the new league may not become the major force it could have been.
Hole truth
VICTOR Harrison has been in touch from Teesdale from where it is always welcome to hear.
The first thing he wants to say is that he will sponsor the Leukaemia Research Fund wicketkeeping effort.
For which many thanks.
(People are now inviting me to play in all manner of matches to boost the takings which is one way of getting a game as wicky).
The second thing Victor wants to say is that he was spurred into action by the piece on holes in bread, which has put one or two of you into a right old sandwich.
And lo and behold, no sooner had British Bakeries written to say ‘the problem should now be eliminated’ than a loaf arrived at home with at least five slices suffering from holes bigger than those in the Darlington defence.
Stephen Brenkley
WINNERS of a unique schools arts competition will be going on board a gigantic new accommodation block for the North Sea oilfields being built in Middlesbrough.
They will be able to see for themselves where their pictures will take pride of place on the 4,000-ton structure being built for Agip (UK) at the SLP Engineering yard in Commercial Street.
John Brook, project manager for SLP, said: ‘Pictures done by the children will do a wonderful job in keeping people happy and in touch with things beyond the rig.’
THE biggest sporting deal in history might be good news for the football clubs who kick off the new Premier League but will it be good for soccer and its followers?
The £300m-plus deal might be filling club coffers but controversy about how it will eventually effect the game and most important of all how it will effect fans is burning fiercely.
The debate is drawing opinion from all sides but Middlesbrough Labour MP Stuart Bell, a keen sports fan, is one man in no doubt about who will suffer most in the new deal which puts live television into the hands of satellite TV bosses.
The Ayresome Park season ticket holder says bluntly: ‘I think greed has taken over football.
It is wrong that fans who pay a licence fee and regularly watch Sunday football on ITV, will now be obliged to buy a satellite dish to watch live matches.
‘That may be the only way fans will see the type of skills shown by Brazilians at Wembley on Sunday.
‘I have resisted satellite television at home so far.
I may now go out and buy a dish, which appears to prove the point Sky TV are trying to make.’
Bell warned the next step would be for BSkyB the amalgamated force of Sky TV and the BBC to buy the rights for other major events like Wimbledon.
‘There will be a terrific fuss when the strawberry-and-cream brigade are deprived of watching the world's top tennis tournament,’ he added sourly.
Bell has backed a House of Commons motion deploring the restrictions over live coverage.
The £304m five-year football package is mind-boggling, with each club guaranteed at least £1.5m a year for five years.
Clubs will receive an initial payment of £850,000, plus £450,000 in sponsorship.
Every club will be guaranteed extra cash from at least one live TV appearance.
The champions next season will receive £118,000.
The team that finishes bottom will pocket a compensation cheque of £37,000.
Premier League chief executive Rick Parry claims the lucrative contract will offer ‘a partnership and a way forward for both football and television into the next century.’
Not all clubs will agree with him.
Nor will millions of fans who have lost out to the all-consuming demands of TV.
Fans will have to pay £250 for a satellite dish to watch live games, with the prospect that Sky Sports could become a subscription channel within a year.
Parry gave an undertaking that pay television would not be introduced next season.
But he would not commit himself beyond that.
A live match on Mondays was part of the Premier League's plans because of the success in the United States of the televised NFL American football game.
Yet live Monday games attracted fierce opposition from many Football League managers.
And neither are all the new Premier League club chairmen happy over the new BSkyB deal.
Liverpool chairman Peter Robinson, who voted against the package, believes fans will miss out and may even turn against the game as a result.
Not only did he vote against the proposals but asked that his  objections be publicly recognised.
And this from a club which stands to gain most from the package Liverpool are sure to figure highly among the clubs who go live on TV.
But Parry says:’ These NFL games have been one of the great success stories of the last decade.
Australian Rugby League games were also a success when they were screened live on Mondays.
‘We conducted an independent market research, because we wanted to establish we were not going to reach saturation point.
‘Professionals told us that these matches can only enhance the appeal of the game.
‘They will be supported, as will the Sunday matches, with 11 hours of magazine-type football programmes, which will be hugely important in terms of widening the audience for football.’
Premier League clubs will enjoy rich rewards and extra exposure.
Players' agents and satellite salesmen will be rubbing their hands with glee.
But Joe Public will feel aggrieved our No.1 sport is not available to everyone.
It is yet one more sign of how television has become an ever-increasing influence on the game.
Matches have been arranged to meet TV schedules.
Kick-offs have even been delayed to fit in with Sky TV advertisements.
And football is not alone in bowing to the demands of TV.
No boxing promoter will stage a world fight unless he is guaranteed coverage.
TV payment is a vital part of negotiations over boxers' fees.
Frank Bruno's proposed showdown with Lennox Lewis has been postponed because TV companies have spent their summer budgets on the European football championships, Wimbledon, Test Matches and the Olympics.
Lewis's manager, Frank Maloney, admitted: ‘We have had to cancel the fight for the time being.
But our offer to Bruno still stands.
‘It is possible we will try to put the fight on in September rather than July.’
And perhaps the biggest threat of all from television will emerge when America hosts the next World Cup.
Already moves to have three 40-minute periods instead of two of 45 have had to be resisted.
What more tinkering will come in the future as the television men seek to change sport for its own purposes?
THE POPULAR Langbaurgh Grand Prix series of races has been saved.
But as part of a council cost cutting exercise the Redcar ten mile road race will not be held this year.
Langbaurgh's Leisure Services Officer, Max Coleby, said: ‘As far as road races are concerned we are having to financially batten down the hatches this year and all events will be self-financing.
‘The council has been capped this year and we felt it would have been incredibly insensitive to spend money on road races when some council workers are facing the prospect of losing their jobs.’
The Grand Prix will consist of four events, the Langbaurgh Half Marathon, the Guisborough Moors Race, the Saltburn Carnival 10K, which is organised by New Marske Harriers, and the Skelton Road Race.
The Langbaurgh Marathon has also been shelved this year, but the council is currently negotiating a sponsorship deal and are confident that the race, which incorporates the NorthEast Championship, will be resumed next year.
The Skelton race will replace the former Skelton and Brotton Carnival event and part of the course has been retained.
The race will be over 5 miles instead of eight and a quarter and is being arranged with the help of Loftus AC road race organiser Peter Clifford.
Coleby said: ‘The course has been approved by police and the race will probably be held on a Wednesday evening in August.’
Meanwhile more than 400 entries have been received for Gateshead Leisure Services Open Meeting at Gateshead International Stadium on Saturday.
Great Britain international triple jumper Jonathan Edwards, who set a new 100 metres record in the North-east Championships at Middlesbrough, will renew his rivalry with Cramlington's David Lawson, beaten by a metre in their clash at Clairville.
Sunderland Harrier David Clark, trained by Stan Long, is entered for the youths 3,000 metres and he will be trying for a personal best time after improving his marks when winning the North-East 800 and 1500 metres titles.
Ten athletes trained by Long came away from the North-East Championships with ten medals, including five  golds .
‘It was our best ever medal haul in the championships since I started coaching in 1961,’ said Long.
Well done MANCHESTER United manager Alex Ferguson was one of the first to congratulate Billy McEwan on his appointment as Darlington's new manager.
McEwan said: ‘Ferguson wished me all the best and offered to help me if he could.
‘I appreciated his call.’
McEwan had a part-time scouting role with United when he left Sheffield United.
MIDDLESBROUGH team manager Ken Knott has switched his pairings for the return Gold Cup meeting with Sheffield at Cleveland Park tonight.
American Donny Odom will partner Steve Regeling in the opening heat in a bid to give the team a flying start.
Dave Cheshire moves to No.3, while Mark Lemon (No.4) and Daz Sumner (No.5) could prove a good pairing.
Sheffield have lacked consistency away from home, though former British champion Neil Evitts and Peter Carr have been in great form.
Middlesbrough fans will be pleased to see Simon Green in action following an horrific accident after he left Cleveland Park for Sheffield last season.
1 Steve Regeling, 2 Donny Odom, 3 Dave Cheshire, 4 Mark Lemon, 5 Daz Sumner, 6 Duncan Chapman, 7 Paul Pickering.
1 Peter Carr, 2 Simon Green, 3 Neil Evitts, 4 Steve Johnston, 5 Louis Carr, 6 Mark Hepworth, 7 Steve Knott.
AFTER weeks of uncertainty Craig Kilgour has  confirmed he will definitely defend his Durham county championship at Wearside over the weekend.
Kilgour declared himself fit after defeating the championship's host club's champion Martin Palmer 4 and 3 in his team's North Durham League match at Ravensworth on Tuesday night, his first major outing since a groin operation two months ago.
Other championship hopefuls include England youth international Richard Walker of the home club, the 1990 champion who will be hoping to end a disappointing run of form and is sure to be closely pressed by past champions Tony McClure and Graham Bell while last year's runner-up John Surtees, John Howson and Jim Dryden, who currently heads the Northern Master Golfer league table, are sure to figure in the action in the final round on Sunday afternoon.
FORMER international referee Pat Partridge has assembled an impressive list of sporting personalities for Richmond Golf Club's centenary competition today.
Apart from fellow referees such as Peter Willis, George Tyson and Keith Hackett, he has attracted a host of former football stars.
Among them are Alan Peacock, Len Shackleton, Stan Anderson and Bobby Kerr.
It is hoped the event, which starts at 9.30, will raise £4,000 for the Sports Aid Foundation.
THE Yorkshire Union of Golf Clubs are seeking a new secretary following the resignation of Alan Cowman because of poor health.
Anyone interested should contact R C Calvert at 1 Byards Park, Knaresborough, HG5 9BB (tel )
BILL Head, the Northern Counties seniors champion, heads the local challenge for the English Open seniors championship at Fulford and Strensall golf clubs which takes place next Wednesday and Thursday.
As well as the overall title, there are four age group prizes in five-year sections from 55 to 70 years and over.
THE Teesside Union of Golf Clubs play the second of their Yorkshire Inter-Union league matches on Sunday when they entertain the East Riding Union at Teesside Golf Club.
Roger Roper, the NYSD champion, leads the team and who will be hoping to continue their winning form which saw them defeat Huddersfield Union 101/2–71/2 in their opening game of the season.
AFTER the first two matches of the Teesside District Inter-Club League the leading positions are as follows:
Mallet matters
AND now the latest in corporate hospitality for pleasing clients always aspiring to something better: croquet.
The message has just been hammered home to companies throughout the North-East by Croquet North.
There is, it seems, nothing that cannot be done on a croquet lawn that can be done on a golf fairway.
‘It's probably much less complicated than golf,’ said Croquet North secretary Bruce Rannie.
‘You've got to hit a ball straight with one of 14 clubs at golf.
You've just got the mallet at croquet.’
Which is not to talk down its skill and delicate nuances, but simply to talk up its potential status as a good day out form the men in the grey suits.
‘Other firms in other parts of the country have tried this and have found it successful both as a social event and as a promotion.’
This ties in neatly with Croquet Day, which it is tomorrow, a chance for the hoi polloi(all of us who do not play the game really) to take up a mallet.
Ormseby Hall club in Middlesbrough is offering the chance to play as is Newcastle University.
Washington Sports Centre will be open from 11am for free games.
There are high hopes for the game around Wearside.
FA Cup Final fever may be dissipating but excitement is only just beginning to mount over plans for a croquet centre of excellence.
‘We've been a bit short of cash for developing it,’ said Bruce Rannie.
‘We have been waiting for grants but there has been some debate about whether croquet is a sport because of the pace it's played at.’
The Government department concerned for dishing out the dosh in these matters must presumably think croquet is a corporate hospitality device.
Records tumbled during the final Middlesbrough Match series on Hemlington Lake as glorious weather signalled a carp-feeding frenzy.
Anglers Choice starlet Graham Metcalfe topped the proceedings for the second successive week and set a new five-hour best of 16–8–0.
Drawn in the middle of the grassy banks, sweetcorn in conjunction with the pole at 11 metres brought five common carp, the best 3–2–0 backed by crucians and tench.
Second place rod Phil Arnold (Middlesbrough Newman Scotts) also opted for the pole but preferred caster on the hook putting together another excellent common carp bag of 14–7–0.
The overall four-match title, run on section points, went to Steve Cooper (Anglers Choice) for the second year as three wins plus a runner-up placing gave him an outstanding victory accruing 39 points from a maximum 40.
Results on the day: 1 Graham Metcalfe (Hemlington Anglers Choice) 16–8–0; 2 Phil Arnold (Middlesbrough Newman Scotts) 14–7–0; 3 Nigel Johnson (Northallerton Match Group) 1111–0; 4 Steve Cooper (Anglers Choice) 11–4–8; 5 Ronnie Wilkinson (Tek Neek Nidmen) 9–15–8; 6 Russ Hodgson (Newman Scotts) 9–15–0; Overall: 1 Steve Cooper (Anglers Choice) 39 points; 2 Phil Arnold (Newman Scotts) 37; 3 Peter Scott (Newman Scotts) 36; 4 Graham Metcalfe (Hemlington AC) 34.
A
QUALITY bream of 6lb gave Stanley Vickers’ Joe Reid the upper hand during Aycliffe AC's opening fixture of the Friday evening series on Aycliffe Pond.
Fishing waggler and maggot, several common carp plus skimmers boosted his winning net to 11–9–0 from team-mate Rob Stobbs 8–10.
YARM AA delegates enjoyed rod-bending action on a private carp lake near Croft as several heavy weights proved too strong for the anglers.
Brian O'Keefe fished waggler and caster successfully landing six common carp, best 7lb 13oz then adding two roach plus perch for a winning 29–3–0.
Mick Broadley enjoyed an amazing session, netting 28–3–0 of fish, pegged in a swim barely 18 inches deep and congested with weed and lily pads, the carp definitely gaining the advantage.
He connected with 19 specimens utilising an 8lb line and sweetcorn on a size 10 hook.
However, after a lengthy arm-aching battle just seven common finished in the landing net, the heaviest taking the scales to 7–1–0.
Others: Jeff Turley 18–7–0; Mick Dressor 12–6–0;
EARLY June promises to be  action-packed on Ashington's QE2 reservoir following the announcement of two major events.
On June 3 is the annual teams of six open competition organised by Northumberland Police Angling Section, entrance fee £27 per team.
The draw takes place at the Lakeside Inn, 9.30 am with fishing from 11am to 4pm.
Tickets from Sgt Gordon Parkin (telephone 091567–6155, ext. 6331.
Leighton Reservoir: 126 visitors grassed a total of 290 fish.
No limit bags recorded; heaviest rainbow 4lb.
Montanas, bibios, black pernell and black spiders top flies on this venue.
Fixtures: May 22: Aycliffe AC Evening Series (2) Aycliffe Pond, 6–9pm.
May 23: Middlesbrough AC Albert Park Cup, Albert Park Lake, 7–12 noon.
May 24: DBT AA Lartington Charity Match incorporating Lartington top and bottom lakes.
Middlesbrough AC Juniors Strikemore Trophy, Hemlington Lake.
May 26: Stockton Elm Tree Open, Middleton Water Park, 6–9pm; tickets £2 in local tackle shops.
May 27: Stokesley AC meeting, 7.30pm, Stokesley Sports Club.
May 28: Durham City AA Brasside Evening Series (3); meet on lakeside 6pm.
FORMER Middlesbrough midfield player Paul Kerr would welcome a return to the North-East.
Kerr, 27, has been transfer-listed by Millwall at his own request and plans to settle in the North-East during or after his playing career.
He said: ‘I established a close affinity with the area in my four years with Middlesbrough.
‘People made me feel so welcome that I will undoubtedly go back and live in the North-East.
‘Whether I join a club in the area may be outside of my control.
But I will put my roots in the area sooner or later.’
Kerr was Millwall's leading scorer and a contender for Player of the Year until an ankle injury forced him to miss the closing weeks of last season.
‘I had a great rapport with the Millwall fans.
‘Mick McCarthy, the new manager, is a good friend of mine.
In fact, we roomed together on away trips.
‘But I don't think I would fit into his scheme of things for next season.
‘I hope to get fixed up soon with another club.
I have always kept myself fit and feel I could continue playing until I am 35.’
Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence plans another meeting with full back Jimmy Phillips and midfielder Mark Proctor, whose contracts run out this summer.
Both have delayed signing new deals and Lawrence said: ‘I am very hopeful things can be settled amicably.
I don't think there is a major stumbling block.’
HARTLEPOOL United central defender Ian McGuckin has signed a new two-year contract.
Boro chase more glory
ROLLER HOCKEY: Middlesbrough visit British champions Southsea this weekend as contenders for the Lennards Cup.
Middlesbrough are already well placed to win the Northern League division one championship for the second successive year and promotion to the premier league will be assured if they win their remaining games.
The junior squad, with convincing wins against Peterborough, Ipswich and Manchester behind them, face Maidstone in the semi-finals of the Dex-o-Tex Cup Coaching for kids FOOTBALL: A Teesside-based coaching organisation Total Futball is holding coaching weeks at various locations in the North of England during school holidays from July to August Boys and girls from six to 16 will be invited to take part and the course will be directed by Football Association coach Mark Donnelly The course is designed to improve individual skills and techniques and detailed brochures can be obtained from Donnelly (0642–343430)
Entries wanted
FOOTBALL: The third B and M Windows five-a-side tournament is being held at the Oak Leaf sports complex, Newton Aycliffe, on Monday.
The closing date for entries is tomorrow night (9pm) and anyone interested in entering a team should contact the centre (0325–300700)
Cost per team is £10 and following the presentations, immediately after the final, the sponsors are providing a buffet Charity match FOOTBALL: Former players of Northallerton Spartans and Brompton are being urged to dig out their boots and play in a charity match in memory of well-known local player Ken ‘Nab’ Pratt.
Proceeds from the game will be given to charity The game is to be at the end of August at Northallerton's ground on a date to be arranged Former players from the 60s to the present day are asked to contact John Murdoch (0609771139) or David Thorne (0609779465)
Speedway
YARM-based double British champion Gary Havelock broke a bone and severely bruised his right hand in a high-speed track crash in Poland and is out of tonight's Gold Cup clash between Bradford and Oxford.
Former Middlesbrough star Havelock was riding his third Polish league match and hit the safety fence at around 50 mph after a local rider inside him drifted wide.
The 23-year-old Keyline Dukes captain retained his British title only last Sunday but seems unlikely to ride again until the next round of the world individual championship the Ancit Commonwealth final at Kings Lynn on Sunday May 31.
He flew back to England yesterday and saw a specialist in Ipswich, Brian Simpson, who uses laser treatment to aid recovery.
His injury comes in the same week as Danish world champion Jan O Pedersen was put out of the sport for 18 months with serious spinal injuries and compatriot Hans Nielsen, who was due to ride for Oxford against Havelock tonight, broke his collar bone.
MIDDLESBROUGH winger Stuart Ripley has dismissed speculation that he is poised to sign for Manchester United.
The former England Under21 international said: ‘Rumours spread in a  close-season .
Like the old Chinese whisper, they grow and grow.
People add a little on and eventually I have signed for a club and sold my house.
But none of it is true.
‘I am happy at Middlesbrough at the moment.
But if a deal comes along then obviously I would consider it.
In football, you never really know what is round the corner.
A player, like a manager, has to keep his options open.’
Ripley plans a holiday to forget about football after a gruelling 60-match season.
On his return, he will discuss his future with manager Lennie Lawrence.
‘Middlesbrough face the exciting prospect of the Premier League and I have been offered a new contract.
‘On the other hand, I have been with my home club for eight seasons.
That's a long time at one club.
I have played in three promoted teams, two relegation teams, and appeared at Wembley in the Zenith Data Systems Cup Final.
‘I have done so much with Middlesbrough that at times I think it might be nice to go elsewhere and start afresh.
‘But I know if I ever left, I would return to Middlesbrough at the end of my career and support my home club.
‘One thing is certain.
I know I can trust Lennie Lawrence.
The manager has been straight down the line since he arrived at the club.
The players have a very high regard for him.
‘It is easy to say Lawrence is a great manager after our success.
But he proved himself at Charlton Athletic when the chips were down.’
RESCUERS last night told how they coaxed a man out of a suicide bid as he drifted half a mile out to sea in a child's dinghy.
Off-duty police inspector Dave Cammish and education psychologist Mike Woods patiently talked the man into a lifeboat as darkness fell off the Saltburn coast.
Redcar lifeboat was launched when the man was seen floating out to sea in the four foot dinghy.
Police had been alerted about a man said to be in a depressed state who was reported missing from the Carousel Hostel, Marton Road, Middlesbrough.
When the lifeboat approached he refused the rescue crew's assistance so helmsman Mike Picknett called the police.
Insp Cammish, 45, a part-time lifeboat crew member, was preparing to report for his police shift but offered his help to the rescue party.
Mr Woods, 55, a Cleveland county council education psychologist, of Gypsy Lane, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough, who was having a drink nearby, offered to join him.
Insp Cammish said: ‘We went through the usual practice of trying to strike up a rapport with the person and gain a genuine sort of confidence.’
The man in the dinghy was wet through and the temperature was falling.
‘It was getting dark, the fog was thickening and the tide was turning which made it even more awkward,’ said Insp Cammish.
‘The most fortunate thing was that we found out he came from a village in Essex and by sheer chance Mr Woods came from the same county and knew the same village which gave them something to talk about.’
The rescued man was yesterday being examined by doctors at Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
THE depleted North-Eastern Counties team will be up against one of the region's leading Olympic hopefuls in the inter-counties championships at Corby today.
Teessider Anthony Brannen, the only British decathlete selected for the world championships in Tokyo last year, will be making his debut in the early season competition as an adopted Staffordshire athlete.
Brannen, now working in Stoke and competing for the city's athletics club, agreed to represent his new home county in the pole vault and high jump before team manager Bill McGuirk contacted him with an invitation to be the NorthEast's 110 metres hurdler.
But inter-county rivalry will be of secondary importance for the 23-year-old World Student Games bronze medallist.
He needs to sharpen up before the Olympic decathlon trial in Sheffield on June 5 and 6, when only victory and a points score of 7,850 will guarantee selection.
Brannen, who resigned from Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harriers before Christmas, had to abort an attempt to achieve the qualifying points score in Maryland, USA, two weeks ago when he registered three fouls in the second discipline, the long jump.
‘It was a wasted trip,’ he said, ‘but there's no reason why I shouldn't get the points score at Sheffield.’
Brannen produced his best decathlon at the Don Valley Stadium last summer, taking the World Student Games bronze with just 200 points fewer than the Olympic qualifying score.
Brannen, who faces World Cup silver medallist Dalton Grant in the high jump this afternoon, will not be the only prominent North-East athlete wearing opposition colours at Corby.
Newcastle security guard Peter Gordon competes for Yorkshire, aiming to extend his record haul of discus titles to seven in ten years.
Yorkshire, runners-up to Essex last year, also boast York's World Student Games bronze medallist Steve Gookey, who has already won county and British University titles for 100 metres and 200 metres this season.
The North-Eastern Counties line-up is: 100m and 200m, Martin Critchley (NSP); 400m, Dave Deacon (S Shields); 800m, Vince Wilson (Jarrow and Hebburn); Mile, Alan Johnson (Elswick); 5,000m, Mark Hudspith (Morpeth)); 10,000m, Mark Smith (Gateshead); 3,000m steeplechase, Justin Reed (Gateshead); 400m hurdles, Anthony Borsumato (Mandale); high jump, Brian Thompson (NSP); pole vault, to be confirmed; discus and shot, Paul Reed (Wolverhampton and Bilston); javelin, Dave Pescod (Sunderland); hammer, Scott Thompson (Sunderland).
Park View Community Association stage their annual 10km road race at Chester-le-Street this morning (10.10).
BLAYDON Harrier Kirsty Wade is preparing to challenge for her first UK title after winning her 17th Welsh championship gold medal at Cardiff on Saturday.
She faces world 10,000 metres champion Liz McColgan in the 1500 metres in Sheffield on June 6 and 7 after registering her first victory of the summer with a rare 3,000 metres outing at Cardiff.
Wade battled through wind to win by 27 seconds from Torfaen's Hayley Nash in 9 mins 12.51 secs.
NEWCASTLE United are looking to their supporters to ease their mounting financial burden.
Admission prices are to be increased by 10pc next season, even though the Tyneside club only narrowly escaped relegation to the Third Division in the worst season in their 100-year history.
With debts rising above £6.5m and spending money to be found for Kevin Keegan's summer team-building mission, fans are being expected to pay part of the price of the club's mismanagement.
It will cost £7 to stand on the terraces at St James's Park from August and £270 for season tickets in the Milburn and East stands.
‘The club has horrendous debts,’ said chief executive Freddie Fletcher, ‘but it still prepared to spend in an effort to launch a genuine promotion push next season.’
Keegan returns to the manager's desk tomorrow with an offer from Jim Smith to take striker Mick Quinn to Portsmouth in exchange for Colin Clarke and Guy Whittingham.
Quinn, who Smith signed for United from Portsmouth three years ago, was disciplined for criticising Keegan last month and is likely to be one of the summer departures from St James's Park.
Keegan will be reluctant to part with another, leading scorer Gavin Peacock, who is out of contract and wanted by Spurs, Coventry, Aston Villa and Middlesbrough.
Lennie Lawrence, Middlesbrough's manager, confirmed his interest at the weekend, saying he was prepared to take the matter to a transfer tribunal if he failed to agree a fee with Keegan.
Director Freddie Shepherd, meanwhile, has denied reports that he plans to sell his 7pc shareholding to chairman Sir John Hall and is expected to be appointed vice-chairman.
JOHN Anderson, forced to retire from a full-time playing career because of an ankle injury, has been appointed player-manager of Berwick Rangers.
The 32-year-old former Republic of Ireland international, whose testimonial match took place at St James's Park last month, succeeds another former Newcastle player, Ralph Callachan.
‘I realise the club is short of cash but it's a great chance for me to gain an insight into management,’ said Anderson.
MIDDLESBROUGH are to join Newcastle in a prestigious four-team pre-season tournament at St James's Park.
The two-day competition will pit the North-East clubs against John Toshack's Real Sociedad and Bobby Robson's Sporting Lisbon.
Darlington Building Society NYSD League CLAYTON Lambert struck an astonishing century to enable to beat the fog and Darlington and record their sixth win of the season.
The RA's modest total of 145–8 looked a tall order for the champions as the weather deteriorated.
However, Lambert, Redcar's West Indian professional, raced to an unbeaten 103 which included 17 fours and two sixes off just 66 balls.
Redcar won by ten wickets in just 20 overs.
For the second successive week professional Mike Farrell scored 145 not out, his team totalling 241–2.
Dennis Wing top scored with 76 in magnificent response of 205–7 in just 42 overs.
They might have won had not professional Ken McLeod been run out on 37 when he was in full flow.
Brad Osborne scored 120 for at home to.
This was his second century in seven days but the game was won by five wickets at Bishop.
Once again their tactics of bowling left-arm spinner Jamie Stewart throughout paid off.
The Australian professional took 7–103, bringing his tally of league wickets to 35 and, although the home side made 187–8, there was plenty of time for the Middlesbrough batsmen to knock off the runs.
David Jackson made 74 and Tony Gray 55 for the losers, while Ian Renshaw top scored with 51 not out for the winners.
gained an eight-wicket win at.
Leftarm spinners Masood Anwaar and Leigh Beaumont, sent down 45 of the 55 overs in the afternoon.
The Pakistani bowled 28 overs against his former club, taking 455 and Darlington struggled to 156–8.
The home attack held no fears for Mike Thomas who scored a fine 78 including 12 fours and shared in an opening partnership of 133 with Chris Minto (49).
Promising young batsman, Ian Place, seems to have booked himself a regular spot in A Division side.
He scored 59 out of a total of 178–7 at home to Normanby.
Peter Guy was unbeaten on 49 when the overs ran out.
A slow over rate left just 40 overs for Normanby's reply which was 130–5, Geoff Robinson scoring 54 not out.
Vaux Durham Senior League FELLING, on a day when the weather was the real winner, created history when they recorded their first league victory.
The only other side to overcome the elements was Chester-leStreet who had a win over Boldon.
looked to be heading for defeat against after a typically workmanlike innings by Steve Greensword (49) had held Wearmouth together.
Stephen Clark enjoyed his 8.2 overs with a 5–42 return and later became the batting hero.
Chasing 162, Felling entered the last hour requiring 82 to win with six wickets left.
However, they were reduced to 86–6 as Greensword's accuracy diminished their hopes.
Then Clark (47) in a 39-delivery blast added 69 runs with Billy Coulson, to guide Felling home.
League leaders South scraped the bonus point at where the minimum requirement of 20 overs were bowled in the second innings.
South Shields rattled Sunderland who slid to 111–7.
However, some tail end enterprise came from the last batsman Chris Young (32) who ended top scorer.
David Parnaby (5–54) again turned in an impressive performance.
Play was halted after six overs but when play resumed Philip Stonehouse hit a quick half century to give South Shields the bonus point.
weren't so lucky managing just 18.3 overs in reply to 166.
Ashok Patel (48) and David Borthwick (50) added 77 for the third wicket.
When Shaun and Tony Birbeck, opening Eppleton's innings, rapidly hit 105, victory looked likely but the conditions caused the game to be abandoned.
Gateshead skipper Phil Dicks helped Ian Robson (62) to add 83 before Graeme Weeks' half century against his former, hoisted the Fell to 195.
Then a productive partnership between Paul Burn (63 not out) and Brett Montgomery (72 not out) added an unfinished 135, when bad light took the players from the field, never to return.
Runs came easily Durham as Paul Currie (128 not out) and Steve Dunsford (84 not out) again exposed the weak attack.
Durham struck early in the Philadelphia reply collecting three wickets.
However, the weather intervened as Brendan Hill and Ken Haswell stemmed the collapse.
The 16-year-old Dominic Williamson showed tremendous maturity for at.
With wickets falling at the other end Williamson (86 not out) helped Boldon recover from 41–4 to a more respectable 158.
Mark Blunt and David Wilson set up the Chester-le-Street win despite a 5–49 return from Mark Storey.
Six wickets by John Pendlington contained Seaham to 144.
This target should have been well within the reach of Horden, seeking their first win.
Unfortunately the drizzle curtailed the match with the teams gaining just one point each.
Millburngate Durham County League CROOK Town are the new leaders after Esh Winning slipped up on Saturday.
ended Ushaw recent good run by defeating them by 63 runs.
They were boosted by an innings of 67 by opener Ian Williams, with good knocks from Stephen Ball and Santosh Jedhe.
Crook youngster Richard Manuel took three early wickets in the Ushaw Moor reply.
The rest were shared by Jedhe and Ball as Ushaw Moor batted the overs out to reach 117–9.
Esh, meanwhile, were beaten by five wickets at home to.
Esh Winning could only muster 110, mainly because of the efforts of Leadgate's professional Nolan McKenzie, who took 7–57 in 21.4 overs, and then the West Indian scored 42 to see his side home.
professional John Pollard scored his second successive unbeaten century, this time it was who suffered.
Visitors Lanchester reached a useful total of 211–8, which was boosted by late innings of 45 and 37 respectively by Stephen Murray and Ian Clish.
But Pollard, who struck 163 last week, was in the same mood, and scored an unbeaten 119 which included 14 fours and four sixes as Evenwood overtook the target with nine overs left.
The West Indian recorded three successive unbeaten centuries last season.
Hetton are only a point off the pacemakers after they won by six wickets Langley.
Hetton professional Dipak Sharma grabbed 7–43 as Langley Park were bowled out for 103, Fred Eastaugh taking 3–30.
Hetton Lyons knocked the runs off with plenty to spare.
BUDDING soccer stars are being invited to sign up for the Reebok Fives national tournament.
Jim Wattis, Middlesbrough Council's football development officer, wants nine to 13-year-olds who wish to take part in the county's biggest five-a-side event to contact him.
Jim and Stephen Bennett, area co-ordinator for Barnado's, are hoping for a repeat of last year's response when the Middlesbrough heats proved the most popular in the North-East, netting £160 for the charity.
The local heats take place at Acklam Sports Centre on Wednesday and Thursday, July 29 and 30 with the winners going on to the regional final on August 5.
More details can be obtained from Jim on Middlesbrough 245432.
GIANT-killing basketball stars the Middlesbrough Mohawks walked tall when they met the town's mayor.
Coun Frank Platt invited them into his parlour for a civic reception after their ‘against all odds’ Wembley appearance this month.
The Mowhawks made the final in the Carlsberg National League play-offs, taking the scalps of league leaders Oldham on the way.
Led by American captain Tony Hanson they eventually lost before a capacity crowd.
Key players, club chairman Paddy Corcoran and team manager Trevor Hawkins met the mayor.
ANYONE for croquet was the cry as the gentle striking of mallets put balls through hoops in the grounds of stately Ormesby Hall, Middlesbrough.
Croquet clubs nationwide opened their doors and lawns at the weekend to put over the message that it is a sport for all.
The Ormesby Hall club, whose home games are played in the grounds of the National Trust property, is now in its fourth year and contrary to popular belief it's not just old ladies and vicars who participate in the genteel Sunday afternoon pastime.
Charles Waterfield, club secretary, said: ‘The best players tend to be very young, students in their early twenties.’
He said it was a tactical kind of game, a bit like ‘a friendly form of warfare’ where the game was never won until the last shot.
Ormesby and Norton Hall, Stockton, are the only croquet clubs in the Teesside area but singles, doubles and knockout competitions are regularly held after which winners take part in regional, national and international events.
The sport is not new to Teesside where the game was known to have been played at about the turn of the century on six lawns at Albert Park, Middlesbrough until it was pushed out by tennis.
Visitors are welcome at Ormesby Hall's Tuesday evening and Sunday afternoon sessions.
Rugby ruckus:
Yorkshire Television cameraman Mark Stokes was shaken but unhurt after being pelted with cans and bottles as crowd trouble flared during the opening match of Great Britain's Rugby League tour of Papua New Guinea yesterday.
A star of the chess world at just ten Jay Stockham is already a star in the world of junior British chess and he is only ten.
Jay, left, of Ashwood Drive, Stokesley, took up the game just three years ago after his family moved back to England from New Zealand.
While unpacking, he found a chess set; his father explained some of the moves, and since then he has gone from strength to strength despite the fact that the family has no chess background.
His enthusiasm led to the formation of a club at his school, Stokesley Primary, and this encouraged other youngsters to learn the game.
Jay progressed though local congresses, and experienced his first big success at the Whitley Bay tournament where he came second in the under-nine events at the age of seven.
After attending the British Chess Championships at Eastbourne, he was invited to join the British junior squad in Bridgend, Wales, last year.
In Liverpool he came second in the English under-12 quick play championship, gave a good performance in last year's London junior championships, and progressed to the England junior get-together in January.
He is already a member of the British junior team, having been chosen two years earlier than most of the others.
Last weekend, he was one of 73 juniors invited to compete in Hampshire for 24 places in the English team.
He now competes regularly against adults too, and came second in the recent Cleveland championships in which most of the players were adult.
He was also second in the Yorkshire Championships at Harrogate and is currently junior champion of Yorkshire.
His success extends even further afield to victories at the Barbican in London.
Jay says his greatest pleasure came when he played against two Grandmasters from Russia and one each from England and Romania, drawing twice and losing twice.
Nearer home, he is a stalwart of the chess club at his present school, Yarm School junior department, and he plays for Stokesley in the senior division of the chess league.
He shares many of the interests of other ten-year-olds, enjoying cricket, soccer and rugby, and he is a supporter of Manchester United and Middlesbrough.
He is in his school sports teams and enjoys singing, having recently won prizes at two festivals.
Fossils fascinate him too, and he says that he might even look to a career in palaeontology.
THE Wearside League, which stretches to the Irish Sea and once included Egypt, duly celebrated its centenary on Friday evening.
The league was formed at a meeting in the Central Coffee Tavern in Sunderland.
Suitably for a competition now sponsored by Vaux Breweries, we drank more potently to its continued success.
The first president was Major Ernest Vaux, he of the brewing family and the maxim gun: of the 11 founding clubs only Seaham Harbour, Seaham Albion and Boldon (who, alone, survive) weren't from Sunderland.
The others were Sunderland Swifts, Wearmouth Swifts, Sunderland Celtic, Sunderland West End, East End Black Watch, Ryhope Colliery, Monkwearmouth and South Hylton, who didn't last the season.
Times being hard, annual subscriptions were set at five bob.
Royal Rovers, who joined in 1894, were so strapped they played with a rugby ball.
Egypt Rangers also enlisted, briefly, in 1894–95.
‘Little Egypt’ was part of the Hendon area of Sunderland which, then as now, had streets called Cairo and Telel-Kebir.
(Egyptologists among our readers may care to explain why.)
Now the League has three clubs in West Cumbria, five in Sunderland, and in the North-East extends from the Bohemians who cast convention aside at Gosforth to Marske United, by the Cleveland sea.
(Q: which England player once scored a hat trick for Marske United after coming on as a substitute?
A: Paul Jarvis.)
Almost all 28 teams were represented at the do.
Fred Eyre spoke about this and that and Tommy Smith about the other (Emlyn Hughes, in other words); Durham FA president Frank Patterson was in particularly good form.
‘Being president of Newcastle United,’ he observed to top table neighbour Stan Seymour, ‘must be like being a Christian Scientist with appendicitis.’
It was an excellent night.
They really must have a centenary more often.
Tie break
THOUGH ageless (that is to say he never lets on) Wearside League president Charlie Thomas is reckoned to be just 16 years junior to the league itself.
Sunderland v Liverpool was his 50th successive FA Cup final.
The admirable Charlie, an FA vice-president, tells us that he bowed to local pressure by wearing a handsome red tie with the appropriate initials SAFC.
Happily no one examined it too closely: the SAFC stood for Shildon.
Nil desperandum STANLEY United tread the Wearside League too, though their better days, perhaps indisputably, lie elsewhere.
Former Stanley stalwarts include Harry Potts, who managed Burnley's 1960 championship side; inside forward Geoff Strong who starred for Arsenal and Liverpool but in 33 swansong games for Coventry never scored a goal; Tommy Cummings who played 434 times for Burnley and thrice for England B; Gordon Pallister, now 75, who had 210 matches at Barnsley and Jack Howarth, a bairn at 47, whose travels embraced 421 games for the late and lamented Aldershot.
On July 9 a reunion is planned at Billy Row workmen's club, down the road from the wind blasted old stamping ground.
Organised by Ernest Armstrong, former House of Commons deputy speaker and Stanley's pre-war defence minister, it's for tea ladies, kit washers and supporters every bit as much as players.
Ernest (Witton-le-Wear 397) welcomes word of any of them.
What puzzles him, and us, is United's newly disencrusted coat of arms and its motto ‘ex nihilo, nihil fit.’
‘I haven't the faintest what it means,’ admits the ex-MP, and neither had any of the scholars at the centenary dinner.
Silver star
ALONGSIDE Stanley in the League's second division hew humble Hebburn Colliery, they of the match magazine with the shiny silver front.
Editor George McHugh has just heard that his refulgent masterwork has been named the North-East's best non-league programme, a point ahead of Northern League Chester-le-Street in the Wirral Programme Club's annual survey.
‘I'm delighted,’ says George.
‘We haven't a lot of money so it's great to get recognition.’
Brandon were third in the region and Shotton Comrades, their Northern League compatriots, deservedly fourth.
Marchon and Sunderland Flo-Gas came second and third in the Wearside League section, but half a street behind.
The reflected glory is all Hebburn's.
Wrong ‘un
WITH just three months notice, Alan Brett produced a splendid, 48 page centenary brochure.
Its best story concerns Roker, members for 30 years.
‘Roker’ is also the back page headline writers' familiar five letter word for Sunderland.
Last year a tabloid reader at the FA sent Peter Davenport's registration and transfer forms to Tom Clark, the Wearside League club's secretary.
‘Dav signs for Roker’ and all that.
‘Eventually,’ observes Brett, ‘it was decided to allow Sunderland to play Davenport.
The management of Roker FC couldn't guarantee him a place in the side.’
ESH Winning Albion held their annual presentation, the column gladhanding, two nights after the centenary bash.
Bottom the previous season, Albion finished ninth of 12 in the Wearside League second division, Billy Harker top scoring with 15 of which one, reputedly, was a penalty that bounced three times en route.
Five others were penalties, too.
Mr Harker, they say, is apt to unnerve opponents by telling them he's a ‘Sherburn Road lad.’
We feigned not to grasp the reference, though Durham City readers may understand it very well.
Joan Fort, a dedicated tea lady and kit washer, also got an award and so did Davey Harrison for his two hat tricks.
Mr Harrison is known as Chopper, for reasons that Chelsea fans will understand but upon which the ladies of Esh Winning can only speculate.
Albion also reached the finals of the Monkwearmouth Cup before losing 2–0 to Eppleton, the first division champions.
Better days are ahead.
Manager Malcolm Smith, once assistant manager at Wealdstone, lives in Middlesbrough.
Unpaid, he makes the 90 mile round trip to Esh Winning three times a week for a total £10 expenses.
Why does the Albion rover do it?
‘Because I'm mental,’ he said.
But Malcolm Smith, not Kevin Keegan, is what football is truly about.
So, and not alone at this level, are Esh Winning Albion and the Wearside League.
FREEWHEELING youngsters John Kell and Karen Davison will represent Britain next week in the European Youth roller skating championships in Spain.
Both belong to the Caprice club which skates at sports centres at Middlesbrough, Eston and Shildon just a quick flip from their homes.
But the club coached by Stokesley hairdresser Ian Watkins, a former Great Britain international is so popular that other members travel each weekend from Milton Keynes, Gillingham, Whitehaven and Bridgend in South Wales.
John, aged ten, lives in Coundon, near Bishop Auckland; 12-year-old Karen is from Middlesbrough.
Newest Caprice champs include ten-year-old Nicola Shildrick and her sister Rebecca, 11, also from Middlesbrough and Darlington based Lee Taylor, 18, the British men's senior title holder.
Lee (’ if he was a footballer he'd be worth millions’says Watkins) skates in Italy next month with club members and British dance champions David Samson and Adele Warner.
They're the ones from Bridgend.
Italy is probably nearer than Shildon.
Drainpipe trousers and fluorescent socks, drape jacket, bootlace tie and hair carefully greased back into a DA style — the Teddy Boy certainly livened up the Fifties.
And men never looked back.
It was the start of a new interest in clothes.
Shirts, for instance, had always been white or with the most discreet of stripes.
But when the Sixties arrived, even elderly men starting sporting pink shirts (pink!— that just used to be the colour of their gin) and sideburns.
It took longer to get rid of the suit.
In the early Sixties, even pop stars wore suits.
Six Five Special looked like an advert for Burtons.
When the Rolling Stones leapt on stage in jeans and open necked shirts they were immediately marked down as Dangerous Rebels.
But Mick Jagger wore a suit when he was best man to photographer David Bailey.
Admittedly, the suit was blue denim and he didn't wear a tie, but he was still more formal than the groom who wore a blue sweater and green corduroy trousers.
The Sixties was a wonderful decade for men who could at last admit to being peacocks.
Tight trousers flowing to flares, waisted jackets, vivid shirts and ties half a mile wide.
Men could and did wear their hair to the shoulders, even wore flowers in it and beads round their necks — that got the pink gins spluttering.
They wore flowered waistcoats, flowered shirts, velvet  trousers .
At least most wore trousers…
Mick Jagger wore a dress at his Hyde Park concert and very pretty he looked too.
By the Seventies the suit was dead, kept for weddings, funerals and job interviews.
Otherwise, apart from extremely formal jobs, most men got along without one.
This was the age of slashed shirts, Medallion Man and chestwigs.
And footballers booked a perm as soon as they got their first team place.
Jeans were acceptable everywhere.
Even in the office you had to look as though you weren't working.
In  corduroy velvet, denim or linen, the look was relaxed, verging on scruffy.
Then it was the Eighties and everyone meant business.
This was a money-making decade and it showed.
The Suit was back, the more serious and sober the better.
Even little office boys dressed as though they were running the country.
Serious workers wore suits all day.
Lads who spent the working day in jeans got dressed up in a suit to go out for the night.
Everyone looked grown up and serious and clutched Filofaxes.
Men are now spending as much as women on their clothes — look at all the designer shops even in places like Middlesbrough.
Today's look is still smart — even casual wear is part of mainstream fashion.
But suits are more relaxed, often in bright colours and, again, no longer compulsory.
Mick Jagger turned up at his daughter's art  exhibition in a beautifully cut silk jacket.
But you just have to look at the chain stores to see how times have changed.
Marks and Spencer now sell pink silk shorts for men — 40 years ago that would probably have got you locked up…
KAREN Davison has got her skates on to become a sporting ambassador for Middlesbrough.
The 12-year-old roller skater is to represent Great Britain in the European Youth Championships.
Yesterday, she met Middlesbrough Mayor Frank Platt, who presented her with souvenirs from the town to give to her hosts in Spain.
Karen, who started skating at the age of six, has received grants from the borough council's Community Chest.
Coun Platt said: ‘It's good to see a young person making the grade in their chosen sport, particularly when the local authority has been able to help.’
Janice's chance:
The local artist of the month for June at the Gray Art Gallery and Museum in Hartlepool will be Janice Wilson.
She uses photographs that she has taken to create collages.
Her exhibition will run from June 1–30.
BUDDING athletes who have run, thrown and jumped their way to ‘five star awards’ received commemorative certificates yesterday.
International hurdlers Steve Markham and Alison Curbishley made the presentations at Cleveland County Stadium in Middlesbrough.
Stadium development officer Elaine Marshall said the five star courses had really put the youngsters through their paces.
‘They included everything from long jump and discus to middle-distance running,’ she said.
More Five Star award courses are planned for August.
For details, call (0642) 246767.
KIWI speedway aces Mark Thorpe and David Bargh lead Newcastle Diamonds' challenge in the Knockout Cup at Middlesbrough Bears tonight.
And the devastating duo are set to steal the show in the Debmat Diamonds' full strength line-up.
Thorpe and captain Bargh are locked in battle at the top of the Second Division averages which has seen their scores take them well ahead of all the other riders in the Homefire League.
Middlesbrough face a real struggle to peg the confident Diamonds, who have dominated the northern section of the Gold Cup and are tipped for the league title.
In contrast, Middlesbrough's riders have struggled to strike form.
Their best performance was a week ago with flu victim skipper Steve Regeling and Australian Dave Cheshire, hit by a bout of bronchitis, successfully battling against the odds.
Ken Knott, Bears team boss, is hoping that both will report 100pc tonight and Mark Lemon will not be suffering from delayed reaction following his spectacular crash in Sunday's World Under-21 championship qualifying round at Belle Vue.
Middlesbrough's new style pairings, tried for the first time against Sheffield last week, gave greater strength in depth, and Knott has named an unchanged team.
Reserves Duncan Chapman and Paul Pickering can expect a difficult time against in-form Dane, Richard Juul, and Max Schofield, the former Bear who will be determined to prove a point to Middlesbrough for allowing him to move on.
The local derby is jointly sponsored by Gateshead-based Colman Industrial Plastics and Hunter Building Supplies who make their first venture into speedway sponsorship.
Middlesbrough: Steve Regeling (captain), Donny Odom, Dave Cheshire, Mark Lemon, Daz Sumner, Duncan Chapman, Paul Pickering.
Newcastle: Mark Thorpe, Phil Jeffrey, Scott Norman, Wayne Garratt, Dave Bargh (captain), Richard Juul, Max Schofield.
A TALENTED North-East teenager has won a place at the prestigious National Youth Theatre.
Darren Lake, from The Glebe, Norton, Stockton, who wants to be a stage and screen star, beat 3,500 other hopefuls after reading a piece from Shakespeare and a twentieth century work.
A pupil at St Michael's School, Billingham, he has acted in amateur productions at the Little Theatre, Middlesbrough, and Billingham Forum.
Darren was helped on the road to stardom by the Hit and Miss Management Agency based in Norton.
Agency director Michael McCarren said they were still looking for youngsters to cast in London shows.
Anyone interested should ring (0642) 584620.
NINETY not out That's what they're celebrating at Low Spennymoor and Merrington Lane Social Club next week.
Back in 1902 that a few local men got together to form the club in a house in Coulson Street, Low Spennymoor.
The club now has more than 1,000 members.
Anniversary celebrations are on Saturday June 6 when the Federation Roadshow brings comedian Alan Snell, singer Sue Sweeney and an instrumental duo.
Chairman Ned Spence and committeeman Wilfred Lowes will be celebrating ten years service awards with beer at 50p a pint.
Cheers!.
—Nearly 50 awards were handed out at the Erimus Quoit and Rifle Social Club, Middlesbrough for the Winter Handicaps 1991–92.
Winners were Billiards: Andrew Dooley, runner-up Chris Atkins.
Snooker, John Mitchell, runner-up Colin Kirby.
Darts, Tony Stynan, runner-up Colin Kirby, Dominoes, Les Behan, runner-up Gerry Nolan.
Dominoes (pairs), Cliff Ward and Paddy Nichol beat Mick Dearlove and John Rafferty.
Dominoes (fives and threes), Gary Maisby and Derek Tooley beat Peter Watkins and L Martin.
Snooker (pairs), Lol Macdonald and Kevin Mahoney won with Ron Hill and Dair Rees in second place.
Winner of the Stan Pearson Trophy for snooker was Alan Fletcher and runner-up John Russon.
The Erimus Angling trophy was netted by Henry Stynan and Keith Bellamy taking the aggregate award.
—Burnopfield Victory Club homing pigeon society has made £1,800 for three local charities from two squeaker sales.
Top breeders from all over the country joined local pigeon fanciers in donating young birds for the sales.
£1,000 was presented to the Freeman Hospital Heart Unit (Ward 27) by Bob Pinkerton, who organised the sale in memory of his sister-in-law Margaret Hardie from Blaydon.
Margaret had one of the first major heart operations carried out in the UK more than 27 years ago in Edinburgh.
Two other cheques for £400 were accepted by Jack Foster on behalf of the Kidney Research Fund and Burnopfield Victory Club secretary Jack Austin on behalf of the club.
—Hartlepool's Unemployment Bowls League hold their presentation night at the Rovers Quoit Club on Friday May 29.
Entertainment will be provided by the hilarious Don Juans and tickets, including pie and peas supper, are £1.50.
—Whoops!
In my report about Newton Aycliffe's Horndale Social Club cabaret nights with Lee and Marie and Feelings, I gave the wrong dates.
Let me put the record straight.
The Cabaret Nights are on Fridays.
The next show is on Friday June 5 when Lee and Marie's guests will include comedy entertainer C C Conway with a girl singer.
Tickets which include supper and complementary wine are £6.
—Trimdon Village Junior Football Club hold their presentation night at Trimdon Village WMC on Saturday May 30.
Entertainment includes a disco for dancing.
—Four committee members received CIU certificates of merit from Durham CIU branch secretary JackAmos at Stanley Empire Social Club John Heaton, Alan Beckwith, Alex Hutchinson and Bill Weelands.
—The supergroup Six of the Best is so popular at Seaham's Westlea Social Club that they have been booked to appear for three nights as part of the club's 39th birthday celebrations on June 12, 13 and 14.
—A presentation will be made to Consett Station Club's retiring stewart Fred Emerson on Thursday June 4.
—At the presentation of awards for the Stanley and District Games League, held at East Stanley WMC Tanfield Lea WMC scooped the darts and dominoes titles through Nick Mitcheson and Alan Nicholson.
Ken Wilson of Tantobie Union Club won the whist trophy and fellow member Brian Snailham took the pool championship.
—Hetton CIU Football League presentation night will take place at Newbottle WMC on Saturday June 6.
—News from your club is always welcome.
Telephone Neil Harris  now!
THIS month's Northern Echo Achiever of the Month award goes to Kenneth Churchill, 17, who lives in Normanby, Middlesbrough.
He is a former pupil of Ormesby School and now attends Longlands College.
Kenneth is a field athlete and competes nationally and internationally in javelin, shot and discus.
Earlier this month Kenneth took part in the BSAD regional junior athletics at Monkton Stadium, Jarrow.
He convincingly won three events, achieving distances of 39.77m in the javelin, 9.85m in the shot and 27.86m in the discus.
He has now qualified to compete in the national junior athletics held in Blackpool on Saturday and Sunday, July 4–5.
And from now until September he will be concentrating on his athletics training as he may be selected to compete for Britain in the Paralympics in Barcelona.
This Sunday Kenneth is competing at the BSAD senior athletics championships to be held at Monkton Stadium.
This is the selection event for the national senior athletics championships at Hull on August 1 and 2.
There are 120 competitors entered in this year's events coming from clubs throughout the Northern region.
The clubs entered are Tyneside Vikings, BSAD Cumbria, Mid Northumberland Young Disabled Centre, West Cumbria Disabled Sports Club, TLF Sports Club, Hirst Welfare Disabled Sports Club, BPF Newcastle, Barbara Priestman School, Killingworth Fliers, John Wright Centre, Carlisle Sports Club, Bedlington Disabled Sports Club and Ashington Floaters.
MIDDLESBROUGH duo Jimmy Phillips and Mark Proctor yesterday agreed to sign new deals with the Premier League club.
And that means Boro boss Lennie Lawrence has succeeded in keeping together his entire promotion-winning squad.
Lawrence leaves for a holiday this weekend but hopes to complete the long-running Jon Gittens deal on his return in July.
The Boro manager has revealed that the Southampton centre-half is one of two summer targets the other being Newcastle's out-of-contract striker Gavin Peacock.
But Lawrence has also maintained an interest in Sheffield Wednesday's unsettled centre-half Peter Shirtliff.
The decisions of Proctor and Phillips came as a boost to Lawrence who explained: ‘Both players have indicated they will sign.
‘I'm delighted about that.
I didn't want to lose any of my squad and it makes my job a little bit easier this summer.’
ITV were dealt another body blow yesterday when rivals BBC announced that they had won the battle to screen Liverpool's European Cup Winners' Cup campaign next season.
With the independent network still smarting over BSkyB's controversial £304 million capture of coverage of the new Premier League it was a second severe setback in just over a week.
And spokesman Trevor East admitted: ‘It's been a trying few days for us and we are very disappointed to miss out again.
TAPES UP:
They're off in a heat of last night's Speedway Division Two KO Cup clash between Middlesbrough and Newcastle at Cleveland Park
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York 656476; Sian Roberts on Richmond 850407 or Richmond 825281 (answering machine), and Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Charity ride:
A Cleveland cyclist is planning a Land's End to John O'Groats charity bike ride.
Mark Proud, 17, of Roseberry Road, Stockton, is looking for sponsors for his solo jaunt, which starts on June 22.
He will raise money for the John Butterwick Hospice at Stockton and Leukemia Research.
Sponsors should call Mark on (0642) 556962.
Equal praise:
Cleveland County Council has been praised for its work in the equal opportunities field.
Flower power:
Hartlepool residents are being urged to enter the borough council's annual garden competition.
There are 15 classes and 34 trophies on offer.
Entry forms can be obtained from the tourist information centre, the central and branch libraries.
The closing date is Friday, July 3.
MORE than 200 war veterans and war widows in Middlesbrough could lose out financially due to council cuts.
Middlesbrough Council may follow the example of neighbour Langbaurgh in a move labelled ‘despicable’.
The authority plans to stop turning a blind eye to disability and war pension income when calculating community benefits charge and housing benefits.
Under current Government rules, only the first £10 is ignored but previously, both Middlesbrough and Langbaurgh ignored the whole pension and met the difference.
The change of heart could cost a small number of veterans or widows more than £40 per week and save Middlesbrough Council £110,000.
Chairman of Cleveland British Legion Barbara Cobb slammed the plan as ‘absolutely despicable.’
Middlesbrough Council spokesman Mike Clark said: ‘This is something this council regrets even having to consider but we are struggling to maintain services.’
School bingo:
Proceeds of a bingo session at Eastbourne School on Monday at 7.15pm will go towards school funds.
A quiz night follows on Friday at same time.
ENGLAND international Robin Bergstrand left his rivals trailing to win the gruelling 14-mile Alwinton Fell Race by over six minutes.
The Mandale Harrier, now a regular in England's World Mountain Races team, went off hard from the start, but was hampered by heavy mist on the highest parts of the Northumberland course and finished 66 seconds outside the record.
Results (14: 1 R Bergstrand (Mandale) 87min 11sec; 2 L Atkinson (Alnwick) 93.12; 3 G Ackland (Livingston) 93.44; 4 A Haynes (Eyri) 94.49; 5 D Henderson (Alnwick) 95.22.
Veterans: 1 J Watson (Livingston) 100.21; 2 A Tait (Tynedale) 102.10; 3 P Kelly (South Shields) 102.10.
Women: 1 J Salvona (Livingston) 109.05.
Six Miles: 1 R Hogarth (Claremont) 42.53; 2 A Tait (Tynedale) 102.10; 3 P Embleton (Alnwick) 46.07.
Women: 1 D Everington (Livingston) 48.40.
HUSBAND and wife Michael and Christine Brunskill recorded a double victory in yesterday's Shildon Rail Trail race over 5.2 miles.
Michael broke away from a four-man leading group after three miles to win by 70 metres, while Christine, who also runs for Newton Aycliffe AC, had a full six minutes in hand on second-placed Darlington veteran Annette Smith.
: 1 M Brunskill (Newton Aycliffe) 29.09; 2 V McKie (Darlington) 29.21; 3 M Threadgill (Middlesbrough and Cleveland) 29.27; 4 N Duffield (Loftus) 29.51.
Over-40 G Duff (Durham City) 32.09; O-50 G Hope (Crook) 37.59.
Women: 1 C Brunskill (Newton Aycliffe) 34.47; 2 A Smith (Darlington Vet 35) 40.47; 3 J Charge (North Yorks Police) 40.55.
NORTHUMBRIAN Bobby Ferguson, who was right-hand man to Bobby Robson in Ipswich Town's glory days in the early 80s, is wanted by Sunderland.
The 54-year-old is being lined up by Roker boss Malcolm Crosby as assistant manager, and the appointment is expected to be ratified at a board meeting on Wednesday.
Ferguson, who was only 17 when he made his debut at fullback for Newcastle United, moved on to play for Derby County, Cardiff City, Barry Town and Newport County before joining Ipswich as coach.
He helped Robson guide Ipwich to UEFA Cup winning success in 1981 and runners up in First Division two years in succession, 1981 and 1982.
When Robson was appointed England manager in 1982 he was succeeded at Portman Road by Ferguson, whose four years in charge ended with the club's relegation to the Second Division.
Ferguson moved to Kuwait, where he first met and impressed Crosby, who was just embarking on a coaching career.
— TOP PREMIER League clubs are set to move in for ace North-East star-spotter Peter Kirkley, who has been sacked by Newcastle United.
Kirkley, the man who discovered Paul Gascoigne, got his cards on his 50th birthday and admitted: ‘It's devastating.’
Newcastle will reap another £350,000 from Gascoigne's £5.5m move to Italian club Lazio but there is no place at St James's Park for the scout who was first to recognise the talent of a chubby-faced 14-year-old from Dunston.
Newcastle sold Gascoigne to Tottenham Hotspur four years ago for a record £2m, and it was written into the deal that the Tyneside club would receive a ten percent cut of any future transfer profit over £2m.
But a jackpot of £2,350,000 was not enough to keep Kirkley in a job.
United's youth development officer was called in by Newcastle manager Kevin Keegan on Friday and told he was being fired.
Kirkley, who will have his contract paid up, said: ‘I am trying not to be bitter.
‘But I am sad and disappointed in my 11 years with Newcastle I have found them players worth millions.’
Kirkley, who also discovered England stars Trevor Steven (for Burnley) and Peter Beardsley (Carlisle), feared the worst when Keegan announced he was planning a major overhaul at the club.
He said: ‘I know that getting the sack is an occupational hazard in football, but it's the first time it has happened to me and it hurts.
‘There was one game last season when nine of United's 13-man Second Division squad were my discoveries.
‘It is all very sad but I do wish Kevin and the club success.
‘At least he had the decency to tell me himself I hope he is as successful a manager as he was a player.’
Keegan said: ‘Peter Kirkley deserves every credit for what he has achieved.
‘But I have my own views on youth development and he fully understands my decision.’
— JON Gittens, a key figure in Middlesbrough clinching a place in the new Premier League next season, wants to join them on a permanent basis from Southampton.
But a valuation disagreement between the clubs over the Midlands-born defender could wreck the move.
SCARBOROUGH manager Ray McHale's hopes of resigning former goalkeeper Ian Ironside for next season have finally been dashed.
The 28-year-old player has signed a new contract at Ayresome Park.
— HARTLEPOOL winger Paul Dalton is expected to become a Plymouth player tomorrow.
He is lined up to join relegated Plymouth managed by Peter Shilton in a deal reported to be worth £275,000.
Cyclist injured in Dales crash A CYCLIST suffered serious head injuries when he crashed off his bike in the Yorkshire Dales yesterday.
The unnamed man, in his forties, was found unconscious by an ambulance crew beside his machine on the B6160 half a mile out of West Burton, near Skipton.
He was taken to Northallerton's Friarage Hospital but later transferred to Middlesbrough General.
The accident happened at about 5pm.
We built the Sydney Bridge I WAS interested to read your front page article (Echo, May 7) and the follow-up on the business page the following day in connection with Cleveland Structural Engineering and the Hong Kong bridge.
I am writing primarily to dispel the myth your business correspondent started some months ago and repeated in each article, that CSE built the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
I am a former management employee of Dorman Long's Bridge and Constructional Works, Middlesbrough, who actually built this bridge and recall talking in the 1930s to men who had worked on it.
The contract was signed in 1924 and this year is the 60th anniversary of its opening in 1932.
I very much doubt if Cleveland Bridge had the facilities for such a project in the 1920s.
I am sure that the reputation of Cleveland Bridge can rely on its postwar achievements as a member of the consortia with Dorman Lond (B and E) Ltd, on the Forth and Severn bridges (with which I was involved) and its own Humber and Dartford projects.
Your correspondent could refer back to Northern Echo archives and CSE, but meanwhile he should let the Sydney Harbour Bridge remain as part of the history of the now defunct Dorman Long group and of Middlesbrough.
J.
Ratcliffe, 13 Hummersknott Avenue, Darlington.
OPPONENTS of a five-aside football development on a Teesside common are taking their protests to an appeal court.
And if defeated, objectors may consider an audacious bid to buy Clairville Common in Middlesbrough.
Anchor International were granted a liquor licence by magistrates on May 13, leaving the way clear to build a ten-pitch, £1.25m complex on the site.
Protestors, who fear increased noise and disturbance from the development, were shocked by the decision.
Leading objector Jill Coleman said last night: ‘We are still angry and amazed and we are determined to fight on.’
The appeal, to be considered at Teesside Crown Court by a judge and panel of magistrates, has to be lodged by Wednesday.
The Clairville Common Action Group may launch a fighting fund to pay costs if defeated.
The objectors will again be legally represented by Londonbased David Bulman, formerly of Middlesbrough.
‘He thinks we have a good chance on appeal,’ said Middlesbrough Liberal Democrat councillor Joe Michna, another leading opponent.
‘It was certainly a tough decision for the licensing magistrates.
I got the feeling it was a split decision.
‘We know we have public support the 1,200 signed letters of protest proved that.
Given that level of support, I think we should carry on fighting.’
Jill Coleman said: ‘At a recent meeting, there was a suggestion that we should buy the common.
‘I'm not sure whether it was a serious question, but we could try although I'm not sure Middlesbrough Council will sell it to us.’
The Labour-controlled authority has consistently backed the project, claiming it will bring important jobs and facilities to the town.
Community groups will be given 250 hours of free use every week.
Protestors have argued that common land in the town centre should not be developed.
The common belonged to the people until the early 1970s when it was taken over by the council.
MARK Briers will finally realise his ambition to play first-class cricket when he makes his debut against Somerset today at Darlington who also make their debut as a County Championship ground.
After two years on the Worcestershire staff without playing a first team game, Briers, 24, took the gamble of moving North last season in search of his first-class ticket.
He topped the batting averages on Durham's tour of Zimbabwe and has earned his chance by hitting two centuries for the second X1 this season.
He is likely to fill the No 6 slot vacated by Ian Botham's Test call, and could also be called on to bowl his leg spin.
Paul Henderson also returns to the side, possibly in place of Saturday's hero John Wood.
Durham, robbed of the chance to topple County Championship leaders Hampshire when torrential rain prevented play at Southampton yesterday, feel Wood is unlikely to get the same response from the Darlington wicket.
There is a danger that the rest of his life will seem like an anti-climax after his sensational start on the experimental wicket at Southampton.
He took two wickets in his first over and finished with five for 68 bowling at the end which offered encouraging lift.
Durham's Director of Cricket Geoff Cook said: ‘It may be better to save John for our next match against Derbyshire at Chesterfield.
He could get more out of the wicket there.’
While it may seem harsh to leave out Wood, the decision marks the start of Durham's policy of rotating their bowlers.
Wood could still play if there is any danger of a recurrence of Simon Brown's problems with cramp, which troubled him over the weekend, while Simon Hughes is also due for a rest.
Skipper David Graveney said: ‘Brown's problem could be the result of him doing too much bowling, and underlines the need for us to rotate our bowlers.
‘Botham's loss is a big blow, but we will just have to get on with it.
It's a shame he can't play against his old county, but I'm looking forward to it because I had a happy season with them last year.
‘They have a very promising batsman in Mark Lathwell.
When I first bowled to him in the nets I said it was like bowling to Zaheer Abbas.
He will prove a big crowd-puller.
‘Somerset are doing very well this year.
But Hampshire are top of the table and we outplayed them for two days.’
Lathwell, 20, has had rave reviews recently, hitting two 70s against Essex and 93 in the Benson and Hedges Cup quarter-final win against Worcestershire.
Also doing well is 23-year-old 6ft 5in paceman Andrew Caddick, who was born in New Zealand.
He is now qualified to play for England and is tipped to do so.
Somerset, who play Yorkshire at Middlesbrough on Friday, are bringing a squad of 14.
Durham from: D A Graveney (capt), W Larkins, J D Glendenen, D M Jones, P W G Parker, P Bainbridge, M P Briers, P W Henderson, C W Scott, S P Hughes, S J E Brown, J Wood.
Somerset from: A Hayhurst, M Lathwell, R Harden, C Tavare, R Bartlett, G Rose, N Burns, N Mallender, A Caddick, H Trump, R Snell, A Van Troost, K MacLeay, A Cottam.
DURHAM seconds again include David Cox, the left-arm spinner from the Lord's ground staff, for the three-day Rapid Cricketline Championship match against Nottinghamshire at Shireoaks, starting today.
Team: G Cook (capt), S Hutton, G K Brown, J A Daley, I Smith, D A Blenkiron, P J Berry, D Cox, S M McEwan, A R Fothergill, G Wigham.
MARTIAL arts expert Tony Carter beat international competition to win the top prize in a prestigious contest in Sweden.
He was one of the 11 men and women from the Darlington-based Koryo Taekwondo club at the recent championships.
Tony, 28, from Middlesbrough, is last year's British welterweight champion and was awarded best fighter of the competition in Sweden after he beat the local champion in the final.
More than 500 people took part in the contest and Tom Stammer, head of the team, said he was delighted with his squad's performance.
—Picture above shows Tony Carter showing other members of the team how it's done.
LAST Sunday BSAD Northern held its annual Senior Athletics championships at Monkton Stadium, Jarrow.
The event was a great success and there were 120 entrants from throughout the Northern region.
There were outstanding performances in the field events from Kenneth Churchill (Middlesbrough), Elaine Ord (Bedlington) and Denis Ross (Stockton) all of whom won their classes in the shot, discus and javelin.
On the track there were some excellent performances from Nicky Butler (Carlisle), Wayne Needell (Sunderland), Kevin Blench (Sunderland) and Esther Cruice (Moorsholm) in the 100m.
In the 200m Samantha Nicholson, Esther Cruice and Kevin Blench provided excellent performances.
In the 800m there was a closely fought race between Wayne Needell and Lee Watson (Sunderland).
Wayne finished winning by only 20 seconds, but Lee, one of our promising juniors in the Northern region, had an excellent race.
Next Saturday, June 6 it is the BSAD Norther region snooker championships at Eston Leisure Centre.
This year there are 26 competitors from Barbara Priestman School, British Polio Fellowship, Carlisle Sports Club, Mid Northumberland Young Disabled Centre, Hartlepool Disabled Sports Club, Killingworth Fliers and North East Disabled Snooker League.
IT would be reasonable to suppose that dreams of following Daley Thompson have inspired Anthony Brannen to take up the world record holder's former mantle as Britain's leading decathlete.
Brannen was 11 and about to start senior school at Eaglescliffe Comprehensive when Thompson dragged his curious ten-event discipline from obscurity and stamped it, and himself, on the national consciousness.
Thompson won the Olympic title that year, 1980, successfully defended it in 1984 and hasn't completed a decathlon since finishing fourth in the 1988 Games in Seoul.
At 33 and suffering from a dislocated shoulder, he won't be Britain's standard-bearer again in Barcelona this summer.
That role, more than likely, will be filled by Brannen, the leading contender for the British trial at the Don Valley Stadium in Sheffield on Friday and Saturday.
Though no world-beater in the trailblazing Thompson mould, he emerged as Britain's number one decathlete last summer, taking the bronze medal at the World Student Games in Sheffield and claiming the sole British place for the World Championships in Tokyo, where a hamstring tear forced him to withdraw on the eve of competition.
At 23, he's improving fast.
This summer he should break through the 8,000 points mark into truly world class territory.
Thomspon, to date, is the only Briton to have done so.
Settling back in the office chair at Northwood Stadium in the Potteries town of Hanley, where he works as a recreation assistant, Brannen shrugs his powerful shoulder at the first reverential mention of the decathlon doyen.
He was never a Daley Thompson fan, he admits, but not with any brash disrespect.
‘I was never much of an athletics fan at all,’ he explains in thick Teesside tones.
It just so happened that Geoff Mitchell, the PE master at Eaglescliffe, coached the decathlon at Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harriers.
He persuaded Brannen, a natural middle distance runner and high jumper, to take up the challenge of the ten events (100 metres, long jump, shot, high jump and 400 metres on day one of a competition, followed by the 110 metres hurdles, discus, pole vault, javelin and 1500 metres on day two).
‘It was just a bit of fun,’ says Brannen.
‘When we were 15 or so, we started going away to competitions around the country with our tents.
We'd camp next to the meeting and go off to the pub on the Saturday night, halfway through the decathlon.
‘The coach would say, ‘Have a couple of pints.
It'll make you feel better.’
It was a good laugh.
Everybody used to enjoy it.’
Brannen, at 6ft 2 ins and 13 and a half stone, is now every inch a serious international pedigree athlete.
He chuckles, though, at the memory of those carefree days.
And he smiles as he talks of the best friend and rival who accompanied him on those weekend trips.
Glenn Stephenson was the star pupil of the group Mitchell nurtured.
He died of leukaemia in 1987.
‘If Glenn had been around today,’ says Brannen, ‘it probably would have been him you were talking to, not me.
He'd have been the one going to the Olympics.
He was always better than me.
‘He still motivates me.
He'll always be my best mate.
I want to do it as much because of him, because he didn't get the chance to do it.’
It's no empty claim, either, according to Geoff Mitchell.
‘I sometimes feel when Anth's competing there's two of them there,’ he says later.
‘It was as if Glenn's death spurred on Anth.
He wasn't just doing it for himself any more.’
Within a year, in the summer of 1987, Brannen was competing for Britain in the European Junior Championships.
He was the fifth best junior, under 20 that is, Britain had ever produced.
The progression to the top of the senior pile was not so meteoric.
Brannen, born on a farm at Sadberge and raised at first Long Newton and then Yarm, moved to Stoke at the age of 20 partly to study a sports and recreation degree at North Staffordshire Polytechnic but mainly to train under the guidance of Jim Talbot, the national decathlon coach.
It's only in the past 18 months, however, that he's started fulfilling his true potential.
It looked to have been wasted for good in 1990 when, after struggling to overcome injuries and failing exams, he packed up and returned home to Teesside.
‘I took a job working on the roads at Knaresborough,’ he recalls, laughing again.
‘I didn't do any training for nine months.
I even thought of going off to Australia, but I re-sat my exams, went back to college and after a bit of nightclubbing eventually got into the gym just to get fit again.
‘I didn't even think about about the decathlon again until Duncan Mathieson, another one of Jim's group down here, started going on about being the only one who was going to make it to the World Student Games.
‘I thought, ‘That's what you think, mate.’
Seven months later, in July last year, Brannen stood on the medal rostrum in Sheffield.
Mathieson was outside the top ten.
Brannen moved to the top of the UK rankings for 1991 with 7,656 points and earned selection for the World Championships in Tokyo.
A torn hamstring in his final training session consigned him to a seat in the stand in the Olympic Stadium, but with Barcelona on the horizon he's hungry for the big stage again.
Victory in the trial, with a score of 7,850 points, would guarantee him a place in Britain's Olympic team and he feels he's ready now.
Outside, it's a grey summer afternoon in the Potteries.
It's misty and raining, but a group of junior school kids are doing their best to enjoy their annual sports day.
They've probably never heard of Daley Thompson.
Come August, when the action is beamed back from Barcelona, they might just recognise that man who works down at the local track.
HARTLEPOOL United have set a two-year target for promotion to the new First Division.
Chairman Garry Gibson said: ‘We believe it is a realistic target.
Hartlepool are in the Second Division under the new set-up, so we need only one promotion.
‘We are gearing ourselves up for promotion on and off the field.
We will start with a better squad than last season.
‘Judging by last season, I don't think we have anything to worry about.
We did well, even though we were a little frightened of big-name teams such as West Brom, Birmingham and Stoke.’
New signing Ryan Cross will fill the problem position of right back, even though he also plays as a central defender.
Cross, 19, admitted it was a wrench to leave Plymouth for a club at the other end of the country.
‘Hartlepool's offer came out of the blue.
Their chairman sold the club to me in our negotiations.
‘With Plymouth, I was mainly involved in the lower half of the Second Division.
Hopefully, I will be at the top end with Hartlepool.
‘The move could be a good stepping stone for me.’
Hartlepool have strengthened their Willington connection with the appointment of Tony McAndrew as their new youth coach.
Manager Alan Murray, assistant manager Eddie Kyle and McAndrew were at the Northern League club at the same time.
The managerial roles were reversed at Willington, with McAndrew the club skipper when he left Middlesbrough.
McAndrew, sacked by Darlington at the same time as manager Frank Gray last season, welcomed a return to the game after a four-month break.
‘I was a bit sickened by what happened at Darlington and I enjoyed the rest.
I played for Middlesbrough Over-35s and did a bit of radio work,’ he said.
‘Now I am refreshed and thrilled to team up with Murray and Kyle again.’
Youth coach Kyle has been promoted to assistant manager following David McCreery's departure from the Victoria Ground.
McCreery left last month after he turned down a new contract.
Kyle said: ‘There will be no old pals’ act behind the scenes.
We will not be frightened to express our views if we feel something has to be said.
‘I can promise some heated discussions.’
Kyle welcomed a tough programme of pre-season friendlies.
Motherwell will be at the Victoria Ground on July 25, followed by Leicester on August 1 or August 8.
WITTON-LE-WEAR trainer Harry Williams' two remaining £40,000 Daily Mirror/Sporting Life Greyhound Derby hopes, New Level and Pond Pavarotti, have been drawn in the opening two heats of round one at Wimbledon on Friday night.
The wide running New Level, which won its qualifying round last week, is drawn in trap four in the opening race, and should go through.
But Pond Pavarotti, which qualified in third place, is up against second favourite to win the classic, Glengar Ranger, and another top notcher, Taringar Bay.
Williams, who saw his initial Derby prospect, Pond Tornado, eliminated, said: ‘I would expect New Level to win his heat but Pond Pavarotti is on a wing and a prayer.
‘But they are in the first two heats so we will know our fate very early.’
New Level, track record holder at Sunderland and Brough Park, clocked a respectable 29.19 sec (-10) winning his heat by 1 5 lengths, while Pond Pavarotti only just scraped through in the faster time of 29.15, beaten 6 9 lengths by another North-East dog, Capricorn Note, which was also trained until recently by Williams.
Capricorn Note, owned by Stuart Ray and now trained at Wimbledon by Arthur Hitch, races in a five-dog heat on Saturday and should qualify for the second round.
FORMER Sunderland racing manager Terry Meynell, who left the East Boldon track in October after 11 months in charge, has been appointed joint racing manager at BROUGH PARK with Jimmy Nunn.
Meynell, who was RM at the Byker track in the 1980s, has also worked at Nottingham, Sheffield and Gosforth.
Brough Park stages the final of the Bookmakers Tyneside St Leger tomorrow night, when there will be four supporting opens on a very attractive card.
Favourite to take the big prize will be TV Trophy winner Fortunate Man, which was the fastest qualifier, clocking 41.61 secs for the 670 metres trip.
The dangers appear to be Readingbased Prince Charming (41.90) and local open racer Breathless (41.99), trained by Gordon Rooks.
The supporting opens will be over 290, 500 (2) and 825 metres.
Catching the eye at Brough is newcomer Bretts Dream Girl, which has won two of her four races since arriving from Ireland.
SUNDERLAND marks its second anniversary on Saturday with four £200 opens and a special cabaret night, while on Monday the Whitbread Mencap meeting is expected to raise £3,000 for the charity.
Sunderland hosts a Bookmakers Afternoon Greyhound Service meeting tomorrow (first race 2.08pm), when entrance will be free.
MONDAY night's benefit meeting in aid of the recently founded local branch of the Retired Greyhound Trust was a great success at MIDDLESBROUGH.
The feature race of the night, the bookmakers-sponsored 462 metres inter-track with Brough Park and Sunderland, saw Gordon Rooks return to again take the honours with Movealong Sir, which had won the £750 Carling Black Label Stakes at Cleveland Park the previous week.
KART racing on Sundays at a Cleveland site was given a reprieve yesterday despite complaints about noise from local residents.
Langbaurgh council's tourism and leisure committee was told that Kart racing and other activities which had been been stopped on Sundays at the controversial Wheelbase Park in South Bank, Middlesbrough, was costing the cash-hit council over £20,000.
It was agreed by a single vote to defer a decision until consultations with clubs booked for weekend activities until the middle of December.
John and Josephine Bowes had a penchant for collecting the bizarre and unusual — from a beast with two heads to a mechanical mouse.
But pride of place among their unique collection goes to the magnificent Silver Swan, pictured left, which has graced the Entrance Hall since the museum opened.
The mechanical bird first came to the attention of the Bowes at the Paris Exhibition in 1867 when it was the star attraction.
Mark Twain was so impressed he included a description in his work The Innocents Abroad: ‘I watched the Silver Swan which had a living grace about his movements and a living intelligence in his eyes — watched him swimming about as comfortably and unconcernedly as if he had been born in a morass instead of a  jewellers' shop — watched him seize a silver fish from under the water and hold up his head and go through all the customary and elaborate motions of swallowing it’.
It was not until five years after the exhibition that one of John Bowes' jewellery advisors informed the excited couple the Swan was for sale.
John Bowes immediately bought it for £200 — quite a bargain as it was on sale for £2,000 at the Paris Exhibition.
The Swan's chequered history can be traced back to almost 100 years before.
In 1773 a London eccentric, James Cox, a goldsmith with premises off Fleet Street, was given permission by an Act of Parliament to disperse a collection of curiosities which formed a small museum he ran.
But in 1779 most of the artefacts were sold as bankrupt stock.
In the 1820s the Swan turned up in another museum, run by a perfumier, Thomas Weeks of London.
But in 1834, Weeks sold the contents of his museum and the Swan disappeared once again until it emerged at the Paris Exhibition 33 years later.
Visitors to Bowes can see the Silver Swan go through its ‘elaborate motions’ twice a day as 12.30pm and 4pm, just as it impressed Mark Twain more than a century ago.
The museum also houses a stuffed creature dubbed Bowes' answer to Dr Dolittle's Push Me Pull You.
The beast is about as big as a sheep and is described as: ‘A freak of nature.
It is beyond conception, the marvel of the age, large sums of money have been refused for it.’
Amazingly the animal has seven legs, two heads, two tails, two breasts, two backbones, four ears, four eyes and two mouths.
A Victorian poster exhorts visitors ‘If you are awake move.
If you are moving walk.
If you are walking run.
And if you are running fly to see this Little Wonder.’
Star attraction in a cabinet of curiosities in Room 15 is a mechanical mouse manufactured in either London or Switzerland and bought by Josephine in 1871 for £22.
It is gold with vivid garnet eyes and when wound up runs around in circles.
Room 30 is a nostalgic retreat for children of all ages.
A Tudor Doll's House takes pride of place in a fine collection of houses and period dolls.
Unique exhibits include a model of Crow's Fairground dating from 1956–68.
It was painstakingly made by motor mechanic Robert Middleton from Middlesbrough.
Each model works and can be packed into its original trailer or truck.
The model is made up of thousands of pieces.
The Noah's Ark consists of 252 pieces, the dodgems 342 pieces and the waltzer 281 pieces — and that doesn't include nuts and bolts.
FORMER Middlesbrough favourite Martin Dixon will make a welcome return to Cleveland Park tonight.
Billingham-based Dixon, who has an all-action style, will be riding for Long Eaton Invaders in a Homefire Division 2 match.
Dixon will be keen to put one over former team-mates on his local track.
The visitors will certainly be match fit in their third meeting on consecutive days.
Danish rider Jan Staechmann and former British junior champion Carl Blackbird both recorded double figures twice at Cleveland Park last season.
They pose a serious threat to Boro's hopes of League points.
Middlesbrough must show improvement on their K.O.Cup defeat at Newcastle last weekend.
Middlesbrough: 1 Steve Regeling, 2 Donny Odom, 3 Dave Cheshire, 4 Mark Lemon, 5 Daz Sumner, 6 Duncan Chapman, 7 Paul Pickering.
Long Eaton: 1 Jan Staechmann, 2 Colin White, 3 Martin Dixon, 4 Gary 0'Hare, 5 Carl Blackbird, 6 Dean Prinsloo, 7 Paul Blackbird.
DURHAM will be without their hero of the hour Mark Ridley when they take on Yorkshire at Strensall golf club on Saturday week.
Ridley, who saved Durham's blushes by winning the last two holes to win his game and to tie the match against Cumbria last weekend, is on holiday in America where he has tickets to watch the U.S. Open.
The team has four changes from the opening game which sees Jim Dryden (South Shields) make his first appearance for Durham since being reinstated as an amateur some years ago.
Also recalled is Woodham head greenkeeper Mark Hodgson, whose decision to play his competitive golf at his old club Brancepeth Castle this season has paid off with some good early season form.
Durham: A J McLure (Whickham), C Kilgour (Ravensworth), J Surtees (Tyneside), J Dryden (South Shields), G Bell, C Marshall (Hartlepool), R Walker (Wearside), P Cain (Seaton Carew), I S Liddle (Dinsdale Spa), J Handy (South Moor), M Hodgson (Brancepeth Castle), A K Green (Darlington).
Reserves D Moralee (Boldon), D Goss (Wearside), M Sewell (Ravensworth).
The Current Northern Counties League Table shows Yorkshire leading from Lancashire followed by Cumbria, Durham, Northumberland and Cheshire Fixtures for June 13 and 14: Yorkshire v Durham at York Golf Club; Lancashire v Cheshire at Royal Birkdale and Cumbria v Northumberland at Carlisle.
THE North-East stages a feast of top quality golf this weekend when the Northumberland golf club Gosforth Park is host to the British Youths championship.
English Open strokeplay champion Ignacio Garrido heads the international challenge to an event which has produced winners such as Brian Barnes, Peter Townsend and more recently Jose Maria Olazabal.
Local interest is provided by former Durham County champions Craig Kilgour (Ravensworth) and Richard Walker (Wearside) while Richard Aisbitt (Bishop Auckland) plays in the tournament for the first time.
CLEVELAND Golf Club have a slender one-point lead over the 1988, 1990 champions Teesside, after four matches of the Teesside Union InterClub A Division League.
The B Division is headed by Eaglescliffe Golf Club who have a five-point advantage over last year's winners Darlington.
A Division: Cleveland 25 pts; 2 Teesside 24 pts; 3 Middlesbrough 19 pts; 4 Hartlepool 18 pts; 5 Seaton Carew 18; 6 Catterick 18; 7 Castle Eden 18; 8 Eaglescliffe 18; 9 Bishop Auckland 16.
B Division: 1 Eaglescliffe 45 pts; 2 Darlington 40 pts; 3 Cleveland 37 pts; 4 Hartlepool 36 pts; 5 Billingham 34 pts; 6 Bishop Auckland 34 pts; 7 Middlesbrough Municipal 34 pts; 8 Middlesbrough Golf Club 32 pts; 9 Catterick 32 pts.
Last year's champion Tony McLure is fast becoming known as the Nigel Mansell of the North-East golf circuit.
Tony, who is sporting a formula 1 haircut this season, is leaving everyone in his slipstream in the region's version of the drivers championship, the Sponsor Tee Northern Amateur Masters League table.
After adding the Ravensworth Bowl to the Seaton Salver he won prior to his country championship victory.
Leading positions table for the Sponsor tee Northern Master Golfer: A J McLure (Whikham) 210; J Dryden (South Shields) 164; G Picket (Arcott Hall) 119; D Conway (South Shields) 93; I Turner (Newbiggin) 84; C Windross (Dunes) 78; C Marshall (Hartlepool) 77; R M Roper (Catterick) 72; J Surtees (Tyneside) and M Ridley (Beamish Park) 69; J Ellison (Houghton) 67; S Twinholme (Morpeth) 65.
ADRIAN GREEN
THE launch of an imaginative new pre-season tournament to be played in the North-East was announced yesterday.
The tournament provides the mouth-watering prospect of top continental sides Sporting Lisbon and Real Sociedad playing against Newcastle and Middlesbrough.
The two-day, pre-season Superchallenge tournament at St.James's Park was welcomed yesterday by former England manager Bobby Robson.
He praised Newcastle United for their initiative at the launch of the tournament between the host club, Middlesbrough, Sporting Lisbon and Real Sociedad.
The tournament will start on Saturday, August 8, with a North-East team guaranteed a place in the Sunday afternoon final.
Robson, who supported Newcastle as a schoolboy, said: ‘I think we have been slow in England to launch this type of tournament.
‘Tournaments are very popular in Holland and Spain.
They provide a cutting edge to pre-season preparation.
‘Clubs welcome top-class opposition to test fitness and the chance to put things right.
‘It is wonderful that this tournament will take place at one of the hotbeds of football in Europe.
‘Newcastle are one of the top six clubs in this country.
They deserve a Premier League place.
‘Lennie Lawrence has done a fantastic job at Middlesbrough.
I hope Newcastle follow Boro into the Premier League next year.’
Robson is now with Sporting Lisbon after guiding Dutch club PSV Eindhoven to two championship triumphs.
Newcastle manager Kevin Keegan looked upon the tournament as a public relations exercise rather than a moneymaking venture.
He hoped there would be a carnival atmosphere.
Keegan accepted Newcastle would be looked upon as the weaker side but hoped it would be the springboard to success.
‘People say Newcastle fans have stood by the club through thick and thin.
It is more like thin and thin.
‘But we hope to reward those fans.
There is only one way to go and that is forward.
It would be great to start off by winning this tournament.’
Sir John Hall, Newcastle's chairman, described the tournament as a Family Festival of Soccer.
He assured fans there was greater stability at the club and exciting plans for the future.
Sir John stressed: ‘There are no differences between Kevin Keegan and the club.
We are united.
‘A lot of work has to be done but we can only go forward.
Problems have not gone away and all-round commitment is needed from everyone.’
Middlesbrough chief executive Keith Lamb also welcomed a venture that would bring top-class opposition to the NorthEast.
With a pointed reference to sponsors Newcastle Exhibition, Lamb promised Middlesbrough would want to win the tournament and not play exhibition football.
Real Sociedad manager John Toshack could not attend yesterday's launch because his side face a vital game that could clinch a UEFA Cup place.
The draw is: August 8.
Sporting Lisbon v Real Sociedad (kick-off 1.30), Newcastle United v Middlesbrough (3.30.)
August 9.
Third/Fourth play-off at 1.30 with a 3.30 final.
JOHN Glendenen, left, is unlikely to take any further part in Durham's match against Somerset at Darlington.
On his doctor's advice he is to see a specialist today following the mysterious breathing difficulties which saw him rushed to hospital on Tuesday.
Although the opening batsman from Middlesbrough reported fit yesterday morning and had a net in anticipation of batting in Durham's first innings, skipper David Graveney immediately decided he must heed his GP's advice.
An appointment has been made for this morning, but there is expected to be a delay before results are known.
NEW MARSKE Harrier Tony Livingstone turned the tables on North-East half marathon champion Kevin Vose to win last night's second Northern Echo Cleveland Midweek Series event at Hutton Gate, Guisborough.
Vose won the opening event at New Marske last month, beating Livingstone by a comfortable 14 seconds in cold, misty conditions.
But last night Livingstone tracked his Newton Aycliffe rival and surged into a winning lead 200 metres from the finish.
Livingstone clocked 18 mins 6 secs for the 3 1/2 miles in heavy rain, beating Vose by ten metres.
Livingstone, a 34-year-old PE teacher said: ‘Kevin and I broke away from another four runners around the halfway mark and I got the measure of him with 200 metres remaining he didn't seem to have anything left.
‘But he's a good runner and I didn't know whether he would come back at me.
‘He beat me at New Marske and he was a target for me in this one.’
The two men each have 19 points and it promises to be a very hard fought five-race series.
Newton Aycliffe's Christine Brunskill also avenged her defeat at the hands of Middlesbrpugh and Cleveland Harrier Marie Stansmore.
Brunskill, winner of the Shildon Rail Trail race on Sunday, also had Stansmore in her sights from the start and burst past her on a downhill section after two miles to win by a comfortable 15 seconds.
Results: 1 T Livingstone (New Marske) 18.06; 2 K Vose (Newton Aycliffe) 18.07; 3 M Burn (Thirsk and Sowerby) 18.20; 4 R Burn (Richmond and Zetland) 18.25; 5 M Cara (Mandale) 18.35; 6 M Brunskill (Newton Aycliffe) 18.37; 7 R Firth (Mandale V40) 18.40; 8 D Askew (Newton Aycliffe) 18.52; 9 I Gilmour (Middlesbrough and Cleveland) 19.03; 10 D Wilson (Mandale) 19.10.
Women: 1 C Brunskill (Newton Aycliffe) 22.19; 2 M Stansmore (M&C) 22.34; 3 C Garland (Mandale) 23.48; 4 N Mercer (Loftus) 25.42; 5 A Bentley (M&C) 26.02.
Krabbe's comeback GERMANY'S double world sprint champion Katrin Krabbe will be back in action for the first time since the lifting of her doping ban, at a meeting on her home Neubrandenburg track on June 13.
Krabbe, who is waiting to see whether officials will allow her to run at this year's Barcelona Olympics, will run over 100 metres in regional championships, meeting organiser Ulrich Krueger said today.
Krabbe and her team mates Silke Moeller and Grit Breuer were  originally banned for four years by the German Athletics Federation (DLV) in February for manipulating doping samples.
But the DLV's legal commission lifted the ban in April.
JOHN Glendenen, left, will take no further part in Durham's match against Somerset at Darlington.
On his doctor's advice he is to see a specialist today following the mysterious breathing difficulties which saw him rushed to hospital on Tuesday.
Although the opening batsman from Middlesbrough reported fit yesterday morning, and had a net in anticipation of batting in Durham's first innings, skipper David Graveney immediately decided he must heed his GP's advice.
Glendenen will be named in the squad for the match against Derbyshire at Chesterfield, starting tomorrow.
MARTYN Moxon returns to lead Yorkshire in the championship match against Somerset starting at Middlesbrough today.
The Yorkshire captain has been out with a broken finger since the opening day of the championship season and it was thought he would not be fit until next week.
But he had two batting sessions at the indoor nets at Bradford yesterday and was sufficiently satisfied with his progress to announce his comeback.
Yorkshire heard the news with some relief for they have badly missed his batting skills.
His 141 at The Oval during which his finger was broken by South African paceman Rudi Bryson remains his side's only century of the season.
Middlesbrough-born strike bowler Paul Jarvis was last night doubtful whether he would be fit to play on his home ground at Acklam Park.
Jarvis managed to bowl only at half pace in the match against Hampshire at Basingstoke which petered out into a draw yesterday and he is still being troubled by a sore hamstring.
Yorkshire set out on the final day in a difficult position, still 130 runs away from making Hampshire bat again, but with all wickets in hand.
Simon Kellett and Ashley Metcalfe were in a business-like mood and although they picked off the bad balls, they took few unnecessary risks.
They moved their stand on to 79, the second best of the first wicket this season, before Kellett was caught behind off Jon Ayling for 37.
Yorkshire's most testing time came soon after lunch when Metcalfe, after top-scoring with 38, was well taken by Rajesh Maru at first slip against Cardigan Connor and David Byas was caught at mid wicket off Paul-Jan Bakker to make them a shaky 95 for three.
Sachin Tendulkar moved quickly on to 19 at which stage the Indian was twice put down, first by Mark Nicholas at short cover and then by David Gower who could not hold on to a hot left-handed chance at second slip, the unlucky bowler on both occasions being Connor.
Richard Blakey worked his way quietly and efficiently to 38 and was then lbw playing across the line at Kevan James and there was a late scare when Phil Carrick and Peter Hartley fell in one over from off-spinner Shaun Udal.
But Yorkshire's lead by then was 53 with the final 20 overs approaching and Craig White and Darren Gough carefully batted on until rain came a few minutes before the close.
Sussex picked up 16 win points at Hove when they overhauled a Warwickshire target of 250 in just under two sessions for their first Championship victory in five matches.
Opener David Smith led the run chase with 82 and was given crucial support by Martin Speight who chipped in with 38.
Rain halted play prematurely at the Oval, where England Under-19 paceman Dominic Cork grabbed three quick wickets to leave Surrey struggling against Derbyshire.
Surrey, set a target of 241 to win in 47 overs, slumped to 69 for three before the weather put paid to the visitors' hopes.
Nottinghamshire and Middlesex drew at Trent Bridge without a ball being bowled yesterday because of heavy rain and the same fate hit champions Essex and Glamorgan at Chelmsford.
Middlesbrough Bears 50 Long Eaton Invaders 39 BORO'S unpredictable Bears grabbed their first league win of the season last night although they made hard work of it at a bitterly cold Cleveland Park.
Their East Midlands opponents, one of the lesser lights of the competition, looked at one stage like being well mauled, but were allowed, like so many teams before them, to stage a late fightback.
Boro saw a 16-point lead cut in half as Long Eaton, outclassed in the opening races, won four of the last seven heats and the margin of defeat would have been less had the impressive Dane Jan Staechmann not slid into the safety boards in the final race when set for his fourth win of the night.
Bears' skipper Steve Regeling was the only one to match the consistent riding of the visitors' heat leaders who included the former Boro favourite Martin Dixon with heavy strapping over damaged ribs, but still able to make his track knowledge count.
Dave Cheshire started strongly but faded while Mark Lemon had two exciting wins including one ‘on the line.’
But there was limited back-up from the rest of the team and it was just as well the second string challenge from Long Eaton was almost non-existent.
Middlesbrough:
Steve Regeling 13, Dave Cheshire 9, Mark Lemon 8, Daz Sumner 6, Donny Odom 6, Duncan Chapman 4, Paul Pickering 4; Long Eaton: Jan Staechmann 13, Carl Blackbird 13, Martin Dixon 9, Gary O'Hare 3, Paul Blackbird 1, Colin White 0, Deon Prinsloo 0.
THERE are times when you just want to give up, lie in bed or in the garden and let someone else do all the work.
It can't be all fun being Princess Diana, but at least she doesn't have to do the ironing, clean the bathroom, cut the grass or do the supper.
She's got other people to do all that for her.
How much, we wondered, would it cost to live like royalty, or the very rich, to pay someone to come in and do all the things us ordinary folk have to do for ourselves.
CLEANING
Cleaning is one of the easiest things to get organised.
You may be very lucky and find a real treasure round the corner.
It's sometimes easier to go through an agency.
‘People don't always like being employers.
They often find it easier to deal with an agency rather than directly with someone,’ said a spokesman for Poppies, the Darlington-based company with franchises all over the country (–444).
They pride themselves on providing a top grade service and have done everything form cleaning ocean-going liners to baby-sitting chinchillas.
Most of their work, however, is straightforward domestic cleaning where they are careful to match client and staff.
They also provide extras as a sort of Yellow Pages finding any other specialist help you might need, and also provide a house-sitting service.
They won't live in but will call regularly, feed pets and plants and keep an eye on things.
They admit they are not the cheapest and are unable to quote average prices.
‘Prices vary according to the type of work.
But if there's something you want done as long as it's legal and within reason, we can probably do it.’
—Iron Ladies in Stockton () started out six years ago as just that, doing ironing.
But it has now grown into a fully-fledged domestic cleaning agency covering an area from Stokesley to Middlesbrough.
They charge 4 for the first hour and 3 for the next.
‘Business is booming.’
says agency owner Mrs Denna Shankster.’
The problem now is finding the right sort of staff reliable ladies with their own transport as more people realise how nice it is to come back to a house someone else has cleaned.’
Ironing is more difficult to farm out.
A few people have tried to set up as independent ironers but we seem to be reluctant to pay someone £4 an hour to iron.
LAUNDRY
—We thought laundry lists and brown paper parcels had long gone, but here again business is booming.
The Hartlepool Express Laundry (861–086) goes all over the North-East and although its main customers are businesses, it's attracting an increasing number of private customers as word spreads.
They'll tackle anything including loose covers, collect and deliver it.
Prices range from 60p for a shirt and 55p for a sheet to £1.20 for an angora jumper.
‘We have the equipment to cope with these sort of things and there's no mystique if you know what you're doing,’ said a spokesman.
GARDENING AND ODD JOBS
Gardeners and odd job are best found from noticeboards and by word of mouth.
Prices range from £3 to £5 an hour for fairly basic digging, gardening, trimming work.
Local training schemes also often do contract gardening under proper supervision which can be a bargain.
But if you want your garden designed and landscaped, then you're talking professional fees and professional money.
DRIVING
Driving can be a bore, finding somewhere to park even worse.
You could hire taxis, or go the whole hog and hire a chauffeur-driven car for the day.
You could go to Newcastle or York shopping and be back in time to do the school run.
From Arena cars in Darlington (482–979) a day like that in a Granada would cost around £130£150, including petrol; more if you wanted the chauffeur to wear posh uniform.
SEWING
Sewing is relaxation for some, purgatory for others.
Get someone to do the alterations and mending for you.
Wrens Quickso in Darlington (352–577) will take up a hem from £3.60, put in a zip from £3.75 or taper your old flares for £6 or so.
NANNIES
Every mother needs a break.
Gems in Newcastle (–7474) provide nannies and mother's helps by the week if necessary.
It might be possible to book them just for a day.
A fully qualified NNEB nanny would be just over £3 an hour; an unqualified mother's help slightly less.
And yes, all references are checked out.
They're quite used to temporary placements, to cover nanny's holidays or short-term panics.
They will also provide housekeepers who'll step in and run the show bit of cooking, cleaning and sorting out the washing for around £35 a day.
COOKING
Cooking can be solved by eating out, raiding the chill cabinets or phoning for a pizza.
Much nicer to do it in style though.
Andersons Home Catering (Richmond 823915) will do a meal in a marquee for £400.
But they'll also do a meal for four in your own home.
They'll provide the food, wine and serve it all if you like.
When they started out, Yorkshire women clearly thought it was an admission of defeat to get the caterers in, but no longer.
What's more, romance is alive and well and living in the dales.
‘We've had a few jobs recently where husbands have given their wives surprise parties in the stables or somewhere.
Last week a husband took his wife out for a drive and we had 45 minutes to get the place ready, wine chilled, chandeliers, and have a lobster dinner ready on the table by the time they got back.
That was a great success.’
But some people have been known to pass Andersons's food off as their own.
‘I've had a few hasty assignations in lay-bys to pass over pots of prepared food that no one must know weren't prepared by the hostess,’ says Mrs Anderson.
Prices can work out cheaper than many restaurants, depending on numbers, but start at around £3.50 for a buffet where you serve yourself.
For about £12 a head you can get something quite special and not have the worry of driving home.
Fin de siecle:
Middlesbrough's ‘Mr Movie’ is retiring after 40 years in the cinema business.
Haydn Dalton, 60, who has been manager of the town's Odeon for over 20 years, started his career as a trainee at the Leeds' Majestic in the 1950s.
Radio prize:
Ray White of South West Denton, Newcastle, won a fully fitted car alarm in a Northumbria Police prize draw.
He entered when he had his car radio security marked by Newburn Crime Prevention Panel.
Pool opened:
Lord Stockton will open a pool built by the 26th Middlesbrough scouts at the GW King Training Centre at Crag Bank Wood, Kildale on the North York Moors on Monday.
It will benefit special schools in Cleveland.
Polish guests:
Three Polish medics based at Krakow University are on a three-week fact-finding trip to Teesside.
They will be visiting the Endeavour School, Middlesbrough, and the South Tees Health Authority, finding out more about the NHS and therapy techniques.
The visit has been organised by the University of Teesside.
Elena returns to Rudby A sporting afternoon at Stokesley tomorrow will raise money for a four-year-old Lithuanian girl who has returned to this country for medical treatment.
Elena Rozhukaite arrived in Cleveland on Sunday to spend some time with Mr and Mrs Chris Challenger of Garbutt's Lane, Hutton Rudby, while undergoing plastic surgery.
She first visited in March last year with her mother thanks to the villagers who started an appeal when they heard about the serious burns Elena suffered in a domestic accident.
There was no treatment available in her own country.
She was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital where the plastic surgeon, Mr Charles Viva, supervised her treatment.
Elena has now returned for more plastic surgery and although her family does not have to pay for the treatment, there will be hefty travelling expenses to meet during the next few years.
Last year Stokesley Youth Centre adopted Elena as its mascot and since then the players have raised about £100 for her.
Elena will be at the centre to watch a football tournament, hear music from Stokesley School Band, see displays by the local police and fire services and enjoy various stalls and sideshows.
The event starts at 1.30pm and all proceeds will go towards the little girl's travelling expenses.
WHEN I were a lad I had one great driving ambition in life.
To play centre forward for Middlesbrough and score the winning goal in the FA Cup Final.
I would spend hours daydreaming about it.
I had it down to the finest of details.
We're playing the hated enemy Sunderland (they've fluked their way to the final).
Five minutes to go.
Nilnil.
The tension unbearable.
Then Page gets the ball on the half way line.
Beats one man, then another and then a third.
The keeper comes out and Page curls the ball past him into the net.
Crowd erupts.
Boro win cup.
Page is hero for all time.
There's a problem with this scenario, however.
Firstly there's more chance striking a match on wet tripe than there is of Boro getting to the FA Cup Final.
And secondly I was a useless footballer.
Twenty years on and, despite these obvious realities, I still get that same dream.
After all, you never know, I could still be spotted.
Signed up for one last glorious season.
So what if I am an even worse footballer now than I was at school.
That the only chance of me ever being spotted is if I catch measles.
A man can dream can't he?
It was with this in mind that I came joyously across the story of Stephen Eastham this week.
Stephen is an obviously intelligent man (postgraduate student, loads of ‘levels’ and all that), yet he is obviously mad.
Mad about the circus, that is.
After teaching himself to juggle, the 27-year-old is now advertising for fellow Big Top devotees to join him in starting up a little troupe.
Would-be clowns, acrobats, trapeze artists,(and, for all I know, nutters who want to be shot out of the mouth of a cannon) are all invited to join the greatest show in Darlington.
Now that's what I call a dream.
For there's a little bit of the performer in all of us.
One of my mates is convinced he could still be a rock and roll star.
At the last Christmas party he proved it with a stunning virtuoso performance in the restaurant, where he mimed to Abba records using a salt cellar as a microphone.
He was great, had all the moves.
It was a well-rehearsed routine (he must practise in front of the mirror at home).
And he was helped by the fact that he bears a slight resemblance to the blond singer in Abba, too.
No, not Bjorn the other one Anneka.
But it's a sad business, really.
Dreaming.
I've another mate who always wanted to be an actor.
He was desperate to get on the telly.
He had a problem though.
Memory like a tea-strainer.
He'd have applied to RADA only he couldn't remember what you called it.
He once joined an am-dram group.
He had to leave after the first rehearsals when the only line he could remember was the one he'd tried on the leading lady the night before.
He was left on the stage opening and closing his mouth without a sound coming out.
Someone unkindly suggested he should audition for a part in Jaws as a fish.
Another, more kindly, soul said he was born out of his time.
‘You'd have been great in silent movies’.
Yet we all have dreams.
And why not?
When it's a cold, wet, miserable day and all that there is to look forward to is another day at the office dream on, is what I say.
And who knows?
Maybe I could try going in goal.
You don't need much skill for that.
I can see it now.
Wembley.
Ten minutes to go.
Boro are winning.
Sunderland get a penalty.
Only Page can save the Boro now.
THE first day of Yorkshire's only County Championship match of the season at Middlesbrough was washed out yesterday but not before there had been a major  surprise at rain-soaked Acklam Park.
Vice-captain Ashley Metcalfe arrived at the ground only to be told by skipper Martyn Moxon that he would not be in the side against Somerset.
Moxon's much-awaited return after breaking a finger meant one of the batsmen who played in the match at Basingstoke this week would have to drop out.
And it was opener Metcalfe who got the chop for the second time this season after a run of indifferent form.
Moxon explained: ‘It was a difficult decision to make but the choice was between Ashley or Simon Kellett who played particularly well at Canterbury when he scored 90.
‘Ashley was disappointed to be left out and felt that his record over the past few seasons was good enough for him to have kept his place.
‘But I think I have done what is best for the side and I hope Ashley can score sufficient runs to get back again.’
Metcalfe was first dropped for the game against Kent but returned at Basingstoke after two half centuries in a second team match and he was the top aggregate scorer against Hampshire.
Yorkshire did not name their side and the wretched weather gave Paul Jarvis another day in which to try to clear up his hamstring trouble.
If Jarvis does not play, Yorkshire may give a debut to Harrogate born paceman Stuart Milburn who was due to play against Oxford University but that game was abandoned without a ball being
GATESHEAD Harrier Jonathan Edwards produced the one world class performance at the first major British meeting of the Olympic season, the Pearl International at Sheffield.
While the  withdrawal of Peter Elliott and Tom McKean weakened the European Relays competition held in tandem with a field event international match between Britain, Italy and Hungary, the Tynesider took it upon himself to elevate the proceedings with the kind of form that suggests he could challenge for an Olympic triple jump medal in Barcelona in two months' time.
Edwards, a 26-year-old medical scientist, jumped 17.26 metres in the first round to move to third place on the world outdoor rankings for 1992, behind Frank Rutherford of the Bahamas (17.41 metres) and German Ralf Jaros (17.28).
Having won in Bratislava on Monday with an impressive 17.18 metres, the Commonwealth silver medallist is laying strong foundations for a serious medal bid in Spain.
He plans to stay in Sheffield to compete on the first day of the UK Championships today then concentrate on training, his Olympic place assured without having to jump in the trials in Birmingham on June 27–28, in which he'll confine himself to an outing in the 100 metres.
Steve Cram, the Olympic 1500 metres silver medallist in 1984, still has to launch a serious challenge for his place in the team but took another solid step on the road to Barcelona with an encouraging relay leg at Sheffield.
The world mile record holder, racing for only the second time since recovering from the groin injury which threatened to ruin his Olympic hopes, ran the third stage for Britain in the 4 x 1500 metres relay.
He was overhauled in the final 100 metres by Alessandro Lambruschini, who placed fourth in the 1988 Olympic steeplechase final, but dipped under 55 secs for the last lap and clocked 3 mins 47.7 secs faster than Neil Horsfield and John Mayock, who ran the first two legs for Britain.
‘I was pleased with that,’ said Cram.
‘It was just a toe in the water really.
It was difficult getting motivated on a night like this.’
The 31-year-old Tynesider intends to concentrate on training until June 17, when he plans to race in Verona.
His selection fate won't be resolved until the trials meeting.
His effort last night helped the British quartet finish second to the Italians as former Gateshead Harrier Rob Denmark failed to catch European indoor 3,000 metres champion Gennaro di Napoli on the last leg, the Italians beating the British by 1.9 secs in 15 mins 4.70 secs.
Cram won't be staying in Sheffield to compete in the UK Championships and David Sharpe, his training partner, will be absent too.
He intended to challenge for a third successive 800 metres title but withdraw last night because of a shin injury.
There will still be a strong North-East contingent, however, including Edwards in the triple jump, Colin Walker in the 5,000 metres and Tony Morrell in the 1500 metres.
Blaydon Harrier Kirsty Wade faces Liz McColgan in the women's 1500 metres, fresh from a 1,000 metres win in 2 mins 40 secs at Leeds on Tuesday.
The one Olympic team place on offer last night was claimed by Commonwealth champion Eamonn Martin of Basildon, who won the 10,000 metres trial in 28 mins 2.55 secs.
Bingley's Richard Nerurkar, who finished second, should join him in the team, having achieved the qualifying time in the World Championships last year, but third-placed Paul Evans must decide whether to chase it in Europe before the team is finalised on June 28.
Anthony Brannen will have to produce another inspired second day performance today to keep his Olympic decathlon hopes alive.
A disappointing high jump and a poor 400 metres left the 23-year-old Teessider trailing Border Harrier Alex Kruger by almost 200 points at the half-way stage of the AAA decathlon championship.
Brannen came from behind to snatch a World Student Games bronze medal at the same track last July and remains confident of overhauling Kruger, a training partner as well as chief rival, who amassed 4,012 points in the first five events.
With just 3,839 points, however, the odds are now stacked against the former Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harrier reaching 7,850 points, the qualifying score the winner must achieve to claim an automatic place in Britain's Olympic team.
Brannen, should he win with fewer 7,850 points, would have the chance to chase the Olympic standard in Germany in a fortnight's time a week before the selection deadline, which has been extended from its original date, June 7.
YORKSHIRE today start out on the last day of their annual visit to Middlesbrough but will it also be their final championship appearance at Acklam Park?
The introduction of a full programme of four-day cricket comes in next season, despite strong protests from Yorkshire and several other counties.
This means that next summer Yorkshire will have only eight championship matches to share around the six venues instead of 11, so someone is going to be disappointed.
Yet loyal Yorkshire fans in and around Teesside need not worry too much because I am confident Acklam Park will continue to stay on the White Rose map.
The arrival of Durham on the first-class circuit can only have strengthened Middlesbrough's claim to continue hosting Yorkshire championship cricket each season.
Yorkshire have always attracted some of their most fervent support from the North-East and they are anxious not to see it all transferred to Durham.
The club's officers and committee are well away that could happen if Middlesbrough lost its championship and Sunday matches, for there is no other Yorkshire venue in the region.
Even if they were not now playing in Durham's shadow, Yorkshire would be hard pressed to make out a good financial case for quitting Acklam Park.
There are enough members in the North-East to demand at least one visit a season from their team.
At the last count, North Riding District, represented on the Yorkshire committee by Peter Quinn, had 579 paid up members.
York district has a membership which has risen rapidly to 669 and Harrogate has 345 members, which all goes to show that the more northerley areas have a just claim for cricket somewhere in the region.
Sheffield boats two championship matches and a Sunday game at present, but has only 499 members, while Scarborough's membership is a disappointing 164, although it is easily the best ground in the county for pay-at-the-gate fans.
Sheffield must lose one of its matches next season and if all the other venues are to be preserved, a couple of games must be taken away from Headingley, unless Yorkshire also get a Tourist match.
Bradford, of course, gets its first game this year since the ground was shut down in 1985 because of the unsafe structure of the pavilion.
Some may think it foolish to restart playing at Park Avenue when fixtures are in such short supply, but a group of people dedicated to keeping first-class cricket on the famous ground have guaranteed Yorkshire £10,000 to stage a match there.
Money talks in today's harsh economic climate and the grounds which survive in future may be those which are prepared to dip deepest into their pockets.
GREAT Britain cross country international Angie Foster demonstrated her considerable talents on the track on Saturday when she sliced almost ten seconds off the Northumberland Schools Championships intermediate girls 3,000 metres record.
The 16-year-old Morpeth Harrier clocked 10 mins 20.4 secs in the  coldy and windy conditions at Newcastle's Lightfoot Stadium, 9.7 secs faster than Kath Gill's 1990 championship best performance.
Amanda Tremble, who runs for North Shields Polytechnic, also set a new mark of 4 mins 42.1 secs in the intermediate girls 1500 metres, an improvement of six tenths of a second on Shirley Griffiths' five-year-old record.
Results Senior Boys: 100m M Critchley (North Tyneside) 11.5; 200m M Critchley (NT) 23.9; 400m P Newton (Newcastle) 52.9; 800m P Wilson (NT) 2:03.2; 1500m M Phillipson (N) 4:15.1; 3000m M Morris (NT) 8:40.9; 1500mSc T Mate (N) 4:33.0; 110mH K Lumsden (East Northumberland) 15.2; HJ B Thompson (N) 2.00; PV P Eyre (N) 3.60; LJ J Taylor (North Northumberland) 6.06; TJ J Swanston (EN) 11.66.
Intermediate Boys: 100m P Steanson (EN) 12.2; 200m S Maxwell (Tynedale) 24.3; 400m C Rae (NT) 53.7; 800m A Jordan (T) 2:07.2; 1500m J Walker (T) 4:21.5; 3000m M Nolan (EN) 9:28.7; 1500mSc P Lappin (NT) 4:42.7; 100mH S Aiston (N) 15.7; 400mH P Whitelaw (NT) 62.2; PV P Eyre (N) 3.60; LJ B WatsonJones (N) 6.24; SP M Vasey (NT) 13.67; DT L Nicholson (NT) 44.07; HT B Smith (N) 31.69.
Junior Boys: 100m L Coulter (NT) 12.7; 200m A Curry (NT) 25.4; 400m P Timney (N) 57.2; 800m S Horn (N) 2:17.6; 1500m D Garron (N) 4:32.5; 80mH R Collins (N) 12.7; HJ P Sundin (NT) 1.60; LJ A Thornton (N) 5.83; PV R Collins (N) 2.70; TJ S Topping (NT) 11.09; SP C Mitchell (T) 11.82; DT P Mole (NN) 34.74; HT D Shenton (N) 34.74; JT J Oakes (T) 37.32.
Senior Girls: 100m E Lauder (N) 13.4; 200m E Lauder (N) 27.4; 400m V Bothams (EN) 61.2; 800m V Bothams (EN) 61.2; 400mH G Whinfield (NT) 69.5; 3000m K Gill (EN) 10:35.2; HJ N Baker (EN) 1.65; LJ N Garry (EN) 3.80; SP M Lumb (EN) 8.28; DT M Lumb (EN) 32.94.
Intermediate Girls: 100m M Margison (NT) 13.6; 200m J Purdy (NT) 28.2; 300m L Hall (T) 44.3; 800m N Klay (N) 2:27.6; 1500m A Tremble (NT) 4:42.1; 3000m A Foster (EN) 10:20.4; 80mH J Suddes (NT) 12.6; 300mH C Bushby (NT) 47.6; HJ T Donker (EN) 1.45; LJ M Margison (NT) 5.37; SP C Bushby (NT) 9.67; DT K Wrigglesworth (North Northumberland) 25.64; JT A Locke (EN) 32.10.
Junior Girls: 100m R Elder (N) 14.0; 200m R Elder (N) 29.3; 800m S Cross (NT) 2:26.7; 1500m C Wood (NT) 4:50.2; 75mH K Forsyth (NT) 12.8; HJ K Bell (NT) 1.41; LJ J Lowery (NT) 4.59; DT A Ludvingsen (EN) 23.06. — CROOK AC's Malcolm Ingram, runner-up in his previous five races, finally struck gold in the Shafto Run at Spennymoor yesterday.
The 36-year-old removals expert, beaten in a thrilling sprint finish at the end of the ten mile race last year, made no mistake this time, taking the lead after two miles and gradually extending his lead to beat clubmate Bill Kershaw by an emphatic 38 seconds.
‘It's fantastic to have won at last,’ said Ingram.
‘I've been second five times in the last three years and I'm over the moon to have got home first at last.’
There was a keen battle for second place between Kershaw and Brunskill, but the Newton Aycliffe runner faded in the later stages, being overtaken by Crook veteran John Dennis.
Crook, with five runners in the first six finishers, easily won the team event.
Results: 1 M Ingram (Crook) 53.09; 2 W Kershaw (Crook) 53.47; 3 J Dennis (Crook V40) 53.54; 4 M Brunskill (Newton Aycliffe) 54.13; 5 J Hardacre (Crook) 54.21; 6 P Carter (Crook) 54.33; 7 P Milburn (Newton Aycliffe) 56.04; 8 P Burnstein (Unatt) 56.14; 9 M Gibson (New Marske) 56.57; 10 C Gibson (Newton Aycliffe) 57.55.
O/50 L Cummings (Crook) 58.00; O/55 E Appleby (Heaton) 58.14.
Team: Crook 28 pts.
DARLINGTON discovery Andrew Pyrah, who has been running seriously for only 18 months, won the Man of the Match award in the Woolworth Young Athletes match at Middlesbrough yesterday.
The 15-year-old Eastbourne School fourth former, whose athletic talents were first recognised by PE teacher Simon Hanniford, won the youths 3,000 metres in 9 mins 9.3 secs 10.7 secs better than a BAF grade two standard beating second placed Gregg Scott, of North Shields Polytechnic, by 53 seconds.
In the second Northern One East match at the Cleveland County Stadium Leeds just beat hosts Mandale after a neck-and-neck struggle throughout the afternoon.
YORKSHIRE captain Martyn Moxon's status as a batsman of the highest class was placed beyond doubt at Middlesbrough on Saturday.
In his first innings since breaking his finger while making 141 on the opening day of the championship season, Moxon graced a bitterly cold Acklam Park with a splendid knock of 117 against Somerset.
Moxon showed few signs of discomfort during his 231-ball innings but his blackened finger afterwards was testimony to the fact that he had played in pain.
Moxon's decision to drop Ashley Metcalfe and keep faith with Simon Kellett turned out to be fully justified.
Moxon and Kellett (87), rattled up 203 together for the first wicket after Yorkshire had been put in to bat.
It was the highest stand for Yorkshire at Acklam Park since they came to the ground in 1956, beating the 188 for the fifth wicket by current coach Doug Padgett and Vic Wilson against Sussex in 1960.
Both batsmen benefited from early dropped catches, Moxon on three and Kellett, 18, but after that they were in charge.
Somerset's sixth bowler, Andy Hayhurst, proved the most troublesome and he broke the stand when Kellett was denied a century by edging a cut to wicketkeeper Neil Burns.
FORMER Middlesbrough manager Colin Todd could team up again with Bruce Rioch at Bolton Wanderers.
Following his appointment as Bolton's new manager, Rioch wants Todd as his assistant at Burnden Park.
Todd, 43, is keen on renewing a partnership forged at Ayresome Park and will seek his release from Bradford City.
Todd joined Bradford as assistant manager five months ago.
‘Bradford are limited financially and have to sell players to cut the wage bill,’ said Todd.
The Yorkshire club are over £1m in debt.
ENGLISH SCHOOLS hurdles champion Allison Curbishley began her competitive return after injury with a record-breaking double in the Cleveland School Championships at Middlesbrough on Saturday.
The 16-year-old Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harrier, who strained knee ligaments in her first race of the season two months ago, won her specialist event, the intermediate 300 metres hurdles, in convincing fashion, clipping nearly a second-and-a-half off the three-year-old record and finishing 30 metres clear of her nearest rival in 47.2 secs.
But it was only a steady run nearly five second slower than her personal best time and almost four seconds away from her English Schools clocking of 43.5 last year.
Curbishley, who will defend her Schools title at Hull next month, said: ‘I did my first training over hurdles on Thursday and my knee was a bit swollen afterwards.
‘I didn't go particularly fast today I just wanted to get round.’
Curbishley then won the 300 metres in equally convincing fashion, being able to ease off down the home straight once she was assured of victory, but still shaving a second off the record in 42.2 secs.
Her toughest assignment turned out to be the anchor-leg of the intermediate girls relay, when she had to put in a spurt to hold off a determined challenge from Middlesbrough.
Curbishley said: ‘My main aim is to get back to fitness and I didn't want to try too much too quickly.
‘My knee feels all right when I am running, bit it has been swelling up slightly afterwards.
‘But I have missed a lot of races and I need to run.’
Curbishley's next races will be in the Inter-Counties match with Northumberland at the Cleveland County Stadium next Saturday.
—MIDDLESBROUGH and Cleveland's Kerry Matthew knocked two minutes off the intermediate girls 3,000 metre record but still finished outside the English Schools qualifying time.
The 14-year-old Billingham Campus pupil clocked 10 mins 29.3 secs, compared with the previous best time of 12:29.5, recorded in 1989, despite the cold, blustery conditions.
Matthew, who must run 11 seconds faster to qualify for the English Schools Championships, said: ‘It was very windy, especially on the back straight.’
The girls race was run with the intermediate boys, and as well as lapping her two female rivals Matthew overtook two of the boys.
Her coach, Ian Threadgill, said: ‘We've got to be delighted with that without the wind she would easily have got the qualifying time.’
But it was such an inspired run the selectors could still give Matthew the nod for the English Schools.
—GRAEME Hall, who is joining Arsenal next month as an apprentice professional, signed off from school athletics with a fine double in the shot and javelin before helping Stockton to victory in the intermediate relay.
The 16-year-old central defender, who captained Cleveland schools last season won the shot by nearly two metres with a put of 12.25 metres, while he was almost two metres clear of his nearest rival in the javelin, with a throw of 39.85 metres.
—NORTH-East discus champion Helen Middlemass won her specialist event, achieving the qualifying distance with a throw of 34.70 after a winning 9.53 metres in the intermediate shot.
—FAST-improving Darren Bunn, of Middlesbrough, equalled his pb when he won the preliminary boys 1500m in 4 mins 54.6 secs, over nine seconds clear of his nearest rival.
—STOCKTON Schools swept the board with victories in all six boys and girls categories.
RESULTS Inter Boys: 100m L Thompson (Middlesbrough) 11.4; 200m R Atha Langbaurgh) 23.2; 400m B O'Brien (Stockton) 53.4; 800m D Choosey (M) 2:01.5; 1500m S Helm (L) 4:16.1; 3000m P Bentley (S) 9.22.9; 1500sc G Harland (M) 4.57.4; 100mh P Tuplin (L) 14.8; 400mh R Mellor (M) 63.7; HJ P Davies (Hartlepool) 1.70; PV P Davies (H) 3.00; LJ N Bromfield (S) 5.29; TJ M Moore (M) 12.70; SP G Hall (S) 12.25; DT N Singh (M) 28.92; HT W Gibson (S) 52.64; JT G Hall (S) 39.85; 4 x 100m Stockton 46.8.
Junior Boys: 100m W Bingley (S) 12.1; 200m W Bingley (S) 25.0; 400m G Porritt (M) 56.9; 800m M Dewing (L) 2:12.9; 1500m P Holden (S) 4:31.3; 80mh B Drydon (S) 12.8; HJ M Gelson (H) 1.67; PV K Stubbs (L) 2.10; LJ M Gelson (H) 5.71; TJ L Drury (L) 11.58; SP S Birse (S) 12.53; DT R Davies (M) 27.32; HT N Bulman (L) 37.24; JT S Birse (S) 41.27; 4 x 100m Stockton 50.7.
Preliminary Boys: 100m A Corbett (S) 13.4; 200m J Shepherd (S) 28.2; 400m M Gordon (H) 65.2; 800m N Cotton (M) 2:28.5; 1500m D Bunn (M) 4:54.6; 70mh M Harriman (L) 12.2; HJ R Jones (S) 1.35; LJ S Burton (S) 4.47; SP M Bates (S) 8.63; 4 x 100m Stockton 57.5.
Intermediate Girls: 100m H Lomas (M) 13.0; 200m A Keenan (M) 26.6; 300m A Curbishley (S) 42.2; 800m L Johnson (L) 2:31.4; 1500m K Lazenby (S) 5:08.7; 3000m K Matthew (S) 10:29.3; 80mh L Ellis (L) 13.2; 300mh A Curbishley (S) 47.2; HJ L Kettlewell (L) 1.50; LJ B Porteous (L) 4.58; SP H Middlesmass (L) 9.53; DT H Middlemass (L) 34.70; JT E Harrison (M) 34.67; 4 x 100m Stockton 60.1.
Junior Girls: 100m V Lendon (S) 13.2; 200m C Batts (L) 27.2; 800m C Tibbett (M) 2:29.9; 1500m K Weall (L) 5:13.4; 75mh K Banks (S) 12.5; HJ L Collam (S) 1.40; LJ C Johnson (H) 4.53; SP A Ward (S) 8.16; DT S Swanson (S) 21.12; JT E Hargreaves (S) 21.54; 4 x 100m Stockton 54.6.
Preliminary Girls: 100m L Crisp (S) 14.5; 200m L McNally (H) 29.8; 800m L Johnson (H) 2:32.4; 75mh L Douglas (H) 13.0; HJ K Smith (S) 1.25; LJ L Johnson (H) 4.22; SP K Nish (S) 8.22; 4 x 100m Stockton 60.1.
Points totals Boys: 1 Stockton 307; 2 Langbaurgh 146 1/2; 3 Middlesbrough 107 1/2; 4 Hartlepool 98 1/2.
Girls: 1 Stockton 374; 2 Langbaurgh 219; 3 Middlesbrough 150 1/2; 4 Hartlepool 101 1/2.
YORKSHIRE produced their most exhilarating batting of the season at Acklam Park, Middlesbrough, yesterday, as they stormed to a magnificent victory over Somerset in the Sunday League.
They were completely undaunted at the prospect of chasing Somerset's highest total against Yorkshire of 252 for three and they romped home by five wickets with a full over to spare.
The heroes of the hour were left-hander David Byas and Craig White, who both came good at the same time to record their career-best Sunday scores.
Byas hit 80 before being out in the final over and White was left unbeaten on 52, the fifth-wicket pair smashing their way to 119 in 15 overs.
Their stand was all the more remarkable in that it was compiled in extremely murky light.
Before Byas and White joined forces, however, Yorkshire were sent on their way with a stunning innings of 57 from skipper Martyn Moxon, whose savage assault contained four fours and three sixes.
Moxon, whose recently broken finger is still badly bruised, started his big hitting by pulling Yorkshire-born Neil Mallender high over mid-wicket for six.
He then hooked Andrew Caddick for another six and a perfectly timed shot off Richard Snell sailed over the square leg boundary and into a back garden.
Moxon lost Simon Kellett to a skier to mid-on at 45 in the tenth over and Moxon fell at 95 to a mistimed sweep against off-spinner Harvey Trump.
Yorkshire wanted 145 from the last 20 overs and they seemed to have lost their way when Sachin Tendulkar needlessly ran himself out and Richard Blakey cut a hard catch to Trump.
They were then struggling at 127 for four with 16 overs remaining but Byas pulled Caddick for six to restore confidence, which was boosted even further when he was dropped on the boundary edge by Andy Hayhurst when 27.
With Byas and White wasting no scoring opportunities, Yorkshire required 41 off five overs and their task became less demanding as Byas clubbed Hayhurst for four and six, the big hit just brushing Caddick's fingers before clearing the rope.
With only 11 runs needed from two overs, Byas rammed Snell through the covers before being caught at long on next ball.
In the same over Snell bowled two consecutive wides and White reached his 50 and won the match by driving him through mid-off for his fourth boundary.
Winning the toss, high-flying Somerset were given an 82 start by Ricky Bartlett and Mark Lathwell and it was the introduction of spinners Phil Carrick and Jeremy Batty which stopped things getting out of hand.
Bartlett fell lbw to Batty for 37 and without addition Lathwell was stunningly caught one handed at mid-off by Batty to bring Carrick a wicket.
But then acting captain Richard Harden and Graham Rose ran riot with a record-breaking third-wicket stand in Sunday cricket against Yorkshire of 167 in only 24 overs.
It was the best for any wicket by a visiting team at Acklam Park and the largest for any wicket against Yorkshire in 11 years.
Rose had roared his way to 88 off 79 balls with eight fours and two sixes when he fell lbw to Darren Gough, leaving Harden unbeaten on 76 off 71 balls.
Although Yorkshire's ground fielding was excellent they spilled three catches off five balls when Harden and Rose were already well set.
Carrick in the end never got his hands to an enormous skier by Harden to mid-wicket, and in the same over from Peter Hartley another high one from Rose was grassed by Batty.
Then Gough himself put down Rose at long on.
SEAHAM Harbour's club champion Keith Adamson led the qualifiers in the Durham County Match Play Championship at Bishop Auckland on Saturday.
Adamson reached the turn in five under par but faltered on the back nine to finish on two under par 70.
Darlington's John Housan and John Kennedy shot the only other seven par rounds of the day both returning scores of 71.
Players with scores of 79 and better qualified automatically to join exempt players Craig Kilgour, Dareen McGee and Adrian Green in the championship proper which gets under way at Heworth Golf Club on June 27 (four scores of 80 also qualified).
Leading Qualifiers: 70 K Adamson (Seaham Harbour); 71 J Housan (Darlington), J Kennedy (Consett); 72 D K McLure (Whickham); 73 C Marshall (Hartlepool), M Hodgson (Barnard Castle), P Kane (Seaton Carew), R J Aisbitt (Bishop Auckland), A J McLure (Whickham); 74 V Kelly (Consett), D Walton (Bishop Auckland), P S Highmoor (Tyneside).
— THE Teeside Union continues their unbeaten run in the Yorkshire Inter Union Championships when they defeated Bradford Union 24–12 at West Bowling yesterday.
Teesside led after the foursomes 31/2, 21/2 and the match was squared when Ian Liddle lost the top singles to Bradford's match play champion Mark Cook.
However, Teesside's fortunes turned when Vince Guest claimed the scalp of former Walker cup player Ces Bloice two and one with the NYSD team winning eight of the remaining 11 games.
Results: I S Liddle (Dinsdale Spa) and A K Green (Darlington) beat C Bloice (Cleckheaton) and J Loosemore (Bingley, St Ives) four and three; S Charnock (Teesside) and P Kane (Seaton Carew) lost to M Cook (Northcliffe) and M Bell (Northcliffe) four and three; V Guest (Teesside) and J Jones (Cleveland) beat W Hopkinson (Bingley, St Ives) and I Houldsworth two up; A J Russell (Middlesbrough Municipal) and S Tilley (Brass Castle) beat C Dowling (Baildon) and M Gaffney (Cleckheaton) two and one; I Doughty (Catterick) and D Wales (Bishop Auckland) lost to R Simpson (West Bowling) and C Smith (Bradford) one down; A Robinson (Brass Castle) and C Womack (Teesside) halved with W Snodgrass (Shipley) and L Holmes (Keighley).
Singles Matches I Liddle lost to M Cook three and two; V Guest beat C Bloice two and one; A K Green beat M Bell one up; S Charnock beat J Loosemore three and two; P Kane lost to R Simpson two down; A Russell beat I Houldsworth two and one; A Robinson beat W Hopkinson three and two; S Tilley beat W Snodgrass one up; J Jones lost to C Dowling three and two; I Doughty beat L Holmes two and one; D Wales beat C Smith four and three; C Womack halved with M Gaffney.
MIDDLESBROUGH Bears and Newcastle Diamonds were outclassed in their heats of the Heat Team Championship and are just about eliminated from the competition.
Last night, Newcastle had totalled just 24 points and Boro 30, while the favourites Edinburgh Monarchs were top of the pile with 97, although they had raced an extra leg.
Newcastle were handicapped by the absence of David Bargh and Mark Thorpe, who were competing in the World Pairs semi-finals in Germany.
Boro had no excuses.
They proved to have no stomach for a fight with only Steve Regeling showing any  semblance of spirit.
Scores At Berwick 38 (R Knight 12), Edinburgh 29 (M Coles 10), Middlesbrough 18,(S Regeling 9, D Sumner 5, D Cheshire 2, M Lemon 2); Newcastle 11 (S Norman 4, W Garrett 4, R Juul 2, P Jeffery 1).
At Glasgow 41 (R Nagy 12), Edinburgh 23 (K McKinna 10), Berwick 20 (Knight 8), Middlesbrough 12 (Regeling 5, Sumner 2, Lemon 2, Cheshire 2, D Odom Aggregate Edinburgh 97, Berwick 79, Glasgow 58, Middlesbrouhgh 30, Newcastle 24.
BARNEY and Ben became part of the family on our second day in the sleepy little fishing hamlet called Es Calo.
They joined us for breakfast that first sunny morning on the terrace of our secluded villa tucked amid the pine trees by the sparkling blue sea.
They were there every day after that.
Like tourists who visit for the first time, it seemed our resident rabbits sensed the tranquil harmony that is the essence of this tiny unspoilt paradise in the Mediterranean.
Formentera is the smallest and least developed of all the Balearic Islands.
It is so enchanting that there is always a certain reluctance to reveal its magic to the rest of the world.
Yet how uncharitable to keep this gem to myself.
The island is little more than a dozen miles long and in places only a mile or two wide.
It lies south of Ibiza and since there is no airport (and there never will be) it is only accessible by sea a deterrent to the more boisterous holidaymakers who prefer the glitz and sophisticated night life of Ibiza.
Fifteen minutes by taxi from Ibiza airport brings you to the port and a choice of crossings to Formentera.
There is the fast and comfortable jetfoil, the hydrofoil or the more leisurely ferry.
Journey time varies between around half an hour to an hour and a quarter.
On a hot summer day though there can be few better ways to begin a holiday than sitting on deck sipping an ice-cold San Miguel and tasting the salt spray as you watch the old town of Ibiza receding while Formentera beckons.
The port of La Sabina has been extended and modernised in the last couple of years and is home to many a fancy yacht.
In fact, yachts are much in evidence in Formentera especially off the glorious white beach of Illetas.
It is here that the rich and super-rich moor their magnificent multi-million pound floating palaces and slip ashore for a glass of bubbly or two.
Yet paradoxically, despite their presence, the beaches of Formentera are never crowded, even in high season.
Neither are there any ghetto blasters or peddlers or time-share pests.
Formentera is a haven for the more discerning tourist who wants sun and sea in a tranquil setting.
And what better place.
Here, it is so very easy to forget what time of the day it is or even what day it is.
The population scarcely numbers 5,000 and the capital, San Francisco, has about 900 inhabitants.
The number one independent tour operator to Formentera is Astbury Apartment Holidays in Middlesbrough.
The owner, John Astbury, fell in love with the island more than a dozen years ago.
He offers a variety of accommodation.
His Formentera representative is Gina Wenham who has lived on the island for 20 years.
It is Gina who meets you at La Sabina and arranges your cab to your holiday home or your hire car.
BC rental cars, the largest in Spain, are based right on the port and offer good rates to Astbury clients.
Just ask the genial boss Bartolo.
The most popular resort on the island is Es Pujols about a ten-minute drive from La Sabina.
Here there are three beaches and a busy little town which offers every facility.
My favourite eating establishment in Formentera is right there on the beach in Es Pujols.
Called Sa Gavina, it is inexpensive, food is excellent and service friendly.
Another which is a must is run by Yvonne.
Take a right turn off the island's only main road which connects both La Sabina and Es Pujols with Es Calo and La Mola.
Watch for the sign K9 (kilometre nine) and Yvonne's name on a board.
The beach here is especially quiet even by Formentera standards and at night a strolling guitarist often serenades diners as they watch some of the most gloriously pink sunsets it is ever possible to imagine.
There are beaches which are easily accessible either side of this artery road, most reached by taking an unmade, often sandy track through the trees.
Mitjorn beach is home to a couple of hotels and hostels and is a long, lazy affair of white soft sand.
Illetas, off the main road between La Sabina and Es Pujols, is possibly the most popular.
It consists of a long gentle curve of slightly shelving sand which often makes it possible to be only waist deep in warm, crystal clear water several hundred yards out.
Es Calo, the sleepy little fishing village which is without doubt my own particular favourite spot, also has a couple of beaches and swimming from almost all the island's beaches is entirely safe.
Water sports abound.
So I have painted a picture of an island Shangri-la, a Mediterranean Utopia and I make no apologies.
The main preoccupations are to relax, sunbathe, swim, dine out and very little else, but for those seeking that little extra Formentera has other diversions.
Cycling is one of them and that means exploring.
You could tackle the island's one and only hill south of Es Calo, stop off for a welcome break at El Mirador and as you cool off with an iced drink, take in the panoramic view.
Then ride on up the hill and when the road levels out watch for some of the traditional island crafts.
Few craftsmen can compare to those in San Fernando where they carve from solid blocks of wood some of the most exquisite acoustic guitars; true works of art.
And if you want to play then there are guitar classes too.
Out of season Formentera is a haven for writers and artists; the ambience is conducive to all creative activity.
It has always been popular with Middlesbrough-born singer-songwriter Chris Rea.
I remember some years ago sharing a few dinner dates with a young lady who turned out to be one of Prince Charles's old friends.
Such is the informality of this unique little island that it matters not who you are or what you have.
Long may it stay just like that.
FACTFILE Flights.
None direct.
From most UK airports including Newcastle to Ibiza (two hours 50 minutes).
Several ferry crossings and jetfoil crossing daily.
From around £10.
Island transport: mainly bicycles on daily or weekly rates.
Also car hire from BC cars.
Very few local buses.
Taxis.
Currency: Spanish pesetas Best buys: ceramics, baskets, guitars Sports: surfing, windsurfing, scuba diving, snorkelling, sailing, walking Nightclubs: limited to a few discos Season: from May until late October.
Out of season holidays also available
—John Astbury, Astbury Apartment Holidays, Baker Street, Middlesbrough.
Inclusive holiday costs from around £300.
WHITBY Jet has found its perfect historian.
‘As a child I always wore a jet necklace and cross,’ recalls Mabel McMillan.
‘I never took it off, even in the bath.’
Years later, when a leading local councillor, she regularly attended a national Museums' conference.
‘I always wore jet, usually with a pastel-coloured dress,’ she says.
‘At first I was the only guest wearing it, but I noticed quite a few others following suit.’
Today Mabel still wears jet jewellery earrings, necklaces, bracelets, brooches.
But not all at once.
And she matches them with cheerful clothes.
So Mabel isn't a reincarnation of her maternal grandmother.
‘I never saw her in a colour,’ she says.
‘She was always dressed in either black, or black and white.
And she always wore jet.
She was our family's own Queen Victoria.’
The sombrely-attired matriarch's husband, Elisha Walker, was a noted Whitby jet carver.
His fondness for carving lilies inspired Mabel's mother's Christian name.
Which makes it all the more appropriate that Mabel, now approaching 80, has produced the classic, much-needed book on Whitby Jet.
Broader in scope than any predecessor its special strength is that it deals not only with the manufacturing industry but the social conditions in which it was set.
As Mabel, a retired teacher who also served on the Middlesbrough and Teesside borough councils for 21 years, says: ‘Anyone reading the book will gather I'm a socialist, though I don't try to make political points.’
Quite.
But Mabel's picture of life in Whitby during the jet era 100 years ago will open many eyes.
It exposes the grim underbelly to the sentimental images captured by the town's celebrated photographer Frank Sutcliffe.
Rape, drunkenness, muggings all were endemic in Victorian Whitby.
Prostitution was rife.
And so was wife beating in true Neanderthal style.
‘Women wore their hair very long in Victorian days,’
Mabel explains.
‘Dragging them round by the locks seemed very commonplace.
In 1867, a drunken jet worker, Benjamin Walker, was accused of pulling his wife round the house by the hair of her head.
In 1872, Thomas Paterson, another jet worker, came home very drunk, got hold of his wife's hair and pulled her out of bed.
Life must have been very hard for many of these poor women.’
Nor was the violence confined to adults.
Children were not only frequently abused but did a fair bit of abusing themselves.
‘Anyone could obtain liquor, and the young jet apprentices took full advantage,’ reports Mabel.
‘They caused trouble on the least provocation.
A jet lad, Robert Middleton, was fined 2s 6d (12p) for assaulting a woman neighbour, merely for sitting on a seat he had made.
‘These young jet lads seemed to have little respect even for their parents.
Jack Backhouse, a jet lad scarcely in his teens, was drunk and smashed up his father's house A letter in 1853 claimed Whitby was infested with thieving ‘city arabs, cast out of their homes, orphans by day and burthens by night’.’
Born in Whitby's cobbled Church St, where her father was a saddler, Mabel left Whitby in the 1930s to pursue her teaching career on Teesside.
‘It was because kids at Thornaby came up to me in barefeet that I became a socialist,’ she says.
In the 1960s she and husband Harry bought a Whitby cottage as a weekend retreat.
Now a widow, Mabel has made her home in the compact whitewashed building, tucked in one of Whitby's historic yards.
‘This cottage was once occupied by a dealer in rough jet,’ she says.
‘As I typed my manuscript in the attic, I thought that perhaps jet had once been strewn along its broad oak floorboards.’
The magnificent outcome of ten years intensive research, her book draws chiefly on contemporary reports in 3,500 issues of The Whitby Gazette.
But the intimate local picture this builds up is amplified by detailed accounts of subjects like fashion and jewellery, jet's role in literature, and its links with Royalty.
And though Mabel's jet-craftsman grandfather died the year before she was born, she has a personal homely memory to relate.
‘My grandma and one of her sons ran two jet shops,’ she says.
‘Outside one stood a penny-in-the-slot model of a jet workshop, made by my great uncle George Wood.
It is now in Whitby's Pannet Museum.
On Saturday mornings it was my job to empty the money, from a cocoa-tin container.
Grandma rewarded me with what she called my ‘Saturday penny’.’
Beginning with jet's origins as a fossilised wood hence its lightness and relative warmth to the touch Mabel's well-illustrated 280-page book traces the use of jet from prehistoric times, through the amazing Victorian jet boom, to our own day.
Although jet is found in several countries, so-called Whitby Jet, which was actually mined in many places in the North York Moors, is the hardest and best.
A jet worker is mentioned by name in the Whitby Abbey rolls of 1394.
But it was the Victorian taste for jet, spurred by the Queen's adoption of it for mourning that forged the unforgettable link with Whitby.
In 1850 the town had 50 jet workshops.
By 1873 there were 200.
Vividly described as ‘gull's nests’ and ‘humming rookeries’, they occupied almost every available nook and cranny.
Whitby's biggest industry, jet now directly provided work for 1,500 men, women and children a tenth of the population.
The main trade in jewellery was supplemented by almost equally huge sales of other items anything from a tea caddy spoon and cigarette holder to a jet Bible and model of Whitby Abbey.
One visitor, unimpressed, wrote: ‘Jet meets you at every turn and in every shape.
Surely no modern manufacturer of trumpery ever rivalled this ugliness.
One wonders who can buy such things.’
HE doubtless welcomed jet's sudden collapse.
For by the mid-1870s the boom was all over.
Many workers, who had earned the princely wage of £3-£4 in jet's heyday, ended in the workhouse.
Only 400 were still active in 1887, and five years later 600 soup-kitchen meals were served to starving ‘jet’ children in a single month.
Mabel believes the use of brittle foreign jet, imported when local supplies couldn't keep pace, is one reason why jet fell from favour.
But more important was a swing away from deep mourning and gloomy clothes, despite the Queen's rigid adherence to them.
‘There was a period of 30–40 years when people actually threw jet out,’ says Mabel.
But today antique jet brings good prices, and a handful of jet carvers finds a ready market for relatively simple jet jewellery, handsomely set in gold or silver.
‘It will never go out of fashion,’
Mabel confidently predicts.
‘It will never die.’
Still less, perhaps, now that its history is gloriously told.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Mark Foster, Keith Crane and Richard Doughty on York 656476; Sian Roberts on Richmond 850407 or Richmond 825281 (answering machine), and Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
MONDAY:
Cleveland Outlook social activities group meet at Lindsey's Bistro for a meal from 8pm.
Details, tel.Guis 635898.
Hard of Hearing Club, Alma Street Centre, Stockton, 6.30pm.
New members welcome.
THE organiser of a big karate competition in Whitby says he has no intention of giving it the chop after  casualties kept the town's hospital at full stretch.
Hospital authorities were warned that there may be some injuries from the competition at the resort's Spa Pavilion, but they were floored when they got nine patients in quick succession.
The town's ambulancemen had four times just arrived back at their station when they were called out again to the Spa, bringing in contestants with injuries including a black eye, broken nose, concussion and a damaged foot.
Said Sheher, the man who organised the competition which brought contestants to Whitby from all over the United Kingdom as well as Belgium and Germany, said: ‘Karate is a rough sport.’
Mr Sheher, a 37-year-old black belt fifth dan, from Acklam, Middlesbrough, said doctors at the competition decided that the casualties should go to hospital.
He said: ‘Out of 450 competitors it is expected that a few will get injured.’
Next year Mr Sheher, who runs karate classes throughout the North of England, hopes to bring the competitions back to Whitby.
‘As usual, I will give the hospital plenty of warning,’ he added.
All the karate casualties, two of them only nine-years-old, were discharged after treatment at Whitby Hospital, which had its busiest weekend for years.
A hospital  spokeswoman said: ‘It certainly kept us on the move.’
IT was ‘eyes down’ in the Cleveland Shopping Centre, Middlesbrough as the 1992 Bingo Roadshow came to town.
The event will be showing shoppers the modern face of bingo all week in Newton Mall.
Mary Craven, spokeswoman for the Bingo Association of Great Britain, said the game had changed dramatically in recent years.
CONFUSION over athletics fixture dates has almost wrecked the annual Inter Counties Schools Championships at Middlesbrough on Saturday.
For only two of the four Northern counties, Cleveland and Northumberland, will be able to compete.
Durham and Cumbria will stage their county championships on Saturday the recommended date instead.
Normally the Inter Counties fixture is staged the week after the county championships and provides a second chance for young athletes to achieve qualifying standards for next month's English Schools Championships.
But Cleveland and Northumberland switched from the recommended second Saturday in June and held their county championships last weekend.
And back in November host county Cleveland also booked Clairville Stadium for the Inter Counties fixture this Saturday, believing that the four counties would be competing as usual.
The mix-up in dates has also occurred in other parts of the country and Neil Dickinson, secretary of the English Schools AAA, wrote to county secretaries a month ago reminding them of the recommended date.
But by that time stadia had been booked and in most cases new arrangements could not be made.
Mr Dickinson said: ‘From what I understand what has happened is that last year the county championships were held the week after the Spring Bank Holiday and some counties have automatically presumed that this would be the case this year Cleveland and Northumberland included.
‘I noticed that a few counties had decided on June 6 and I sent out a letter pointing out that the recommended date was the second Saturday in June.
‘But it is only a recommended date we can't dictate to the counties.
‘It is unfortunate that only two teams will now be able to take part in the Inter Counties match because everyone seemed to enjoy taking part.’
Dorothy Best, secretary of Durham County Schools AA, said: ‘Cumbria and ourselves are staging the county championships on the recommended date but unfortunately Cleveland and Northumberland have held theirs a week earlier.
‘Unfortunately there is nothing we can do about it and it means that the athletes from Durham and Cumbria will not get a second chance of achieving the English Schools qualifying standards.’
‘This will have to be discussed by the four counties to make sure it doesn't happen again.’
Durham have tried to arrange a match with Cumbria but there is no stadium available.
Former Olympic 10,000 metres silver medallist Mike McLeod will be aiming to become the first veteran to win tonight's Golden Wonder Blaydon Race.
The Elswick Harrier, who was 40 in January, has won the traditional 5.9 mile from Balmbra's Music Hall in the centre of Newcastle to the Geordie Ridley public house in Blaydon four times.
It looked as though he would be renewing his rivalry with Paul Cuskin, who won a sprint finish in 1988, but the new Sunderland Harrier is having treatment for a calf muscle injury and cannot race.
McLeod's main rivals are expected to be Valli Harrier Gary Nagel and clubmate and Welsh marathon international Ieaun Ellis.
Golden Wonder have taken over the race sponsorship from Scottish and Newcastle Breweries, who backed the event for the past ten years.
But the expected 2,000 finishers will still get their traditional drink of Newcastle Brown Ale and stotty cake sandwich.
NOTTINGHAM Forest are set to swoop with a £1m-plus bid for Boro ace Stuart Ripley.
Forest manager Brian Clough is poised to challenge Middlesbrough's resolve to hold on to the former England Under-21 international after having had Ripley watched during an impressive promotion season.
A Midlands source said last night: ‘Forest could move in with a £1m plus bid.’
The flying winger has already been linked with First Division and Scottish clubs, following a string of excellent performances for the Boro.
Manchester City were just one of the clubs impressed by his aggressive style a style which helped dump the Frist Division side out of the Rumbelows League Cup and FA Cup at Ayresome Park.
Neighbours Manchester United have also shown an interest, while Celtic were represented at Ayresome Park towards the end of the season.
Former Newcastle United midfield player Mick Martin watched Ripley on behalf of manager Liam Brady Martin is now first-team coach at Parkhead.
But it is almost certain Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence, who has plans to strengthen his squad for the Premier League next season, will want to hold onto Ripley.
The pair have already had initial talks over a new contract.
And Lawrence may be keener to buy than to sell.
The former Charlton Athletic boss is an experienced wheeler-dealer on the transfer market and now has the rare luxury, for him, of money to spend.
In his Charlton days, Lawrence was forced to accept any reasonable offer to ease the club's financial crisis.
That is not necessarily the case at the Boro.
Middlesbrough made a substantial profit last season, especially with two good Cup runs, and have an extra Premier League windfall.
The club are prepared to back Lawrence in the transfer market and chairman Colin Henderson has promised £2m for team-strengthening.
Newcastle United midfield player Gavin Peacock tops Boro's shopping list.
There is no doubt a player of Peacock's scoring ability would be a tremendous asset, because Middlesbrough are short of midfield goalpower.
On his return from holiday Lawrence will talk to a player whose contract at St. James's Park runs out this summer.
PHIL Carrick spun out Somerset for 167 in 64 overs and forced them to follow on at Middlesbrough yesterday before the rain-hit championship match ended in a draw.
Carrick, who will be 40 next month, brought Yorkshire maximum bowling bonus points by grabbing six for 58.
It was his best return since taking seven for 99 against Glamorgan at Swansea in 1985 and he did the damage despite bowling with a swollen knee.
Carrick was superbly backed up by paceman Mark Robinson, who thoroughly deserved his best figures for Yorkshire of three for 34.
In the end, Yorkshire could feel delighted at outplaying Somerset, who had refused skipper Martyn Moxon's offer of a run chase at the start of a final day which began 75 minutes late because of a wet ground.
Moxon's first revised plan was to continue the first innings on 317 for seven but he then decided to declare in an attempt to bowl out Somerset twice.
‘I would have preferred to have given them a run chase but I then decided we had to be positive and get whatever we could out of the match,’ said Moxon.
Somerset openers Andy Hayhurst and Mark Lathwell began promisingly against the pacemen but Carrick came on for the last over before lunch and had Lathwell caught at slip off a cunningly flighted ball which turned.
Robinson, bowling enthusiastically and getting life out of the pitch, forced Hayhurst and Richard Harden into edging catches before being replaced by Peter Hartley, who had Neil Burns splendidly caught at second slip by Byas.
Carrick then destroyed the Somerset middle order and his next three wickets were all the result of fine catches by Sachin Tendulkar, who seemed to relish the challenge of fielding close to the bat at silly mid-off.
One of those to fall was Rick Bartlett, Somerset's top scorer with 56 off 119 balls with seven fours.
Byas held on to his third catch in the slips to gain Carrick the wicket of Harvey Trump, and after Robinson had returned to account for Andrew Cottam, Carrick rounded off the innings by getting the stubborn Andrew Caddick caught at extra cover for 37.
You printed the story of Leslie Benns and his life in what was in those days called gentlemen's service.
(Echoes, May 6).
I too had a short sojourn into the company of that noble society.
I was 22 in 1934 and the Hon Mrs Bower, wife of the Tory MP for the area, and her friends on the council of social services organised a scheme whereby any lad on the dole (and most of us were) would be trained for private service and find jobs in London and the South.
Well, I applied and was accepted, rigged out with clothes, shoes etc and sent to a large country house near Burton on Trent for training.
Another couple of lads joined me at Middlesbrough station and off we went to be gentlemen's gentlemen.
I am sure that if the gentlemen had seen what they were getting they would have changed their minds.
There wasn't one of us over 5ft 2ins and looking half starved to death, which we were.
I arrived just after dinner at night, so we were taken into the kitchen and sat down at a huge table on which were chicken legs, lamb chops, steak, dishes of three or four veg and told to help ourselves and did we!
The next day Mrs Jones, who was in charge of the place, had to get a doctor.
We all had stomach pains.
Well, when it was thought I was ready to go to a job, I was sent to 101 Cadogan Gardens in Chelsea, near Sloane Street to be told to go down the steps to the tradesmen's entrance.
There I was admitted by the butler, of all people.
He was an Irishman and his name William Butler.
He said to get changed and he would show me how to lay the table for dinner as guests were being entertained that night.
I said I was not commencing duties until the next day as my girlfriend worked in Richmond and I had arranged to see her, which I had, by phone.
So off I went.
Well, next morning we were cleaning silver in the butler's pantry and the bell rang calling us to breakfast and this is where the fun began.
Egg and bacon on each plate but one and on this one a dried up, curled-up-with-age piece of smoked fillet, or what we called finney haddock.
I said to the chef, ‘That wouldn't be for me, would it?’.
He said, ‘Of course, we can't waste good food.’
So I took his egg and bacon, gave him the finney haddock and he never said a word.
In fact a couple of nights later he took me to see Max Miller at Holborn Empire and would not let me pay for anything.
I think he must have enjoyed that haddock.
I didn't last long in service, they were always complaining.
First I kicked the chair legs when serving, then I must not use scenty hairdressing, don't say good morning unless they say it first.
Then one day a visitor called and gave me his card, so I just took it and gave it to the master in the drawing room.
He said take it back downstairs and bring it to me on a salver.
But what made me decide I'd had enough was when one night about 11pm I was about to climb into bed when the bell rang from the drawing room so I had to slip some clothes on and go and answer it.
The boss had a letter for me to take to the pillar box just about five yards from the front door.
— Leslie Wheater, 8 East View Terrace, Grove Hill, Middlesbrough.
My parents once or twice mentioned Fatty Arbuckle, seemingly a Hollywood scandal before I was born.
Can you tell me what it was?
I've often wondered.
Roscoe ‘Fatty’ Arbuckle was a popular star of early silent comedies, an obese 21 stones but agile, with an air of cherubic innocence.
Celebrating a new $3m contract in 1921, the 34-year-old comic threw a three-day party in a San Francisco hotel which ended in the fatal rape of 25-year-old starlet Virginia Rappe, who died from a ruptured bladder.
Arbuckle was acquitted of manslaughter but his career ended overnight, with all his films scrapped.
Added to complaints by women's organisations about the screen's increasing sexuality (for that era), the Arbuckle scandal helped to bring about censorship by the Hays Office, a self-regulating body set up by the big studios in 1922, under lawyer Will H. Hays.
Arbuckle directed a few comedy shorts as William Goodrich, was booed when he toured the backwoods in second-rate farces, and began to drink heavily.
In 1933 he was hired by Warner Brothers to make several short comedies, but died of a heart attack after a celebration party.
I vaguely remember controversy about a Harold Wilson honours list, but recently I saw a reference to ‘the lavender list,’ apparently the same one.
Why lavender list?
His resignation honours list in 1976, drawn up to reward prominent Labour Party supporters, was controversial because of some of the names on it.
The original was said to have included even more controversial figures.
The final list was amended and typed on lavender-coloured notepaper by his political secretary Marcia Williams, who had become Lady Falkender in 1974.
Touring Northumberland we visited the site of the battle of Flodden in 1513, but it is really Branxton Ridge and the monument is near Branxton village Flodden Edge is about a mile away.
Do you know why we say Flodden Field?
James IV first occupied the high ground of Flodden, but moved to Branxton hill when he realised the English were outflanking him, eluding Scottish patrols on a drizzly day.
Early writers called it the battle of Branxton, but Flodden came to be preferred, probably because of balladeers like Sir Walter Scott and Jane Elliott (The Flowers of the Forest).
Flodden sounds more romantically sorrowful than Branxton.
Field means battlefield, as in Bosworth Field and other instances.
Writers have sometimes brought in the phrase ‘The Greeks had a word for it.’
What is the allusion, please?
The Greeks Had a Word For It was the title of a play by the American poet and playwright Zoe Akins, first produced in 1929.
The word (hetero: other, different) referred to the outlandishness of certain characters in the play.
Curiously, the phrase was dropped from the dialogue, remaining only as the title, but it became a kind of smart catchphrase.
The reference was not sexual; but in 1932 a film about three New York gold-diggers — forerunner of the Gold Diggers series and other movies — was called The Greeks Had a Word for Them.
(They had indeed — hetaerae, courtesans).
One Middlesbrough cinema manager, worried that the title might baffle or mislead his patrons, added a handwritten ‘Gold Diggers’ to it on the display bills supplied.
Displaying one's car tax disc where we do seems sensible, but what would happen if we chose to put it somewhere equally prominent?
You would be fined for ‘failing to display a current excise licence in the prescribed manner’— and that, according to the Road Traffic Act, is ‘on or adjacent to the nearside lower corner of the windscreen, so that all particulars thereon are clearly visible by daylight from the nearside of the road.’
Whether any other position could serve that purpose is at best arguable, but in any case all discs need to be in a standard place so that they can be checked in seconds without searching.
MIDDLESBROUGH are arranging a three-way inter-track meeting with Brough Park and Sunderland, possibly at the end of next month.
Each track would stage a home leg, with a points system determining the winners.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
THE biggest swimming event ever to be held in the area, the European Sprint championships featuring many of the world's top swimmers, will take place at Felling on November 27–28 next year.
It is second time lucky for Gateshead, who almost staged the first of these championships last year.
They tried to get them for Felling, but lost out to Yugoslavia.
Then, due to the current troubles, they were taken away from them and offered to Gateshead, who agreed to take them but then could not get television coverage, so they went to Germany.
This year they are taking place at Espoo, Finland, and in 1994 they will be at Stavanger, Norway.
— The 30-strong British Olympic swimming team, including Samantha Purvis (Stockton Aquatics), Samantha Foggo (Newcastle) and Ian Wilson (Sunderland), are all entered for the Optrex National Championships, which start in Sheffield today and end on Sunday.
The biggest programme faces Foggo, who is down for 11 events, including her Olympic races of 400m and 800m freestyle, but she is unlikely to compete in them all.
Wilson has the 200m butterfly, 400m and 1500m freestyle, while Purvis is down for the 200m backstroke, 400m freestyle, 50m, 100m and 200m butterfly.
A number of other local swimmers are also taking part.
Vicki Horner (Newburn) is the third fastest qualifier for the 400m individual medley, behind Olympians Helen Slatter and Sharron Davies, and is seeded fourth in the 200m.
Darlington's John Bradley (Bath University) is also in the third spot in the 100m butterfly, with Tynemouth's David Warren in fifth place.
In pole positions are Olympians Rik Leishman and Mike Fibbens.
Others seeded to qualify for finals include Andrew Aitken and Stephen Davison (Stockton Aquatics), Lee Dalzell (Gateshead/ Whickham), Susan Colling and Jonathan Hunter (Derwentside), Susan Rolph, Joanne Park and Caroline Kerr (Newcastle).
Sharron Davies' bid to win the 400 metres individual medley title for a record sixth time will be watched with added interest now that she has been given the opportunity to swim the event in Barcelona next month.
The 400m medley is one of the most physically demanding in the Olympic programme but Davies refutes any suggestion, that at 29, she may be too old to cope.
She said: ‘I broke my own 12-year-old British open (short course) record a few months ago, so how can anyone say that?’
The team goes straight from Sheffield to a ten-day training camp in an open air pool at Narbonne, France, to acclimatise for the games.
Last weekend Samantha Purvis scored an excellent win in the 200m butterfly at the Monte Carlo international meet.
She was also third in the 100m and fifth in the 50m.
Guisborough entertain Stokesley, Saltburn/Marske and Whitby in the last of the six Moors swimming league heats on Saturday (2pm).
The fifth heat was won by host club Stokesley with 151 points to go top of the league, Saltburn/Marske scored 137, Redcar 118 and Eston 78.
Scarborough Castle long distance club members Adele Seamarks and Alexia Morgan compete in the eight-mile tidal assisted Invergowrie to Broughty ferry races at Dundee on Saturday, Adele is in the junior section and Alexia the senior.
On Sunday, Alexia is also swimming in the one-mile races across the River Tay.
Only one Northumberland and Durham diver is competing in the national one metre springboard championships at Huddersfield this weekend, Louise Gibson (Newcastle), holder of three Twin Counties titles.
Middlesbrough water polo club's Paul Floyd and Lee Cooke are in the England squad of 16 which has a training camp at Cheltenham this weekend, at the end of which the team will be chosen for the junior (under 20) international tournament in Vienna on June 26–28.
ALEX Robertson won his first North region PGA tournament this week when he clinched the £8,000 Brough Classic with a 2 under par total of 136.
It is a welcome return from the golfing wilderness for the former Durham County champion who carried hopes of a highly successful professional career when he moved to the paid ranks after gaining international honours some five years ago.
Robertson, who has spent time labouring and more recently teaching in Europe to finance his playing career, is now attached to Castle Eden and Peterlee golf club which is allowing him to concentrate on playing local professional events.
DURHAM, who narrowly escaped defeat by Cumbria in their opening match of the season, will need to pull out all the stops when they travel to Strensall for their game against Yorkshire on Saturday.
Yorkshire field their strongest team for years in their bid to redress their relatively mediocre performances in recent seasons which have seen them lose two of the last three encounters against Durham.
Player-captain Mike Kelly, himself a golfing legend, is able to name five England internationals in his 12-man squad which includes former English strokeplay champions Mark Pullan and Roger Roper as well as former English matchplay champion Ian Garbutt.
Yorkshire team: S East (York), N Ludwell (Selby), I Garbutt (Wheatley), T Wood (Keighley), J Dockar, M Kelly (Ganton), A Gelsthorpe (Renishaw Park), R Roper (Catterick), G Harland, M L Pullan, S A Pullan, I Pyman (Sandmoor).
THE Teesside Union are joint leaders of the Yorkshire InterUnion League championship after recording their third successive win when they defeated Bradford Union at West Bowling on Sunday.
Teesside, who have won the Inter-Union strokeplay championship for the last four years, will be hoping to extend their unbeaten run when they entertain Harrogate Union at Middlesbrough golf club in a fortnight's time.
THE Green Howards host their annual golf tournament tomorrow in honour of their late president, former Open champion Fred Daley OBE.
The event sees a welcome return to the area for renowned golf coach John Jacobs who will be holding a golf clinic on the practise ground during the day.
The winners of the Stableford competition will be invited on a hot air balloon flight which is sure to give those who do not relish the though a good excuse for their less than perfect scores.
SCORES so far in Durham County Clark Cup: Seaham bt Hartlepool; Tyneside bt South Shields; Houghton-le-Spring bt Wearside; Consett bt Boldon; Darlington bt Durham; Birley bt Seaton Carew; South Moor bt Beamish; Chester-le-Street bt Blackwell Grange; Ravensworth bt Washington; Dinsdale bt Billingham.
Games yet to play: Bishop Auckland v Brancepeth; Whitburn v Eaglescliffe; Woodham v Ryton; Castle Eden v Mount Oswald; Roseberry Grange v Hobson; Garesfield v Barnard Castle.
MIDDLESBROUGH expect 10,000 season ticket holders to back their Premier League campaign.
There has been big demand for tickets, despite price increases, and the club anticipate a sell-out in the North and South stands and terraces.
Chief executive Keith Lamb said: ‘There are a total of 8,400 seats in those areas and 2,000 Holgate End tickets.
‘We are very encouraged by the fact that ticket renewals have been almost matched by new applicants.
‘There has been very little criticism over price increases.
‘The biggest criticism has been over the fact we have not offered season ticket discounts.
‘That is a little unfair when you consider there are 5,000 family area places where there has been no increase.
A 46-minute audio cassette tape on Middlesbrough's promotion-winning season will be launched in Cleveland Centre on Saturday.
Proceeds from the £3 cassettes will go to Children In Need.
Manager Lennie Lawrence describes the wide range of emotions and also reviews a ‘momentous’ season on the tape.
Hastings is big worry
RUGBY UNION: Scotland have delayed naming their team for Saturday's international against world champions Australia amid continuing doubts over the fitness of full back Gavin Hastings.
Hastings, who has played only 40 minutes on the tour, increased speculation that all was not well when he declined a round of golf today significant as the Watsonians star is a golf fanatic and plays off a seven handicap.
Copeland boss FOOTBALL:
Seaham have appointed Chris Copeland as their new manager to succeed Kenny Mitchell who resigned a month ago.
Copeland was previously assistant, and he will have former Blyth, Whitley Bay and Bishop Auckland midfielder Paul Walker as his number two.
Flying wingers RUGBY UNION:
Wings Steve Hackney of Leicester and Northampton's Harvey Thorneycroft both scored a hat-trick of tries as England B began their tour of New Zealand with a crushing 68–4 win against North Otago.
Club for sale FOOTBALL:
Fourth Division Cardiff City were yesterday put up for sale at £2 million by the club's financial controller.
Confident Paul GOLF:
Ryder Cup star Paul Broadhurst was in confident mood as he prepared for the Mitsubishi Austrian Open, starting in Salzburg today.
Broadhurst, who won £28,650 in finishing third in the Carrolls Irish Open at Killarney on Sunday, said: ‘It would be nice to carry on from where I left off in Ireland.’
Sad Sonny RUGBY LEAGUE:
St Helens forward Sonny Nickle is to be sent home from Great Britain's tour of Australia with a serious knee ligament injury.
Hart operation FOOTBALL: League champions Leeds have appointed their former central defender Paul Hart as director of youth coaching.
Wassall deal FOOTBALL:
Big spending Derby splashed out another £600,000 today on Nottingham Forest defender Darren Wassall.
Boro miss out FOOTBALL:
Middlesbrough lost 3–2 after extra time to Dynamo Dresden after leading 2–0 in the final of a youth tournament in Austria.
Boro midfield player Graham Kavanagh was voted the best player in the tournament.
ANTHONY Brannen has decided to stick to home territory for his last-gasp bid for Olympic selection.
The 23-year-old Teessider, who dropped out of the British decathlon trial at Sheffield last weekend after eight events, has chosen not to chase the Barcelona qualifying score, 7,850 points, in Germany before the selection deadline, June 28.
He will instead compete at Stoke where he lives in the British Student Championships on June 27 and 28.
The former Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harrier, bronze medallist in the World Student Games last year, will make the trip to Barcelona if he is one of the top three British scorers beyond the qualifying standard.
Meanwhile, British 800 metres record holder Kirsty Wade has arranged a social evening tonight to boost the trust fund set up for Cameron Sharp, the former international sprinter disabled in a car crash last year.
Local band Forever After will provide entertainment at the Vale of Derwent Social Club, Rowlands Gill, Gateshead, from 8pm.
Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harriers had 21 winners as they just lost to Liverpool in the Woolworths Young Athletes Northern Premier League fixture at York.
There were doubles for the Teessiders in the colts 800 metres (Fernando Whitworth 2:23.7 and Neal Cotton 2:29.0), boys discus (Stephen Birse 28.02m and Mark Earl 22.80m), youths hammer (Wayne Gibson 53.96 metres and David Waller 41.52 metres), youths steeplechase (Stephen Helm 4:37.8 and Glen Harland 4:51.0) and the youths 3,000 metres (Kevin Mace 9:30.9 and Paul Bentley 9:39.8) while Barry O'Brien scored a double in the youths 200 and 400 metres and Ian Taylor in the shot and hammer.
Other winners included Michael Weadall (youths 1500m 4:16.1), and Darren Bunn (colts 1500m 4:53.1), while the middlesbrough youths 4 x 100 metres team of Lee Thompson, Darren Watkins, Richard Atha and Richard Mellor won in 46.7 secs.
Final table: 1 Liverpool 229 pts; 2 Middlesbrough and Cleveland 216; 3 Rowntrees 152; 4 Hallamshire 140.
MORE than 200 golfers from social clubs in the Durham area are competing this weekend in the Durham CIU Golf Tournament at South Moor Golf Club.
Once called the rich man's game, golf is now one of the top sports activities of many social clubs and the winners of the Durham championship go on to compete nationally.
The tournament is sponsored by the Durham CIU branch and all the top brewers in the area.
The competition started yesterday and carries on today with the final tomorrow.
Top awards are given for the best net and best gross scores with over £200 in cash prizes.
The winners of the best gross trophy then decide, either by mutual agreement or by a play-off, on the player who goes on to the national championships.
—It's rock weekend at Seaham's Westlea Social Club with top group Six of the Best providing the entertainment tonight, tomorrow and Sunday.
—CIU Honours Alan Frank, committeeman at Shotton Colliery WMC (the Palms) received the long service certificate and badge for 25 years service to the club and Ralph Kipling, vice-chairman at Cockfield Social Club for more than 17 years, was presented with the long service award by Durham CIU branch secretary Jack Amos.
More long service awards were handed over to committeemen George Henderson and Fred Edney at Evenwood WMC.
—Durham CIU branch secretary Jack Amos was the odd man out when he went along to Beamish and West Pelton Social Club to present the awards for the Beamish, Chester-le-Street and Stanley Ladies Games League.
‘The league is one of the most successful in the area thanks to secretary Margaret Winters,’ he said.
—Following in Mama's footsteps, Mandi Scott, daughter of clubland's Queen of Song, Wendy Kay, takes to the boards this month.
Mandi, who has signed with Spennymoor agents AIR, can be seen in clubs around the area.
Her act comprises chart covers and songs by all the popular stars.
A great future lies ahead for this talented 23-year-old girl from Newton Aycliffe so Wendy look to your laurels, here comes Mandi.
—Dance nights every Saturday have started at Thornley WMC with music provided by the resident dance band Trumpet and Crumpet.
Admission is just 50p.
—The monthly star show at Haswell Social Club tomorrow features popular comedian Walter Gee and singer Ray Osborne.
—The glamorous Tyneside girls measure their success in degrees both on and off the stage.
Kerry Lee and her sister Janine known in clubland as Ritzy have been up to their ears in exams of late.
Janine is at Leeds University studying for a B.A Ed and big sister Kerry is studying psychology at Newcastle.
And they still manange to fit in club engagements as firm favourites with North-East audiences.
—Two former chairmen of Spennymoor WMC will be honoured at a special presentation evening in the club on Saturday June 21.
Ronald Bateman and James William Kelly, who both still serve as committeemen, are to receive the CIU's long service award for 25 years work with the club.
—Following the huge success of the last series of Stars In Their Eyes, Granada TV is looking for more people who look and sing like the biggest stars in the business.
If you look like Springsteen or sing like Lulu get in touch with Granada right away.
Telephone  or write to Stars In Their Eyes, Granada TV, Manchester M60 9EA.
—Clubmen from the Chester-leStreet area joined over 1,000 runners in the tenth annual Chester-le-Street fun run.
The event, sponsored by the Cooperative Bank and organised by the town's recreation department, attracts entries from all over the country, many of whom run in fancy dress for their favourite charities.
As an added incentive the Chester-le-Street group of clubs provide a trophy for the first CIU member past the post and this year the clubmen's shield went to Paul Casey from Osborne Social Club.
In addition to the shield which will be displayed in the club Paul received a travel clock as a personal prize.
The  organisers also gave a special award to veteran runner Albert Dolman, who was competing in the tenth consecutive run.
—Hartlepool Carpet Bowls League holds its presentation night next Thursday, June 18, at Hartlepool WMC.
Entertainment will be provided by the hilarious comedy duo The Chimes and singer Dave Alexander.
Tickets, including plate buffet, £1.25.
—Middlesbrough singer Lawrie Bennett is off to Cromer next week to star in the Pavilion Theatre summer show.
This is Lawrie's second season at the theatre, which boasts the only authentic end of pier variety show in the country.
For the past couple of years he has also appeared in pantomime with Rolf Harris.
—Special presentation parties were held for George Flowers, treasurer of Framwellgate Moor Workmen's Club, who has retired after 30 years service and for Consett Station Social Club steward Freddie Emmerson on his retirement.
Something happening at your club.
Tell Neil Harris about it.
Telephone  now.
QUALITY bream recently stocked into Wingate's Tilery Lake produced all the weights during Yarm AA's visit to the Hartlepool club's water.
A drop in temperature determined still bait essential for success and the feeder and red maggot proved the method for all.
Newman Scott's Dave Cockerill, drawn on the deeps near the island, landed six specimens to 3lb and recorded an impressive winning net of 14lb 14oz.
Kenny Allen (Yarm) at the next peg located three for 10lb 3oz as did third placed Peter Simpson 8lb 12oz.
In the opening fixture of the Middlesbrough AC Evening Gazette Matchmen series the public bank produced most of the action on Albert Park Lake.
Newman Scott's Jim Prescott returned the day's only double figured weight of 12lb 3oz to clinch the match.
The annual Darlington Brown Trout versus Durham Police challenge match on Lartington's top lake proved a tight affair.
Policeman Bob Walker took the individual honours from peg one returning 9lb 15oz.
Waggler and caster fished alongside the weed bed tempted tench skimmers and roach, but as Darlington rods took the next three places, Bob's best efforts failed to secure the team victory.
Results: DBT 26lb 8oz, Durham Police 24lb 10oz.
Individuals: Bob Walker 9lb 15oz; Karl Aldorfer 5lb; Roy Cloak 4.10.8 and Clive Cloak 4lb 1oz.
Broken Brae Fisheries, the latest of the exciting new ponds to be created in the region, is now open, situated just through Brompton-on-Swale before the caravan site.
The water carries a stock of quality bream, carp and roach.
Richmond tackle dealer Peter Scott is running matches on Monday evenings 69pm commencing June 22 and Saturday mornings from June 28, 40 pegs at £10 a ticket.
Bumper sport and prizes are on the cards and further details from Scotts Angling Supplies .
Reservoir roundup: Leighton: 156 anglers grassed 347 fish, rainbows to 4lb 8oz, bibios, black and peacocks, black buzzers, Montanas, Maid Marian muddlers and daddies top flies.
Scaling Dam: 282 rods landed 230 fish, six limit bags, rainbows to 4lb, black and green Montanas, black and peacock spider, damsel fly and nymph all successful.
Lockwood Beck: 259 visitors returned 420 fish, 28 limited bags, heaviest rainbow 4lb 2oz, Montana nymph, booby fly, black and peacocks best.
Blackton: 245 rods produced 464 fish, 26 limit bags, rainbows to 3lb 8oz falling to fly and worm, black and pattern flies, 42 fish over 2lb taken.
Cow Green: 67 visitors grassed 174 fish, small black flies best.
Hury: 426 anglers netted 530 fish, 32 limit bags, rainbows to 3lb, zulus and black pennell tops.
Selset: 260 anglers totalled 350 fish, 32 limit bags, brownies to 1lb 8oz, rainbows to 5lb 8oz, worm and fly, 35 fish over 2lb recorded.
Burnhope: 328 rods weighed in 419 fish, 25 limit bags, rainbows to 8lb 8oz, black and peacock accounted for the best fish.
Kielder: 465 visitors produced 167 fish, 11 limit bags, heaviest rainbow 1lb 8oz, worm best also black and peacock, black  chenille , viva, baby doll and Montanas.
Fixtures: June 12: Stokesley AC Moonlighters Trophy, Tontine Lake, fish 10pm to 4am.
Aycliffe AC evening series (5), Aycliffe Pond 69pm.
Saturday June 13 and Sunday June 14: Middlesbrough AC two-day open festival, Albert Park and Hemlington lakes, fish 7am to 12 noon.
Tickets from Anglers' Choice on Middlesbrough 850428.
June 14: DBT AA Brother George Charity, Snipe, Lane Fox and Willowgarth ponds.
June 15: NYSD Federation AGM, 8pm Harrowgate WMC, Darlington.
June 16: Opening day for coarse fishing on all rivers.
Yarm AA evening series (1) tidal Tees.
Boroughbridge evening series (1), River Ure, cricket field length, fish 6.30–9.30pm.
Durham City AC evening series (1), Tursdale Pond.
June 17: BBC Radio Cleveland Castle Howard championships fish 10am to 3pm.
Thirsk AC, Swale, Crake Hill.
Ferryhill and DAC, Teesdale Pond.
Richmond AS, Swale, Broken Brae.
June 18 BBC Radio Cleveland Lake Semerwater championships, 10am to 3pm.
Tickets from Jeff Herbert, tel Middlesbrough 825604.
DBT AA Knockout (1), Snipe and Willowgarth ponds.
Snape AC, Carlton Lodge.
Durham City AC, Brasside Pond.
NEWCASTLE UNITED will have to wait to make their bid to tempt Gavin Peacock to stay at St James's Park.
Manager Kevin Keegan hoped to open talks this week but the 24-year-old midfield player has remained in London with his family after returning from holiday in Florida.
‘Kevin will be seeing Gavin and his father in London next Monday,’ said Keegan's assistant, Terry McDermott, yesterday.
Peacock is in demand after scoring 22 goals in United's struggling side last season.
Chelsea are the latest club to declare an interest, joining Middlesbrough, Aston Villa, Coventry and West Ham.
‘We have been given no indication by Gavin about what he might decide,’ added McDermott.
‘All I can say about Chelsea is that Newcastle United would be a bigger club if we got things right here.’
The talk on Tyneside yesterday was whether United got it right when they chose not to keep Jan Eriksson, the Sweden and Norrkoping defender who headed the opening goal of the European Championships on Wednesday night.
He played just two reserve games in December 1990 before Jim Smith, the manager at the time, decided he was not worth £300,000.
Smith spent £350,000 instead on the Czech goalkeeper Pavel Srnicek.
Meanwhile Tottenham celebrated bouncing out of the red as they banked nearly £6m from the sale of former Magpie Paul Gascoigne and immediately announced new plans to make money out of the midfield wizard.
Gascoigne will make his first competitive appearance for Lazio against Tottenham in Rome this summer, before returning to White Hart Lane with the Italians to complete a double fixture which could net Spurs £500,000.
News of the two games came as Tottenham announced they had wiped out their debts by finally banking almost £6m from the Italians for the gifted Gascoigne.
Lazio's opening game against Tottenham in Rome in August will be Gascoigne's first full-blown match since he shattered his knee in the FA Cup final against Nottingham Forest in May, 1991.
Tottenham chief executive Terry Venables has arranged for Lazio to return in November, and Alan Sugar, chairman of Tottenham Hotspur plc, said: ‘Those with an eye for a popular event will immediately recognise the potential of these fixtures.
‘Terry Venables is negotiating exclusive television rights for this duel, and we anticipate additional revenue of £500,000.
And the completion of the Gascoigne transfer puts the company where I want it out of debt and trading strongly.’
LOUISE STUART faces her first serious test of the summer track season in the Northern Championships at Blackpool this weekend having completed her final exams at Newcastle Polytechnic yesterday.
Business studies have taken precedence for the 25-year-old Stokesley sprinter thus far into the season, but she steps belatedly on to the Olympic trail at Stanley Park on Sunday.
Stuart, who left Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harriers in November and has since joined Sale, is entered for the 100 metres as well as her main event, the 200 metres.
She ran an encouraging 11.9 secs 100 metres heat in the North-East Championships last month but, that apart, has no form to suggest whether she can mount a serious challenge for selection at the Olympic trials meeting in Birmingham on June 27 and 28.
‘Louise has been doing a very limited amount of training because of her exams,’ said Charles Stuart, her father and coach.
‘She's maintained her fitness but racing is a different matter.
We'll just have to see how it goes on Sunday.’
Stuart ran for Britain in the 1988 Olympic Games and in the European Championships in Split two years ago but has since had ankle and Achilles problems, as well as her degree course, hampering her progress.
Last year was no disaster she placed sixth over 200 metres at the World Student Games and was a member of Britain's silver medal winning 4 x 100 metres relay team but she will have to run faster than ever to earn selection for Barcelona.
The 200 metres qualifying standard is 23.20 secs 0.16 secs faster than her personal best and 0.26 secs quicker than the best by a British runner this year.
Stuart made her international breakthrough in 1985 when she took the European junior 200 metres silver medal behind Kerstin Behrendt, who was named earlier this week as one of the athletes involved in a state-run drug-administering programme in what was East Germany.
Her father, however, does not expect she will be belatedly upgraded to gold medal status, which she missed by 0.62 secs, the margin she finished behind Behrendt seven years ago.
Meanwhile Stephen Gookey of York's Rowntrees club was 0.25 secs short of the men's Olympic 200 metres standard, 20.80 secs, when he finished fourth in the UK Championships last weekend.
With Linford Christie, John Regis and Marcus Adam all in line for places in Barcelona, his realistic target for the summer is the European Cup for Under 23s at Gateshead on July 18 and 19 in the relay at least, if not in the 200 metres.
Gookey, 21, has made rapid progress at 200 metres this year but will line up second favourite for that event and for the 100 metres, which he won last year, if Sale's European junior champion attempts a sprint double at Blackpool.
Campbell, 18, runner up to Adam over 200 metres in the UK Championships, has been hailed by Linford Christie as the heir apparent to his crown as British sprint king.
Morpeth's Terry West will be looking to repeat his 800 metres win of 1988.
His task will be eased by the  withdrawal of Longwood's Martin Steele, the national indoor champion, and Liverpool's Curtis Robb an impressive winner of the UK title last week may also be absent, having been selected with Steele and European champion Tom McKean for the GB v Kenya match in Edinburgh a week tonight.
West's club-mate Mark Hudpith and Elswick's Alan Johnson should be among the medal contenders in the 5,000 metres, while Newcastle security guard Peter Gordon defends his title in the discus.
Jocelyn Kirby, back from retirement and racing for Middlesbrough, faces tough opposition in the 100 metres hurdles, with Stretford's Louise Fraser and Angela Thorp of Wigan the two favourites.
But the former North Sheilds Polytechnic athlete has the potential to place in the top three, as do Blaydon runners Catherine Allsopp (800 metres) and Sonia Hogg (3,000 metres).
Elliott back in action
PETER ELLIOTT, the Commonwealth 1500 metres champion, returns to action following an ankle injury in a mile race at Rotherham tonight.
The Olympic silver medallist faces the first two finishers in the 1500 metres at the UK Championships, Enfield's Steve Crabb and Paul Larkins of Nene Valley Harriers.
Hartlepool's Tony Morrell, who took the bronze medal, continues his summer racing campaign by chasing the Olympic 1500 metres qualifying time, 3 mins 37 secs, in Dijon tomorrow night.
Nannini quits racing
MOTOR RACING: Italian driver Alessandro Nannini, 32, who lost an arm in a helicopter crash almost two years ago, yesterday admitted his Formula One motor racing days were over.
He said Ferrari president and managing director Luca Di Montezemolo has allowed him to test a Formula One car in July.
‘But we'll leave it at that.
My right hand lacks strength,’ said Nannini.
‘Now I've given up all hope (of returning to Formula One).’
Cane's soft spot FOOTBALL:
Northallerton Town manager Geoff Cane is to sponsor the Teesside League.
Cane, owner of an engineering company, was approached by the league after they lost their previous sponsor Hyper UK.
He said: ‘I've got a soft spot for the league, because I played in it for many years.’
Weaver banned RACING:
Leading apprentice jockey Jason Weaver was yesterday banned for 15 days for excessive use of the whip on Finjan when the horse was beaten a short head in the Ian Herd Claiming Stakes at Redcar on June 1.
It was his third whip offence of the season.
Record bid ATHLETICS:
Britain's Olympic 1500 metres medal hope Peter Elliott will attempt to break the track record of 3 min 56 sec for the mile at Herringthorpe Stadium, Rotherham tonight when he makes his comeback on his home ground.
Munro's boss FOOTBALL:
Scottish first division club Hamilton have appointed former Sunderland full back Iain Munro as new manager.
He replaces Bill McLaren, dismissed after a season.
Coupe coup SHOWJUMPING:
Nigel Coupe, back in action after breaking a leg in March, scored a spectacular first day victory with Crosby in the Royal Interntional Horse Show at Hickstead.
Coupe, 21, from Preston, won the Coomes Bookmakers Chase when going last of 28 starters, racing clear in 62.32 secs.
Henry's reward CYCLING: Milk Race hero Conor Henry has been drafted into Ireland's Olympic cycling team.
Reynolds poser ATHLETICS: Officials of The Athletics Congress, the US governing body, said its executive committee would hold a teleconference to discuss whether banned 400 metres runner Butch Reynolds could compete in the US Olympic trials later this month.
Ellis wins GOLF:
Former Middlesbrough footballers Gary Pallister and Tony Mowbray teamed up in the Dave Bingham Memorial Trophy competition at Barnard Castle Golf Club.
Mowbray presented the trophy to Tim Ellis (Seamer), who won by 38 points.
Hall leads GOLF:
Patrick Hall, from Harrogate, leads the field with a seven-under-par 65, after the opening day of the Mitsubishi Austrian Open at Salzburg.
David J Russell is on 66.
Former Middlesbrough skipper Tony Mowbray is thrilled at Celtic's back-door entry into Europe after final-day heartache last season.
Cricket venue in jeopardy The future of a regular venue for Yorkshire County Cricket Club is in doubt again.
Five years ago the Argyll Group, which owns the Presto chain, made a £2m. bid for Acklam Park in Middlesbrough as a site for a £5m.
supermarket.
The offer caused mass protests and eventually the firm pulled out, but now it has put in another bid, believed to be £5m.
The park has been used regularly for 30 years by Yorkshire County Cricket Club and it is also home to Middlesbrough rugby and cricket clubs.
The land is jointly owned by both local clubs.
Five years ago rugby club chiefs were in favour of selling but the cricket club committee was firmly against.
These positions are believed to be unchanged.
Officials are now waiting for details so that the latest offer can be fully debated by members.
THE future of a top sporting venue in the North-East is i n doubt again after a new offer to buy the land for a massive shopping development.
It was revealed last night that Acklam Park in Middlesbrough a regular venue for Yorkshire County Cricket Club for the past 30 years is the subject of an offer from supermarket giants Argyll.
In 1987 the Argyll Group, which owns the Presto chain, made a £2m offer to develop a substantial part of Acklam Park, in Green Lane, into a £5m supermarket.
That bid sparked a public outcry.
This time the offer is believed to have been advanced to £5m.
Acklam Park is also the home of Middlesbrough Rugby Club and Middlesbrough Cricket Club.
Although the executives of the rugby club were in favour of the earlier offer, the cricket club committee was firmly against it a stand it has maintained to this day.
Last night, a notice from the rugby club appeared in foyer of the social club stating that a ‘substantial offer’ had been made by a supermarket chain to purchase the whole ground.
It stated: ‘Officers of the rugby club are awaiting more details of the proposal so that matters can be fully debated by all members.’
Alongside the notice was another one from the cricket club stating that the offer to the rugby club had been made on on April 9 and, as joint owners of the ground, the cricket club had been informed.
It stated: ‘In 1987 Middlesbrough Cricket Club stated they were totally opposed to the sale of Acklam Park.
After holding an executive meeting on June 8 we can again announce that our position on this matter has not changed.’
The land, which includes two rugby pitches, is jointly owned by both clubs.
The news is sure to stir local residents into action.
When the last threat was made they staged a protest meeting which packed a church hall, a few hundred yards away from the sports field.
They expressed strong views  against having a supermarket on their doorsteps.
In the end the company became frustrated by lengthy negotiations and laid down an ultimatum saying it wanted an answer by September 1988.
It led to the rugby club ending the talks.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout Cleveland and North Yorkshire to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Chris Brayshay and Ailsa Mackenzie on Stockton 675678; David Lee and Denis McLoughlin on Middlesbrough 247645; Steve Hilton and Sara Sweeney on Hartlepool 272578; Ian Lamming on Northallerton 773510.
Or you can reach us at head office on Darlington 381313.
Our Offices
NORTHERN Echo reporters work throughout South West Durham and Darlington to bring you the region's most comprehensive news service.
You can contact Cliff Edwards and Barbara Steeper on Bishop Auckland 602232; Gavin Engelbrecht at our Barnard Castle office on Teesdale 38628; Martin Shipton, Nigel Burton, Christine Fieldhouse, Helen Nowicka, Adam Batstone, Jo Crozier, Margaret Hussey and our news desk and specialist writers on Darlington 381313.
Bears beaten
SPEEDWAY: Edinburgh Monarchs beat Middlesbrough Bears 57–33 in the Homefire League's second division to put Bears back to the bottom of the table.
Les Collins 15, Johnny Jorgensen Steve Regeling 16.
TO most of the Yorkshire team, Arthur ‘Rocker’ Robinson was just a face in the crowd at the thrilling Sunday League clash with Somerset at Middlesbrough last weekend.
Only veteran Phil Carrick has been around long enough to tell them that 45-year-old Robinson was one of the hardest working and most likeable players ever to wear a Yorkshire cap.
The former left-arm paceman from Northallerton was renewing memories at Acklam Park of his years with Yorkshire from 1971 to 1977 when he captured 196 first class wickets at an average of 25.13 runs apiece.
How times change!
In those days, Robinson was in the side mainly because he was a willing workhorse at a time when Yorkshire did not have a surfeit of senior fast bowlers.
But a bowler who does not break down at the end of every other over and who can finish each season with an average around the 25 mark would be worth his weight in gold now.
Certainly none of Yorkshire's current crop of bowlers has been able to boast a similarly low average over the past two seasons.
One of the reasons why Robinson kept going, often when his legs were black and blue from bruising blows taken while fielding at ‘Boot Hill’, was quite simply because he loved the game.
‘It was a marvellous privilege to play for Yorkshire and I enjoyed every minute of it,’ he told me.
‘I was in the side to bowl and that is what I wanted to do.
Sometimes skipper Geoff Boycott would come up to me during a long spell and ask if I was feeling OK to continue.
I always said yes, even if I was drained, because I did not want him to chuck the ball to someone else.’
We reminisced about Robinson's batting, which was not exactly the best on the county circuit, but he did have one great moment when he put on 144 for the last wicket with Arnie Sidebottom against Glamorgan at Cardiff.
The pair were only five runs away from displacing Lord Hawk and David Hunter from the record books for the highest last wicket stand for the county when Sidebottom ran himself out on 124, leaving Robinson unbeaten on 30.
‘My legs were in a right mess from blows which I took from Tony Cordle and I could hardly bowl for all the strapping when we took the field,’ grinned Robinson.
He could hardly have chosen a more exciting match than Sunday's in which to run the rule over Yorkshire, but Robinson admits he's a bad watcher of cricket.
He likes to be much more involved and that is why he spends hours of his time organising cricket and soccer for the kids around Northallerton.
‘Cricket gave me so much that I want to put something back into the game and teaching the youngsters how to play is a rewarding way of doing it.
‘I get the same pleasure out of the football.
Last weekend we booked a 55-seater coach and went down to the youth soccer international at Wembley between England and Italy and had a marvellous time.’
Perhaps county cricket takes itself too seriously now for Robinson to want to be a part of.
FORMER
Middlesbrough skipper Tony Mowbray is thrilled at Celtic's backdoor entry into Europe after final-day heartache last season.
The 28-year-old central defender said: ‘It will be a step up in my career to play against continental sides in the UEFA Cup.
‘Celtic fans are celebrating the 25th anniversary of the club's European Cup triumphs and will be looking for more success.
‘Celtic have not won a major trophy for a while and have lost out to rivals Rangers.
So there is a desperate need for some silverware.
‘We will be going for the Scottish Cup, the Skol Cup, the Premier Division and the UEFA Cup.
If Celtic fall short and win only three, I will be satisfied.
It is time Celtic won something for their fanatical supporters.’
Mowbray is set for an emotional return to Ayresome Park when Celtic provide the opposition for his testimonial match on Sunday, July 26.
The match was agreed when Mowbray moved to Scotland for £1m last November.
Mowbray was frustrated over Achilles tendon and ankle injuries, and was suspended for the last game when Celtic suffered an embarrassing home defeat to Hibs.
Yet he has no regrets over his move to Parkhead.
Mowbray said: ‘Every player wants to play for his home club and I have great memories of my Boro days.
To be involved in the club's rise after liquidation was something special.
‘I would advise any 14-year-olds to forget about the glamour of Man-chester United and Arsenal and join their local clubs.
‘It is important to grow up in a family environment.
Some youngsters discarded by top clubs could be so disillusioned that they pack in the game at 16.
‘Those who join their local clubs will progress, if they have the talent, to a top club at a later stage.
‘I only moved from Middlesbrough because I became a little stale.
I began to lack self-motivation and this was reflected in my play.
‘I did not want to lower my standards and lose the special relationship I had with the fans.
‘So I jumped at the chance to join Celtic, a club steeped in tradition and history.
Yet I had no idea just how big a club Celtic are.
There seems to be hundreds of supporters’ clubs.
‘Every team wants to beat Celtic, so the opening 20 minutes of any game is frantic.’
Mowbray was suspended for the final game when victory against Hibs would have guaranteed a passport into Europe.
It was a day of mixed emotions for a player who came up through the ranks at Ayresome Park.
As Mowbray watched Celtic battle for a place in Europe, his home team were locked in a tense promotion decider against Wolves at Molineux.
‘No-one gave Hibs a chance.
A Celtic win was more or less a formality.
But Hibs spoiled the party, just like Leicester City at Ayresome Park four years ago.
‘Middlesbrough fans will recall the carnival atmosphere before that game.
Yet Leicester, under no pressure, played us off the park.
When Celtic lost I knew how the players felt.
The dressing room was locked for 40 minutes.
‘I was in a difficult situation when someone passed on the news Boro had won.
I was thrilled inside for Boro but I could not jump up and down with delight.
I knew how much missing out on Europe meant to Celtic and their fans.
‘Yet at the same time I imagined what the celebrations would be like at Molineux.
My mind went back to our promotion play-off win at Chelsea.’
Now Mowbray is looking ahead to his emotional testimonial return to Ayresome and to next season in Europe.
‘Fortunately, the unification of East Germany and West Germany has given Celtic a late entry into Europe.
My best years are ahead of me and I am looking forward to next season.
I have bought a house near Glasgow and Shankly will join me.’
Shankly, in case you hadn't guessed, is Mowbray's  labrador dog who has been separated from his master for six months last season.
No prizes either for guessing his four-legged friend is named after a famous Liverpool manager.
Mowbray said: ‘A few years ago, Middlesbrough manager Bruce Rioch showed us a two-hour video of Bill Shankly talking about football and life in general.
‘Shankly's passion and enthusiasm for the game, and for life, really hit me.
So when I bought a dog I decided to name him after a man I admired so much.’
KERRY Matthew ran the race of her life on Saturday only to finish agonisingly outside the English Schools Championships qualifying time.
The 14-year-old Billingham schoolgirl, of Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harriers, had hoped to be lining up against Great Britain cross country international Angie Foster in the Inter County match between Cleveland and Northumberland at Middlesbrough.
But the 16-year-old Morpeth Harrier had already achieved the 3,000 metres intermediate girls' qualifying time three days earlier, clocking 10 mins 13 secs at the Tyneside Track League, and decided to travel instead to Manchester to watch pop group Eurasure.
Matthew, determined to get inside 10 mins 20 secs, took the race by the scruff of the neck and when senior girl Kath Gill allowed the pace to drop after four laps, the gritty Teessider hit the front and battled gallantly alone.
The crowd at the Cleveland County Stadium rose to salute Matthew's efforts but she finished in 10 mins 20.4 secs, four hundredths of a second outside the qualifying time.
It was a personal best performance by a second and a half, and now Matthew is hoping she will still be picked to represent Cleveland in the English Schools Championships at Hull next month.
A week earlier Matthew had defied cold, windy conditions to win the Cleveland County Schools title in 10 mins 29.3 secs.
‘Last week it was windy and this week it was a bit too hot,’ said an exhausted Matthew, who beat Gill, the Northumberland senior champion, by 150 metres.
But there was qualifying joy for other athletes who had missed out at the county championships, including Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harrier Stephen Helm.
The 16-year-old, who had clocked 4 mins 49 secs the previous week, improved his performance to 4 mins 34 secs, two seconds inside the English Schools qualifying time.
Philip Calvert, an A-level student at Prior Pursglove Sixth Form College, Guisborough, was two-hundredths of a second inside the senior boys' qualifying time in the 800 metres, clocking 1 min 54.8.
Calvert, a former 1500 metres runner, made the English schools 400 metres semi-finals last year.
Another Middlesbrough and Cleveland athlete, Allison Curbishley, was also in superb form in the intermediate girls' 300 metres hurdles, winning in an improving time of 44.6 minutes.
The 16-year-old English Schools champion, who has recovered from a knee injury, is gradually getting back to her best form and her target is beating her own British record of 42.9 secs recorded at Crystal Palace last season.
Curbishley, however, was pushed by Northumberland's Claire Bushby, a first year inter, who finished ten metres in arrears.
Curbishley already had the English schools time, thanks to a 44.3 secs run in her first track outing at Hull this season, before she was injured in a 400 metres hurdles race at York.
Northumberland senior boys 110 metres hurdler Kevin Lumsden knocked four barriers down but won in 14.9 secs, a three-second improvement on the run which earned him the county title seven days earlier.
Seventh in the English Schools final last year, the 17-year-old Morpeth Harrier has only just recovered from a dislocated hip.
His next test will be in a GRE Brritish League match for Morpeth Harriers at Liverpool on Saturday.
Hartlepool schoolgirl Sarah Gascoigne, who missed the county championships when she was on a family holiday in America, was five seconds outside the qualifying time in the junior girls' 800 metres with a time of 2:25.0 but she cleared 1.50 metres as a guest in the high jump, four centimetres inside the English Schools qualifying height.
Stephen Birse, who competes for Middlesbrough and Cleveland, completed a fine double in the junior boys' shot and javelin with throws of 12.41 metres and 47.37 metres both qualifying distances.
Results Senior 100m K Lumsden (N) 11.5; 200m S Carrick (N) 24.3; 400m G Whinfield (N) 70.1; 800m P Wilson (N) 1:59.1; 1500m T Mate (N) 4:02.5; 1500mSC S Purcell (C) 6:25.0; 110mH K Lumsden (N) 14.9; HJ N Greenley (N) 1.80; PV P Ayre (N) 4.00; LJ S Wallace (N) 5.91; TJ A Gavrad (N) 11.70; SP S Ashton (C) 11.17; DT C Hime (C) 40.52; HT G Armstrong (N) 26.70; JT C Wallhead (C) 43.16.
Intermediate 100m L Thompson (Cleveland) 11.6; 200m R Atha (C) 23.9; 400m B O'Brien (C) 52.2; 800m M Weedall (C) 1:59.5; 1500m J Walker (Northumberland) 4:13.1; 3000m M Nolan (N) 9:24.6; 1500mSC P Lappin (N) 4:34.9; 100mH P Tuplin (C) 15.2; 400mH R Mellor (C) 60.4; HJ R Laws (N) 1.90; PV C Ayre (N) 3.80; LJ B Watson-Jones (N) 5.85; TJ N Moore (C) 12.40; SP M Vasey (N) 13.06; DT M Pringle (N) 35.34; HT W Gibson (C) 54.44; JT R Tune (N) Points Northumberland 89, Cleveland 85.
Junior 100m R Oswald (N) 12.3; 200m W Bingley (C) 25.1; 400m S Chapman (C) 56.7; 800m M Dewing (C) 2:08.9; 1500m D Barren (N) 4:27.9; HJ M Gelson (C) 1.70; PV P Lofthouse (N) 2.90; LJ D Stewart (C) 5.59; TJ S Topping (N) 11.46; SP S Birse (C) 12.41; DT P Mole (N) 30.24; HT N Bulman (C) 36.52; JT S Birse (C) 47.37; 4 x 100m relay Cleveland 48.7.
Points: Cleveland 82, Northumberland 72.
Senior 100m E Dray (N) 13.3; 200m E Lauder (N) 27.2; 400m T Smart (N) 55.0; 800m E Brady (N) 2:22.3; 1500m E Thompson (N) 4:58.8; 400mH G Whinfield (N) 70.1; HJ S Noble (C) 1.68; SP M Lumb (N) 8.20; DT M Lumb (N) 32.02.
Intermediate 100m A Holton (C) 13.7; 200m H Lomas (C) 28.7; 300m A Keenan (C) 42.7; 800m N Kay (N) 2:23.0; 1500m A Tremble (N) 4:39.7; 3000m K Matthew (C) 10:20.4; 80mH S Kelsey (N) 12.3; 300mH A Curbishley (C) 44.6; HJ F Wilson (C) 1.55; LJ M Margisson (N) 5.37; SP C Bushby (N) 9.62; JT G Harrison (C) 40.68; 4 x 100m relay Northumberland 51.2.
Points: Cleveland 67, Northumberland 62.
Junior 100m R Elder (N) 14.0; 200m C Batts (C) 27.6; 800m S Gascoigne (C) 2:25.0; 1500 C Wood (N) 4:49.6; 75mH K Forsythe (N) 12.4; HJ K Bell (N) 1.50; LJ C Johnson (C) 4.78; SP A Ward (C) 9.08; DT A Ludvigsen (N) 23.56; JT E Hargreaves (C) 23.86; 4 x 100m relay Cleveland 54.0.
Points: Northumberland 55; Cleveland 52.
Match 1 Cleveland 286; 2 Northumberland 278.
DBS NYSD LEAGUE
LEADERS Redcar claimed their eighth win in 12 matches thanks to veteran left arm spinner Colin Bainbridge, whose nagging  accuracy , flight and turn made visitors Norton struggle for every run in their modest 55 over score of 155 for seven.
Bainbridge sent down 25 overs and finished with five for 44.
With Clayton Lambert making 87 out and Martin Hood 30, Redcar won by seven wickets in just 35.3 overs.
Second-placed Thornaby faltered at home to third-placed Middlesbrough.
They were all out for 146, professional Brad Osborne top scoring with 60.
Bright Yorkshire prospect Adil Ditta scored 58 for Middlesbrough but they too had to fight hard for runs and were into the last over before they achieved their win by a four wicket margin.
There is now only three points separating these two sides.
Fourth placed Guisborough made short work of the opposition at Saltburn.
Although Phil Ramage made a fighting 53, the home team were dismissed for 116 by Dave Pennock (3 for 27) and Steve Donlan (3 for 18).
Pennock top scored with 33 not out in the Priory men's winning score of 120 for four.
Synthonia are now the only side without a win after they were soundly beaten at Blackhall.
Home professional Colwin Cort, took four for 41 while Graham Bell, Graham Young and Brian Lewins took three wickets each to dismiss the Synners for 95.
John Darby hit 63 not out clinching a nine wicket win for the Colliery men by 5.30pm with a six.
Their confidence shattered, Darlington batsmen turned in another dismal display at home to Hartlepool in a game which they lost by seven wickets.
They won the toss and elected to bat but no one could break the stranglehold put on them by off-spinner and former Test player, Clyde Butts.
The West Indian opened the bowling and sent down 25.5 overs including eight maidens and took six for 40.
Andy Holland now having shed the burdens of captaincy, took four for 24 in 19 overs and the home side were all out for 97.
Hartlepool won by seven wickets with Des Playfor making 31.
Bishop Auckland struck 200 for five declared in 53 overs of their home match against Stockton with David Jackson scoring a fine 81.
Visiting skipper Russell Crawford praised his rival Colin Barker for his sporting declaration but Stockton made a poor response and, at stumps, after 47 overs they were 157 for five, professional Masood Anwaar making 42.
Darlington RA made the highest score of the day.
With Troy Dixon making 75, Mike Amour 59 and Dave Robinson 42, they were able to declare on 254 for five.
Northallerton's response was 218 for six with Ian Place (82) making his highest score in the A division.
There was also a personal best at Marske where home skipper Alan Hugill took six for 61 while Normanby Hall were making 209 for nine.
Marske's 43 over reply was 169 for six.
For the second week running Neil Russell (71) top scored for the Seasiders.
THE Olympic steeplechase qualifying time is proving an elusive barrier for Gateshead Harrier Colin Walker.
The Durham prison officer needs to break 8 mins 29 secs before June 28 to make certain of a place in Britain's Barcelona team.
He went close in an international invitation meeting in Dijon on Saturday, but missed out by an agonising 0.12 secs.
Walker, who finished third in a race won by the Frenchman Bruno Le Stum in 8 mins 27.47 secs, now plans to make his third attempt in three weeks in the GB v Kenya match at Edinburgh's Meadowbank Stadium on Friday night.
With Olympic silver medallist Mark Rowland injured and no other Briton having broken 8 mins 36 secs, Walker is the clear British number one in the event this summer, but he wants the security of a qualifying time before the Olympic trials meeting in Birmingham on June 27 and 28.
Hartlepool's Tony Morrell finished fifth in the 1500 metres in Dijon in 3 mins 39.70 secs 2.70 secs outside the Olympic standard for that event.
Sale Harrier Kevin McKay, runner-up to Frenchman Pascal Thiebaut, also missed out and, with Peter Elliott injured and Matthew Yates ill, the battle for metric mile places remains wide open.
Steve Cram, Jarrow's world mile record holder, has a valid qualifying time from last year and runs his first race at the distance this year in the Northern League at Leeds this Saturday.
Cram's club-mate David Sharpe, looking for an 800 metres time inside 1 min 46.2 secs, moved further down the pecking order in the two-lap event after quick times by two of his rivals in Dijon: Wolverhampton's Steve Heard, who was third in 1 mins 45.65 secs, and Haringey's David Strang, fourth in 1:45.85.
Sergei Bubka provided the high point of the meeting, literally, earning £35,000 for improving his pole vault world record to 6.11 metres.
The British performance of the weekend came in the Southern Counties Championships at Crystal Palace on Saturday, when Shaftesbury's Jason Livingston clocked an astonishing 10.09 secs in the 100 metres final.
That places the 21-year-old European indoor 60 metres champion second to Linford Christie on the British all-time ranking list.
Former Middlesbrough and Cleveland Harrier Anthony Brannen won the 110 metres hurdles in 14.72 secs in the Midland Championships at Stoke on Saturday.
Gookey, the 21-year-old York sprinter who finished third in the World Student Games 100 metres final last year, lost the photo-finish verdict in the 100 metres after he and Sale Harrier Darren Campbell stopped the clock at 10.46 secs.
He hoped to make amends in the 200 metres and would have started a clear favourite had first the marksman and then the referee not barred him from lining up for the heats.
The Rowntrees athlete, it transpired, had not been seeded for one of the three races.
An official refused to accept his registration for both races at the start of the meeting and he forgot to report again after the 100 metres final.
‘It was was partly my own fault,’ said Gookey, ‘but it's not as if I didn't attempt to register.
‘The annoying thing is there were spare lanes on the track and they still wouldn't let me run.’
Gookey could certainly count himself unfortunate.
Liz McColgan was allowed to run in the 3,000 metres in the UK Championships the previous weekend even though she was not entered.
Rules, though, don't always apply when you're a world champion.
There were two crumbs of comfort for Gookey, who  recently finished a politics degree course at Nottingham University.
He improved his championship best to a wind-assisted 10.39 seconds in the 100 metres semi-finals and the organisers have agreed to pay his expenses for competing in the Olympic trials in Birmingham on June 27 and 28 a bonus normally offered only to winners.
‘We felt it an appropriate gesture in the circumstances,’ said meeting secretary Roy Swinbank.
Gookey, travelling reserve for the British 4 x 100 metres relay team at a meting in Oslo tomorrow, had already left for home.
In his absence, the 200 metres final was won by Allyn Condon of Sale in 21.75 secs 0.70 secs slower than the personal best Gookey recorded in the UK Championships.
There were only three other medal winners from the NorthEast and North Yorkshire in men's track events, none of them winners.
Morpeth Harrier Terry West came the closest, leading from the gun until 50 metres from the line in the 800 metres final.
As Mark Benson of Leeds sped past to retain his title in 1 min 50.96  secs , West took the bronze behind Warrington's Jon Rigg in 1:51.34.
Former Tynedale Harrier Michael Hutchinson, now competing for Trafford, finished second to Bingley's Mick Hawkins in the 3,000 metres steeplechase, while Australian John Lisiewicz, making his debut as a Valli Harrier, overhauled Elswick's Alan Johnson for third place in the 5,000 metres in 14 mins 28.75 secs 25 secs behind winner Andy Lyons of Hull.
Like Johnson, who finished fourth in 14:28.75, Mandale's Paul Lowe just missed out by one place in the 1500 metres, clocking 3:57.0.
In the field events, Newcastle security guard Peter Gordon retained his discus title with a throw of 55.30 metres and struck gold in the hammer too with 57.48 metres.
The 40-year-old veteran, now competing for London club Haringey, was joined on the rostrum by Bedlington policeman Paul Reed, who took the discus bronze medal with 50.70 metres and silver in the shot with a putt of 15.14 metres.
Other performances Hammer: 7 S Thompson (Sunderland) 49.20m. 3,000m steeplechase: 10 S Parr (Gateshead) 9:34.42; 12 J Larkin (Gateshead) 9:47.27.
Discus: 6 P Corrigan (Gateshead) 40.34m. 400m hurdles: 7 A Borsumato (Mandale) 56.91 secs.
Long jump: 5 D Garner (Hartlepool) 6.78m.
5,000m: 8 M Humble (Gosforth) 14:45.12; 12 I Abbiss (Valli) 15:01.71; 13 J Ranson (Chester-le-Street) 15:06.47; 17 K Vose (N Aycliffe) 15:20.12; 18 P Gardner (Elswick) 15:21.25; 22 A Thompson (Elswick) 16:00.63. 110m hurdles: 4 J Gregory (Rowntrees) 15.92 secs. 1500m: 7 R West D Slipper (Jarrow) 4:03.7. 400m: 6 D Deacon (S Shields) 49.24; 8 J Bird (Hartlepool) 49.81.
Javelin: 8 C Elliott (Middlesbrough) 47.06m.
But the Stokesley sprinter, whose season has been delayed by the combined effects of study and injury, summarily dismissed her chances of qualifying for a second successive Olympic Games after winning the 200 metres title for the third time in seven years.
Stuart, an Olympic quarter-finalist in Seoul four years ago, was a comfortable winner in 24.40 secs, beating 100 metres champion Christine Chambers of Derby by 0.41 secs.
But she has to run 23.30 secs or faster to secure a place in the British team for Barcelona and, still hampered by an Achilles tendon injury, she doesn't think she'll do it.
‘I don't think any of the British girls will,’ said Stuart, 25, who completed a politics degree course at Newcastle Polytechnic only on Friday.
‘I might have had a chance if the fates hadn't conspired against me, but my left leg's still giving me some stick.
I wasn't sure whether I would even run today.’
Stuart, who plans to see an acupuncturist tomorrow in an attempt to cure the problem, may compete for the North in a representative match this weekend before endeavouring to raise her spirits for the Olympic trials meeting.
She will be joined in Birmingham by Middlesbrough's Jocelyn Kirby, who continued her  encouraging comeback with a silver medal in the 100 metres  hurdles final, clocking 14.15 secs behind Wigan's Angela Thorp (13.69 secs).
Blaydon Harriers provided the region's two other medal-winning performances on the track.
Catherine Allsopp ran an intelligently-paced race in the 800 metres, finishing third in 2 mins 11.36 secs.
The 18-year-old Ryton Comprehensive School pupil was over two seconds behind winner Debbie France, of Hull Achilles, but demonstrated the kind of talent which won her an English Schools' title at Derby two years ago.
Sonia Hogg displayed similarly adept pace judgement to take her second successive bronze medal in the 3,000 metres, this time improving her personal best to 9 mins 42.48 secs and holding off the fast-finishing Scottish international Christine Price as Sarah Bentley of Crewe took the title in 9:36.37.
Gateshead Harrier Nicky Baker was the region's lone female field event medallist, clearing 1.70 metres for the silver in the high jump.
Other performances Discus: 5 G Gipson (Morpeth) 33.74m; 6 J Coote (Rowntrees) 32.84m. 400m hurdles: 5 E Baker (Middlesbrough) 67.31 secs.
Triple jump: 4 E Baker (Gateshead) 11.11m.
Javelin: 7 J Coote (Rowntrees) 40.30m. 3,000m: 7 J Scott (Darlington) 9:56.62; 9 S Shield (Valli) 10:06.66; 10 B Taylor (Darlington) 10:15.28; 12 K Cornwall (NSP) 10:24.21. 400m: 5 D Knox (Middlesbrough) 56.87 secs; 6 R Williams (Darlington) 57.15 secs.
GRAHAM Fowler from Puma Sunderland, appearing in his fifth final eventually became the Durham and Cleveland County Closed Men's singles champion at Tennis World, Middlesbrough.
Fowler, 24, the top seed, had cruised through to the final against the County's No 2 junior 16-year-old Ben O'Connor from Tennis World where he found the going much tougher.
After taking a close first set Fowler saw O'Connor increase in confidence with some great service returns and O'Connor's attacking tennis  paid dividends by grabbing the second set.
Fowler regained his composure and confidence when he broke O'Connor's serve in the fourth game of the third set and when O'Connor dropped his serve again two games later Fowler, struggling to hold his serve took the title on his fourth match point.
The ladies final between two County juniors from Tennis World saw the holder 14-year-old Libby Fletcher after a slow star dominate against 16-year-old Julie Neill.
Miss Fletcher was 0–2, down in the first set before taking ten games in a row and going on to retain her title.
Graham Fowler made it a double when he teamed up at the last minute with Chris Schaefer from Tennis World and in see-saw men's double final the Tennis World pair of Ben O'Connor and Peter Ford.
In the ladies doubles final the talent of Jayne Morton and the determination of Emily Andrew proved too much for Ann Clayton and Jill Carroll.
Results: Men's singles final: G Fowler bt B P'Connor 6–4, 4–6, 6–1.
Ladies singles final: E Fletcher bt J Neill 6–2, 6–1.
Mens doubles final: G Fowler and C Schaefer bt B O'Connor and P Ford 6–2,5–7, 7–5.
Ladies doubles final: E Andrew and J Morton bt A Clayton and J Carroll 6–2, 6–4.
Springbok drugs vow
RUGBY UNION: South Africa has pledged to drug test all provincial rugby union players before New Zealand's All Blacks arrive for a tour in August.
Eddie Tonks, Chairman of the New Zealand Rugby Football Union said yesterday that he had received the reassurance from South African rugby chief Danie Craven.
New Zealand have voiced strong concern after disclosures that several South African rugby players were found to have traces of bulk-boosting anabolic steroids in their blood.
In the money GOLF:
European money list top 10 1 T Johnstone (Zim) £249,483, 2 A Forsbrand (Swe) £225,243, 3 N Faldo £214,019, 4 J-M Olazabal (Spain) £200,023, 5 J Rivero (Spain)
£169,827, 6 P Senior (Aus) £160,956, 7 C Montgomerie £132,911, 8 D Gilford £125,940, 9 V Singh (Fiji) £125,647, 10 C O'Connor jnr £122,288.
Butch promise ATHLETICS:
Butch Reynolds yesterday vowed to defy an international ban and continue his quest to run in the US Olympic trials.
But the Athletics Congress, the US ruling body caught in the middle of the drugs ban row, voted to take its case to his court hearing.
Crash victim MOTORSPORT:
Belgian Stefan Everts yesterday had his spleen removed in emergency surgery after crashing in the German 250cc motocross Grand Prix on Sunday.
Ioka champ BOXING: Hiroki Ioka of Japan retained his WBA junior flyweight title by outpointing South Korean challenger Kim Bong-jun over 12 rounds in Osaka yesterday.
Standing by FOOTBALL:
Cambridge United are standing by manager John Beck following the disclosure of his affair with a former beauty queen.
Beck's wife Sandra and their two children have left the family house.
Star billing BOXING:
Dennis Andries's European cruiserweight title clash against Akim Tafer of France in Beausoleil last February, has been voted as the EBU's fight of the year.
Mowbray match FOOTBALL:
Tony Mowbray's testimonial match between Middlesbrough and Celtic at Ayresome Park on Sunday, July 26, will kick off at 1pm.
Tickets will be available from early July.
Berger backing MOTORSPORT:
Austrian Gerhard Berger yesterday toasted his victory in the Canadian Grand Prix in Montreal but insisted Britain's Nigel Mansell is still on course for the title.
Driver fled after causing crash
A FORESTER drove the wrong way along a dual carriageway to escape police after hitting another car, Thirsk magistrates heard yesterday.
Christopher Todd, 19, of Boltby, near Thirsk, drove his Land Rover into the path of a car on the A168 near Thirsk, injuring two people.
Then he drove off, the wrong way down the dual carriageway, said Jane Cockburn, prosecuting.
Blood tests revealed he was almost twice the legal alcohol limit.
Todd yesterday admitted driving with excess alcohol and failing to stop and report an accident.
The case was adjourned for reports Hens raid: Thieves raided a hen house in Ripon.
They made off with nine birds worth a total of £180 from a house in Studley Road.
Driver fled after causing crash
A FORESTER drove the wrong way along a dual carriageway to escape police after hitting another car, Thirsk magistrates heard yesterday.
Christopher Todd, 19, of Boltby, near Thirsk, drove his Land Rover into the path of a car on the A168 near Thirsk, injuring two people.
Then he drove off, the wrong way down the dual carriageway, said Jane Cockburn, prosecuting.
Blood tests revealed he was almost twice the legal alcohol limit.
Todd yesterday admitted driving with excess alcohol and failing to stop and report an accident.
The case was adjourned for reports Hens raid: Thieves raided a hen house in Ripon.
They made off with nine birds worth a total of £180 from a house in Studley Road.
TALKS are to be held between a cricket club and a rugby club over the future of a top sporting venue.
Middlesbrough cricket club is to join the town's rugby club in talks over the possible sale of the Acklam Park ground they jointly own in Green Lane, Acklam, Middlesbrough.
But cricket club president Brian Kneeshaw stressed the move did not alter his club's stated opposition to parting with the land, described by a local councillor as ‘the jewel in Middlesbrough's crown’.
Developers Foinavon has offered £5m for the purchase of the whole of the ground with the intention of developing the site as a giant supermarket.
Mr Kneeshaw said: ‘We will have to look at the offer along with the rugby club because the offer was made to joint clubs but we are firmly against a buy-out.’
Coun Edmund Pearson is planning to organise a public meeting  next week in St Mary's Hall, Green Lane.
‘Acklam Park is the jewel in Middlesbrough's crown,’ he said.
Coun Jackie Nilsson, is busy raising national awareness of the situation.
‘I received a reply to a letter I wrote to the Duke of Edinburgh, president of the Playing Fields Association,’ she said.
‘Unfortunately, his personal secretary said she did not think he could become actively involved, but I am writing to the Prime Minister Mr Major and George Howard, the Environment Secretary, seeking their support.’
Dave Waddington, selection committee member for Middlesbrough Rugby Club, said the £5m offer should be seriously considered as the club's primary objective was to develop higher standards of the sport.
Coun Nilsson said: ‘I can see their point, but the solution would be to seek a sponsor such as ICI or British Steel who have a vested interest in the area instead of selling the ground.’
OPENING batsman Richard Carruthers paved the way Bedale High School's victory in their match with North Yorkshire Boroughbridge High.
Carruthers hit an uneaten 64 in their 120 for two and they then dismissed Boroughbridge for only 42.
Batsmen were also in the ascendancy Framwellgate Moor Comprehensive made 132 for three St Bede's from Peterlee, with opener Andrew Bowman making 54 and Paul Richardson 53.
It was a different story when St Bede's batted, with Stuart Beaumont taking four wickets for 17 runs in his three overs.
Simon Johnson (44) and Neil Burnett (55no) were Boldon Comprehensive's 116 for three against George Stephenson Community High School from Killingworth.
Ian Bellerby then took four for 16 as George Stephenson were all out for 27.
After being restricted to 66 for six by Woodham Comprehensive from Newton Aycliffe St Francis Xavier School Richmond, were indebted to James Broadwith (47) and Mark Baxter (3–13) as they won by eight runs.
Spennymoor Comprehensive's Steven Thorogood hit 74 but still finished on the losing side as 14-year-old Ian Dixon's 72 took Willington Parkside Comprehensive to victory in a high-scoring game.
Ian Ramsey School from Stockton shared the runs around in making 94 for nine and then bowlers Ian Richards (4–8) and David Sweet (3–10) Red House from Norton, to 64, also for nine wickets.
Andrew Lake and Kevin Ash took three wickets each Tanfield School Stanley, restricted local rivals Greencroft to 58 for eight.
They then reached their target for the loss of three wickets.
Andrew Allen hit 59 Brierton School Hartlepool, made 105.
John Fitzpatrick then took four for six to Wellfield Wingate, to 92.
Whitburn put Hedworthfield Comprehensive Jarrow, in to bat and they made 86 for six, no problem to Whiturn openers Anderson and Clarke, who scored 44 and 42 respectively to secure a ten-wicket win.
Thomas Gregory-Smith took three Hummersknott Darlington, wickets but they still Durham Johnson School's total of 54 with four wickets in hand.
After King James, Knareborough had made 50 for eight St Aidan's Harrogate romped to victory.
Stokesley's 141 for four (Alan Cook 45; Neil Hurren 36 not out) was too much for Hallgarth School Middlesbrough, who could reach only 68 for seven.
Nunthorpe School Middlesbrough, made 62 for six but were edged out Sedgefield's 65 for five.
Filey's total of 110 for six was dominated by 64 from Daniel Gregory Scalby school Scarborough, making 58 for nine in reply.
Easingwold School York, made 111 for six but lost Norton School near Marton, who made 112 for four.
Northfield School Billingham, made 81 for six then skittled Our Lady and St Bede's Stockton, for 40, Stephen Collier taking three for six.
Hermitage Comprehensive Chester-le-Street, won a last-ball thriller against Seaton Burn Community High Newcastle.
Seaton Burn made 92 for four, with John Graham 43, but Hermitage pipped them by one run, Paul Mallabar top scoring with 41.
Teesdale Comprehensive Barnard Castle, progressed at the expense Roseberry Comprehensive Chester-le-street, who were bowled out for 48 after Teesdale had made 61 for one.
King James' Bishop Auckland, made 84 for seven but it was not enough Hurworth, near Darlington, reached 87 for eight with the runs spread around.
Barnard Castle won their battle with Durham School while Daniel Newton, of Marden High hit 37 runs and then took four for one as they beat Harton Comprehensive.
Ripon Grammar made the easiest progress when Wensleydale scratched.
GAVIN Peacock is keeping Middlesbrough, Chelsea, Swindon and a string of other clubs waiting while he debates his future.
Newcastle's wanted man won't make any decision for at least another seven days following talks in London with boss Kevin Keegan.
And that has encouraged the Geordies to believe they still have a fighting chance of keeping him.
Midfielder Peacock, out of contract and rated at £1m, was keeping his cards close to his chest yesterday.
But he said: ‘We've had talks and Kevin Keegan has given me something to think about.
‘We'll be talking again early next week and until then everything is on hold.
Nothing has been decided either way.’
Swindon are ready to offer £350,000 fullback David Kerslake in part exchange if Peacock decides to go.
Aston Villa and Coventry are also watching developments.
Newcastle, meanwhile, could be ready to step in for Liverpool keeper Bruce Grobbelaar following David James' move from Watford to Anfield.
But the Geordies are also chasing Dunfermline keeper Andy Rhodes.
MIDDLESBROUGH supporters will have to wait until next month to discover their side's Premier League fixtures.
Keith Lamb, Middlesbrough's chief executive, said yesterday that ‘early July’ was the expected time for confirmation of the club's playing schedule for the new season, which starts on August 15.
Only then will negotiations start on which matches involving Middlesbrough may be televised by BSkyB.
Lennie Lawrence's side could feature in up to five live televised games at least one on a Monday night and one on a Sunday.
Lamb, however, dismissed suggestions that Middlesbrough's share of the television deal would be £1.4 million with an additional fee of £78,000 per televised match.
‘We'd be delighted if that was the case,’ he said, ‘but the figures don't add up.
They're wildly inaccurate.’
MAIDSTONE United are set to fold today just three years after being elected into the Football League.
A meeting of the club's shareholders is expected to confirm the club will go into liquidation with debts of around £550,000.
Main creditors are the Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise.
Maidstone's chairman and managing director Jim Thompson announced last week the Fourth Division club would have to close unless a buyer stepped in to save them going out of business.
The club, currently without a ground of their own, failed to win planning permission to build a new multi-million pound sports and leisure complex outside the town when the local council voted 11–2 to reject the idea last November.
Maidstone sold their original home to DIY superstore chain MFI for £2.8 million four years ago and have ground-shared with Beazer Homes League club Dartford
SUNDERLAND Stadium has taken the unprecedented step of offering free beer for punters attending tomorrow's Bookmakers Afternoon Greyhound Service meeting.
In addition to free admission and a free programme, racing enthusiasts will receive two pint vouchers to be  exchanged at the bar one up to 4pm and and the other afterwards.
Normally the afternoon meeting at the east Boldon track are attended by around 250 regulars, but with the attraction of a couple of free pints the gate is expected to be much bigger at tomorrow's meeting, which starts at 2.08 pm.
The only stipulation to the free beer offer is that punters must arrive at the track before 3pm to claim their vouchers.
Sunderland also expect a big crowd for Friday night's £5,000 marathon challenge match.
It was originally planned that local dog Bodies Lisa would take on TV Trophy winner Fortunate Man, but Terry Hart's Sunderland-based bitch is lame.
Her place will be taken by another topnotch stayer, Lilac Wonder, which will be travelling from Mildenhall for the two-dog race.
The winner will race against the outstanding Poor Sue, reckoned to be the best marathon performer in the country, at Sunderland next Wednesday night in a £7,000 challenge.
Sunderland are staging eight open races tonight, including a sparkling £500-to-the-winner 450 metres invitation race which includes former track record holder Gulleen Darkie and Charlie Lister's Bank Tunnel, which has won his last three opens.
ARRANGEMENTS have been finalised for a new Tyne, Tees, Wear Trophy for three six-dog events between Brough Park, Middlesbrough and Sunderland.
The there will be three distances involved Brough Park 290m, 460m, 670m; Cleveland Park 266m, 464m, 640m; Sunderland 255m, 450m, 631m and the aggregate points winners over all three legs.
The tracks have agreed to give free admission and racecards to travelling enthusiasts and the dates for the meetings are: Middlesbrough Monday, August 3; Sunderland Friday, August 7 and Brough Park Tuesday, August 11.
The Cleveland Park Owners, Trainers and Patrons Association will be organising coach trips to Broguh Park and Sunderland.
Brilliant Bergstrand ATHLETICS: England international Robin Bergstrand celebrated his British Fell Championship success by slicing 32 seconds off his own record in the Ingleby Incline Uphill Mile race last night.
Moving quickly into the lead the Mandale Harrier attacked the formidable 719 feet of climb on the Forestry Commision track and reached the summit in only 7 mins 32 secs, 36 seconds ahead of clubmate Neil Raitt to complete a hat-trick of victories.
Bergstrand, who won the British Championship race at Dollar two weeks ago, is obviously in peak condition and he will be trying to help Mandale retain their title in tomorrow's Crook Cloverleaf Relays.
Results Men: 1 R Bergstrand (Mandale) 7 mins 32 secs; 2 N Raitt (mandale) 8.08; 3 M Cara (Mandale) 8.18; 4 A davison (Todmorden) 8.21; 5 R Burn (Thirsk) 8.27; 6 P Connor (Mandale) 9.02; 7 M Fisher (Mandale) 9.05; 8 J Blackett (Fell Running Association) 9.07; 9 I davison (Billingham Marsh House) 9.15; 10 P Wilkin (Thirsk) 9.21.
Vets: 1 R Firth (mandale) 8.44; 2 I Giklmour (Middlesbrough and Cleveland) 9.15; 3 J Williams (Mandale) 9.31.
O/50 D Owens (Mandale) 10.14.
YORKSHIRE County Cricket Club and former England test star Chris Old have joined the campaign to save a prestige North-East sports venue.
Middlesbrough's Acklam Park is the subject of a £5m bid from property developers Foinavon, believed to be working with the Argyll Group, owner of supermarket chains Presto and Safeway.
The ground's co-owners, Middlesbrough Cricket Club and Middlesbrough Rugby Club, appear split on the issue.
Cricket club president Brian Kneeshaw has said the club does not want to move from the Green Lane site.
Rugby officials say the offer has to be seriously considered and the two parties are currently holding talks.
Chris Old, a former Yorkshire skipper and England fast bowler, started his cricketing career at Acklam Park.
He spoke of his ‘many happy memories’ of the ground and said any move away would end first-class cricket in Middlesbrough.
‘It would probably take three years to prepare a new wicket of first-class standard and once you have lost a county fixture, it's hard to get it back,’ he said.
‘It would be very sad to see Middlesbrough without first-class cricket.’
Yorkshire CCC has played at Acklam Park at least once a year since 1956.
Secretary David Ryder said: ‘We would be sorry to leave Acklam Park, because traditionally it's been a well-supported venue in the Northern part of the county.’
Rugby club chairman John Redmayne said the club was looking at alternative sites.
One is believed to be on the outskirts of Middlesbrough, near The Post House Hotel.
Foinavon chairman Alisdair Mackenzie said they were waiting while the clubs discussed the bid.
— Anne Storr, of Stanhope Grove, beside the ground, is raising a petition for planning objections.
TWO young footballers playing for Middlesbrough and Darlington will return to their old school as heroes tomorrow.
Excitement is high at St Michael's School, Billingham, at the prospect of Jamie Pollock and Sean Gregan turning up to launch the school's 1992 year book.
Jamie, 18, is Boro's young player of the year while Sean, also 18, plays for the Quakers.
Editor Alex Carter, a teacher at the school, said: ‘There is a special air of anticipation.’
Also expected tomorrow is another old boy, Richard Cooper, who recently signed a full-time contract with Darlington.
The book can be bought for £1.50 from the school or the Book Inn, Billingham.
EAST meets West when a Teesside school holds a fashion show and exhibition tonight.
Langbaurgh School has been working on a series of projects relating to India and the fruits of their labours will be on display at the Southlands Centre, Ormesby Road, Middlesbrough.
Pupils have also trained for the catwalk to model during the fashion show, while others will serve up Asian refreshments.
The school has worked closely with Keldholme School, Cleveland Compact and other agencies to prepare for the event, which starts at 7.30pm.
A LOCOMOTIVE restored at ICI Wilton steams into the area again this weekend as the centrepiece of a charity open day.
Blue Peter, an A2 Pacific steam locomotive, will appear at Trainload Metals, Thornaby depot, Middlesbrough Road, Thornaby, Cleveland on Sunday, one of many locos, wagons and rail units on display.
About 20,000 visitors are expected and the gates open at 10am.
THE joint owners of one of the North-East's leading sports grounds have met to decide its future.
A supermarket chain wants to build a superstore on Acklam Park, home to both Middlesbrough Rugby Union Club and Cricket Club.
It is understood the rugby club favours the development which could net £5m.
But the deal would mean the developers, Foinavon, taking over the whole of the Green Lane site.
Last night the clubs issued a joint statement saying their executive officers had an amicable meeting at which the development plans were discussed.
It said: ‘The cricket club's stance with regard to the sale of the ground remains unchanged but they understand the aspirations of the rugby club and the strategy for the future of rugby that has been proposed.
‘The two clubs will continue to discuss developments including the potential for the further development of Acklam Park as a venue for first class cricket and rugby.’
A general committee meeting of the rugby club is to be held on July 1, following which the two clubs will jointly consider their future plans.
A public meeting is to be held on Wednesday at St Mary's church hall, Green Lane, Middlesbrough, to discuss and oppose the supermarket proposal.
The ground has been the northern venue for Yorkshire county cricket for over 30 years.
Local councillor Edmund Pearson said: ‘This is the most crucial decision that has to be made since the land became used for sport.’
Middlesbrough council's planning department and representatives from the town's Acklam ward will be attending the meeting.
MIDDLESBROUGH and Cleveland Harriers host their second Daily Telegraph Womens National League Division Five fixture at the Cleveland County Stadium tomorrow.
The Teessiders finished fifth in the opening match, but were only 40 points behind winners Leicester Coritanian.
And with a near full strength team Middlesbrough hope to make full use of their home advantage tomorrow (1pm).
Middlesbrough and Cleveland welcome back after injury their brilliant intermediate 300 metres hurdler Allison Curbishley, while newcomer Jocelyn Kirby, who won the 100 metres and 100 metres hurdles at the NorthEast Championships, will be making her club debut.
World mile record holder Steve Cram, still building up towards peak fitness for his Olympic qualifying bid, could turn out for his club, Jarrow and Hebburn, over 800 metres in a Pamasonic Northern League match at Leeds, which also features Teesside rivals Mandale and Middlesbrough.
Great Britain international Paul Cuskin makes his long awaited debut for his new club, Sunderland Harriers, in the Washington six mile road race tomorrow (11am).
The Darlington Women Only 10K starts at 11am tomorrow from the Longfield Road Stadium.
VISITORS to Middlesbrough Council's Southlands Leisure Centre saw at first hand that the world of fun and sport was literally on their doorstep.
The council's new Sportsworks project was launched at the centre in the town's Ormesby Road.
Building on the success of Action Sport and Sports Motivation projects, Sportswork aims to encourage everyone, regardless of age or ability, to get involved in sport.
The launch of the project at a sports fair in Southlands focussed on demonstrations, displays and competitions.
Sportswork co-ordinator Tony Sharkey, said: ‘Daytime activities for adults are a big part of the programme.
They are low in cost and there's no outlay on expensive equipment.’
There are also the Champion coaching sessions for youngsters during holidays and development programmes on football and tennis which have forged valuable links with schools and youth programmes.
A quiz organised at the launch by Delta Holidays, with a prize of a trip for two adults to Euro Disney, was won by Kevin Chambers, of Birkhall Road, Thorntree, Middlesbrough.
A SERIOUS ankle injury sustained by Great Britain's leading decathlete Alex Kruger could open an Olympic door for Teessider Anthony Brannen.
Kruger, who leads the UK rankings this season with 7,804 points, was unable to compete in Saturday's Panasonic Northern Men's League Division One match at Gateshead International Stadium.
After winning the AAA multi-events championship at the Don Valley Stadium two weeks previously, the Border Harrier had hoped that a short rest would clear up the trouble.
But the  Achilles injury is still troubling Kruger and he decided not to compete on Tyneside.
Kruger collected 7,582 points at Sheffield, where Brannen decided to withdraw after eight events, saving himself for a multi-events meeting at Stoke this week, where he hopes to battle his way to the top of the rankings.
If no UK decathlete achieves the 7,850 Olympic Games A standard, Britain will take only one competitor to Barcelona.
Kruger and Brannen are the leading contenders.
Border, who had hoped that Kruger would help them win points in four events at Gateshead, finished fourth, 74 behind winners Rotherham.
Hosts Gateshead were fifth, scoring only three victories Steve Parr (14mins 27.3secs) and Ray Smedley (14:58.0) in the 5,000 metres A and B races, and Paul Corrigan (14.12 metres) in the shot.
Rowntrees' Steve Gookey completed a comfortable sprint double, winning the 100 metres (10.9 secs) and 200 metres (21.5).
Final 1 Rotherham 314 pts; 2 Trafford 295; 3 City of Hull 249; 4 Border 240; 5 Gateshead 215; 6 Rowntree 207; 7 Stockport 164. — World mile record holder Steve Cram continued his belated build-up to this week's Olympic trial by winning an 800 metres race for Jarrow and Hebburn in a modest 1min 51.1secs in a Panasonic Northern League Division Two match at Leeds.
Cram, who hopes to win a 1500 metres place in Barcelona, won by a comfortable five seconds.
The Tyneside star, who has recovered from a groin injury, admitted afterwards: ‘The Olympic Games seem a long way away.
I'm not too happy with my form but it's another race under my belt.’
The fixture was won by Mandale, who had Anthony Borsumato to thank for fine victories in the 400 metres hurdles (56.7 secs) and long jump (6.52 metres).
Result: 1 Mandale 257; 2 Leeds B 253; 3 Bingley 235; 4 Jarrow and Hebburn 196; 5 Middlesbrough and Cleveland 171; 6 Richmond and Zetland 139.
BRITAIN'S Derek Warwick and Mark Blundell backed Frenchman Yannick Dalmas as Peugeot clinched a first ever Le Mans 24hour sportscar race yesterday.
The trio kept the 3.5 litre Peugeot 905 ahead f or most of the rain-hit race to delight the flag-waving local and British fans and confound the critics who predicted the car could not stay the distance.
It was also a first success for the drivers in the race and a particular personal triumph for ex-Formula One driver Warwick, who failed at the track with Jaguar in 1986 and 1991.
Toyota, the French car giant's main rivals in the world championship, took second place six laps behind with Japan's Masanori Sekiya, France's PierreHenri Raphanel and Ireland's Kenny Acheson.
The only problem for the Peugeot team came early yesterday when Warwick suffered problems with the ignition.
He explained: ‘We're not really sure what happened the car cut out four or five times around the circuit in one lap and the only way to keep it going was to mess around with the ignition.
‘We changed many things but exactly the same thing happened again after three laps,’ he added.
Blundell, the regular McLaren Formula One test driver, said all three drivers agreed to work double shifts to cut the number of pitstops.
The second Peugeot, driven by Italy's Mauro Baldi and Frenchmen Philippe Alliot and Jean-Pierre Jabouille, was third, just one lap behind the Toyota.
The race started with the smallest grid since 1932, yet 16 of the 29 cars that qualified were still running at the end.
—OULTON Park hosts the Rapid Fit Open Formula Ford Championship for Formula Ford 1600cc motors next Saturday with an international field of drivers lining up to prove that they can make the leap into Formula 1 status.
Also at this event the Champion of Oulton series continues with Graham Riley of Rochdale out to prove that he can stay on top of the contest and improve on his third place last year.
Yorkshire is strongly represented in the Cleanaway Filters Sports Saloon Challenge with Harrogate duo Bob and neil Claxton, Roger Matthews from Holmfirth and Ron Harper from Middlesbrough featuring.
The Rover GTi race will also be closely contested with Mike Whalley from Holmfirth being up among the leading challengers.
Non-League Football
FORMER Middlesbrough and Northern Ireland international Terry Cochrane has been named as the new manager of South Bank.
Cochrane, who will be assisted by former youth team manager Alan Skelton, returned from a spell coaching abroad earlier in the year, but has played in the Northern League for Billingham Synthonia.
His first priority will be to find players as it is understood that several of last season's side want to leave.
Cochrane takes over from Jimmy Wattis, who resigned last weekend from the crisis-torn club.
Meanwhile, former Shildon manager Tommy Smith has been appointed to the managerial team at Second Division Billingham Town.
BRILLIANT hurdles prospect Allison Curbishley watched birthday girl Gowry Retchakhan smash the Daily Telegraph UK Women's League record yesterday and immediately set a new divisional mark.
UK champion Retchakhan, second in the UK rankings behind Sally Gunnell, celebrated her 32nd birthday with a superb victory in the opening event at the Cleveland County Stadium, Middlesbrough.
The Seoul Olympian's time of 56.5 seconds was six  hundredths of a second inside the nine-year-old League record.
Curbishley then stepped up for the intermediate girls' 300 metres hurdles and proceeded to win by 25 metres in a time of 43.9 secs, 1.6 seconds inside the Division Five record.
Middlesbrough and Cleveland, who finished fifth in the opening fixture at Leicester, completed an intermediate hurdles double when Beverley Sowersby won the B race.
After 12 of the 36 events, the Teessiders had an eight-point lead over Thurrock.
Denise Knox earned Middlesbrough maximum points in the senior 400 metres with a clear-cut victory, winning by over 40 metres in 56.8 secs 7.1 secs ahead of her nearest rival.
But in the 200 metres she finished second, three metres down on Retchakhan, whose time of 24.9 was a divisional record.
North-East 100 metres hurdles champion Jocelyn Kirby, who won the silver medal in last week's Northern Championships, ran a superbly controlled race to set a Division Five record of 14.2.
Another convincing Middlesbrough winner was the NorthEast intermediate javelin champion, Emily Harrison, who threw 34.78 metres.
Middlesbrough, however, were overhauled by Wirral in the second half of the fixture and had to be content with second place.
Final 1 Wirral 276; 2 Middlesbrough and Cleveland 272; 3 Thurrock 261; 4 Leicester 238 7; 5 Radley 233; 6 Pitreavie 199 7.
League positions after two Wirral 9 pts; Leicester 9; Thurrock 9; Middlesbrough and Cleveland 7; Radley 6; Pitreavie 2.
FORMER North-East 3,000 metres track champion Jo-Ann Scott was a comfortable winner of yesterday's Darlington Women Only 10K road race.
The 28-year-old graphic artist, who won the event three years ago, eased into a five metres lead at the first kilometre mark and only Heaton veteran Geraldine Beedle managed to stay close.
1 J Scott (Darlington) 37.21; 2 G Beedle (Heaton V35) 37.38; 3 N Porter (Heaton) 38.50; 4 C Brunskill (Newton Aycliffe) 38.55; 5 S Laws (Darlington V35) 38.57; 6 E Wilson (Unatt) 41.48; 7 S Carbert (Darlington) 42.07; 8 P Jones (Chester-le-Street) 42.13; 9 D James (Elvet Striders) 42.33; 10 G Dobson (Chester-le-Street) 42.37.
O/45 M Jackson (New Marske) 46.43; O/50 E Armstrong (Blaydon) 51.53.
GREAT Britain international Paul Cuskin bounced back after injury to win yesterday's Washington six-mile road race.
1 P Cuskin (Unatt) 29.20; 2 I Archbold (Moirpeth) 29.58; 3 D Mullen (Houghton) 30.36; 4 A Brown (Blyth) 30.49; 5 W Watson (Washington) 30.51; 6 T Field (Sunderland) 31.28; 7 N Day (gateshead) 31.29; 8 D Littlewood (Crook V45) 31.35; 9 L Watson (Jarrow and Hebburn V40) 31.56; 10 S White (Blaydon V40) 32.04.
O/50 R Donkin (Sunderland) 35.26; O/55 E Appleby (Heaton) 35.59.
Teams: 1 Sunderland 59; 2 Blyth 95; 3 Washington 134.
Women: 1 M Dodsworth (Houghton V35) 39.03; 2 S Allen (Unatt) 39.20; 3 S Sales (Gateshead) 39.47; 4 K Glynn (Blyth V40) 40.11; 5 A Irvine (Houghton V40) 40.36.
‘I'm not talking about a police amnesty, where the lads are asked to drop their knives in a bin,’ he said.
‘That kind of thing has no credibility on the street.
‘I'm not even saying don't have knives.
I'm saying leave them where they belong at home.
And if you have to fight, do it with your fists.’
Rod claimed the growth in the use of knives was closely-linked to drugs-related crime and protection rackets.
‘Drink and drugs and knives do not mix, we all know that,’ he said.
‘It's getting as bad as the days of cutthroat razors.
We had a quiet spell and now it's silly again.
‘We need a co-ordinated approach to make sure everybody leaves their knives at home.
‘The ones who don't leave them at home should be sent down.
‘We have to appeal to the parents, asking them to think about the mothers whose sons will never come home.’
Rod says club bosses and doormen are equally concerned about the situation.
Some clubs have considered introducing ‘scanners’ to check people entering nightclubs for weapons.
‘Everybody who carries a knife should know that if they try to take it into a club, they won't just be banned from that club, but all the clubs in town.’
The increase in the use of knives has also heightened the fears of doormen and bouncers, who already ‘don't know if they are going home at night’.
‘If things go on like this, there will be no doormen and that will make it even worse,’ he said.
A spokeswoman for Cleveland Police admitted there was a problem with young men in Middlesbrough carrying knives, but added: ‘We have not seen a particular increase in the recent past.’