

The Northern Echo
DOWN the swamp at Darlington, something is stirring.
It's the conservation volunteers.
On a bright February morning they're up to their wellied ankles in mud and water, turning a formerly ignored site on the edge of heavy industry into a nature haven.
Up to now, the patch of land off Whessoe Road hasn't had a great deal going for it.
It backs onto a couple of euphemisms, the Civic Amenity Site and the  abattoir , and a valuable pond which attracted migrating birds has regularly dried up in the summer.
The British Trust for Conservation Volunteers have already achieved much to improve the site's appeal.
They have taken steps to stop water draining off from the mini-lake, and done an inordinate amount of plodging in the wetland.
‘We're trying to increase the amount of aquatic habitat here, which includes planting reed mace and building dykes,’ says Dean Heward, who is organising the project for BTCV.
The project is what you might call labour-intensive.
Wheelbarrows of mud are carted from one site to help form a containing mound for a pond at the other end.
The land is owned by Darlington Council, who are funding the conservation work.
Helpers have included pupils from an adjacent school, and also handicapped volunteers.
The site will have wildlife-friendly hedges of blackthorn, hawthorn, sweet briar and dog rose, and three wedges of young trees will provide shelter to pond users.
‘We've planted 4000 trees  including aspen, silver and downy birch and rowan,’ says Dean.
‘The water is used at the moment by passing migratory birds, but hopefully once the cover grows up a little they will be encouraged to stop here.’
The volunteers started work by hauling away an accumulation of rubbish which had found its way into the little lake.
Dumped cars have also been an occasional problem.
But even in the middle of industry, the Darlington site has attracted wildlife.
Rabbits live in the surrounding area, and a kestrel has been spotted nearby.
The BTCV manages several sites in County Durham, all relying on the hard work of volunteers.
Work at Whessoe Road will go on right through the summer.
‘We want to create a wildflower meadow, but it's important to see what's already here before we go ahead and plant,’ says Dean.
‘So we'll keep the long stuff down over the season and see what flowers come up.’
The volunteers are about to start recycling in an unusual way.
‘There's a job coming up in Easington where the Middlesbrough group is clearing a dyke system of the sort we are trying to create here.
‘So we are going to bring all the plants that they don't want over here more rushes and sedges and aquatic plants to diversify the habitat.’
—The British Trust for Conservation is looking for more volunteers.
Ring  for details.
SANDPIPER: small, migratory wader that by way of a good nosh up pecks insects and other invertebrates from the mud.
Whistle-happy, too Swans at the Sandpiper
MAINTAINING the avian theme, the Sandpiper at Leyburn is run by Peter Swan, large and amiable, and his wife Beryl.
An exceptionally attractive pub, it's housed Tardis-like in a cottage that's said to be Leyburn's oldest building.
A guidebook on the mantlepiece adds that until the plague did for Wensley, Leyburn was just a speck on the map anyway.
Even in February the place is busy, and deservedly, but its attractions may be a sum of parts rather than the outstanding appeal of the food.
The unadventurous menu is a mix of home made (like creamy vegetable soup, or slightly over-heated  moussaka ) and high grade bought-in stuff like chicken nuggets and scampi.
Pleasant puddings seemed not to be home made either.
A short specials board offered herrings in dill or madeira sauce, much enjoyed, cottage pie and beef curry.
Theakston's and Webster's ale is in excellent nick, there's a handsome stove fire and a notice advertising a charabanc trip to Middlesbrough guide dog centre.
Abundant evidence suggests that the landlord is a rugby buff his son plays for Waterloo and he also keeps 60 or 70 malt whiskies, on a shelf with the sub-title ‘Medicine for men.’
One of the whiskies is called Sheep Dip.
Golden eagles, see above, would alone be advised to land elsewhere.
GOLDEN EAGLE: raptor with two metre wing span, now confined to Scotland and increasingly rare.
Feeds on hares, rabbits, grouse and carrion, especially sheep.
That sheep dip is singularly disagreeable to a golden eagle is one reason for its rarity.
TEESSIDE is to have an £11m., 2,500-acre International Nature Reserve as part of Teesside Development Corporation's regeneration of the lower Tees and its estuary.
It will be the largest man-made nature reserve in the United Kingdom, designed to provide ideal conditions in which birds, fish and wild plants will thrive.
And the National Rivers Authority has pledged to introduce 200,000 salmon a year for the next four years into the cleaned-up River Tees the first time the fish have been in the river in any numbers in the last 30 years.
The multi-million scheme was announced on Monday this week by Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine, backed by his Minister of State, David Trippier; Prof David Bellamy; Sir David Attenborough, President of the Royal Society for Nature Conservancy; Lord Crickhowell, chairman of the National Rivers Authority, and Ron Norman and Duncan Hall, chairman and chief executive respectively of the Teesside Development Corporation.
The scheme is being launched on land formerly owned by ICI.
Within the Teesside redevelopment project there is also the Tees Barrage, which will create 11 miles of clean, tide-free water upstream of Teesdale, where the TDC has its headquarters, and where the new Joint University College, which is to specialise in environmental courses, is sited.
Also, Teesdale, with its views of the revitalised Tees, will be an appropriate home to Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution from May this year.
The new nature reserve will be the area of Middlesbrough and more than seven times the size of Hyde Park.
It will create new natural habitats in reedbeds, grasslands, swamp, saltmarsh, water and woodlands.
And this priceless asset would qualify for United Nations recognition as an International Biosphere Reserve.
Situated on the Tees estuary, the area is already an internationally-famous Ramscar class wetland refuge for birds, waders and wildfowl.
It attracts significant numbers of species including the shelduck, sanderling, redshank and grey plover.
Its importance will grow as the reserve takes shape and provides even more of the right habitats for wildlife and wild plants.
The International Nature Reserve is for the benefit of the Teesside community and beyond.
It has been carefully designed to develop and protect wildlife and plants while attracting many thousands of visitors.
It has taken the best elements from several Dutch schemes the Dutch being recognised as the experts in creating wetland nature reserves.
The launch of the 2,500-acre nature reserve is a giant step in the creation of a new environment on Teesside, and as part of the urban regeneration of Teesside it is change on a grand scale.
At the official launch on Monday, Mr Heseltine said: ‘Along with the major initiatives, the local councils, organisations such as the Wildlife Trust and the community are working towards a new environment.
‘When the people come together, the most ambitious projects are achievable.’
Sir David Attenborough said: ‘Companies of local and national importance on Teesside recognise their environmental responsibilities.
They prove that industry and nature can coexist.’
And ICI chairman Sir Denys Henderson added: ‘I am proud of ICI's conservation record on Teesside.
Our successful partnership there serves as a powerful example of what can be achieved by industry working together with conservationists and local communities.’
Fur facts
FURTHER to your piece on the leopard trade ban (Echo March 7), it appears you took the trouble to consult the views of Lynx.
We did not have the pleasure of hearing from you and it shows.
The African leopard was never in danger of extinction throughout its range.
A voluntary ban was imposed by the London trade in order to give stocks breathing and breeding space.
It is significant that it is the Africans who are pressing for a partial lifting of the ban and the maligned fur trade has made no move in that direction.
It is the money-making of animal rights organisations which science threatens, not animal welfare.
Mike Allan, Spokesman, Fur Education Council, PO Box 1EW, London W1A 1EW.
IT will doubtless be cataclysmic to learn that out is the last place cats should be at night.
Far from spending long hours on the tiles hunting, scavenging and generally having a high old time with their pals, as tradition and practice dictate, they should be indoors tucked up.
This information has been relayed in this direction by the Cats Protection League.
It is not that cats do not enjoy all the aforementioned nocturnal pleasures, it is that nightlife is too dangerous for them.
To this end the CPL has won a little victory in its efforts to ensure that the cat is not put out with the milk bottles.
Having espied precisely such a scene on a television advertisement for milk, Marjorie Roberts of the CPL in Darlington wrote to the Milk Marketing Board.
A reply has eventually arrived from the National Dairy Council.
This makes the usual noises about the careful research which goes into making television advertisements, not to mention the advice-seeking.
This may be so, but the Cats Protection League was obviously not on the list.
But the NDC has not merely turfed out the CPL's complaint with the milk and the cat.
It says that in the light of the observation it is now reviewing the commercial.
If it is possible, within budgets, to amend the film it will do so.
The budget gives them a get-out option but the CPL and Marjorie Roberts are grinning like Cheshire cats to have extracted such a promise.
Of course, they may have to write next to Hannah-Barbra, makers of the cartoon series The Flintstones, to persuade them to change the ending to all the episodes in which Fred lets out the family mogg.
From now on, Gower the Cat stays in.
He can do his gallivanting in the daylight hours with or without milk bottles.
World problems:
Prof IG Simmons, head of Geography at Durham University and a writer about the human influence on the environment, will give a talk on where he considers the world is heading.
The event, organised by Durham Friends of the Earth at Elvet Riverside, room ER153, Durham City, on Wednesday, May 6 at 7.30pm.
Driver fled after causing crash
A FORESTER drove the wrong way along a dual carriageway to escape police after hitting another car, Thirsk magistrates heard yesterday.
Christopher Todd, 19, of Boltby, near Thirsk, drove his Land Rover into the path of a car on the A168 near Thirsk, injuring two people.
Then he drove off, the wrong way down the dual carriageway, said Jane Cockburn, prosecuting.
Blood tests revealed he was almost twice the legal alcohol limit.
Todd yesterday admitted driving with excess alcohol and failing to stop and report an accident.
The case was adjourned for reports Hens raid: Thieves raided a hen house in Ripon.
They made off with nine birds worth a total of £180 from a house in Studley Road.
Animal Magna Carta signed OFFICIALS yesterday signed a copy of a new Magna Carta written by David Bellamy pledging to protect wildlife.
The ceremony took place at Fountains Abbey, near Ripon, on the anniversary of the original being signed, 777 years ago.
Signatories included the mayors of Harrogate and Ripon, Barabra Hillier and Doreen Spence.
The treaty contains seven personal pledges to encourage wildlife protection, save energy, use recycling schemes and join environmental groups.