

The Northern Echo
A COUNCILLOR has lost his claim for unfair dismissal from a do-it-yourself store where he was assistant manager.
The industrial tribunal at Middlesbrough has found that David Heselton, 29, of Rosedale Close, Whitby was partly to blame for his sacking last June.
Mr Heselton, an Independent on Whitby Town Council, was dismissed after he gave a customer he knew a free bottle of barbecue fluid, valued at £1.
He claimed he only did so to seal the sale of a barbecue which was damaged.
But the owners of the Handyman Store at High Stakesby, Whitby, told the tribunal that Mr Heselton had broken company rules and that he had been warned about his behaviour only four days before the incident.
Fishing boat nets torpedo A 1,000lb wartime aerial torpedo which became entangled in a fishing boat's nets was blown up by bomb disposal experts last night.
The World War Two relic was dredged from the seabed three miles off Hartlepool by the Whitby-based Pioneer.
It was taken to deeper water and detonated in a controlled explosion at about 6pm.
Hawk found:
A bird of prey which had been flying loose since the weekend is back with its owner.
Gary Smith said the female hawk broke free while in the garden of his Redcar home.
He eventually found it sitting on a wall outside a house.
‘They must have got quite a shock seeing a 4lb 6oz bird sunning itself on the garden wall,’ said Gary.
Rail trouble:
Cleveland councillors agreed to try to improve relations with British Rail and then criticised it five minutes later.
Members of the passenger transport sub-committee agreed to the move but Coun John Stokes then criticised the frequency of the Middlesbrough to Whitby service during a discussion on the Esk Valley line and said it was wrong that BR had banned cyclists from the trains.
Lorries stolen:
Three lorries loaded with catering packs and worth a total of £160,000 were stolen from the Cairns and Brown compound in Washington.
One of the lorries has since been found in Gateshead.
Crime rising:
An increase in crime on the Tyneside Metro means police have to deal with 80 incidents a week.
Vandalism and theft are to blame for the 23pc rise.
Arrests have risen by 41pc since the introduction of Metro Police.
PUBLIC inquiries should be held in places where the public has easy access, it was claimed yesterday.
Cleveland and North Yorkshire councils are preparing major objections to the National Grid's plan to build overhead power cables across parts of the area.
The main venue for the inquiries, which start in May, will be at Northallerton although parts will be held in the Marton Hotel and Country Club, Middlesbrough.
Coun Paul Harford told Cleveland's development control sub-  committee that Northallerton was remote from Cleveland and the public would need at least two buses to attend the Marton venue.
He also criticised the decision to hold a public inquiry in privately-owned property.
Coun Harford said the council chamber in Middlesbrough town hall or Teesside Polytechnic could have been looked at or public buildings in one of the districts would have been better.
‘The town hall was used for the toxic waste inquiry and the Butler Sloss inquiry and people affected by them had ready access,’ he said.
His views were  endorsed by Coun David Walsh, committee chairman, who said he first thought the Marton hotel had been chosen for barristers coming off the Parkway.
He feared the views of people living in areas like Lazenby and Portrack, Stockton, may not hold much sway in Northallerton.
He suggested a shuttle service may be suitable for people wishing to attend at Marton.
Members agreed a recommendation that the council be jointly represented, through a barrister, with Middlesbrough and Stockton councils.
The inquiry, which will last ten weeks, starts on May 19.
Matters which will be debated include the visual impact of the pylons, the implications affecting the health and safety of local people, local amenities and particular areas of landscape value or nature conservation.
PUBLIC inquiries should be held in places to which the public has easy access, it was claimed yesterday.
Cleveland and North Yorkshire councils are preparing major objections to the National Grid's plan to build overhead power cables across parts of the area.
The main venue will be at Northallerton although parts will be held in the Marton Hotel and Country Club, Middlesbrough.
Coun Paul Harford told Cleveland's development control sub-committee that Northallerton was remote from Cleveland and the public would need at least two buses to reach the Marton venue.
He also criticised the decision to hold a public inquiry in privately-owned property.
He said the council chamber in Middlesbrough town hall or Teesside Polytechnic could have been considered or public buildings in one of the districts.
‘The town hall was used for the toxic waste inquiry and the Butler Sloss inquiry and people affected by the issues had ready access, he said.’
His views were echoed by Coun David Walsh, committee chairman, who feared the views of people living in areas like Lazenby and Portrack, Stockton, may not hold much sway in Northallerton.
He suggested a shuttle service for people wishing to attend at Marton.
Members agreed that the council be jointly represented, through a barrister, with Middlesbrough and Stockton councils.
They also agreed to contribute £3,000 towards the costs of consultants appointed by Hambleton and North Yorkshire attending the inquiry.
Pre-inquiry meetings will be held on February 26 and 27 with the full inquiry starting on May 19.
Matters to be debated include the visual impact of the pylons, the implications for health and safety, local amenities and landscape value.
THE man accused of trying to batter Coast to Coast walker Josephine Chandler to death walked free yesterday.
Speaking after his acquittal, Darren Nichol described his time under suspicion as a ‘dreadful ordeal’.
The packed public gallery at Teesside Crown Court erupted in a roar of approval as the jury foreman announced that Mr Nichol was not guilty of attempted murder.
Det Chief Supt Robin Cooper, who headed the investigation, said the case would not be re-opened.
Josephine Chandler, 47, who was attacked in the summer of 1990 on the banks of the River Swale near Scorton, not far from Richmond, North Yorkshire, suffered terrible injuries.
She is confined to a wheelchair and her sight is badly impaired.
Mr Nichol, now 24, was charged in February last year and spent four and a half months in custody before being released on bail.
After the verdict he was hugged by his tearful mother Patricia Bell before walking outside where his solicitor John Turner read a prepared statement on Mr Nichol's behalf.
He said: ‘As you will appreciate this has been a dreadful ordeal.
Mr Nichol was first accused of the attempted murder of Mrs Chandler in October 1990.
He spent a total of four and a half months in custody for a crime he did not commit.
‘He has maintained his innocence throughout and has been fully vindicated by a jury who took only an hour and a half to find him not guilty.
‘Mr Nichol would now like a period of peace and quiet with his family in order to take stock of his life.’
Mr Turner said Mr Nichol was not surprised the police did not intend to re-open the case.
‘The prosecution has been misconceived throughout and this is just part and parcel of that.’
Mr Nichol, formerly of Regal Drive, Darlington, said he had no idea what he now intended to do with his life.
He said: ‘I'm just going to go and get my head sorted out.’
Mrs Chandler, from Chepstow, was attacked on August 29, 1990.
She was discovered lying half naked on the river bank.
Examinations at Middlesbrough General Hospital's neuro-surgical unit showed Mrs Chandler had multiple skull fractures and she had several operations.
James Spencer QC, prosecuting, alleged Mr Nichol approached Mrs Chandler in a field but when she ignored him he pulled her down the bank, sexually assaulted her and hit her on the head with a rock or rocks.
But two lorry drivers passing the scene described Mrs Chandler's attacker as slightly smaller than her and estimated his height at five feet eight or nine inches.
Mr Nichol is five feet three inches tall.
Mr Chadwin, defending, told the jury there was no evidence to link Mr Nichol to the scene of the attack.
His car was not spotted in the area that morning and he was not identified as being there.
There was no forensic evidence to link Mr Nichol to the attack.
After the trial Det Chief Supt Cooper said: ‘I am entirely satisfied with the prosecution case and the trial; this has been English justice at its best.’
— Special report: Page 7
AN inquest has opened into the death of 63-year-old William Sample who died as a result of an incident in hospital last year.
Cleveland Coroner's Court heard Mr Sample was taken to Hartlepool General Hospital after an incident in Peterlee Nursing Home Westcott Road, on October 30 last year.
But after an incident in ward 16 of the hospital on November 27, he was transferred to Middlesbrough General, but died on November 29 due to a head injury.
George Turnbull, 48, of Christchurch Place, Peterlee, has been sent for trial charged with manslaughter.
The inquest was adjourned until completion of court proceedings.
A BABY girl saved three lives because she couldn't sleep, her grandmother claimed last night.
Young Keely Smith woke her sleeping dad Paul, who found his Middlesbrough terrace house thick with smoke in the early hours of yesterday.
He called firemen, who snatched his four-year-old son Jamie to safety from a smoke-filled bedroom of the Errol Street house.
Mary Elliott, mum of Paul's girlfriend Lynne Rootham, said: ‘If the baby hadn't been up, there would have been three corpses in the house.’
Paul, who had fallen asleep in front of the TV after making chips, was wakened by 11-month old Keely coughing.
The 30-year-old tackled the chip pan blaze, but couldn't get to Jamie.
‘His room is above the kitchen and the smoke had gone through,’ he said.
‘I couldn't see him the room was full with smoke.
My eyes were popping out.
‘The fireman pulled him out and gave him oxygen.’
Jamie was suffering from shock, but was not treated in hospital.
Paul said he would be fitting smoke alarms immediately.
Lynne was out with friends at the time.
Inquest opened:
An inquest into the death of 61-year-old James Dawson has been opened and adjourned.
Mr Dawson, of Lewis Road, Middlesbrough, died in South Cleveland Hospital on February 6.
Hearing adjourned:
Cleveland deputy coroner Ronald Smith opened and adjourned an inquest into the death of plumber Alan Vest, 52, of Oulston Road, Fairfield, Stockton.
He died after an incident while working at a house in Beech Grove Road, Middlesbrough.
Ban backed:
Cleveland and Yorkshire North Euro MP David Bowe supported yesterday's vote in favour of banning tobacco advertising throughout the European Community.
He said: ‘Europe is right to listen to the health lobby, not the tobacco lobby.
Health must come before profit.’
THE brutal attack on Josephine Chandler horrified a nation of walkers.
Such an attack on a popular long distance walk in rural North Yorkshire seemed unthinkable.
Walkers who would not dare stroll half a mile in inner cities thought nothing of walking 190 miles across the fells, dales and moors from St Bee's in Cumbria to Robin Hood's Bay in North Yorkshire.
The attack changed that.
Guest houses reported a sharp drop in visitors on the popular route following the attack.
Women were conspicuous by their absence.
Any who did walk the route after August 29 did so in groups.
Even local walkers were put off making their local rambles, aware that Mrs Chandler's attacker could strike again.
Mrs Chandler, 47, had set off from Shap in Cumbria on August 25.
She was a tall, strongly-built divorcee who aimed to walk part of the Coast to Coast route as a holiday, like most of the other thousands who trek the walk each year.
It was a Dutch hiker who came across her battered body at the side of the River Swale between Catterick Bridge and Scorton, near Richmond.
At first he thought her body was a bag of rubbish but then saw her rucksack.
Mrs Chandler was rushed to the Duchess of Kent's Military Hospital at nearby Catterick Garrison, but then transferred to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Surgeons performed an emergency operation.
She underwent several operations on her brain, skull and eye.
Mrs Chandler regained consciousness at the end of September a month after the attack but was never able to recall the attack.
Later, she was transferred to another hospital in Middlesbrough and then to the Frenchay hospital in Bristol to be nearer her home in Chepstow, Gwent.
Then she was moved to Newcastle General Hospital before returning to Gwent.
BEFORE August 29, 1990 Josephine Chandler was a happy, healthy woman.
She worked as an occupational therapist and listed gardening and walking as her hobbies.
Now she cannot work, she cannot walk, she cannot drive and she is dependent on family, friends and professional carers.
Doctors believe she will probably never walk again.
She also suffers from associated internal problems and is confined to a wheelchair.
Her sight is badly impaired.
She has no functional vision in her right eye and only half sight in her left eye.
She is unlikely to improve.
She was in hospital for almost a year and now lives with her son in an adapted bungalow for disabled people run by social services in Gwent.
She receives physiotherapy three or four times a week and is regularly visited by the district nurse.
A home care assistant visits daily.
It is felt that she would be unable to cope independently.
She can no longer drive because of her visual handicap, had to give up her job and cannot pursue her former hobbies of walking and gardening.
She is socially dependent on friends and relatives.
Brother Paul Chandler attended the trial last Thursday and Friday.
Mr Chandler, who lives in Reading, said: ‘Regardless of the outcome of the case I am convinced that the legal system would be unable to make the punishment fit the crime.
‘My sister has undergone a devastating life-changing experience.
Her son and the immediate members of the family will be called upon to help and support her throughout her life.
‘I hope that the guilty person, whoever he is, has some concept of the suffering and distress which he has caused and that he has a troubled conscience.
‘As a family we would like to express our most sincere thanks to Detective Chief Superintendent Cooper and all his staff for their diligence in their inquiries and especially for their sympathetic support and concern throughout this extremely difficult time.
‘We would also like to record publicly our overwhelming sense of gratitude to all the hospital staff who did so much to save Jo's life, skilfully repair the dreadful injuries and to effect a good measure of rehabilitation.
‘It would be impossible to say too much in praise of consultant Ernest Sinar and his colleagues and staff at Middlesbrough General Hospital for the way in which they cared for Jo and the family during the time she was there.’
SAFINA Hussain was followed home by a neo Nazi last week.
With his skinhead haircut, Doc Marten boots and mind full of race-hate, he walked just a pace behind the Middlesbrough student and her sister as they neared their parents' house.
‘He was so close you could hear him breathing,’ says Safina.
‘We were just glad there were two of us.
If we'd been alone, God knows what might have happened.’
As they reached their garden gate, he burst into a torrent of foul-mouthed racist abuse that continued as they went inside and closed the door.
On another occasion she was on the bus with fellow sixth-former Huma Farooqui when another passenger launched into a verbal assault.
‘He was going on about fighting the war and how there should be no place here for ‘Pakis’, how they should go home,’ said Safina.
She knows she could have pointed out how troops from India fought alongside the British in the war, or that she was born in that far-off, exotic setting, Middlesbrough General Hospital, and was indeed just on her way home but he was drunk as well as ill-informed, so it hardly seemed worth it.
‘We can handle stuff like that, individual racism,’ she says calmly.
‘We were born here and we've grown up with that.
I think it's even made us more tolerant towards other people.’
BUT there is a dark shadow B on the horizon that these B bright, articulate 18-year-olds say they cannot countenance: the rise of the extreme right and the spreading of its racist, fascist message across Europe.
‘When it's individual racism it's bad, but when it's organised that's the real threat,’ said Huma.
‘Fascism is on another level all together.
It's not just against blacks but against Jews, disabled people, homosexual men and lesbian women anyone who's different.
How can anyone live in a society like that?’
Organised racism demands an organised response, the two friends argue, and so they have joined the Anti-Nazi League, relaunched nationally last month amid concern over the advance of the racist right in Europe and the threat that its influence could spill over the Channel.
The ANL was originally founded in 1977 to counter the rise of the National Front and saw the crumbling of far right support in the face of the biggest anti-racist demonstrations in Britain since the Thirties.
Now it says that groups like the British National Party hope to feed on the ultra-nationalist rhetoric of the French National Front leader Jean-Marie Le Pen and the rise of neo-Nazism amidst the mass unemployment and economic hardships of eastern Germany.
Le Pen sparked protests when he recently flew to Britain at the invitation of the right-wing Western Goals group.
Supporters of his visit included Western Goals founder member Stuart Millson, who has described himself as a fascist and a racist, and BNP deputy leader Richard Edmonds, who has said he wanted to emulate what Le Pen has done in France.
‘I am a racist.
Hitler was a genius,’ he has declared.
Support for the relaunch of the Anti-Nazi League has been wide-ranging, with sponsors including original founder Peter Hain, fellow Labour MPs Bernie Grant, Tony Benn and Blyth Valley's Ronnie Campbell, actress Julie Christie, singers Billy Bragg and Jimmy Somerville, film director Hanif Kureishi, TV stars Lenny Henry, Dawn French, Stephen Fry and Jonathan Ross, footballers Pat Nevin and Alex Williams and trade union leaders Arthur Scargill and North-East NUM General Secretary Dave Hopper.
A COURT date has been fixed for a North-East mum claiming £200,000 damages because she had two babies after being sterilised.
Maria Cossins has waited nearly ten years to sue North Tees Health Authority.
Mrs Cossins and husband Ray decided four children was enough but ended up with six when nine-year-old Stephen and Caroline, eight, were both born after a sterilisation operation at North Tees General Hospital.
The health authority confirmed a High Court hearing would start on April 9 in Middlesbrough.
The hearing is expected to last four days.
‘The case is clearly being contested,’ said patient liaison manager Vince Conway, adding: ‘We have had no particular difficulties.
It's obviously up to the plaintiff to make the running.’
Mrs Cossins' solicitor, Jeremy Hardy, of Darlington-based Walton, Hardy and Clough, said: ‘I have no comment to make at all.’
Last year Nigel Soppitt, of the same firm, confirmed the delay was exceptional but said the matter was extremely complex.
Mr and Mrs Cossins, of Rye Close, Eaglescliffe, refused offers of abortions over the unexpected pregnancies.
They have stressed that they love all their children.
Three days after giving birth to Caroline, Mrs Cossins had a second sterilisation operation.
She has not conceived since.
A PEDESTRIAN died in hospital three days after a road accident, Cleveland Coroner's Court heard.
Trevor Mills, 26, of Alconbury Way, Thorntree, Middlesbrough, was hit by a car in Ormesby Road, Berwick Hills, Middlesbrough, on June 21.
Consultant pathologist Ursula Earl said Mr Mills died from head injuries.
A man has been charged with causing death by reckless driving.
The inquest was adjourned.
A DEPRESSIVE alcoholic killed himself while his wife was at work, Cleveland Coroner's Court heard.
Irene Green found her husband Gordon, 57, slumped in a chair when she arrived home at Hall Drive, Acklam, Middlesbrough, on October 21.
Three empty bottles of anti-depressant tablets were by his side.
She said he had seemed normal when she went to work.
The inquest heard the laboratory technician suffered from depression and alcoholism.
Verdict: suicide.
Warning over bogus surgeons
HOUSEHOLDERS have been warned about bogus tree surgeons operating in Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough, who are misinforming people that trees in their gardens are dangerous.
Planning officer Glen McGill reminded householders many trees in Nunthorpe are protected by preservation orders, which means council approval is needed for any surgery.
Civic thanks:
Agnes Sowler, widow of Stockton's popular amateur historian, Tom, received gifts and the personal thanks of Stockton mayor Michael O'Brien for donating a portrait of her husband to the council.
Bridge gone:
Workers demolished the old steelworks bridge in Coronation Drive, Hartlepool.
The landmark was closed more than ten years ago due to worries over its safety.
A new bridge will be built in its place.
Safeway blaze:
The warehouse area of the Safeway supermarket in High Street, Ormesby, Middlesbrough was damaged in a fire last night.
Firemen from Grangetown and Coulby Newham attended the incident, at about 8.30pm.
Jury set to retire in rape trial
THE jury in the Teeside Crown Court trial of two men accused of attacking a 17-year-old girl as she walked home after a night out is expected to reach a verdict today.
Michael Burns, 31, of Whorlton Road, Hardwick, Stockton, is accused of raping the girl after dragging her into an alleyway by the Newtown Social Club in Durham Road, Stockton.
James Baker, 32, of Rushyford Avenue, Roseworth, Stockton, is accused of attempting to rape the girl.
Both deny the charges.
Raids quizzing:
Two Teesside men are likely to appear before a special court today after being arrested and questioned in connection with an armed attempted raid at Eves Garage and a cigarettes snatch at a supermarket on The Parade in Whitby on Wednesday.
Top dogs:
Research staff at ICI on Teeside have bought a guide dog with cash donated following a successful safety drive.
A cheque for £1,000 was presented to Middlesbrough Guide Dogs for the Blind centre manager Brian Lewis, left, by Dr Ian Click, ICI's Internation Research and technology manager.
(PIC)
New faces:
Tilly Bailey and Irvine, the Hartlepool-based law firm, has appointed three new solicitors.
Nick Peterken and Andrew West have taken up posts in Hartlepool, while John Lewis has joined the company's Barnard Castle office of Watson's.
Stolen:
A CAR radio from an MG Metro.
five bags of potatoes and 10 boxes of eggs from Hooks View Nursery at Great a radio from a Vauxhall Astra in Hebron Road, a radio from an Austin Maestro in Wheatlands, Great tools worth £80 from a garage at Eastfields, Stokesley.
The following cases were dealt with by Stokesley magistrates:
Kevin Peter Horner, 18, of Sycamore Road, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, admitted possessing cannabis, fined £100 plus £30 costs.
David Howes, 18, of Whingrove, Thornaby, was convicted of driving a motor car without due care and attention, fined £100 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, six points.
Steven Antony Bird, 28, of Moorland Fell, Redcar, was convicted of failing to produce licence for examination, driving motor car without supervision of qualified driver, without L-plates, without insurance and without test certificate, fined £400 plus £25 costs, licence endorsed, disqualified for 12 months.
The following case was dealt with by Northallerton magistrates: Brian Edward Robson, 45, of West Home Farm, High Worsall, Yarm, admitted driving Land Rover with excess alcohol in breath, fined £350 plus £25 costs, licence endorsed, disqualified for 18 months.
Slow sales:
The economic slump has put the brakes on council house sales in Middlesbrough with only 172 being sold during the current financial year.
Latest figures to January show a total of 4,258 sales out of the council's 20,059 stock since right-to-buy began in 1980.
Protest grows:
The Yorkshire Dales National Park committee has joined the growing protest about the Wensleydale rail line and added its voice urging Transport Secretary Malcolm Rifkind to intervene in the controversy, sparked by British Steel's decision to switch transport of Redmire Quarry limestone from rail to road.
Resignation move:
Guisborough councillor Barbara Murrant, elected last May, has resigned from the town council.
Theft heartache:
A couple's ‘priceless’ family photos spanning 50 years have been stolen along with their Ford Fiesta car, taken from outside their home.
Susie Novis of Castlegate, Scarborough, had the photos in a box in the car ready to make a presentation for her parents' golden wedding anniversary today.
Route revealed:
The Department of Transport today stages the first of three exhibitions on the route for the new £38m dual carriageway due to be built between Malton and Seamer.
The exhibition opens at Rillington village hall at 2pm and continues tomorrow.
Next Wednesday and Thursday it moves to Staxton before going on to Sherburn.
Poll tax rise:
Poll tax payers in Hambleton will have to find at least an extra £25 after district councillors yesterday set the rate at £210 for the area's 60,000 payers an increase of 13pc.
Spending in the district will be £5.5m over the next financial year.
Pigs escape:
A farm tractor and trailer overturned at Pinchinthorpe roundabout on the A173 Stokesley to Guisborough road, allowing 53 pigs to escape.
One injured animal had to be destroyed but the rest were recaptured.
Open door:
Sir Terence Beckett, director general of the Confederation of British Industries from 1980–87, opens Teesside's new Buisiness Growth Centre today in Queen's Square, Middlesbrough.
Dealer's service: The funeral takes place at Scarborough's Woodlands crematorium today of car enthusiast William Lambert, who died in hospital at the age of 47.
Mr Lambert was a well-known car dealer in the town.
Society move:
Sir Richard Storey, of Settringtom House, Malton, who is High Sheriff of North Yorkshire and vice-chairman of the Press Association, is to be the new president of Malton Agrciutlural Society, which stages one of the county's shows.
Major's no:
Prime Minister John Major has been accused of being insensitive after turning down an invitation to visit Hartlepool from the town's Labour candidate, Peter Mandelson.
Mr Major says it has so far proved impossible to visit all areas of the UK.
Rubber stamped:
A full meeting of Hartlepool Borough Council has confirmed that poll tax bills will be £322 in 1992/93, a rise of £25.
Poop scoop:
Teesside Polytechnic BA student Jonathan Welfare has invented an easy to use cardboard poop scoop which might be used by Middlesbrough council dog wardens.
FIRE swept through The Northern Echo's branch office in Middlesbrough in the early hours of yesterday.
The blaze was caused by an electrical fault.
Flames melted a lead pipe and ignited leaking gas causing the fire to spread along the passageway and up the stairwell to the second floor.
Closed doors stopped the fire taking over the whole building in Borough Road.
Prompt action by firemen prevented thousands of pounds of damage to computers in the part of the office used by staff of The Northern Junior Sports magazine.
Police closed Borough Road in case of an explosion as 25 firemen fought the blaze and brought it under control after 30 minutes.
The fire was controlled in 30 minutes.
Production was not affected and reporters have moved to The Northern Echo Stockton office as a temporary measure.
A TEENAGE newspaper boy who entered a house after hearing a baby crying found the toddler's young mum lying dead on the living room floor.
The tragedy  occurred as John Robson, 15, of Essex Close, Grangetown, Middlesbrough, went to collect paper money owed by Robyn Thrower, 25, who lived a few doors down from his own.
He could hear baby Penny crying but when no one answered the door he went into the unlocked house to investigate.
John, a pupil at Gillbrook School, took the 22month-old baby to his mother and called an ambulance.
Little Penny is now safe in the care of her grandparents, who live in Wilton, near Redcar, and is said to be fine.
Last night a police spokeswoman said there were no suspicious circumstances surrounding the death and an inquest had been opened.
Last night John refused to talk about his part in the tragedy.
THE BILL that would have banned the hunting of wild animals was rejected in Parliament yesterday by just 12 votes.
MPs voted by 187 to 175 against the McNamara Bill, for the protection of wild mammals, which would have made acts of cruelty to wild animals a criminal offence.
A large majority of North-East Labour MPs voted for the Bill, and most of the region's Tories against it.
The vote has disappointed the anti-hunting lobby which was hoping the groundswell of public opinion would sway MPs.
The RSPCA says the Bill invoked the biggest ever response from the British public to any of its campaigns, with nearly 20,000 contacts on the special phoneline.
The McNamara Bill brought probably the most testing challenge yet for hunting and forced country sports groups to unite in a fight for survival.
The National Hunting Club, Masters of Hounds Association and others joined the British Field Sports Society to form the Campaign for Hunting.
Steven Loveridge, speaking for the Campaign, said: ‘If you look at the facts there is a very strong case for hunting and that's what Parliament voted for, quite rightly so.’
But James Barrington, director of The League Against Cruel Sports said: ‘We are disappointed on one level that our wildlife will still have to suffer because of the bigotry and ignorance of elected representatives.
‘But we will build on this and we will be back.
There are already three Bills against hunting being drafted.
‘The Government had to scrape the bottom of the barrel to save their so-called sport.’
Those North-East MPs who voted for the McNamara Bill were: Stuart Bell (Lab Middlesbrough), Tony Blair (Lab Sedgefield), Roland Boyes (Lab Houghton and Washington), Ronnie Campbell (Lab Blyth Valley), Dr David Clark (Lab South Shields), Bob Clay (Lab Sunderland N), Jim Cousins (Lab Newcastle upon Tyne Central), John Cummings (Lab Easington), Don Dixon (Lab Jarrow), Derek Foster (Lab Bishop Auckland), Ted Garrett (Lab Wallsend), Ted Leadbitter (Lab Hartlepool), Marjorie Mowlam (Lab Redcar), Chris Mullin (Lab Sunderland S), Joyce Quin (Lab Gateshead E), Gerry Steinberg (Lab Durham City) and Jack Thompson (Lab Wansbeck).
Those opposing the Bill were: Alan Amos (C Hexham), Robert Banks (C Harrogate), Alan Beith (Lib Dem Berwick-upon-Tweed), David Curry (C Skipton and Ripon) John Greenway (C Ryedale), William Hague (C Richmond).
Those who did not vote were: Hilary Armstrong (Lab Durham NW), Nicholas Brown (Lab Newcastle upon Tyne E), David Clelland (Lab Tyne Bridge), Frank Cook (Lab Stockton N), Tim Devlin (C Stockton S), Michael Fallon (C Darlington), Conal Gregory (C York), Doug Henderson (Lab Newcastle N), Ashok Kumar (Lab Langbaurgh)
John McWilliam (Lab Blaydon), Giles Radice (Lab Durham N), Neville Trotter (C Tynemouth).
Band is victim of arson attack
MUSIC scores, some more than 100-years-old, were destroyed early yesterday in an arson attack on a hall used by a well-known silver band.
Hundreds of pounds worth of instruments, including kettle drums and trombones, were damaged in the blaze at the Hetton Silver Band hall in South Market Street, Hetton-le-Hole.
Murder charge:
Douglas Graham, 45, was remanded in custody by Newcastle magistrates yesterday charged with murdering his invalid father Henry, 75, at the family home in Barclay Terrace, Newcastle, more than 13 years ago.
He will appear in court again next week.
For sale:
Hayburn Wyke Hotel, near Cloughton, Scarborough, a haunt for smugglers in the 19th century, has been put on the market at £350,000 by owner John Colledge.
Actor ill:
Actor Robert Stephens has withdrawn from the forthcoming RSC Newcastle season through ill-health.
Men held:
Two men were last night helping police investigating a till snatch from a wine shop in North Shields town centre.
Bank break-in:
Burglars have stolen several thousand pounds after breaking into a bank at Rowlands Gill, near Gateshead.
Four hurt:
Four teenagers suffered minor injuries after the car they were in crashed through a fence near Front Street, Blyth, Northumberland.
Station raid:
A robber escaped with £100 after threatening to attack a woman attendant at a petrol station in Hudson Street, South Shields.
Bogdan recovering:
Bogdan Ursu, the Romanian baby who underwent a life-saving brain operation, was last night stable in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Bed blaze:
Flames gutted the bedroom of a first floor flat in Saltersgill Avenue, Middlesbrough, at the weekend.
Trees spared:
The beech trees of Yarm's Beech Tree Court are to stay, says Stockton Borough Council, despite residents' calls for them to be given the chop.
They will be given a 20pc thinning out.
Bitter pill:
In the light of Stockton's homeless problem, the borough council wants further talks with management at the town's North Tees Hospital over its plans to turn a number of flats into offices.
Baby recovering:
Baby Bogdan, brought from Romania for a life saving operation to drain fluid from his brain, is ‘satisfactory and making good  progress ’ in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Car blaze:
Police are trying to trace the owner of a car spotted well ablaze on the westbound carriageway of the A174 near the Ormesby intersection.
Moving on:
Alan Crosskill, general service manager and Press spokesman for Cleveland ambulance, is leaving the service after ten years to become self employed in public relations and career counselling.
Help needed:
Hartlepool's Citizens Advice Bureau is recruiting volunteer workers.
The bureau is looking for people with a spare six hours a week who would be able to cope with working in a busy office.
Volunteers would be trained both internally and externally.
People interested in volunteering should contact the bureau in Victoria Road or telephone 273223.
Phone help: Confidential help on solvent abuse is available from HARCAS on Northallerton 779911 extension 714073.
Landlords launch pubwatch scheme
BILLINGHAM landlords are launching a pubwatch scheme in connection with police this week.
Under the scheme pubs will be informed of potential problems within a minute and a half, via a telephone voice bank system and personal pagers.
The scheme will be launched tomorrow at the Black Horse, The Green, Billingham.
Sixteen pubs and a nightclub are taking part in the scheme, being regarded as a preventive measure rather than replacing the normal reporting of incidents to the police.
ICI alert: A toxic alert was sounded at ICI Wilton yesterday after a leak of acetic acid on the polyester intermediates site.
The area was sprayed with water to ‘fume down’ the acid, which spilled at about 9.20am.
No-one was injured.
Warehouse blaze:
A warehouse in Johnson's Yard, off Westgate, Guisborough, was damaged in a fire yesterday afternoon.
Golden occasion:
Saltersgill Community Council holds its 50th meeting tonight.
Middlesbrough Council chief executive John Foster is guest speaker at The Sutton Estate Tenants Hall, Tranter Road.
Icy hold-up: Birk Brow on the Guisborough-Whitby moor road was closed for more than an hour yesterday morning because of ice.
Houses burgled:
Detectives in Hartlepool are investigating house burglaries in Mulroy Road and Hart Lane.
The raiders escaped with cash, jewellery and electrical equipment.
Fire alert:
Two fire engines and a hydraulic platform raced to North Tees Hospital, Stockton, yesterday after cooking fat on a cooker caught fire.
The fire was out on arrival.
Theft warning:
Police are warning people to be on the guard after cash and items worth about £60 were taken by a sneak thief from a bungalow in Colburn Village, near Catterick Garrison.
Then as nurse Neil McGregor looked on helplessly Peter Sigsworth attacked a fellow patient before being restrained by six members of staff.
Sigsworth was given a drug which would normally induce prolonged unconsciousness but it had no effect on him.
Police were called but when he was interviewed about the attack the next day he could not remember anything.
Yesterday Sigsworth, 33, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted causing grievous bodily harm with intent, wounding, two offences of assault causing actual bodily harm and two offences of burglary.
Judge William Hannah sentenced Sigsworth to three years imprisonment.
Jamie Hill, prosecuting, said Sigsworth had been admitted as a voluntary patient to St Luke's Hospital in Middlesbrough after presenting himself at North Ormesby police station.
The attack came three days later.
Nurse Neil McGregor was keeping a watch on patient Michael Robinson when Sigsworth, of Melbourne House, Middlesbrough, got up and went into the day room.
But 20 minutes later Sigsworth returned.
Mr Hill said: ‘Mr McGregor appreciated something was not right but had no more time than a split second to begin to look round the corner of his chair when he was struck two extremely heavy blows to the base of his skull and the back of his neck by this defendant wielding a heavy fire extinguisher.
‘That had the effect of breaking his neck and he slumped in his chair paralysed.
‘All he could do was watch helplessly as the defendant, shouting incoherently, went towards Mr Robinson and began to attack him.’
Mr Robinson managed to defend himself but Sigsworth bit his thumb.
Mr Hill said: ‘He had six years experience as a mental nurse but had never seen anybody so violent as the defendant.’
Six members of staff restrained Sigsworth and took him into a secure room where he was injected with a drug and the police were called.
Mr McGregor still suffers from a reduced function in his arms and has not been able to return to work.
Laurence Hazell, defending, said Sigsworth was remorseful for what he had done.
He said Sigsworth had been on a drinking binge for several days before going to the police station.
Sigsworth had not been receiving any medication at the hospital to help him over his withdrawal.
AN armed robber fled empty-handed from a shop.
The man and an accomplice both thought to be in their late teens tried to rob The Candy Box, Ayresome Street, Middlesbrough, at 8.45pm on Saturday.
They demanded money and threatened the 22-year-old female assistant with a piece of scaffolding.
She cried for help and the pair ran out of the shop.
Anyone who saw the youths running is asked to contact police on 301733.
THERE will be no reward for poll tax payers in Middlesbrough who pay up on time.
Councillors yesterday refused a suggestion to offer a £5 discount to people who settle their full annual bill within 30 days.
The idea could have cost the authority which has poll tax arrears of more than £10m another £50,000 per year.
‘We did not want to have poorer people paying  slightly extra to subsidise those wealthier individuals  who can afford to pay up on time,’ said council leader Michael Carr.
He said he was concerned by the level of arrears, but could not see things getting much better.
On February 11, the council had £10.5m poll tax arrears, 21.8pc of the total that should have been collected.
This was made up of £3.5m from 1990–1 and £7m from 1991–2.
But Coun Carr stressed that the 1990–1 debt had been almost halved from £6.5m to £3.5m in just nine months.
A report to the Community Charge sub-committee also revealed that the council is still owed £331,373.93 in rates, last collected in 1989–90.
Police officers facing trial
TWO North Yorkshire police officers face crown court trial in connection with a deception involving a car.
PCs Gaynor Brady, 23, and PC Andrew Woodburn, 26, appeared at York Crown Court yesterday where Aidan Marron, defending, told Judge Harry Bennett, QC, that a five day trial would take place.
Simon Lawler, prosecuting asked for a 14 day adjournment so that the charges against the two officers could be finalised.
PC Brady, from Skipton, and PC Woodburn, from Harrogate, were both granted unconditional bail.
Verdict due:
The jury in the trial of a landscape gardener man who allegedly raped two teenage girls is expected to reach a verdict today.
Stanley Hornibrook, 42, of Wimpole Road, Stockton, has denied seven offences of indecent assault, four of rape, two other serious sex offences, taking indecent photographs of a child and assault causing actual bodily harm.
Inquest opened:
An inquest opened yesterday into the death of a three-year-old girl after an incident in her mother's home.
Ruth Dales, 23, of Steele Crescent, South Bank, Middlesbrough, gave formal identification evidence of her daughter Toni to Cleveland coroner Michael Sheffield who adjourned the hearing pending further inquiries.
A 24-year-old man has appeared before Teesside magistrates charged with the girl's murder.
Puppy death fine:
A puppy died the day after RSPCA officials investigated a complaint of neglect, North Shields magistrates were told yesterday.
Four others were found in a poor condition.
Michael Dunn, 26, of Blackfriars Way, Longton, North Tyneside, admitted causing unnecessary suffering.
He was fined £200 and banned from keeping an animal for five years.
Shotgun remand:
Christopher Currie, 24, of Rievaulx Road, Billingham, was further remanded in custody by Teesside magistrates yesterday until March 9 charged with assault, having a shotgun when he is prohibited for life, possessing a firearm with intent to endanger life, making threats to kill and criminal damage.
Shop raided:
Thousands of pounds worth of clothing was stolen from Berties, Saddler Street, Bishop Auckland, at the weekend.
Police are appealing for anyone with information about the break-in, which is thought to have happened at about 6am on Saturday, to contact them on 0388–603566.
Memorial service:
A memorial service for broadcaster Louis Allen, a former professor at Durham University and an expert on military history who died just before Christmas at his home in Durham City aged 69, will be held in Durham Cathedral on May 9.
Firefighting boon:
Cleveland fire service has taken delivery of two all-terrain Pinzgauers vehicles which can climb embankments, drive smoothly over the roughest of ground and keep going in water.
One of the six-wheel drive vehicles will be based at Grangetown, the other at Coulby Newham.
£100,000 grant: The NorthEast has won a £100,000 Government grant for adult education courses run by the Workers Educational Association in schools, community centres and colleges throughout the region.
Housing facelift:
Run-down maisonettes in Southwick, Sunderland, are set to be converted into houses in a £4.5m facelift by Sunderland Council.
The scheme follows similar projects in the Hendon area of the city.
Baby Bogdan on road to recovery ROMANIAN baby Bogdan Ursu is as ‘bright as a button’ in Middlesbrough General Hospital after last week's operation to remove water from his brain.
The eight-month-old child has put on four pounds since he was brought to Britain by Teesside-based Convoy Aid Romania.
Closet fire:
Stockton firemen had to use breathing apparatus to put out a small fire in an extractor fan in the women's toilet of the Waterfront pub, Church Road.
No one was in the toilet at the time.
Girl injured:
Stacey Gibson, of Deepdale Avenue, Grove Hill, Middlesbrough, broke her leg in a road accident on Monday afternoon.
The seven-year-old was in collision with a Volvo 340 saloon car in Eastbourne Road, Middlesbrough.
She was comfortable in Middlesbrough General last night.
Trainee trophies:
Two trainee engineers with Cleveland County Council received awards yesterday.
John Redding, 21, picked up a trophy donated by former Teesside County Borough engineer Jim Radcliffe, while 18-year-old John McGuckin received an award given by Garth Drabble, retired county surveyor and engineer.
Pub chosen:
The Greensides pub in Hartlepool is to be re-named the Tap and Spile.
The existing T and S at Stranton was included in a package of pubs bought from Camerons by Wolverhampton and Dudley.
Keep left:
Cleveland county highways authority decided to take no action to a request from Middlesbrough council to stop vehicles turning right from Acklam crematorium onto Acklam Road.
Scenic route:
A contribution of £1,000 is to be made by Cleveland County Council to British Rail towards publicity costs for the Esk Valley Line.
Life line:
A £46,000 grant to keep Cleveland's Ring and Ride service on the road is to be met from the county council's light rail transit budget.
J House raid: Valuables worth almost £1,200 were stolen from a house in Northallerton.
Intruders broke into the property in St James Drive and stole a mirror, fire, vacuum cleaner, hi-fi and watch after searching the bungalow.
ARSONISTS laid a meticulous fire-trail on each floor of a four-storey Teesside warehouse.
The former Suite Centre in Sussex Street, Middlesbrough, was left a death-trap after a fierce blaze early yesterday.
Station Officer Eric Warrior, of Middlesbrough Fire Station, said anyone entering the building could easily fall up to 15 metres into the basement of the premises.
‘The building is particularly dangerous because there were nine or ten separate fires, which have burned through the floors,’ he added.
‘They laid cardboard sheets meticulously and made small piles of combustible material to start the fire.
It was a nasty piece of work, done with thoroughly malicious intent.’
Salmon released to restock river
SALMON are being returned to a NorthEast river by the National Rivers Authority.
It has launched a five-year action plan to revitalise the River Esk and hopes the move will bring about the return of the river's salmon fishery.
As part of a joint initiative, with anglers and clubs the authority has begun releasing 50,000 young salmon at Egton Bridge near Whitby.
Price rise:
The York Waterworks has confirmed that charges will increase by 6.2pc from April 1.
The increase is 1.1pc less than the maximum permitted by national price control formula.
Arts boost:
A major new scheme is to be launched to boost arts projects in health service settings.
The £44,000 Arts in Healthcare initiative is designed to aid workshops where artists work with staff and patients, and the commissioning of works of art.
Rifles stolen:
Police at Scarborough are concerned that two rifles taken from a store in the resort's Castle Road could be used in crime.
The proprietor, Gordon McLeod-Crossley believed the burglars knew exactly what they were looking for when they took a BSA .22 and a Rellum .22.
It is the tenth time since last April that his store has been broken into.
Church appeal:
A £50,000 appeal has been launched to carry out vital restoration work on the parish church of St John the Baptist at Cayton near Scarborough which this year celebrates its 800th anniversary.
The tower was crumbling said the Vicar, the Rev Michael Long.
New appointments:
The York Diocese has appointed the Rev Stuart East, currently the assistant  surage at St Martin's, Middlesbrough, as Rector of Upper Ryedale.
The Rev Margaret Paskett, assistant curate at Marske in Cleveland becomes Diocesan Adviser for Diaconal Ministries.
The Rev David Richardson team vicar at Brayton is the new Rector of Monk Fryston and South Milford while the Rev John Roden has resigned as Diocesan Youth Officer.
Faithful restored:
A Scarborough fishing boat will sail out of the harbour tomorrow after major restoration work which followed a collision at sea.
The Faithful was working off the Yorkshire coast last November when it was in a  collision with a Bridlington trawler and almost sunk.
The skipper and joint owner Colin Watson said ‘It was only the bravery of the crew and the emergency services which averted a tragedy’.
A MAN who set fire to his former girlfriend's home was jailed for 18 months yesterday.
Craig Simpson, 21, set light to the front door of the house in Tower Green, Middlesbrough, and also set a fire in the dustbin at the back door of the house.
Simpson, of Hollyfield, Coulby Newham, was arrested when he returned to the scene shortly afterwards and a policeman smelled petrol on him.
Simpson had denied arson with intent to endanger life and arson being reckless as to whether life was endangered.
A Teesside Crown Court jury cleared him of both charges but convicted him of arson last month.
Alert issued over bogus workers con
POLICE have warned old people and their neighbours to be on the alert after a woman fell prey to bogus council workers.
The 69-year-old from Beechwood in Middlesbrough lost a ‘substantial’ sum of money after a visit from two men, claiming to be Middlesbrough Council workers measuring up for replacement doors and windows.
She let the men dressed in yellow safety hats and donkey jackets in after they showed an apparent ID card.
While one measured up, the other stole cash from a bag.
A council spokesman said: ‘All employees are issued with identity cards which they are always happy to hand over for close inspection.
It is extremely unlikely anyone working for us would arrive unannounced.’
Lift rescue:
A fire crew released an eight-year-old boy from a lift in the Forbes Building, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, yesterday.
The boy was said to be calm after his 15-minute ordeal.
Hall threat:
Two weeks after quitting their civic home of more than 60 years to move into new offices in the town hall, Loftus town councillors now have to look again as looming charge capping of the district council could mean the closure of the uneconomical hall.
Pub chosen:
The Greensides pub in Hartlepool is to be re-named the Tap and Spile.
The existing T and S at Stranton was included in a package of pubs bought from Camerons by Wolverhampton and Dudley.
Slur letter:
Hartlepool MP Ted Leadbitter has responded to an attack on Hartlepool's image in America's leader business newspaper The Wall Street Journal by writing an angry letter to its editor.
Garden scheme:
The young and the elderly are to be catered for in a small land reclamation scheme in New Skelton.
The parish council is creating a peace garden with seats and a play park.
The £11,000 cost will be met through £4,000 from the parish council, grants and fundraising by the project committee.
Mayor elect:
Two councillors who have served Hartlepool for a total of 26 years have been nominated Mayor and Deputy Mayor for the municipal year beginning on May 19.
Vic Burton, the current Deputy Mayor, is set to step up to Mayor, while Coun Brian Smith is to become his deputy.
Speech win:
Anne Cains, a member of Stockton area International Training in Communication has won her heat in the organisation's national speech competition, and now goes on to compete against five other clubs in the North-East in the regional heats.
TWO gold chains of office worth £27,400 have been stolen from a town hall safe.
Police are quizzing staff and contractors in Middlesbrough municipal buildings after the theft of the nine-carat chains and two badges of office.
The ceremonial chains used by Cleveland County Council chairman Ted Wood and his wife Ruth was found to be gone just before noon yesterday.
‘I opened the door of my personal assistant's office and then the safe,’ said Coun Wood.
‘Both chains and pendants were gone.’
The chains were last seen on Monday morning.
There was no sign of the safe having been forced.
Coun Wood said he was very upset by the theft and appealed for the return of the chains.
‘They belong to and are part of the community of Cleveland,’ he said.
‘People admire the chains.
They are part of our county's image and I hope people realise that.
‘My wife and I are very proud to wear the chains.’
The pennants date from 1974, while the chains are believed to be five years older.
‘It's very sad because people love to see me wearing the chains, particularly children and old folk,’ said Coun Wood.
The chairman, the first to hold the post for two consecutive years, was on his way to visit 101-year-old Donella Carter when he discovered the theft.
Det Insp John Kelly, of Middlesbrough CID, said: ‘We have inspected the scene and interviewed staff.
‘We will be talking to contractors working in the Town Hall and any member of the public who may have been in the building.’
Anyone with information should call Middlesbrough CID on .
Safe start:
Special vehicles being used by the Cleveland Ambulance Service are to be fitted with tiny safety seats for mothers with young babies.
Tablets overdose:
Pensioner David Warnock, 66, of Almond Grove, Fairfield, Stockton, killed himself with a massive overdose of paracetamol, an inquest heard yesterday.
Verdict: Suicide.
Suicide verdict:
Unemployed James Christopher Scott, 42, of Burtree Residential Caravan Park, Seaton Carew, killed himself on the eve of a court appearance, an inquest heard.
He was found in his fume-filled car at the Cowpen Marsh Nature Reserve, near Billingham.
Verdict: suicide.
Costa pensioners:
Ten residents of Charlotte Grange Home, Flaxton Street, Hartlepool, are a heading for Spain later this year.
Seven of them use wheelchairs and so staff need to raise an extra £4,000 so twelve of them can accompany the residents, who are paying their own way.
Home blaze:
A man who feared his girlfriend and children were trapped in a fire at his Wharton Terrace, Hartlepool, home has been reunited with them.
Food blocked:
Hartlepool Roman Catholic priest Father Tony Cornforth, of St Joseph's Church, is being stopped by red tape from distributing food past its sell-by date to the needy.
Staff at the head offices of Tesco, Asda and Kwik-Save said  outdated foodstuffs had to be destroyed or returned to manufacturers.
Judo joy:
A blind member of Stockton Judo Club, Christopher Ross, 13, of Thornaby, won the gold medal in his class at a competition at Wellington Spectrum Centre, Stockton.
Ram raid with a wheelbarrow
A THIEF walked away with a haul worth hundreds of pounds when he staged a ram raid on a shop with a wheelbarrow.
He loaded the barrow with paving stones before running straight through a plate glass window at the B&Q superstore in South Shields.
He escaped with gardening equipment worth £300 including three pairs of green wellies.
Death mystery:
Police need help to identify a man found dead on a Cleveland cycle-track.
The man, thought to be in his 50s, was found beside a gold-coloured Celeste bicycle on the track between Marton Manor and Tollesby Hall, Middlesbrough, yesterday.
There are no suspicious circumstances.
Conman sought:
Police are seeking a conman who tricked his way into the home of a 74-year-old woman in Smith Terrace, Gateshead, and stole £3, hours after two conmen stole a purse from the home of an 83-year-old woman also in Smith Terrace.
Diploma day:
John Howell, chief executive of Teesside Training and Enterprise Council, is to present 27 people with qualifications for occupations from horse care to floristry at the High Street, Stockton, offices of training organisation Face today.
Inquest opened:
An inquest into the death of rock climber Peter Bowron, of Byerley Road, Shildon, was opened and adjourned to a date to be fixed in Cornwall.
A post-mortem examination could not ascertain the cause of death.
Home closure:
North Yorkshire County Council yesterday confirmed the closure of a home for the elderly at Royal Crescent, Whitby.
POLICE are hunting a gang of youths out last night stopping lone women drivers, smashing their car windows and grabbing their handbags in the Coulby Newham area of Middlesbrough.
The youths, aged about 15, dressed in brightly shell suits were riding mountain bikes.
A TEENAGER was given just six hours to live after taking an ecstasy tablet, a court heard yesterday.
A doorman at a ‘rave’ at Sunderland Polytechnic last year rang Lee Turner's parents to tell them he was dying, but he refused to call an ambulance because he knew drugs were involved.
Instead, 18-year-old Lee's parents had to drive from their Middlesbrough home to collect him and then take him to the town's General Hospital, where the next day doctors gave him just six hours to live.
However, Lee survived but spent 16 days in the intensive care unit and a month in hospital.
Yesterday, the men who supplied the drug to Lee's friend appeared before Teesside Crown Court.
David Elsdon, 19, admitted four offences of possessing and five offences of supplying drugs.
Darren Cook, 19, admitted two offences of possessing, possession of cannabis, and three offences of being concerned in the supply.
Judge William Hannah sentenced Elsdon to 21 months and Cook to 19 months, both in a young offenders' institution.
Tim Roberts, prosecuting, said following the affects of the drug on Lee, Turner Elsdon and Cook were kept under surveillance at their home in Station Road, Trimdon.
They were arrested as they prepared to go to another rave in Ashington.
Drugs with a street value of £1,600 were found in the car and £2,070 worth were discovered in the house.
Roderick Hunt, defending Elsdon, said he had not realised the danger of the drugs.
Deborah Sherwin, defending Cook, said he was also naive about the drugs.
A MAN smashed all the windows of a car in a dispute between prostitutes.
Andrew Lamont had befriended prostitute Sharon Welsh when they came into contact with another prostitute, Ann Roth.
Lamont, 24, approached the car in which Roth was sitting and smashed the windows.
Yesterday Lamont, of Kensington Road, Middlesbrough, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted criminal damage and attempting to pervert the course of justice by giving the police a false name when arrested.
Judge William Hannah sentenced Lamont to one month in prison.
Ken Gillance, defending, said Lamont was not connected with vice but Welsh told him the previous day she had almost been run down by one of Roth's friends.
A TEENAGER needed plastic and cosmetic surgery to facial injuries after a car crashed into her mother's, a court heard.
Joanne Wood, 13, was the front seat passenger when the vehicle hit the side of her mother's VW Polo.
Martin Gilfellan had taken the car just a few minutes before the accident and was being followed by the police when he drove straight over a junction.
Yesterday Gilfellan, 18, of Keith Road, Middlesbrough, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted taking a car without consent, reckless driving, driving while disqualified and driving without insurance.
He asked for eight other offences to be considered.
He was sentenced to 18 months in a young offenders' institution disqualified from driving for two years.
Tim Roberts, defending, said: ‘He feels so responsible for the injuries caused to the family and wants to admit the offence and be punished for it.’
BRAVE Aaron Solomon, seven, had his thumb ripped off in a farm accident and surgeons sewed it back on after it was packed in ice lollies by his uncle.
The youngster fell while playing on a haystack at his grandmother's farm.
His thumb got stuck in wire binding used to bail the hay and was torn off.
Aaron was taken to hospital by his father, Graham, who could not find the missing digit.
Then Aaron's ice-cool uncle Bob sprang into action.
He found it and packed it among orange and strawberry lollies so it could be taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital to be sewed back on in a four-hour operation.
The accident happened at Aaron's grandparent's farm at Brotton, East Cleveland.
The youngster's family live next door.
The rescue act mirrored a similar incident featured in a recent episode of The Bill.
But bricklayer Bob, 47, of Park Road, Brotton, said he got the idea from another TV programme.
‘It was the first thing that came into my head.
I saw it done on the hospital programme Jimmy's.’
He said Aaron, a pupil at St Peter's Primary School, Brotton, had been very brave.
‘His thumb had been completely ripped off but he was just worried that he might need stitches.
He was amazing considering the pain he must have been in.’
Aaron's mother, Lesley, 26, said: ‘He was very calm and must have been in great pain.
His Nan always gets lollies in for the kids and they came in more than useful this time.’
Doctors said the quick-thinking action had saved Aaron's thumb.
AN RAF veteran has pleaded for the return of six commemorative plates stolen from his Cleveland home.
The plates are of great sentimental value to Keith Whittam, of Devonshire Road, Middlesbrough.
The 70-year-old is offering a £150 reward for their return.
One plate is a limited edition of the RAF College at Cranwell, Lincolnshire.
Other plates recall the 50th Anniversary of Dunkirk and the Golden Jubilee of the Air Training Corps.
A GOVERNMENT minister and council leaders signed documents yesterday allowing Middlesbrough's £37m City Challenge project to go ahead.
Environment Minister Lady Blatch signed the agreement, with Middlesbrough council leader Mike Carr and Les Southeran, City Challenge manager, at the Southland's Centre in Ormesby Road.
The council's action plan features seven strategies covering jobs and training, environment, health, housing, youth, leisure and community activity.
‘We hope over the five years to make a significant impact into solving the area's many problems,’ said Coun Carr.
Lady Blatch, Middlesbrough's ‘sponsor’ minister at the Department of the Environment, said ‘I don't know how many hurdles you have had to jump but today is the beginning of the biggest of all the challenges.
‘You've determined the plan, you've sorted out your priorities, you know what you want to do, you are absolutely sound about the vision, you've put together the detail and now it is about delivering it, that's the greatest challenge of all,’ she said.
Firefighters tackle factory blaze
A FIRE at a Darlington firm badly damaged an electric transformer and a quantity of copper wire.
The blaze broke out at Darlington and Simpson Rolling Mills factory site, off Whessoe Road, during the early hours of the morning.
Firemen wearing breathing apparatus used special foam to extinguish the flames in the factory's North Works.
Lift fire:
Firefighters were called to the county library in Grammar School Lane, Northallerton, when a blaze broke out in the lift shaft.
The fire started in the lift's transformer.
Car fire:
A car was badly damaged by fire in West Witton, Wensleydale.
An electrical fault is believed to have been the cause.
Ornament taken:
Thieves stole a £70 free standing stone ornament from a garden at a house in Brompton Road, Northallerton.
Shop hit:
Burglars caused £2,000 worth of damage when they broke into a greengrocers' shop in Castlegate, Thirsk, and stole £45 in cash.
Cash stolen:
Thieves who broke into Ryedale Travel in Market Place, Thirsk, stole £10.
TV taken:
A six-inch TV set and radio cassette player, £15 cash and lemonade were stolen by thieves who broke into a fish and chip shop in Millgate, Thirsk.
Clinic raided:
Burglars stole about £100 from a cash box at the clinic in Zetland Street, Northallerton.
Damage caused:
Burglars caused £90 worth of damage but stole nothing when they broke into the Lunn Poly shop in High Street, Northallerton.
Charity boost:
More than £3,500 has been raised by the Darlington Meningitis Support Group in the last six months.
The group presented a cheque for £2,800 to TV celebrity Paul Frost for the meningitis research unit at Southampton at their charity dance on Thursday.
Tabletop sale:
The Save the Children Charity has organised a tabletop sale on March 14 at the Arts Centre, Vane Terrace, Darlington, from 10am until 2pm.
Tables are bookable in advance by phoning Darlington 332301.
HOMELESSNESS in Middlesbrough has hit a record high.
Last night 100 families were being housed in bed and breakfast accommodation the first time the total has reached three figures.
Throughout the borough, 229 families are considered ‘priority’ cases for rehousing due to homelessness.
Housing committee chairman Bob Brady said the situation was ‘obscene’.
He added: ‘We are being compelled to take part in an unparalleled exercise in human and financial waste.
‘It surely makes sense to re-direct money currently being spent on temporary accommodation into the building of homes whioch will solve this current crisis and provide an asset for the future.’
Latest figures also show that families are staying longer in so-called ‘temporary’ accommodation.
Some are spending as long as four months in bed and breakfast ‘hotels’ while they wait to be re-housed.
The council's homeless hostels which cater for 25 families are full.
Last February, fewer than 50 families were in bed and breakfast accommodation in the town.
The figure has more than doubled in just a year.
Coun Brady said the statistics were ‘desperate’.
He revealed figures showing it is almost twice as expensive to house a family in bed and breakfast accommodation than it is to build a family home.
Coun Brady said: ‘Our figures show it costs the public £202 per week, £10,500 per year to place a family of four in bed and breakfast accommodation.
‘The cost of building a house worth £53,000 works out at £5,800 per year, balancing out running costs and debt charges against income from rent.’
He said the current system which he claimed had prevented Middlesbrough council from building a single home for three years was ‘a recipe for countless cases of personal misery.’
The shock figures which show 229 priority rehousing cases will be discussed by Middlesbrough's housing committee on Monday.
WOMEN drivers were warned yesterday not to stop if signalled to do so by an unauthorised person.
The alert from police came after the latest smash and grab raid on a car being driven by a lone woman in Middlesbrough.
Wendy Vickerman, 28, had just visited her mother in the Alderwood sheltered housing block in Newham Grange, Middlesbrough when she was confronted by three bike-riding youths.
Two of them blocked her exit from the car park while the third smashed the car window to grab her handbag.
Mrs Vickerman, a Binns Store manageress, said she was upset and concerned that her two-week-old baby could have been on the seat.
A police spokeswoman said they could not confirm reports of a second bag snatch from a another woman's car just a few minutes later.
But the attack on Mrs Vickerman's car was the latest in a series in the Middlesbrough area where the sole occupant was a woman.
She added: ‘We strongly urge woman motorists not to stop unless indicated to do so by an authorised person.
It is also advisable not to leave handbags on view inside the vehicle.’
POLICE are investigating the cause of a fire which led to the evacuation of a Teesside street.
Arsonists are thought to have caused the blaze which spread through the roofs of Trent Street, in the Rivers area of Middlesbrough yesterday.
Families were evacuated and the street cordoned off.
One family has been left homeless.
Falling debris rained down as eight men in breathing apparatus fought the flames.
Fire-fighters were on the scene for more than three hours after the call at 12.47pm.
Station Officer Ron Carr, of Middlesbrough Fire Station, said: ‘Smoke was bellowing from the roof of number 14 the end terrace house when we arrived.
‘It had reached the roof void of number 12.
We evacuated that house, which was occupied and the rest of the street about ten people in all, including several children.’
Fire crews using a hydraulic platform managed to prevent the fire spreading further.
Council engineers were called in to inspect number 14.
Parking scheme:
Langbaurgh Council plans to introduce a voucher parking system in Guisborough and Redcar before the autumn.
Buzzing riddle:
A mysterious buzzing sound is plaguing people in the Grangetown-Lazenby areas of Cleveland.
Ian Frank, of the local environment group NEON, said it seemed to be coming from the ICI Wilton site.
ICI are investigating.
Happy birthday:
Langbaurgh mayor Coun Arthur Harvison cut a birthday cake at the Redcar Leisure Centre yesterday to celebrate its ten years in business.
Welcome cash:
A Karaoke Night held by ICI employees raised £1,000 for the newly-opened Anne Charlton Home in Redcar for multiple sclerosis sufferers.
Jobless toll:
Unemployment figures for Stockton in December showed little change.
A total of 9,376 were without work, a rise of 12 over September.
Rosy future:
The future for a centre for the unemployed at Thornaby looks rosier thanks to its new manager and support from Stockton Borough Council.
Prospects were bleak a year ago at Thornaby Impasse after it failed to secure funding.
Now it is to start again with a new name and continued council support.
Man named:
Cleveland Police have identified a man found dead on a Middlesbrough cycle-way as Joseph Hawes Thompson, 65, of Morpeth Avenue, Easterside.
There are no suspicious circumstances.
Real tonic:
A pilot scheme offering prescription ‘season tickets’ is planned in Cleveland from April 1.
Crime fighter:
Newsagent Jeff McKenna who runs a shop in Murray Street, Hartlepool, wants local traders and residents to club together to pay for a policeman to patrol their area exclusively.
No homes:
Councillors have revealed that 293 people in Hartlepool were found to be homeless and in priority need in the first three quarters of 1991/92 compared to 320 in the whole of the previous year.
Road closed:
Works at Ormesby Road, Middlesbrough, will involve the closure of Cranmore Road at its junction with Ormesby Road today and tomorrow.
Lost tablets:
Police warn that orange-coloured Bruofen tablets and Molipaxin tablets, coloured green and purple, lost in the Newport area of Middlesbrough are potentially lethal if taken without medical advice.
Swing low:
Gospel singer Yvonne Kendrick is giving a concert at the New Life Pentecostal Church, in Low Grange Avenue, Billingham, tomorrow night starting at 6pm.
Nuclear free:
Middlesbrough council is to renew its membership of the National Steering Committee for Nuclear Free Local Authorities.
Till-snatchers in double raid POLICE in Durham were yesterday hunting three men after two tills full of cash were stolen from a shop.
The till snatchers struck at the North-Eastern Coop in Commercial Street, Coxhoe, south of Durham City, on Thursday evening.
Two men went into the shop and grabbed two tills containing about £1,000.
One witness locked the door of the shop in a bid to foil the raiders but a third member of the snatch team forced the door open from the outside.
All three men escaped in a red Metro car.
Anyone with information should contact police on .
Poll task:
A former professional footballer has been appointed to mastermind efforts to retain the seat of Cleveland's only Tory MP, Tim Devlin.
Robin Baldry, a former Ipswich Town player, is the new Stockton South Conservative Association agent.
Aged 49, he is married with three children.
Sad loss:
Betty Stone, a former county councillor and leading Whitby charity worker, has died.
Mrs Stone of Low Stakesby House, Whitby, was awarded the MBE for her charitable work in 1977.
She was a leading worker for the British Red Cross Society and was a vice president for the North Yorkshire branch.
Mrs Stone was chairman of Whitby Trust for the Blind and a founder of the town's Business and Professional Women's Club.
High note:
A scanner appeal has hit a high note after receiving a boost from Cleveland police.
North Tees General Hospital received a cheque for £1,850 from the constabulary, raised from its annual charity concert in December last year.
The CAT scanner which the hospital wants for its X ray department will cost £600,000 to buy and run for the first few years.
Rail blaze:
Train services on the main East Coast line were disrupted yesterday morning when fire broke out in a locomotive.
The incident happened south of Northallerton and involved the locomotive's alternator.
The line was closed for about half an hour while firemen dealt with the blaze.
Landmark goes:
One of the last landmarks of Consett's steelmaking past is coming down.
On Monday, work will begin on dismantling the railway bridge at Delves Lane and Station Road to make way for a roundabout on the new Consett by-pass.
The work will take eight months.
Caravan theft:
A man stole a £5,500 caravan from outside a vets' practice for his homeless girlfriend York Crown Court heard yesterday.
Andrew Fowler was caught a few days later when police discovered the caravan at the girl's former home.
Fowler (20) of Coppice Close, Haxby admitted theft and was placed on probation for two years.
Hitting back:
Cleveland County fire officer Bill Cooney has hit back at criticism of the service.
He accused Tory politician Michael Bates of ‘trying to destroy the morale of Cleveland fire brigade’.
Mr Bates, prospective Conservative candidate for Langbaurgh, claimed the fire service training budget had been  drastically cut.
Mr Cooney said Mr Bates had used incorrect figures.
Baby joy:
Bogdan Ursu, the Romanian baby who underwent a life-saving brain operation, leaves hospital today.
He was brought to this country by Convoy Aid Romania suffering water on the brain and was operated on by neurosurgeon Fred Nath in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
A mercy mission from Convoy Aid Romania is distributing £10,000 worth of powdered milk to feed starving orphans.
Robbery charge:
Three men are to appear before Teesside magistrates on Wednesday charged in connection a with an armed robbery at a building society in Great Ayton.
The three, who have not been named, have been charged with robbery and firearms offences.
One man has been remanded in custody.
The other two are on bail.
Man is cleared after drug find
A DRIVER was yesterday acquitted of possessing LSD with intent to supply after £1,800 worth of the drug was found in his car boot.
Robert Stewart, 28, of Skipton Green, Low Fell, Gateshead had denied the charge at Newcastle Crown Court, saying he had bought the car just three weeks before being stopped by police and the 351 squares of the drug hidden in fog lamp covers must have been left there by the previous owner.
The jury returned its verdict over five hours deliberation.
Indecent exposure:
Police are hunting a man who exposed himself to a young schoolgirl beneath the viaduct in North Road, Durham City on Thursday afternoon.
He is described as 22, 5ft 8in, slim, with short black spiky hair and was wearing a white coat and trousers.
Canister alert:
Children  have been warned to beware of dangerous canisters containing the skin irritant cyalume after a schoolgirl was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital after two of the canisters used for nightfishing washed up on Redcar beach.
Fatal crash:
Michael Armstrong, 28, of Welfare Crescent, Newbiggin-by Sea, Northumberland, died almost instantly when his van was involved in a crash at Great Stainton, near Sedgefield on Wednesday, an inquest heard yesterday.
The hearing was adjourned.
Theft charges:
Nigel Anthony Cross, 20, of Billingham, and Ian Donoghue, 23, of Wheatley Hill, County Durham, are are to appear in court this morning following an incident involving a stolen car in which three police officers were injured outside Mill House Leisure Centre in Hartlepool.
Arrows man dies:
Former Red Arrows leader and commander of RAF Linton-on-Ouse near York, Air Cdre Roy Hartley Crompton has died aged 70.
Mr Crompton, awarded the OBE in 1962, joined the RAF in 1942 and flew in India and Burma before going on to hold a number of RAF training positions.
Inquest opens:
An inquest was opened and adjourned yesterday on James Coulson, a 68-year-old retired medical attendant miner, of Dalkeith Crescent, Hemlington, Middlesbrough, who died in South Cleveland Hospital on February 20.
Student improves:
Durham University Patrick Brodie, 21, rescued by friends after suffering multiple injuries in a 40ft fall from a walkway into the River Wear in the city has been moved out of intensive care at Dryburn Hospital and was yesterday stable and satisfactory.
VIP guests:
Durham County Council yesterday presented Newton Aycliffe Juniors football team with a plaque for the Lord Mayor of Liverpoool, who they will meet during a tour of the North-West as guests of Everton FC.
Twinning plea:
Action is being taken to encourage closer cooperation between Stockton council and its Asnieres-sur-Seine Twinning Association, which has appealed for more support.
GENEROUS donors shocked at the sudden death of a little girl have raised more than £1,000 for vitally-needed equipment.
Laura Bremner, seven, of Ratten Row, Hunton, near Bedale, died last month.
Her family has sent £571.86 to the scanner appeal for the Friarage Hospital, Northallerton, and the same amount to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Laura's father, John, said: ‘People have been very generous and we're very grateful.’
FIREFIGHTERS rescued a pensioner from an upstairs bedroom after his daughter jumped to safety from their blazing home.
The early morning blaze in Grangetown, Middlesbrough, was spotted by a neighbour, who alerted 19-year-old Julie Silcock asleep upstairs with her 21-month-old baby Clare Louise at the time.
Her father, Harry Silcock, 66, told her to go with the baby into a front bedroom and close the door.
As the fire brigade sped to the scene in Derwentwater Road, Julie lowered her daughter into the hands of neighbours and jumped from a ledge above the front door injuring her ankle.
Father and daughter were taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital and treated for smoke inhalation.
Woman freed:
An elderly woman was rescued by firemen yesterday after locking herself in her home in Topping Close on Hartlepool's Headland.
She was taken to hospital as a precaution.
Ferrets die:
Two ferrets died when fire swept through a garden shed in Ilkley Grove, Hartlepool.
The blaze also spread to a neighbouring house, damaging three windows and some plastic guttering.
Fire escape:
A mother and her young daughter were taken to hospital for a check-up after a fire at their home in Romaine Park, Hartlepool.
Firemen wearing breathing apparatus fought the blaze which extensively damaged the house.
Walker hurt:
Pedestrian John Baxter, 57, of Hazel Court, Middlesbrough, suffered a broken ankle when he was struck by a car in Albert Road, near Rusel Street, Middlesbrough.
Stable fire:
Firemen attended a blaze in stable at Upleatham Street, Saltburn, which destroyed two bales of hay and smoke-damaged the interior.
Toxic leak:
An investigation is under way after firemen were called to a toxic leak of amines while a road tanker was being unloaded.
No one was injured.
Tele watch:
Closed circuit television cameras are to be installed in the Brentnall Street car park, Middlesbrough, in a bid to beat car crime.
Self help:
A group of unemployed people in Middlesbrough will be building their own homes this year.
Members of the Bruntons Manor Self Build Association are receiving training in construction skills and will start on site, near Homerton Road, Middlesbrough, in April.
Recycled goods:
Coun Suzanne Fletcher, prospective Social and Liberal Democrat parliamentary candidate for Stockton North, is pressing the Chancellor of the Exchequer to reduce VAT on environmentally friendly products and products made from recycled materials.
Reclamation at old pit site
A RECLAMATION scheme on the site of a former County Durham colliery is due to begin next year when Durham County Council plans to improve the landscape of more than 17 hectares at Sacriston.
The scheme would also free 1.35 hectares for an extension of the nearby industrial estate.
The work entails regrading waste heaps, recontouring the site, planting trees and creating a new watercourse.
Sex charge:
A man appeared at a special sitting of Scarborough magistrates on Saturday accused of attempted rape.
Stephen Jones, 18, of Sands Lane, Holmeon-Spalding Moor, near York, was also charged with aggravated burglary, entering a house as a trespasser with intent to rape and having a knife as an offensive weapon.
He was remanded in custody to appear in court again today.
Rebate call:
The Government should introduce 100pc rebates for people least able to the pay the poll tax, claimed Middlesbrough council leader Mike Carr.
He was speaking after new figures show the cost of administering the poll tax in Middlesbrough this year will be £1.6m, or £16 for every adult.
Under the old rating system the cost worked out at £7 per property.
a Perfect clue: Vandals who attacked a bus station left police the perfect clue they daubed their names over the freshly-painted terminus in Seaton Carew.
Rising tide:
Hard-pressed Scarborough hoteliers are warning of a sharp rise in water rates when Yorkshire Water introduces meter charges from April.
Danger warning:
Six detonators stolen from the railway line at Saltburn yesterday could be dangerous, police warned last night.
Four are green, one blue and the other orange.
They have two lead strips on the bottom.
Number crunching the friendly way
IF maths just never added up for you, a new course at Stokesley Comprehensive School may well be the answer.
The adult-orientated maths workshops, run on similar lines to English literacy sessions, is not new.
But this year participants can opt to re-learn maths and be certified in the process.
There are still places open at the free Wednesday Workshop (7–9pm), and Mrs Freda Weaver, one of six volunteer tutors, says a City and Guilds Number Power certificate is on offer for the first time.
There is individual tuition rather than class sessions, though group tuition is offered if preferred.
Mrs Weaver, of Roseberry Road, Great Ayton, says it encompasses ‘anything to do with what people use in everyday life.
‘It is as much about building confidence as doing any formal teaching,’ she said.
Maths tuition can be tailored to the needs of people budgeting for the family groceries, learning to measure and switching over to metrication or simply those wanting to be able to help their children with maths homework.
‘Anyone wanting any type of help can come along,’ said Mrs Weaver.
‘All the work is on an individual basis.
It is what they want to learn and at the speed they want to learn it.
And it doesn't have to be a weekly commitment.’
Co-ordinator Mrs Irene MacDonald, of Bellborough Lane, Hutton Rudby, who teaches English as a foreign language at Longlands College, Middlesbrough, said the demand for maths teaching was growing.
She hoped people would want to try for the Number Power certificate as they learn and has even joined herself: ‘I have always been rotten at maths but this is the ideal way to do it,’ she said.
Anyone wanting more information can contact Mrs Weaver on  or Mrs MacDonald on .
Police name dead walker
POLICE yesterday named a rambler who collapsed and died after walking on the North York Moors.
An off-duty policeman is believed to have tried to revive James Fraser after he collapsed near Carlton Bank but the 65-year-old, of Burgate, Pickering, was certified dead on arrival at Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Mr Fraser had been walking on the moors with his wife and daughter when he was taken ill at about 5.30pm on Sunday.
A post mortem examination will be carried out today.
Toddler found:
David Peter Bicker, aged three, went missing for four hours in Cononley, near Skipton, North Yorkshire, during a family visit to friends but police aided by the force helicopter and around 100 villagers who undertook a detailed search found the youngster safe and well at around 9pm.
Last respects:
Family and friends have paid their last respects to rock climber Peter Bowron, who was swept to sea by a freak wave during a New Year rock-climbing holiday.
A service and cremation took place in Cornwall after the body of the 23-year-old from Byerley Road, Shildon, was discovered washed up on the beach near Sennan Cove.
Acid spill:
Firefighters used specialist equipment to deal with a chemical spill at a Washington firm last night.
The incident at Labelling Dynamics in Tower Street, involved a  quantity of hydrochloric acid.
A GIANT hill figure is to be set up in North Yorkshire today as a protest against the proposed pylon route.
And two councils are to spend money opposing the National Grid plans at a public inquiry.
The 60ft high and 200ft long figure spelling out No Pylons will be set up at Beacon Hill, Kirby Sigston, near Borrowby in the Thirsk area.
The Borrowby Pylon Action Group hopes the figure will draw attention to the National Grid Company's plans for 400kv lines on 150ft pylons across Cleveland and North Yorkshire.
Mike Barr, from the Borrowby Group, said the figure which is half the height of the proposed pylons would be visible miles away.
He said: ‘We can remove our hillside protest tomorrow.
The pylons if built will ruin our countryside forever.’
The NGC scheme has met with strong opposition from local people worried about the possible health effects of electro-magnetic fields and the destruction of the countryside.
The pylon route from Lackenby, on Teesside, to Shipton, near York has received 6,000 objections and is the subject of a public inquiry in May.
A pre-inquiry meeting starts tomorrow in the community centre in Northallerton and a second on Thursday at the Marton Hotel and Country Club, Middlesbrough.
Mr Barr said ‘We are unable to afford high powered legal advice.
We can however shout our message from the hilltops.’
Mr Barr claimed landowners had been offered ‘sweeteners’ up to £12,500 per pylon to allow the lines to be built.
And he urged people to attend the pre-inquiry meetings.
Meanwhile Stockton and Middlesbrough Councils have both agreed to spend on opposing the plans.
But while Stockton councillors yesterday agreed to put £19,000 towards the costs, cash-strapped Middlesbrough said they could spend no more than £10,000.
Langbaurgh Council says it cannot afford to protest.
Safety probe at nuclear station
AN investigation has been launched at Hartlepool nuclear power station after a safety incident.
A fuel inlet isolating valve was found to be shut, putting a back-up cooling pump out of action.
Managers claim there was no radiological hazard to staff or the public.
Costly challenge:
Stockton's policy and resources committee has agreed to make a total of £275,000 available to spend on a bid for money from the Government City Challenge this year subject to further financial appraisal.
Borough council treasurer Bob Patterson told members that the bid will cost an initial £75,000 for document preparation and a further £200,000 will be required to work out a five-year plan, involving several full time officers.
Speed fine:
Adish Sadik, 28, of Chadburn Road, Norton, Stockton, was fined a total of £250 with £40 costs by Thirsk magistrates yesterday after he admitted driving without due care and attention and speeding last June.
Police followed him for six miles on the A1 near Dishforth at speeds of up to 96mph through heavy rain.
Pavilion repairs:
Repairs to the John Whitehead Pavilion, vandalised recently, have been agreed after Stockton Borough Council policy and resources committee recommended spending £6,500.
Marina offices:
Councillors in Hartlepool are set to offer no objections to the Teesside Development Corporation's plan to convert Abdiel Building the current home of the town's Sea Cadets and diving club into offices for the town's new £160m marina.
It will also be used by HM Coastguard.
Fast work:
New figures show that between April and June 1991 planners at Hartlepool Council succeeded in determining 87pc of applications within eight weeks, compared to the national average of 60pc.
Cash plea:
Graham Robb, the Conservative prospective parliamentary candidate in Hartlepool, has urged the Government to extend the life of the town's Safer Cities anti-crime initiative which is due to run until April 1993.
Grants awarded:
Grants worth £65,048 have been awarded to local development agencies by Cleveland County Council.
The community development grants sub-committee agreed to give: £16,995 to Hartlepool Voluntary Development Agency; £16,707 to Stockton Voluntary Services; £16,312 to Middlesbrough Volunteer Bureau and £15,034 to Langbaurgh Volunteer Bureau.
Top student:
A former student of Kirby College, Middlesbrough, has been awarded the Northern Council for Further Education Regional Student of the Year award.
Tracey Watson, of Marton, Middlesbrough, receives a shield next week.
House work:
Middlesbrough Council is to spend £800,000 on new kitchens and bathrooms, re-wiring, redecorating and external repairs to 175 properties in Grove Hill, Berwick Hills, Pallister Park, Thorntree and Park End.
A TERRIFIED pensioner had to wait an hour for police to arrive after an attempted burglary at her Teesside home.
Cleveland Police have apologised to 73-year-old Bessie Marron for the delay.
Bessie, of Eshwood Sqaure, Newport, Middlesbrough, was alone when a young burglar tried to kick in her door on Monday night.
She rang daughter Patricia Dinsdale immediately after alerting police.
Patricia and husband George dashed from their Skelton home to comfort Bessie.
Officers arrived 15 minutes later.
‘I was shaking like jelly,’ said Bessie.
‘I was disappointed the police didn't turn up sooner.
‘The police station is only a few minutes walk away.’
A Cleveland Police spokeswoman said: ‘We apologise for this lady's distress.
However, an officer was sent out as soon as he was available.
‘We are looking into the matter and someone will contact Mrs Marron personally.’
The burglar ran away before entering Mrs Marron's home.
A CLEVELAND pensioner may have died because he wore dark clothing, an inquest heard.
Christopher Baden Owens, 68, died when he was hit by a Mazda van in Keith Road, Grove Hill, Middlesbrough.
Cleveland Coroner Michael Sheffield said Mr Owens may have been startled by a car swerving to avoid him and had stepped into the path of the van.
A witness had seen the retired steel worker in the middle of the road.
Car driver Paul Wesson said he did not see Mr Owens, of Woodville Avenue, Grove Hill, until the last moment.
Van driver Kevin Corcoran told police: ‘I did not recognise Mr Owens as a pedestrian.
He was just a black shape.’
Mr Sheffield accepted a pathologist's report that Mr Owens died of shock due to massive abdominal haemorrhage.
Verdict: accident.
MP may sue over Tory ‘lie’ RONNIE Campbell, Labour MP for Blyth, Northumberland, yesterday met a solicitor to talk about taking out a writ over allegations in the Tory document, Labour's Soft on Crime.
The document names him as a sponsor of an Irish Freedom Movement troops-out rally, but Mr Campbell said he had never supported a troops-out policy.
Mine netted:
Royal Navy bomb disposal experts from Rosyth were on board a trawler, the George Duncan, two miles of the coast at Crimdon, near Hartlepool, last night after it caught a mine in its nets.
Rail fight:
Middlesbrough Council has joined the growing campaign to urge British Steel to keep using the Redmire to Redcar freight rail link in order to prevent thousands more lorry journeys through Teesside.
Waiters' hopes: Steven Coates, 20, of Northallerton, who works as a waiter at Harrogate's Crown Hotel, and York's Simon Girling, 23, head waiter at Torquay's Imperial Hotel, have reached regional finals of the Young Waiter of the Year competition.
Woman charged:
Valerie Charlotte Patterson, 28, of Geneva Road, Darlington, has been charged with stealing almost £6,000 from Skippers garage in the town, where she worked.
She was released on unconditional bail pending committal proceedings to the crown court.
Monsieur Mayor: French students on an exchange visit organised by Marton Sixth Form College met Middlesbrough Mayor Eddie Bolland yesterday.
Half the students will spend a week ‘shadowing’ Middlesbrough Council officers, while the others work with local businesses.
Serviceman fined after accident
A YOUNG RAF serviceman was fined by Richmond magistrates yesterday after he admitted careless driving and using a car without insurance.
Neall Young, 20, formerly of RAF Catterick, collided into the back of a BMW waiting to turn right in Colburn, near Catterick Garrison.
He was fined a total of £400, ordered to pay £50 compensation with £20 costs.
Andrew Watson, 25, also of RAF Catterick, was fined £200 with £20 costs after he admitted allowing Young to use his car without insurance.
Car blaze:
A car on the Melsonby to Aldbrough St John road, near Richmond, was badly damaged by fire after petrol leaked from a loose pipe and ignited the engine, setting fire to the car.
The incident was dealt with by firemen from Darlington.
Burnt out:
A Ford Orion car stolen from Middlesbrough was found burnt out at Black Man Corner between Dalton-on-Tees, near Richmond, and Great Smeaton, near Northallerton.
Quality service:
The quality of service at Darlington town hall has been given a kick-start.
Coun John Williams, Labour leader of the council, said every member of town hall staff had been trained in the council's quality awareness programme.
And the aim was to improve services for people in the town.
Action threatened on council job cuts
A UNION representing workers at Stockton Borough Council has still not ruled out action over plans to cut jobs.
Nalgo, whose Stockton branch chairman Steve Matthews said members were not consulted on the proposals, is seeking an urgent meeting with council leader Bob Gibson over moves to axe 38 jobs in a bid to avoid being rate-capped.
Members fear more jobs could be lost if a budget decision to cut the jobs and save money is ratified at a special full council meeting tomorrow night.
Spill probed:
British Steel has launched an inquiry after a spillage of molten steel at the Lackenby plant on Teesside late on Monday night.
Charter attacked:
Langbaurgh Labour MP Ashok Kumar has criticised British Rail's Customer Charter due to be announced today as a ‘pathetic, expensive farce’.
He claimed lack of investment and cash curbs put a real level of passenger service out of reach.
Candidate picked:
Former policeman Alan Earle, 52, of High Street, Norton, has been chosen to try to retain the Norton ward for the Tories in the March 12 by-election called after the death of Cleveland County Councillor Hilda Reading.
Spy cameras:
Middlesbrough Council is to install two closed circuit TV cameras in the town's Brentnall Street car park at a cost of £20,000 in a bid to beat auto crime.
Car fires:
A car was destroyed by fire on open ground at Chippenham Road, Easterside, Middlesbrough.
Firefighters also tackled a car on fire in a field at Grinkle Lane, near Loftus, and one at Park End, Middlesbrough.
Barn blaze:
Fire destroyed 200 tons of straw in a Dutch barn at Bell Close Farm, Kirklevington, near Yarm.
Cabin theft:
Detectives in Hartlepool are investigating the theft of a portable telephone and a wristwatch from a site cabin in Fraser Grove.
Anyone with information should call (0429) 221151.
Hospital goes:
A familiar landmark in Hartlepool has been reduced to a pile of rubble by bulldozers.
New houses are to be built on the site of the former Cameron maternity hospital and its facilities have been transferred to a new unit at the town's general hospital.
Disabled pledge:
Stockton Council is to improve access to Bowesfield Pond for the disabled and people with pushchairs after the leisure services committee was told large gates were causing problems.
Cash boost:
The Hartlepool Voluntary Development Agency has received a big cash boost from Cleveland County Council.
It is to be given a £17,000 share of a £65,000 handout.
Tourism award:
Ken Pellant, of Guisborough Tourist Information Centre, picks up his Certificate of Tourist Information Centre Competence today.
A NORTH-EAST bus driver is the friendliest in Britain according to a survey into the region's manners.
Number eight United driver Norman Bell, 39, who works the 50-minute Barnard Castle to Bishop Auckland route in County Durham, was discovered during an investigation by the Polite Society.
Society founder the Rev Ian Gregory encountered Norman as he toured the region for eight days in a study commissioned by the Northumbria Tourist Board.
‘He does the journey three times a day and does more for that community than any amount of social workers, teachers or vicars,’ enthused Mr Gregory.
He must be Britain's friendliest driver.
It would be wonderful if more were like him.’
But Norman, of West Auckland, County Durham, said: I don't think I do anything special.
I've been doing the route for two years now.
I've got to know the passengers and they have become friends.’
He admits he will often delay his departure time if he knows a regular customer is late.
He says no-one seems to mind as it could be them next time and Norman can make his time up on route.
Meanwhile, spitting passengers on the Tyneside Metro and a beggar bothering passers-by in Durham did not impress Mr Gregory, who travelled incognito to check up on politeness.
He visited Darlington, Durham, Barnard Castle, Bishop Auckland, Newton Aycliffe, Middlesbrough, Sunderland, Newcastle, Gateshead and parts of Northumberland on his quest.
Durham Cathedral's restaurant was dubbed: ‘The noisiest place I have ever been in with chairs falling over and crockery being rattled.’
One unnamed area was criticised after it appeared to have industrial dereliction and sad, downcast people.
‘That was one place I was glad to get away from,’ he said.
But his overall impression confirmed the North's reputation for being the friendliest place in the country.
‘Wherever I went I met very friendly, helpful and cheerful people,’ he said, but warned that Northerners were unnecessarily defensive about the region.
He recommended some training for hotel staff to be a bit more professional in their attitude.
Ian Sloyan, who commissioned the survey for the Northumbria Tourist Board, said he disagreed with some of the impressions in the report but welcomed the findings as a means of improving the region for tourists.
‘If we could just say please, excuse me and thank you I think we would be top in the list of places people want to visit.’
He thought of a survey after the North-East came eighth in a list of 11 favourite tourist spots in Britain.
RESIDENTS of Middlesbrough are expected to face a poll tax increase of almost £45 from April 1.
The increase could be lower if Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine insists on tough capping limits but that could mean job losses.
Middlesbrough Council's policy and resources committee meets today to set the borough's tax level for 1992–3.
The budget set by the council would mean an increase from £309.34 to £353 a rise of 14pc.
The new figure includes £28.04 per bill for non-payment estimated deficit, provision for bad and doubtful debts and interest payable on the collection fund.
Middlesbrough Council has set the £353 bill based on a £21.6m budget.
But if Mr Heseltine caps the authority at £20.2m, bills could fall by £14 27p per week.
The authority claims to have cut its budget by £6.1m 20 pc in the last two years.
Coun Michael Carr, council leader, said: ‘We are conducting an exercise looking at implications of various levels of cuts.
‘We would hope to avoid cutting any single major service.
It's inconceivable we could go further down the road without job losses.’
A PSYCHIATRIC hospital patient hanged herself in her own room, an inquest heard.
Catherine Morse, 58, of Jervaulx Road, North Skelton, was discovered by a domestic worker hanging from a curtain rail in her room on Canterbury Ward at St Lukes Hospital in Middlesbrough.
Attempts at resuscitation failed and pathologist Dr Campbell Ritchie told Cleveland coroner Michael Sheffield the cause of death was asphyxia as a result of hanging.
David Roach, the ward manager, said Mrs Morse had been admitted to St Lukes from South Cleveland Hospital after taking an overdose of tablets.
She had been admitted for treatment on many occasions, he said.
Mr Sheffield said a report from a consultant psychiatrist at the hospital stated Mrs Morse had been receiving treatment since 1983.
Her response had been poor and she had a resistance to anti-depressants.
Before the afternoon staff reached her room to administer medication her body was found by the domestic.
Verdict: Suicide.
Decision put off on circus ban
COUNCILLORS have deferred a decision on banning circuses with performing animals from council-owned land at Stockton.
The council's leisure services committee was told by chief leisure officer John Warbrook that more information was needed from other authorities before a decision should be made.
Pensioner hit:
Cleveland police are appealing for witnesses after Thora Wilkinson, 82, was hit by a Ford Fiesta in Millbank Lane, Thornaby.
She received head injuries and a badly broken leg, and was last night ‘stable but rather poorly’ in North Tees General Hospital, Stockton.
Youth sentenced:
Raymond Allison, 17, of Amberley Green, Pallister Park, Middlesbrough, was sentenced to nine months in a young offenders' institute when he appeared before Teesside Crown Court yesterday.
He was also disqualified from driving for six months.
He admitted burglary, taking a car without consent, driving without a licence, driving without insurance and assault causing actual bodily harm.
He also asked from three other offences to be taken into consideration.
Arson charge:
Raymond Downing, 21, of Tankerville Street, Hartlepool, was remanded in custody until next month, charged with attempted arson at a Chinese takeaway in Owton Manor Lane and assaults on the proprietor and his daughter.
Hartlepool magistrates heard that he allegedly threw a petrol bomb into the rear of the premises.
False alarm:
Emergency services were called to ICI Wilton yesterday afternoon.
Spokeswoman Fiona Bell said the alarm had been sounded in the tunnel between Billingham and Wilton, but that there was no incident.
Baby oils:
A playroom and bathroom painted by Berlin artist Frena Gould is officially opened today by consultant gynaecologist Ann Ryall in the maternity outpatients department at North Tees General Hospital, Stockton.
Dust death:
A former ICI labourer, whose job involved contact with asbestos died of mesothelioma, an inquest ruled yesterday.
Cleveland Coroner Michael Sheffield recorded a verdict that Edward Gibson, 66, of Bogden Green, Middlesbrough, died of the industrial disease.
Packed days:
HMS Hurworth will dock in Hartlepool on March 6 prior to a five-day programme of activities in their namesake village of Hurworth.
More cash:
Cleveland County Council's economic development subcommittee has agreed to allocate another £12,000 to a European development programme.
It will approach the Cleveland Action Team and Teesside Training and Enterprise Council for financial support.
Health ‘disaster’: A plan by the Northern Regional Health Authority to merge Hartlepool and North Tees Health Authorities has been attacked as ‘a potential disaster’ by Hartlepool prospective Labour candidate Peter Mandelson.
Centre break-in: Coundon Health Centre was broken into on Tuesday night.
Police said it appeared £5 in petty cash had been stolen.
Plan rejected:
Plans to convert a building used for storage to form part of an existing house in Bridge Street, Middleton in Teesdale, was rejected by Teesdale district councillors on the grounds that there was inadequate parking.
Railed in:
Greenwoods shop in the Market Place, Barnard Castle, has won permission to construct metal railings and gates at the back of the premises.
No home:
Teesdale district councillors yesterday rejected plans for a house and double garage within the grounds of Etherley Lodge, near Bishop Auckland, because it was felt they would have an adverse effect on appearance and character of the the Lodge.
Converted:
Plans for a bungalow and the conversion of an outbuilding to a farm garage on land to the north of Pond House Farm, Hamsterley, have been approved.
More B and B: A wing of Dryderdale Hall, South Bedburn, is to be converted for use as bed and breakfast accommodation.
Owl hunt:
Farmers, hikers and nature lovers have been asked to report any new sightings of barn owls in the Teesdale area.
Dennis Luckhurst is collating the information as part of a survey by the Durham Bird Club to establish the range and population of the threatened bird.
Mr Luckhurst can be contacted on Teesdale 38438.
Accident:
Two people were slightly injured in a collision between two vehicles on the A66 west of Bowes at 9.30 yesterday.
Wendy Colley, 46, of Windermere, was admitted to the Darlington Memorial Hospital and  discharged after treatment.
Bernard Beatty, of Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough, suffered superficial facial cuts.
Oil spillage:
Police stayed at the scene of an accident on the A66 near Bowes for three hours on Tuesday following an oil spillage.
There were no injuries in the accident between two vehicles at about 4pm.
Northern Sinfonia Orchestra: Middlesbrough Town Hall MOZART professed to like neither the flute nor the harp, yet he wrote the most delightful concerto for the two in combination.
David Haslam on the flute and Bryn Lewis as harpist gave great pleasure in their performance of the work with the Northern Sinfonia Orchestra on Wednesday night.
The balance of the instruments was ideal and the orchestra accompanied with their usual panache under the direction of Alfred Walter.
This was preceded by Mozart's Parish Symphony, an equally engaging work.
The strings here, in the opening, were untypically ragged for a spell, but the second movement was beautifully played and the finale had an agreeable  buoyancy .
Alfred Walter is  something of an expert on Viennese music particularly that of the Johann Strauss era.
He came into his own here, so to speak, in the second half in directing a succession of polkas and  waltzes by Johann the younger.
The orchestra responded in kind, bursting into a song at one point, although their vocal abilities fell far short of their instrumental ones.
This was a most enjoyable set, with the orchestra obviously delighting in the direction and the audience lapping it up.
The Radetsky March of the elder Johann Strauss gave a rousing finish.
A SECURITY guard cheated death when a thug slashed him across the neck with a Stanley knife.
Doctors told the 28-year-old that the five slashes were just millimetres away from cutting his jugular vein.
Cleveland Police have condemned the unprovoked attack as ‘despicable and cowardly’.
The attack happened at 10.25pm on Tuesday in the Skipper's Lane Retail Park, South Bank, Middlesbrough.
A stolen white Vauxhall Astra GTE revved into the car-park and performed several wheelies.
The uniformed guard, who wishes to be known only as John, approached the car and asked the three youths inside to leave.
The front-seat passenger leapt out and slashed him across the neck.
As the Viking Security employee radioed for help, the laughing youths raced away.
In a statement to police, the man said: ‘I felt my neck.
It was wet and cold and I realised I was bleeding heavily.’
Peter Foxon, operations manager with Vulcan, was quickly on the scene.
‘If he hadn't turned his face, he could have died,’ said Mr Foxon.
‘The doctor at Middlesbrough General said a sharper blade could have killed him, too.’
‘It's disturbing to think people are driving around who are capable of doing that,’ he added.
‘The one who pulled the knife was clearly intending to hurt him, not frighten him off.’
Mr Foxon himself was attacked with a crowbar at the same site just last week and the firm has had to double its guard at the retail park.
The youth who slashed John is said to be about 6ft tall, of medium build with short hair and a ‘Borstal spot’ tattoo on his right cheek.
A Cleveland Police spokeswoman said: ‘This was a despicable attack by cowardly people.’
The guard was treated in hospital, but later released.
A PENSIONER who was charged £160 for a 36-mile ambulance trip will not have to pay the money.
Ena McMaster was presented with the bill for a journey from her home in Middlesbrough to Middleston St George, near Darlington.
The 86-year-old had to call an ambulance when her carer failed to turn up.
Cleveland Ambulance originally said the bill which represented nearly two weeks' income for the pensioner was based on the cost of running a two-man vehicle.
But in a reply to a letter from prospective Stockton South Labour MP John Scott, a senior ambulance officer says: ‘The account was submitted not to the patient but to a relative whose name and address were given to us at the time of the booking.
‘In the event, due to an error in our accounting system, the wrong amount was quoted.
‘As a gesture of goodwill, I have decided to waive the charge on this occasion and have written to the gentleman informing him of my decision.’
Father of murder charge man dies
THE father of Antony Gurney, 27, the man been charged with murdering 19-year-old Stephanie Dorman in Hartlepool last weekend, has died.
Mr Gurney is understood to have suffered a heart attack at his Coventry home.
His son, who lives in Brafferton Street, Hartlepool, is also accused of attempted murder.
Driver banned:
Alan Hoggarth, of Warren Street, Middlesbrough, admitted driving while disqualified without insurance and also two charges of obstructing the police when he appeared before Whitby magistrates yesterday.
He was fined a total of £300 and disqualified from driving for a year.
Silver bugle:
The silver bugle light infantry badge is returning to Hartlepool after 50 years with the setting up of a new army cadet force detachment which is looking for boys and girls aged between 13 and 18 to go along on Monday at 7pm to St James Church Hall, Rossmere Way.
Top shop:
The Middlesbrough branch of Mortgage Advice Shops has topped the other 24 outlets of the national chain to become the company's branch of the year.
Clamp bid:
Guisborough town councillors are considering buying a wheel clamp to stop illegal parking behind their Sunnyfield House Community Centre.
Car blaze:
Billingham firemen put out a car on fire in Cowpen Bewley Road, Cowpen Bewley, near Billingham.
Petrol leak:
Firemen from Thornaby and Stockton swilled away an amount of petrol leaking from a car in Yarm Street, Stockton.
Cash blow:
Efforts to raise £28,000 to keep a popular Hartlepool community centre open have been hit by raiders.
They stole £250 and vandalised offices at the People's Centre in Raby Road.
Birds menace:
Landlord Alan Thornton is calling for council chiefs to take action to remove pigeons which have left his property in Ellison Street, Hartlepool, coated in a thick layer of bird droppings.
A NEW lease of life for a derelict Middlesbrough building may be delayed, its London-based owner has revealed.
The former Teesside and District Society for the Blind workshop has been empty for six years and is a magnet for vandals.
Residents, Middlesbrough Council and the society all want the Stockton Road building developed.
Planning permission was granted by the council last year to an agent for the building's owner, Herant Aghajan.
He wanted to turn the premises into flats.
But Kate Pallis, personal assistant to Mr Aghajan, said negotiations had hit a snag.
‘We have not been able to get a deal sorted out with whoever was going to use the property,’ she said.
‘It's been a dead end for two or three months.’
Ms Pallis could not name the other party or say exactly what kind of development was proposed.
John Whitehouse, of West Lane Residents' Association, said it was time for action.
‘There have been so many plans for the place and everything seems to fall through,’ he said.
‘West Lane is a nice area and the building spoils it.
It's an eyesore and residents want something to be done.
‘It's always being vandalised, there's not a window left in it.’
Mr Whitehouse said he feared the building was becoming unsafe.
Kitty Grove-Stephenson, organising secretary of the Teesside and District Society for the Blind, said the building was sold by the society more than three years ago.
Crash victim fights for life
DAVID Bell, 30, of Arncliffe Hall, Ingleby Cross, near Stokesley, is fighting for his life with serious head injuries after being knocked down by a pick-up truck.
Mr Bell was visiting his mother, Lady Bell, at East Rounton, near Northalleton, yesterday when the accident happened.
He was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital where his condition was described as very poorly.
Trio in court:
Three workers from McDonalds restaurant in Newcastle's Northumberland Street appeared in court yesterday charged with making a hoax bomb call to rivals Burger King.
Manageress Patima Heron, 24, assistant manager Lance Green, 20, and hostess Helen Calderwood, 19, were remanded on bail until March 11.
Fan improves:
Durham cricket fan Lydia Bhatlekar, of Jesmond, Newcastle, is improving in hospital after suffering a reaction to anti-malaria tablets while supporting her team abroad.
She was flown back from Zimbabwe at the weekend for treatment at Newcastle's Royal Victoria Infirmary.
Friars descend:
Friars from all over Britain converged on York yesterday to celebrate the first arrival of their order in this country.
The first Carmelites landed in England 750 years ago and the first celebration of the anniversary was held at the Minster.
Man remanded:
Stewart Hickman, 20, of Gloucester Terrace, Haswell Plough, near Durham, was remanded in custody until Wednesday by Chester-le-Street magistrates yesterday charged with grievous bodily harm with intent, reckless driving and other motoring offences following an incident in which a policeman was treated for a neck injury and bruising after being hit by a car he was attempting to stop.
Hear this:
The cochlear implant team, based at Middlesbrough's North Riding Infirmary, has hit its target of restoring the hearing of 12 deaf people in its first year of operation.
The unit is officially opened tomorrow by Alvin Stardust.
FIRE closed the main A19 Tees viaduct for two hours at Middlesbrough last night.
The blaze broke out 50ft up on the road deck of the flyover at Middlesbrough.
Teesside trains were also stopped when firemen discovered a gas cylinder near the fire.
It is understood to have started when tarpaulin sheeting blew on to heaters drying a new resin coating on repair work.
Three appliances and a hydraulic platform tackled the blaze.
Extensive steelwork in the bridge rendered firemen's radios useless and communication between the 16-man team almost impossible.
Raider flees with off-licence cash AN armed robber wearing a rubber mask escaped with a cash haul from a Teesside off-licence.
The raider, carrying what appeared to be a firearm, burst into Victoria Wines in Woodrow Avenue, Marton, Middlesbrough.
The male assistant handed over a small sum of money and the robber escaped on foot towards Marton Road.
Cleveland Police are appealing for witnesses who might have seen the man as he left the premises at about 8.50pm on Thursday night.
The man is described as 5'9’ -5'10’tall and wore a brown leather bomber jacket and the costume mask.
Anyone with information is asked to contact police on 0642–326326.
Safety visit:
After an early morning visit yesterday to Wilton Village following complaints of speeding drivers, Langbaurgh councillors recommended another ‘slow’ sign and repainting of other warning signs.
Roads closed:
Two slip roads off the A19 in Cleveland have been closed for resurfacing work to be carried out.
The northbound exits to the A139 and A179 interchanges will be shut until 6am on Monday.
Diversions have been set up.
In residence:
An artist appointed to depict life along the River Tees will be working at the Gray Art Gallery and Museum in Hartlepool during March and April.
Graham Crowley is one of four artists working on Riverscape, an international initiative developed by Cleveland Arts and Teesside Tomorrow.
Road works:
Cleveland County Council has announced that it intends to close Church Bank on Church Lane in Elwick, near Hartlepool, for about three weeks from March 1 for work to be carried out to prevent a verge from subsiding.
Theft sentence:
Andrew Tombs, 27, of Stokesley, North Yorkshire, agreed to carry out 150 hours community service after pleading guilty at Teesside Crown Court to stealing equipment valued at £7,400 from Tarmac Construction, while working for them as a drainer on a building site in the town.
Cars crash:
Two cars, including an unmarked police car, collided on the northbound carriageway of the A19 at Elwick, near Hartlepool, yesterday.
No one was seriously hurt.
Banks moved:
Recycling banks in Coulby Newham, Middlesbrough, are to be moved temporarily from the Parkway Centre to Langdon Sqaure Community Centre car park while redevelopment is carried out.
Show of force:
Cleveland Soroptimists are to present a show by Cleveland Police in aid of North of England Children's Cancer Research at the Redcar Bowl on March 19 at 7pm.
Real prize:
Redcar off-licence manager Bob Thomas has won £150 of shopping vouchers in a Coca-Cola sales initiative.
Photo call:
Loftus Library is looking for old photographs of the area to replace its original file of old photos which went missing some months ago.
The main periods of interest range from the late 1800s to the Second World War.
In control:
Longlands College in Middlesbrough is the first college in the country to train engineers and technicians in the use of Fisher Controls valves and regulators vital to the safety of heavy industrial processes throughout the world.
Today's wills
HARTLEPOOL:
Keith Douglas Hunter, of Wilton Road, left £176,765 net.
NEWTON UNDER ROSEBERRY: Mildred Patricia Whitehead, of Old Hall, left £215,145 net.
A TEENAGER who broke almost every important bone in his body when his speeding car collided with a van escaped being locked up yesterday.
Shaun Largue had admitted reckless driving at Teesside Crown Court.
The court heard Largue, 19, was driving over Victoria Bridge, Stockton, at at least 50mph in a 30mph limit zone.
He lost control of his car and collided with a van being driven by self-employed glazier Stephen Whitehead.
Mr Whitehead was off work for six weeks following the accident and Largue spent two weeks in intensive care.
He broke both legs, his jaw, nose, hip and wrist and suffered a fractured skull.
Mr Recorder Paul Worsley QC said he was considering a custodial sentence to deter other young drivers from driving recklessly.
But yesterday he gave Largue, of Acklam Road, Middlesbrough, a community service order for 100 hours and ordered him to pay £500 costs.
He banned him from driving for 18 months.
Mr Recorder Worsley said: ‘You have seen the suffering your mother has gone through.
You broke nearly every important bone in your body as a result of your driving.
It is no exaggeration to say your life will never be quite the same again.’
Largue was an apprentice turner but because of his injuries is now unable to lift heavy objects and is now retraining to be an electronic engineer.
Laurence Hazell, defending, said he would not appear in court again.
Driver hits police car
A MAN has been injured in a road smash on Teesside involving a police car.
The unnamed driver was hurt when the box van he was driving collided with an empty patrol car parked on the A66 at Middlesbrough.
He was described as having slight injuries.
Police closed off the westbound carriageway for an hour.
Ski appeal:
More than 200 skiers have answered an appeal for instructors at the Eston Hills Ski Village, near Middlesbrough.
Once the country's largest dry ski-slope is fully operational it is hoped to offer up to 70 part-time jobs to experienced skiers.
Pay pledge:
North Yorkshire's chief education officer Fred Evans has assured schools staff that the new 7.5pc pay award for teachers will not lead to loss of jobs.
Leader's speech:
York City Council Labour leader Rod Hill gives the key note speech at a major conference in York on April 7.
The conference will examine the quality of service councils give to the public.
Bridge boost:
A local charity was £750 better off yesterday thanks to a bridge evening held thousands of miles away.
The cash for York Against Cancer was raised at an event in the British Embassy at Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, organised by Mary Masefield, whose husband is a pilot based in Saudi.
In the swim:
A sponsored swim by 61 probationary police officers at Aykley Heads, the North-East District Training Centre in Durham, has raised £1,227 for the British Epilepsy Association.
Court closed:
Whitby's main magistrates court closes next week for repairs.
The main job is to mend the court's flat roof which leaks in heavy rain and lets water run down the interior walls.
New rules:
Rules change on Monday for disabled drivers using orange badge parking discs.
North Yorkshire police warned yesterday that if people failed to display the discs in accordance with regulations they would be prosecuted.
Coming down:
People in the Redcar area should not be alarmed if they hear a loud bang tomorrow morning.
A concrete chimney is to be demolished in a controlled explosion at British Steel's Pellet plant at 10am.
Shops centre attack probe
THREE men were last night helping police with their inquiries into a vicious attack on a security guard in Hartlepool's Middleton Grange Shopping Centre.
Horrified shoppers watched as Darren Caygill was knocked to the ground, suffering a broken nose.
He is understood to have approached the youths about an alleged assault in which a shop assistant was hurt.
Peto help:
The new Peto Institute in London will benefit from a Special Events Appeal Day held by the Spastics Society in their shops across Britain, including those in Darlington, Barnard Castle, Stockton, Middlesbrough, Whitby and Scarborough, today.
Back home:
Aid worker Rod Jones was expected back in Middlesbrough today after an arduous trip to take milk to Romanian babies.
He is in a bad state of health, said his Romanian-born wife Fanica last night.
Appeal lost:
John Munroe, 35, of Ablemarle Crescent, Scarborough, had his appeal against a three month sentence for theft and handling stolen goods dismissed after York Crown Court heard he was caught on film selling a stolen compact disc player.
Welder ‘stable’:
Welder George Wallace, 50, of Hipsburn Drive, Humbleton Hill, Sunderland, who was thrown from the top of a chemical tank at a Consett factory when the solvent it contained exploded, was in a stable condition at Newcastle General Hospital yesterday.
Drugs charge:
David Gerald Swales, 22, unemployed, of Severn Way, Darlington, was jailed for nine months by Judge William Hannah, at Teesside Crown Court, after he admitted possessing LSD with intent to supply.
Car theft:
Terence Dowse, 25, of Hamilton Drive, Marske-by-Sea, Cleveland, was given a nine month suspended prison sentence by Teesside Crown Court after he admitted stealing a car and handling stolen goods.
Rock mystery:
A major rock band will be performing at the Gateshead International Stadium this summer, it is expected to be announced on Monday.
And rumour has it that the big-name band will be outrageous rockers Guns N' Roses.
Smoke talk:
Youth workers from all over North Yorkshire will meet today at the Galtres Centre in Easingwold for a special conference on smoking.
Healthy growth:
The award-winning Yorkshire Heartbeat scheme to promote healthy eating in pubs across Yorkshire is to be extended.
BURGLARS who broke into a pensioner's home probably couldn't believe their luck.
They discovered a cash-box, crammed full with notes £12,000 in £20 notes and £9,000 in £50 notes.
But they are the old-style notes without silver strips although legal tender could arouse suspicion.
And the police have alerted banks, building societies, pubs and traders to look out for the notes.
The money was taken from the home of a 66-year-old retired businessman in North Ormesby, Middlesbrough.
Det Con Gary Wilson, of North Ormesby CID, said: ‘This money was the man's life savings.
‘We urge people not to keep large sums of money in their houses.
The safest place for any significant amount has to be the bank.’
WHEN beat bobby Bill Clapperton needs to escape the pressures of urban policing he takes to the hills.
And the Cleveland police constable hopes others will follow in his footsteps and ease the pressures on one of Britain's most famous walks.
Bill has devised a coast to coast walk to rival the hike made famous by Lakeland legend Alfred Wainwright.
Though he prefers to call it the Hospice Coast to Coast, ramblers have already nicknamed the route Clapperton's Way.
The walk stretches 154 miles from Morecambe in Lancashire through Cumbria and ends in Scarborough.
Now fully waymarked, the route is described in a booklet which has just been released.
All profits will go to the Teesside Hospice which is on Bill's beat in Middlesbrough, Cleveland.
‘I've always wanted to walk Coast to Coast, but Wainwright's route is getting very worn in places now.
‘In many ways it has become a victim of its own success.
Often there are crowds of people doing parts of it and landowners and farmers are complaining.’
The booklet contains photographs taken by Bill, a list of  accommodation , local stories and descriptions of the wildlife seen on the route in May.
‘People can either do the walk in one spell or a bit every weekend, though they should complete it in a 12-month period’ said Bill.
‘It's designed for walkers of all abilities, the longest stretch is nine miles and although there are two large climbs up Ingleborough and Pen-Y-Ghent these can be bypassed.’
For Bill the highlight of the walk is the spectacular views from the Hambleton Hills.
Like Wainwright he hopes his route will be used only as a guide and people will branch off in parts to find their own little routes.
‘I'd recommend walking to anyone, when you are out in the countryside you forget all about work and the bills coming through the post all the stress of everyday life disappears.
‘Initially I planned this simply because I wanted to go from coast to coast, but then I thought I might as well try and raise some money for the hospice which is on my beat.
‘Hopefully people will buy the booklet and will be sponsored for a good cause when they do the walk so charity will gain twice.’
Bill has plenty more  photographs and stories about his walk and if it proves popular hopes to bring out a hardback guidebook.
Unlike Wainwright, Bill doesn't specify that walkers should go from West to East.
And anyone competing his walk won't get a free beer as with Wainwrights but can apply for a badge.
The booklet can be obtained by sending £1.80 and a large stamped addressed enveloped to the Teesside Hospice Care Foundation, 10a Cambridge Road, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, Cleveland TS5 5NQ.
A LIFEBOAT crew plucked a young man to safety from the freezing North Sea.
‘It's one of those occasions when you know you have saved a life,’ said Teesmouth lifeboat coxswain Peter Race.
Shivering John Dunn was saved by the seven-strong crew of the Phil Meade after he was swept out to sea near South Gare, Redcar, at noon on Saturday.
The 19-year-old spent about half an hour in the water, clinging to a plastic ‘play’ dinghy.
Mr Dunn, of Springvale Road, Whinney Banks, Middlesbrough, was pulled about half a mile out to sea.
When he was rescued by lifeboat crews, he was suffering from hypothermia.
‘He was incoherent and shivering violently,’ said Mr Race.
The lifeboat crew took the victim to Tees Dock, where an ambulance was waiting to rush him to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Mr Dunn was discharged later in the day, but was ‘very lucky’, according to the Tyne Tees coastguard.
‘We were alerted by a 999 call from the pilot station at the mouth of the Tees,’ said a spokesman.
‘If we hadn't got the lifeboat out quickly, he would have died.’
Mr Dunn is believed to have been enjoying a morning's fun in the spring sunshine.
When his dinghy blew out to sea, he swum after it, not realising the strength of the waves.
‘Lightweight dinghies shouldn't be used unless they are tethered to the shore,’ said Peter Race.
‘It was glorious weather and very pleasant generally if you stayed out of the water but once you're in the water, you are in trouble at this time of year.’
SCOTT Garthwaite's mum Susan thought he would never hear again when he went deaf at the age of two.
But she was overjoyed last year when Scott, now 12, announced: ‘I can hear myself laugh.’
His mum recalled the day.
‘He just laughed louder and louder,’ she said.
‘It was one of the best things that's ever happened.’
Scott is one of 12 people who have  benefited from cochlear implantation at North Riding Infirmary in Middlesbrough.
The NRI's cochlear implantation programme met all its first year targets and on Saturday, a purpose-built unit was officially opened by entertainer Alvin Stardust.
Scott, of Holt Street, Hartlepool, was the youngest person to have the implant when he was treated at the NRI last October.
One of the oldest was 58-year-old Violet Homer.
Although confined to a wheelchair for most of her life, Violet was active in church life and helped out with a local Brownie pack.
Then three years ago, she lost her hearing and seemed destined for a life of isolation before she underwent the operation.
Three more people have been prepared for the surgery, which involves implanting electrodes into the inner ear.
ONE man was killed and nine others injured, including two critically, in an horrific crash involving a football supporters minibus on the A66 transPennine road yesterday.
The hired minibus, which was carrying a group of Newcastle United fans, collided with a Vauxhall Cavalier a mile west of Bowes at 8.10am on a section being converted to dual carriageway.
The accident, which left wreckage spread over a wide area, blocked the road causing severe traffic disruption.
All east bound traffic was diverted until noon.
Ambulances from Darlington, Bishop Auckland, Middleton-in-Teesdale, Crook and Cumbria ferried the injured to hospital.
The car driver, Brian Edward Boyle, 37, of Howe Hill Close, Yafforth, Northallerton, died at the scene.
Firemen had to cut his body free from the wreckage.
Nine others travelling in the minibus, which was returning the from game at Port Vale, were injured.
They are all from Co Durham.
The driver, Gary Hutchinson, 25, of Frederick Street, Meadowfield, is critical in Darlington Memorial Hospital with serious multiple injuries.
Tony Curl, 23, of Black Road, Langley Moor, is also critically ill in Middlesbrough General Hospital with serious head injuries.
Ian Dye, 25, of Dorlonco Villas, Meadowfield and Peter Nolan, 23, of Hemmel Court, Brandon are ‘poorly but stable’.
Mr Dye is in intensive care with head injuries while Mr Nolan has chest injuries.
David Dobson, 22, of Elm Avenue, Brandon, has head injuries and is described as ‘stable’.
Norman Reeve, 24, of Alder Park, Brandon received multiple bruising and Peter Clark, 25, of South View, Meadowfield suffered leg injuries.
Both are described as ‘fairly comfortable’.
Stephen Richardson, 21, Murrayfield Drive, Brandon suffered a broken leg and is ‘stable’.
All are detained in Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Barry Graham, 26, of Tyree Close, Brandon and Jason Murray, 21, of Victoria Avenue, Brandon were treated for minor injuries and discharged.
BAIRDWEAR has closed its Newton Aycliffe factory with the loss of 95 jobs it was revealed yesterday.
The job losses are a further milestone in the decline of County Durham's textile industry which has suffered  severely during the current economic recession.
Regional organiser at the General and Municipal Boilermakers' Union Derek Cattell said: ‘The workforce were told of the closure by managing director Tony Jowett.
He said the factory's problems were due to lack of sales.
He said he saw no short-term upturn in the economy and, in fact, said the recession was getting worse.’
The Aycliffe factory makes nightwear, for men and women, and the union believed this sector would be safe during the economic slump as other luxury items would suffer more as the pockets of the consumer got tighter.
Mr Cattell said: ‘We had been expecting bad news but had no idea where the axe would fall.
We thought this operation would be safe from the recession.’
Last night a spokesman for the company confirmed Bairdwear was closing its Aycliffe operation.
He added that efforts were being made to transfer staff to other North-East factories in the group.
The former N Hyer factory was bought by Scots company William Baird two years ago when parent company Paisley Hyer went into receivership.
The union is currently in negotiation with management about the transfer of staff to the company's Ferryhill factory, but the total number of jobs expected to be created in a transfer will probably be less than 30.
Mr Cattell said: ‘Job cuts in the textile industry do not normally attract a lot of attention because it  largely employs women, but textiles is a very important part of the North-East's economy and a very important source of employment.’
Early last year Bairdwear closed its factories at Middlesbrough, where it employed more than 80 workers, and at Fencehouses in Durham with the loss of 40 jobs.
The closure of Bairdwear at Aycliffe brings the total number of textile job losses in South Wear Durham and Cleveland over the past 12 months to more than 1,000.
Last year Ramar Textiles at Crooks axed more than 500 jobs when it went into administrative receivership and similar jobs losses were announced in Darlington and Aycliffe.
Recently Berghaus on Tyneside revealed it was reducing its workforce by 60 jobs as part of a cost-cutting exercise prompted by the recession.
Lesiure pool plans in the spotlight
DETAILED plans for a £4.63m leisure pool for Middlesbrough go before councillors this week.
The ambitious project could form part of a huge development by Cameron Hall in the centre of the town.
Wave machines, water rides, flumes, a beach area, water cannons, whirlpools and geysers are all featured in the plans.
Council officers believe 300,000 people could use the leisure pool during its first year.
If all goes to plan, the pool to be sited in Gilkes Street could be open by April, 1995.
Bike campaign:
Police are out to stop the East Cleveland bike thieves, who stole 500 cycles worth £75,000 last year.
Officers will stop cyclists throughout March and offer crime prevention advice.
They will also security stamp cycles at Redcar Police station every Sunday in March from 11am-3pm.
Home blaze:
Firemen were called to the Manor Park Clinic pensioner's home in Hartlepool on Saturday night where rubbish in a waste bin was alight.
Carpet and a plastic footstool was damaged in the fire.
Matron dies:
Constance Turner, matron of the Teesside Leonard Cheshire Home at Marske Hall, has died suddenly at the age of 58.
Poly posts:
Teesside Polytechnic has appointed three academics Graham Street, Dr Gurdial Singh and Dr Joe McGuinnis to posts created by the Richard Lines Award.
Mr Lines, chairman of the polytechnic's board of governors, donated £100,000 to develop research into chemical and biotechnological sciences.
500 up: A food safety registration scheme in Middlesbrough signs up its 500th customer today Chinese restaurant The Jade Garden.
Middlesbrough Council expects to have 1,000 firms on the register by May 1.
Winner Jean: The winds of fate blew for Jean Morris, winner of Middlesbrough Council's Captain Cook Birthday Balloon Race.
Set off last October to mark the anniversary of the explorer's birth, all but one of the balloons are believed to have drifted out to sea.
Jean's landed safely in Sunderland and its return means she wins a trip to London to see Joseph and his Amazing Technicolour Dreamcoat.
TWO MEN were killed and eight others injured, including one critically, in an horrific crash involving a football supporters minibus on the A66 trans-Pennine road yesterday.
The hired minibus, which was carrying a group of Newcastle United fans, collided with a Vauxhall Cavalier a mile west of Bowes at 8.10am on a section being converted to dual carriageway.
The accident, which left wreckage spread over a wide area, blocked the road causing severe traffic disruption.
All east bound traffic was diverted until noon.
Ambulances from Darlington, Bishop Auckland, Crook, Middletonin-Teesdale and Cumbria ferried the injured to hospital.
The car driver, Brian Edward Boyle, 37, of Howe Hill Close, Yafforth, Northallerton, died at the scene.
Firemen had to cut his body free from the wreckage.
The minibus driver, Gary Hutchinson, 25, of Frederick Street, Meadowfield, died as a result of his injuries last night in Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Eight others from Langley Moor, Brandon and Meadowfield travelling in the minibus, which was returning the from game at Port Vale, were injured.
Tony Curl, 23, is critically ill in Middlesbrough General Hospital with serious head injuries.
Ian Dye, 25, with head injuries and Peter Nolan, 23, with chest  injuries are ‘poorly but stable’…
David Dobson, 22, has head injuries and is described as ‘stable’.
Norman Reeve, 24, received multiple bruising and Peter Clark, 25, suffered leg injuries.
Both are described as ‘fairly comfortable’.
Stephen Richardson, 21, suffered a broken leg and is ‘stable’.
All are detained in Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Barry Graham, 26, and Jason Murray, 21, were treated for minor injuries and discharged.
New life:
Kidney patient and senior registrar at South Cleveland hospital, Dr Marion Stevens who three years ago could barely move due to her illness is becoming medical director of Teesside Hospice partly due to her work on the new drug which changed her life.
Shake-up: The Royal Shakespeare Company launched the Cleveland Schools Shakespeare Year at the weekend with a teachers' workshop.
Andrew Wade, head of voice at the RSC, and three RSC education officers guided teachers through Romeo and Juliet at Hall Garth School, Middlesbrough.
A series of events for teachers and students will culminate in a Shakespeare festival next year.
Crime audit:
Hartlepool Council is taking part in a crime audit organised by Newcastle University student Rebecca Walker and funded by the town's Safer Cities initiative which aims to detail the costs of crime, and help plan a crime prevention strategy.
Drive offences:
Neil Ashurst, 24, of Sycamore Drive, Brotton, was fined £630 and was banned from driving for two years by Whitby magistrates yesterday after he admitted driving while drunk, without L-plates and insurance and also while not being supervised.
He was also ordered to pay £25 costs.
TV raid: Ram raiders smashed a car through the front window of a Granada TV store in Westgate, Guisborough, yesterday at 5.40am and made off with more than £2,000 worth of video recorders.
Anyone with information can contact the police on .
Girl safe:
Cleveland teenager Carrie Gallagher, 13, who caused concern when she was reported missing from her home in Declarden Road, Pallister Park, Middlesbrough, had been staying overnight with a friend.
Drop in:
Fire fighters were called to free a blocked roof drain which was causing flooding problems in classrooms at Kings Manor School, Middlesbrough.
Asbestos death:
A retired joiner who had worked at Smith's Dock, Middlesbrough, fitting asbestos lagging in ships died in hospital due to asbestosis.
Cleveland deputy coroner Ronald Smith said Arthur Goodhill, 78, of Laburnum Road, Redcar, died of an industrial disease.
Raid reward:
A reward is being offered for information leading to the conviction of burglars who escaped with thousands of pounds after breaking into the Alliance and Leicester Building Society in York Road, Hartlepool, between 10pm and 11pm on Saturday.
Anyone with information should contact detectives on .
Work disease:
A retired assistant fitter who had worked with asbestos in ICI Teesside died in hospital due to asbestosis.
Cleveland deputy coroner Ronald Smith said Hayden Corner, 69, of Woodhouse Road, Guisborough, died of an industrial disease.
Road injury:
Norman Askew, 59, of Victoria Avenue, Redcar, was taken to the intensive care unit of Middlesbrough General Hospital with serious head injuries last night after he was struck by a car in Redcar Road, Marske.
Bags snatch:
Police believe two teenage youths stole two handbags and a purse from blind Middlesbrough pensioner Bella Foster, 94, of Fulbeck Road, Netherfields, Middlesbrough, on Monday.
A total of £130 was stolen.
Name and number:
The owner of Wendy House, Yarm Road, Eaglescliffe, is to have a postal number to assist callers, Stockton council environment and general services committee agreed.
Info centre:
The St John's Ambulance station on the sea front at Seaton Carew has been earmarked as the site of a new tourist information centre.
The first aiders will be given alternative premises.
More copies:
The success of the new tourism brochure Hartlepool, History in the Making, has prompted the borough council to order a second batch of 20,000 copies.
Star student:
Tracey Watson, a former student at Kirby College, Middlesbrough, who now works for the personnel department of South Cleveland Hospital, was yesterday presented with the Northern Council for Further Education's regional student of the year award.
New name:
Houses to be built on the site of the former Cameron maternity hospital in Hartlepool are to be named Greenbank Court.
MYSTERY surrounds the death of an ex-para who disappeared after a row with his wife about who should sign greetings cards.
Ethel Topp told an inquest in Middlesbrough, Cleveland, that the last she saw of her 72-year-old husband Edmund was when he went out to ‘clear his head’ on December 14 last year.
A massive police search was launched for the former paratrooper involving 25 officers, a search and rescue team, dogs and horses.
At a press conference Mr Topp's son Alan told how his dad walked out of his home in Oxbridge Court, Stockton, Cleveland, after a row with Mrs Topp about who should sign Christmas cards.
Mr Topp's body was found 23 days later in the River Tees at Thornaby, Cleveland.
No one saw how he came to be in the water.
Mrs Topp, 69, told the coroner: ‘He said he was going for a walk around the block to clear his head.
That was the last I saw of him.’
Mr Topp served as a para during the Second World War and was captured by the SS after parachuting into Arnhem.
Pathologist Dr John McCarthy said Mr Topp had probably drowned on the day he went missing.
He said sand had been put in the pockets of Mr Topp's jacket.
The pensioner's GP, James Harley, said he had seen Mr Topp two months before his disappearance and he was displaying early signs of dementia.
Cleveland coroner Michael Sheffield said death was due to drowning and recorded an open verdict.
A THIEF who stole from cars was jailed for a year yesterday.
Judge Geoffrey Vos told Brendan Glorney: ‘In this particular part of the country the stealing of or from cars has become an absolute epidemic.
‘Nobody dare leave their car anywhere it seems to me, be it outside their own house, place of business, car park or anywhere else.
‘I think all criminals know what to expect if they monkey about with other people's motorcars.’
Glorney, 25, of Woodlands Road, Middlesbrough, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted three offences of theft, handling stolen goods and obtaining by deception.
Judge Vos said had Glorney appeared only on the charges of stealing a television and video recorder and obtaining a meal in a restaurant he would not have considered a prison sentence.
But he said: ‘For the offences involving or linked to theft from cars particularly while committed on bail I feel no other sentence than a custodial one would be appropriate.’
Jamie Hill, defending, said Glorney's marriage had broken down and his despair manifested itself in him turning to drink and committing offences.
AN EMPLOYEE stole his boss's BMW car and sold it to make up for wages he had not been paid, a court heard.
Dean Bexton sold the car for £500 although it was worth £2,000.
He also sold tools which belonged to the firm.
Yesterday Bexton, 24, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted two offences of theft and one offence of obtaining by deception.
Judge Geoffrey Vos fined him a total of £610.
The court heard Bexton, of Thornton Street, North Ormesby, Middlesbrough, was employed by Torre Thorssen to work on his private boat at Middlesbrough docks.
As part of his employment he used the BMW and tools.
But when Mr Thorssen went on holiday Bexton sold them.
Peter Armstrong, for Bexton, said he had been taken on and offered a wage of £170 a week.
He said: ‘Bexton was working a week in hand and at the end of the first period when he went to claim his wages there was no one there and Mr Thorssen had disappeared.
‘Bexton thought he had gone back to Norway and no money had been left for him.
His instinct of dishonesty came to the fore again and he thought a way to get the money would be to take the car which he was allowed to use but not to sell.’
He said Bexton was now working for his brother-in-law.
THE charity Dreams Come True was presented with £850 by Cleveland County Caterers in Middlesbrough yesterday.
It will go towards the setting up of a north-eastern branch of the charity which arranges holidays for children with terminal illnesses.
The idea for the branch came from four nurses at South Cleveland Hospital.
A ONCE-blind Middlesbrough civil servant who regained his sight is back in town this month to shed light on his recovery.
Andrew Miles was born blind in his left eye and lost his sight completely at 26 due to glaucoma.
Andrew, now 37, withdrew from society but a new beginning started in 1987 when he met Wendy Screaton, now 24, at a guide dog training centre.
They married and guide dog Peter was best ‘man’.
While holidaying in Scotland the couple became committed Christians and Andrew believes his recovery was God's will.
They gave up their home in South Bank and are now at St Andrew's Bible College, Malton.
He said his return to vision was foreseen by evangelists in 1990 who prayed that his sight may be restored.
Within four months he was able to drive again.
‘When I went to the opticians to see if my eyesight was good enough for driving she said it was beyond all medical explanation, it had to be a miracle,’ he said.
‘The doctors can not explain it, neither can anyone else,’ said Andrew who is staying with friends in Nunthorpe.
Gone out:
Firemen from Billingham attended Redpath Offshore, Port Clarence, after a compressor caught fire yesterday morning but the fire was out on their arrival and there were no injuries.
Fatal accident:
Norman Askew, 59, of Victoria Avenue, Redcar, knocked down by a car near St.Bede's School, Marske on Monday has since died in hospital from the head injuries he received in the accident.
Dream trip:
Multiple sclerosis sufferer Nicola Jones, 18, who attends Thornhill Special School in Hartlepool, has scooped one of just 24 places on a month-long expedition from Peking to Pakistan organised by the Journey of a Lifetime Trust.
She won her place after impressing the charity with an essay about herself and how she could benefit others.
Top marks:
A group of Hartlepool women have successfully taken the first step towards a career in creche work.
They all took top honours in the City and Guilds/Northern Council creche workers course organised by the borough council's Women's Opportunities Project.
Man taunted:
David Garrington, 26, of Wynyard Road, Hartlepool, punched another man because he was being taunted about his stammer and blindness in one eye, the town's magistrates heard yesterday.
Garrington admitted assault occasioning actual bodily harm on Ian Dixon and he was fined £50.
Magistrates declined to order compensation because they said he had been provoked.
Link data:
A three-year research programme to identify links between local air quality and respiratory disease is being carried out by Teesside Polytechnic with the aid of a £3,000 grant from Middlesbrough council towards its cost.
Doorstep attack:
Police are appealing for witnesses after Thomas McKeowen, 48, of Mattison Avenue, Whinney Banks, Middlesbrough, was brutally attacked and robbed by two youths as he opened his front.
Anyone who can help should contact detectives on Middlesbrough 301733.
FOUR trains were cancelled in the North-East yesterday.
A BR spokeswoman said: ‘This was only four trains out of 1,600 in the whole of the regional railway network.
This was unusual as we normally have a better record of reliability than that.’
The 7.05 from Hartlepool to Darlington and the 7.57 from Darlington to Hartlepool were both cancelled and passengers transferred to buses.
A 6am train from Sunderland to Newcastle was cancelled and passengers transported by bus.
The 11am from Middlesbrough to Hexham was cancelled between Middlesbrough and Newcastle.
The 2pm InterCity from King's Cross to Glasgow via Darlington and Newcastle was 25 minutes late.
CAMPAIGNERS last night called for investment in North-East rail services and dismissed the Passenger's Charter as meaningless.
Brian Milnes, secretary of the Cleveland Transport 2000 pressure group, said the charter  benefited the South rather than the North.
He said:’ It is designed mostly for London and turns reality on its head because it is dealing with late trains.
‘The major problem in the North-East is that we have been savaged by cuts in the timetable following on from totally unreliable services.
‘We need to go back to 1979 when we had adequate services up here, when there were eleven trains a day from Hartlepool to Darlington, not three as there now are and from May there will be none at all.
‘The Whitby line service was halved in the 1980s; while the last train from Middlesbrough to Darlington or Newcastle is at 9pm.’
Coun David Walsh, chairman of Cleveland County Council's economic development and transportation committee, was equally damning.
He said: ‘For the travelling public of Cleveland, the charter his hyperbole.
It will not make up for the insufficient level of public services that Cleveland has been given by BR.’
‘Four trains a day between Whitby and Middlesbrough and an almost skeleton service on the main line to Darlington is no advert for the railway system.
We need a properly resourced railway network not an empty piece of paper.’
The charter received a more cautious welcome from Ernie Preston, North-East spokesman for the transport users' consultative committee.
He said:’ At least some passengers now have an automatic right to redress their problems.
But we would have liked to have seen refunds in cash.’
Mr Preston was concerned about the one-hour delay factor for compensation.
‘On a long journey this may be reasonable, but if you are travelling a short distance you don't want to wait an hour.
I just hope BR in future will go a little bit further down the consumer road.’
DOOR staff at nightclubs and pubs in Cleveland might in future need a licence to work in the county.
A Cleveland police-inspired training and registration scheme has been approved by Middlesbrough Council's public protection committe.
A police report said the scheme would improve the image of Middlesbrough town centre night-life.
Some of the doormen had criminal convictions and a history of violence.
Serious incidents had  occurred in recent years and one man was serving a prison sentence after his conviction in 1991 for manslaughter, the report said.
At his trial it was revealed he had previously been involved in an incident whilst working as a door supervisor when another person died.
On that occasion he received a sentence of imprisonment for causing grievous bodily harm.
Similar schemes have been established in Westminster and Derby city centre.
Cleveland police have studied the Derby operation and hope to use the same type of scheme.
In Derby it is a condition on the public entertainment licence for all licensed premises employing doormen.
Agreement is being sought from the Clerk to the Licensing Justices to have the condition included on the Justices Licence.
The scheme could come into effect next year.
NO ONE is going to get rich quickly under British Rail's new Passenger's Charter.
Far from being a jackpot for commuters, the compensation payouts are hardly likely to be worth the flutter.
I set out for an appointment in Sunderland on the day of its launch, full of hope as York station's displays indicated the 11.34 InterCity to Newcastle was running ten minutes late.
That stretched to 13 by the time it rolled in at 11.47 to loudspeaker apologies reporting technical problems at Peterborough.
Sunderland hasn't yet achieved the fame it deserves for being Britain's newest city nowhere is it to be seen on York station's platform timetables.
Regardless, a 12-minute delay before I had started and the pound signs were ringing up.
But despite a minor stoppage outside splendid sunlit Durham, you could feel the power of the new class 91 locomotives clawing back at the clock on the run in to Newcastle.
We arrived just nine minutes late within the ten minute target outlined in the charter.
I queued up at the travel centre to pick up my copy.
It took eight minutes, outside of the three minutes aimed at for a wait at ticket offices, but the charter makes no distinction or offer of compensation for that delay.
And I was still in time for my 13.15 departure to Sunderland across the footbridge.
The diesel unit had no problem in arriving on time 45 minutes later.
Delays need to be of more than an hour before compensation is paid out, and even then you need to have bought your ticket before knowing about the hold-up.
But if the delay is caused by vandalism by far one of the biggest causes in the North-East or terrorism, forget it.
After lunch in Sunderland, I took the coastal route home, hoping the notorious Hartlepool to Middlesbrough line could secure my fortune.
It was not to be.
Unprompted, helpful conductors advised me to change at Thornaby and on approaching Darlington, to head for platform one.
Even at windswept Thornaby where facilities can best be described as minimal, I checked the charter during my 15 minute wait for a connection.
But stations particularly unstaffed appear not to fall within its remit.
Copies of the charter were being given out during the rush hour at Darlington but connections proved not to be the best with an hour wait for the next train south.
And it was on time.
But the first public glimpses of the charter were proving to be a disappointment.
One disgruntled woman found it disgusting that 35 people could be expected to stand per 100 seated, with no guarantee of a seat.
Whether BR pulled out the stops yesterday to give the charter a smooth launch remains to be seen, but it doesn't promise a lot, and admits it.
‘These standards are in place now.
Some of them are below the level you expect and below the standards we want to provide,’ it says.
As I arrived back in York just before 6pm on time and with little hope of a refund there was just one conclusion.
Whichever form of transport you use, your arrival on time is always hit and miss.
And who do you turn to for compensation if you've just spent two hours in an eight-mile tailback on the A1?.
AN OLD couple died of heart attacks after a traffic incident in which neither suffered injury, an inquest heard.
Cleveland Coroner Michael Sheffield recorded verdicts of death from natural causes on James McGinley, 86, a retired bricklayer, and his wife Ivy, 80, both of Newstead Road, Middlesbrough.
The couple were crossing Park Vale Road in the town on their way home when they were seen by car driver David Buxton, of Brattenham Avenue, Easterside, Middlesbrough.
He told the police they were wearing dark clothing.
He braked hard and managed to stop before impact, but the woman fell on to the road in front of his car.
PC Richard Parry said the car was very dirty and a detailed inspection failed to find any sign that it had made contact with the two pedestrians.
They were taken by ambulance to Middlesbrough General Hospital where Mrs McGinley died later the same evening.
A post mortem examination revealed she had suffered a heart attack at the time of the accident.
Her husband, who suffered from Alzheimer's disease, was detained in hospital and sedated pending geriatric assessment.
He was discharged to Elton Hall Nursing Home, Elton, Stockton, where he died eight days later due to acute coronary deficiency.
Mr Sheffield said the acute coronary attack suffered by Mrs McGinley would have resulted in her falling down in the path of the car.
Post-mortem examinations on each of the deceased showed no signs of injuries which could have been caused by contact with the car, he said.
Second fire at farm probed
POLICE and fire brigade experts are investigating the second blaze in a fortnight at a farm on the Mulgrave estate near Whitby.
The second fire, on Wednesday night, in a large store at Overdale Farm at Goldsborough near Whitby is being treated as suspicious.
The first fire was in the same store.
Man stabbed:
Detectives are investigating a stabbing in Station Road, Shotton Colliery on Wednesday which left an 18-year-old East Durham man with a serious stomach wound.
He discharged himself from Hartlepool General Hospital yesterday and last night detectives were waiting to question him as part of their inquiries.
Kin sought:
Police are anxious to trace the relatives of Stanley Dack, 83, of Westcott House, Berwick Hills, Middlesbrough, who died on Wednesday.
Telephone Cleveland police on .
Boys quizzed:
Four boys were last night helping police with their inquiries into two separate fires in Peterlee.
In one, a disabled man who lives in Kemp Road was taken to Hartlepool General Hospital suffering from the effects of smoke after fire broke out in a neighbouring house.
The second fire occurred at Acre Rigg Junior School.
Badly hurt:
Kevin Tearney, 36, of Ellenmere Court, Billingham, Cleveland is critically ill in Middlesbrough General Hospital, after being knocked down by a car in Marsh House Avenue, Billingham.
PAUL Frost's luck was in when he took on Sue Kane, manager of Ladbrokes new Middlesbrough betting shop, in a penalty shoot-out.
The television personality won £200 for the North Tees Scanner Appeal and hoping his good fortune would last for the rest of the day he put £50 on Middlesbrough to beat Manchester United at odds of 3–1, and £150 on Robins Son, running in the 4pm race at Catterick.
The new betting shop in Albert Road was  officially opened by Richard Carter, sales director of Ladbroke Racing.
A CHRISTMAS Day burglary was foiled by a passer-by who called the police and then followed the suspects into an alleyway, a court heard yesterday.
Simon Lee was awarded £150 by Judge William Crawford at Teesside Crown Court.
Mr Lee, of Merrykirk Road, Thornaby, spotted two men trying to break into a butcher's shop in Acklam Road, Middlesbrough.
Yesterday David Binks, 19, and John Dalziell, 44, appeared before the court and admitted burglary.
Binks, of Barnaby Avenue, Middlesbrough, was put on a community service order of 60 hours and ordered to pay £70 costs.
Dalziell, of Springvale Avenue, Middlesbrough, was put on probation for 12 months and ordered to pay £120 costs.
POLICE discovered three wardrobes full of stolen clothes in a shoplifter's home, a court heard.
Most of the 44 stolen items still had price tags on them.
Yesterday, Ellen Burton, 26, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted five offences of theft.
Judge William Crawford sentenced her to three months in jail suspended for two years and ordered her to pay £50 costs.
Peter Armstrong, prosecuting, said police went to Burton's home in Rosedale Avenue, Grove Hill, Middlesbrough, after she was arrested for shoplifting in York.
The wardrobes in the front bedroom and spare room contained 44 garments stolen from shops in Middlesbrough.
PRICELESS antique Chinese government seals were discovered by police almost a year after they were stolen.
The seals, one 1,000-years-old and the other 300-years-old, were stolen from a car parked in Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, in August 1989 as they were being taken to be valued.
But they were found in Ian Gregory's car when police stopped him in Billingham.
Yesterday Gregory, 35, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted handling stolen goods.
Judge Angus Stroyan QC sentenced him to six months imprisonment suspended for 15 months and ordered Gregory, of Bevanlee Road, South Bank, Middlesbrough, to pay £60 costs.
Christopher Attwooll, prosecuting, said: ‘The seals have not been valued properly but there are perhaps even priceless.’
Mr Attwooll said Gregory was driving John Wright when Gregory said he had an errand to run and stopped at a house in Billingham.
He came out carrying a yellow carrier bag and put this at Mr Wright's feet.
When the police stopped the car they found the seals in the bag.
Mr Wright was also arrested but not charged and Mr Attwooll said his involvement was innocent.
Barry Stewart, defending, said Gregory's plea was based on the fact that he had been helping in the retention of the items.
He said: ‘It was not his idea to pick the seals up.
It was the man Wright.’
When the seals, which belonged to Rose Cuthbert, were stolen the police said they dated from the pre-Ming dynasty.
Petrol snatch:
Two youths made off without paying for £15 worth of petrol from the Q8 garage at Great Ayton.
Cassette theft:
A radio cassette player worth £80 was stolen from a Ford Orion parked outside the WI Hall at Great Ayton.
On the map:
The Lockwood Parish Map created by a band of workers over several years in East Cleveland has been packed off to Milton Keynes where it will be on display when the Queen commemorates the 25th anniversary of the new town on March 13.
Fire boon:
The worry of evacuating a disabled pupil during a fire has been lessened for a Stockton school by a special chair given to Bishopsgarth School by Northumbrian Water.
Car recovered:
A car stolen from Newton Road, Great Ayton, has been recovered by police.
Jacket taken:
A sports jacket worth £100 was stolen from a car at Cod Beck reservoir near Osmotherley.
Cycle check:
Cyclists will be checked by police this month in a bid to stop thieves who made off with nearly £75,000 worth of bikes in East Cleveland last year.
Job security:
Staff working at Hartlepool's Middleton Grange Shopping Centre have been assured that their jobs will be safe when new owners take over from the borough council.
Bedsit rights:
A campaign organised by Bedsit Rights to improve conditions for residents in houses in multiple occupation is to receive a £320 grant from Middlesbrough council.
CLEVELAND athletes of the future get off to a flying start today with a new course at Cleveland stadium, Middlesbrough.
Disabled and able-bodied children can enrol on the course, which lasts for two hours each Saturday for six weeks and which offers expert tuition.
Open to children aged nine to 14, it covers ten events, including the 100 metres, 1,500 metres, long jump, triple jump, high jump, shot, discus and javelin.
Helping to put the youngsters through their paces will be qualified coaches and local junior international athletes.
Cleveland County Council, which is sponsoring the course at the Clairville Road stadium, is also putting one on in the summer.
Places are limited and children are advised to apply early.
Both schemes will cost £9.
A ‘HORRIFIC’ attack left a policeman beaten senseless, Teesside Crown Court heard.
Peter Gore attacked off-duty PC Ivor Jones ‘like a mad dog’, gripping him in a head lock, thumping him repeatedly in the face, and smashing his head against a gatepost.
He left PC Jones in a pool of blood with a jaw shattered in three places.
Peter Gore, 24, of Gainford Road, Billingham, Cleveland, denies assault causing grievous bodily harm in May last year.
PC Jones, of Middlesbrough, told the court: ‘I pleaded with him to leave me alone.
I tried to calm him down because he was being aggressive and shouting.
‘I turned to go and he hit me.
I just tried to defend myself from the blows.’
Witness Isabella Wilson said: ‘It was horrific.
He was banging his head on the post and shouting.
He was like a mad dog.’
Defending Gore, Robin Denny said he was provoked.
He said the two men had been involved in an argument in a pub earlier in the evening.
Mr Denny said to the PC: ‘You threatened him with a broken cider bottle.
You pushed him in the chest with your hand and then you went for him trying to slash him.
But he ducked and punched you and you dropped the bottle.’
PC Jones said he had not provoked Gore but had seen his attacker in the pub on occasions.
He also denied having the broken bottle.
The trial continues.
ELEVEN bus passengers were injured when their vehicle left the road and toppled down an embankment.
The incident happened on the A1085 trunk road between Redcar and Grangetown near British Steel's Redcar complex at about 4.30pm yesterday when rush hour traffic was building up.
The Tees bus company's Lingdale bus carrying 14 passengers ended up on its side.
Firemen had to release three passengers, and three fire engines, including an emergency tender, attended the scene.
Of the eight injured passengers who were taken by ambulance to Middlesbrough General Hospital, six were later discharged.
Two others were detained overnight for observation, but it is understood the injuries were not serious.
A police spokesman said: ‘The cause is the subject of an investigation by our traffic department.
‘We don't yet know why the vehicle ran off the road but about eleven people were injured.’
Chase driver is locked up
A TEENAGER who led police on a chase at speeds of up to 90mph through a built-up area was yesterday sent to a young offenders institution for two months.
George Robinson, 18, of Phoenix Road, Pennywell, Sunderland, admitted taking an F-reg Ford Sierra from the Roker Hotel car park and driving it recklessly on the A19, A183 and various roads in Sunderland.
The car eventually crashed into a bus stand, Durham Crown Court was told.
Chairman resigns:
Richard Lines, executive chairman of chemicals company ITM, has resigned as chairman of Teesside Polytechnic.
Acting chairman Dr James Smith said: ‘He is an extremely busy man and we are grateful for the time and effort he gave.’
Celebrity guest:
Northallerton Grammar School will learn next week which Olympic star will visit them to help with a fitness day to raise cash towards sending the British team to the Games.
Animal welfare:
Labour is the only party with firm policies on animal welfare, said Sunderland South MP Chris Mullin, commenting on the launch of a Labour manifesto on animal welfare.
Stabbing mystery:
Detectives say the stabbing in the stomach of an 18-year-old youth at Shotton Colliery, near Peterlee, appears to have been motiveless.
MP's car stolen:
Redcar MP Mo Mowlam returned on Thursday night from a train trip to London to find her white Ford Sierra had been stolen from Darlington railway station.
The registration number is G109 TJD.
Inquest date:
An inquest is due to open on Monday into the death of Etta Bennison, 65, of St James Chapel Wynd, Richmond, who was found washed up with her dog by the River Swale.
In court:
A man and woman aged 32 and 30 are expected to appear before Teesside magistrates today charged with assaulting a 49-year-old man in a domestic incident at Durnford Road, Thorntree, Middlesbrough early yesterday.
The man is poorly in South Cleveland Hospital.
EC is blamed for farmers' ‘losses’
PUBS and supermarkets have had 40 years of prosperity at the expense of farmers, according to Tory Langbaurgh parliamentary hopeful Michael Bates.
He said a clear example was the price of wheat which had increased four fold for the farmer but was now in a loaf of bread at ten times more in the shops.
He blamed the European Community being preoccupied with keeping farm gate prices down without applying the same rules to pubs and shops.
Cutting edge:
A small Stockton hair salon is proving it is a cut above the rest in competitions.
Holga's stylist Stephen Fletcher has returned with two colleagues and an apprentice from Border championship competitions with two cups and two shields.
Football coaching:
Youngsters at a Middlesbrough school are getting their own Football Association coaching.
For the next six weeks around 20 ten and eleven-year-olds at Linthorpe junior school will have the ball at their feet, courtesy of Middlesbrough council's football development officer Jim Wattis.
Full power:
Both reactors at Hartlepool nuclear power station have remained in continuous service over the last two weeks, generating more than 379 million units of electricity.
New look:
A major refurbishment scheme is to give Hartlepool's civic restaurant a new look.
The council-run Windsor Restaurant will be redecorated and get new carpets, a suspended ceiling and new furniture.
Big attraction:
The Energy Information Centre in the grounds of Hartlepool nuclear power station attracted more than 5,500 visitors during January and February.
Muscle man:
One of Britain's top bodybuilders is to flex his muscles at an event in Hartlepool's Town Hall Theatre.
Dorian Yates, whose achievements include second place in the 1991 Mr Olympia contest, will appear on Saturday April 25 at 7.30pm.
£12,000 cash is stolen from car A KARATE instructor has lost more than £13,000 after his car was stolen.
Toru Takamizawa, from Chatham, Kent, parked his prestige Vauxhall Senator car in Back North Bridge Street, Sunderland, while he enjoyed a meal in the Shangai Palace restaurant.
But the car, stolen on Wednesday night, was found abandoned in Fulwell, Sunderland, yesterday, minus 300,000 yen, 1,000 krona, 1,195 English pounds (worth £12,100) and other items.
Police are appealing for anyone who may be offered large sums of foreign cash to exchange to contact Sunderland CID on Wearside (091) 567 6155.
Alsatian attack:
Police are trying to trace the owner of an Alsatian dog which savaged four-year-old Anthony Dobson, of Strauss Road, South Bank, Middlesbrough, as he played with friends.
Secret service:
Police in County Durham are using borrowed second-hand cars to foil criminals who become familiar with the force's unmarked vehicles.
Monk's challenge:
York Benedictine monk Cyril Brooks has set himself a 100-mile a day challenge to cycle around Britain to raise money for a church convention.
Father Cyril, 62, hopes to reach Lands End and John O'Groats in his marathon effort in July in aid of the One Voice ecumenical mission.
New depths:
Television presenter Lyn Spencer took the plunge off the edge of a building yesterday as part of International Women's Week.
Dozens of women abseiled off the top of the Louisa Centre in Stanley.
Full steam ahead:
Crowds of rail  enthusiasts are expected to flock to the Settle-Carlisle line today for the first public run along BR tracks of the steam locomotive Blue Peter.
Marble attack:
Police in Seaham are investigating a series of incidents in which three car windows and a shop window were broken in Stockton Road.
Marbles fired from a catapult are thought to have been responsible.
Murder charge:
Former nightclub bouncer Paul Abley, 31, of Castle View, Esh Winning, Durham, made his second appearance before Sunderland magistrates yesterday charged with the murder of Paul Robson, 23, of Dame Dorothy Crescent, Monkwearmouth, Sunderland, on January 26.
Rape charge:
The case against police sergeant Glynn Victor May, 47, of Gloucester Way, Fellgate Estate, Jarrow, who is accused of raping a Sunderland woman in her home last July, was adjourned by Sunderland magistrates yesterday until July for committal proceedings.
Sex attack:
Police were today hoping to question a man in connection with a sex attack on a teenage girl in Scarborough in the town centre on Saturday afternoon.
Stables break-in:
Thieves broke into a Scarborough riding stables and stole tack worth £859.
The haul from the Hallam Field stables on Bridlington Road included a saddle, stirrups and bit.
Citadel burglary:
Scarborough police are also investigating a burglary at the Citadel Salvation Army building in the town where thieves made off with an Atari computer worth £520.
Decision time:
Redcar's Town Centre pedestrianisation experiment ends tomorrow with the council.
The data will be analysed and a decision made as to whether to carry out a similar experiment during the busy summer months.
Sentence upheld:
Kenneth Anderson, 53, of Northumbria Walk, West Denton, Newcastle, who was jailed in 1989 for an armed robbery at a council housing office in Newcastle's Denton Park, mistaking it for the adjoining post office, had his 12-year-prison sentence upheld by the Criminal Appeal Court in London yesterday.
A BUS accident in which seven passengers and the driver were injured is thought to have happened because the driver was taken ill.
The Tees and District bus company 268 service to Lingdale left the A1058 Trunk Road between Redcar and Grangetown on Teesside on Friday afternoon.
Five of the injured passengers were treated at Middlesbrough General Hospital and later released.
One passenger, Robert Craig, 69, of Shepperton Court, South Bank, who sustained head, chest and back injuries, is still detained.
The driver, 50-year-old Keith Sturman, of Holder Street, Redcar, who sustained neck, back and chest injuries, is also detained.
Both are ‘satisfactory’.
The bus, which was travelling towards Redcar left the road half a mile west of Dormanstown roundabout, hit a lamp-post and fence and ended up on its side in a ditch.
A POLITICAL row has blown up after the Labour mayor of Langbaurgh snubbed the opening of a new ski slope.
Coun Arthur Harvison was due to open a 140-metre slope at the new £3m Eston Hills Ski Village, near Middlesbrough, on Saturday, but failed to turn up.
Langbaurgh council later issued a statement saying the controlling Labour group did not agree with owner Michael Jackson's policy of charging potential ski instructors £200 to be trained.
The Mayor's  absence was condemned by Tory and SDP leaders.
Coun Len Douglass said: ‘He has obviously been told to stay away by the Labour group but he was there in a civic capacity and I find it very sad.’
Coun Jean Kay said: ‘It was unfair to take this political stance when it was a civic matter.’
The council statement said Coun Harvison and leader of the Labour group Arthur Taylor appreciated that paying for training was normal, ‘but were concerned that the unemployed would not be able to apply for one of the 70 part-time instructors’ jobs.
‘They acknowledge that Mr Jackson has already created employment in the construction of the slope and other work to date.’
Shildon-born Mr Jackson said: ‘To be a good instructor you must have had at least a  season's skiing on snow and if you want to get basic qualifications you would be charged around £3,000.’
Mr Jackson said he given jobs to five unemployed people.
He expected to take on at least another four by September and more once the village was fully operational.
Parish hopes for toilet reprieve
PARISH councillors at Lingdale, East Cleveland, are appealing for the village's vandalised toilet block to be opened again despite the near total ban on public toilets as part of Langbaurgh District Council's budget savings.
Talks have been held with district representatives, where fears were voiced.
Local people say the village is a terminus for the local bus company and a halt for ramblers, and pub landlords are also concerned about under age users of their toilets.
Earth works:
Work on transforming derelict land turning former railway land at Primrose Hill, Stockton into a new park and reclaiming a former iron and steel works at Stillington for industry begins this summer with a £500,000 Government reclamation grant.
Smaller improvement schemes are planned for Billingham, Thornaby and Stockton.
Name change:
Hartlepool's home alarm system has been re-named by the council.
The former Homecare service is now to be known as Warden Call, following a Government decision to change the name of the current home help service to Homecare.
Director of housing Fenwick Patterson said: ‘Several telephone calls and complaints have been wrongly directed to us.’
Post fire:
The fire brigade put out a fire in a post box in Yarm Lane, Stockton, yesterday.
A quantity of mail was destroyed.
Diesel spill:
Stockton fire fighters swilled away a quantity of diesel after a small spillage in Portrack Lane, yesterday morning.
Charity blaze:
A rubbish fire at the rear of the Spastics Society Shop, Kingsway, Billingham, caused serious damage to the building and smoke damage to adjoining premises at the weekend.
Burning car: Fire fighters were called to a car on fire at Hillside Avenue, Middlesbrough.
Grass theft:
Police are investigating the theft of 30 square metres of turf which had only just been laid at St Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Owton Manor Lane, Hartlepool.
Dragon task:
A children's art competition is being launched to create a new logo to be used on publicity material for the Green Dragon Museum, Stockton.
Anyone between five and 11 can enter, and the task is to draw, paint or model a green dragon.
All entries must be in to the Green Dragon Museum Theatre Yard, Stockton, by May 23.
The following case was dealt with by Stokesley magistrates:
Michael Purvis, 22, of Bolckow Street, Eston, Middlesbrough, was convicted of using motor car without insurance, and failing to produce test certificate for examination, fined £270 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, six points.
The following case was dealt with by Thirsk magistrates:
Adish Sadik, 27, of Chadburn Road, Norton, Stockton, admitted two charges of driving motor car exceeding 70mph and driving without due care and attention, fined £250 plus £40 costs, licence endorsed, nine points.
Pylons inquiry will hear health paper A consultant who specialises in the effects of electromagnetic fields on health has agreed to give evidence at the North Yorkshire and Cleveland pylons public inquiry.
Dr. Roger Coghill plans to submit a technical paper to the hearing in Northallerton in May at the invitation of Dr. Ashok Kumar, Labour MP for Langbaurgh.
The inquiry, expected to last two months, will decide whether the National Grid Company is given permission for a new high-voltage overhead electricity line from the Enron power station at Wilton to Shipton, near York.
NGC claims the line is needed to accommodate the extra power while protesters say the existing line can cope.
Campaigners along the 50-mile proposed route also fear the 400,000-volt cable could endanger health, spoil the landscape and devalue property.
Last year Dr. Coghill addressed a public meeting called by the Cleveland-based pressure group NEON at Langbaurgh Town Hall.
He showed slides and graphs which revealed that children living very near high-voltage overhead lines showed more instances of leukaemia and other cancers.
The safety threshold for electromagnetic fields was two milliGauss and if the NGC line gave out a higher level of radiation, this would be potentially hazardous, he said.
‘I have no axe to grind and it may be that the scheme would pose no hazard, in which case I would be happy to say so publicly,’ he said, ‘But if I learn that the route would expose local populations to field strengths greater than two milliGauss I will say it is potentially hazardous and will support my statement with a good deal of scientific information.’
The inquiry starts in Northallerton on May 19 and switches to Marton Hotel and Country Club, near Middlesbrough, to consider the Cleveland sections of the line.
There was a time in the Swinging Sixties when the Richmond Meet looked like an anachronism — an out-dated throwback to more genteel times that had long since passed.
At the annual meeting in 1961 there was sharp criticism of an ‘out of date’ programme and by 1964 there was talk of winding the whole thing up because it just couldn't pay its way.
Fortunately, there always seemed to be a hard core of people who were determined to breathe new life into a tradition that had started with phenomenal success in 1892 under its first president, Billy Hutchinson, of Redcar.
It was in April of that year that F.W. Hardy, captain of Stockton Cycle Club, got together with a few others to complain that the Barnard Castle Meet was being dominated too much by clubs from Tyneside and suggested it was time for cycling clubs from the south of the region to break away.
A meeting was set up in Stockton the same month, they decided to organise their own Meet in Richmond and by June the first ever North Yorkshire and South Durham Cyclists' Meet was held.
Reports said that the population of Richmond increased fourfold as 700 competitors from 27 different clubs drew thousands of visitors along to enjoy the fun.
Special trains run by LNER poured in from Middlesbrough, Stockton, Newcastle and Hartlepool, and the price was 2s.
6d. plus cycle.
In short, the event got off to a cracking start.
The success continued for years and many who had first come as children returned as parents with their own families.
A genuine loyalty was built up not only among competitors but from those who took part in the parades, the fancy dress contests and the competitions for everything from juvenile jazz bands and babies to dogs.
It seemed that every year was special — but there were extra special years, too, like the £1,000 Meet of 1915.
Coun Edward Turner, of Middlesbrough, who had been Meet President two years earlier, had the idea of raising £1,000 to equip the voluntary training corps — the home guard of the First World War.
Not only did they raise more than £1,000 but they also succeeded in helping to recruit men for a battalion of the Green Howards that was being formed at Northallerton.
For the rest of the war it was a case of just ticking over until a splendid Victory Meet in 1919 which raised cash to help build the Richmond YMCA.
Prizes of up to £8 were available to winners of the cycle races that year and total prize money was £100.
Admission, incidentally, was 1s. and 1s. 6d. with reductions for members of H.M.
Forces in uniform.
For most of the two world wars, though, the Meet was just kept ticking over and from 1940 to 1947 Alderman Billy Robinson was both Mayor of Richmond and President of the Meet.
This year's centenary is obviously being planned with special care but the Meet breaks with tradition by having its first lady as President — long-serving member Joan Church.
Meanwhile, last year's president, Alan Wilcox, Richmond's Town Clerk, is putting together a bumper centenary brochure looking back at some of the highlights.
In the course of two years' research he's discovered a great deal but admits there are gaps that he would like to fill.‘
There are huge blanks,’ he says.
‘There are a lot of blanks in the Thirties where we don't know a great deal about it and there was a period just after the war from 1947 through to the middle Fifties — that's another gap.
‘It doesn't matter what people have got, whether it's photographs, programmes, even if they've got memories in their head they can write down.
Otherwise you're having to make assumptions.’
There was a period when cyclists disappeared from the Meet altogether but they have started to return in the last few years and among the highlights of this year's event — May 22–25 — will be a return to races on the old grass cycle track around the perimeter of Richmond Cricket Club's ground and a road race for penny-farthings.
Cycling was the backbone of the Meet right up to the start of the Fifties, but then, says Alan Wilcox, the motor car came within the reach of the working man and that led to the decline of cycling clubs.
For a few years in the Sixties, scooter clubs replaced cycling but the phase passed and the emphasis was switched again to entertainment and raising money for charity.
After the financial troubles of that decade, though, a more businesslike approach was taken so that reserves were kept back to cover for lean years when the weather proved to be unkind.
In recent years the successful formula has remained largely unchanged.
It all starts off on the Friday evening of the Spring Bank Holiday with the President's dinner, which for the centenary is being held in a marquee to cater for the huge numbers who wish to attend.
On the saturday there are seven-a-side football competitions for youngsters involving 30 or more teams who travel from as far as Newcastle in the North and Wetherby in the South to take part.
The games start around 11am and it's usually 5pm before the finals are under way.
On Saturday night there is a dance and on Sunday morning a civic procession to church when the President has the company of the Mayors of Richmond, Darlington, Middlesbrough, Stockton, Hartlepool and Ripon.
Sunday is also show day with two centre rings featuring professional entertainers, dog shows, baby shows and a parade of veteran cars.
On Sunday night there's a traditional smoking concert in the Town Hall but the organisers have to be up and about again early on Monday morning to make arrangements for a full carnival-type procession featuring decorative floats, juvenile jazz bands and various fancy dress competitions.
The Richmond Meet is clearly thriving — but how did it manage to survive the lean years?
What special ingredient has helped it to flourish again?
Alan Wilcox puts it down to the fact that there has always been a hard core of people for whom it becomes their chief social interest.
It takes over,’ he says.
‘And there's always so much to do.
It's like the Forth Bridge.
It's a tradition, it's something people have grown up with from being children.
‘The local fair always appears in the square at Meet weekend and for a child it must seem absolutely magic.
They never forget it.
And that includes all the people who come from outside of Richmond who were brought as children, who may have come with jazz bands as children.
‘There used to be lots of special trains.
Today, you cannot find a parking space.
I think what they said in 1892 is true today…the population of Richmond, which is now about 8,500, increases fourfold.’
ANOTHER North-East policeman has become a victim of the county's joyriding epidemic.
PC Ronald Hall was recovering in Middlesbrough General Hospital today after he was deliberately rammed by a stolen car.
He was said to be ‘comfortable and quite settled’ last night.
A senior officer said it was another example of the reckless  attitude of car thieves, which highlighted the enormous dangers faced by police.
PC Hall underwent emergency surgery for serious leg injuries following the attack at 2.50am yesterday.
The 35-year-old was dragged along the side of his police van by a stolen Toyota carrying two men in ski masks.
The traffic officer and colleagues were trying to arrest the men behind the Roseberry Square shopping centre in Redcar.
He was crushed as the stolen car tried to make its escape.
Another officer was slightly hurt.
Only last week PC David Iceton had to quit the force because of severe neck and back injuries inflicted when a patrol car was rammed by car crooks.
Chief Constable Keith Hellawell said after PC Iceton's retirement: ‘This is the living proof that for modern police officers, it's hell out there.’
His words were echoed last night by PC Hall's boss, Chief Insp Peyer Harrison, of Redcar Police.
He said: ‘It would appear that these car thieves are totally reckless with regard to the police and other road users.
‘We are in the front line when it comes to the physical victims, but these people are disregarding public safety generally.
‘This highlights the enormous danger faced by today's police officers.
‘At the same time, it hardens our resolve to catch these people.
Morale is affected in the short-term, but in the long-term, our desire for a prosecution is heightened.’
Mr Harrison said the courts had to make sure the punishment fitted the crime for such serious offences.
The stolen Toyota taken from Dormanstown was later found abandoned on the Lakes Estate, Redcar.
Anyone with information can call Redcar CID on (0642) 302606.
AN IDENTICAL twin gave the name of his brother when he was arrested for burglary, a court heard.
Anthony Ganguly continued the deception when he appeared before Teesside magistrates and was placed on probation.
He later confessed to his probation officer.
Yesterday, Ganguly, 26, of Kirkham Road, Beechwood, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted burglary, attempting to pervert the course of justice and criminal damage.
Judge William Crawford QC ordered Ganguly to do 200 hours community service and to pay £500 compensation for damage he caused breaking into Ideas for Furnishing in Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough.
Charles Forster, prosecuting, said Ganguly had stolen a nest of tables and was seen by police.
He gave his name as Robin Ganguly, his twin brother.
Peter Armstrong, defending, said Ganguly had pretended to be his brother because he was already facing a charge of driving with excess alcohol and did not want to be remanded in custody.
Mr Armstrong said: ‘It was as a result of this defendant coming clean that these proceedings were brought.
Had he not done so, the probability is the probation order would have run for six months and no one would have been any the wiser.’
ACTION is underway to try to curb the ‘horrendous’ accident records on Middlesbrough roads.
In 1990, 13 people were killed and 922 injured in 739 road accidents.
Now a Middlesbrough Council working party has been set up to look at the problem.
Its chairman, Coun Barry Coppinger, said: ‘The scale of the problem is horrendous.’
Middlesbrough has the worst accident statistics of Cleveland's four boroughs.
Coun Coppinger said the road safety working party had four main target areas: learning from successful road safety schemes, identifying what resources were available, talking to all other bodies involved in road safety and targeting groups who need to hear the road safety message.
‘Our resources are limited, but we hope to come up with some constructive recommendations,’ said Coun Coppinger after the group's first meeting yesterday.
The decision follows years of anxiety about the high levels of respiratory illnesses in the area.
Last year more than 30 families in Grangetown with children who suffer with asthma were granted legal aid to explore the possibility of  suing British Steel and ICI.
Emissions from BS's Teesside works and ICI Wilton are widely suspected of having a detrimental effect on health.
Middlesbrough council yesterday announced it was hoping to donate £3,000 towards the purchase of computer equipment for the project.
The money would come from Government funds provided under the City Challenge initiative, but permission must first be granted by the Department of the Environment.
Ironically Langbaurgh council, whose residents have the highest incidence of asthma in Cleveland, has been told it cannot have special funding to contribute to the project.
The two leading members of the research team will be Dr Erasmus Harland, a Middlesbrough-based paediatrician, and Dr Jim Longstaff of Teesside Polytechnic's School of Computing and Mathematics.
The polytechnic has employed research student Jo Denn to see whether a link can be established between childhood asthma and atmospheric pollution.
All four district councils in Cleveland have pledged to provide monitoring data relating to air pollution levels in their areas.
Jeff Duffield, manager of Middlesbrough council's environmental protection unit, said mortality rates in the district ‘were 18pc higher than the national average, with heart and respiratory diseases the main factors’.
Dr Longstaff said: ‘Our study will enable us to find out more about the causes of asthma, suggest ways of preventing it, and make sure the resources to treat it are used to best effect.’
Later this year a High Court judge will decide what information British Steel and ICI should be made to release about past emissions.
Doctor attacked as he walks dogs
A YOUNG doctor was attacked by two youths as he walked his dogs on a Middlesbrough housing estate.
The 33-year-old doctor was knocked unconscious by one of the youths as he passed an empty house in Coulby Manor Farm, Coulby Newham.
The men are thought to be aged about 25, 6ft tall with short fair hair.
One was wearing a blue jacket and the other a grey jacket.
Detectives are appealing for witnesses to the attack to ring Hemlington CID on Middlesbrough 590323 or North Ormesby CID on Middlesbrough 301835.
New vicar:
The Rev Ian Parkinson, Linthorpe's assistant curate, has been appointed vicar of Saltburn.
He will be instituted at the parish church on July 15.
Bonus books:
A £100 safe working bonus by laboratory staff at ICI Wilton's research centre has helped buy science and technology books for St Mary's Infant and Alderman William Jones Primary schools in Grangetown.
Toilet fire:
Firemen wearing breathing apparatus put out a fire in a toilet at the Green Tree pub, Ramsgate, Stockton.
Bed blaze:
A quantity of bedding was destroyed when a bed caught fire in a house in Mulgrave Road, Norton.
Firemen from Billingham and Stockton attended but the fire was out on their arrival.
Staff evacuated:
Staff at two industrial units on Teesside were evacuated when tyres were set alight at the rear of their premises.
Firemen from Thornaby and Stockton were called to Robert Street, Thornaby to find a large amount of tyres well alight at the rear of Britannia Garage.
Tenants decide:
The first of a number of pioneering tenant participation projects was launched in Langbaurgh yesterday.
The Alderwood Tenant Management Cooperative will manage their own part of the Spencerbeck Estate in a scheme which allows the tenants to decide their priorities on repairs, maintenance, allocations, waiting lists, control of allowances and general estate management.
Car crime:
A crackdown on car crime has been mounted in Redcar.
Chief Insp Peter Harrison urged motorists to ensure their boots were locked when parking their cars.
Neighbourhood Watch: Two of the largest estates in Loftus Mars and Westfield have formed a Neighbourhood Watch scheme.
A 79-YEAR-OLD man was struck with a hammer by a burglar who broke into his home, Teesside Crown Court heard yesterday.
James Wheelhouse was woken by noises at his bedroom window and saw Stewart Fawcett climbing in.
Mr Wheelhouse, of Roseberry Crescent, Norton, Stockton, asked him where his money was then hit him on the head with the hammer, knocking him unconscious.
But alert neighbours Alan and Beatrice Eales heard the noises and called the police.
Mrs Eales noted the car Fawcett was driving and police later stopped it.
Inside they found the hammer with Mr Wheelhouse's blood on it.
Yesterday Judge William Crawford QC commended the actions of Mr and Mrs Eales and awarded them £75 each.
Fawcett, 27, of Grasby Close, Netherfields, Middlesbrough, admitted aggravated burglary and handling stolen goods.
He was jailed for five years.
Fawcett then hit him with the hammer.
Tim Roberts, defending, said Fawcett had an unsettled upbringing and had emotional mood changes.
‘His plea of guilty is the only means by which he can express his contrition today and acknowledging it must be a lengthy prison sentence which he now faces.’
He said Fawcett had been smoking cannabis at the time of the offence.
A CLEVELAND aid worker has been quizzed by police about misuse of the Red Cross symbol.
Rod Jones, of Convoy Aid Romania, could face prosecution for using the symbol on the organisation's trucks.
This could lead to a heavy fine or the impounding of the CAR trucks which could jeopardise future mercy trips to Eastern Europe.
Cleveland Police confirmed that Mr Jones had been questioned in Middlesbrough yesterday.
‘A file will in due course be sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions,’ said a spokeswoman.
Mr Jones acknowledges he is contravening the Geneva Convention by using the symbol, but claims that the Red Cross symbol is needed to stop attacks on convoys.
But the Red Cross says every misuse of its symbol could put its workers in danger.
A spokesman reiterated the position: ‘The Red Cross symbol is the only protection for unarmed international workers who have to operate in remote and life-threatening situations.
‘Every abuse, actual or perceived, undermines the symbol's protective authority.’
But Mr Jones remained unrepentant.
‘I told the police I would take them off in this country, but that I couldn't give confirmation I wouldn't use them abroad.’
He said the Red Cross was being petty and that it was clear that he was not driving a Red Cross vehicle.
The crunch could come when Mr Jones takes his next aid convoy to Romania on April 5.
A TEENAGER has appeared in court after an incident in which a policeman was badly hurt.
PC Ronald Hall was allegedly rammed by a stolen Toyota Corolla in Redcar on Monday.
He received serious leg injuries and underwent emergency surgery.
Duncan Evans, 17, of Redcar, was remanded in custody until March 16 when he appeared before Teesside magistrates yesterday.
He is charged with taking a car without consent, causing grievous bodily harm with the intent to resist arrest and criminal  damage with intent to endanger life.
Another youth was being questioned by police last night.
Three others were released on unconditional police bail.
Last night PC Hall was said to be comfortable in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
He is expected to make a full recovery from his injuries.
A NORTH-EAST firm was allegedly involved in a multi-million fraud which crippled the economy of an African country.
Marktrace Projects Ltd (MPL), formerly of West Street, Middlesbrough, is named as a central player in a huge corruption game by a TV programme to be shown tomorrow night.
ITV's This Week examines what happened to a £20m loan, designed to revitalise a massive timber operation in Ghana.
The loan was arranged by the Bank of Scotland and backed by the British Government.
In the programme, called Raiders of the Rainforest, Friends of the Earth alleges that MPL a subsidiary of Babcock Electrical Projects Ltd of Gloucester which is in turn controlled by FKI plc illegally siphoned off a significant proportion of this loan.
At the time of the alleged fraud, MPL was ultimately controlled by FKI Babcock Ltd, since re-named FKI plc.
The programme makers say the alleged fraud not only crippled the Ghanaian economy by taking £30m out of the country, but also caused an environmental disaster.
They say 250 square kilometres were plundered in the course of the alleged fraud, said to have taken place in the 1980s.
MPL no longer operates from West Street.
Middlesbrough-based Marktrace International said yesterday that MPL was a separate company, set up for the Ghanaian project only.
No one could be reached for comment at Babcock's Gloucestershire headquarters.
Friends of the Earth have called on FKI plc to launch a full investigation.
It also wants the Government to look at the wider issue of what happens to British aid and credit going into Ghana.
More details of the programme are to be released today.
BURIAL costs in Middlesbrough are going up to pay for the installation of cameras in flats overlooking cemeteries.
Security cameras are being installed in flats at Thorntree, which overlook the vandal-plagued Protestant and Roman Catholic cemeteries, at a cost of £350,000.
Most of the money will come from the council's public protection committee, but its budget was £9,000 short.
The committee is therefore proposing to increase interment fees.
On Friday the cemeteries and crematorium consultative committee will be told that burial costs will rise from £140 to £160.50.
Poll taster:
Voters in Norton, near Stockton, get an early taste of going to the polls tomorrow when they cast their votes for a new county council representative.
Three candidates are fighting for the Norton seat following the death of Tory county councillor Hilda Reading: Alan Earle (Tory), Dorothy Johnson (Lab) and Maxine Carre (Lib Dem).
Pair sentenced:
Richard Paylor, 20, of Cleadon Walk, Hardwick, and Mark Lauder, 19, of Hartburn Lane, both Stockton, were put on probation by Richmond magistrates yesterday after admitting two charges of jointly taking a car without consent and one of interfering with a car without consent.
Lauder also admitted jointly interfering with a van without consent.
Both were also banned from driving for a year and ordered to pay £25 costs.
Going home:
A seven-year-old Cleveland boy, who lost his thumb in a farm accident, has left hospital.
Surgeons at Middlesbrough General sewed back on Aaron Solomon's thumb after his dad carried it to the hospital, packed in ice.
Roof blaze:
The timber roof of an outbuilding was destroyed when a steamcleaner caught fire at Dixon's Garage, Guisborough Road, Nunthorpe, at 12.30pm yesterday.
Historic gift:
Young rugby fans Antony and Daniel Weegram weren't too disappointed about missing England's Grand Slam decider against Wales when their parents returned home to Hartlepool with captain Will Carling's shorts handed over after Mr and Mrs Weegram asked for a gift for the brothers.
Show probe:
Hartlepool's Conservative candidate Graham Robb intends to write to borough council chief executive Brian Dinsdale to find out if poll tax payers' money was spent on a cabaret show to mark International Women's Day.
This follows claims that Saturday's Town Hall event which featured the Chuffinelles, a female trio, was politically biased and tasteless.
MIDDLESBROUGH has joined Leicester as an Environment City.
In May there will be a formal public ceremony at which council leaders and representatives from the business and voluntary sectors, together with the trades unions and others, will sign a Declaration of Intent.
To achieve the title Middlesbrough competed against eight other shortlisted towns and cities Gloucester, Leeds, Newcastle, Peterborough, Sheffield, Southampton, Stoke and Swindon.
Catastrophe Leicester was designated in 1990 and another two towns or cities will be chosen over the next two years.
The aims of Environment City are to achieve a greener and cleaner city which will contribute to a better world which can sustain itself.
Many people believe we are heading for environmental catastrophe unless we radically change the way we live, and the programme is a practical bid to bring about that change in urban areas.
In Leicester working groups have been set up to look at such issues as energy, transport, waste and pollution, food and agriculture, economy and work, and the environment both natural, man-made and social.
The Environment City Programme is a national initiative managed by the RSNC, The Wildlife Trusts Partnership (formerly the Royal Society for Nature Conservation), supported by the Department of the Environment.
The programme is now sponsored by British Telecom hence the new title, BT Environment City.
Official designation as Environment City is for a four-year period.
In a letter the Chief Executive of RSNC, The Wildlife Trust Partnership, Tim Cordy, tells Middlesbrough: ‘The designation is both an accolade and a challenge and acknowledges you for the contributions which already you have made towards environmental improvement, and the future plans you have to encourage sustainable development.’
The letter adds: ‘In four years’ time we would expect Middlesbrough to have achieved noticeable progress on the path to sustainable development.
Partnership It should rival the best of European cities and should be famously celebrated in Britain as an example of what can be achieved when resources and the expertise to implement solutions to environmental problems are combined with civic will.’
To compete for the award a partnership was formed representing all sectors in the town: Private sector: Teesside and District Chamber of Commerce and Industry and Teesside Tomorrow.
Public sector: Middlesbrough Borough Council and Cleveland County Council.
Voluntary sector: Cleveland Wildlife Trust and Cleveland Council for Voluntary Services People who Live and Work in Middlesbrough: Middlesbrough Trades Union Council, churches and residents' associations.
VALUABLE racing pigeon chicks will have to be destroyed after thieves broke into a breeding loft and stole the parent birds.
The theft, at allotments behind the Beechwood and Easterside Club, Middlesbrough, has angered the racing club members so much they are forming a vigilante group to keep overnight watch on the lofts.
Joe Bell, who lost 24 breeding pigeons valued at more than £2,500, said the raiders also broke into another breeder's loft letting out his stock birds.
Joe, a 61-year-old housing supervisor, of Portland House, Longlands, said when he arrived at the loft yesterday morning the outer door had been nailed up from the outside.
‘I borrowed a hammer from one of the allotment holders and forced an entry to find the raiders had ran amok inside hurling bricks through the wooden huts and smashing window frames,’ he said.
‘They took 24 champion stock breeders leaving eight chicks and seven sets of eggs.
I managed to get another breeder to take two of the chicks, but the others will have to be destroyed.
‘I'll have to get somebody else to do it because I  couldn't bring myself to hurt any bird.’
The thieves also stole a pigeon basket and defecated inside a cabin where he and his wife sometimes sit.
‘After a lifetime of keeping pigeons it makes you feel you don't want to carry on,’ he said.
The other breeder who lost his stock birds, Eddie Scott, from Hemlington, feels the same.
A police spokeswoman said the thefts were being investigated.
Flagship train service returns
A FLAGSHIP commuter service from North Yorkshire to London returns to the tracks on Monday.
York's White Rose Pullman, leaving the city at 7.40am, was withdrawn in January because of signalling problems in Scotland, but it will return on Monday after the resolution of difficulties, InterCity announced.
As a result, two other trains from the North-East, which had been making additional stops in York at 7.34 and 7.53, will no longer do so.
Trial committal:
Alan Swindon, 25, of Elliott Drive, Felling, Newcastle, was sent for crown court trial by Newcastle magistrates yesterday charged with murdering Paul Furness, 21, of Ashington, outside a city centre nightclub last November.
He was remanded in custody.
Survival battle:
Whitby's self-funding Pictorial Archives Trust is struggling to survive.
The trust, which attracts 30,000 visitors each year to its exhibition of pictures illustrating Whitby's past, has just managed to scrape through with a surplus of £75.
It is now seeking more volunteers.
Arson probe:
Police are treating a fire at a Cleveland community home as arson.
Furniture was piled up and burned in an unused portable classroom at the home for young people in Farndale Road, Middlesbrough.
The buildings and contents were severely damaged by fire and an adjoining classroom smoke-damaged in the fire, late on Tuesday night.
Solicitor fined:
A solicitor was fined £80 by Barnard Castle magistrates for illegal overtaking at the scene of roadworks on the A66 trans-Pennine road.
David George Michael Keating, 46, of Hesleden Hall, Monk Hesleden, Hartlepool, who pleaded guilty by letter, was also ordered to pay £20 costs.
bridge switch: Work is due to start this weekend on a £25,000 scheme to replace a footbridge over the A167 in Ferryhill.
The road will be closed nearby on Sunday while the old bridge is removed, and again the following Sunday while the new bridge is erected.
Traffic using the A167 will be diverted through Ferryhill and pedestrians should use the nearby road bridge.
Loo drama:
A two-year-old Hartlepool boy was released by firemen after his head became stuck in a plastic lavatory seat yesterday.
A fire brigade spokesman said the boy's mother took him to Stranton fire station where staff freed him unharmed and undistressed.
Health names:
Health Minister Virginia Bottomley has announced the names of chairmen of district health authorities who take office on April 1.
There are three new appointments in the Northern Region.
They are Darlington, Ian Cordial; Newcastle, Alan Crute, and Sunderland, George Bedell.
They are each appointed for two years.
Accident deaths:
Figures released by Northumbria Police yesterday show that 116 people have been killed in road accidents in the area in the past year year, a slight drop on the previous 12 months.
A REDCAR man struck his son-in-law over the head with a pool cue after his family was subjected to harassment, a court heard.
John Murphy's daughter had separated from John Neal and returned to her parents' home but Mr Neal continued to call, often drunk and at odd hours.
Finally Murphy went to see Mr Neal in the Magnet pub in Grangetown, Middlesbrough, but lost his temper and struck him twice on the head with the thin end of a pool cue, causing a cut.
Yesterday Murphy, 50, of Grasmere Road, Redcar, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted wounding.
Mr Recorder Shaun Spencer gave him a nine months suspended prison sentence.
Ken Gillance, defending, said: ‘He didn't go to attack Neal, he went to negotiate with him.’
RAM raiders smashed their way into Debenham's in Middlesbrough, left sports clothes strewn across the road and made off with clothing worth over £2,000, Teesside Crown Court heard.
David Williams, 20, of Dalcross Court, Hemlington, was sentenced to two years in a young offender's institute.
Keith Clarke 17, of Crimdon Close, Hemlington, was placed on probation for two years.
Kenneth Tindall, 20, of Woodvale Road, Grove Hill, was sentenced to two and a half years' custody.
All three had admitted burglary and related charges.
David Hall, 21, of Cragdale Road, Berwick Hills, was cleared of the Debenham's burglary.
He admitted going equipped for theft, another burglary and asked for four similar offences to be taken into consideration.
He was given two and a half years custody.
RESIDENTS of a Cleveland town are taking the chance to see plans which will make a long-awaited bypass a reality.
The need for a new road avoiding the centre of Guisborough was first recognised nearly 50 years ago.
Boundary changes, opposition to routes and a lack of cash have all held up progress, but the project is set to start in autumn.
The Guisborough public took their first chance to see the bypass plans yesterday when an exhibition opened at the town's library.
Cleveland County's Council transportation chairman, Coun David Walsh, said the people of Guisborough were fully behind the £5.9m scheme.
‘They are very positive,’ he said.
‘The bypass will bring environmental benefits by taking away  through traffic and by allowing the regeneration of the market-place, which has suffered from all the traffic.
‘It will also open up further parts of East Cleveland for industrial development.’
The bypass will run to the North of the town from the Woodhouse roundabout on Middlesbrough Road.
It crosses Wilton Lane to a new roundabout on the A173 GuisboroughSkelton road and ends on the A171 moor road at Waterfall Farm.
The project should be completed by 1994.
Coun Walsh said he did not believe the bypass would hit the Guisborough economy by taking passing trade away from shops and garages.
A GROUP of trainees get the chance to run their own local authority tomorrow in Middlesbrough.
They will be make priority decisions on key issues in the regional competition of the Local Government Management Game, at the Cadcam Centre, Riverside Park.
The 21 trainees all work for Cleveland County Council and will form three teams in the competition.
DAVID Sinclair made himself the ideal employee when he filled in an application form for a sales job, a court heard yesterday.
Within a few months he produced an order from Littlewoods to produce the store's quarterly catalogue, bringing in £478,000 of business.
But both the application form and the order were untrue, Teesside Crown Court was told.
Sinclair, 28, of Endeavour Drive, Ormesby, Middlesbrough, admitted obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception, forgery and obtaining services by deception.
Mr Recorder Shaun Spencer, QC, deferred sentence for six months on the man he said had been acting like an ‘incorrigible swindler’.
Barry Stewart, prosecuting, said Sinclair, who was born with only one arm, was a persistent confidence trickster who had served a sentence of 18 months imprisonment for deception in 1990.
On his release from prison as an undischarged bankrupt, he changed his name from Bowesfield to Sinclair.
A few days later he got a job as a sales executive with the Hartlepool marketing company SMAC.
He was sacked when the Littlewoods contract turned out to be fake.
Hospital job loss fears quashed
A HOSPITAL chief executive has quashed rumours that nursing staff will lose jobs when it becomes a trust on April 1.
Mike Belton, chief executive of North Tees General Hospital at Stockton, says that more nursing jobs will be created.
Royal College of Nursing members at the hospital had expressed worry over possible job losses and morale was said to be at a low ebb.
Cash ‘insufficient’:
Stockton's £1.6m government cash injection is not enough, says council leader Bob Gibson.
The Urban Programme award means pedestrianisation of the town's High Street can go ahead this summer, but other schemes put forward by the council have been turned down.
Homely advice:
A leaflet giving advice to homeworkers on getting a fair deal is being provided by Middlesbrough district council at its town hall, library and advice centres.
Missing man found:
A man who went missing on Tuesday has turned up in Cornwall.
Police had been concerned about the welfare of George Heinrich Leigers, 35, a patient of St Luke's Hospital, Middlesbrough.
Bus pass reprieve:
Langbaurgh pensioners' free bus passes have been given a reprieve until the end of April.
Coun leader Arthur Taylor told the full council yesterday that they had made a sensible deal with the bus companies which could save the free pass scheme.
Centre nearer:
A community centre for Ragworth estate, Stockton came a step nearer yesterday with a decision by Stockton Borough councillors to allow the borough secretary to conclude a necessary deed of release on the Ragworth primary school site.
Club revamp:
The former Havana nightclub in Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough, is set to undergo a change of image after Fred Veazey was yesterday granted a provisional public entertainment licence.
The club was previously a magnet for the North-East rave culture.
Mr Veazey, 52, plans to rename it The New Belmont Club and introduce social club type cabaret.
Battle won:
Tony McTaminey has won a seven-month battle to set up a flower stall using a traditional, hand-painted barrow in the Linthorpe Road shopping precinct, Middlesbrough.
Inquiry called off:
A public inquiry into enforcement action by Stockton Borough Council against L and LW Casey and Company over a rundown area of Stockton has been cancelled because one of those involved is seriously ill.
The situation will be reviewed in June.
Girls awards:
Sharon Greensitt, 18, and Debbie Walton, 17, both of New Marske, are to receive the Girls' Brigade Queen's Award.
They are the first in the New Marske unit to achieve the honour.
Lavatory fight:
Residents in Saltburn have sent more than 50 letters to Langbaurgh council protesting at the planned closure of the town lavatories.
They say they have volunteers to help keep the lavatories open and stress that they are essential for the town which is a terminus for buses and trains in East Cleveland throughout the year.
Still talking:
The Teesside Development Corporation says talks are continuing in a bid to find a new location for Hartlepool's Clarence Road bus depot.
The current site is to be redeveloped as part of the town's £160m marina.
Braille class:
Public protests against the closure of a weekly braille class in Redcar's Grosmont Centre has persuaded Cleveland social services to reconsider its decision and the session will be reinstated.
Mesh fence:
A mesh is to be positioned on top of the existing boundary wall at Loftus Youth and Community Centre to prevent balls coming over the fence into the gardens of nearby houses.
Jazzy appeal:
Recruits are wanted for the Lockwood Lions jazz band which was formed a year ago.
Organiser Anne Coates said she hoped children from throughout the parish would join.
Meetings are on Saturday afternoons in Lingdale Village Hall.
From the Courts The following case was dealt with by Stokesley magistrates:
Steven Roger Dawson, 24, of Hutton Grange, Hutton Rudby, Yarm, admitted depositing mud and clay on highway without lawful authority, fined £20 plus £25 costs.
The following cases were dealt with by Thirsk magistrates: Andrew Thomas Harvey, 22, of Oban Avenue, Hartlepool, was convicted of using a motor car without insurance, fined £200 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, eight points.
RAF Leeming in North Yorkshire has admitted one of its Tornado aircraft was the mystery plane which ‘buzzed’ Teesside this week.
The late night, low level circuits made by the military jet over west Stockton and Eaglescliffe angered residents and Hartburn councillor Stephen Smailes, who was on the receiving end of their complaints.
He is writing a complaint to the Ministry of Defence.
River rescue:
A distressed woman was saved from ‘certain death’ yesterday after jumping 80ft from Wearmouth bridge.
The 44-year-old woman, who has not been named by police, was pulled from the River Wear in Sunderland by firemen on a routine training  exercise .
Home blow:
The owners of a Saltburn nursing home which closed last month have gone bust and the official receiver brought in.
South Tees Health Authority cancelled the licence of the Strathearne, in Albion Terrace, last month.
A public notice has been published under the Insolvency Act sating that a bankruptcy order had been made against owners Peter and Anne Taylor.
Watch out:
Police are on the lookout for two youths who viciously attacked a 13-year-old Middlesbrough schoolboy at the Mandale picnic area, robbing him of his wristwatch.
Drugs alert: Police forces throughout the North-East have s een put on alert after dangerous drugs were stolen from a Teesside chemist's shop.
Morphine, methadone and cocaine taken from Salmon and Atkinson, Stockton, could have a street value of between £4,000 to £5,000.
Paint work:
British Rail has turned to the privately-owned North York Moors steam railway at Pickering instead of Brel workshops to repaint six carriages in the  colours of Regional Railways.
They have been brought up from Derby and are expected to be used on forthcoming charter excursions, possibly over the Settle-Carlisle line.
Guards in court:
Two Coldstream guardsmen who are accused of robbery while on the run from their unit in Germany made a second appearance before magistrates in Whitby.
Gary Besterfield, 20, of Derby Road, Guisborough, and Keith Brown, 18, of Barnes Wallis Way, Marske, were further remanded in custody for two weeks for committal proceedings to take place.
Club ordeal:
Four masked men subjected two staff at a snooker club in waterloo Street, Newcastle, to a terrifying ordeal yesterday before escaping with several hundred pounds.
On bail:
A man accused of killing his 21-year-old girlfriend has been released on conditional bail by Sedgefield magistrates.
Gary Sams, 20, of Kirkstone Place, Newton Aycliffe, is charged with unlawfully killing mother-of-four Joanne Robinson at the same address on November 26 last year.
Road warning:
Traffic will be severely disrupted today in Scarborough's town centre because of work on the £350,000 new traffic scheme in Westborough, Northway and Valley Bridge Parade.
All traffic will be diverted down York Place, a one way street, and major changes are being planned to bus routes and stops during the next few days.
Consumers:
Youngsters aged between 14 and 18 made their bids for the title of Cleveland's Young Consumer of the Year at Middlesbrough town hall last night.
The winner, Ackland Sixth Form College at Middlesbrough, qualified for the regional final which will be held in Gateshead next month.
THE former home of a child molester has been repossessed by the council after neighbours petitioned a judge.
Six families living near the former Lambton Road, Middlesbrough, home of widower Thomas Pemberton, 64, signed affidavits after asking the council to act.
Pemberton sexually assaulted a five-year-old girl in May last year.
He is now on probation, living in a boarding house in another part of the town since his arrest.
In granting the county court order, Judge Geoffrey Vos said the families' affidavits showed they feared for their children.
Gerard Ford, for the council, said the decision last June to seek repossession came because rent arrears of £1,298.25 had built up and Pemberton was allegedly guilty of ‘conduct of nuisance and annoyance to neighbours’.
PERSISTENT shoplifter Anthony Thompson tried to walk out of a clothes store with £370 worth of clothing.
When shop assistant Michael Griffiths tried to stop him, he was grabbed from behind by Alan Rootham and knocked to the floor.
Yesterday Rootham, 25, Thompson, 20, Gary Livingstone, 22, and Craig McCabe, 18, appeared before Teesside Crown Court.
Rootham and Thompson admitted assaulting Mr Griffiths.
Rootham, of Tower Green, Middlesbrough, also admitted theft and handling stolen goods.
Thompson, of Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough, admitted 11 offences of theft.
Livingstone, of Kirkstone Road, Berwick Hills, Middlesbrough, admitted theft.
McCabe, of Millbrook Avenue, Brambles Farm, Middlesbrough, admitted three offences of theft and asked for six offences to be taken into consideration.
Rootham and McCabe were given community service orders for 180 hours.
Thompson was sentenced to 27 months in a young offenders' institute, and Livingstone was fined £150.
PC denies sex charge A POLICE officer yesterday denied attempting to commit gross indecency with another man nine months ago.
PC Robert Hamilton, 33, of Westcott Road, South Shields, also pleaded not guilty to assaulting two policemen on the same day.
Hamilton was remanded on bail by a judge at Newcastle Crown Court.
Derek Turnbull, 51, of Bramham Court, South Shields, denied attempting to commit gross indecency with Hamilton and was also bailed.
Youth remanded:
Peter Barron, 19, of Lancefield Avenue, Newcastle, was remanded in custody for five days by city magistrates yesterday charged with attempting to murder PC Keith Richardson, who was stabbed after being called to a house burglary.
Metro upgrade:
A £4m plan to improve the Tyneside Metro system, including upgrading the trains, was approved by councillors yesterday.
Violent raider:
A woman aged 47 needed hospital treatment for bruising yesterday after being attacked in her home in Chirton Road, North Shields, by a man who stole her video recorder.
Arsonists strike:
A fire in an empty house in Queen Street, South Bank, Middlesbrough, was started deliberately, said firemen.
Local flavour:
Stokesley sausage makers Lazenby's have produced three new bangers named after local places Guisborough, Roseberry and Stokesley.
Visitors alert:
Police are urging elderly people to be careful after two women posing as social workers stole a pension book and purse from a pensioner's home in Stockton.
Partnership to keep town green
MAKING sure Middlesbrough stays green and pleasant will be one of the issues discussed by the new Environment City board at its first meeting on Monday.
Since the successful bid to win the coveted Environment City title for the town, plans have been drafted by the council to continue the ‘partnership approach’ which proved successful.
The board comprises representatives of the council, business, the voluntary sector and wildlife and conservation bodies.
Sunday trains:
Normal Sunday train services out of Saltburn will be resumed on April 5.
Maintenance and improvement works have been carried out over the past few months resulting in the first Sunday train leaving at 5pm.
£100 for fund:
A cheque for £100 was presented by estate agents Dollery Waller in Saltburn yesterday towards to town's Bandstand Fund.
The funds stands at £3,000.
Paper service:
The monthly paper collection organised by Saltburn's 500Club has been resumed.
The scheme had to be halted because the collector had been forced to make a charge.
Now 500Club member Martin Bell has revived it and service will be resumed first Saturday of the month in the Gateway car park.
Repair bill:
Repairs costing £5,000 will be carried out to garages at Evesham Way and Barnet Way, Billingham, by Stockton Borough Council.
Rig cash:
Workers on the Brent Delta oil rig have raised £450 for Hartlepool Hospice.
The money was handed over by Jackie Hamilton and her mother Evelyn Raw whose late husband Douglas was a patient at the hospice.
Mrs Hamilton's husband works on the oil rig.
Just Top service: Stockton trained Edwin Taylor has been nominated the best trainee waiter in Britain the second consecutive year a trainee with the Middlesbrough based Hotel and Catering Training Company has won the award.
Just the ticket:
Pupils at Egglescliffe Comprehensive School, Eaglescliffe, have organised a draw among local businesses so the parish council can buy a seat to commemorate the Queen's 40th year.
Liberal choice:
Rosamund Jordan has been formally adopted as the Liberal Democrat's General Election candidate for the safe Labour seat of Middlesbrough.
Mrs Jordan, a teacher in charge of two special schools for disaffected teenagers, came second in Scarborough with a 14,000 vote in 1983.
Shed fire:
A shed and its contents were destroyed in a fire in Church Lane, Eston, Middlesbrough, yesterday.
Rock night:
There's a chance to rock against racism tonight when a mixture of pop, blues and bhangra fills the air in Middlesbrough Town Hall Crypt from 7.30pm.
Proceeds go to the Anti-Fascist Association.
Road works:
Work starts on the A174 Parkway in Cleveland on Monday.
There will be offside lane closures between the A19 and B1365 interchangees for five days.
Factory blaze:
Three fire engines were called to the Sweet and Savoury food  factory on the Oakesway Trading Estate in Hartlepool to fight a blaze which severely damaged a filtration plant.
A flue at the top of a deep fat frying machine was also affected.
Pub raid:
Detectives are probing a break-in at the Smith Arms in Greatham, near Hartlepool.
The raiders escaped with £850 and a quantity of cigarettes.
Road survey:
A traffic survey is being carried out at Sappers Corner, an accident blackspot on the outskirts of Hartlepool, and it has raised hopes that improvement works may be carried out by Cleveland County Council.
Jewellery stolen:
Burglars who broke into the Blacksmiths Arms in Stranton, Hartlepool, escaped with a quantity of jewellery despite being disturbed by the landlord's wife.
Young boy hurt in car smash
A YOUNGSTER broke his leg and suffered cuts to his face after being involved in a car crash at the weekend.
Six-year-old Scott Wilson, of St Helen's Auckland, was injured when a Nissan Micra car he was travelling in was in collision with another vehicle at the entrance to the Roman Way industrial estate at St Helen's Auckland.
Police at Bishop Auckland said Paul Wilson, believed to be the boy's father, was the driver of the Micra.
The youngster was taken to Bishop Auckland General Hospital where his condition last night was said to be quite comfortable and improving.
Driver injured:
A man was badly hurt when his car overturned outside Newcastle House, Ingram Road, Middlesbrough, at about 3.30pm yesterday.
He was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Fat fire:
A Stockton man needed hospital treatment for burns to his hands after a chip pan fire.
Martin Kean was injured as he tried to carry the flaming pan out of his third storey flat in Ainstey House, Norton.
A spokesman for Cleveland Fire Brigade said: ‘The cloth over the chip pan caught fire and as he walked towards the door cold air blew the fat up his arms.’
The fire damaged the cooker and carpet and melted the kitchen sink.
Branching out:
A northern store chain is helping to open branches of a different kind.
The North Eastern Coop's Summerville hypermarket at Stockton has given neighbouring Blakeston Comprehensive School 400 trees as its contribution to the school's attempt to win a one-off Queen's 40th anniversary trust award.
Pupils, teachers, parents and governors planted the trees yesterday.
MIDDLESBROUGH have been hit by injuries as they prepare to concentrate on their Second Division promotion challenge.
Five players are ruled out of today's trip to Southend, with midfield players Robbie Mustoe and Mark Proctor facing operations.
Mustoe could be out for six weeks with a groin injury, while Proctor will miss two or three weeks after a minor knee operation.
Winger Stuart Ripley faces a three-week lay-off with a hamstring injury.
Full back Gary Parkinson and striker Andy Payton are still unfit and will also miss Tuesday's game at Cambridge.
Midfielder Andy Peake is recalled and central defender Jon Gittens will be on the bench after being Cup-tied.
Willie Falconer will start a League game for the first time in six months, and teenager Alan Moore could make his debut.
Boro must find self-motivation at unfashionable Southend after playing above themselves in the Rumbelows Cup semi-final at Manchester United in midweek.
Team from:
Pears, Fleming, Phillips, Mohan, Kernaghan, Hendrie, Peake, Pollock, Slaven, Hendrie, Wilkinson, Falconer, Moore, Gittens, Kavanagh.
Southend striker Brett Angell has rejected the chance to join second division leaders Blackburn Rovers in a £1 million deal.
And full-back Dean Austin, 21, has turned down an £800,000 move to Derby.
Angell, 23, joined the club from Stockport for £100,000.
He has scored 22 League and Cup goals this season, the last against Blackburn in midweek.
Southend await a late fitness test on Andy Ansah before naming today's side.
Southend from: Sansome; Austin, Powell, Jones, Scully, Prior, Ansah, Cornwell, Tilson, Benjamin, Angell, Locke, Butler, Edwards.
New vicar for Saltburn The Rev. Ian Parkinson is to be the new vicar of Saltburn.
For the last six years he has been assistant curate at St. Barnabas' Church in Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, and he will be instituted as vicar of Saltburn in July.
Mr Parkinson takes over from the Rev. Tony Smailes, who began his new job as vicar of St. Cuthbert's in Ormesby on Sunday.
A MAN aged 26 suffered a fractured skull when he was struck on the head by an axe during a row at his home.
Michael Smedley, of Gordon Bank, Eggleston in Teesdale, was said to be ‘stable’ in Middlesbrough General Hospital after the incident at the weekend.
Mr Smedley was involved in an argument early on Saturday morning although police only released details of the incident yesterday.
Another family member, Carl Smedley, 28, suffered a stab wound to the neck which was not serious.
A spokesman for Durham Constabulary said three people were arrested following the incident and all have been released, one of them on police bail.
A file was being prepared for the Crown Prosecution Service.
HARTLEPOOL:
LIBERALDemocrat candidate Ian Cameron asked the police to intervene after a number of boards promoting his campaign were removed from land in the outlying village of Elwick.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
TORY MP Tim Devlin admits he could lose his marginal seat.
Devlin majority 774 votes says third runner-up in the 1987 General Election, Labour's John Scott, might pip him at the post if ‘the anti-Labour vote is split.’
DURHAM NORTH:
A FORMER policeman will contest Durham North for the Liberal Democrats in the coming election.
Philip Appleby, 44, a father of three from Wylam, Northumberland, was the unanimous choice of the constituency party.
Mr Appleby is now a full time student at Newcastle University.
His opponents in the April 9 contest are sitting Labour MP Giles Radice and Tory candidate Elizabeth Sibley an NHS medical secretary from London.
CLEVELAND:
THE Liberal Democrats yesterday unveiled their trio of female candidates fighting Cleveland seats in the forthcoming election.
Rosamund Jordan, Kay Kirkham and Suzanne Fletcher are the centre party's hopes for Middlesbrough, Stockton South and North respectively.
TYNEMOUTH
LABOUR candidate Paddy Cosgrove has pledged his support for a fight against opencast mining at Holywell on the edge of the constituency.
He said: ‘This is an area of natural beauty and is a very popular amenity for the surrounding community.’
HARTLEPOOL:
GRAHAM Robb, Conservative candidate in Hartlepool, mapped out the course of his campaign at his adoption meeting in the town's Grand Hotel.
He said his four main themes would be tough action on law and order, the fight for jobs, further improvements in public services and the chance for Hartlepool to break away from Cleveland County Council.
HARTLEPOOL:
ACTION must be taken to boost the construction industry in the town, Labour candidate Peter Mandelson says.
While the percentage of people employed in construction nationally is 6.9pc, the proportion in Hartlepool is significantly higher at 9.2pc.
POLICE called to keep the peace on a Teesside estate days after Tyneside's Meadow Well riots were pelted with bricks and stones, a court heard yesterday.
Trouble flared on the Brambles Farm estate in Middlesbrough last September after a youth from the area was arrested.
John Hitchen, prosecuting, told Teesside Crown Court police dog handlers on patrol in the estate's Marshall Avenue had been pelted with missiles.
Additional officers in a police van were called to give them back up and in turn became the target for bricks and stones.
Mr Hitchen said police in the van had seen two of the youths allegedly involved in the missile throwing later that night and arrested them.
Andrew Livingstone, 20, of Compton House, Cottingham Drive, Pallister Park, Middlesbrough, and Jason Hardy, 20, of Delarden Road, Pallister Park, Middlesbrough, both deny violent disorder.
PC Steve Broughton told the continuing trial one group of 30 youths, some in ski masks, had stood in front of the van and thrown rocks.
‘It was a pretty terrifying situation,’ he admitted.
PC Broughton said he had seen one youth in a distinctive T-shirt whom he later identified as Hardy throw a missile.
When interviewed by police Hardy had said he had been watching the disturbances but denied throwing missiles.
David Livingstone, father of Andrew and of the same address, said his son had been at home weight training when he was supposed to be out throwing stones.
Catherine Moore, 19, was trapped in a Ford Cortina car after it crashed into parked vehicles in east Middlesbrough on Sunday afternoon.
Three youths who escaped from the wreckage ran away from the scene and were last night branded cowards by police.
Chief Insp Dick Copeman of Cleveland Police's traffic unit said there were three men and one young girl in the car and all the younger men could think about was themselves.
He renewed appeals for the youths to come forward and make themselves known.
‘We have had no response as yet,’ he said.
‘They are cowards because they must have realised she was quite seriously injured.
‘They may have panicked, may have had a gut reaction to run.’
Catherine, of Daniels Court, Middlesbrough, suffered a blood clot on the brain and multiple injuries.
She was said to be stable in Middlesbrough General Hospital last night, but no longer on a ventilator.
She is still in a coma.
A hospital spokesman said it was too soon to say whether there would be any permanent brain damage.
Catherine's parents could not explain why she was in the car at the time.
The accident happened at the junction of Ingram Road and Bradhope Road, Berwick Hills, at 3.30pm on Sunday.
Chief Insp Copeman admitted the police did not even known the cause of the accident.
Police are still trying to trace the owner of the car which has changed hands several times.
Anyone with any information should call Cleveland Police on (0642) 326326.
New rail service details revealed
CLEVELAND'S Transport 2,000 group will be told about the new Middlesbrough to Liverpool through train services by Richard Hast, marketing manager for Regional Railways, at its meeting tomorrow.
The timings of the trains will be revealed for the first time and anyone interested is welcome to attend the meeting at St Mary's Centre, Corporation Road, Middlesbrough at 7.30pm.
Members will also discuss questions to be put to candidates during the General Election campaign.
PC says ‘thanks’: A police officer injured last week when he was allegedly rammed by a car, has thanked all his well-wishers.
PC Ron Hall, who suffered serious leg injuries and underwent emergency surgery in Middlesbrough General Hospital, said: ‘The response from people has been overwhelming.
The cards and calls from well-wishers have been a real pick-me-up and I want to thank everyone for their concern and support.’
Rethink urged:
A fight is being waged to save war pensioners' housing benefits.
Coun Chris Abbott hopes that Langbaurgh Council's £70,000 budget saving by disregarding the first £10 instead of the normal full pension is a misunderstanding.
He says it could cost some pensioners as much as £25 a week and is urging the council to think again.
Club grant:
Middlesbrough councillors have agreed to give £1,000 to help the newly organised Teeside Ju-jitsu Club, which is introducing sessions in the town.
Cash backing from the council ‘s community chest will help by mats and training equipment.
Other grants approved recently include: £1,000 to the Fisher Mountain Bike Racing Team; £500 to the Saltersgill and Sutton Association for the Young; £1,000 to Middlesbrough Crime Prevention panel; £535 to Grove Hill Youth Club.
Business bid:
Langbaurgh Council is to take stands at Birmingham and Stavanger in Norway to help local companies exhibit at major trade fairs this year.
The council believes businesses will be given an opportunity to win new customers in both the UK and abroad.
Attendance at such exhibitions has in the past allowed companies both to protect existing jobs and expand their workforces.
Kitchen fire:
Firemen tackled a fire in the Albany Court old people's sheltered housing complex in Hartlepool.
A kitchen and its contents were damaged by smoke.
Cash boost:
Members of Hartlepool Council's policy and resources committee have pledged £300 to support the work of the Salvation Army.
This follows similar donations in the past two years.
Subs renewed:
Hartlepool Council's policy and resources committee agreed to renew its £3,000 subscription to Teesside Tomorrow for 1992/93 after hearing that the organisation had become involved in a number of projects which would benefit the town.
Pension protest:
Elsie Stringer, 71, of Billingham, is taking the plight of Britain's pensioners to the European Parliament and will address a two-day conference attended by pensioners from all over the EEC.
A DARLINGTON woman is mystified by a series of vandal attacks on her car since she moved to the town.
Yesterday, Pauline Golightly, 24, woke to find her Nissan Sunny car had been covered in paint stripper severely damaging all the paintwork.
This was the fourth attack on her car since October when she moved to her home in Vernon Gardens, Harrowgate Hill.
She and her boyfriend Jonathan Clack have become convinced the vandalism is more than just coincidence.
‘The first time I had my tyres slashed, then my car was scratched, next the windows were smashed and now this,’ she said.
Darlington police have been told about the vandalism and yesterday an officer went to interview Miss Golightly.
A police spokesman said the incidents are being investigated but it is not possible to speculate why vandals are concentrating on this car.
Miss Golightly, who works as a sales and marketing representative in Middlesbrough, moved to Darlington from Woodham last year.
‘I cannot think why anyone would want to do this to me,’ she said.
Yesterday she went to several of her neighbours' houses to ask if anyone had seen the incident or knew who was behind it.
‘It's happening once every six weeks and I'm sure it's not just the usual car thieves,’ she said.
LABOUR would scrap plans for more Government-backed superschools in the North-East as part of a grand strategy to plough millions of pounds into nursery places.
Hilary Armstrong, one of the party's education spokesmen, yesterday said a Labour government would dismantle the City Technology Colleges, bringing them under local authority control.
Ms Armstrong, who is defending Durham North-West, said the CTCs had created an elitist element within the education system by attracting millions of pounds of investment from private companies.
There are CTCs in Middlesbrough and Gateshead where pupils are taught in ultra-modern classrooms packed with the latest equipment.
But the CTCs have been criticised by opponents who say the Government has lavished money on a few pupils at the expense of others throughout the country.
Last night Schools Minister Michael Fallon, standing again for the Tories in Darlington, warned that meddling with the CTCs would be ‘a disaster.’
And John Paddick, principal of Macmillan College, Middlesbrough, said any attempt to change the CTCs would be met with stiff opposition.
Miss Armstrong said plans to build more CTCs would be scrapped and control of the existing colleges handed to local education authorities.
Money from the CTC programme, estimated at £50m, would go into a new scheme aimed at providing 23,000 extra nursery places in the first year of a Labour Government.
Darlington College of Technology could benefit from the extra investment.
Miss Armstrong said she hoped the College would forge greater links with Durham University under Labour's plans to introduce a degree course for nursery nurses.
Miss Armstrong said Labour wanted to work alongside the existing CTCs to bring them within the mainstream education system.
She added: ‘We don't intend to hold grudges against either the staff or the pupils.’
But Mr Fallon said: ‘Any meddling with the CTCs would be a big blow for the North-East.
Smashing up Macmillan College and Emmanuel, in Gateshead, would reduce the opportunities available to our children.
It would be an act of sheer vandalism.
‘CTCs are overwhelmingly popular.
I only wish we had one in County Durham providing high standards of education.’
Tories say industrial sponsorship helps pay for extra facilities at the CTCs and ensures they keep in close touch with prospective employers.
MacMillan College boasts an electronic information network which relays messages throughout the building, satellite tv and even has its own television studio.
A TEESSIDE woman is hoping to raise £1,000 for women suffering from breast cancer.
Jose Ransome of Church Lane, Ormesby, Middlesbrough, became aware of the disease when her sister Valerie developed it.
Now she has joined the Breakthrough fundraising drive to build a research centre in London.
Anyone who wants to help Jose can contact her on .
Unionist politicians frequently refer to the six counties of North-Eastern Ireland, reputed to be part of Britain, as Carson Country.
What is meant by this?
John Brady, 2 Gibson Street, Consett.
The 1801 Act of Union merged Ireland with Britain, but in the 1870s-80s Home Rule was called for.
Gladstone tried but failed to get it through Parliament.
When the Liberals in 1911 again proposed to grant Irish Home Rule, Sir Edward Carson, later Lord Carson, led the mainly Protestant six counties' resistance to being a minority in a mainly Catholic Ireland — the objection still made today.
Carson (1854–1935) was a Dublin-born Anglo-Irish lawyer, a famous barrister at both Bars, and a Conservative MP who became solicitor-general in 1900.
As leader of the militant Ulster Unionists he not only voiced the six counties' wish to remain under the King and the Parliament at Westminster, but organised a large force of Ulster Volunteers, for whom arms were landed in 1913.
The Home Rule Bill was about to become law, heralding a clash between British forces and the Ulster Volunteers, when the First World War broke out and postponed the problem.
Irishmen of all persuasions served in the Army, and Carson in the wartime Government.
In 1916 the Easter Rising in Dublin introduced a new complication.
It meant militants in the South had turned to violence to gain Home Rule, while militants in the North would use violence to prevent it.
Though the six counties initially refused an offer of separation from the rest of Ireland, that was the compromise eventually agreed on, although it led to civil war in the new Irish Free State, and remains the root cause of later violence.
The six counties are ‘Carson Country’ because Edward Carson was their champion in the crucial early years.
Reading about the postulated 500-year life span of a plastic food container, in Oddfacts, is anything known about the possible life span of negatives and photographs?— A.W.
Farrow, 9 Hexham Green, Middlesbrough.
The statistic is only an informed assumption, and no one offers one in the far more delicate field of photography.
So much depends on the camera and quality of materials, the processes used, the conditions in which negatives and prints have been or may be preserved, and so on.
Leaving aside Fox Talbot's 1835 picture of a lattice window, Niepce's earlier experiments in France, Daguerre's pictures on metal and other examples of ‘fixing an image’ as a one-off, the earliest photographs in our sense date from the 1840s.
The short answer is that there are too many imponderables for a neatly overall prediction, and only time will tell how far into the future a given photograph or negative is likely to survive.
Would you please tell me the significance of the Burning of the Tar Barrels ceremony at Allendale on New Year's Eve?
This is one version of a now largely Scottish custom of Burning the Old Year Out.
At Allendale in Northumberland the Guisers go their rounds from mid-evening while a band plays near an unlit bonfire.
A procession is formed as midnight approaches and the Guisers carry blazing half-barrels on their heads to hurl into the bonfire and light it, before first-footing round the parish.
Biggar in Lanarkshire and Wick in Caithness go in for bonfires and torches, while at Stonehaven in Kincardshire young men parade with blazing fire balls.
A more elaborate ritual at Burghead in Morayshire, the Burning of the Clavie, a barrel construction put together according to strict rules, is held on January 11, New Year's Eve in the pre-1752 calendar.
Burning the Bush was a ceremony on Herefordshire farms which died out just before the First World War — the ‘bush’ being a ball of hawthorn twigs and mistletoe, ceremonially burned on a wheatfield early on New Year's morning, and replaced by a new one which hung in the farmhouse until next New Year.
In some West Midland and Welsh Border houses, mistletoe was similarly though more casually burned and replaced, and a crown of blackthorn serves in Worcestershire.
These are survivals of a formerly widespread practice of lighting communal bonfires on New Year's Eve or another date near the winter solstice, originally to drive out old evils and bring fertility to crops and cattle in the coming year.
Nothing doing
CLAIMS in Another Paper that the former submariner Cdr Bill Boakes polled the lowest vote ever may be taken with a bucket of bilge.
The nadir is property of F R Lees who in 1860 stood, doubtless upright, for the Temperance Chartist party in Ripon but failed to trouble the scorers.
Since both Chartists and temperance men remain in short supply in Ripon, we have been able to discover nothing more about the singularly unsuccessful Mr Lees.
Of the late Cdr Boakes, however, we can report that he contested 28 Parliamentary elections, tried unsuccessfully to prosecute Prince Philip for careless driving (and the Queen for aiding and abetting) and disapproved of fireworks and homosexuals.
His main concern was road safety, but he was never the same man after 1982.
Unfortunately he was hit by a motor bike.
Sutch ignorance
AND speaking of losers, we have to report that no one at Darlington Post Office Club's quiz night on Sunday knew who was Britain's longest serving Party leader.
It is of course Screaming Lord Sutch.
Man Freitag PETER Freitag isn't what you'd call a loser, of course, simply an habitual bronze medallist.
A sort of Liberal party Man Friday, the region's most widely travelled and most durable candidate twice fought Darlington in 1974, contested Middlesbrough in 1979, Jarrow in 1987 and this time tackles Easington.
The Darlington estate agent has also been Durham's Euro candidate.
On each occasion he finished third.
‘I enjoy taking on the big battalions,’ he says.
‘The Liberal Democrat message needs to be heard.’
Coy about his age, but we reckon it's 63, he had rather more success at the veteran's Wimbledon last year, winning a first round match in two hours 38 minutes.
‘I was so exhausted,’ he says, ‘I fell asleep on the physio's couch.’
Rix pickings
ROSAMUND Jordan, Freitag's ultimate Lib-Dem successor to the Middlesbrough candidacy, admits that she couldn't bank on her 20-year-old son's support.
He'll vote Labour.
The Jordan tributary, who lives in the next constituency, is called Rix.
‘He sounds like a unisex hairdresser's,’ someone said.
Blue-eyed boy OUR man on the two bob end reports that man of the people Hartlepool Tory candidate Graham Robb was standing at the Victoria Ground on Saturday.
Doubtless Robb found it portentous that the blues (of Hartlepool United) comfortably beat the reds (of Darlington.)
Overcome, perhaps, he left at half time.
Quote ‘It looks like he's won a dog show.’
Langbaurgh Labour party official at Ashok Kumar's campaign launch, describing a supporter's tricoloured rosette of red, gold and green.
BRITISH Rail has promised a better deal for Teesside travellers.
It says changes in its latest timetable, due out in May, will mean better connections on both the local and national networks and shorter journey times.
Improvements include better connections between Teesside and Tyneside, more through services within the North-East and introduction of SuperSprinter trains on many local services.
The move will also mean more connections and faster journey times between Teesside and London and see the introduction of the Class 158 train on the route to Manchester.
From May, connections between Teesside and King's Cross will increase from 31 to 37 each weekday and average journey times are set to be cut by 12 minutes to three hours 15 minutes.
The new SuperSprinter trains will replace many Pacers on the Saltburn-Darlington route and lines to Sunderland and Newcastle.
And for the first time a handful of trains will run to Tyneside via the main line, calling at Durham.
BR has also decided to give Middlesbrough, Stockton and Hartlepool more direct links with Carlisle with the addition of an extra through service.
The number of trains between Teesside and the MetroCentre will increase from four to seven each day.
More trains are promised between Saltburn, Redcar, Middlesbrough and Darlington although the number of calls at South Bank will be reduced to speed up journeys.
A MAN with a compulsion to drive cars at high speed was sent to young offenders institution for a year.
Police twice chased Garron Mulraney at speeds reaching 80 miles an hour, as he drove through red lights, across junctions and over white lines, Recorder George Moorhouse heard at Teesside Crown Court.
Mulraney, 20, of Lambton Road, Middlesbrough, admitted two charges each of reckless driving, driving a vehicle knowing it was taken without consent, driving whilst disqualified and having no insurance.
He also admitted assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
Andrew Clarkson, prosecuting, said an Escort XR3i was stolen from the car park at Kirby College, Middlesbrough.
Police chased him at speeds of up to 70mph.
On another occasion he drove a Saab 9000 taken from the car park of the Post House Hotel, Thornaby.
Police in a Sierra gave chase at up to 80mph.
In mitigation Lawrence Hazell said the defendant had acted stupidly in accepting invitations to drive cars he knew were stolen.
The Recorder told Mulraney: ‘'You have a compulsive urge to drive at excessive speed.’
Mulraney was also disqualified from driving for two years.
Police seek crash driver
POLICE are still trying to trace the driver of a car involved in an accident which left 19-year-old Catherine Moore fighting for life.
She was critical but stable in Middlesbrough General Hospital last night after  being left for dead when a Ford Cortina crashed into parked vehicles in Berwick Hills, Middlesbrough, on Sunday.
Police have questioned two male passengers of the car but still want the driver to come forward.
He is from Middlesbrough and in his early thirties.
Councillor in court:
Arnold Warneken, 34, a Green councillor on Harrogate Borough Council, appeared before magistrates yesterday charged with  recklessly causing a runway obstruction at Marston Hall Airfield at Tockwith near York last year.
Harrogate magistrates adjourned the case.
Inquest verdict:
Cleveland Coroner Michael Sheffield yesterday recorded a verdict of death from an industrial disease at an inquest on former foundry worker Edward Bird, 76, of Auckland Street, Guisborough, who died of silicosis.
Road death:
A pensioner died in hospital after being run over by a car on the poorly lit Corporation Road, Redcar, an inquest heard yesterday.
Cleveland Coroner Michael Sheffield recorded a verdict of accidental death on Ellen Rooney, 69, of Severn Road, Redcar.
Tot trapped:
Firemen had climb through a window to rescue Natalie Prosser, aged 13 months, from her home at The Fairway, Saltburn, yesterday after she managed to slam the French windows shut when her mum popped into the back garden.
Heritage coast:
Plans to protect a six mile strip of coastline between Scarborough and Filey by designating it ‘Heritage Coast’ were welcomed yesterday by members of Scarborough Borough Council's development services committee.
Town fears:
Pleas that the character of the North Yorkshire market town of Pickering should not be spoiled by takeaway food shops have been made by town councillors who rejected schemes to convert a dry cleaners into a kebab house and for a pizza takeaway at a music shop.
DARLINGTON:
Cleveland AntiFascist Association has congratulated mainstream candidates for refusing to share a platform with British National Party candidate Donald Clarke.
STOCKTON NORTH:
Decisions on North-East planning issues will be made in the region if the Liberal Democrats come to power, said candidate Suzanne Fletcher.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Liberal Democrat candidate Rosamund Jordan holds her first phone-in for voters today.
The lines will be open 7pm and 8.30pm. (0642) 827594.
EASINGTON:
John Cummings, defending the seat for Labour, said the number working in the coal industry there had fallen from 11,799 in 1979 to 2,300 now.
He promised a  moratorium on pit closures if Labour won.
TWO youths have been cleared by a Teesside Crown Court jury of hurling missiles at police during a fracas on a Middlesbrough estate.
Andrew Livingstone and Jason Hardy were alleged to have taken part in the near-riot on Brambles Farm estate only days after the Meadow Well revolt on Tyneside, the jury heard.
But Livingstone and Hardy, both 20, had denied a charge of violent disorder during the incident last September.
John Hitchen, prosecuting, told the jury that Livingstone, of Compton House, Cottingham Drive, Pallister Park, and Hardy, of Delarden Road, Pallister Park, both Middlesbrough, had been involved in missile throwing when police were called to quell trouble on the estate which flared after a youth was arrested.
Livingstone said he had been at home at the time of the trouble while Hardy said he watched the disturbance, although he did not throw anything.
After being acquitted Livingstone admitted possessing a five-inch knife as an offensive weapon on a separate occasion and agreed to be put on probation for twelve months.
A RACE
Equality Council could be established in Darlington.
The move comes following the announcement that a British National Party candidate is to contest the General Election in Darlington.
Dr Donald Clarke, the BNP candidate, wants to see forced repatriation and passports taken away from immigrant workers and ethnic minorities.
A racial equality steering committee has now been set up to monitor discrimination in Darlington and the county as a whole.
And a branch looks set to open next month.
A spokesman said: ‘Darlington has got the most ethnic minorities in the county and this branch will cover the whole of the county.’
He said they were concerned about discrimination, particularly in work and education.
‘We have to look at the movements of the BNP and what they are doing.
We feel there is a need for a branch in the town.
All the groundwork is done now.’
A BNP spokesman attacked the decision to spend up to £40,000 on the Darlington branch.
‘If the money is provided it surely indicates the priorities of Government at a time of supposed financial restraint,’ he said.
‘The BNP contends that it will take more than a Race Equality Council to smooth over the cracks of the fragmenting edifice that is the multi-racial society.’
The steering committee has applied to Durham County Council and eight district councils for funding and hopes to be up and running next month.
The REC already has branches in Newcastle and Middlesbrough.
A TEENAGE motorist died in a pile-up on the A174 Parkway road in Cleveland after running into the central reservation.
Cleveland coroner Michael Sheffield recorded a verdict of accidental death on Graham Morley, a 19-year-old apprentice joiner of Lingfield Ash, Coulby Newham, Middlesbrough.
He was driving a Peugeot 309 which an eye witness, Richard Bowden, of Pembroke Way, Redcar, said hit the barrier and turned over, finishing up back on its wheels.
Mr Bowden said he pulled over onto the grass verge and was about level with the car when he heard two thuds as two other cars ran into it.
Pathologist Dr Mustansir Nurbhai said the cause of death was shock due to multiple injuries and internal bleeding.
PC Stephen Garner, who attended the scene near the Stokesley turn-off, said three metal securing posts and concrete foundations of the central reservation were uprooted by the impact.
He said in his opinion the accident was caused through driver error.
AS THE general election campaign gets under way, leading Cleveland councillors marked yesterday's Vote for Democracy Day by pledging their support for democracy in South Africa.
County council chairman Ted Wood said everyone should have the right to vote.
He placed his voting paper in a special ballot box in Middlesbrough town hall.
Another ballot box was available at the central library.
He said: ‘In this country we tend to take our democratic rights for granted but this event gives Cleveland people a chance to make it clear they value those rights and believe that everyone in South Africa should have them too.’
Coun Andy Wilson, chairman of the council's equal opportunities sub-committee, said yesterday's timing was particularly appropriate since the ‘Whites Only’ referendum on political reform in South Africa was taking place.
Fire service:
Firemen in Hartlepool were only too happy to help out when pupils asked for assistance in putting up bird boxes in trees within the grounds of West Park School.
They duly turned up equipped with a ladder, a hammer and a bag of nails.
Fresh appeal:
Detectives have issued a fresh appeal for information following an incident in Hartlepool's Middleton Grange Shopping Centre on Saturday in which a security guard suffered a hairline fracture of the skull.
Anybody who can assist can contact (0429) 221151.
Cigarette alert:
Cleveland Police are warning smokers to beware of offers of cheap cigarettes as they could be part of a hoard stolen from a storeroom in Morgan Drive, Guisborough.
Czech visit:
A party of Czech academics called in to see Middlesbrough Mayor Eddie Bolland yesterday.
The group is in Cleveland for eight weeks to study the North-East's path to economic recovery.
Coordinating the visit is Debbie Welch, a Czech-born lecturer at Longlands College, Middlesbrough.
resident's support: Two-thirds of residents on the Ings housing development at Redcar have backed plans for a revised layout to the proposed local centre.
The developer plans a small supermarket, a few shops, a pub with car park and garden, general parking, landscaping and a village green.
Driving charge:
David Peter Woodier, 28, of Alma House, Middlesbrough, was convicted of driving without a licence, insurance or test certificate, and was fined £340 by Richmond magistrates and ordered to pay £25 costs.
Ramp grant:
A £1,000 grant has been recommended by Langbaurgh's finance committee towards the provision of a ramp for disabled people to have access to Scaling Dam sailing club which has a specially adapted dinghy for them to enjoy the sport.
Expansion praised:
A £300,000 expansion at the Skelton food firm Savoury Kitchen, which will be adding 15 more employees to the present 35 when it is completed in June, was praised by former Agriculture Minister David MacLean during his East Cleveland visit yesterday.
Piglets saved:
Cleveland firemen wearing breathing apparatus saved 120 piglets during a farm blaze at Carlin How.
BRITISH Rail has promised a better deal for passengers with a new timetable shake-up to take effect from May.
It says the changes will result in better connections on both the local and national networks and shorter journey times.
The improvements include better connections between Teesside and Tyneside, more through services within the North-East and the introduction of SuperSprinter trains on many local services.
The new SuperSprinter trains will replace many of the existing Pacers between Saltburn, Redcar, Middlesbrough and Darlington, with the number of trains running on the Darlington to Saltburn line also being increased.
The number of calls at South Bank will be reduced to cut journey times.
There will also be more connections and faster journey times between Teesside and London and the introduction of the Class 158 train on the route from Teesside to Manchester.
A NINE-year-old Teesside girl became an honorary member of the Cleveland Police dog section for the day.
Aimee Welsh, nine, of Weaverham Road, Norton, suffers from cystic fibrosis and is a regular patient in the children's ward at South Cleveland Hospital, Middlesbrough.
The Glebe School pupil is very fond of dogs and PC John Baines, who is involved with the ward's Dreams Come True charity, arranged for her to spend the day with members of the police dog section.
Last summer the officer made a parachute jump at the Northern Parachute Centre, Topcliffe where he and his colleagues raised over £500 for the charity.
Aimee was thrilled by yesterday's experience and the dog handlers were delighted with her progress in crime and drug-busting techniques.
‘I wanted to see how the police train the dogs and it really made my day,’ she said.
Her mum, Sheila, said: ‘Aimee is crazy about dogs.’
A LABOUR candidate has been attacked for his ‘arrogant’ attitude towards the forthcoming General Election.
Stuart Bell, who is sitting on a near-15,000 majority in Middlesbrough, came under fire from Tory opponent Paul Rayner and Liberal Democrat challenger Rosamund Jordan.
The furore erupted after Mr Bell said he could not make any of five dates offered for public debates by Teesside Poly chaplain Cathy Rowling.
Mrs Rowling hoped to arrange the meetings on behalf of church groups in the town.
Mr Bell said: ‘My programme has been set for many weeks and every day is tied up.’
He added: ‘I had a public debate of this nature in 1983 and it was not a success.
It was badly distorted in the press.’
Mr Bell said he would spend the campaign ‘on the doorsteps and in the market-places meeting the people.’
Mr Bell was dismissive of the criticisms, commenting: ‘I have managed to get through campaigns without knowing the names of my opponents and I think I will be reasonably successful this time, too.’
Paul Rayner and Rosamund Jordan said they were disappointed there would be no public forum featuring all three candidates before the election.
Mr Rayner said: ‘Mr Bell is being a bit arrogant.’
Victims of crash show improvement
THREE people seriously injured in a crash that claimed the lives of two teenagers are improving.
Hannah Smith, 16, of Lees Lane, Northallerton, is stable in the intensive care unit at the Friarage Hospital, Northallerton.
She suffered multiple injuries in the accident on Saturday on the A168 at Thornton-le-Street when the Peugeot 405 she was travelling in collided head on with a Daihatsu car.
Peugeot driver Esther Martin, 17, of South Parade, Northallerton, is improving in Middlesbrough General Hospital, and Daihatsu driver Richard Boyton, 45, of Mayfield, South Otterington, near Northallerton, is in the Friarage Hospital with a broken collarbone, serious leg fracture and facial injuries.
He is comfortable.
Peugeot passengers Paul Dyke, 19, of St George's Grove, Northallerton, and Jonathan Bell, 17, of Leachfield Grange, Newsham, near Thornton-le-Street, died in the crash.
Fund celebrates:
Lord Halifax, High steward of York Minster and chairman of the York Minster Fund is to launch the fund's 25th anniversary year next Tuesday.
He will be reviewing the fund's achievements and outline the challenges ahead.
Shop appeal:
Leeds and London Holdings and Deans Garden Centre, Scarborough, are to appeal against refusal of planning permission by Scarborough council for a superstore to be developed on land at Seamer Road.
It is one of five applications for a big supermarket currently on the drawing board for the resort.
Splashing out:
Yorkshire Water is to spend more than £300m on improvements to supplies, treatment works, mains and sewers in the coming financial year, equivalent to £180 per household.
INQUESTS were opened and adjourned yesterday into the deaths of an elderly woman and her daughter who were killed in a car crash.
A hearing at Bishop Auckland was told that 81-year-old Edith Humphrey died of multiple injuries and her daughter Iris Blenkinsop, 57, died of chest injuries in a crash involving their car and a tipper lorry.
The car driver, Mrs Blenkinsop's husband Jacob, 53, of Northam Close, Stainton Park, Hemlington, Middlesbrough, suffered serious chest injuries.
The Renault car was crushed in the collision on the A689 outside Sedgefield on Monday morning.
Mrs Humphrey, of Ash Hill, Colby in Cleveland was in the back seat.
The inquest was adjourned to allow police to make further inquiries.
Driver fined:
John Henry Northmore, 29, of Bennison Street, Guisborough, was convicted of driving a car without due care when he appeared at Easingwold Magistrates' Court.
He was fined £250 and ordered to pay £25 costs.
His licence was also endorsed with five points.
Animal award:
Labour's Stuart Bell, who is defending Middlesbrough in the General Election, has received an inscribed glass paperweight from the League Against Cruel Sports for supporting the Second Reading of the Wild Animals (Protecion) Bill on February 14.
Twin tunes:
The music school in Langbaurgh's German twin town of Troisdorf has invited groups from the district to join them in an international concert in autumn.
The invitation is to orchestras, singers and dancers of school age and adults.
A travel grant is available and accommodation will be provided free with families in Troisdord.
More details from Peter Sotheran, chairman of Langbaurgh Twinning Association.
POLICE have spoken by telephone with the man who left his girlfriend for dead after a car crash in Cleveland.
Catherine Moore, 19, of Daniels Court, Middlesbrough, was still clinging to life in hospital last night.
Her condition was described as ‘poor.’
Chief Insp Dick Copeman, of Cleveland Police's traffic unit, said: ‘We have spoken to the man by telephone.
He has admitted he was the driver and says he will give himself up when he is ready.
I don't accept that.’
The man is in his early 30s and lives in Middlesbrough.
Catherine suffered a blood clot on the brain in the accident in Berwick Hills last Sunday.
AN Army and civilian exercise went ahead in secret yesterday a casualty of the General Election.
The simulated disaster in exercise Gryphon's Lift was a midair collision between military and civilian planes over Catterick Garrison.
Hamish Lumsden, the Ministry of Defence's chief press officer who arrived from London, said: ‘There's an absolute ban on proactive PR during an election.’
Journalists who reported to Gaza Barracks at 7.15am as instructed were told they would not be allowed to witness the exercise, which involved 24 Airmobile Brigade, North Yorkshire Police, fire and ambulance services, the county emergency planning department and ‘casualties’ from Longlands College, Middlesbrough.
The aim of the Gryphon Lift was to test army support for civil emergencies.
Brief details supplied to the Press outlined the disaster.
A fully loaded civilian plane crashes in mid-air with an armed military plane over Catterick Garrison.
The 1st Battalion The Green Howards and a bomb disposal squad cordon and clear an area scattered with armaments.
24 Airmobile Field Ambulance, which served in the Gulf War, tends a burning, packed youth hostel hit by pieces of aircraft.
38 Engineer Regiment from Claro Barracks, Ripon, search a lake where a light aircraft crashed when hit by flying wreckage.
Civilian emergency services, including the police underwater team, were due to work alongside military personnel under the overall co-ordination of the police.
Mr Lumsden said: ‘There is a very very strict rule that during a General Election nothing that the Government does can intrude on the election process.’
IN a sea of Cleveland red, Stockton South is a pinprick of blue but only just.
Tim Devlin waves the lone Tory flag in the county following Ashok Kumar's November by-election win for Labour in nearby Langbaurgh but for how much longer?
Labour and the Liberal Democrats are breathing down his neck.
Last time out, all three were separated by only a couple of thousand votes.
This makes Stockton South one of the most crucial constituencies in the coming election.
If there is any kind of swing against the Tories, the prospects for Mr Devlin look bleak.
But his high profile, the constituency's diverse make up and the closeness of all three parties make it hard to call.
The presence in the constituency yesterday of Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd illustrates how deeply the Tories want to retain the seat.
He won't be the last big gun brought out in the battle for Stockton South.
Stretching from the west of Middlesbrough into Stockton and across through Thornaby, Yarm and Eaglescliffe, the seat is more middle class than its counterpart, Stockton North.
Home ownership is high and while unemployment remains a factor, new developments have transformed parts of Stockton.
Labour held it until 1983 when SDP President and former Labour MP Ian Wrigglesworth dramatically won with a majority of 102.
Four years on Mr Devlin, a 32-year-old barrister, pushed Wrigglesworth into second place.
The SDP man's compensation for his years of public sevice was a seat in the House of Lords.
Mr Devlin had a majority of 774.
Labour took third place just 2,000 votes behind the winner and John Scott, a Stockton councillor, is the Labour man again.
The Liberal Democrats have put up Kay Kirkham.
Stockton South is probably the centre party's best hope of winning a seat in Cleveland.
In his four years as an MP Mr Devlin has kept up a high profile.
But his campaign for the relocation of 1,600 Ministry of Defence jobs ended a couple of months ago in failure.
At one time, the Preston Park site looked a certain winner but in the end Stcokton lost out.
The blow was softened somewhat by the relocation of a cream cake factory bringing 700 jobs.
But unemployment, currently in excess of 11pc, will be a factor in the campaign.
On the credit side, huge developments, many already under way at the Teesdale site at Thornaby promise 10,000 jobs.
The former Head Wrightson site, now renamed Teesdale, is famous as the venue for Margaret Thatcher's so-called walk in the wilderness on the day she referred to those who complained about high unemployment as ‘moaning minnies’.
Since then new offices and flats have sprung up but the Teesdale Development Corporation itself is the only significant tenant on the site.
More than three-quarters of the office block is empty.
The area also has a giant new shopping centre at Teesside Park which may or may not kill off Stockton High Street.
The town centre is almost moribund with the Co-op recently pulling out.
The continued revitalisation of the area will be an important issue.
A proposal for a multi-million pound shopping mall could be the key.
National Grid's proposal to route a 400kv power line through part of the constituency is another issue which has sparked controversy.
A public inquiry into the proposal will be held in May.
Last month Tim Devlin's proposed new route was dismissed by National Grid.
John Scott, at 65, is more twice Tim Devlin's age.
They have clashed on a number of occasions and will fight all the way to the finish.
But Tim Devlin predicts a larger majority ‘because disillusioned Liberal Democrats are defecting in large numbers to the main parties.’
Mr Scott has been chairman of Stockton Council's planning committee almost constantly since 1974, says a dire slump in the local economy is enough in itself to sound a death knell for the Tories.
Kay Kirkham, the Liberal Democray candidate, believes the Government's economic record will undoubtedly cost them the seat.
The result is too close to call.
Will Cleveland turf out its only Tory or could Tim Devlin again snatch victory?
Since boundary changes for the 1983 election, the seat has swung from Labour to the SDP and lastly the Tories.
No one has managed to put their stamp on Stockton South.
This election could go a long way to sorting that out.
The outcome may well depend on who copes best with the long run in to polling day.
BRITISH RAIL believes it could be on the right lines for attracting more passengers in Cleveland.
It has targeted the Redcar area in a bid to persuade travellers to use stations at Redcar East and Redcar Central by distributing thousands of leaflets through letter boxes.
The leaflets give details of timetables for the Middlesbrough to Saltburn line as well as specials to key towns in the North-East.
Hartlepool and Durham are also targeted for the scheme.
British Rail North East is also talking to local authorities about other ways of winning more people over to rail travel and reducing road traffic levels at the same time.
SIX men charged with conspiring to steal cars will be sentenced at Teesside Crown Court today.
The six have admitted the charges, committed at a rented factory in Burn Road, Hartlepool.
A seventh man, 23-year-old Sean Wood, of Windermere Avenue, Easington Lane, County Durham, denied the charge.
He was found not guilty yesterday.
The men to be charged today are: Darren Watson, 23, of Cotswold Crescent, Billingham; Paul Bartley, 22 and Mark Barry Cross, 23, both of Victoria Road, Middlesbrough; Anthony Gamble, 21, of Rugby Terrace, High Clarence, near Billingham; Alan Davison, 28, of South Hetton Road, Easington Lane and John Coulson, 28, of Court Road, Bedlington, Northumberland.
Gamble, Bartley and Cross have admitted further charges.
In the North-East Bishop Auckland 5,750 (12.4pc); Darlington 5,342 (9.2); Durham 6,223 (8.9); Hartlepool 6,349 (15.7); Middlesbrough 18,414 (13.1); Newcastle 44,137 (11.2); South Tyneside 10,381 (18.3); Stockton 9,758 (11.5); Sunderland 23,416 (13.2) Harrogate 2,400 (4.6); Malton 400 (3.9); Northallerton 875 (4.1); Pickering and Helmsley 415 (4.3); Richmondshire 925 (5.7); Ripon 673 (5.1); Scarborough and Filey 3,681 (8.8); Thirsk 326 (4.3); Whitby 1,171 (11.0); York 6,830 (6.7).
UNEMPLOYMENT increased by 40,200 last month to reach its highest total for four years The increase took the number out of work to 2,647,300 figures immediately seized on by Labour and Lib-Dems and used to attack the Tory jobs record.
The number of people out of work in the North-East also rose slightly last month adding an extra 700 to the region's dole queue.
The regional seasonally adjusted jobless total, the best indication of the underlying trend, now stands at 152,900, equivalent to 11pc of the workforce the highest figure of any region on mainland Britain.
Tony Blair, Labour's employment spokesman and Labour candidate for Sedgefield, said: ‘It is now more urgent than ever that Britain has a Labour Government pledged to get the North working again.’
Conservative Michael Fallon hit back saying his own Darlington constituency was far from being an unemployment blackspot and pointing to four pages of jobs carried in yesterday's copies of The Northern as evidence of available vacancies.
Electioneering protocol did not allow Employment Secretary Michael Howard to make his normal full statement yesterday.
But he did say that February's increase was significantly lower than that recorded in January.
And yesterday it emerged that Britain's inflation rate of 4.1pc had fallen below that of Germany for the first time in 25 years.
But North Tyneside, the region's unemployment blackspot would have taken little comfort from such news.
It is still the hardest hit area with 10,381 unemployed, which, despite being a slight decrease on January's figure still leaves 18.3pc of the area's workforce without a job.
The figures have raised further arguments over just who has the best policies to tackle unemployment.
In Darlington, defending Conservative Michael Fallon argues that things are set to improve he has set his sights on at least 500 new jobs being created when Fujitsu's superconductor factory at Aycliffe starts recruiting in earnest.
Elsewhere job-creating agencies hope to see more investment in the region from Korean and Taiwanese chemical firms in the near future.
The benefits of Eastern investment can be seen in February's unemployment figures for Sunderland they have dropped by 314 on the previous month, thanks in the main to the ‘Nissan effect’ and the start of a huge recruitment campaign for 1,500 workers.
More traditional home grown ways of alleviating unemployment meanwhile have been outlined in each of the major parties' manifestoes.
The Conservative's plan a continuation of current training programmes for the long-term unemployed together with a new initiative in conjunction with the Training and Enterprise Councils giving people a voucher with which they can buy a ‘skill check’, providing guidance on how to make the most of their working lives.
It is on such schemes that they intend to bring regional levels of unemployment back down to at least the June 1990 low point of 107,000 and lower.
Labour has a more fully developed programme for the long-term unemployed, including three days work a week and two days training.
Spending on a skills training fund of up to £300m is planned.
The Liberal Democrats have stated they would cut the national jobless total by 400,000 within a year.
A job creation and training programme costing a mammoth £3bn, partially funded by tax revenue, would be implemented.
Both Labour and the Liberal Democrats agree that radical measures are needed to stem the growing jobless total.
It would, says Peter Allen, also signal a message of hope for local people.
And although yesterday's total is nearly 40,000 below the region's high of the last five years nearly 192,000, reached in June 1987 their plans will stop it being surpassed they argue.
EXPERIMENTS with drugs cost a young soldier his career yesterday.
Signaller Stuart Wilson, 20, was dismissed from the army and sentenced to six months detention by a Catterick Garrison district court martial after he admitted possessing drugs.
Amphetamine powder was found in a car containing five youths including Wilson, the driver, who was stopped by police in Middlesbrough last May.
Wilson, of 8th Signals, Catterick Garrison, had just bought it after deliberately going in search of the drug because he wanted to try it, the court martial was told.
He told police that he had tried cannabis during the previous weekend while driving in Catterick Garrison with a friend.
Chris Wright, defending, said the two offences, freely admitted to police by Watson, happened during a bad patch when Watson was unhappy with army life.
Watson joined the army at 17 at the Army Apprentices College, Harrogate.
When the offences happened he was an unenthusiastic and below average soldier, the court heard.
But he had since matured into an above average soldier and technician, talented, willing and desperate not to leave the army.
He admitted unlawful possession of amphetamine and unlawful possession of cannabis.
The guilty finding and sentence are subject to confirmation.
A MOTHER was killed and her two young children injured when her car was in a horrific collision with a lorry on the transPennine A66 route yesterday.
A seven-month-old girl was taken to Middlesbrough Hospital with serious head injuries after the accident, yards from the site of a fatal crash two weeks ago.
The smash, in which a three-year-old boy was also slightly hurt, has prompted a call for radical action.
The head-on collision happened a mile west of Bowes in County Durham at roadworks, where no overtaking has been allowed and the speed limit has been 50mph since road widening started.
The driver was certified dead at the scene and police were trying to trace relatives last night.
Truck driver John Thompson, of the St Aiden's area of Hartlepool, said his vehicle jack-knifed after dragging the car along the road for a way.
Teesdale District councillor Phil Hughes, who also represents Bowes parish council on the accident prevention panel, said: ‘The people doing the roadworks have taken adequate measures and could not have put up any more ‘no overtaking’ signs or 50mph speed limit signs.
The only thing left to do is to put wrecked cars on posts to confront people with the consequences of bad driving.’
He said police maintained a high profile on the road at all times, but could not be everywhere at once, adding cardboard cutout cars should be considered.
A fortnight ago two men were killed and eight injured on the same stretch of road when a minibus and a car crashed.
Copter crash victim named
A CLEVELAND man who died in the North Sea helicopter tragedy last weekend has been formally identified.
Andrew Swales, 31, of Chesham Street, Middlesbrough, was one of 12 men killed when the Bristow Super Puma plunged into icy seas during a short hop from an oil rig to an accommodation platform.
Mr Swales, an instrument artificer, worked for Press Offshore, based in Wallsend, Tyne and Wear.
A spokesman for Aberdeen police confirmed that Andrew's mother Mary visiting relatives in Canada at the time of his death now knew about the tragedy.
Mary and other relatives of the dead man live in Lazenby, Cleveland.
Cut free:
Carol Fordham, 50, of Levenside, Hutton Rudby, was in a satisfactory condition at Middlesbrough General Hospital yesterday after she was cut free from her Honda Accord following a head-on collision with a Saab between Hutton Rudby and Crathorne, near Stokesley.
Rescue mission:
Brian Loughborough, 53, of Elwood Road, Hartlepool, is expected to return home today following a 2,000-mile rescue mission from Spain where he dislocated his replacement hip.
He is expected to arrive in Glasgow by air ambulance before being driven to Hartlepool General Hospital.
HARTLEPOOL and district's annual charity match on County Durham's Hurworth Burn reservoir proved a big disappointment on Sunday.
In fact, officials and competitors were devastated by the result as in the past, this venue has always offered bumper roach bags for all.
This popular competition, which has local matchmen inevitably chasing tickets, turned into a farce following months of up to 50 cormorants a day feasting on the venue's fish stocks and depleting numbers.
Now in its fifth year, the event has always been a scalesman's nightmare producing winning weights ranging between a colossal 92lb to 60lbs.
However, this time around just 3.1.0 was enough to win this 90-pegger.
Durham's Ray Currie, drawn at the dam end, punched a groundbait feeder and maggot 60 yards out taking 16 specimens all of which had chunks missing and fungus growing following their close encounters with the scavenging birds which have taken up residence on the water.
Only high spot from what should have been a red letter day was the terrific £300 raised for the local Hartlepool hospice.
North-East winter league champions Yarm Cleveland Angling Centre missed out on the Angling Times national final by an agonising one point on the River Trent at Swarkstone.
The Northern semi-final, fished by 21 league winners, offered a passage to the final for the top four and unlucky Yarm finished fifth.
Durham champions Northallerton also gave a spirited performance taking 11th position as favourites Barnsley and Starlets clinched the glory.
Tipton's Stuart Phipps float fished maggots to win individually netting 18.14.0 of chub as Yarm's Dave Harris 13.14.0 and Northallerton's Addie Dunn 12.13.0 returned section winners.
Saturday's last day of the season open on the middle Swale proved an anticlimax as three foot of cold water chilled the Maunby to Ainderby reaches spoiling what had promised to be a chub bonanza.
Anglers in the frame relied on single maggot as ex-Masters winner Keith Ward (Yarm Cleveland Angling Centre) netted the heaviest.
Pegged below Swainby bend, ledgered cheese brought a crucial specimen weighing 4.10.0.
The River Ure around Langthorpe was badly affected by mid-week floods and no one expected much from a venue still out of sorts for Bradford's closing fixture.
Yet, Tony Atkinson (Leeds Tykes) lifted a  tremendous winning net of 8.9.0 on a difficult final day.
Staked on peg 14 upstream of Brampton Farm, bomb and waspgrubs down the edge under overhanging trees accounted for five chub and victory.
Cairns Tackle member Carl Robson also found the chub feeding taking four totalling 6.13.0 to feeder and maggot from the top of Brampton Field.
Other results: Tadcaster APA Open, River Wharfe, Smaws Ings Chris Burton 11.2. 0 roach, stickfloat and maggot; Dave Limbert 7.8.0; Geoff White 5.9.0.
Anglers' World Series, Ouse, below York Howard Robson 4.8.0, roach and perch, ledgered maggot; Ben Coulson 3.3.8; Geoff Austin 2.3.0.
Overall winners Tim Harrison 129 pts; Howard Robson 97 pts and Ray Green 95 pts.
Trout anglers at Leighton Reservoir enjoyed a marvellous start to the season despite poor weather.
Opening week saw visitors average three fish apiece as Mr A Robinson (Darlington) grassed an impressive rainbow of 6.12.0.
Black flash, Maid Marian and Montanas have proved the best flies.
A total of 144 anglers netted 462 fish.
Fixtures: March 21 Middlesbrough NFA Open, Hemlington Lake, 9am to 2pm.
Saturday and Sunday Loch 10, teams of three open, tickets from Dave Connell, tel  — March 22 First day for trout fishing in Northumbrian region.
Thornaby AA Trout Cup, Croft.
Ferryhill and District AC Pattinson Cup, Teesdale Pond, meet 9am, fish 10am to 3pm.
Middlesbrough AC works party, Claphow Reservoir, meet 9am, all help welcome.
THE campaign to free convicted killer Kenny Carter came to the streets of Cleveland yesterday.
The Northern Echo has obtained copies of letters written by the Thornaby man, who is serving a life sentence for murder.
Carter, 21, repeatedly protests his innocence in the letters.
A representative of the ABC Network, which fights on behalf of prisoners it believes have been framed, handed out leaflets about Carter's case in Middlesbrough yesterday.
John Welch, of ABC, said one of Carter's former solicitors was convinced of his innocence.
A letter from D. Eklund, a former partner in Buckinghamshire-based WinterTaylors solicitors, written on January 8 this year, said: ‘I have formed the opinion that the conviction of Kenny Carter is not safe and that the matter should be looked into again.’
Carter was sentenced to life in December 1990 for the murder of Darren Brook, his cell-mate in Durham Jail.
Darren was found hanging from the roof of the cell he shared with Kenny Carter and Jason Rochford in January 1990.
The murder trial jury heard how Carter at the time serving a sentence for robbery had subjected Darren Brook to a ‘barbaric’ ordeal, which included forcing him to write a suicide note.
But Carter has always protested his innocence and in letters from prison, constantly questions the evidence used to convict him.
One of the letters, to Val Hulme of ABC, said: ‘I have met many innocent men inside this building of darkness, many who gave up the fight a long time ago.
‘No matter how long it takes to prove my innocence, I'll still be here protesting.’
In another letter, Carter said: ‘I have nothing to hide and nothing to fear.’
Carter is in contact with fellow prisoners who believe they have been framed.
One of his early ‘pen-pals’ was Winston Silcott, cleared last year of killing PC Keith Blakelock during the Broadwater Farm riots.
John Welch said the ABC Network were totally confident Kenny Carter was innocent.
‘We will continue to highlight his case wherever possible,’ he said.
Police probe pub break-ins POLICE are investigating break-ins at two pubs in the Hartlepool area, when gaming machines were raided.
Intruders at the Bull and Dog pub in Greatham, near Hartlepool, stole £920 from the vending and gaming machines after getting in through a groundfloor window.
At the Smiths Arms in Greatham, near Hartlepool, £800 was taken from the vending and gaming machines during a burglary.
Assault charge:
Wayne Michael Harvey, 19, of Gosford Street, Middlesbrough, was convicted of assaulting a PC in the execution of his duty by Northallerton magistrates.
He was fined £100, plus £8 costs and £30 compensation.
Car offences:
Graham Coates, 23, of Hutton Road, Eston, Middlesbrough, admitted using a car without excise licence or test certificate and with a defective headlamp.
He was fined £210, with £58.30 back duty and £20 costs, by Northallerton magistrates.
Asbestos scare:
A Cleveland Post Office was closed after an asbestos scare.
The office in Westgate, east Cleveland was shut down after asbestos tiles were discovered in the ceiling.
Harbour hope:
The head of Whitby's cargo trade says he is hopeful new business can be attracted to the port, following the collapse of the weekly service from Norway.
Terry Johnson, general manager of Whitby Port Services, said he is having talks with three potential customers to replace the Norwegian Stream Line which is switching its operations to Killingholme, Humberside, at the end of the month, after ten years of using Whitby harbour.
New magistrate:
A new magistrate was sworn in before the sitting yesterday of Whitby Court.
She is Moira Thompson, 32, who runs the Arundel House Hotel in Whitby with her husband, Andrew.
Meanwhile another magistrate, John Hemson, is retiring from the bench today.
Golden day:
Retired painter and decorator Arthur Joy and his wife, Elsie, of Windsor Road, Eston, yesterday celebrated their golden wedding.
The couple, who have two daughters and four grandchildren, were married at St Luke's Church, Thornaby.
Yesterday was also Arthur's 72nd birthday.
Elsie is 71.
To the rescue:
Firemen were called to a house in Chaucer Avenue, Hartlepool, to free a cat trapped in a hedge.
The injured animal was later taken to a vet for treatment.
Car fire:
Firemen used a single hose reel to put out a blaze in a car in Old Cemetery Road, Hartlepool.
The car was severely damaged.
House break:
Burglars forced their way into a house at Great Ayton.
They broke into the house in Scotto Crescent through the patio doors and made off with several ornaments.
Porch theft:
Thieves stole the milk money from a house porch in Great Ayton.
More than £4 which had been left for the milkman was stolen from the house in Marwood Drive.
Postal payments:
Closure of cash collecting paypoints at the end of this month will mean poll tax payers at Loftus, Saltburn and Skelton having to pay by post, through an arrangement with their bank, or by travelling to one of the other cash offices at Guisborough, Redcar and Eston.
REDCAR:
Chris Abbott, Liberal Democrat candidate said last month's unemployment figure of 152,900 in the northern region, an increase of 700, reflected the indifference of the Tories to the human tragedy of unemployment.
REDCAR:
Robert Goodwill, of Richmond, has been adopted as the Conservative candidate.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
Conservatives last night re-adopted Tim Devlin, MP since 1987, as candidate.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
Labour health spokesman Robin Cook visits North Tees general hospital maternity and special baby care unit today.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
The Liberal Democrats' headquarters in Aspern Drive, off Sycamore Road, was opened by local candidate Rosamund Jordan.
The party's phone-in went so well that it will be repeated on the next three Wednesday evenings right up to the eve of the poll.
Callers will be able to put their questions direct to the candidate on 827594.
RICHMOND:
Tory candidate William Hague, allegedly the House of Commons' fittest man, yesterday canvassed in Great Broughton, Great Ayton and Stokesley.
By-election victor: Tory Kenneth Turner won the vacant seat on Saltburn, Marske and New Markse parish council last night beating Labour's Philip Hewitt in the by-election by 206 votes.
There was a 17.27pc turnout: Cons 531 and Labour 325.
Victim freed:
A man was released from his car after it crashed in Longford Road, Middlesbrough, shortly before 8pm last night.
A life all parcelled up
A CHRISTMAS job in his university days convinced Mr John Ensoll that the Secret Service was not for him.
Mr Ensoll, district head postmaster for Darlington, recalled this week how he came to bypass an MI5-type job in favour of the Post Office.
And, as he enters the last week of a career which spans more than 30 years, he knows he made the right choice.
During his three years at University College, London, he got work each Christmas with the post office in his home town of Woking: ‘When I was coming to the end of my university period I sat a civil service examination with possible jobs at the end which included income tax, the secret service and the post office which involved travelling as a management trainee.
‘I decided that was the job that appealed and it's just as well because at the interview I talked myself out of the other jobs by being so keen on the post office.’
Mr Ensoll and his wife, Daphne, live in Blackwell Lane in the town and after five years in the area, they are sure the North-East is where they want to spend their retirement.
Their daughter, Kerry, has since moved to Thirsk where she and her husband, Mr Nigel Morgan, and 18-month-old daughter, live in Front Street, Sowerby.
They came to the area to run the village store but now Mrs Morgan has returned to her career as a midwife at the Friarage; her husband is in farming.
The Ensolls' son, Simon, still lives in Woking with his wife and son of two months.
Mr Ensoll, who is 55, is an active member of Grange Road Baptist Church and has occasionally played the organ there.
He had been a deacon and church treasurer before coming to Darlington and he hopes in retirement to have more time for church work.
He has sung in church choirs and is a tenor with Darlington Choral Society.
He and his wife also enjoy walking and the countryside of the area is one of their reasons for wanting to remain in the North.
On his retirement the job of district head postmaster will cease to exist, the responsibilities being undertaken by four senior managers.
Mr Ensoll reflects: ‘It has been a very varied career working for the Post Office for the last 33 years.
‘I was travelling round a great deal at the start in the West Country, then I went into headquarters which involved administration.’
He had nine years at Leeds, where his children grew up and where he became a specialist in building matters and worked closely with architects on the planning of major buildings.
And this stood him in good stead when he moved to the Darlington area.
‘I had a fair amount to do with the mechanised letter office at Middlesbrough and other major post office buildings,’ said Mr Ensoll who has had a hand in new buildings for Crook, Saltburn, Coulby Newham and Hartlepool.
Candidates for the Tory marginal seat of Stockton South face the task of canvassing voters in a constituency which has no focal point.
The 99,500-strong constituency embraces six villages, including Yarm, Eaglescliffe and Thornaby, which have a strong sense of their own identity, and also covers a small area of Middlesbrough.
Its 76,680 potential voters are to be found dotted around the countryside as well as in concentrated pockets on a growing number of new housing estates, including a development at Ingleby Barwick and established urban centres.
Unemployment levels since the last general election have fallen from 15.6 per cent to 9.9 percent in January of this year.
The latest figures for Stockton South show 4,894 out of work and opponents of the town's Conservative MP Mr Tim Devlin are quick to seize on the loss of the planned Ministry of Defence Quality Assurance Division as a major blow for the area.
A much-publicised gateau factory is to be built in its place.
Most people in the area work in manufacturing and services industries with less than one per cent working in agriculture.
Almost thirty per cent of the the population are employers, managers or white collar workers with just under six per cent unskilled labourers.
Several government and local authority funded regeneration programmes have attracted retail and other industries to the area.
Teeside Park, founded by the government-funded Teeside Development Corporation and borough council-funded Preston Farm and the Bowesfield industrial estates have sprung up since the last election.
A new university is due to open its doors by September and a £2m scheme to revamp Stockton High Street is already underway, with an improvement scheme planned for Thornaby.
Thornaby by-pass has also been in the offing for a number of years, but is now not expected to be completed until 1996 or 1997.
Political hot potatoes include the pylons scheme which is planned for Cleveland and North Yorkshire and the Department of Environment's decision on whether to allow a toxic waste incinerator at Portrack.
Job losses from some of the largest employers, ICI and factories, are also likely to be on the agenda when Mr Devlin defends his 744 majority against Labour's Mr John Scott and Liberal Democrat Mrs Kay Kirkham.
ends
UNEMPLOYMENT is still one of the most important issues for Jarrow.
The current rate is 17.7pc almost double the national figure.
Declining heavy industry has been partly replaced by small engineering firms and some light industry.
Chemical company Rohm and Haas, Hebburn Reyrolle and furniture firm Be Modern are major employers.
But it still has the second highest unemployment rate in Britain and the highest in England, so the economy and the creation of new jobs are critical to voters.
The seat has been Labour held since before 1945.
TORY candidate Graham Robb has pledged the abolition of Cleveland County Council if he becomes Hartlepool's MP.
He said yesterday he would help to bring services such as care of the elderly, education, policing and libraries back under local control.
‘The teachers, the social workers and the carers who deliver the services at the sharp end need the overbearing weight of the county bureaucracy lifted from their shoulders.’
But Coun Paul Harford, leader of the county council, said: ‘What must be made clear to Mr Robb is that the five local authorities in Cleveland the county council, Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Langbaurgh and Stockton have jointly commissioned the Institute of Local Government Studies to investigate the best options for local government  structures within Cleveland for the future.
‘We are still awaiting the outcome of that report.’
THE row over the use of the Red Cross symbol by a Cleveland aid charity appears to have been resolved.
Convoy Aid Romania was threatened with legal action for illegal use of the symbol and coordinator Rod Jones was quizzed by police.
The Red Cross claims that every misuse of the symbol undermines its authority and endangers its members operating in difficult conditions.
Mr Jones claimed the crosses were necessary for his mercy missions to Romania, to ensure vital supplies got through.
But after a visit to his home by a senior officer of Cleveland Police, he has painted out the symbols.
Charles Eldred-Evans, for the Red Cross, said: ‘Provided they have gone for good, that would be a big step along the road to resolving the problem.
‘But the matter is now with the Crown Prosecution Service, which has to decide whether to proceed.’
Meanwhile, CAR is planning to bring back two more babies from Romania for vital treatment after the success of the operation on tiny Bogdan Ursu.
The eight-month-old baby is recovering with Middlesbrough foster parents following the operation to remove water from the brain.
Rod Jones hopes two more children can be brought back from Romania for operations in the summer.
One child, two-year-old Constantine, was in a dreadful state, he said.
‘His face is a terrible picture and his fingers and toes are stumps,’ he added.
CAR leaves for the orphanages of Iasi again on April 5, this time with 26,000 baby dinners, supplied by Cow and Gate.
POLICE are searching for the owners of four stolen paintings.
The works of art were recovered when a car was stopped at roadworks on the A19 near Cleveland Tontine, Northallerton, on Thursday.
A young man jumped out of the car, dropped the paintings and ran off but was caught by police.
Another car drove off but ran into a ditch at the roadworks and another young man was arrested.
The men have not been charged and have been released on police bail.
One picture is a 2ft 6in by 2ft oil painting in gilt frame of Paris and the Eiffel Tower.
The artist is T. Carson.
The other three, all in gilt frames, are scenes of Whitby by Middlesbrough artist Colin Russell.
One is 6in by 8in and shows a beached boat and three boats in sail; another of the same size shows sailing boats entering Whitby harbour; and the third is 8in by 10in and shows a beached sailing boat at the entrance to Whitby harbour.
Anyone who thinks they recognise the paintings should contact Northallerton CID on Northallerton 783131.
REBEL sailor Jack Lammiman yesterday revealed he wore disguise to attend a shanty singing competition in his honour.
The Whitby skipper was speaking after returning from his latest controversial adventure on the high seas.
Jack first hit the headlines last July when he took his boat the Helga Maria to the Arctic Circle even though the Department of Transport had not declared the vessel seaworthy.
It was in honour of that adventure which left him facing a crown court appearance on Monday that Whitby Folk Club held the shanty event last week.
People assumed Jack had not turned up to hear shanties written in his honour.
But yesterday he said: ‘I was dressed as an Indian with dark make-up and no one recognised me.
I even spoke to my son and he didn't know who I was.’
Yesterday he stayed tight-lipped about his latest high-seas adventure.
The 53-year-old mariner sneaked back into port in the early hours of yesterday morning after disappearing for three days on a sailing trip to Scotland, putting ports and coastguards on the alert.
Jack and the 70-year-old Helga Maria slipped out of Whitby Harbour on Tuesday after the skipper told harbour authorities he wanted to test the engines.
Next time the vessel was spotted was 120 miles away in the North Sea off Eyemouth.
Coastguards were alerted and Department of Transport officials travelled to Eyemouth and boarded the boat, which was believed to have ten people on board.
DoT detention orders are still in force from last July when Jack dodged naval forces and coastguards from 14 countries to sail to the Arctic Circle and back.
It is for that alleged breach of the orders that he is due to appear before a judge and jury in Middlesbrough on Monday.
The regulations are supposed to tie him down to sailing no more than three miles out to sea and to stay within 15 miles of the harbour.
A DoT spokesman said: ‘These trips of his may sound like jolly larks, but he is being very irresponsible.
He is not cocking a snook at the authorities, he is putting his passengers at risk and that is a very serious matter.
‘The boat will not have proper insurance cover because he does not have the correct safety certificates and if there was an accident or the boat sank, everybody on board would be in trouble.’
He said the DoT would not be taking any further action until after the court case.
AN unemployed resource centre in Cleveland is believed to be in financial difficulties.
Middlesbrough's Impasse Centre is holding crisis meetings over the next few days to try to determine funding to stay open.
The Corporation Road building offers a wide range of options for the unemployed, including woodwork, motor vehicle engineering and needlecraft.
Middlesbrough residents who use the centre rang The Northern yesterday and said they feared the centre was about to close.
Manager Chris Morgan said: ‘There are plans being made for the new financial year, but no firm decisions have yet been made.
‘It's the usual thing, gathering together enough financial resources to continue for the coming year.
At the moment, our activities will continue.’
He said it was premature to make further comment.
The centre has been in financial trouble before, but has always managed to find further sources of funding at times of apparent crisis.
Impasse is funded by Cleveland County Council, charitable trusts and industry.
Road works:
Diversion will be in operation from Monday at a new roundabout being built on Stainton Way, Coulby Newham, near Dixons Bank, and drivers are asked to slow down on this fast stretch of road and to take care.
Roads alert:
The A19 northbound exit to the A1127 and the A19 southbound entry from the A1049 in Cleveland will be closed until 6am on Monday.
Book launch:
Author Bob Woodhouse will be signing copies of his new book today.
The official launch of An Illustrated History of Hartburn Village Through The Passage of Time is at the Stockton Arms Hotel from 10.30am.
The book is the third local history published by Printability Publishing, of Lower Church Street, Hartlepool.
Boy's op:
Eric Longden, 11, hopes to follow in the footsteps of his soccer hero Lee Chapman, of Leeds United, after undergoing sophisticated leg surgery.
The Owton Manor Primary School pupil from Hartlepool had his left leg broken and pinned in a bid to make it grow longer.
Eric was born with one leg shorter than the other.
Today's wills MARSKE:
Robert Breckon, of Spencer Close, left £147,934 net.
YARM: Mabel Crawford, of The Wheatlands, Low Worsall, left £164,465 net.
HARTLEPOOL: John Thomas Andrews, of Stockton Road, left £386,121 net.
POLICE have appealed for witnesses to a fatal accident on the A66 as a baby girl fights for her life.
The child's mother, Alison Margaret Cowley, 34, of Allerthorpe, North Yorkshire was killed when her car was in collision with a lorry at roadworks a mile west of Bowes, near Barnard Castle on Thursday.
Katie Elizabeth Cowley, aged one, was last night critically ill with head injuries in the intensive care unit at Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Mrs Cowley's two-year-old son, Samuel, was discharged after treatment at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
A police spokesman said a Vauxhall Nova driven by Mrs Cowley had been travelling east, while the Mercedes articulated truck driven by John Thompson of Hartlepool was travelling west.
Witnesses are asked to contact police on .
SIX members of a North-East car theft gang have each been jailed for three years after an 18-month undercover police operation.
Regional crime squad officers videotaped the group at work and estimate vehicles worth around £500,000 were involved, Teesside Crown Court heard yesterday.
Detectives found group members would buy written-off cars and arrange for a vehicle of the same make and model to be stolen from Teesside, Humberside or North Yorkshire.
The stolen vehicles were driven to rented garages at Burn Road, Hartlepool, where they were stripped of identifying marks and given the write-off's markings a process called ringing.
Once the ringed car had its new identity it was sold or went to one of the group members, while parts from the wrecked vehicle were sold off.
All six admitted conspiring to steal cars.
They are Paul Bartley, 22, of Kings Road, Wingate, Co Durham; John Coulson, 28, of Elizabeth Way, Seaton Carew; Mark Barry Cross, 23, of Mond Crescent, Middlesbrough; Alan Davison, 28, of South Hetton Road, Easington Lane, Co Durham; Anthony Gamble, 21, of Rugby Terrace, High Clarence, Cleveland; and Darren Watson, 23, of Lincoln Crescent, Billingham.
A seventh, Sean Wood, 23, of Windermere Avenue, Easington Lane, County Durham, pleaded not guilty to the charge and was acquitted on Thursday.
Barry Stewart, prosecuting, said Coulson and Davison were concerned with arranging the ringing while the others stole cars for them and were paid £200 for each vehicle.
Mr Stewart said one of the more ‘involved and audacious’ thefts took place when Gamble pretended to be interested in buying a Ford Escort XR3 from a Billingham garage.
He disconnected its alarm while the salesman revved the engine, then went with him to the office to arrange the sale, giving false details.
Meanwhile Bartley removed the passenger door lock, used its serial number to buy an ignition key from the garage's parts department and drove the car away to be ringed.
In mitigation Charles Foster for Coulson said his client was not the villain of the piece and had lost £9,000 through his involvement.
Tom Roberts, for Mark Cross, said he disputed the value of cars involved.
Sentencing, Judge David Bryant told the gang: ‘Dishonest people like you who choose to make your living out of stealing, transforming and selling other people's motor cars can expect substantial sentences of imprisonment.’
Cross also admitted two counts of mortgage fraud and was given nine months concurrent for each.
His father Barry Cross, 44, also of Mond Crescent, admitted six counts of mortgage fraud and was given 18 months concurrent for each suspended for two years and ordered to pay £500 costs.
A TEACHER who quit a North-East City Technology College is outraged that she has been used in election literature by one of the CTC's biggest supporters.
Michael Bates, Conservative candidate for Langbaurgh, says in the education section of his manifesto: ‘The MacMillan City Technology College has provided a beacon of excellence in Middlesbrough and is hugely popular with pupils, teachers and parents.’
Immediately below, he is pictured in the classroom of a Cleveland Local Education Authority school beside a teacher who left the CTC.
She did not want to be named, but told The Northern last night: ‘I left the CTC for a variety of reasons.
There were things I was not happy with.’
The teacher was furious that the photograph taken in her new school on the outskirts of Middlesbrough had been used for political purposes.
The school's headmaster has made a complaint about the use of the photograph to Mr Bates' campaign office.
‘We were never told it would be used in this way,’ the teacher said.
‘Mr Bates came into the classroom during the by-election and before I knew it, the photographer had snapped.
‘Lots of people at school have commented on it and now associate me with Tory party propaganda.
‘They should have asked my permission.
The way the picture is used is misleading.
People have linked the CTC comments immediately above with the picture they think it is the CTC.
The teacher's local union representative, Hans Ruyssenaars, described it as ‘a classic own goal.’
He added: ‘The teacher is one of the very people who were glad to get away from the CTC and find employment in a properly-run county school.
‘It is disgraceful this picture was used to promote a failing enterprise.’
Michael Bates said there was no obvious link between the photo and the paragraph about MacMillan College.
‘The focal point is me in a school because the subject is education,’ he said.
‘It is not trying to infer that the people in the classroom are supporting me.
‘The other people in the picture are incidental.’
Mr Bates said permission would have been sought if a close-up head shot or a quote from an individual was used.
He had not heard of the complaint, but promised: ‘If we have a personal complaint, we would take it up.
We have no wish to offend anybody.’
WITH three Australians, the greatest number since the 70s, and the club's first American rider, Middlesbrough Bears are set to start a new season confident they can be as good as anyone in the Sunbrite League's second division.
At the end of the club's first full workout last night, promoter Tim Swales confidently predicted Boro would be in the top three, challenging Berwick and Peterborough for honours.
‘We will have a good, well-balanced team and the team spirit will do the rest,’ he said.
The American is Donny Odom, 24, who has competed in his country's national championships twice after spending four seasons maturing on tracks in southern California.
He is rated in the top ten in the States.
Swales said he had a lot of flair, but admitted he was an unknown quantity.
Odom said: ‘A lot of people doubt my ability and I intend to prove them wrong.’
The Aussie trio is led by newly-signed Steve Regeling who has moved from Exeter with Dave Cheshire, who spent most of last season recovering from a bad wrist injury, and Mark Lemon whose plans to move into the first division have been put on ice.
The biggest surprise is the return of Daz Sumner who left to achieve his ambition to race in division one.
He did not quite make the grade and said he was happy to come home after missing all last year.
The only local rider in the squad will be Paul Pickering, who was selected only yesterday for the No 7 race jacket.
He has been promised an initial six-match run.
Pickering, 24, a self-employed plumber from Hartlepool, has invested in three new machines.
Completing the line-up will be Duncan Chapman, Malton-based.
He could mature well after coming through the junior ranks.
Regeling, an Australian international who had guest outings last season at Cleveland Park, said: ‘We intend to go all out to win everything we can; we have the team which can win the league providing we avoid bad injuries and bad luck.’
The Bears start the season at Middlesbrough against a Danish select team on Thursday night.
In one of the major cup competitions they have been given home advantage against first division Coventry.
This will bring an early return to Cleveland Park for Darlington-based Paul Bentley who was signed just a few weeks ago by the Midlands club from Boro.
This match is in mid May.
TIM SWALES: Looks for a good season
MIDDLESBROUGH is one of the safest Labour seats in the country.
It has a smaller than average electorate but is unlikely to prevent former barrister Stuart Bell, who took over from long-serving Arthur Bottomley in 1983, winning.
Tory candidate Paul Rayner and Liberal Democray Rosamund Jordan will struggle to keep Mr Bell's majority under 10,000 despite his concentration on Tees and Hartlepool Port Authority issues, with has diverted him from other matters.
Large parts of West and South Middlesbrough are eaten up by the Langbaurgh and Stockton South constituencies.
This leaves the east of the town, the heart of the City Challenge area, forming a major part of Middlesbrough.
Urban regeneration and unemployment, running at 17.3 per cent in the constituency, are likely to be major issues in the campaign, along with housing problems.
Mr Rayner has also put crime on the agenda.
Party split claim ‘fantasy’
THE opinions expressed in South Durham Viewpoint (Echo March 9) about a split in the Labour Group on Wear Valley District Council are complete nonsense.
We, the undersigned, being the group concerned, are the only ones who can state authoritatively what is happening within our group.
Therefore, we state clearly there are no divisions, no battles for leadership and no danger of civil war within the group.
To present such fantasy in your article as though it were fact is unworthy of your newspaper and can only be regarded as malicious mischief-making.
It would seem you have every intention of continuing the personal attacks on John Richardson that first surfaced in your paper some weeks before the Willington by-election.
We suggest your readership would be better served by some honest and balanced reporting of real issues instead of trying to conjure up imaginary conflict to act as a smokescreen for what is really happening in Wear Valley under the present Liberal administration.
Keith Reed, George Taylor, Philip Brown, Betty Harker, David Kingston, Hilda Dowson, Harry Douthwaite; The Labour Group, Wear Valley District Council, Crook.
Editor's note:
The Northern Echo has never indulged in personal attacks on John Richardson.
We have simply reported the comment and opinion of others.
Election round-up
I REFER to Coun Groves' letter (HAS March 9) concerning the so-called inaccurate statements reputed to have been made in the Labour Party leaflet in the run-up to the Willington East by-election.
I admit that figures were rounded up, a ploy learned from previous Liberal Democrat propaganda.
He mentions the Rough Lea banner.
The cost to the community charge payer was £2,500 plus VAT, £2,937.50, which by the time the cost of administration is taken into account would be £3,000.
The £1,800 earmarked for extensions and alterations to the Civic Centre had not in fact been turned down by the Liberal administration but had merely been cynically deferred until after the byelection!
Regarding Woodhouse Close are the readers aware that the deal involves a housing association which will take over in excess of 150 of these properties?
Tenancies will be on an assured basis rather than on a secured one.
The council will have no control at all over rent levels.
In May, the electorate of Wear Valley chose the Liberals after being given a multitude of promises which have yet to be fulfilled.
What a start to their reign poll tax up £35 and council rents £2.50 a week.
Some achievement.
B L Myers, 85 Low Willington, Willington, Crook.
Poor relation
I REFER to your report on the lack of a specialist diabetic nurse at Darlington Memorial Hospital (Echo March 4) and the repetitive cry of no money.
Where does the money come from at the other hospitals in our area, the two special nurses at Northallerton and Bishop Auckland and the three at Middlesbrough General with a fourth starting in April?
Someone must be doing their housekeeping rather better at those hospitals, especially when one thinks of the help the Memorial Hospital gets from the WRVS and the Friends of the Hospital who raise a good deal of money and have done so for many years.
Diabetes may not be one of the high profile diseases, but we continue in Darlington to feel like a poor relation as far as treatment at our hospital is concerned.
Mrs Yvonne Simpson, Darlington and District British Diabetic Association Branch, 1 Conyers Avenue, Darlington.
Real concern
I REFER to the letters of G J O'Neill and Bethany Megan Robinson (HAS March 17).
I wish to make it clear that our objections to the changes to Lakeside are not motivated by the ‘Private Residents against Council Residents Syndrome’.
A great deal of our concern is for the rights and needs of the council residents.
Mr O'Neill makes light of changes proposed for Lakeside (would he like them in Loraine Crescent?), although he agrees there will be more traffic.
He says are no houses on the west side of Lakeside.
What he fails to say is that there is a large common widely used by children of all ages, pedestrians, dogs, walkers etc.
Bethany Megan Robinson says residents of Hammond Drive who object to the closure of Loraine Crescent do so because it stops them taking a short cut.
What an insult the same responsible residents were the very first to organise a petition against the closure, because they feared the consequences in the delay to emergency services.
On her final point, she is right.
Loraine Crescent was a full crescent without access to Hammond Drive, but she fails to say that Lakeside was a cul-de-sac, also without access to Hammond Drive.
The council opened both roads to give easier access to the estate's residents.
Surely she does not want to deprive them of these  amenities ?
R Howe, Lakeside, Darlington.
A LIFEBOAT crew has been honoured for a daring rescue on the Cleveland coast.
The four men plucked a couple and their collie dog to safety amid crashing waves at Huntcliff, Saltburn, on January 19.
Senior helmsman Peter Hodge, who led the team, has been awarded the Royal National Lifeboat Institution's bronze medal.
His Redcar Lifeboat Station colleagues Barry Wheater, Derek Robinson and Mark Reeves will receive the thanks of the institution, inscribed on vellum.
Ian Readman, honorary secretary of the Redcar Station, said he believed it was only the third time a crew at the station had received a medal in the 190 years since the Zetland was first launched from Redcar.
He said: ‘It's a great honour for everyone.
These are very highly rated awards in the lifeboat world.’
Peter Hodge played down his own part in the rescue of Peter and Margaret Darling and dog Monty.
He said: ‘It was a great team effort.
The crew did a magnificent job.’
Mr Hodge remembered the seas had been very rough as the crew attempted to rescue the couple, who had been surprised and cut off by a fast moving tide at Huntcliff.
‘It's all rocks and boulders there,’ he said.
‘There was a lot of break and the boat was banging on the rocks.’
Despite the dangers, the crew completed the rescue in the Atlantic 21 vessel.
After the rescue, Mr Darling, a former editor of the Evening Gazette in Middlesbrough, said: ‘The crew did a tremendous job.’
In his official report, Tim Harrison, deputy inspector of lifeboats for the eastern division, wrote: ‘Hodge showed great leadership in quickly assessing the danger and courageously taking the lifeboat into heavy breaking seas.
‘It was a truly excellent service and a great team effort which resulted in the crew coolly and professionally saving the casualties.’
Mr Hodge, 44, of Ings Road, Redcar, will travel to the Royal Festival Hall in London in May to collect his award.
The three other crew members are all from Redcar.
Mr Robinson, 36, lives in Ings Road, Mr Wheater, 25, in Dalby Close and 21-year-old Mr Reeves in Station Road.
A LEGAL secretary who claimed she had been unfairly dismissed from work during sick leave is considering appealing after losing her case.
Dorothy Spence, of Broad Meadows, Darlington, lodged the original case against her employers, solicitors Ward Hadaway, of Darlington, who argued she had left of her own free will.
David Hessellberth, who represented Ward Hadaway at the Middlesbrough industrial tribunal, said Mrs Spence had left the firm because of difficulties at home.
But mother-of-two Mrs Spence said her sick leave was brought on by the stress of overwork.
Bid to put youths on the right road
TEESSIDE teenagers will be encouraged to take part in a ‘Wheels’ project in a bid to cut car crime.
The proposal aims to offer positive alternatives to stop 14–17-year-olds stealing cars and joyriding.
Motor vehicle craft training, car maintenance and driving tuition would play a part in the scheme, proposed by Cleveland Police as part of Middlesbrough's City Challenge initiative.
But a report to Cleveland county councillors warns: ‘There is a lack of substantive evidence to support the view that such projects significantly affect auto-crime.’
Witnesses plea:
An appeal has been issued for witnesses to a serious road accident which closed part of the A19 in County Durham.
Only one car, a Ford Escort 1.6 Ghia, was involved in the incident near Sheraton on the outskirts of Hartlepool on Saturday at 10pm.
It overturned leaving its driver, Angela Armstrong, 26, of West Street in Blackhall, near Peterlee, with serious head and back injuries.
Kitchen damaged:
The kitchen of a house in Birkdale Road, Hartburn, Stockton, was badly damaged in a fire yesterday.
Two people escaped from the house uninjured.
Contract landed:
A Middlesbrough company has struck a 21month deal with BT worth more than £3.6m.
Integral Ltd, of South Bank Road, will supply BT with small ducts to protect cabling.
Blaze probe:
Detectives are probing the cause of a fire which caused £6,000 worth of damage to a wagon at the premises of Pioneer Concrete on the Graythorp Industrial Estate, near Hartlepool.
Pushchair taken:
Heartless thieves stole the pushchair of two-year-old cerebral palsy sufferer Thomas Wright while he was seeing the doctor.
Now his mum Susan who lives in Ivanhoe Crescent, Hartlepool, is appealing for its return.
Going solo:
Lingdale Silver Band will be the only Cleveland representative in the National Brass Band Competition at Wembley in October after winning the Northern Region's National Grading Contest.
Repeat winners:
Karen Bage and Eileen Boynes have been named sales negotiators of the month for Shepherd Homes in the North-East the second time in a year the team at the Beckfields Walk development at Ingleby Barwick, near Thornaby, has won the award.
So close:
Catherine Hobaiter, 11, of Redcar, a pupil at Teesside High School, was runner-up in a national newspaper competition to write a letter in no more than 20 words to Environment Minister David Trippier on what can be done for the environment.
Auctioned pub:
The Old Station Hotel in Middlesbrough, is being auctioned by Christie & Co in London on April 29.
It is expected to reach around £20,000 but there is no reserve price.
AN INQUEST opened yesterday on Andrew Swailes, one of 11 men who died in a North Sea helicopter crash.
Thomas Swailes, a 35-year-old commercial operator, of Wilton Green, Lazenby, Cleveland, formally identified the body of his brother, 31, an instrument artificer, of Chesham Street, Middlesbrough.
The crash happened on March 14 when the helicopter went down while transporting 15 men from Shell's Cormorant Alpha platform to an accommodation barge.
Andrew was one of six employees of Tyneside-based Press Offshore who died in the tragedy.
Cleveland deputy coroner Ronald Smith adjourned the inquest.
A DRIVER rammed a police car during a high-speed chase, Teesside Crown Court heard.
John Stevenson drove at up to 90mph in areas where speed limits were imposed, the court heard.
Stevenson, 20, of Grendon Walk, Park End, Middlesbrough, was sent to a young offenders' institution for a total of 21 months and banned from driving for two years.
He admitted two offences of taking a car without consent, reckless driving and driving while disqualified.
Stevenson was also sentenced for offences which magistrates convicted him of in February this year.
He was convicted of two charges of driving while disqualified, two charges of driving with no insurance, three of taking a car without consent, one of burglary, one of attempted burglary and one of criminal damage.
He admitted being in breach of bail and in breach of a probation order.
Judge Vos told him: ‘You cannot be unleashed on the public because of the damage you do when you take a car, and there is also the danger to life and limb that you present.’
Jamie Hill, prosecuting, said Stevenson and a friend took a Nova car from North Skelton and abandoned it in Nottingham.
They then took an Astra car but neighbours heard the car being broken into and alerted police.
There was a car chase with the defendant ignoring speed  limits of 40mph and 60mph and doing speeds of up to 90mph.
At one stage he turned the car round and rammed a following police car, nudging it aside.
Two other police cars joined in and he was finally stopped.
In mitigation Duncan Smith said Stevenson and his friend had been drinking in a pub and decided to take a car to get back home.
IRISH nationalism, women's issues and a dirty tricks campaign.
It sounds like politics of the Nineties but in fact these topics were at the forefront of public debate in Middlesbrough 120 years ago.
They are also the subject of a day school on Victorian Middlesbrough at Leeds University Adult Education Centre, Harrow Road, Middlesbrough, on Saturday April 4 from 9.45am to 5pm.
Dr Malcolm Chase, who is conducting the day school, highlighted the importance of Middlesbrough as an industrial area.
He revealed that the town, described by Gladstone as an ‘infant Hercules’ had an awesome reputation for squalor and toughness.
He added: ‘The picture of politics which survives, however, is completely different, and is largely made up of the petty squabbles of shopkeepers and the airy superiority of the ironmasters.’
Places on the day school can be booked by contacting the centre.
A BABY girl is still battling for life following an accident in which her mother died.
Police are appealing for witnesses to the crash which claimed the life of 34-year-old Alison Cowley of Allenthorpe, North Yorkshire.
Her Vauxhall Nova was in collision with an articulated lorry at roadworks on the A66, a mile west of Bowes, last Thursday.
Katie Elizabeth Cowley, one, suffered severe head injuries.
Last night a spokesman for Middlesbrough General Hospital said Katie was still in intensive care and ‘poorly but stable.’
Witnesses should contact police on .
‘Stranded’ bird flies off from its rescuer FIREMEN were called to council buildings in Middlesbrough yesterday to rescue a cockatiel which was stranded on a 25ft high ledge.
The RSPCA were also called after reports that the bird had a broken wing and was in distress.
A firemen climbed an extension ladder and edged along the wall but when he reached the scene the yellow-topped fledgeling flew away.
Onlooker the Rev Brian Rice, social  responsibilities officer for the county council and keen football supporter, commented to the senior fire officer: ‘I thought it was a canary from Norwich City on its way to frighten Sunderland in the FA Cup semi-final next month.’
Hepatitis slowdown:
There were 60 cases of Hepatitis A in Langbaurgh in the six weeks up to March 6 with ages ranging from a two-year-old boy in Grangetown to a 99-year-old woman in Teesville.
But the borough's environmental health committee was told yesterday that the outbreak, which has been sweeping the region, is slowing down.
Barn blaze:
Police are hunting arsonists following a dutch barn blaze at Liverton Lodge Farm, near Loftus, when 500 bales of hay and 1,000 bales of straw were destroyed at the weekend.
Canaries stolen:
Thieves raided an allotment at Lingdale and stole 17 multicoloured canaries worth a total of £500.
Each bird has a blue ring on its left with the numbers 5 and 73 on it.
£1,500 haul: More than £1,500 worth of equipment was stolen when thieves raided premises at Rectory Lane, Guisborough.
New office:
Hartlepool's leading firm of solicitors, Tilly Bailey and Irvine, will celebrate 150 years in the town by opening its newly-refurbished offices in York Chambers tomorrow.
Pigeons saved:
Firemen rescued 30 pigeons after a blaze in a car threatened to spread to their loft in Hutone Place in Hartlepool.
One bird died in the incident.
Good news:
Opponents of plans for a £2m entertainment complex at Seaton Carew, near Hartlepool, have welcomed the news that Department of the Environment officials are taking a close look at the proposal.
Inquest opened:
An inquest opened into the death of James Hamilton, a 67-year-old retired labourer, of Blakelock Road, Hartlepool, who died in Middlesbrough General Hospital on Sunday.
Cleveland deputy coroner Ronald Smith said as there was a possibility of industrial disease he was adjourning the hearing pending further inquiries.
MIDDLESBROUGH Liberal Democrat candidate Rosamund Jordan (left) is making constitutional reform one of the main planks of her campaign.
The 48-year-old special project teacher from Aislaby near Yarm, is hoping to overturn Stuart Bell's Labour majority of almost 15,000.
In yesterday's constituency  profile , the picture featured was not of Mrs Jordan.
THE chief executive of Teesside Training and Enterprise Council last night claimed the TEC's chairman had been wrongly accused in a ‘cheap labour’ row.
Last week The Northern Echo disclosed details of a document suggesting that a company run by TEC chairman Les Bell was hoping to pay a school leaver £29.50 for a 50 hour week.
It emerged that two versions of the job advert existed, the second offering the job at £29.50 for a 40-hour week.
A statement issued last night by TEC chief executive John Howell said: ‘It should be understood that Freshfayre (Mr Bell's company based at Skelton, East Cleveland) were initially contacted by Cleveland Compact as part of their normal canvassing campaigns (Compact is a branch of the TEC that places job adverts in schools).
It is not true to say that Freshfayre contacted Compact and neither were the staff of Compact aware until much later of Mr Bell's interests in the company.
This is an important point of principle given that Mr Bell was accused of using his contacts to try to get cheap labour for a family business.’
The statement goes on to say that a first document was prepared by Compact saying the working week was 50 hours, but the incorrect forms were later destroyed and correct ones issued to the Middlesbrough area office of the careers service.
‘I can only draw from this fact that the Careers Service did not destroy their copies of the incorrect documents and that it was theirs that was passed to the county councillors and Dr Ashok Kumar (the Labour candidate for Langbaurgh),’ says the statement.
Mr Howell says he is asking the chief education officer to investigate the matter urgently.
Mr Bell said he had consulted his solicitor about the matter.
Cleveland County Council leader Paul Harford said the statement underlined the need for an urgent inquiry into the way in which the Compact scheme is operated.
‘That inquiry by staff of the county education department is already under way,’ he said.
CLEVELAND'S retiring fire chief Bill Cooney was presented with a bronze statuette of a firefighter yesterday in recognition of his ‘outstanding’ service to the brigade.
The event took place prior to the consumer protection committee.
Chairman Coun Dave Punshon said Mr Cooney's commitment to firefighting was second to none.
He said he had earned an international reputation, particularly in his work on the transportation of dangerous chemicals.
Mr Cooney, 53, retires due to ill health at the end of the month.
Mr Cooney said there were areas of the fire service in Cleveland where there was still work to be done and added he would like to see a new fire station in central Middlesbrough.
A CLEVELAND firefighter has earned top marks in a tough examination.
Shaukat Khaliq is to receive the Best Candidate Award for achieving the top mark in the National Leading Firefighters written examination.
CONSERVATIVE candidate Paul Rayner has denied an allegation by Mehdi Husaini, chairman of the Cleveland Racial Equality Council, that he was bigoted because he supports the abolition of the Commission for Racial Equality.
Mr Rayner, standing in Middlesbrough, furiously denied the charge.
He said: ‘I just think the CRE has outlived its usefulness and is wasting public money.’
A NIGHT-WATCHMAN sacked by Cleveland County Council after a New Year beating is considering legal action.
Nigel Gooch was hit with a fire extinguisher during the attack while he was on duty, just a few hours into 1992.
He received a dismissal letter, but the county council later admitted this was ‘based on misinformation’ and withdrew it.
Mr Gooch, of Grantham Green, Easterside, Middlesbrough, was offered his job back, but refused.
The 26-year-old is still suffering with shoulder and back injuries which resulted from the beating outside Park End Community House, Middlesbrough.
His solicitor, Miss Ranj Matharu of Doberman's, confirmed yesterday that Mr Gooch was pressing for damages for slander.
She said: ‘There were allegations made of criminal convictions, which my client does not have.
‘He is seeking compensation for the distress and inconvenience.’
Miss Matharu said her client was pressing the case on principle, not for financial reasons.’
The family has openly admitted that Nigel's brother does have a criminal record and has been known to use Nigel's name.
Cleveland County Council referred to January 6 comments.
A statement expressed ‘sincere regret’ for the letter informing Mr Gooch of his dismissal and confirmed the letter was based on misinformation.
A CONSERVATIVE candidate has urged the chairman of British Gas to cancel his recent 17pc pay rise.
Paul Rayner, standing in Middlesbrough, wrote to Robert Evans saying such an increase was ‘inappropriate’.
He pointed out that Mr Evans' salary was many times higher than that of the Prime Minister and that massive increases meant others would expect similar rises.
He said: ‘When so many are tightening their belts to get the country out of recession, this pay rise in inappropriate.
‘Mr Evans has a chance to put things right by admitting a mistake was made and cancelling the increase.’
A PARTIALLY-sighted man suffered fatal injuries when he was struck by a car while crossing a road without using his white stick.
Cleveland coroner Michael Sheffield recorded a verdict of accidental death on Frederick Gibson, a 79-year-old retired steelworker, of Eastbourne Gardens, Ormesby, Middlesbrough.
He died of internal bleeding due to head injuries.
The incident happened in Normanby Road, North Ormesby, on a dark winter evening but street lighting was good, an inquest heard.
Eye witness Edmund Hugill, of Wetherby Crescent, Overfields, Middlesbrough, saw him cross the road.
He said he saw no sign of a white stick until after the accident when it was seen to be folded up.
Mr Gibson was struck by a car driven by Julian Lightwing, 19, of Phillips Avenue, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough.
He said he had just driven from Ladgate Lane when the man suddenly appeared in front of him.
He braked but could not avoid the pedestrian whom he thought was wearing dark clothing.
PC Stephen Garner said skid marks indicated that the car was travelling at not less than 29 mph.
It had reduced to 18 mph on impact and the driver had reacted very quickly.
TENDERS to carry out ground maintenance work in Langbaurgh currently done by about 25 council employees are being invited by the borough council.
The contract will be for a minimum of four years starting next January and will involve all grass cutting on council land, maintenance of playing fields, hedge cutting, rose, tree and shrub maintenance, spring and summer bedding displays, cemeteries, and house gardens.
A draft specification is now available for inspection, free of charge, at the council's Clay Lane Offices, Middlesbrough Road East, South Bank.
The Specification will be available for purchase on payment of £100, non-returnable.
A council spokesman said any suitably experienced firms wishing to be considered for inclusion in a select list should notify Paddy Corcoran, chief tourism and leisure officer, in writing.
PETER Mandelson gave Labour the red rose and it's said a whole new bloom to its image.
Officially director of campaigns and communication alias media guru, image-maker or spin doctor he is credited with transforming the Party's fading image between the vital years of 1985–90.
At the 1987 election he was cocooned at Labour headquarters, surrounded by television screens, satellite aerials and endlessly insistent telephones.
Yesterday he was at Hartlepool Labour Hall, surrounded by a dozen or so women shoving leaflets into envelopes.
‘My recollections of 1987 are of severe stress, constant sleeplessness and almost of solitude,’ he says.
‘The room was like a command post and I hardly ever left it.
I hardly saw anyone from beginning to end.’
London born and Oxford educated, he is 38 and unmarried.
Hartlepool was the only candidacy he applied for, or ever intended to.
‘I felt drawn to the North-East,’ he says.
‘Everything about this is a plus.’
For 28 years Hartlepool's MP was the retiring Ted Leadbitter, whose media relations were often taciturn, sometimes abrasive and occasionally bloody rude.
The contrast with the personable, ever-approachable Mandelson could hardly be more marked.
‘Once I dealt with every newspaper and broadcasting medium in the country,’ he says, ‘now I walk in fear of the Hartlepool Mail, or what The Northern Echo will make of me.’
(The national Press, in truth, remain fascinated by him.
‘For Mandelson's Hartlepool opponents it must be rather as if George Bush were to retire from the White House and run for Mayor of Amarillo,’ said yesterday's Independent.)
He talks himself up too.
‘I'm an around the clock man — I don't do things in half measures — it's a big boost for Party morale, they like to show me off.’
The new man defends Leadbitter's 1987 majority of 7,289.
The Conservatives, even allowing for the synthetic optimism manufactured so voluminously on such occasions, have targeted him and are confident of an upset.
Mandelson, curiously, declines to forecast that he will win.
‘I never talk about my opponents,’ he says, though the claim doesn't survive the succeeding 20 minutes.
Conscious, like his rivals, that he could be seen as a Southern carpet bagger, he makes much fuss of the Labour stalwarts.
Women are cuddled frequently, told how marvellous their scones and cream are, affably encouraged.
‘All sorts of quiches, flans and things have been spirited into my house.
They quite mother me,’ he says.
‘In so far as I ever had snake hips, they have gone since I came here.’
Of course, he adds, he's not complaining.
And the rivals of whom he never talks?
‘Since this campaign began, not a day has passed without them trying to spin some story or other about me to the local paper.
It seems to be what their campaign revolves around.’
That morning he'd had an hour at a training centre (’ not just a fleeting photo opportunity’); in the street he was collared by an elderly chap about the price of Guinness and tried in vain to stick a Vote For Me sticker on a recalcitrant toddler.
In the Labour Hall the little army of women had grown to 20.
‘He's lovely, is Peter,’ said one, and he gave her a cuddle to celebrate.
Boyes brigade
ROLAND Boyes, the only Member in the last Parliament who was also a cricket umpire, was up with half the rest of Britain at 4.30 this morning.
‘I'll be keeping awake on coffee and packets of biscuits,’ said Labour's man in Houghton and Washington.
A Yorkshireman (so who could doubt his knowledge of cricket?)
Boyes forecast a crushing World Cup victory and a century for I T Botham.
Discounting the John Major ‘feelgood factor’ he also expects to make up for lost sleep.
‘If Pakistan bat first, it'll be over by breakfast.’
No stopping:
Both reactors at Hartlepool nuclear power station have remained in service over the past two weeks, generating over 394 million units of electricity.
Couple's joy: Alison Kitchen, 28, and her husband David, 31, who live in Hartlepool, are celebrating the birth of triplets the first test tube babies to be born at the town's general hospital.
Sealed up:
The mail was late in St George's flats in Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, yesterday, when the postman got stuck in the lift.
He was rescued after 20 minutes by the fire brigade.
New crossing:
A new pelican crossing has come into use at the junction of King's Road and Cromwell Street, North Ormesby.
Staff plaudit:
Four staff from Stokesley sausage manufacturers Mr Lazenby's have been awarded the Introductory Certificate in Supervisory Management.
HQ switch: The headquarters base of Middlesbrough council's housing and community services department switches on April 6 from the 16th and 17th floors of Corporation House to the first floor.
Contamination found:
Routine checks at Hartlepool nuclear power station discovered some contamination on the reactor pile cap.
The area was cleaned and Nuclear Electric says there was no danger to staff or members of the public.
Food threat:
Over 400 food premises which have failed so far to register with Langbaurgh Council could face heavy fines unless they do so by April 3.
In court
The following cases were dealt with by Easingwold magistrates:
Gary Young, 19, of Raby Road, Hartlepool, admitted attempting to steal scrap metal and wilfully obstructing a PC, fined £100 plus £30 costs.
John Paul Reilly, 22, of The Lodge, Sketterskelfe, Yarm, admitted failing to produce driving licence and using motor car without insurance, fined £220 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, six points.
STOCKTON NORTH:
Conservative candidate Simon Fowler opened his election campaign yesterday by expressing his deep concern over Labour's minimum wage policy.
He said it would kill the job prospects of thousands of workers in the constituency, including those working in nursing and residential homes which he says could go out of business as a result.
A Liberal Democrat government will make pollution a high priority, while Labour pays lip-service to environmental issues and the Tories talk green but refuse to meet EC standards set for beaches, drinking water and sewage, claims Liberal Democrat candidate Suzanne.
The three candidates Mr Fowler, Mrs Fletcher and Frank Cook, who defends the seat for Labour will speak at an open forum arranged by the Christian Election Forum in Norton parish church, at 8pm on Sunday.
Businessmen outlined their views on future government policies when two General Election candidates visited the Belasis business centre, Billingham.
Liberal Democrats Suzanne Fletcher and Kay Kirkham talked to owners of small companies and find out how they have managed to weather the recession.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Paul Rayner, Conservative candidate for Middlesbrough, wants the council and Cleveland County Council to make greater provision for cyclists.
He said the land was relatively flat and thus ideal territory for cyclists.
Following the success of her first voter phone-in last week, Liberal Democrat candidate Rosamund Jordan repeats the exercise tonight.
She is encouraging first-time voters to ask questions about policy.
The LibDem hotline is open from 6.308pm on (0642) 827594.
THE voters of Langbaurgh are likely to be campaign-weary when the time comes to place their cross.
After electing Labour's Ashok Kumar last November, they are back at the polls barely five months later.
The death of outspoken Conservative MP Richard Holt forced the by-election and for three weeks, Langbaurgh endured the full glare of the media spotlight as pundits searched for a clue to the timing of the election.
Labour's victory, widely predicted but with a smaller swing than they had hoped for, essentially ruled out any chance of a snap poll.
Dr Kumar turned a 2,000 deficit into a near 2,000 majority.
Langbaurgh is still a key marginal and if the Tories want to form the next Government, it's seat like these they need to win and to win well.
Labour's majority is still precarious in a sprawling constituency with more than 80,000 voters, some 30,000 of whom live in Middlesbrough including Ashok Kumar and Michael Bates.
Middlesbrough and East Cleveland are like chalk and cheese.
Throw in Marske and Saltburn and the market town of Guisborough and you have some idea of the mixed nature of this constituency.
Michael Bates Dr Kumar's adversary in November is back for more and looking confident.
The Tynesider has now moved into the constituency and built up his profile.
He says his team is ‘at fever pitch’ and raring to go but Dr Kumar won't be easily unseated.
The former research scientist, who has resigned his seat on Middesbrough Council, said he would stand or fall by his record over the last few months.
And he has been busy.
He has already sparred with Michael Bates on virtually all topics.
Both men believe they are best-placed to set the agenda for Langbaurgh in the Nineties.
Mr Bates has identified four key topics the economy, health care, crime and local government.
He refuses to accept that the voters are fed up of electioneering in Langbaurgh.
‘I think the people of Langbaurgh are lucky,’ he said.
‘They have already had a bit of excitement, while the rest of the country has had to put up with the phoney war.’
One key issue back in November the Skelton and Brotton Hospital will not be so prominent now the Northern Regional Health Authority has confirmed the site.
But this is unlikely to prevent regular fierce exchanges between Dr Kumar and Mr Bates as unalike in personality as East Cleveland and Middlesbrough.
There is no doubt that losing Langbaurgh would be a bad result for Labour.
Mr Bates thinks the disappearance of November's protest vote could tip the scales his way.
November's by-election was to a large extent a media circus.
A succession of ‘names’ headed for the constituency, posed for photos and headed South again.
This time around, the national  spotlight is far less intense, leaving the candidates to peddle their messages to the local electorate without the big boys to lend a hand.
The Liberal Democrat vote will also be significant.
Peter Allen, a hard-working local candidate, polled 8,400 votes in November and will be looking for an improvement.
He says the LibDems are the only party offering a real change and is stressing education, environment and, of course, fair votes, as key issues.
There are also 1,000-plus potential votes up for grabs due to the absence of the minority parties who fought the byelection.
Maybe the 577 voters who plumped for either Lindi St Clair (Corrective), Nigel Downing (Football Supporters) or Colin Holt (Yorkshire) will stay at home on April 9, but the 456 who plumped for Green Ged Parr are likely to make a different choice.
In November, one unwelcome factor featured in the campaign.
After his election, Dr Kumar spoke of the racial attacks he endured during the campaign.
It's impossible to say if this element affected the Asian research scientist's vote but in General Elections it is the issues, usually, which dominate.
The spotlight may not be full on this time round but Langbaurgh is still a key result to watch out for.
THE Conservative candidate whose son was dragged into a furious election debate has defended his use of private health care.
Michael Bates, standing in Langbaurgh, said his other son had the same operation on the NHS and that there was little difference between the two.
He claimed Labour had shown desperation tactics by naming four-year-old Matthew to justify a party political broadcast.
The ‘glue ear’ broadcast showed two little girls one waiting in pain for an NHS operation and another whose parents paid to go private.
Matthew Bates had a similar operation last summer.
Both Neil Kinnock and Labour campaign co-ordinator Jack Cunningham used Mr Bates' son to justify the broadcast.
But Mr Bates said last night: ‘I have nothing to hide.
This tells more about the Labour Party than it does about me.’
Mr Bates has never denied that the private operation on his son's ear went ahead.
He said: ‘Matthew was due to start school before the operation could be done on the NHS.
We wanted him to be well before he started school, so we took advantage of the health care scheme offered by my company and by many other companies and trade unions.’
Mr Bates stressed that this was the first time his family had used private health care.
Youngest son Alexander, 22 months, had the same operation as his brother on the NHS at the Freeman Hospital in Newcastle in January.
Mr Bates said: ‘The waiting time there was just two months.
Now I have discovered the waiting time at North Riding Infirmary in Middlesbrough is just two weeks.’
Mr Bates' claims that the Labour case used on TV was bogus angered his Langbaurgh Labour opponent Ashok Kumar who said: ‘There are genuine cases of suffering up and down the country.
People tell me stories on the doorsteps.
It's not just isolated cases.
‘I understand parents who provide private care for their children.
It must have been a difficult decision for Mr Bates because he obviously cares for his child.
‘But not everyone has the money to go private.’
A WOMAN died when her car crossed over onto the wrong side of the road, hit a Transit van and overturned yesterday.
The 32-year-old, from Yarm, Cleveland was driving a Mini Clubman when the accident happened on Low Lane, near Stainton, Middlesbrough, at 7.50am yesterday.
The car had to be righted before fire crews could attempt to cut the woman free.
She was pronounced dead at the scene.
Lawrence Patrick White, driver of the Transit van, was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital with whiplash injuries.
A spokeswoman said police had no idea why the car which was heading into Middlesbrough crossed over into the wrong lane.
New look for High Street PLANS to improve Stockton High Street will be revealed in the Church Road public library lecture room today.
The plans, inspired by local people, include the pedestrianisation of the street with French-style cafe facilities and smart street furniture.
Urban Programme cash totalling £700,000 is  already committed to the scheme, due to start in the summer.
Snatch warning:
The head of Lynnfield Primary School in Hartlepool, Joy Lowe, has written to parents after a ten-year-old girl complained that a man tried to accost her as she made her way to the school.
Family escapes:
A family of three escaped from a house fire in Bardon Road, Berwick Hills, Middlesbrough, yesterday afternoon.
A bedroom was badly damaged in the blaze, but arson is not suspected.
Police released:
One sergeant and 19 constables will be released for operational duties by Cleveland Police under a £204,000 project.
Civilians will be employed as office supervisors, research assistants, counter staff, clerks, detention officers and general administrators posts now filled by police officers.
Arson fear:
Fire crews tackled the second blaze in three days in an empty house in Trent Street, Middlesbrough yesterday.
The fire is being treated as arson.
Pressing on:
Saltburn Residents' Association is pressing on alone to take part in Britain in Bloom.
It is already well on the way to raising the £2,500 needed to sustain its bid, particularly the watering of the 300 hanging baskets between the April spring judging and the main event in June.
Over the next two Saturdays it is organising town litter picks along with skip collections at the Gateway car park, Ox Close and the Parish Church car park.
Decision correct:
An appeal against Langbaurgh Council's decision not to allow the erection of a two-storey side extension at Abrams Buildings in Loftus has been dismissed by the Secretary of State.
The plan was rejected because it would result in an unacceptable loss of light to the High Altar of the RC Church next door.
Rail offer:
Thousands of British Rail leaflets are being delivered to homes in Redcar giving details of timetables and fares and include a £1 return special offer to main North-East stations.
Quality estate:
Langbaurgh Borough Council has won a Royal Town Planning Institute Northern Branch Quality in the Residential Environment award for revitalising the Spencerbeck Estate, near Eston.
Baptist visit:
Eleven members of Stockton Baptist Tabernacle and Norton Baptist Church are going to Virginia in the U.S. for two weeks next month to take part in the 200th anniversary celebrations of William Carey who founded the modern missionary movement.
Cricketer arrested after pub incident
TOP cricketer Michael Roseberry was arrested by police after a late-night weekend incident in Durham City, it was confirmed yesterday.
Last night the cricketer said the incident happened as he tried to get into a pub.
A police spokesman said the 25-year-old Middlesex opening batsman, whose home is in Durham, was released without charge following his arrest for alleged  drunkenness .
The arrest is understood to have followed an incident near to the Swan and Three Cygnets pub on Elvet Bridge on Saturday night.
Last night Mr Roseberry said: ‘I was hit as I tried to get into the pub.
The police put me away for my own safety.’
He said he was not injured and would not be taking any action about the incident.
He said he was not drunk.
Mr Roseberry, who was educated at Durham School, has been on the Middlesex playing staff since 1986.
Fight for life:
A baby is still fighting for her life a week after being  critically injured in a road accident in Teesdale.
Katie Elizabeth Cowley, aged one, remains in intensive care at Middlesbrough General hospital suffering from serious head injuries.
For several days her condition has been described as ‘poorly but stable’.
Last Thursday's crash at roadworks one mile west of Bowes claimed the life of her mother Alison Cowley, 34, of Allenthorpe, near York.
Her Vauxhall Nova was in collision with an articulated lorry.
THE furious wrangling over Labour's controversial party broadcast on the health service yesterday plunged into a flurry of claim and counter claim.
But at least one leading health expert believes that the party broadcast furore is clouding the real debate about the future of the NHS.
Ron Akehurst, director of York University's nonpolitical Health Economics Consortium, believes that regardless of which party is in power after April 9 health care in Britain will continue to be cash-limited.
‘How much you can spend on the NHS depends on how much the country earns and what share of that you want to put into the service,’ he says.
Instead he believes priorities have to be drawn up and stuck to even if that means low-priority areas are ignored altogether as is already the case in some parts of the country.
NHS plastic surgeons in North-West Thames, for instance, no longer treat people wanting tattoos removed.
And while some politicians point to falling numbers of hospital beds as an illustration of NHS cash cuts, Mr Akehurst says this drop reflects advances in surgical technology which have dramatically reduced the amount of time people need to stay in hospital.
Consequently, resources need to be channelled into providing extra theatres and consultants to cope with the increased workload.
In the Northern Region new hospital developments are being built at Middlesbrough, North Durham and Bishop Auckland.
Mr Akehurst questions the wisdom of ensuring no-one waits for more than two years for hospital treatment a key Tory election pledge as this would result in people with low priority conditions holding up treatments for people with more urgent clinical needs.
On waiting lists, he points out that these only measure the time spent waiting patients have seen a hospital consultant and not the period leading up to that appointment.
So, even though the waiting lists in the North continue to decline from January's 462 people waiting more than two years for treatment to just 207 in February they may not be an accurate reflection of the numbers waiting to see a consultant.
‘There's a lot of talk about success in waiting lists but it is not at all clear that there is any great benefit that's arisen here.’
Mr Akehurst says one of the positive results of recent changes in the NHS, however, is that the medical profession has been forced to look at whether the services it provides meet local needs.
But he also believes that the creation of fundholding GP practices, who opt to receive their budgets directly from the Government instead of their local health authority, could lead to the creation of a two-tier system.
He adds: ‘If you set up an incentive system for fundholders they may provide services that pay well to the detriment of other groups.
Elderly people require a lot of time and effort on a GP's part, the GP gets extra money for that but it may not compensate for the extra work.’
Here's how the parties shape up: Labour The party aims to ‘modernise the NHS, increase investment and ensure that patients get the treatment they need using £1 bn to begin to tackle 13 years of underfunding.’
They intend to introduce a shift towards preventative medicine and will bring back the free eye test and dental check ups axed by the Conservatives.
Prescription charges will be frozen and reduced over time.
Opted-out hospitals will return to local health authority control and will there will be new incentive funds to reward and encourage those health authorities who can raise standards in health provision.
Funding for care in the community will be ‘ring fenced’ so that it goes to the elderly, infirm and those with disabilities to enable them to stay in their own homes if they wish.
Priority will be given to those with health problems from  disability or old age.
Labour's White Paper, Your Good Health, pinpoints the need to promote health by creating a healthy environment and workplace and promoting a free public health service.
They aim to increase the use of fluoridation schemes which benefit most those who live in socially deprived areas and may be deprived of preventative dentistry.
Liberal Democrat To keep up with the growth of the elderly population LibDems are hoping to increase health expenditure by two per cent compared to what they claim is a current increase of only half a per cent.
This will mean a proposed increase of £460m in the first year, followed by £770m in the second rising to £1.95 billion within five years.
They plan to create a UK Sports Commission to encourage more people to take up sport.
Community Sports Plans will offer tax relief to sports clubs that share facilities and coaching resources with local schools.
They will also abolish tax relief for private health insurance while protecting the rights of existing policy holders, ban tobacco promotion and like Labour remove charges on eye tests and dental checkups.
Prescription charges will be frozen and they will extend the number of those exempt from payment.
They would restore the dental screening service in schools.
Their Patients' Charter will include rights to hospital  treatment within a specified time, a choice of GP, guaranteed access to health records and a comprehensive no-fault compensation scheme.
NHS staffing will also be reformed with more in-service training and teams of accredited specialists replacing what they describe as a ‘consultant-led hierarchy.’
CONSERVATIVES The Conservatives intend to increase the level of resources committed to the NHS, continue with the move towards trust status, placing responsibility for managing hospitals and other services on health professionals who deal with the patients.
Nurses will be allowed to prescribe necessary drugs.
Following maternity leave or a career break, all women working in the NHS will be able to return to work of a similar status.
Fund-holding will be available for any GP who wishes to apply.
Tories have already pledged that no one will have to wait more than two years for treatment and from March 31, 1992 they say no one should have to wait more than 18 months for a hip or knee replacement, or a cataract operation.
They are planning a new national NHS information service for patients, and they claim a new system will allow complaints to be answered.
A CLEVELAND town's crime prevention panel is to get a £1,000 boost to help launch a range of projects helping young people to fight crime.
The cash, from Middlesbrough Council's community chest fund, will help to improve links between the police and youngsters and includes a competition to find new devices to prevent bike thefts, auto crime and burglary.
It will also help to introduce a ‘copper card’ scheme which involves young neighbourhood watchers collecting a series of crime prevention stamps to stick on a card.
Sgt David Chaplin, secretary to the panel, said the scheme formed part of a Youth Crime Challenge aimed at establishing better links between the police, young people and children.
Torre Thorsen's freight company Scansiris allegedly gained £100m from the swindle involving the shipment of cars from the Nissan Motor Company of Japan to British distributor Nissan UK.
Thorsen, the 51-year-old managing director of Scansiris, is charged with fraudulently preparing falsely inflated invoices over a ten-year period up to 1991.
He was arrested in Middlesbrough and charged jointly with Michael Hunt, managing director of Nissan UK, the company's finance director Frank Shannon and two others.
Thorsen, of Grimstad, Norway, was granted £100,000 bail until June 18.
A TEENAGE mother from Cleveland is at the centre of a court wrangle over her child.
Banned from seeing her six-month-old baby after being charged with assaulting the child in her cot at a London hospital, yesterday she failed in a bid to win supervised access.
The 17-year-old single mother, who cannot be named for legal reasons, appeared at Horseferry Road Court in Westminster and was remanded until April 16.
The jobless Middlesbrough girl, whose father attended the hearing, was ordered as conditions of bail to live with her parents and not to see her baby.
She is charged with wilfully assaulting her daughter on March 11 this year in a manner likely to cause her unnecessary suffering or injury to health.
The alleged offence took place at The Royal Brompton Hospital in Sydney Street, Chelsea, where the baby was being treated.
Magistrate Pamela Long made an order under the Children's and Young Persons' Act banning publication of details which might lead to the baby's identity.
The mother's solicitor, Colin Nott, asked the magistrate to vary the bail terms to allow the young woman supervised access to her child, now with foster parents at a secret address.
The local authority in Cleveland had obtained an interim care order for the child from Middlesbrough magistrates who allowed the baby's grandparents supervised access to her.
That meant that social workers would collect the child from the foster parents and take her to a venue where the grandparents would be able to visit, said Mr Nott.
He went on that the Middlesbrough magistrates had indicated that they would be prepared to allow the mother similar access to the child if the ban imposed by the London magistrate was lifted.
But Miss Long said she was not prepared to vary the order at this stage.
AS the row over Labour's election broadcast grew it was revealed grandparents of a four-year-old boy paid out £300 for a private ear operation to avoid a six-months wait on the health service.
Middlesbrough Labour candidate Stuart Bell revealed they had been told there was a waiting list of several months but his parents were advised he was going deaf and if he went private he would be in hospital within three weeks.
Robert White, of Maldon Road, Middlesbrough, underwent the private operation to restore his hearing in January 1991.
After a few months the child's speech improved but later a specialist advised there was need of a further operation.
Robert's parents, Garry and Thelma, both 26, paid for the second operation which was carried out in November 1991 and it has proved successful.
Mr Bell used the case to back Labour's broadcast.
He said he had received five calls from angry parents or grandparents who had similar problems to the child portrayed on television.
Robert's mum, a hospital staff nurse, said: ‘Robert must have been an emergency because he had a vocabulary of four words at the age of three and speech therapy was no good to him because he  couldn't hear what they were trying to teach him.
‘If he was a priority, six months is a long time, especially for a child.
Luckily we are in a position where we could afford it.
Mr Bell said the parents and the grandparents brought it to his attention.
But South Tees Health Authority claimed waiting lists have been halved since the child's operation took place and urgent treatment was available.
Paul Raynor, Conservative candidate for Middlesbrough, said South Tees acute hospitals were providing 30pc more treatments than ten years ago, whilst waiting lists had fallen from over 6,000 to approximately 4,000 in the same period.
— Graham Robb, Tory candidate for hartlepool, said a three-year-old girl whose father claims she has waited over a year for surgery is to get her operation.
Helen Wrangham was put on a hospital waiting list last April and has not been treated despite being in constant pain, claims her father Peter, of Hart Station.
But Mr Robb said Helen was due to be treated in May for ear, nose and throat trouble.
He said: ‘The little girl is having her operation in May as part of the Government's special waiting list initiative.’
But Labour candidate Peter Mandelson said it showed how people were suffering under the NHS in its present state.
NO ‘airworthiness abnormality’ affected the Super Puma helicopter which crashed in the North Sea earlier this month with the loss of 11 lives including a North-East man, a preliminary accident report said yesterday.
Data from the accident ‘black box’ recovered from the destroyed helicopter has been played back satisfactorily, according to the Air Accidents Investigation Branch.
The accident happened on March 14 while 15 oil workers were being ferried 200 metres from an oil platform to their accommodation vessel in stormy weather with 30ft waves.
The North-East man who died was Andrew Smailes, 31, of Middlesbrough.
The report said close examination would be given to:— Possible reasons for the progressive descent into the sea;— The helicopter's performance under the prevailing conditions;— Flight crew actions and procedures;— Observance and applicability of any operational limitations and guidelines;— Survival aspects including structural integrity, survival aids and search and rescue assets.
The helicopter plunged into the sea close to the Cormorant Alpha production platform shortly after take-off.
Nine bailed on drugs charges
POLICE arrested nine men in a drugs raid on the Empire pub in Linthorpe, Middlesbrough.
The men, all under 25, were questioned yesterday at Middlesbrough police station before being released on bail pending further investigations.
Woman's place: The childhood home of suffragette martyr Emily Davison, Longhorsley Post Office, Northumberland, is for sale for £119,000.
Emily Davison died when she threw herself under the King's horse during the 1913 Derby.
Guards' trial: Two Coldstream guardsmen were committed for trial at Teesside Crown Court when they made another appearance before magistrates in Whitby yesterday accused of a series of robberies while AWOL from their base in Germany.
There was no application for bail for Gary Besterfield, 20, of Derby Road, Guisborough, and Keith Brown, 18, of Barnes Wallis Way, Marske.
Poison alert:
Police have issued a poison alert after aircraft equipment coated with  cadmium was taken in a van stolen from Hartlepool on Wednesday and later found burnt out on Thornley Industrial Estate, Shotton Colliery.
£2,000 bills: Theatre buffs are being offered the chance to buy posters dating back 25 years to raise £2,000 for restoration work at York Theatre Royal.
Girl thief snatches bag from pensioner A 62-year-old woman had her bag snatched by a girl thief in Stockton while she was taking a short cut between Hartington Road and Lawson Walk.
Cleveland police say the girl grabbed her shopping bag, fished out the purse and ran off with it joined by another girl.
The purse-snatcher is an auburn haired 17-year-old, about 5ft 10ins tall, and was wearing a dark or navy blue jacket with a motif on the back, jeans and white training shoes.
Her female companion was about 5ft 6ins tall with dark hair, and was dressed all in white.
Shell alert:
Army bomb experts were called to ICI Wilton on Teesside when workers unearthed what appeared to be an unexploded wartime shell.
But the alert was called off when it was identified as a dummy empty shell.
Bridge fear:
Residents in a moorland hamlet are urging action to combat heavy lorries taking a short cut down narrow country lanes.
They especially fear that a bridge across the beck at Iburndale near Whitby is threatened and are now pressing the North Yorkshire highways committee to investigate the problem.
Chapel lease:
The old Saltburn mortuary chapel is to be leased by Langbaurgh Council to Cleveland Wildlife Trust for use as a store.
Fire bugs:
Police are hunting arsonists who set fire to a house in Stamford Street, Middlesbrough.
The blaze damaged the ground floor, lounge and furniture.
Race questions:
The Racial Equality Council in Cleveland is calling on the next government to strengthen the Race Relations Act.
A questionnaire is being sent to all local General Election candidates asking them their views on the subject.
Business takes off at school
PUPILS at a private boarding school are considering employing their own workers as their ‘mini-enterprise’ becomes too large to handle.
Teenagers at Giggleswick School, near Settle, have been learning about business by setting up their own manufacturing company, XS Baggage.
But their sports bags, suit-covers and hair scrunchies were so popular that demand quickly outstripped supply.
Now managing director James Bussell a pupil who also lends a hand on the production line is considering employing outside workers to meet his company's bulging order books.
Union man:
John Wright, chairman of Nalgo's Cleveland County branch, has been re-elected by Northern members to the national executive committee.
He works as a lawyer in the county council's legal department.
Tram lines:
Newcastle-based consulting engineers Merz and McLellan have helped the Bradford Industrial Museum, housed in a former wool mill, install a tramway along a re-created 19th century street.
Watching brief:
Disabled people will be able to watch birds at Fishburn Pond, Bishop Middleham, from a hide built by construction students at New College, Durham.
Inquest opens:
An inquest was opened and adjourned yesterday on Mini driver Kay Lynch, 32, who was killed in a crash in Low Lane, Stainton, near Middlesbrough on Wednesday.
The 32-year-old pay office clerk, of Griffiths Close, Yarm, who was pregnant, had to be cut free from the wreckage by fireman.
Go ahead:
Langbaurgh planning committee yesterday recommended permission for the Guisborough by-pass and the long-awaited East Cleveland Community Hospital at Brotton.
THE row over who leaked the name of the girl featured in Labour's controversial health election broadcast became more bizarre yesterday.
It saw journalists verbally attacking each other and Labour's press secretary making her own emotional public statement.
In an extraordinary twist, health secretary William Waldegrave first denied any Tory involvement then admitted Conservative Central Office had helped the consultant involved get in touch with the Daily Express.
Earlier, on a visit to a York hospital, Prime Minister John Major said: ‘It was not us.
Most certainly not.’
Two weeks before polling day, the row overshadowed the day's campaigning.
Even the girl's parents were split over the use of her case in Tuesday's broadcast.
No party has yet owned up to actually revealing the identity of five-year-old Jennifer Bennett of Faversham, Kent, who waited 11 months for an operation for glue ear.
A Tory headquarters spokesman denied they disclosed her name to the press, claiming they did not know it until they saw the Independent newspaper on Wednesday.
Shaun Woodward, the Tory director of communications, also denied the Prime Minister had any knowledge of Conservative Central Office involvement in the affair.
But later, Mr Waldegrave admitted Conservative headquarters put Jennifer's consultant in touch with the Express.
He also said that the girl's grandfather, a former Tory mayor, told Tories by fax about the film nine days before it was transmitted.
Labour leader Neil Kinnock denied any member of the Labour Party was connected with the leak and challenged the culprit to come forward.
Julie Hall, Neil Kinnock's press secretary, took the unprecedented step of stating publicly that she did not leak the name.
Then Peter Hitchens, the Express reporter following Mr Kinnock, was harangued by fellow reporters over how his paper got the name of the girl and an Express spokesman claimed The Independent must have got the name from Labour Party sources.
Mr Hitchens said: ‘We did not get it from the Labour party.’
But Independent chief executive Andreas Whittam Smith said the name did not come from ‘a political source’.
Mr Woodward, the Tories' director of communications, said: ‘The doctor has confirmed that the Independent newspaper contacted him around 4pm before the broadcast went out.
The Independent already knew the name of the girl concerned.
‘The doctor then contacted Conservative Central Office at about 6.15pm and explained his anger at the broadcast.
It was suggested that he contact the newspapers.
‘We then told the Daily Express that that was what we had done.
The Express then spoke to the doctor.
‘Central Office did not know the name of the child until Wednesday morning when we read it first in the Independent and subsequently in the Daily Express.’
He claimed Dr Ardouin ‘said the Independent newspaper had details unavailable to the consultant.
For example, they had details of Mr Bennett's letter to Robin Cook.’
Mr Kinnock said: ‘I condemn without reservation whoever gave this little girl's name to the newspapers,’ he said.
Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown told a rally in Edinburgh: ‘The Labour Party must defend their own use of the particular case Jennifer Bennett, and justify their handling of such an emotive and sensitive issue.’
In the North, three similar cases including a five-year-old York girl Sarah Hendry's 14month wait for an operation to cure glue ear, were revealed.
In Middlesbrough, the grandparents of a four-year-old boy told how they paid out £300 for a private operation because of a six-month wait.
Labour's campaign coordinator Jack Cunningham was forced to apologise yesterday to Hexham woman Caroline Drain after her name was included without her permission on a list of people who had telephoned the health hotline to say they were waiting for operations.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
A direct rail link between Cleveland and London would be back on the tracks if Liberal Democrat policies were adopted, claims candidate Kay Kirkham.
She is proposing electrification of the line between Middlesbrough, Eaglescliffe and Northallerton and so to London.
Other local priority schemes would be the replacement of the 101 year-old Oxbridge Primary School, Stockton, a second primary school at Ingleby Barwick, a restart to the nursery programme, housing developments and an additional £750,000 for the North Tees Health Authority to invest in capital assets.
REDCAR:
Candidates Chris Abbott (LibDem), Robert Goodwill (Con) and Marjorie Mowlam (Lab) will form the panel for an Any Questions-style meeting in Rye Hills School on Sunday at 7.30pm.
The public meeting has been organised by Churches Together in Redcar, an inter-church body representing 15 churches in the town.
REDCAR:
Conservative candidate Robert Goodwill, has written to Labour's Marjorie Mowlam asking her to clarify her personal position on the nuclear defence capability of the country.
LANGBAURGH:
Conservative candidate Michael Bates is to press for Cattesty Beach at Skinningrove to be designated a bathing beach.
He said: ‘This would force Langbaurgh Council and Northumbrian Water to get together to do something about the terrible sewage problems there.’
LANGBAURGH:
Liberal Democrat Peter Allen has accused his fellow candidates of mud-slinging and claims neither Labour nor the Conservatives have offered a vision of the future.
HARTLEPOOL:
Labour's credit control policies will destroy any chance of the North-East's depressed housing market recovering, Graham Robb, Conservative candidate claimed yesterday.
He said: ‘Labour's plans for credit controls would create a waiting list for mortgages and destroy any recovery in the housing market.’
Labour's Peter Mandelson dismissed the remarks and added: ‘It is impossible to imagine a housing market more depressed than it is under the present Tory government.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Rosamund Jordan (LibDem) has pledged to do all she can to fight against age discrimination.
She said ‘a massive programme of reforms’ was needed for the elderly.
STOCKTON NORTH:
Labour candidate Frank Cook says Labour will ‘return prosperity to Stockton’ and see that local companies fighting for survival in the world's market places get the Government help they need to compete.
He added: ‘Many hundreds of thousands of jobs have been lost because our industry, our companies have not been able to compete in a fair contest.’
HARTLEPOOL:
The candidates will be a public meeting staged by the Christian Election Forum in St George's United Reformed Church hall, Park Road, at 7.30pm on Wednesday.
STOCKTON NORTH:
Labour's Frank Cook predicted the North Tees Hospital Trust, which comes into effect next Wednesday ‘despite  opposition from medical and ancillary staff as well as the general public’ will be brought back under local control a short time after the General Election.
STOCKTON NORTH:
The three  candidates will be speaking at an open meeting arranged by the Christian Election Forum, on Sunday at 8pm, in Stockton parish church.
BEEZY MARSH meets the candidates in Stockton South and finds age and sex are both issues
Youth-v-experience or perhaps it's time a woman won in Stockton South The three candidates squaring up to each other in the battle for Stockton South are quick to use the differences that lie between them as political ammunition.
Much is made of the age factor by Mr Tim Devlin, the Conservative defender of a 774 majority, for at 32 he is the youngest contender in the country's closest three-way spilt.
The London-born barrister points out that he is half the age of the Labour Party hopeful, Coun. John Scott, who he says, at 66 is no spring chicken.
Mr Devlin is the son of a surgeon, and was educated at Dulwich College before moving on to the London School of Economics where he graduated with a BA in modern history.
After studying law at the Inns of Court in London he was called to the bar in 1985 and moved with his wife Carole-Ann to Eaglescliffe.
Success came when he defeated the SDP in 1987 by a slim majority to take up the Stockton South seat.
He prides himself on a forthright nature and says he has asked more questions than any other MP in the House.
‘I'm known as a bit of a rebel and someone who does not always follow the party line,’ he adds.
Mr Devlin portrays himself as a dynamic character, bursting with enthusiasm and energy and commitment to the constituency.
He has a long list of Parliamentary posts, including chairing the Parliamentary panel on charity law, acting as deputy chairman of the foreign affairs forum and secretary of both the back bench arts committee and smaller businesses committee.
He pushed for the formation of the government-funded Teesside Development Corporation and pours cold water on critics' suggestions that he has failed the region over the relocation of the Ministry of Defence quality assurance unit.
But Labour's Coun. Scott, who has clocked up more than 25 years on the borough council, has also shown an increasing commitment to the improvement of the region.
The former Mayor of Thornaby and Stockton has been chairman of the planning committee for 16 years and was founder-director of the Northern Development Company, which aims to attract investment to the area.
Until June last year he divided his time between his home in Thornaby and the Newcastle HQ of the Northern Regional Councils' Association.
He sees his age as an asset.
‘I bring a lot of experience with me in this campaign,’ he says.
‘I might not be the youngest but I have a great deal of knowledge which I have been using in the field of local and regional government for years.’
Educated at Oxford, he left with a degree, also in modern history, after military service in 1949.
The move to the NorthEast came in the 1950s when he met his wife who is from Teesside.
Their six children were brought up in Thornaby.
He is confident he will gain the 6pc swing needed to secure the seat and says a Labour victory will ‘finish off’ what his colleague started at the last election in 1987.
For Coun. Mrs Kay Kirkham, Liberal Democrat, the election has given her the chance to experience the action from the other side of the fence.
Last time she was the agent for the then-MP, Mr Ian Wrigglesworth, and she was more than willing to step into his shoes.
Coun. Mrs Kirkham, a 42-year-old music teacher from Thornaby, believes the fact that women are under-represented in Parliament will lead many voters to put a cross next to her name.
‘It helps to be a woman and I can exploit that when it suits because there are so few women in Parliament and it concerns a lot of people.
‘Of course proportional representation would change that.’
Coun. Mrs Kirkham, who is married with two teenage children, is a seasoned county councillor and was elected to represent Victoria ward in Thornaby in 1985 before taking up a seat on the borough council in 1987.
She sees herself as ‘a fighter and a campaigner who is good at getting to the root of the problem,’ adding: ‘I am particularly interested in the individual, personal difficulties that people have.’
Her petitioning against the A19 pylons scheme and for a parish council in Thornaby seem to bear this out.
And she is honorary secretary of the Association of Liberal Democrat Councillors, which also tackles live issues in the area.
Education is top of the list for Coun. Mrs Kirkham, who was born in Dulwich and educated there, before reading music and education at Sussex University in 1968.
Her first job in the area at Ayresome Junior School, Middlesbrough, gave her first hand experience of the problems faced by teachers in the region and she is now county education committee spokesman.
She says the Liberal Democrats came a close second last time and believes the mood on the ground is one of dissatisfaction with the Conservatives which will give her the swing needed to gain the seat.
Bronze medal for lifeboat crew member
A Redcar lifeboat crew is to receive rare honours for rescuing a couple stranded by the incoming tide at Saltburn earlier this year.
On January 19 the four-man crew braved rough seas to rescue a Marton couple and their pet dog at Huntcliff.
For his skill in guiding the vessel within feet of Mr Peter and Mrs Margaret Darling, Mr Peter Hodge, aged 44, of Ings Road, Redcar, will travel to the Royal Festival Hall in London in May to receive the RNLI bronze medal.
It is the first time that a lifeboatman has received such an honour since sea rescues began in the town with the historic Zetland lifeboat 190 years ago.
Mr Ian Readman, honorary secretary of the Redcar station, said: ‘In the whole history of Redcar lifeboat there have only been three medals one was a gold, another a silver.
Now we have got a full set with the bronze.’
The other crew members are to receive the thanks of the institution inscribed on vellum.
They are Mr Derek Robinson, aged 36, of Ings Road, Mr Barry Wheater, aged 25, of Dalby Close and Mr Mark Reeves, aged 21, of Station Road, all of Redcar.
Mr Hodge was modest about his part in the rescue.
He said: ‘It was a great team effort.
The crew did a magnificent job.’
However, in his official report of the incident Mr Tim Harrison, Eastern division deputy inspector of lifeboats, said: ‘Hodge showed great leadership in quickly assessing the danger and courageously taking the lifeboat into heavy breaking seas.
‘It was a truly excellent service and a great team effort, which resulted in the crew coolly and professionally saving the casualties.’
Mr Darling, former editor of the Evening Gazette in Middlesbrough, said after he and his wife were rescued: ‘I think the lifeboatmen were brilliant.
We did not really think they could possibly get a boat in.’
CAROLINE PARNELL looks at the Langbaurgh campaign Into battle again in constituency of contrasts Candidates from the three main political parties only are fighting for the marginal Langbaurgh seat and all three stood just five months ago.
The by-election following the death of Mr Richard Holt, the longstanding Conservative MP, was carried out in a glare of national publicity.
Dr. Ashok Kumar won for Labour with a majority of almost 2,000 over Mr Michael Bates, Conservative.
Mr Peter Allen, the Liberal Democrat candidate was pushed into third place with about 8,400 votes.
Now their campaign is being carried out without the mass of top party politicians they had to back them up last year.
Dr. Kumar, the 35-year-old research scientist, who is single and lives in Marton, has been campaigning on his short but busy record as an MP.
Since taking his seat Dr. Kumar, who lectured at the Imperial College of Science and Technology before carrying out research for British Steel, has dealt with more than 300 letters from constituents, asked more than 50 questions in Parliament and raised a number of local issues including coastal pollution and the delay in building the new hospital at Brotton.
A Middlesborough borough councillor since 1987, recently resigned from the local authority to concentrate on his duties as an MP.
The former chairman of the board of governors of Longlands College in Middlesbrough is a quietly spoken man, who when he was elected in November said he was determined to serve all the people of Langbaurgh, whether or not they had voted for him.
He plans to provide an expert witness to give evidence at the public inquiry into the controversial plan for pylons from the power station at Wilton, and he has also raised the matter of the Skelton and Brotton link road in the European Parliament.
Dr. Kumar said that if Labour was elected, pensions and child benefit would be increased immediately and he promised more investment in the rural development commission.
Heavy freight would be moved from road to rail to make roads and villages safer.
Party workers claim that enthusiasm for him and his party is positively bubbling in Guisborough, but admitted that the campaign had been slower to get off the ground in other parts of Langbaurgh.
After he was elected in November he revealed that he been the subject of racial attacks during his campaign.
As only the second Asian MP in Parliament it is anyone's guess how that issue will affect the voting this time in this traditionally ‘conservative’ area.
Since his election Dr. Kumar has had regular battles with Mr Bates, who since his narrow defeat has moved from Gateshead to Marton.
This confident 31-year-old financial advisor was a leading Young Conservative and stood as a candidate for Tynebridge in the 1987 election.
He and his wife, Carole, a district nurse, have two young sons.
There has been speculation that he might have been the ideal Tory candidate for the Hexham seat if he had not already given his allegiance to Langbaurgh.
During the last five months he has made a  strenuous effort to get to know the area and the residents of this constituency of contrasts.
He describes himself as a practising Christian whose main hobby is cricket.
His enthusiasm has obviously appealed to the party faithful.
He is obviously eager to overturn Dr. Kumar's small majority and once again give Langbaurgh the reputation of being a Conservative area.
Land in the more rural parts of the constituency is virtually covered with placards urging voters to support Mr Bates and since the by-election he has been involved in setting up a forum for local farmers to air their views.
He claims to have played a vital role in the final stages of negotiations to bring the long-awaited community hospital to East Cleveland and he has an active interest in cleaning up local beaches.
Mr Bates, a local school governor, is a supporter of the controversial Macmillan City Technology College in Middlesbrough and is fighting his campaign on four main issues: law and order, the Conservative Government's ability to lead the country out of recession, the Prime Minister's commitment to the health service and his expectation that Langbaurgh voters will reject the plans of other parties to set up a regional assembly.
Mr Allan, the 32-year-old Liberal Democrat, is hoping to pick up votes from people tired of the bickering between the two major parties.
During his campaign this personable single man, who lives in the very heart of the constituency in Guisborough, has appealed to Dr. Kumar and Mr Bates to stop ‘the negative mudslinging’ and take part in constructive political debate.
Unlike the other two candidates, little has been heard from the business strategy lecturer at Durham University Business School since the byelection.
He admitted that he thought electors were sick of what seemed like endless campaigning, but for the last two weeks his home has been the headquarters for a hectic campaign office.
Placards bearing his name are rivalling in numbers those of Mr Bates.
A former British Steel employee, nonconformist preacher and member of the Round Table, he is the most local of the candidates and local issues are playing a major role in his electioneering.
Education, coastal pollution at Marske, Saltburn and Skinningrove, the pylons from Wilton, threats to the future of Guisborough maternity hospital along with high unemployment in certain wards such as Lockwood, Easterside, Stainton and Thornton are all areas of concern.
He tells voters that by investing in housing, the environment, schools and hospitals, the Liberal Democrats will ‘kick start’ the economy.
All three candidates are approachable men with deep seated-convictions.
With almost two weeks still to go the race for the seat is far from over.
Tory and tobacco
I NOTE that Tory candidate Michael Bates has pledged to support a clampdown on drug dealers if he wins the Langbaurgh seat (Echo March 21).
I thought for a moment he meant the tobacco industry, but realised that when big business and jobs are involved the 100,000 deaths per year counts for nothing.
Eric Gendle, 13 Mayfield Road, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough.
Calling time
THE Tories are said not to have been able to get in right in 13 years.
In fact, they have had two 13-year sessions since the war.
Why keep wasting 13 years when Labour can prove the same point in less than half the time.
F. Charnock, 163 Auckland Terrace, Shildon.
CIVIC leaders from Middlesbrough's twin Zimbabwean town of Masvengo are making a two-week trip to the UK next month.
Masvengo's mayor Timoti Aphiri and town clerk, Tsunga Morris Mhangami, will visit council departments, local schools and attend the general election count at the town hall.
MIDDLESBROUGH council's chief personnel officer is set to become the president of the Society of Chief Personnel Officers in local government.
Alf Illingworth, 55, will be elected to the position at the society's annual meeting in Plymouth on April 8.
The society represents the interests and views of over 300 chief personnel officers working in local government throughout the United Kingdon.
Middlesbrough-born Alf has been chief personnel officer with Middlesbrough council since 1974 and before that he worked for Teesside county borough council.
He is married with two grownup children and lives in Seamer, North Yorkshire.
The general election's best dressed candidate took to the streets, somewhat gingerly, on Saturday.
It would be convenient to report that Ross Cranston's performance was as immaculate as his appearance or that it is on him that the smart money will be laid.
Sadly, it doesn't quite turn out that way.
‘I've only had one ‘bugger off’ though,’he said.
Cranston, 43, is Labour's man in Richmond, where the Party's vote in 1987 and at a by-election two years later failed to top 10,000 added together.
On those inauspicious occasions the candidate was Frank Robson, a market trader who lives near Darlington.
His successor is a law professor from Australia.
‘I've been here before as a tourist,’ he said.
Shire difficulty became sheer impossibility after a months long battle to deselect David Abrahams, the previous candidate.
Party officials say it's dirty washing under the bridge, or words to that effect; not everyone agrees.
‘I've voted Labour all my life, but I think it's disgusting the way David Abrahams was hounded out,’ a balding man in his 30s tells Cranston as he stands, leaflets in hand, on a corner.
‘I don't know about that,’ says the new candidate.
Another potential voter starts to tell him about the car that went through his garden wall.
‘There's not a soul from the council been to see it,’ he says, before setting off to find the Tory.
‘I'm going to give him rock all,’ he adds.
The Tory appeared to have vanished and the LibDem's due this Saturday.
Posters on every lamp post promised a personal appearance of Peter the Panda, representing the Darlington and Stockton Times, but we couldn't find him either.
In 1986 Cranston came back to England, where he'd studied, to be Professor of Law at London University.
His wife and baby daughter (who's had her picture in the Financial Times) are English.
Adopted just five weeks ago ‘I'd tried for other seats but hadn't got anywhere’ he has been staying in Northallerton with Jim Stafford, the cheery and down to earth constituency agent.
A former Consett steelworker, Stafford was born in nearby Chopwell known as Little Moscow because of its proliferation of streets like Engels, Marx and Lenin Terraces.
Stuart Bell, defending Middlesbrough for Labour, is another Little Moscovite.
Jim Stafford was one of just three Party workers mustered to persuade the market day masses; that they were standing next to a van marked ‘Richmond Fudge Co’ was entirely coincidental.
‘They asked me to consider standing myself,’ he says, ‘but I'm 67 and I thought that was too old.’
A nice man, he canvasses in anorak and crew-neck jumper; Cranston wears pin striped suit, Crombie overcoat and refulgent black shoes.
It's not for the Diary to speculate upon whose coat is cut better according to Richmond's cloth, but we can report that none of the candidate's pockets contained pen or paper a problem when taking down canvass details.
‘He's a bit of an absent minded professor,’ the agent had said.
His man didn't seem unfriendly more like diffident, nervous, intellectually adrift from his surroundings.
We recall having the same feeling about Leon Brittan, Richmond's Tory MP until 1989 and he didn't dress off the remnant rail either.
Earlier we'd had coffee and conversation in Mary's tea room, an interview more off the record than on, and for little obvious reason.
In short he'd heard of the last minute vacancy a sort of electoral bucket shop familiar to Hexham Conservatives through Tony Blair, a friend through Cranston's sideline as a Labour front bench trade and industry adviser.
This election, we can probably add, is an exercise in earning the sartorial seat seeker his stripes.
The commission, and the socialist Sam Brownes, may come later.
But they'll be suited to somewhere an awful lot different from Richmond.
Happy hunting ground
NEITHER Ross Cranston nor defending Tory William Hague will find much comfort in an opinion poll at Richmond School, where the mock election's also on April 9.
The LibDems, in round figures, had 45 per cent, Conservatives 25 per cent and Labour 17.
The Happy Party ‘sort of Monster Raving Loony’ says head girl Lynne McCafferty have nine per cent, and are doubtless laughing all the way to the ballot box.
Wets?
WE may have been leaked a world exclusive, incidentally, about a split in the Monster Raving Loonies (for whom, incidentally, Screaming Lord Sutch is standing in three different seats.)
Before nominations closed Stockton South returning officer Frank Theobalds received a request for papers from both the official MRLP and the MRLP (plumbers division.)
Water on the brainless, perhaps, but neither remembered to return them in time.
Wrong note
NEIL Kinnock's slightly manic conducting of Men of Harlech at Egglescliffe School on Friday may have come as a mild surprise to the attendant gentlemen of the Press.
According to the day's briefing notes the masterwork was to be Men of Harlem something to do with his globetrotting, presumably.
Semi-detached MOTHER of three Elizabeth Sibley, Tory candidate in Durham North, faces a clash of loyalties over Sunderland's FA Cup semi-final next Sunday.
Though half the constituency supports the Roker side, Liz was born in Norwich their last four opponents.
‘I'm not really a football fan,’ she insists.
‘I only went once (Chelsea, the MP's lot), got frozen stiff and remember wondering what on earth I was doing there.’
So who'll win the big one, then?
‘The best team,’ says the lady, diplomatically.
Bad news
JOHN Major, of course, is known to set store by the ‘feelgood factor’ occasioned by English sporting successes.
So what of Michael Fallon, anxiously defending a narrow Tory majority in Darlington where the football team has sacked the manager and is about to be relegated.
Mission Impossible, the club's fanzine, reckons the feelbad factor could be crucial ‘the local MP will soon be following Frank Gray (the ex-manager) down to the dole.’
Better bet
DARLINGTON Tory councillor Peter Jones is more optimistic of his man staying in the big league.
Our first Diary reported his offer of a £1000 bet on Fallon to win; without takers and with the benefit of two weeks canvassing he's upping it to £2000, at odds of 8–11.
‘He's the supreme favourite,’ says Jones.
Fable talk
THREE hours after the Diary's election limerick contest was launched, the first entry arrived.
Based on one of Aesop's fables, it was as much like a limerick as one of Shakespeare's sonnets.
We're after a standard limerick on any electoral theme, remember, but probably featuring a North-East candidate.
Entries to Election Diary, Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington DL1 1NF.
Handsome prizes.
THE parents of teenage car crash victim Catherine Moore are pleading for key accident witnesses to come  forward .
Catherine, 19, of Britannia Court, St Hilda's, Middlesbrough, is making slow progress but remains critically ill in hospital since the crash on March 15.
She has needed four brain operations following the accident on the town's Berwick Hills estate.
The car was driven from the Wee Willie pub in Evesham Road and travelled via Overdale Road, Crossfell Road into Evesham Road.
It crashed near the Newcastle pub.
Catherine's mum, Judith Wrathmall, has spent every day at her daughter's bedside.
Her dad Michael, 43, pleaded for anybody who saw what happened to come forward.
The 37-year-old driver of the car involved has been questioned by the police about the incident and allowed police bail.
Friends raise funds for Mark THE family and friends of autistic five-year-old Mark Mason have raised £1,400 to buy special computer equipment to help him communicate and make better progress at the special school he attends in York.
The equipment has been installed at his home in Langley Drive, Norton, Malton.
Mark's grandmother walked the Cleveland Way in a sponsored effort and local well-wisher Andrew Monk raised more than £800.
New courts:
The new Teesside Combined Court Centre will be formally opened by Lord Justice Taylor, Lord Chief Justice Designate.
Guests at the  opening will arrive at the building in Russell Street, Middlesbrough at 11.30am on Friday April 10 prior to the unveiling of a plaque at 12 noon.
Ancient sounds:
Historic bells including some dating back to Henry VIII's reign are to go on show at the Ryedale Folk Museum, Hutton-le-Hole near Kirkbymoorside from tomorrow.
The display, entitled Pull the Other One, will include bells from HMS Farndale, railway bells and hawk bells.
Sex charges:
A 50-year-old sales consultant appeared at York Crown Court on Friday charged with sex offences.
Anthony Gannon, of Harewood Road, Harrogate, denies indecent assault and a serious sexual offence on another man.
He was remanded on bail.
Quality counts:
A team of 12 and 13-year-olds from Dowdale School in Cumbria beat top class entries from sixth formers in North-East schools to take the £500 first place in the Northern Development Company's Quality Counts competition.
The Graduate: Teesside Polytechnic is calling on all past students to get in touch with Alumni Officer Clare Tanner so they can receive a copy of its new magazine, The Graduate.
Millionaire's thanks:
A County Durham millionaire has left £5,000 to the Salvation Army in his will.
John Moran, 73, the owner of a small ironworks at Stillington, near Newton Aycliffe lived at Cotherstone in Teesdale.
Mr Moran, who died last year from cancer, left an estate worth £1,215,928.
Pupils' gift: Pupils at Grangefield School, Stockton presented North Tees General Hospital in Stockton, with a £10,000 cheque for closed circuit TV as part of their Safe Babies' Appeal.
The money was raised from sponsored runs, discos, car security window etching, and a sponsored walk from London to Stockton.
The school has raised a total of £17,000.
Clothing stolen:
A large quantity of children's clothing was stolen from the Huckleberry shop in High Street, Stokesley, on Friday night, including wax jackets and dresses.
All the items carried the Huckleberry label.
Rubbish fire:
Firemen extinguished a rubbish fire in a corridor at Spencerbeck House, Spencerbeck, Middlesbrough.
It caused slight fire damage to skirting board and smoke damage to 30 metres of corridor.
Car blaze:
Firemen attended a car fire on a disused railway line near Letch Lane, Stockton.
The car was destroyed.
Home rule:
Over 1,200 Thornaby residents have called on Stockton council to support their call for their own town council.
They want the Boundary Commisioners to grant Thornaby town or parish council status.
Funny man:
Funny man Norman Wisdom will be at Wynyard School, Billingham, tomorrow to make awards to winners of Service with a Smile.
Over 500 nominations were received for the competition organised by the Northern Development Company and sponsored by Training and Enterprise Councils in the North to find the region's most conscientious workers.
Common concern
LIBERAL Democrat candidate Rosamund Jordan has said she is concerned that the developer of a proposed five-a-side football complex at Claiville Common, Middlesbrough, seems reluctant to go ahead without a licensed bar.
She said several local residents had contacted her about the application submitted to the council by Anchor International.
‘It would seem the people of Middlesbrough are about to lose a valuable free open space for the sake of an enterprise aimed primarily at commercial profit rather than providing a sports facility,’ she said.
Mrs Jordan said she supported local councillor Joe Michna who has been fighting to save the common and to stop the sports complex licence.
She said she would like to hear from members of the central community council who were wondering how their opinions could be put  forward ‘now that the local Labour Party has denied them a voice’.
‘If they contact me on Middlesbrough 827594 or at 14 Aspen Drive, off Sycamore Road, I will arrange for their views to be heard,’ she said.
Pledge on Poll tax SUZANNE Fletcher, Liberal Democrat candidate for Stockton North says her Party in power ‘could have the Poll tax dead and buried by April 1993’.
She took the message out on to the streets of Stockton yesterday.
She reported: ‘People were also pleased to hear that it will be far more difficult to avoid paying and so they will be less likely to have to pay so much for other people's arrears.’
Scheme ‘shows seriousness’ NEWS of a £308,000 scheme to open a 20-bed ward, two operating theatres and a gastro-intestinal investigation suite at North Tees Hospital, Stockton ‘shows that the Government is serious about investing in the long term future of the NHS’, claims Stockton South Tory candidate Tim Devlin.
A TEESSIDE pensioner is taking her fight for better British pensions to Brussels this weekend.
Battling Elsie Stringer, 71, from Billingham, will tell Euro MPs British pensions should be raised to equal those of all the other member countries.
‘If our pensions were higher and brought up to standard there would be no need for people to go cap in hand and ask for concessions,’ said Elsie.
‘Pensioners should be able to live with dignity I think we have that right.
That's why I'm going.’
Mrs Stringer was yesterday given a civic send-off by Stockton Mayor Coun Mike O'Brien.
David Bowe, Euro MP for Cleveland and North Yorkshire, is already in Brussels but is sending a representative to see Mrs Stringer off from Middlesbrough station today.
Mrs Stringer, an active member of Teesside Pensioners Association, is attending a two-day Pensioners' Parliament in Brussels, paid for by the European Parliament's Socialist group of MPs.
Mr Bowe said: ‘British pensioners have had a raw deal.
Participants will share experiences and compare living standards for retired people throughout the community.
‘I know of Mrs Stringer's excellent work for pensioners and I am sure that she will be a fine ambassador for British pensioners and for the whole of my Cleveland and Yorkshire North constituency.’
A SENIOR police officer has become one of the latest victims of the car crime epidemic in the North-East.
Thomas Williamson, a senior officer with the Metropolitan Police in London, had come to Cleveland to be interviewed for a top job in the county's force.
He was one of three applicants for the post of assistant chief constable.
He left his Volkswagen car overnight in the Blue Bell Hotel car park at Acklam, Middlesbrough, about half a mile from the police headquarters.
But yesterday he found the would-be thieves had smashed the door lock in an attempt to break in.
Mr Williamson was doubly disappointed because he didn't get the job.
It went to Chief Supt David Wood, 47, who has been with the force since 1964.
His appointment comes with next month's retirement of assistant chief constable Fred Smith.
A FATHER-to-be kicked and punched his pregnant girlfriend in a row.
Gordon Harker's girlfriend Lisa Hughill was five months pregnant at the time of the assault.
But yesterday Teesside Crown Court was told that the pair were now living together as a family with their daughter.
Harker, of Ingram Road, Berwick Hills, Middlesbrough, admitted assault causing actual bodily harm, two offences of damaging property, assault with intent, affray and having an offensive weapon.
Judge Angus Stroyan QC placed Harker on probation for 18 months.
Duncan Smith, prosecuting, said a row had developed when Harker and his girlfriend were living with his parents in Chaucer Avenue, Brambles Farm, Middlesbrough.
Harker punched and kicked the girl and when she escaped he smashed a window, went outside and began to smash the windows of her brother's car.
Harker, 25, threatened the brother with a wrench and when a police officer arrived Harker had an eight-inch knife.
Sea airlift for injured worker
DAVID Foster, 47, from Hartlepool, is recovering in Newcastle's Royal Victoria Infirmary after being airlifted from an oil rig suffering from a knee injury.
He was hurt as he tried to transfer from the Tayjack rig to the tug Torbay Endeavour off the coast of Sunderland.
Garages fire: A caravan and car were badly damaged when fire broke out in two garages on allotments at Sherburn village, Durham, yesterday.
Boots on: Middlesbrough mayor Eddie Bolland took penalty taking practice against Boro goalie Steve Pears yesterday to prepare for a celebrity shootout on Wednesday.
Duo's denial: Neighbours Graham Barber, 30, and Colin Yarrow, 27, of Sycamore Avenue, New Earswick, York, were granted conditional bail at York Crown Court yesterday after they denied robbery at Christmas.
Bus disruption: Bus services will be disrupted at Ferryhill Station tomorrow because of the bridge closure.
Four hurt: Four men were treated in hospital after a head-on car crash at Musham Bank, Scarborough.
Foetus check is available
A TEST which checks foetuses for Down's Syndrome will be made available at Hartlepool General Hospital's Cameron maternity unit from next Wednesday for mothers-to-be who want it.
The Triple, as the test is known, is currently only available to women over 37 years old, but around 2,000 younger women will now be able to take advantage of it.
New role: A centre which formerly worked solely with the unemployed is changing its name from Thornaby Impasse to Five Lamps to reflect its new role in helping the entire community.
Cleveland County Council is granting £13,782 to the Eldon Street resource centre which gives practical advice on car repairs, offers a woodcutting service and advice on painting, decorating, gardening and fitting smoke alarms.
Dustbin derby:
Schools throughout Langbaurgh are competing for Telethon's dustbin derby by collecting plastic bags for recycling.
Langbaurgh Council's refuse collection service will pick up sacks full of plastic carriers and take them to the British Visqueen factory in Stockton for recycling.
The council will keep a note of the number of sacks collected from each school.
No knockout: The Mother's Day Its a Knockout event scheduled for tomorrow in Cleveland county stadium, Middlesbrough, has been cancelled.
It has been rearranged for Saturday April 25 from noon to 4pm.
John re-elected: John Wright, 49, of Saltburn, who is chairman of the Cleveland branch of Nalgo, has been reelected as the North of England's representative on the union's national executive council.
Venue study: The Arts Council is backing a £5,000 feasibility study into using Coatham Memorial Hall, Redcar, as a permanent venue.
Cigarettes stolen: A £500 carton of cigarettes was stolen from a supermarket at Loftus Market Place.
NINE people were yesterday committed for trial at York Crown Court accused with an £800,000 mortgage fraud.
The charges relate to 24 separate mortgage advances ranging from £61,750 to £17,500 involving some of the country's leading building societies.
Scarborough magistrates were told that the alleged offences involved a total of £803,000.
The nine people charged with conspiring to obtain mortgage advances by deception from various building societies are: Teresa Bradshaw, 28, of Britannia Street, Scarborough; Paul Humfreys, 30, of St John's Avenue, Scarborough; Steven Birley, 37, of Prospect Road, Scarborough; Trevor Barner, 37, of Arghan Cottage, Grindale; Stephen Wray, 41, of Willon Drive, Bridlington; Richard Wagstaff, 31, of Linthwaite, Huddersfield; John Ramsden, 34, of Keswick Road, Normanby, Middlesbrough; Peter Watson, 50, of Hodgson Lane, Upper Poppleton, York; and Neil Dunbar, 37, of Penderry Rise, Catford, London.
POLICE are investigating an arson attack on a former DIY shop in a popular Middlesbrough shopping area.
The blaze broke out early yesterday morning in premises once occupied by The Cheapest Wallpapers and Paints in the town's Parliament Road.
A passing police car and two neighbours alerted the fire brigade and firefighters were able to save the building from being gutted.
It contained a substantial amount of  combustible materials, said a fire officer.
One of the neighbours told officers he saw two youths running away from the scene just prior to the fire being discovered.
The ground floor of the building was gutted and the front extensively smoke damaged.
Smoke also damaged the remainder of the building.
Police appealed to anyone who saw anything suspicious at the scene at around 12.45am to contact Middlesbrough CID on 248184.
Man committed on rape charge
DURHAM magistrates yesterday committed Ian Stewart Johnson, 38, of the Pennywell Bail Hostel, Pennywell, Sunderland, for trial at Newcastle Crown Court on a charge of rape.
He is also accused of indecent assault, indecency with a child, and taking indecent photographs.
Magistrates extended legal aid and conditional bail.
Sarah's plea: Student nurse Sarah Kavanagh, 20, from Hartlepool, is seeking help to fund her mercy mission to Romania to care for babies suffering from AIDs.
Anyone who can help should contact her father, Mike, at 19 Warkworth Drive, Hartlepool, or telephone .
Works starts:
Work has begun on a new £800,000 housing scheme for the elderly in Hartlepool.
North Housing Association is building 24 flats on a former play area in Miers Avenue.
The should be completed by November.
Theft warning:
Police in Bishop Auckland are reminding people to make sure garages and garden sheds are secure following several thefts in the area.
Det Sgt Martyn Lowrie said tools and equipment had been taken from homes in Evenwood, Crook and Ramshaw.
Stolen tablets:
Police warned that tablets stolen in a burglary at a house in Harford Street, Middlesbrough, could be harmful if taken in quantity.
The Naprocin and Diltiazem tablets were in brown bottles.
No change:
Taxi licence fees in Hartlepool are to remain unchanged, councillors have decided.
They say they gave considerable thought before making the decision which they hope will help the trade ride the current recession.
Vandals strike:
A window was smashed at Clemitson's chemists on North Terrace, Crook, on Sunday night.
Fire chief:
Eric Priest has taken over as acting Chief Fire Officer for Cleveland after the retirement of Bill Cooney on health grounds.
Buses stay:
Cleveland County Council has saved two East Cleveland bus services.
Tees and District withdrew the 251 and 252 services this weekend, but the local authority agreed to keep them on as socially useful Countybus services.
The 251, which serves the Westfield Estate in Loftus, has been renumbered as 751 and the 252, which runs from Skinningrove to Easington, is now the 752.
In court
The following cases were dealt with by Stokesley magistrates:
Lee Anthony Finegan, 24, of Meadow Bank Road, Ormesby, Middlesbrough, was convicted of driving a car with excess alcohol in breath and using a car without insurance, fined £400 plus £30 costs and £50 compensation, licence endorsed, disqualified for 18 months.
Arthur Anthony Malone, 52, of Sycamore Road, Ormesby, Middlesbrough, was convicted of using a car without an excise licence, without insurance and without a test certificate, fined £400 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, six points.
Steven Andrew Malone, 20, of Sycamore Road, Ormesby, Middlesbrough, was convicted of using a car without an excise licence, without insurance and without a test certificate, fined £400 plus £20 costs and £41.66 duty, licence endorsed, six points.
The following cases were dealt with by Stokesley magistrates:
Anthony Simpson, 45, of Hillside Avenue, Grove Hill, Middlesbrough, was convicted of stealing a vehicle excise licence value £2 and fraudulently using an excise licence, fined £200 plus £30 costs.
Simon Andrew Detchon, 19, of Cleveland Street, Great Ayton, was convicted of receiving a stolen cover note knowing or believing it stolen, making a false instrument, namely a cover note, with intent to induce someone to accept it as genuine, using a motor without insurance, forging or altering an insurance certificate, using insurance with intent to deceive, fined £350 plus £30 costs, licence endorsed, disqualified for one month.
Michael Mead, 45, of Captain Cook Way, Great Ayton, was convicted of using a van without insurance, without a test certificate and with a defective tyre, fined £310 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, seven points.
The following case was dealt with by Northallerton magistrates:
David Rathmell, 34, of Bouley Road, Redcar, admitted assault occasioning actual bodily harm, fined £50 plus £30 costs and £50 compensation.
LANGBAURGH:
Labour's Ashok Kumar meets Bill Connor, of shopworkers' union Usdaw today.
The pair will meet constituents and shopworkers during a walkabout in the Parkway Shopping Cente, Coulby Newham.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Conservative Paul Rayner has claimed 15,000 new jobs have been created on Teesside since 1984.
He said only the Tories offered hope to small businesses and attacked Labour's minimum wage policy, commenting: ‘One man's minimum wage would be another man's P45.’
LANGBAURGH:
Liberal Democrat Peter Allen says the environment is the forgotten issue of the campaign.
He accused the two main parties of paying lip service to the subject and promised his party would ‘clean up beaches and coastlines by ensuring full treatment of all sewage’.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Liberal Democrat Rosmamund Jordan says her campaign doorstepping shows increasing support for a change to a fairer voting system in Britain.
DARLINGTON:
Three students take part in a TV politics debate tonight.
The three from the Queen Elizabeth Sixth Form College are to be seen enjoying the atmosphere at Brannegans and taking part in a lively debate in Club Lucy's in East Street.
Andrew Wright represents the Tories, Nicola Potter Labour and Gillian Fiske the Liberal Democrats.
The trio are to be featured on Channel Four's short programme Voters which takes a look at different groups of the electorate.
HARTLEPOOL:
The Tories will offer hard-pressed families help to reduce their fuel bills, says Hartlepool candidate Graham Robb.
He has highlighted the party's commitment to the Home Energy Efficiency Scheme.
This, he says, will be increased to £40m to allow for the insulation of 250,000 low income homes over the next year.
‘I went to some low income homes on Hartlepool's Headland which were really cold.
Items such as double glazing and cavity wall insulation are standard for middle income homes.
This scheme will cut down bills and also help to save energy,’ he said.
He has also highlighted plans to set up an independent Energy Savings Trust, funded with some of the profits made by British Gas and the regional electricity companies.
LANGBAURGH:
Council tenants will get a better deal under Labour, claimed the party's candidate for Langbaurgh yesterday.
Dr Ashok Kumar was joined by Labour housing spokesman George Howarth on a visit to a community refurbishment scheme on the Hornsea Estate, Hemlington.
‘We shall see tenants’ rights extended under a Labour Governement and a greater involvement by  tenants in the running of their estates,’said Dr Kumar.
‘We will build a partnership with tenants so that they can be represented on housing committees and housing association management committees and have greater influence over repairs and services and the local management of their own estates.’
STOCKTON NORTH:
Tory candidate Simon Fowler said the halving of the unemployment rate since the peak of the mid-1980s was one of the reasons why the Tories expected to win the seat.
The current unemployment rate in the constituency is 11.5pc.
Liberal Democrat candidate Suzanne Fletcher has welcomed news from British Rail that the Norton to Ferryhill route is to be kept open for freight traffic, but also says that an improved service is badly needed through Stockton station.
Labour  candidate Frank Cook told Mr Fowler to recognise the difficulties of thousands of pensioners and families in the constituency living below the poverty line, and to apologise to them for the agony 13 years of Tory rule has caused them.
LANGBAURGH:
Labour's Ashok Kumar meets Bill Connor, of shopworkers' union Usdaw today.
The pair will meet constituents and shopworkers during a walkabout in the Parkway Shopping Cente, Coulby Newham.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Conservative Paul Rayner has claimed 15,000 new jobs have been created on Teesside since 1984.
He said only the Tories offered hope to small businesses and attacked Labour's minimum wage policy, commenting: ‘One man's minimum wage would be another man's P45.’
LANGBAURGH:
Liberal Democrat Peter Allen says the environment is the forgotten issue of the campaign.
He accused the two main parties of paying lip service to the subject and promised his party would ‘clean up beaches and coastlines by ensuring full treatment of all sewage’.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Liberal Democrat Rosmamund Jordan says her campaign doorstepping shows increasing support for a change to a fairer voting system in Britain.
SCARBOROUGH manager Ray McHale has set out his stall for next season and plans a cautious plunge into the transfer market this summer.
With the Seasiders announcing a revolutionary offer to season ticket holders of a free season pass for 1993–94 if they fail to make a top seven placing next season, McHale knows he has to strengthen his side.
‘I want to improve the side right down the middle,’ he explained.
‘I want a good goalkeeper, a centre-back, midfielder and striker.
‘I reckon the goalkeeping position has cost us about 20 goals this year.
It's been a problem, mainly because of injuries right from the start.’
McHale is an admirer of York City's out-of-favour keeper Chris Marples and is also thought to be keen on City midfielder Sean Reid.
McHale plans to use the extra £50,000 he has been given for players' wages to good effect.
‘I want to get three or four more experienced lads in their mid-20s to help bring on the youngsters but I don't want players who are 30.’
McHale's budget boost would allow him to pay four players £400 a week, rather than £200, and he is confident of tempting better players to the McCain Stadium.
McHale is also set to release one or two more players in addition to Dave Logan, Mark Ash, Darren Foreman and Chris James, before the end of the season.
Fans may get chance to discuss the Seasiders' ambitions as chairman Geoffrey Richmond is considering holding a public forum next week.
Scarborough will meet Middlesbrough in the North Riding Senior Cup at the McCain Stadium on Thursday (7.30).
To his evident surprise, Dr Ashok Kumar has been telling us what a civilised place the House of Commons is.
‘John Major always speaks to me,’ he says.
‘I am quite shocked by it; it is so nice of him.
‘On my first day the Prime Minister shook me by the hand.
I was touched, I couldn't see Mrs Thatcher touching, shaking my hand.
‘Even Norman Lamont has been kind to me.’
Born in India, Dr Kumar was Labour's victor last November in the Langbaurgh by-election in East Cleveland ‘the by-election of the century,’ Dennis Skinner called it.
Five months ago the nation's media mounted stepladders, physically and metaphorically, to get a better look at him.
Yesterday just two local reporters were at his Press conference about low pay at a community centre in Coulby Newham, Middlesbrough.
‘It is very nice of you to come,’ he said, with a smile that rarely faded.
The reporters said it was because they were experts on low pay.
He is the most amiable of men, and perhaps among the most idealistic, qualities that were severely tested in the last week of the by-election when the Conservatives allegedly used his ethnic origins as a campaign issue.
‘Kenneth Baker came up in the House to offer congratulations.
I said ‘Thank you very much, but it was awful what you did to me in Langbaurgh’.’
It's one of only two occasions, says the 35-year-old former British Steel research officer, when he has been ‘rude’ to another MP.
‘People make an immense effort to be polite, even at question time; you would be amazed by it.
If anyone sees me looking lost they come immediately to my rescue.
‘I have loved many things about it, and certainly the Chamber.
When I went to the House I thought that Churchill had sat there, and Lloyd George and my hero Aneurin Bevan had sat there, and I felt quite humble.
‘I always say that there are two great privileges in life.
One is to be a good parent (he is neither husband nor father) and the other is to be a good representative of the people.’
Dr Kumar has also become particularly friendly with fellow scientist and ex-Middlesbrough MP Jeremy Bray, now weighing Labour votes in Motherwell South.
‘Jeremy will come over and say ‘Ashok, have you seen this equation.’
I miss my science very much, it is such a beautiful subject.’
Conspicuously active since his election six commons speeches, 60 questions, two surgeries a week he defends a 1,975 majority against the same two major party candidates.
‘John Major has put out a statement saying race wouldn't be an issue,’ he says.
‘I hope he has told the rest of the Conservative party.
So far it has not been.’
Politics has also meant little time for hobbies like reading, music, badminton and cricket.
Once a fast bowler, he suspects an appearance in the Commons cricket team may be delayed.
‘First,’ he says, ‘I want to change the world.’
Family matters:
Women's organisations in the North-East are joining forces in a seminar on the future of families.
Speakers at the seminar on Saturday will include York University Professor Jonathan Bradshaw discussing changing family patterns, and Newcastle Polytechnic senior education lecturer Dorothy Sisterson on children's rights and parental responsibility.
The event at the Quaker Meeting House, Archbold Terrace, Jesmond, has been arranged by  representatives of the Soroptomists, the UK Federation of Business and Professional Women, the National Council of Women and the British Federation of University Women.
Prize giving:
The winners of The Northern Echo Why Don't You?
Monster competition are as follows: First prize: Andrew Russell, Marwood Crescent, Darlington.
Runners up: Andrew Barraclough, Brancepeth Close, Newton Hall, Durham; Craig McCulloch, St Oswalds Walk, Newton Aycliffe; Eamonn Williams, Bradley Close, Ouston; Ian McMain, The Fairway, Darlington; Hannah Buckley, Denton Close, Darlington; Anthony Hay, Zetland Road, Hartlepool; Steven Gray, Langley Street, Langley Park; Ian Ranson, Scripton Gill, Brandon; Miss J.
Robinson, Inglewood Close, Darlington, Michael Winterbone, Blandford Street, Dean Bank, Ferryhill.
Prizes will be despatched shortly.
The winners of our Why Don't You?
Mother's Day competition are as follows: Claire Keay, Glastonbury Close, Spennymoor; Mrs V. Walker, Craddock Street, Spennymoor; Mrs J. Smith, Whitworth Terrace, Spennymoor; Andrew Bushby, Lime Road, Ferryhill; Liz Britton, Yafforth, Northallerton; Mrs M. Lee, Arkendale Street, Darlington; Miss D. Davies, Mendip Grove, Darlington; Mrs P. Testo, Ashford Avenue, Middlesbrough; Mrs C. Lowes, Carrhouse Drive, Durham City; Mrs H. Ward, Leyburn; Mrs J. Gordon, Starmer Crescent, Darlington; Miss H. Bradbury, Alderside Crescent, Lanchester.
The correct answers were: Febor, Gold Crown, Hallmark, Shampoo, Soap, March, Flowers, Paris, Sunday, Mother.
The prizes have been despatched.
Moving home:
An organisation devoted to the use of historical houses for educational purposes is leaving London and moving north.
The Heritage Education Trust, established ten years ago, is switching from St Mary's College on Strawberry Hill to Ripon  where it will move into new offices on the campus of the University College of Ripon and York St John at the beginning of September.
The Trust is funded mainly by sponsorship and a small Government grant and one its main tasks is the administration of the prestigious Sandford Award of which there are now 52 holders, including York Minster.
Each property is inspected every five years to ensure standards are maintained.
The Trust's chief executive, Martin Dyer, is also moving up from the south to Askrigg Darrowby in TV's All Creatures Great and Small.
A FORMER prisoner who suffered a form of epilepsy killed himself by lying in front of an oncoming train, an inquest jury heard.
Tony Lee, 23, a bachelor, of Northbourne Road, Stockton, was transferred from Durham jail to St Luke's Hospital, Middlesbrough, after expressing paranoid ideas and hearing voices.
The tentative diagnosis was temporal lobe epilepsy which affected his personality.
On the day of his death he had done some clearing up at the home he shared with his mother, and refused tea before going out of the house unnoticed.
His sister, Linda Lee, who called at the house, said her children were talking about someone who had been killed on the railway line.
Mrs Lee, who went to investigate, said: ‘I said it was bad news for some poor soul.
I never thought it would be me.’
Train driver Graham Lumsden, of Duke Street, Hartlepool, said he was driving the train from Port Clarence to Thornaby and was approaching the North Shore signal box, about a quarter-of-a-mile north of Stockton station, when he saw a dark-haired male dash out from some bushes and place his head on the line.
He said to his assistant ‘I don't believe it’ but by the time he had sounded the horn and applied the brakes the train had run over him.
Both his mother and sister said Mr Lee was never the same person after spending time in prison.
‘He was crying out for help but no one was listening,’ his mother said.
The jury returned a verdict that he killed himself.
Woman killed in accident
A WOMAN died in a two-car smash in County Durham yesterday.
The accident happened at Running Waters on the A181 near Durham City.
Janice Vincent, 36, of Norton, Stockton, was certified dead on arrival at Dryburn Hospital shortly after the accident at about 8.40am yesterday.
Her Vauxhall Nova was badly damaged in the smash with a Ford Fiesta driven by Susan Cawthorne, 33, of Ox Close, Washington.
She suffered a broken ankle and was also treated at Dryburn.
Police are appealing for witnesses.
Summons twist:
A county councillor facing assault charges is taking out a private summons against the man he allegedly assaulted.
Coun John Garvey's solicitors have revealed that he has issued the summons against Middlesbrough councillor Mike J Carr.
Bank pays off:
North Tees Health Authority says its nursing bank, comprising nursing staff not wishing to take on permanent jobs, proved invaluable over Christmas, when a flu epidemic hit hard.
Mercy…
: A group of prison officers are preparing for a mercy mission to Romania on Sunday.
Eight men from Deerbolt Young Offenders Institution in Barnard Castle and four from Durham prison will be transporting tonnes of emergency supplies, including hundreds of wooden crutches, to an orphanage and hospital.
Senior officer Robert Ambler said the journey to Tiju, in Romania, had taken a year to prepare and followed a successful trip by three officers.
…missions: Two more relief convoys leave Cleveland for Romania this weekend one of them carrying 4,000 pairs of shoes!
The mountain of footwear has been given to Middlesbrough-based Convoy Aid Romania by a businessman in Bristol.
Meanwhile, Cleveland Aid for Romanian Children is heading for the Iasi district of Romania on Sunday.
SCARBOROUGH:
Conservatives have set a target of £20,000 to raise for the General Election campaign.
Candidate John Sykes, seeking to succeed Sir Michael Shaw who retired after 26 years as MP, is defending a majority of just under 13,500.
NORTH DURHAM:
North Durham Conservatives have free copies of the party's manifesto in braille.
STOCKTON NORTH:
Liberal Democrat candidate Suzanne Fletcher said if her party were in power they would bring in a new type of rented housing, called partnership housing, which would cater for middle income groups wanting to rent rather than buy, built through public and private money.
STOCKTON NORTH:
Simon Fowler, Conservative candidate has expressed ‘horror’ over Labour's ‘half-baked’plans for a regional assembly in the North-East which he claims would strip people of the proposed single-tier authorities.
LANGBAURGH:
Labour candidate Ashok Kumar claims he has the shopworkers' support for his party's minimum wage policy.
Dr Kumar said he had found almost every shopworker he had spoken to in Langbaurgh was earning less than Labour's intended minimum of £3.40 per hour.
He denied that introducing the measure would mean massive job losses and was backed by shopworkers' union boss Bill Connor.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Liberal Democrat candidate Rosamund Jordan has again fallen foul of car crime.
The special project teacher, who had her car burned out in January, had a window smashed while canvassing in East Middlesbrough.
She said a tiny minority were making life miserable for the majority and said it was time to tackle the root causes of crime.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Multi-racial Abingon Road School won praise from Conservative candidate Paul Rayner during a visit yesterday.
He said the school which has 70pc of ethnic minority pupils provided a first-class educational establishment in an ‘inner-city’ area.
Tonight, Mr Rayner holds a meeting at Mill Hill School, Green Lane, Acklam, at 7.30pm.
THE 7,000 poll tax defaulters in Darlington should be taken to court in a bid to stop the cash being collected from those who have already paid, it was urged yesterday.
Michael Fallon, who is defending Darlington for the Tories, has hit out at the surcharge of £19 on poll tax bills which have already gone out.
‘Parliament has given Darlington Council all the powers it needs to get on and prosecute those who refuse to pay,’ said Mr Fallon.
‘Yet people are still being asked to subsidise the non-payers.
The surcharge should be coming down not going up.
‘There are many people who don't like the poll tax but they obey the law and pay it.
It's those who can afford to pay but refuse to do so who are making everybody else pay more.
‘The biggest single item people are discussing on the doorsteps is the poll tax.
It should be easy to chase these people up.
Darlington doesn't have a particularly mobile population.’
He said almost half of Darlington's homes would be on the lowest band and 60pc will be on the bottom two bands when the council tax is introduced.
‘The average couple will pay £200 less than the poll tax,’ he said.
But yesterday Labour candidate Alan Milburn said: ‘It wasn't Darlington Council who imposed the poll tax on the town or who kept it for a year longer than necessary.
‘The poll tax is the Tory tax which Darlington Council has done everything to collect, including calling the bailiffs in.’
Yesterday several North-East councils said the number of electors has risen despite voters trying to avoid paying the poll tax.
Combined Newcastle constituencies have seen a 0.5pc increase in voters.
In Darlington, York, Durham and Middlesbrough the number of voters is marginally higher.
Council staff say that although there has been a general increase in nonpayment in the region most non-payers are on the electoral roll.
THE church can pay to repair its own crumbling towers, Middlesbrough councillors have decided.
They refused a request for a £5,000 grant to repair the 70ft church tower in North Ormesby.
Peter Jackson, Conservative group leader, said Middlesbrough poll tax payers should not be baling out the church.
‘The church has huge amounts of money and is far better-placed to fund these things than us,’ he claimed.
‘If they are unwilling to dip into their pockets, I have no sympathy.
‘If they are unable, the decision might have to be re-considered.’
The Rev Donald Trotter of The Holy Trinity Parish Church in North Ormesby, said the council's decision was a huge blow.
‘I'm very disappointed.
We needed and expected that money.
Don't they want to help preserve one of the best-known landmarks in the town?’ he said.
Mr Trotter said he had approached various church funds without success.
He claimed repair works were urgent and said that although the public had responded magnificently, councils and businesses had not followed suit, with the exception of ICI which had given £500.
Safety career:
George Blackett, who has been looking after the safety of council workers and buildings in Middlesbrough since 1974, is retiring through ill health.
George, 58, who lives in Billingham, at times had responsibility for 132 different premises and up to 2,500 employees.
MIDDLESBROUGH council formally approved spending £50,000 to develop a health suite at the town's Southlands Leisure Centre, despite objections from minority party members.
The cost of the work, including structural and minor alterations, will come out of council balances on the basis that the money will be paid back as the scheme goes ahead.
Tory leader Coun Peter Jackson said he had expressed doubts about the scheme's viability, and details on estimated income and expenditure which he had asked for had not been produced.
‘All we have been told is that there will be a profit of £7,000-a-year but similar facilities in the North-East are running at a loss.’
He said he could see no reason why the council should finance the scheme.
‘At the best it is dubious and at worst it could be costing us a lot of money.’
Coun Mike Carr, the council leader, said the leisure services committee had approved the proposal in principle and the policy and resources committee had agreed to finance it.
He said it was a matter of accepting it as a capital project but he would see that Coun Jackson received the information he had requested.
STOCKTON NORTH:
Liberal Democrat candidate Suzanne Fletcher said if her party were in power they would bring in a new type of rented housing, called partnership housing, which would cater for middle income groups wanting to rent rather than buy, built through public and private money.
STOCKTON NORTH:
Simon Fowler, Conservative candidate has expressed ‘horror’ over Labour's ‘half-baked’plans for a regional assembly in the North-East which he claims would strip people of the proposed single-tier authorities.
LANGBAURGH:
Labour candidate Ashok Kumar claims he has the shopworkers' support for his party's minimum wage policy.
Dr Kumar said he had found almost every shopworker he had spoken to in Langbaurgh was earning less than Labour's intended minimum of £3.40 per hour.
He denied that introducing the measure would mean massive job losses and was backed by shopworkers' union boss Bill Connor.
LANGBAURGH:
Labour's challenger for the Langbaurgh constituency, Ashok Kumar, will be visiting Cleveland Police headquarters in Ladgate Lane, Middlesbrough, today, to meet local representatives of the police force trade union, the Police Federation.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Liberal Democrat candidate Rosamund Jordan has again fallen foul of car crime.
The special project teacher, who had her car burned out in January, had a window smashed while canvassing in East Middlesbrough.
She said a tiny minority were making life miserable for the majority and said it was time to tackle the root causes of crime.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Multi-racial Abingon Road School won praise from Conservative candidate Paul Rayner during a visit yesterday.
He said the school which has 70pc of ethnic minority pupils provided a first-class educational establishment in an ‘inner-city’ area.
Tonight, Mr Rayner holds a meeting at Mill Hill School, Green Lane, Acklam, at 7.30pm.
A DAIRY has launched a £1.5m campaign to halt a decline in doorstep milk deliveries.
Wakefield-based Dale Farm Dairy, which has customers from Northampton to Middlesbrough, has a poster and radio campaign with the slogan ‘So you think that's fresh’.
Spokesman Tim Roberts said in the past decade doorstep sales had declined, mainly due to supermarkets.
‘The main points of the campaign are freshness and convenience.
There are a lot of older people who can't carry back big bottles.’
A POLICEMAN resorted to using his truncheon in a bid to restrain a man he had arrested, Teesside Crown Court heard yesterday.
Gary Kelly was arrested by PC Tim Brown who thought he was fighting with a group of girls, the court was told.
Kelly, 24, of Coledale Road, Berwick Hills, Middlesbrough, was fined £250 after admitting assaulting PC Brown, occasioning him actual bodily harm, outside Middlesbrough Town Hall.
Charles Foster, prosecuting, said the officer  arrested Kelly for a breach of the peace after he struggled with him and pushed the officer away.
PC Brown struck him on the head with his truncheon in a bid to restrain him.
Kelly needed five stitches in his head as a result and was kept in hospital for three days.
Sean Dodds, for Kelly, said he was out with his girlfriend for the first time since the birth of their baby.
As she got a taxi three other women tried to get in as well and a row ensued.
College stylists sweep awards
HAIR stylists training at Kirby College, Middlesbrough, took the top awards in the North of England Hairdressing Championships, held at Newcastle.
Alison Kirton, of Cunningham Drive, Thornaby, won first prize in the styling competition, while Sarah Bone, of Weaver Close, Ingleby Barwick, Thornaby, gained third place in the fantasy-style section.
The 18-year-olds are both attending the optional competition class at the college.
Tutor Julie Burbidge said: ‘We always have plenty of students wanting to join the course which, this term, is over-subscribed.’
Benefit help:
A leaflet explaining how disabled people may qualify for the new disability living allowance, which came into effect on Monday, has been produced by Stockton Borough Council for distribution to 75,000 households.
Advice on how to fill in claim forms can be obtained from Stockton District Citizens Advice Bureau.
Car fire:
Firemen were called to Old Cemetery Road in Hartlepool shortly before midnight on Tuesday to put out a blazing car.
The vehicle was totally destroyed.
Conmen alert:
Detectives in Hartlepool have issued a warning after a 73-year-old woman was visited twice in two days by bogus charity workers.
The incidents happened in the Owton Manor area.
Hospice care:
A £1.8 million campaign is to be launched by Teesside Hospice Care Foundation to build a ten-bed unit for the  terminally ill in Middlesbrough.
Centre open:
Killhope Leadming Centre in Upper Weardale opened to the public for the 1992 tourist season yesterday.
The centre, billed as Britain's highest tourist  attraction , is open only to youth groups and schools during the Winter.
Candidate's visit: Labour candidate for the Bishop Auckland seat Derek Foster met people in Toft Hill yesterday who are campaigning to establish a new nursery in the village school.
New agency:
Schools minister Michael Fallon yesterday launched the teachers' pensions agency at Darlington College of Technology.
The agency is the first of its kind in the Department of Education and Science.
Fire probe:
Police investigating the cause of a suspicious house fire in which a 33-year-old man died said yesterday (Wed) they were not looking for anyone else in connection with the incident.
Stephen Howe, 33, of Hillside Crescent, Newcastle, was dead on arrival at hospital.
Robbery charge:
A chef was yesterday charged with robbing two sixth formers from the £8,000 a year Bootham School in York of their phone cards.
At York Crown Court, Robert Buchan, 26, of no fixed abode, denied the offence.
He was remanded in custody.
Death appeal:
Police are appealing for relatives of an 84-year-old man to come forward after he collapsed an died in Middlesbrough town centre yesterday.
Robert Kirkbride, of Waterloo Road, was pronounced dead on arrival at Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Two injured:
Two people suffered chest injuries in a two-car smash at the junction of Boroughbridge Road and Carr Lane, York at about 6.35pm yesterday.
The man and woman were treated at York District Hospital.
Housing plan:
Gateshead council's housing programme for the next 12 months includes more than £2m for repairs and painting work.
Man charged with murder
JOBLESS driver David Alexander Smith, 35, of Hampton Middlesex was remanded in custody by Ealing magistrates yesterday charged with the murder of double life girl Sarah Crump.
Sarah, whose mother lives in Middlesbrough, was found dead in her flat in Southall, London, la st August.
She was discovered to be a nurse by day and an escort girl by night.
Teachers' pensions: Schools minister Michael Fallon yesterday launched the teachers' pensions agency at Darlington College of Technology.
Roof tragedy:
George Alan Miller, 66, of Seafield Avenue, Osgodby, Scarborough collapsed and died while repairing the roof of his house.
Weather victim:
Caroline Tarn, 26, of Middleton-in-Teesdale, was last night comfortable in Darlington Memorial Hospital after her car was in collision with a van during a snowstorm in Teesdale yesterday.
On bail:
Businessman Ian Frederick Thompson, 38, of Wallnook Court, Wallnook Lane, Langley Park, Durham, was remanded on bail by magistrates in Lytham, Lancashire, yesterday on two forgery charges involving a total of £20,000.
Friendly farming:
Simon Howard of the Castle Howard estate and Nick Botterell, of the Co-operative Wholesale Society were presented with Partners in Conservation certificates yesterday to mark the estate's conservation commitment.
A FAMILY were terrified when the estranged husband of their neighbour burst into their home wielding a knife.
Kenneth Fulcher demanded to know where his wife was and confronted Kevin Leonard on the stairs of his home.
Fulcher lunged at Mr Leonard who pushed him into a bedroom and then took the knife from him.
Yesterday Fulcher, 28, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted affray.
Judge William Hannah sentenced him to three months imprisonment suspended for 12 months.
He ordered Fulcher to pay £100 compensation and £100 costs.
Charles Forster, prosecuting, said when Fulcher had gone to his wife's home in Berwick Hills Avenue, Middlesbrough, he was ‘on bail following an almost identical incident in August last year.’
Nadim Bashir, defending, said Fulcher, of Spencerfield Crescent, Thorntree, Middlesbrough, now accepted his marriage was over but at the time of the incident there were problems over access to their children.
Mr Bashir said: ‘These were two very desperate attempts to save his long marriage and long relationship.’
Bedsit tenants flee as fire breaks out
TENANTS were evacuated when fire broke out in a block of Stockton flats.
The fire started in the fuse box of a house divided into bedsits in Hartington Road.
While the fire was small it filled the groundfloor of the building with smoke, which had started to take a hold of the first floor when Cleveland Fire Brigade arrived.
The cause has been described as an electrical fault.
Tidy team:
Langbaurgh's cleansing squads in their new uniforms will have a group of young overseers on their rounds today.
Pupils from Redcar's Zetland Primary School have been invited to join them as part of the launch of the Tidy Britain Group's National Spring Clean ‘92 Campaign within Langbaurgh.
Accident probe:
An investigation has been launched by police and Hartlepool Transport chiefs after David Lancaster, a pupil at the town's Grange Junior School, suffered head and arm injuries in an accident involving a bus in Catcote Road.
He is being treated in Middlesbrough General Hospital for a dislocated jaw.
House raids:
Detectives in Hartlepool are investigating break-ins at houses in St Abb's Walk and West View Road in which electrical goods and cash were stolen.
Anyone with information can contact the police on .
Not so new:
A competition to find a new name for the former Tap and Spile pub in Hartlepool has been settled.
However, the name isn't very new it is reverting back to its old name, The Causeway.
Man on probation for baby assault
STEWART McCutcheon, 23, of Oxford Terrace, Bishop Auckland, was put on probation for two years yesterday after he admitted assaulting a 21-month-old baby in his care, causing actual bodily harm.
Tim Parkin, prosecuting, told Durham Crown Court that the child had bruising to both ears and bruising in the shape of a hand on the side of the head.
McCutcheon was also ordered to pay court costs of £420.
‘Benefit of doubt’: A man who denied illegally overtaking on the A66 trans-Pennine route was yesterday given the ‘benefit of the doubt’ by Barnard Castle magistrates and found not guilty of the charge.
Adrian Scott Moses, 32, of Acklam, Middlesbrough, said he had manoeuvred past a lorry turning off the road and had not passed two cars as alleged by police.
Overtaking fine:
David Alan Davies, 40, of Grantham, was fined £100 for illegally overtaking a car on the A66 trans-Pennine route.
He pleaded guilty to Barnard Castle magistrates by letter.
Arrest warrant:
Barnard Castle magistrates have issued a warrant for the arrest of Terence John Gill, 36, of Bridgeford, Notts.
He failed to appear in court to face four charges of theft.
Kitchen break-in:
Thieves have broken into the kitchens at King James I Comprehensive School in Bishop Auckland, police said.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Liberal Democrat Rosamund Jordan admitted yesterday she was a bit bored with the election campaign.
‘I have spent time in Greece and Malta during those countries’ General Elections and found the electorate involved themselves much more in the campaigns and really enjoyed the experience,’she said.
Mrs Jordan has organised two public hustings to try and meet more of the electorate on Sunday at 1.30pm and Monday, 7.30pm, at the St Mary's Centre, Corporation Road, Middlesbrough.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Labour's proposed tax regime would be a ‘disaster for middle management’, said Tory candidate Paul Rayner.
‘Many would be tempted to emigrate,’ he told a public meeting.
Mr Rayner also attacked Cleveland County Council's plans for a light rail transit system and said Middlesbrough Borough Council had made little or no provision for cyclists.
LANGBAURGH:
Labour contender Ashok Kumar has expressed support for a junior doctors' campaign for shorter working hours.
He accused the Government of dragging its feet on reducing hours and added: ‘This is an unjust and unsafe system.
We want junior doctors to train, not to sleepwalk.
REDCAR:
Conservative Robert Goodwill claims Labour's minimum wage policy has not been thought through properly and that it would ‘cause inflation to let rip again’.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
Liberal Democrat Kay Kirkham has called for the cancellation of an additional sum on Stockton community charges payers' charges for this year, to cover non payers, saying the next government should offer an interest-free loan to the council instead, to be paid off as soon as the council collects overdue payments.
RECESSION, what's that?
Peter Dalrymple, secretary of the Middlesbrough Buffs Club wants to know.
‘This club is absolutely booming’ he explained.
‘Takings are up on last year and we haven't had a price rise in over twelve months.’
‘When the brewers put up beer prices last July we decided to peg our prices.
It is quite normal to pay out bonus tickets in December which costs us over £30,000 but the committee felt members would rather have the benefit over 52 weeks so the bonus system was abandoned to cover the cost.’
The 3,500 member club still attracts full houses in it's concert room six nights a week and provides a wide variety of entertainment including dancing and discos, country and western and top bands.
‘If you're not in by half past seven on a Sunday night you've no chance of getting a seat,’ a regular member told me.
Full time secretary Peter, who won the Club Mirror Manager of the Year award last year, is backed by an energetic and enthusiastic management committee headed by president Ted Harker.
Retired joiner Ted is not just a figurehead, as many presidents are he plays an active part in the running of the club and was recently honoured by the CIU and the club for completing 25 years in the post.
The Buffs is well-known for it's work for charity and on Easter Monday all proceeds from a lunchtime ‘bandbox’ and evening show featuring Lee and Marie and Feelings will boost an appeal for the North Riding Infirmary.
The irrepressible Kay Ward, famous for her naughty jokes and amazing vocal talents has a new alternative show for those of stronger morals, and guess what? no saucy comments, just sensational singing from Kay in her new, smut-free role.
However, don't despair, Big Bang fans, show is still the same so don't take Granny to see it unless she's wearing shatter-proof ear muffs.
Kay Ward's Big Bang can be seen at Woodham Equestrian Centre on Saturday april 4 when the ladies of the North-East also say au revoir to the hunky Men of America.
The Big Bang Show will also be appearing at Darlington's ASE Club on Sunday April 5.
No dates have yet been fixed for the new clean show could it be that no one wants to hear it?!
DURHAM branch CIU president George Lawson presented certificates of merit to four members of the management committee at Glendale Social Club, Houghton le Spring treasurer David Gibson and committeemen John Blakey, William Robson and Micahel Tolan.
MORE money is spent on repairing vandalised schools than on books, it has been revealed.
Pupils are losing out as the cost of arson attacks on schools has doubled from £60m to £120m.
And the North-East is one of the worst areas affected.
National figures released by the Municipal Mutual Insurance company show that just £1.50 is spent per head each year on books for schoolchildren while £13.47 is spent on repairs.
The North-East is one of the worst areas, with more insurance claims over £100,000.
Noel Hulse, a National Union of Teachers spokesman, said: ‘It is a pity that resources are being wasted on repairing schools when they could be used for books.
This is money that could be used elsewhere.
‘It is also very demoralising for teachers and pupils whose teaching is affected by arson attacks.’
Mr Hulse said schools were easy targets for vandals and arsonists but it was difficult and expensive to monitor attacks.
‘Under local management many schools cannot afford their own security system,’ he said.
A national survey has shown one in 15 schools can expect some sort of fire.
Insurers say the only way to prevent attacks is to make schools totally vandal and arson proof.
Some schools are being encouraged to hire private security guards.
David Forster, a marketing manager with Municipal Mutual Insurance, said: ‘We have got a disaster here on our hands.
It is getting out of control.
If we don't do something about it, the problem is just going to continue spiralling.
‘Security in some schools has to be 24 hours a day to keep kids out and stop them burning them down.’
Over the last year thousands of pounds worth of damage has been caused to schools in the region.
These include: £70,000 at Northlea Comprehensive, Seaham; £50,000 at Hustler School, Acklam, Middlesbrough; £15,000 at Stephenson Way Junior and Infant School, Newton Aycliffe; £800,000 at Greengate Prmary School, Redcar and £80,000 at Newtown Junior School, Stockton.
ANIMAL WELFARE:
For generations my family have been staunch Conservatives, but I am afraid my immediate family will no longer support a Government which cares little about animal welfare.
First, the dog registration scheme was turned down and dog problems continue to increase.
Next the Pig Husbandry Bill outlawing tethered sows was hardly touched, followed by the Badger Sett Protection Bill which the pro-hunting lobby objected to.
Last but not least Kevin McNamara's Wild (Mammals) Animal Protection Bill was not supported by many leading Conservatives.
North West Durham Conservatives are now represented by Theresa May who states: ‘The Conservative Parliamentary candidate for North West Durham is a member of the British Field Sports Society and supports fox hunting and other field sports.’
No way could I ever vote for a person who approved of cruelty to animals and I would urge anyone who cares anything about animals to cast their vote elsewhere.
I am disappointed, but in my experience and opinion people who care for animals care about people also and should be supported.
So I will be voting for a party whose manifesto puts animal welfare high on its agenda.
Marjorie Embling, Rennie Close Farm, Westgate, Weardale.‘
FAIR’ TAX:
As a retired person living alone and needing to plan ahead, I need to know what the parties' plans are on local taxation.
When the community charge arrived I was about to retire.
It enabled me to stay in my home of 30 years rather than move to a property with cheaper rates.
I have many friends in the same position, but one hardly dare voice the opinion that the community charge has some fairness built into it.
I have been a lifelong Labour supporter, but I have to say that under the present Government I was able to save in my last years at work without seeing my savings disappear in inflation.
After retirement they were not milked by the heavy rates previously levied by the high spending Cleveland County Council.
Unless I hear something from a Labour spokesman to suggest they have reasonable plans for single householders, I think many people will be deserting and voting Conservative.
J. Pountain, 3 Wheatley Close, Middlesbrough.
SWITCHING SUPPORT:
The Tory tactic of trying to scare those they claim to be dissenters from switching to another party is laughable.
In fact, traditional Tory support is holding.
The truth is those who are supposedly dissenting are not traditional Tory followers.
Twenty years ago they were Labour but switched in 1979 for one reasons, the right to buy which gave those genuinely attempting to better themselves the chance to do so.
They were also dismayed that the popular Labour Party of the sixties had been hijacked by the greedy unions.
So in the Eighties voting patterns changed decisively.
However, people have since realised they have been lured into a debt trap aimed at bringing the working class to heel, with unemployment the main weapon.
Voters do not want to see the Tories achieve their ultimate goal the destruction of the NHS, the welfare state and a return to Victorian-style society.
Jeff Storey, 11 Marine Crescent, Blackhall Rocks.
FACE TO FACE:
We have to have a General Election to see which party is going to make another mess of the country.
But why do I have to put up with election leaflets coming through my letter box at 6.30am?
Haven't these candidates got the guts to face up to the voters who elect them to Parliament and spare us a few minutes of their time.
After all, it is the voter that counts.
So please show your face or is this asking too much?
After all, I make the effort to cast my vote and those few minutes are very important to me.
A. Allen, 37 Caravan Park, Reeth Road, Richmond.
STOP ‘EXTREMISM’:
So Mrs T is back (Echo March 23).
Let's see.
in 1979 she increased VAT from 8pc to 15pc and was in the political doldrums until a torpedo sunk the Belgrano, then lots of flag-waving and bingo another election victory.
Then she had an obsession with changing the political map in the guise of union bashing, she also smashed the engineering industry, especially in the North.
Lately, there have been a few million unemployed, massive recession and a resulting rise in crime.
And VAT up to 17.5pc.
We need electoral reform so that a minority government with a 100seat advantage cannot implement the extremist policies of the Eighties again.
M. Atkinson, 3 Lindisfarne, Shincliffe, Durham.
A TEENAGER was robbed of his coat and jumper as he walked home from a pub, a court was told yesterday.
Andrew Garthwaite had been playing pool with his attacker and thought at first it was a joke.
But when he turned round he saw Dean Simpson was holding a stanley knife.
Yesterday, Simpson, 23, of Boscombe Gardens, Hemlington, Middlesbrough, was jailed for three years at Teesside Crown Court after admitting robbery.
Robert Moore, prosecuting, said Mr Garthwaite, 17, had been playing pool with Simpson in the Linthorpe Pub in Middlesbrough.
After closing time he was walking home with a friend when he felt an arm round his neck and was confronted by Simpson, who wielded the knife and demanded he hand over his jumper and coat.
TWO men decided to stage a burglary at their home so they could sell a hired television and video recorder, a court heard.
But as one called the police to report the alleged burglary another was caught carrying the equipment down the street.
Yesterday Paul Roche, 23, and Martin Solomon, 18, of Berner Street, Middlesbrough, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted theft.
Both were placed on probation for 18 months and Roche, of Lovaine Street, Middlesbrough, was ordered to pay £75 costs.
Rodney Jameson, prosecuting, said the two men were living in a house in Crescent Road, Middlesbrough, which was owned by a woman who had rented the television set and video recorder.
After she went out one afternoon they decided to steal the equipment and had arranged a buyer for it for £130.
Mum ‘thought she was fat’
A WOMAN who had the slimmers' disease anorexia nervosa died thinking she was fat.
Tragic mother of two Olive Green, 55, forever told her family and friends: ‘Look how fat I am,’ an inquest at Middlesbrough heard.
Mrs Green of Buttsfield Way, Billingham, died after a heart attack on January 11.
Pathologist Dr Krzysztos Karczenski said he found her body ‘terribly wasted and dehydrated.’
Coroner Mr Michael Sheffield recorded a verdict of death from natural causes ‘aggravated by self-neglect’.
Police appeal:
Police have appealed for help in tracing the last movements of Anthony Buck, 46, of Bishopthorpe Road, York, whose body was discovered in the River Ouse at Selby on Wednesday evening.
Anyone with information should contact Selby coroner's officer, PC Mark Whitehouse, on .
Family affair:
It's a family affair for a father and daughter whose art exhibition opens in Stockton today.
Etchings by Roy Hildon and ceramics by daughter Jane are on show at the Central Library until May 1.
Star date:
The North-East branch of Star Trek fan club Star Fleet Command meet at Newcastle Central Library, Princess Square, between 12.30pm and 5pm today.
For more details call Sue on .
Shop raid:
Two youths escaped with several hundred pounds after attacking a 29-year-old shopkeeper in Tyne View, Lemington, near Newcastle.
Conmen warning:
Two men posing as electricity board workmen escaped with £700 after tricking their way into the home of a 78-year-old woman at Greenside, near Gateshead.
Cabbie robbed:
A taxi driver was attacked and robbed of £35 by two men as he left his office in Coperative Terrace, Backworth, North Tyneside, early yesterday.
Mill blaze:
A welding torch yesterday started a fire at a North Yorkshire corn mill.
About 15 firefighters tackled the blaze in a silo at I'Anson's mill in Masham in the Dales.
Safe raid:
Raiders got away with more than £600 after using cutting equipment to open a safe at the Leeds Permanent Building Society in Whitby.
Cutbacks ‘threat to council trainees’
TRAINEES on Cleveland County Council schemes could suffer because of Government cutbacks, it was claimed yesterday.
Council leader Paul Harford said it would be a ‘tragedy’ if reduced funding from Teesside Training and Enterprise Council affected three training workshops.
‘These are vital training opportunities many of them for the most disadvantaged young people,’ he added.
Coun Harford said the multi-purpose workshop in Queen's Square, Middlesbrough, could be worst hit, while centres at Kirkleatham and Dormanstown might also be affected.
Blooming clean:
Saltburn is getting a spring clean this weekend to be spic and span for Northumbria in Bloom judging on Monday.
A parking ban, except for weddings and funerals, is to be imposed in front of Guisborough Parish Church.
Ironing day:
A sponsored ironing day with a team from local churches including Canon Eric Hoskins of Easington, has been organised by Loftus and District Christian Aid Committee for April 28 in the United Reformed Church in Loftus.
Bike day:
Langbaurgh's mountain bike series concludes in Guisborough Woods on tomorrow with registration from 8.30am on the day.
Public meeting:
The Cleveland branch of the Cystic Fibrosis Trust holds a public meeting on Wednesday at the Hospitality Inn, Fry Street, Middlesbrough.
Token prize:
Jamie Brown and Richard Stow, students at St Mary's Sixth Form College in Middlesbrough, have collected book tokens from TV naturalist David Attenborough in London.
The pair impressed at the British Association Science Fair with their geology project.
Visitor guide:
Middlesbrough Council has launched its 1992 Visitor Guide, with the slogan, Middlesbrough In The Tees Valley: Gateway To Captain Cook Country.
Credit talk:
Fancy setting up a credit union or finding out a bit more about how one works?
Then get along to the Cleveland Centre in Middlesbrough today.
People with direct experience of running the savings clubs will be on hand to answer any questions.
Builders' guide:
Stockton Borough Council has produced a handbook explaining building control regulations and process, and is issuing completion certificates for work which meets council satisfaction.
Trip to Hell:
Train enthusiast David Scott who lives in Seaton Carew, near Hartlepool, is preparing for a special journey…to Hell and back.
He has booked his ticket to visit the Arctic Circle destination.
School meals:
High Tunstall Comprehensive School in Hartlepool became a cordon bleu restaurant for the day when chefs from The Hospitality Inn in Middlesbrough prepared a menu of haute cuisine as part of a home economics course.
Romainia aid:
Pupils at Grange Primary School in Hartlepool have collected a huge amount of toothbrushes and toothpaste for an orphanage in Romania.
They also intend to send soaps, sponges, colouring books, crayons and jigsaws.
Animal prize:
Billingham campus school has been awarded the Frank Cook Award for outstanding achievements and concern for animal welfare.
Digging in:
Wildlife expert Oliver Sherratt is to spearhead a Cleveland County Council task force charged with stabilising sand dunes at Hart Warren, Hartlepool, and creating wetlands by the River Tees at Thornaby.
Weir survey:
A series of weirs could be the answer to the long-term problem of Guisborough's dirty Chapel Beck, according to Langbaurgh's chief engineer Keith Brown.
A survey is to be carried out with riparian owners contributing to the £500 cost.
Civic takeover:
Townspeople who form the Loftus Development Trust under the chairmanship of Barbara Welford have now taken over the work of the Civic Trust Project.
Middlesbrough 1 Watford 2 MIDDLESBROUGH lost ground in the Second Division promotion race with a performance against that lacked passion and commitment.
A lifeless performance left manager Lennie Lawrence wondering whether his players are suffering battle fatigue after a hectic cup-and-league programme.
Lawrence said: ‘There is no point in shouting and screaming.
Some of the lads have played 50 games already.
Most of them will have to play in our remaining games.
‘We have lost two League games in succession for the first time since August.
We have to wipe the slate clean and start all over again.
‘I have to lift the players mentally and physically for games at Bristol City and Tranmere Rovers.
‘We must get back to a rigid pattern, with players in the right holes.
With players in the wrong holes, Watford played through us, round us, and over us.
‘We lost our shape and we suffered.
I just hope it is a one-off, because there is no time to rest players.
‘We looked so jaded against Watford.
I don't know whether it was mental or pyschological, but Watford should not have caused the problems they did.
‘If we win four of our nine games we should get into the play-offs.’
Lawrence will make changes in personnel and tactics at Bristol tomorrow night.
Jimmy Phillips has been sorely missed through suspension and will make a welcome return at left back.
His recall will allow Willie Falconer to switch to his more natural position of midfield.
Jon Gittens looks set to return to the heart of defence after five stitches in Nicky Mohan's injured foot.
Lawrence said the priority at Bristol was not to lose.
Middlesbrough have blown their championship chance with two defeats in four days.
The best they can hope for is the No.2 spot or the play-offs.
No excuses were offered for a lacklustre performance on Saturday.
Leading scorer Paul Wilkinson struck his 20th goal of the season against his former club but looked glum as he left the dressing room.
Wilkinson said: ‘It was very disappointing.
We won't get into the playoffs if we play like that.’
‘It is important for us to pick up something on our visits to Bristol and Tranmere.’
Middlesbrough lacked the understanding and urgency of Watford.
They played as individuals, poor individuals at that.
With the stakes so high, the lack of atmosphere was quite remarkable.
Middlesbrough, fortunate to be level at half-time, went a goal down immediately after the break.
Jason Drysdale, the son of a former Hartlepool United defender, caught out Middlesbrough with a superb free-kick for David Holdsworth to score.
Middlesbrough immediately hit back.
When David James made a point-blank save from Bernie Slaven, the Republic of Ireland international slipped the rebound to Wilkinson who scored from close range.
Watford looked more dangerous though and no-one could dispute they deserved a matchwinning goal.
Jason Soloman went past three players before shooting for goal.
Stephen Pears made a fine save but could only palm the ball into the path of Steve Butler.
Butler's shot into an empty net was consolation for an earlier effort that struck the bar.
Middlesbrough failed to raise their game.
No individual could spark off a revival.
Jamie Pollock came close to a late equaliser only to be denied with a brilliant save by James.
James showed the class that won him PFA recognition, even though Boro fans may rate Pears the No.1 goalkeeper.
A WOMAN waiting for surgery has reacted angrily to figures showing a massive reduction in the number of people waiting more than two years for hospital treatment.
Marjorie Thomas, 35, who has been waiting since August 1989 for surgery on an eye condition, said the claims are no consolation.
Her hopes were raised in January when she received a letter from Hartlepool General Hospital offering the chance of an operation at Middlesbrough General within a fortnight.
She accepted but has heard nothing since.
She decided to speak out after recent figures released by the Department of Health showed that the number of people waiting over two years for treatment in the Nothern Region had dropped from 1,474 at the end of March 1991 to just one now.
Mrs Thomas, of Milbank Terrace in Station Town, near Peterlee, said: ‘To me it is a load of rubbish.
They are taking them from one list and putting them on another.’
Her condition, which is related to her cholesterol level means she has a white dot on each eyelid.
The operation is routine.
She said: ‘It is a local anaesthetic and you are in and out in the same day.’
She said it was time something was done.
‘You can see the dots a mile off.’
No one was available for comment at Hartlepool General Hospital yesterday.
A YOUNG man was on a life support machine last night after being attacked out of the blue in a town centre.
Michael Gibson and his younger brother David were walking along High Row, Darlington, at 10.15pm on Friday when they were approached by three youths.
Michael, who had been looking forward to his 21st birthday celebration next month and planned to become engaged later this year, was attacked.
As shocked on-lookers stood by, the youth was beaten to the ground.
David was also approached by a second man but was not assaulted.
Michael was saved from choking to death by David, who reached inside his mouth to move his tongue.
Three girls rushed up to help and call for an ambulance.
Michael was taken to Darlington's Memorial hospital with serious head injuries and later transferred to the intensive care unit at Middlesbrough general, where he is on a life support machine.
A spokesman described his condition as ‘critical’ last night following an emergency operation.
Fighting back the tears, Michael's mother Pat Gibson said: ‘My son was quiet and shy.
He never harmed anyone.’
Mrs Gibson, who lives with her sons in Moffatt Close, Darlington, is maintaining a vigil by her son's bedside.
His father, who works in Oman, was planning to catch the first flight home.
She said: ‘The whole family are hoping and praying for Michael.
Everyone has been excellent during this nightmare.’
Detectives investigating the assault have been shocked by the attack.
A local man who has been charged with grievous bodily harm will face further questioning today before he appears before magistrates.
Senior officers say more serious charges could follow.
Hospice boost:
Thames Television has donated £1,000 to York's St Leonard's Hospice after mistakenly describing a burning portable building as a trademark registered Portakabin during an episode of The Bill.
Portakabins are made of steel and do not burn.
Fraud charges:
Businessman Keith Skelton, 47, of The Crescent, Nunthorpe, was given conditional bail by Scarborough magistrates at the weekend accused of obtaining £44,000 by deception.
Tracer Family tree:
Margaret Evans would like information on the children of Jim and Margaret Kearton (nee Jones) of Wolsingham Terrace, Darlington.
Jim Kearton Jr had a son, Stanley, and has moved away from Darlington.
Jim's sisters are Sarah Knaggs, who moved to Skelton, and Lizzie Ann Hillary, who may still live in Darlington.
Mrs Evans can be contacted at Cobwebs, The Willow Chase, Longnewton, Cleveland, TS21 1PD.
Middlesbrough (0642) 581404.
IF Little Nemo in Slumberland ever met Tank Girl he would wake up with a start and ensure he never perchanced to dream again.
He could hardly be blamed.
The pair, not to mention in between the great Wilson of the Wizard and Alf Tuppe, represent the progress which has been made in comics this century.
Little Nemo was a little boy with a sweeping imagination, Tank Girl is a big girl steeped in harsh reality.
Something ill was always about to befall Little Nemo when he was doing the rounds 85 years ago.
He always escaped because the dream ended in the last frame.
Tank Girl has no time for fantastic dreams, drinking, as she does, beer from bottles labelled Git This Down Ya Neck.
They are both there in Middlesbrough at present, the one charming and the other charmless.
Little Nemo was from another world when comics were gentle, escapist entertainment.
Tank Girl is of the Nineties when there is a message to put across from the bleak streets out there.
Gentility and entertainment have nothing to do with it.
Whatever your view on these matters (and from this corner an interest must be declared in Wilson, Tupper, Roy of the Rovers and Dan Dare in that order) they probably both have a place.
The aim of Strip Search is to demonstrate this.
From Nemo through Krazy Kat, Dare, The Fantastic Four, The Bash Street Kids, If to Luther Arkwright, Swamp Thing and Trypto the Acid Dog it goes, the images getting more bizarre with the years, not to mention gloomier.
‘I think we want to show that comics are an extremely accessible art form,’ said Jane Warrilow, exhibitions officer at the Cleveland Gallery where Strip Search is till May.
‘Comic strips today make serious and political points.’
It may seem something of a paradox that comics should take themselves seriously, but there you have it.
In no strip is this more obvious than in Troubled Souls.
This is set in Ulster and sets out to depict ordinary people getting on with their lives.
The bombs, guns and paras are there but it avoids stereotypes, reminding us that most of the people in Belfast simply want no truck with the war.
It does not make for your typical comic fare.
Or maybe in 1992 it does.
There are other strips full of angst, of the search for self knowledge, if not for the meaning of life.
There are not many jokes.
It was a touch disappointing to find that the great Wilson of the Wizard was not there.
Wilson used to train in the mountains and emerge in the nick of time to perform his prodigious exploits.
He was great, maybe the greatest.
He could run and climb, throw and catch, bowl and bat, jump and kick.
Nothing was beyond him.
There was an element of mysticism about him too.
He was not just of the Wizard, he was a wizard.
Alf Tupper is not in Middlesbrough either.
Maybe his fish and chips and his welding background are not what they were looking for, though in Middlesbrough they would seem to be born for each other.
Jane Warrilow was right in saying: ‘There is a lot of information on the walls here.
It took about two and a half days to read it all.
The comics come from all over the world and there were people queueing up to see it when we opened last Saturday.’
To the less expert eye, the comic reader who is a fan but not a connoisseur, the early stuff has a childish delight which will never fade.
Little Nemo falling out of his bed at the end of every strip still brings a wry smile.
There is an example from The Bash Street Kids of the Fifties.
The art work is primitive but the silly little joke is what comics used to be about.
Of course, the exhibition does rather more than nod to the past.
But it feels that the modern men have expanded comics, made them somehow more artistic.
Alan Moore, one of the new generation, has a word for viewers, readers and comic writers: ‘Comics may be one of the only untainted sources of information available to a readership; so it becomes vital that no matter what you say, say it well, say it true, say it clearly.’
This advice is not always taken.
Graphic novels are perhaps the latest form of comic, an attempt to make it part of literature.
There are, as the programme notes reveal, lecturers in the subject.
It would be rather more welcome if comics could still be comics.
The Classics section with Nemo, Krazy Kat, TinTin, Dick Tracy, is featured largely because the strips in it have been reprinted in the past few years.
But by far the bulk of what is on show is modern, probably stemming from San Francsisco in the late Sixties.
The language, not just the art work of comics changed then too.
It is said that there is now a comic for everyone and indeed the gay and black communities have thriving titles.
The sooner Wilson returns, however, the better it will be not only for the teams he plays for but for all of us.
SCORES of motorists in the North-East are risking their lives driving on illegal tyres, according to a shock new survey.
A sweeping investigation by national tyre company Superdrive spotlighted a huge number of drivers breaking the law.
In Darlington, 83pc of the tyres checked were already illegal and should have been replaced weeks earlier.
Twenty nine per cent were worn below the legal limit of 1.6mm of tread, which came into force this year, and 54pc were below the old limit of 1mm.
A worrying 22pc of the tyres examined had sidewall damage which could lead to a potentially fatal blow out.
Checks throughout the region revealed a similar picture.
In Stockton, 89pc of all tyres were illegal and 22pc had sidewall damage.
Middlesbrough motorists were slightly more safety conscious, 65pc of the tyres checked were judged to be illegal and 10pc had sidewall damage.
Richard Reid, Superdrive's chief executive, said: ‘Despite publicity for the new tyre tread laws it is clear that many local drivers are delaying tyre replacements far too long.’
A spokesman for Britain's biggest motoring organisation, the AA, said drivers often ignored the importance of good tyres until it was too late.
He said motorists should check tyres every week and before a long journey.
A TORY councillor caused an outcry at a housing committee meeting yesterday when she warned of ‘the floodgates opening to let all the immigrants in.’
Coun Jackie Nilsson made the remarks during a meeting of Middlesbrough's housing and community services committee.
The town has a growing problem of homeless families with more than 100 on the waiting list.
Coun Nilsson said there were already too many people in Britain and claimed new immigrants would aggravate Middlesbrough's problem.
Coun John Jones, Labour, immediately called on the chairman, Coun Bob Brady, to intervene saying Coun Nilsson should be thrown out of the meeting.
Coun Brady said his action would be similar to that taken after MP Douglas Fairbairn's outburst at the weekend and said the committee disassociated itself with the remarks.
Tory leader Peter Jackson was asked if he had any comments to make after those of his fellow party member Coun Nilsson.
Coun Nilsson offered to withdraw her remarks saying there was no need to ask Coun Jackson to comment.
But Coun Jackson said he, also, disassociated himself with her remarks.
He said if anybody had to spend one night in a hostel because they were homeless it was too long and everything must be done to alleviate the situation.
He agreed with Labour's policy that capital receipts from council house sales should be released to build new houses.
Coun Brady said the council had capital receipts totalling £13m, which could be used for housing purposes but which they could not touch.
Members discussed plans which could be used for families without permanent homes, including the use of housing associations, local authority hostels, use of empty houses awaiting modernisation and private sector leasing.
Because of the General Election and a possible change of government and housing policies it was decided to adjourn the debate to a later date.
Coun Nilsson said after the meeting she was not being racist in her remarks.
‘I got a letter from one of my constituents who put it more succinctly than I did,’ she said.
‘She said immigration was an issue which ought to be raised because it was going to affect not only employment and social service benefits, but also cause homelessness.
‘That was one of the prime reasons I raised the issue, because if the constituents are saying that, it is time the councillors were saying it as well.’
MIDDLESBROUGH:
The Liberal Democrats have decided to use flower power.
The party has run out of posters and have asked supporters to put a daffodil or yellow tulip in their windows.
LANGBAURGH:
Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Allen claimed the Government has cut back on its training budget.
‘Locally, both the Teesside TEC voluntary sector group and managing agents in Cleveland have told me what the effects of these blinkered policies will be in the coming year.
A number of training providers are likely to cease their activities.’
STOCKTON SOUTH:
Tory candidate Tim Devlin has been accused of ‘political mischief’ in his claims of more home rule to come for Thornaby by Labour rival John Scott.
Mr Scott says turning back the clock to when Thornaby had its own town council, salaried professional officers and support services is no longer credible.
HARTLEPOOL:
Peter Mandelson, Labour candidate in Hartlepool, yesterday welcomed Shadow Home Secretary Roy Hattersley's announcement that a Labour government will allow lower division soccer clubs to keep their terraces, easing the financial pressure on them.
STOCKTON NORTH:
Voters will get a better deal with a hung parliament and are more likely to get the decisions they want, rather than having a single party riding roughshod over their wishes, as in the community charge, claims Liberal Democrat candidate Suzanne Fletcher.
POLICE last night repeated their appeal for witnesses to a town centre attack which has left a young man fighting for his life.
Michael Gibson, 20, is critical but stable in Middlesbrough General Hospital after being beaten up in Darlington on Friday night.
Last night, his father Ian flew in from Oman, where he has been working, to be near his son.
Mr Gibson said: ‘My wife Pat phoned to tell me what happened and I just packed my bag and got the first flight.’
He is shocked at what has happened to his son although he added that Darlington town centre has a reputation for violence.
Michael was walking up High Row with his brother David when he was attacked.
His brother stopped him from swallowing his tongue.
Other men who were with the alleged attacker have been questioned and witnesses have also been interviewed.
Detectives still want to contact more people who may have seen what happened.
Michael's mother Pat was at his bedside last night.
The family has taken some comfort from the fact his condition has stabilised.
— David Clark, 21, of Station Road, Darlington, was remanded in custody for a week when he appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with causing grievous bodily harm to Michael Gibson.
Bright sparks beat energy challenge
JUNIOR and senior teams from Grangefield School, Stockton, have swept the board with their energy plans.
They took the top prizes in an alternative energy competition at Hartlepool power station, beating five other Cleveland schools in the exercise, designed to encourage problem-solving in science and technology by and to foster links with industry.
The junior team members were Dannielle Clements, Karima Rachi, Ceri Trinder, Sarah Turner and Claire Wilson while the senior side was made up of Urfan Ali, James Andrew, Neil Gibson, Stewart Kirton, Martyn Notman and Anthony Waugh.
Fighting chance:
Campaigners against controversial plans for a second electricity sub station at Lackenby have the chance to state their views on April 16 when Langbaurgh Council has arranged a special planning meeting to discuss the issue.
Light problem:
Residents in Ansdale Road, Middlesbrough, have petitioned the council asking for more street lighting to try to reduce the problems associated with vandalism.
Hostel plan:
A new £250,000 refuge for Cleveland's Asian women fleeing from violent husbands is to open without an official ceremony in order to safeguard its residents.
Pensioners protest:
An old age pensioners' club in Whinney Banks, Middlesbrough, is objecting to a £6.03 rates demand.
But a council spokesman said the club was in receipt of an 80pc discount.
DURHAM CITY:
Labour and Liberal Democrat candidates in Durham City have found themselves united in opposition to the proposed route for a western bypass.
Both Gerry Steinberg and Nigel Martin, asked about the £13m scheme by the Western Bypass Action Group, said they backed the group's alternative more westerly route which it is claimed would be environmentally less damaging.
DURHAM CITY:
Durham Greens will be joining a national CND demonstration against Trident when the first submarine is named at Barrow-in-Furness at the end of the month.
Green Party candidate Sarah Banks said the Trident programme was a ludicrous, unilateral UK nuclear escalation which contravened the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
HARTLEPOOL:
The Liberal Democrats are the true party of opposition in Hartlepool, it was claimed yesterday.
Candidate Ian Cameron said he had the best chance of overturning Labour's majority.
But Conservative candidate Graham Robb claimed only his party could beat Labour.
HARTLEPOOL:
Workers at a Hartlepool factory have written to their chairman asking him to explain his views on Labour's minimum wage proposals.
John Jackson, chairman of Leeds-based Centaur which also owns Alexandre in Powlett Road, Hartlepool, said in a recent newspaper article the policy would cost thousands of jobs.
HARTLEPOOL:
Women were the target yesterday as Hartlepool Labour candidate Peter Mandelson's election campaign entered its final phase.
He embarked on a whistle-stop tour of mother and toddler groups, childcare facilities and a number of junior schools.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
More technology colleges, a greater scientific and business role for Teesside and 9,000 new jobs are among priorities in a ten-point ‘manifesto’ outlined by Stockton South Conservative candidate Tim Devlin.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
Recent Cleveland County Council free school meals figures show a rise in the Yarm and Eaglescliffe area (148 last year to 229 this year), proving that the recession has hit all pockets, claims Labour candidate John Scott.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Liberal Democrat Rosamund Jordan said only Liberal Democrat policy could solve the town's housing crisis.
She promised an injection of cash into the economy to kick-start the building industry.
LANGBAURGH:
Keith Legg, agent for Labour candidate Ashok Kumar, has predicted the party will double its near-2,000 majority tomorrow.
Tory choice Michael Bates said a vote for Labour would be ‘a vote for economic suicide’.
THE replay of a court battle over a five-a-side football development is to be staged tomorrow.
Anchor International which wants to build a £1.25m floodlit complex at Clairville Common in Middlesbrough is pitched against local objectors.
Middlesbrough Council and some local residents groups are supporting the Anchor application for a drinks licence.
Magistrates refused a similar request last December after residents' objections, but Anchor resubmitted the application.
Last night, both sides promised a hard but fair battle.
A council spokesman said senior officers would be in court to outline why the local authority thought the development would be good for Middlesbrough.
The council claims the project will bring jobs and a vital leisure and community facility.
Residents who visited a similar Anchor development in Hamilton, Scotland, will also be in court.
‘The vast majority were impressed and we want the court to hear their views, too,’ said the council spokesman.
‘We want the magistrates to see the full picture, to hear the full range of local opinion.’
With Anchor present in court, too, protestors face a tough fight.
But they claim to have the support of hundreds of local residents, who they say don't want the complex sited on common land.
‘We have always said we don't oppose the development, but it's in the wrong place,’ said Jill Coleman, who will be in court ‘with one or two others’.
She added: ‘We will put our case, but I haven't got a clue which way it will go.’
Middlesbrough councillor Mike J Carr will not be in court.
VOTERS in the Middlesbrough Borough Council area have been reminded they may not necessarily be voting in the Middlesbrough constituency tomorrow.
Three Middlesbrough Council wards Ayresome, Brookfield and Kader fall into the Stockton South constituency.
Seven other wards Easterside, Park End, Hemlington, Marton, Newham, Nunthorpe and Stainton and Thornton are part of Langbaurgh.
Residents of the remaining ten wards Acklam, Beckfield, Beechwood, Berwick Hills, Gresham, Grove Hill, Kirby, Linthorpe, North Ormesby and Pallister will vote in Middlesbrough.
Returning officer Colin Crossman said: ‘Poll cards show the name of the constituency and details of where people should vote.’
THE North-East rail network would be devastated under a secret British Rail plan to close vital local lines, a union warned last night.
Union officials caused an outcry yesterday when they produced a document claimed to be a national British Rail hit list of lines which would close under privatisation.
Transport Secretary Malcolm Rifkind and BR immediately denied the closure plans.
But Jimmy Knapp, general secretary of the Rail, Maritime and Transport union, insisted the report was genuine.
And last night, an independent railways body backed union claims that widespread closures could cripple North-East services.
According to the RMT, stations throughout the country could be axed because they don't make enough money.
Lines said to be under threat in the North allegedly include: the historic Settle-Carlisle route, Bishop Auckland to Darlington, Thornaby to Saltburn, Whitby to Thornaby and Hull to Filey.
If the closures go ahead, the unions say up to 30,000 railway jobs could be lost.
They claim the proposals could have an even bigger impact on the network than the Beeching report which led to widespread closures in the sixties.
Cleveland County Councillor David Walsh last night claimed the plans would hit important centres like Middlesbrough, and leave Saltburn and Redcar completely isolated.
And Richard Rosser, general secretary of the Transport Salaried Staffs Association, said: ‘For towns and communities on the threatened routes, closure would be a devastating blow.’
Tony Walker, North-East chairman of the Railway Development Society, said: ‘The impact of these plans could be very serious indeed.
‘People simply won't use the trains if they can't complete most of their journey on the network.
They will use a car or take the plane.’
Mr Walker believed the chances of widespread closures were ‘a distinct possibility’ under privatisation.
‘BR will switch on to a commercial footing and something will have to go.’
Transport secretary Malcolm Rifkind, attacked the report, saying: ‘The Conservatives have no proposals to privatise British Rail's passenger services.
‘If only Jimmy Knapp and his union colleagues had taken the time to read our manifesto, they would have realised this and saved themselves undoubted embarrassment.’
Alan Milburn, Darlington's Labour candidate, said: ‘All the evidence suggests that fares are rising, that pensioners will loose their concessions and now services to Darlington will suffer as well.
British Rail needs modernisation not privatisation.’
Pressure group Transport 2000 recently claimed 100 miles of NorthEast track is already at risk.
Darlington Tory candidate, Michael Fallon said: ‘The only threat to the Darlington-Bishop Auckland line is if not enough people use it.
I am a vice-president of the heritage line and I am fully  committed to it.’
Prints stolen:
A collection of prints depicting Whitby at the turn of the century have been stolen by thieves.
The prints by Whitby photographer, Frank Meadow Sutcliffe, were in a car broken into in the resort earlier this week.
Rink report:
A progress report will be given this weekend on efforts to develop an £800,000 indoor bowling rink for Durham City.
Durham Indoor Bowls Club has called a public meeting at the Abbey Sports Centre, Pity Me, Durham, at 4.30pm on Saturday.
Tree project:
Stockton Sixth Form College today plants its 10,000th tree as part of an environment project.
Students have worked over the last four years with Castle Eden Walkway and Cleveland Wildlife Trust in planting trees throughout Stockton.
More class room scores for school
PUPILS at Newcomen School, Redcar, are settling into a new  classroom which has been converted from a cloakroom at a cost of £10,000.
The architect-designed classroom is proving popular with the four and five year olds who use it and it has provided more space for activities.
Fireplaces stolen:
Detectives are investigating a burglary at a house in South Crescent on Hartlepool's Headland in which three marble tiled fireplaces worth £2,500 were stolen.
Anyone with information can contact them on .
Scrapyard blaze:
A fire in a scrapyard in Normanby Road, South Bank, Middlesbrough, damaged several scrap vehicles yesterday.
It was started by a spark from a cutter's torch.
Chairman Chairman Ron: Cleveland International Eisteddfod has appointed Teesside Development Corporation chairman Ron Norman as its 1992 chairman.
Kirkleatham Showground hosts the Eisteddfod from July 24–30.
Showroom prize:
Furniture and interior design company Decorcast has won the top showroom award for April from Solid Fuel and Fireplaces Magazine for its premises on Marton Road, Middlesbrough.
Going west:
Cleveland County Council tourism officer Tim Rogers is moving cross-country to head a three-year tourism programme in Cumbria.
Flat fire:
Firemen tackled a blaze in the kitchen of a flat in The Esplanade, Redcar last night.
A cooker and four kitchen units were destroyed, and the remainder of the flat badly smoke logged.
No one was hurt.
Surgery move:
The Middlesbrough doctors surgery run by Dr John O'Neill and Partners is to move out of the health centre, in the Cleveland Centre, to a former office block in Linthorpe Road, opposite St Barnabas Church.
HARTLEPOOL:
The Liberal Democrats are the true party of opposition in Hartlepool, it was claimed yesterday.
Candidate Ian Cameron said he had the best chance of overturning Labour's majority.
But Conservative candidate Graham Robb claimed only his party could beat Labour.
HARTLEPOOL:
Workers at a Hartlepool factory have written to their chairman asking him to explain his views on Labour's minimum wage proposals.
John Jackson, chairman of Leeds-based Centaur which also owns Alexandre in Powlett Road, Hartlepool, said in a recent newspaper article the policy would cost thousands of jobs.
HARTLEPOOL:
Women were the target yesterday as Hartlepool Labour candidate Peter Mandelson's election campaign entered its final phase.
He embarked on a whistle-stop tour of mother and toddler groups, childcare facilities and a number of junior schools.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
More technology colleges, a greater scientific and business role for Teesside and 9,000 new jobs are among priorities in a ten-point ‘manifesto’ outlined by Stockton South Conservative candidate Tim Devlin.
STOCKTON SOUTH:
Recent Cleveland County Council free school meals figures show a rise in the Yarm and Eaglescliffe area (148 last year to 229 this year), proving that the recession has hit all pockets, claims Labour candidate John Scott.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Liberal Democrat Rosamund Jordan said only Liberal Democrat policy could solve the town's housing crisis.
She promised an injection of cash into the economy to kickstart the building industry.
LANGBAURGH:
Keith Legg, agent for Labour candidate Ashok Kumar, has predicted the party will double its near-2,000 majority tomorrow.
Tory choice Michael Bates said a vote for Labour would be ‘a vote for economic suicide’.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Tory candidate Paul Rayner has defended his party's record on education.
He said spending had increased by 43pc over the last 13 years.
STOCKTON NORTH:
Crime is the Conservatives' ace-in-the-hole, claims Tory candidate Simon Fowler, with their record of giving the police greater resources, increased community-based policing in the North-East and tougher sentences for criminals, including joyriders.
LIVERPOOL soccer manager Graeme Souness, 38, was last night recovering in an intensive care unit after five hours of heart surgery.
A private hospital at Cheadle, near Stockport, said the triple by-pass operation on the former Scottish international and Middlesbrough star had gone without complications.
A hospital spokeswoman said: ‘Three grafts have been completed.
The first 24 hours are the most critical.’
Hospice appeal hopes to raise £1.8m.
Teesside Hospice Care Foundation is to launch a £1.8m. building appeal.
The charity already has plans drawn up for a ten-bed hospice at Middlesbrough to care for terminally ill people and contractors are currently submitting tenders for the work.
However, the foundation needs to raise £1.8m. to pay for the specially designed building and its running costs for the first year.
Mr Peter Briggs, foundation executive officer, said the charity was busy drawing up plans for the launch of an appeal to raise much-needed cash.
He said: ‘Research has shown that 70 per cent of us would prefer to die at home and only 30 per cent of us do.
We want to make this the second best place to die.
‘We can give more time to patients who are terminally ill in an environment which is purpose built to provide the support they need.’
A French TV station spent two days out on the election trail in Darlington this week.
Mlle Patricia Allemoniere, of the TF1 station, said her team was working on five different projects; health, housing, education, the election campaign and the three party leaders.
She said Darlington had been chosen because it was a marginal constituency.
The TV crew is pictured on West Row filming Mr Alan Milburn, the town's Labour candidate, and Mr Stuart Bell, who is defending the Middlesbrough seat.
Mr Michael Bates (C), aged 31, who recently moved from Gateshead to Marton with his wife Carole and sons Matthew, four, and Alexander, two.
A financial advisor, he was beaten into second place by about 2,000 votes in the November by-election, having stood for the Tynebridge constituency five years ago.
Mr Peter Allen (Lib.
Dem.), aged 32, a business strategy lecturer at Durham University Business School.
He lives in Guisborough and previously worked for British Steel.
A non-conformist lay preacher, he fought the November byelection.
STOCKTON SOUTH Mr Tim Devlin (C), aged 32, married, a barrister, who holds Stockton South with a 774 majority.
Born Teesside, he was educated at Dulwich College, London School of Economics, City University and Inns of Court before being called to the bar in 1985.
He fought for a local government seat in Islington in 1982 and gained Stockton south from the SDP in 1987.
He is secretary to the Back Bench arts committee, smaller businesses committee, chairman of the Parliamentary panel on charity law, deputy chairman of the foreign  affairs forum, and speaker on the government's Childrens' Act 1991.
Interests include regional policy, European affairs, transport and defence.
Mr John Scott (L), aged 66, married with six children, a former teacher and professor at Stockton and Billingham Technical College.
He is a former Mayor of Thornaby and Stockton, and has been actively involved in local politics for more than 20 years.
He is a district and county councillor and lives in Thornaby.
Special interests include planning and the environment; he has been chairman of the borough planning committee for 16 years.
He is founder-director of the Northern Regional Development Company, which aims to bring businesss to the area.
Educated in Manchester, he went on to read modern history at Oxford University after military service in 1949.
He served in the Royal Air Force.
Mrs Kay Kirkham (Lib.
Dem.), aged 43, a former schoolteacher, married with two children.
Born in Dulwich, she was educated at Sussex University where she read music and education in 1968.
She moved to area in 1975, and her first job was at a primary school in Middlesbrough where she taught music.
She has been active in local politics since 1985 when she took up a seat on Cleveland county council for Victoria ward, Thornaby.
She was elected to borough council in 1987.
She was agent for Sir Ian Wrigglesworth (SDP) in 1987 General Election.
Campaigns include fighting against the A19 pylons scheme and for more electoral reform and more women in Parliament.
STOCKTON NORTH Mr Simon Fowler (C), aged 31, merchant banker, single, educated at Westminster School and Jesus College, Cambridge, where he read history.
Formerly with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, he has held posts at the British Embassy in Madrid and the Western European department, Whitehall.
He has doubled the Tory majority in St James's, the second most marginal ward in Westminster where he is a councillor.
He has specialised knowledge of the UK economy and trade and foreign and defence policy.
Mr Frank Cook (L), aged 57, married with four children, a former specialist remedial teacher.
He was elected to Stockton North in 1983 and is defending a 8,801 majority.
Born in Hartlepool, he was educated at Corby School, Sunderland, and De La Salle College, Manchester, where he received a Diploma in Education.
He taught for ten years before moving into industry and working his way up to the post of project manager for a major construction company.
Posts with the Trade Union Congress include regional branch chairman and he has served on the national executive.
He campaigned against the burial of irradiated waste in the UK, and Parliamentary  commitments include serving on the select committe for employment, 1983–87, and he has been a whip responsible for defence, energy, transports and Northern Ireland for several years.
He is a NATO delegate.
Mrs Suzanne Fletcher (Lib.
Dem.), aged 47, a voluntary advice worker.
She is married with one son.
She is group leader of the Liberal Democrats on Stockton borough council, holding the balance of power.
She worked as a councillor for more than ten years and has campaigned on issues such as the environment, recycling, and nuclear dumping.
She has been involved with promoting freedom of information in local government.
Mr Kenneth McGarvey (I), aged 41, has lived in Norton all his life.
He is a part-time student at Teesside Polytechnic and has worked on Teesside all his life.
He is a director of  the Eastern Ravens Trust, which helps disabled people in the area He campaigns on the environment and is a believer in  unilateral nuclear disarmament.
REDCAR Mr Robert Goodwill (C), aged 35, is married with one son and lives in North Yorkshire where he is a farmer.
He was educated at Terrington Church of England School, Bootham School, York, and the University of Newcastle, and has been politically active since he left university.
He fought the 1987 election campaign.
He is a parish councillor, school governor and a  member of Yorkshire Water Consultative Committee.
He was chairman of the National Farmers' Union branch, 1987–89, chairman of the NFU county cereals and livestock committee 1986–88 and a representative in London and Brussels.
Dr. Marjorie Mowlam (L), aged 43, a former lecturer, defending a 7,780 majority.
Educated in Coventry and at Durham University, she later studied at the Unversity of Iowa, and became active in politics as a researcher for Mr Tony Benn and Mr Alvin Tofler.
She was elected in 1987 and has served on Labour's national executive and is currently party spokesmen for city and corporate affairs.
Coun Chris Abbot (Lib.
Dem.), aged 41, a self employed electrician who lives in Redcar and is married with three children.
He was born in Harrogate, and moved to Redcar in 1984.
He joined the Liberal Party in 1968 and served on the Young Liberals' executive committee.
He is a former Whitby town councillor and was elected to Cleveland county council in 1985.
He is a member of Langbaurgh district council and is spokesman for housing and highways.
MIDDLESBROUGH Mr Paul Rayner (C), aged 32, managing director of an independent management consultancy.
He lives in Leeds and is married with three children.
In 1981 he was chairman of the Computer Retailers' Association, and he stood as a local government candidate for Rother Valley in the 1987 General Election.
From 1970–71 he was a committee member of the Progressive Federal Party, Durban, South Africa.
He is also chairman of a board of school governors.
Mr Stuart Bell (L), aged 53, born in Durham, former barrister, married with one son.
He worked as an insurance secretary for Lloyds Bank before moving to France and qualifying as a barrister.
He owned a firm of barristers in France but moved to work in Middlesbrough.
He fought a local government seat in Hexham in 1979 but was defeated.
He was elected for Middlesbrough in 1983 and is defending a 14,958 majority.
Parliamentary committments include being Shadow Defence Spokesmen on Northern Ireland and promoting the case for an elected House of Lords.
He has campaigned against the privatisation of the Tees and Hartlepool Port Authority and was a prominent campaigner during the Cleveland child sex abuse scandal.
He is a member of the General and Municipal Boilermakers' Union.
Mrs Rosamund Jordan (Lib.
Dem.), aged 48, married with three children.
She is a former teacher who has lived on Teesside all her life.
She lives in Aislaby, near Yarm, and joined the Liberal Party in 1960 and was treasurer of Stockton Young Liberals.
She was involved with local government from 1970–74 when she was a councillor for Stockton rural district.
She was vice-chairman of the planning committee.
She fought in Scarborough in the 1983 General Election for the SDP.
HARTLEPOOL Mr Graham Robb (C), aged 28, married with a daughter.
He is a freelance public relations consultant and presenter with BBC Radio Cleveland.
Educated at Hustler and Nunthorpe Comprehensive Schools, Middlesbrough, and Longlands College of Further Education, he is a governor of two schools in the town and a member of the Community Health Council and Cleveland Wildlife Trust.
During the Gulf conflict he was president of Hartlepool Gulf Troops Support Group, and he is chairman of the Northern Area Parliamentary Candidates' Association and press officer for the Conservative Group on Cleveland county council.
Mr Peter Mandleson (L), aged 38, single, a former television producer for Thames Television.
Mr Mandleson is fighting to keep Mr Ted Leadbitter's 7,289 majority.
Educated at a state school in Hampstead, he went on to study at Oxford University.
He joined the Labour Party when he was 16 and was a councillor in Lambeth.
He is well known as the man who revamped Labour's image with the Red Rose campaign in the 1987 General Election.
He moved to Hartlepool in 1990 and gave up his role as Labour's director of  communications .
He writes a weekly column for The People newspaper.
Mr Ian Cameron (Lib.
Dem), aged 44, married.
He owns a taxi firm in Hartlepool and lives in Wolviston.
He was born and educated in Hartlepool, and has one daughter.
Mr Cameron is a school governor and a member of the Rotary Club.
He is involved in local campaigns to improve road safety.
BR under scrutiny as direct rail link reaches end of line North-East councils plan to set up a steering group to discuss all aspects of British Rail services in the region.
The move follows their dissatisfaction with what they say are deteriorating services throughout the area.
The Darlington to Hartlepool service whose direct link ends in May has been particularly criticised for reduced frequencies, later first trains and early finishing last trains.
BR has already announced the direct service between the two towns is ending.
Although the line will remain open, people will have to change trains at Thornaby.
A BR spokesman yesterday said the direct link was ending because of poor patronage.
On Monday Darlington council's transport committee will be recommended to join the steering group and appoint a member.
The idea came out of a December meeting with Mr Patrick McLaughlin, Junior Transport Minister, held to discuss the state of services.
Although he supported the formation of a steering group Mr McLaughlin said the Department could not join because the Government could not get involved in planning and running rail services.
The Government gave a block grant to British Rail.
How it was spent was up to BR but ministers could not intervene.
‘The only direction the Government gives is that BR should operate their passenger railway system so as to provide a public service which is comparable generally with that operated at April 1 1988,’ he wrote.
An officers report to Monday's committee says standards have fallen over a number of years.
The steering group would lobby for improvements.
VITAL election mail has not been delivered throughout the region, it has been claimed.
Scarborough, Middlesbrough and Stockton have been affected, Liberal Democrat workers say.
And Tories on Tyneside have complained of similar problems.
In Middlesbrough, Lib Dem candidate Rosamund Jordan said 2,500 leaflets were not delivered.
Lib Dems in Scarborough and Whitby constituency claim up to 15pc of the leaflets they prepared did not reach their destinations.
‘We have had a series of phone calls from people saying they had not received our election information,’ said Ms Jordan.
‘We spent an hour and a half at the post office in Middlesbrough before we finally got into the sorting office to find that 2,500 of our 36,000 leaflets had not been sent out.
‘The Post Office could give no explanation other than the fact that the other parties address their leaflets to individual households, while we did not.’
Frances Foote-Wood, Liberal Democrat northern regional organiser, said mail in Stockton had been sent to the wrong areas and in Bishop Auckland constituency some people still had not received leaflets yesterday.
A spokesman for Royal Mail said the incident in Middlesbrough had been caused by an oversight.
He apologised, and added the leaflets would be sent out this morning.
‘We found 2,500 had not been delivered, the equivalent of about ten streets in the whole of Middlesbrough,’ he said.
‘We are doing our level best to make sure all the election information arrives, but we are sending out something like 100 million items across the country.’
Scarborough Lib Dem agent Richard Creasey said: ‘A fairly significant proportion of voters haven't had our address.’
But a Royal Mail spokesman said yesterday: ‘Our managers in that area have assured us that everything has been delivered.’
On Tyneside, Tories in Wallsend say leaflets have gone astray or not been delivered.
Deputy Central Office agent Peter Smith said thousands of leaflets had been given to the Royal Mail in time to be sent out but were not delivered.
He said the Royal Mail had agreed to pay for the reprinting of the leaflets but it would be too late.
Mr Smith said: ‘It is very suspicious that it is only one party's leaflets that have not gone out at all in large quantities.’
He said the party was demanding an inquiry.
There had also been problems with leaflets for Newcastle North and Central, Redcar, Gateshead and North Durham.
North Durham Tory candidate Elizabeth Sibley said people in areas of Stanley and Chester-leStreet had complained of not receiving her leaflet.
A TWO-year-old girl is recovering in hospital after a savage attack by her family pet dog.
Vicky Booth, of Owton Manor, Hartlepool, was bitten in the face by the lurcher dog while out playing.
After a two-hour operation to her face Vicky was said to be ‘stable’ in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
The dog has been destroyed.
Vicky's mother has warned parents to get rid of any dog they are dubious about.
THE parents of the 20-year-old man beaten unconscious in Darlington last weekend are hopeful that his condition is improving.
Michael Gibson is still in intensive care at Middlesbrough General Hospital after he was victim of an unprovoked attack on High Row.
Last night his father Ian Gibson, of Moffat Close, Darlington, said his son may soon be moved into one of the non-critical wards.
Michael has still not regained consciousness since the attack.
Hospital staff described his condition as poorly but stable.
A PAIR of badger baiters were convicted yesterday with the help of the man behind several BBC TV wildlife documentaries.
Dr Stephen Harris, who scripted Brookside and other badger watch documentaries, was in court to see Lee Yafano and John Haytey admit digging for badgers.
Teesside magistrates heard how the two Middlesbrough men used an electronic tagging device to track a terrier as it bore down on badgers in a well known sett.
The dog had a metallic collar which could be traced by a hand-held detector, operated by the men on the surface.
Simon Caterall, prosecuting, said the men were armed with a spade, net and snare ready to dig out and catch the prey.
However, a member of the public passing the farmland in Cleveland became suspicious and called the police.
Yesterday Yafano, 20, of Vine Street, and Haytey, also 20, of Preen Drive, pleaded guilty to digging for badgers.
The case was adjourned to May 6 for reports.
The maximum sentence is six months in jail or a £2,000 fine.
The court heard that Yafano has a previous conviction as a juvenile for cruelty to cats which involved skinning and stringing them up.
Mr Caterall said that when the men were arrested they claimed they were hunting for foxes.
The RSPCA contacted Dr Harris and his report concluded that the men must have been after badgers.
Dr Harris said afterwards: ‘When a fox is being hunted it bolts.
If they were after foxes they would have either had several nets to cover all the holes or a dog such as a lurcher to chase after and catch the fox.
‘These men had terriers with them, which are put down setts in illegal badger hunting.
‘A badger will stand its ground so if you locate where it is you can dig it up and need only one net.’
Dr Harris, a lecturer at Bristol University, said some 10,000 badgers a year are now dug up and killed.
The worst areas are the North-East, South Wales and Cheshire.
The RSPCA applied for costs of £1,100 which will be considered during sentencing in May.
The resumed hearing will also consider an RSPCA application that the badger baiting equipment and the men's two terriers be confiscated.
The court heard that after the men were arrested the RSPCA returned to the land to try and retrieve a third terrier which was down the sett.
Mr Catterall said they never found the dog but there were signs it had been dug out by someone else.
Comets alert:
Massive rocks or ‘dead’ comets from space threaten a close encounter of the catastrophic kind with the Earth, Dr Alan Fitzsimmons told a Royal Astronomical Society meeting at Durham University.
‘The likelihood of a collision now is very tiny, but nevertheless a remote possibility,’ he said.
Star attraction:
A collection of photographs featuring pop stars as diverse as David Bowie and The Osmonds, is expected to fetch £80,000 at auction.
The pictures taken over a period of 30 years by late showbusiness cameraman Dezo Hoffman are to be sold by Phillips in London on April 22.
Bee warned:
Thousands of beehives are at risk after a deadly parasite was found in more colonies, experts warned yesterday.
The National Bee Unit said the varroa parasite has been found north of Dartmoor.
Hunt alert:
Huntsmen in Northern Ireland have been alerted by police after letter bombs were sent to two hunt members.
Both incendiary devices in padded brown envelopes were opened but did not explode.
£2.6m pools win: Pools giants Littlewoods announced a record double payout yesterday of more than £2.6m.
The winners, who both come from Manchester and asked for no publicity, scooped £1,338,825.45p each.
Bug beaten:
A new vaccine against an which kills 10 million people a year worldwide has been developed at Leicester University.
Researchers believe the vaccine is a major breakthrough in tackling a form of pneumonia, meningitis and septaecemia, caused by the microorganism streptococcus pneumoniae.
SCHOOL pupils cleaned up parts of Middlesbrough this week.
The 30 youngsters from Keldholme School took up plastic sacks and gloves as part of a three-day litter pick to learn about the environment as they help to protect it.
The teenagers hit Pallister Park and Gunnergate Wetlands and Fairy Dell Park, Marton.
Northumbrian Water offices have received telephone inquiries and Labour's Stuart Bell said he had been contacted by numerous people claiming they were having to pay more.
But a Northumbrian Water spokesman said yesterday the confusion had arisen because Middlesbrough Council had chosen not to continue collecting water payments along with tenants' house rents.
A council spokesman said said the decision to end the system was taken on economic grounds.
He said the council received about £200,000 a year to act as the collecting agent for the water authority but it cost nearly double that to do it.
Mr Bell accused Northumbrian Water of being ‘high handed’ in the way it implemented the change and said many tenants felt they were having to pay about £5 a week extra.
But the water company spokesman said letters had been sent to all tenants letting them know what was happening.
It also explained how to make the payments.
‘We would have been far happier to continue with the old system but Middlesbrough council decided it no longer wanted to collect on our behalf, which is their prerogative,’ he said.
He explained payments in eight monthly instalments may give the impression that tenants were paying more but it covered the full year.
Another another point of confusion, he said, was that in the past the sewerage charge paid to the water authority was included in the rent book in the figure ‘for general services’ which was apart from the amount for ‘water services’, he said.
People were comparing their 1992–93 charge with just the ‘water services’ charge they paid in 1991–92 which was not comparing like with like, he said.
He added that out of the 26 councils in Northumbria Water's area only five no longer wished to collect payments for water.
A POLL-TAX payer has received an apology from Middlesbrough Council after an unexpected visit by the bailiffs.
David Taylor said the bailiffs were looking for property belonging to his brother's former girlfriend, who left the house two years ago.
‘I've told them many times that she no longer lives here,’ said Mr Taylor, of Newstead Road.
‘I've even been down there twice in person.
‘What if my wife had let them in?
They could have taken our property and we are paying our poll tax.’
Mr Taylor said he had no forwarding address for the woman, but knew she was somewhere in the London area.
‘I kept sending the demands back and when I went in I was told not to worry, they had to send them to the last known address.
But I'm bound to worry if they come to take my furniture away.’
Council spokesman Mike Clark said the authority apologised for any inconvenience and distress.
He said: ‘We are reluctant to take anyone off the poll tax register, for obvious reasons.
‘We don't want to trouble this family for any longer, but if we did not follow up every ‘not known at this address’, we would have a short poll tax register.’
A HAUL of antique jewellery has been found by detectives in the Middlesbrough area.
Now Cleveland Police hope to trace the owners of the items, believed to have been stolen from houses in East Cleveland and North Yorkshire.
The jewellery pictured includes a silver pocket watch, a pearl brooch, a silver pendant and several tie or stick pins.
Anyone with information should call Cleveland Police on .
LIBERAL Democrat hopes of repeating Sir Ian Wrigglesworth's 1983 victory in marginal Stockton South looked set to be dashed last night.
Candidate Kay Kirkham's aides admitted their vote had collapsed in her home town of Thornaby and neighbouring Ingleby Barwick.
Her agent, Cleveland County Coun Alan Sykes, told The Northern: ‘Things don't look as well as they might be.’
Another aide confided: ‘We are being squeezed out everywhere.’
His dismal forecast came even though the votes from Tory strongholds like Hartburn, Stockton, and Yarm remained to be counted.
Nervous Tory candidate Tim Devlin admitted he did not know which way the vote would go.
With high turn outs in Labour's Middlesbrough heartlands such as Whinney Banks (75pc) and Brookfield (82pc), and in Stockton's Parkfield (80pc), it was a buoyant Labour candidate John Scott, who arrived at the count at Thornaby Pavilion.
Getting there swifter and more often British Rail has announced more services linking Cleveland with other parts of the region, and promised faster journeys from Darlington to Middlesbrough and Saltburn.
A new trans-Pennine service from Cleveland to Manchester and Liverpool will be launched on May 11; councillors and business people will sample it on Tuesday.
Class 158 trains, reaching speeds of up to 90mph, will be used, meaning journeys from Middlesbrough to York will take just an hour, and passengers will reach Leeds in 90 minutes, Manchester in 2 7 and Liverpool in three hours 20 minutes.
The service will run two-hourly.
Thirsk and Northallerton will also benefit as they will get an hourly service to York instead of the current two-hourly one.
One train a day will also take passengers on to Newcastle, calling at Sunderland and Hartlepool.
A BR spokesman said the service was a measure of commitment to rail travel in Cleveland.
— Also this week, BR branded as a fake a leaked document which claimed to reveal plans to close vital lines in Cleveland and County Durham.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, Secretary of State for Transport, said the Conservatives had no plans to privatise passenger services run by British Rail though it did propose privatising the freight service.
Yorkshire Tories march in step with Major victory Tories in Yorkshire and the NorthEast squeezed the Liberal Democrat vote to play their full part in Mr Major's general election triumph.
Only the loss of Darlington, where Mr Michael Fallon was comprehensively defeated to become one of eight unseated ministers, went against the regional pattern of swings to Labour far lower than that predicted by the polls.
He was swept aside by 5.03pc swing.
The shock result at Langbaurgh was also part of a national factor of eight all eight seats the Conservatives had lost at by-elections between 1987 and 1992 returned to the fold.
In the diverse Teesside constituency, that meant the dismissal of Dr. Ashok Kumar after only five months as a Labour MP.
Mr Tim Devlin's surprise victory for the Conservatives in Stockton South to hold on to the seat he won narrowly in 1987 from the prominent SDP man (now Sir) Ian Wrigglesworth was a classic example of the collapse of the centre vote working against Labour.
BLUE RE-RINSE Sir Ian had polled 20,059; his successor, local councillor Mrs Kay Kirkham managed less than half that figure.
The Labour challenger, 66-year-old Coun. John Scott, put up his tally by well over 6,000, but Mr Devlin a young man in the right-wing mould of several Tory candidates who did unexpectedly well on Thursday night garnered even more of the disaffected centrists.
In North Yorkshire, there was only one rogue wave in the county's traditional flood tide of Conservative support.
York is the main urban island in the county and Mr Conal Gregory's 147vote hold on the city was effectively written off before the polling booths opened; he went down to Labour by a thumping 6,342.
Richmond, covering a huge swathe of the county from Hawes high in the dales down through Northallerton and Thirsk to the borders of Cleveland, re-painted itself blue with a vengeance.
The 1989 by-election result, when even a split centre vote got within 2,650 of defeating Tory wunderkind Mr William Hague, was proved to be a midterm aberration.
So too, in Ryedale, where the brief flirtation with Liberalism at a 1980s by-election was put even further into old-flame category.
Mr John Greenway's solid work in the constituency was rewarded with a 17,439 majority after his vote went up more than 4,000 to 39,888.
Even so, that by-election victor, Mrs Elizabeth Shield, scored an impressive 22,449.
At Skipton and Ripon, which also has increasingly distant Liberal antecedents.
Mr David Curry, a junior agriculture minister, was returned with a??????? majority (17,174 in 1987) over the Liberal Democrat.
In Teesside seats outside of the two where the Conservatives had famous victories, only Dr. Marjorie Mowlam won for Labour with a anti-Tory swing anything like that necessary to put the national outcome into hung parliament country.
Her 11,577 majority over the Tory represented a 3.89pc crossover.
Mr Stuart Bell retained Middlesbrough with a 1.86pc swing; Mr Frank Cook, Stockton North with 1.5pc; and Mr Peter Mandelson, Hartlepool with 1.22pc.
The national Labour defeat, of course, denies Mr Mandelson the government post widely predicted for him as a consequence of his guru status within his party; the Hartlepool runner-up, radio and PR man Mr Graham Robb, put up the Conservative vote by a thousand but was still 8,782 adrift.
DURHAM DALES Mr Tony Blair, who would almost certainly have been in Mr Kinnock's cabinet, won Sedgefield with 1.71pc swing that gave him a increased majority of 14,859.
The Tory, North Yorkshire farmer, Mr Nick Jopling, added nearly 700 to his party's vote.
Again it was the Liberal Democrat vote that slumped.
Mr Blair's national prominence meant he was often away from his constituency during the campaign.
To a lesser extent, that also applied to Mr Derek Foster, the Labour chief whip who easily held on to the Bishop Auckland seat.
His majority in a constituency which includes rural Teesdale and part of Weardale went up by three thousand, a 2.5pc swing.
Here, an impressive local candidate, Coun. Bill Wade, bucked the trend against the Liberal Democrats; he collected a thousand more votes than his 1987 Alliance counterpart.
Miss Hilary Armstrong, whose Durham North-West patch includes the Weardale towns of Wolsingham, Stanhope and Crook, achieved a swing against the Tories above the national average, at 3.86pc to put her Labour majority up nearly 4,000.
She is another likely to have been denied a post in the Kinnock government that now will not happen.
Pensioners hurt in blaze
THREE elderly people were taken to hospital following a fire in a block of flats yesterday afternoon.
The blaze, at Morpeth Avenue, Middlesbrough was in one of the ground floor flats, and the whole block was smoke damaged.
The pensioners were taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital suffering from smoke inhalation.
Woman questioned:
Police probing allegations that children in an un-named Sunderland care home were neglected yesterday began questioning a woman social worker.
Crash appeal:
Police are appealing for witnesses after cyclist Stephen O'Boyle, 25, of Browning Avenue, Hartlepool suffered a broken shoulder blade in a crash in the town's Jesmond Gardens.
School raids:
Police are investigating three break-ins at village schools in Melsonby, West Tansfield and Grewelthorpe, North Yorkshire.
Bomb scare:
Bomb disposal experts from Catterick Garrison blew up a suspect bag left in the Town Hall Hotel, Richmond on polling night.
Road victims:
A woman and two children were taken to hospital following a road accident involving two cars on Prince Edward Road, South Shields, near the Rose and Crown pub yesterday.
Nightclub protest:
Cleveland police are to object to the transfer of a licence for Henry Afrika's nightclub in Norton Road, Stockton when the case is heard next month.
Smokebuster:
Karen MacGregor, 11, of Redmire, Wensleydale, travelled first class on the train to London yesterday as her prize for helping her mum stop smoking for two weeks from No Smoking Day on March 11.
Church opens:
The West Cliff Congregational Church at Whitby, which closed last December because of dwindling congregations, is to re-open on Easter Sunday.
Footpaths action:
Whitby Town Council is backing moves by the National Local Councils Association and the Countryside Commission to restore and protect public footpaths in the area.
Nearly finished:
Ryedale Sports Club's new extension at its Pickering headquarters is nearing completion, enabling table tennis and other sports to be played.
Albania aid:
Pickering Methodist Church member Peter Robinson is making a second visit to Albania in May taking 200 mattresses and clothing collected in the Ryedale area.
In addition he is appealing for tin openers, aspirins and vegetable seeds to take to the stricken country.
Final service:
The Rev Bernard Brownbridge takes his last service as vicar of Birdsall and Langton, near Malton, on Easter Sunday.
Taking over will be the Rev John Woods.
Bowing out:
Myrtle Milner is retiring as postmistress in the village of Wharram-le-Street, near Malton.
For many years she delivered the mail when her mother ran the post office.
£300,000 folly: Deer Park House, Scampston near Malton, an eighteenth century  aristocratic folly, is on the market at £300,000.
The Grade II listed property was built for the St Quentin family of Scampston Hall and was used by women for tea parties while their husbands were out shooting.
Improvements boost:
The National Trust's Ryedale Centre raised more than £3,000 to aid improvements at the trust's landmarks, Nunnington Hall, The Bridestones and Bransdale.
Building update:
The imposing historic Seamen's Hospital in Whitby's Church Street, which dates back to 1670, is to undergo a renovation scheme.
The 23 residential units in the hospital, are to upgraded.
Playground plea:
Town councillors at Whitby are backing calls by children for the restoration of a play area in the Green Lane area of the town.
Some 120 children and parents have signed a petition which is now being sent to Scarborough Council.
The original playground was axed after being hit by vandals and becoming run-down.
Euro contender:
Bradley Boyes, 19, of Sleights, near Whitby, a former student of Whitby School has been chosen to represent Britain in the European Community Contest for Young Scientists in Spain in September.
He has developed a control system for a wheelchair.
Appeal mounted:
An appeal has been lodged against Hambleton District Council's refusal of planning permission to alter and extend a disused farm building into two houses at Knayton Hall Farm, Knayton, near Thirsk.
The appeal will be dealt with by an exchange of written statements.
Raiders strike:
Thieves caused damage estimated at £50 when they threw a paving stone through a window at Kwik Save store, Thirsk, to break into the shop.
They stole 24 tins of baked beans worth £4.14.
Footwear theft:
Trainers worth £918 were stolen by thieves who broke through a top floor window from a flat roof into Stead and Simpson's Thirsk shop.
The trainers were various sizes, colours and makes, including Hi-Tec and Gola.
TEN people were injured in accidents on North-East roads over the weekend.
Four were hurt when their car crashed off the A66 on the westbound carriageway near the Elton turn-off just outside Stockton.
The Austin Metro veered off the road, went across an embankment and ended up in a field, having ploughed through a fence and hedgerow.
Driver James Carr, of Wheeldale Close, Darlington, suffered whiplash and neck injuries and one of the passengers, Gary Moses, also of Wheeldale Close, was treated for shock at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
The two other passengers; Darren Costello, of Caledonian Way, and Roy Wolstencroft, of Welbeck Avenue, Darlington, suffered head and internal injuries.
They were taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital where their condition was said to be stable.
And a woman is in hospital after a three-vehicle crash on the A1 yesterday on the southbound road at the Kirkby Fleetham turn-off near Bedale in North Yorkshire.
The woman, who has not yet been named but is aged about 50, was trapped in her car and had to be freed by firemen before being taken to hospital with back and neck injuries.
Yesterday afternoon, five people, including three children, were taken to hospital after an accident on the A684 at Blowhouses between Leeming Bar and Morton-on-Swale, near Northallerton, North Yorkshire.
A woman aged about 35 was cut free from one car and taken to hospital with  various injuries.
Three children, aged about four, seven and ten, suffered minor injuries and shock.
A man aged about 50 in the second car also suffered minor injuries and shock.
None were named.
Trio in court for armed robbery
THREE Tyneside men have appeared in court charged with £15,000 armed robbery on a house at Iveston near Consett, County Durham.
Derwentside magistrates remanded the trio in custody until April 16.
They are David Clark, 25, of Gosforth, Andrew Davies, 21, of Longbenton, and Steven Knowles, 21, of Killingworth.
A 19-year-old woman has already been bailed by the court on a handling charge and tomorrow a 22-year-old man will appear in court charged with robbery.
Star car:
An Italian sports car once owned by pop star Paul McCartney is expected to fetch up to £30,000 at auction.
The red Lamborghini Espada will be auctioned in Morpeth, Northumberland, on April 25.
Woman injured:
Patricia Nolan, 49, of Ashbourne Road, Stockton, was seriously injured in a car accident on Friday at the junction of Overdale Road and Evesham Road, Park End, Middlesbrough.
She was said to be ‘comfortable’ in Middlesbrough hospital.
Flying high:
ONE year on, captain Baard Bogen and his crew from the Norwegian airline Braathens celebrate a year of flying into Newcastle with a cake baked specially for the occasion.
More than 50,000 passengers used Braathens services in the first year more than double the airline's predictions.
(PIC)
Canned food help for pets
DOZENS of cans of pet food were delivered to an animal rescue centre yesterday.
Gordon and Julie Wellsted, from Darlington, have collected tins of unwanted cat and dog food over the last month for the Eldon Hope Kennels, Shildon.
Gordon, who runs the American Heartbeat clothes shop, Whessoe Road, said: ‘We have had a great turn-out and are still collecting lots of cans.
People have been very generous with their donations.
We've had all sorts, we even had a cat basket.’
Road to jobs:
Job-seekers in East Middlesbrough can get on the road to employment opportunities from Monday.
A new bus service means people are just a short journey from Beresford Buildings, which have undergone a £1.1m refurbishment plan.
Boat rescue:
The pilot vessel Hadrian towed a dive support vessel safely back into South Shields yesterday after it broke down with four divers on board.
Child blamed:
A fire which badly damaged a house at Leam Lane, Felling, near Gateshead, was started by a six-year-old girl playing with a lighter, police said last night.
A woman and five children escaped the blaze unhurt.
THEY were standing in the aisles when the Lord Chief Justice designate officially opened the Teesside Combined Court Centre yesterday.
Lord Justice Peter Taylor, who recommended all-seater football grounds in his report on the Hillsborough disaster, was back on home ground.
A packed courtroom far from all seated heard the former Recorder of Teesside recall his early days in the area during his speech to mark the opening of the Middlesbrough-based court centre.
Lord Justice Taylor, set to officially take over from Lord Lane on April 27, was speaking in court one of the town centre building.
He said he remembered well the 1972 Teesside Law Courts, now used as magistrates courts only.
‘The judge's retiring room and the magistrates’ dining room shared a single lavatory situated between the two,’he said.
‘Wishing to use this facility, I discovered it had no lock.
Judicial dignity could only be safeguarded by placing a foot judiciously against the door.
‘When I complained to the court keeper, he agreed the absence of the lock rendered the convenience somewhat inconvenient.
But that was trivial, he said.
More seriously, there were no locks on the cells, either.’
Earlier, Lord Justice Taylor unveiled a plaque to mark the official opening of the building, which dealt with its first cases last May.
He said it was a delight to be back among old friends on the North-East circuit.
‘I have been proud to be a member of the circuit all my working life and welcome any opportunity to come back,’ he added.
‘But today is special.’
Lord Justice Taylor praised the design of the court centre and paid tribute to circuit and court staff.
Guests at the launch included the Honourable Mr Justice Waite, presiding judge of the NorthEastern circuit, the Lord Lt of Cleveland, Lord Gisborough and Christopher Hawthorn, the Archdeacon of Cleveland, who dedicated the court centre.
Brian Walsh, QC, leader of the North-East Circuit, spoke on behalf of the bar.
‘It is a delight that this great office of Lord Chief Justice is to be held by a distinguished son of the North-East,’ he said.
‘We are pleased to welcome you to one of the country's finest footballing cities.’
Sandcastle marks Challenge bid REDCAR'S multi-million pound City Challenge bid will be marked by a giant sandcastle on the beach on Easter Monday.
The Challenge team will mark the submission bid to the Department of the Environment later this month with a castle-building event to raise at least £15,000 through sponsorship for two local charities, the Ann Charlton Muscular Sclerosis lodge and the Kirkleatham Special School.
A FIRE at old people's flats in Middlesbrough has forced two residents to move in with their families.
The pair from council flats in Morpeth Avenue, Easterside, had to be treated for the effects of smoke inhalation at South Cleveland Hospital.
Willemina Saunders, 78, and Florence Jarnell, 85, were released after treatment and are staying with relatives.
All eight flats in the warden-controlled block had to be evacuated during the blaze on Friday afternoon.
Cleveland police said it was believed an electrical fault started the fire in a ground-floor flat.
Soccer fans set to face court
ELEVEN soccer fans were arrested for a variety of public order offences following Saturday's Third Division soccer match between Hartlepool United and Stoke City.
Ten have been charged and bailed to appear in court at a later date while another will appear before the town's magistrates this morning.
Jobs service:
Job-seekers in East Cleveland will soon have a new service to help them find work.
A mobile job centre staffed by two part-time coordinators will offer up-to-date information about available jobs as well as advice and counselling.
It will operate initially in Lingdale, Loftus and Brotton.
Photo award:
Richard Mankin, 23, of Stockton, a student at Blackpool and Fylde College, has won the prestigious Konica Award in an annual competition organised by the British Institute of Professional Photography Yorkshire and Humberside Region.
He has just returned from working as a photographer for six months on the Russian liner Karelya.
Legal aid:
Hartlepool solicitor David Keating is offering his own version of legal aid to one of Europe's newest democracies.
He is one of a number of British lawyers who are assisting the Albanians to draft electoral law, economic regulations and other legislation.
Workshop blaze:
Firemen from Grangetown put out a blaze in a workshop at P C Richardson's, Sotheby Road, South Bank, Middlesbrough, yesterday.
Trailer fire:
A trailer and contents were destroyed in a fire at Arundel Green, Pallister Park, Middlesbrough.
Lifeboat mission:
The Redcar offshore lifeboat was called to the aid of a fishing vessel which broke down off the coast yesterday.
It was safely towed back into the River Tees.
Divers alert:
A major rescue operation was launched yesterday after two divers were reported missing off Redcar.
They were re-located unhurt by their support vessel after firing mini flares.
A coastguard spokesman said: ‘The current was drifting them one way and the wind was blowing the boat the other.’
Boat drama:
Firemen were called to Hartlepool marina yesterday after a 30ft fishing boat began taking in water.
The used pumps to prevent it from sinking.
Horse is victim of sickening attack
THE sickened owner of a horse which was attacked in its stable at Newton Bewley, near Hartlepool, is appealing for help in tracking down the thugs responsible.
A metal object was used to gouge a deep wound in the animal's forehead.
The owner who doesn't want to be named, is urging anyone with information to contact the police.
Bag snatch:
Police are hunting a man who snatched a woman's handbag as she walked to a bank in Church Street, Hartlepool.
The thief escaped with a quantity of cheques and documents.
Anyone with information about the incident can contact the police on .
Potting fire:
Fire fighters from Stockton put out a fire in a potting shed at a house in Bishopton Road, Stockton.
Machine blaze:
Smoke damage was caused to the kitchen of a house in Gilmour Street, Thornaby, after a washing machine caught fire.
Lottery cash:
Three organisations are to benefit from Hartlepool Council's lottery fund.
The Hartlepool Physically Handicapped and Able-Bodied Group and the Eldon Grove Disability Sports Group will each receive £500 toward the cost of an activity holiday while the Hartlepool Indoor Bowls Club will receive £100.
Splashing out:
Children in Hartlepool will soon be able to have more fun than ever, thanks to the borough council.
It is spending almost £30,000 on new play equipment at Grayfields recreation ground, Ward Jackson Park and King Oswy Drive playground.
In court
The following cases were dealt with by Stokesley magistrates
Peter Ernest George, 65, of Fir Tree Close, Hilton, Yarm, admitted driving motor car with excess alcohol in breath, fined £250 plus £25 costs, licence endorsed, disqualified for one year.
Stephen Sanders, 24, of Roseberry Crescent, Great Ayton, Middl esbrough, admitted failing to produce driving licence, failing to produce insurance and test certificate and using motor van with defective lights, fined £90 plus £20 costs.
Brian Eaton, 36, of Woodhouse Road, Guisborough, admitted failing to produce driving licence and failing to produce insurance and test certificate, fined £40 plus £20 costs.
The following case was dealt with by Easingwold magistrates:
Steven Francis Gulick, 22, of Norham Walk, Ormesby, Middlesbrough, was convicted of driving motor car exceeding 30mph, fined £60 plus £45 costs, licence endorsed, three points, disqualified for six months.
Boy charged with rape A 15-YEAR-OLD boy appeared before magistrates yesterday charged with rape and other serious sexual offences involving young children, alleged to have been committed over a lengthy period.
The offences are alleged to have taken place at a children's home in Sunderland where the boy was a resident.
The case was adjourned for four weeks.
Ecstasy charges:
John Jeffrey Saunders, 30, of Ferryhill, Jeffrey John Ayre, 21, of Sedgefield, and Mark Davison, 19, of Sedgefield, appeared before Sedgefield magistrates yesterday charged with possession with intent to supply 400 Ecstasy tablets worth £800 at Coxhoe in March.
They were remanded on conditional bail.
Eyes have it:
Joanne Elliott, 21, of Brotton, Cleveland, the only NorthEast contender in a national Miss Beautiful Eyes contest, has reached the final, to be judged by Terry Wogan.
Arson attack:
Cleveland police are appealing for  witnesses to an arson attack on a white Volvo car parked in Waterloo Road, Middlesbrough.
Videos case:
Businessman Timothy Sturdy, 29, of Stanhope Road, Darlington, accused of supplying counterfeit videos to the post office at Middleton Tyas, elected trial at crown court when he appeared before Richmond magistrates yesterday.
Victim poorly:
Michael Gibson, 20, of Moffat Close, Darlington, spent another day unconscious in Middlesbrough General Hospital yesterday following a vicious attack in the centre of Darlington last weekend.
Speaking up:
Darlington Sixth Form College pupils Sandya Suri, Jo-Anne Searle and Emma Gaunt have reached the national finals of a public speaking competition organised by The Association of Business and Professional Women.
A WOMAN whose unborn child died in the last days of her pregnancy is seeking compensation from South Tees Health Authority.
Debra Busuttil will never have another baby because after labour was induced for the dead child doctors had to perform a life-saving hysterectomy.
Yesterday Mrs Justice Ebsworth, sitting at Teesside Crown Court, was told the life of the child could have been saved if doctors had monitored the foetus' heartbeat after Mrs Busuttil, then 26, was admitted into Middlesbrough's Parkside Hospital in 1984 because her general practitioner detected irregularities.
Experts to be called by Mrs Busuttil have studied traces of the foetal heartbeat and claim she should not have been allowed home.
Geoffrey Burke QC, for Mrs Busuttil, said instead she was allowed to her then home in Ayton Court, Guisborough, Cleveland, and three weeks later returned to Middlesbrough General Hospital believing she was in labour.
Mr Burke said: ‘When she got there there started events which ended in what was a double tragedy.
First the baby died in the uterus and the second tragedy was that in the course of delivering the now dead foetus Mrs Busuttil suffered a massive haemorrhage so severe it was necessary in order to save her life to perform a hysterectomy.
‘So within a short space of time she lost her baby and permanently lost her ability to have another baby with serious and lasting consequences to her health and eventually fatal consequences for her marriage.’
Staff at Middlesbrough General Hospital at first tried to induce labour on January 31 but when it became clear Mrs Busuttil, now of West Drayton, London, was not in labour they discontinued their efforts.
She was allowed home on February 3 although she felt unwell and said she could not feel the baby moving.
Her GP was called on February 6 and could not hear a heartbeat.
Mrs Busuttil was admitted into Parkside Hospital to have the dead child induced.
But Mr Burke said whilst labour was being induced Mrs Busuttil was given a drug to hasten the process.
He said the drug caused over-stimulation.
He said: ‘The delivery came very quickly and so suddenly Mrs Busuttil's recollection is the baby just fell out onto the table or whatever it was she was lying on.’
Soon after the delivery bleeding was noticed and doctors performed a hysterectomy.
Mr Burke said it was Mrs Busuttil's case that she should not have been given such high doses of the drug to induce labour.
The case continues.
SHORT-LIVED MP Ashok Kumar admits he is still ‘shell-shocked’ five days after losing his seat.
The Labour politician was member for Langbaurgh for just 154 days, joining a small and unhappy band of by-election winners who become General Election losers.
He was joined last week by a handful of defeated Liberal Democrats including Nicol Stephen, who won Kincardine and Deesside the same night Dr Kumar won Langbaurgh November 7.
But while Mr Stephen's vote fell, Dr Kumar's rose by a mighty 6,000 and he still lost to Conservative Michael Bates, beaten by a huge turn-out and the collapse of the Liberal Democrat vote.
‘I have not got over it,’ admitted Dr Kumar last night.
‘I need more time it's no better than last Thursday.
The personal pain does not go away.’
Dr Kumar is pondering whether to approach British Steel, to see if he can return to his job as a research scientist.
He says he will not go back halfheartedly.
But he certainly will stay in politics and may possibly remain on Middlesbrough Council.
He intended to resign his seat if he won the election.
He will also stay on Teesside, despite the pain of the result.
‘I was absolutely taken aback by my result and by the national result,’ he admitted.
Dr Kumar said John Major's attacks on the Liberal Democrats had clearly got through to middle-income earners terrified by the thought of a Labour Government.
The first sign that this was happening in Langbaurgh came shortly after 1am, as the votes came in from Marske and Longbeck, Marton and Nunthorpe.
On the platform after the announcement, Dr Kumar looked stunned.
Afterwards, he admitted, he did not sleep.
But he is left with memories his time as an MP is a considerably longer stretch than the 50 days enjoyed by Ossie O'Brien in Darlington in 1983.
He won a by-election in March, but surrendered the seat to Michael Fallon in the June General Election.
And back in 1945, Vice-Marshall Donald Bennett, a Liberal, was MP for West Middlesbrough for just 31 days.
COLLEGE students are raising money for a hospital in a battle of the sexes.
The second year business and finance diploma course students at Cleveland College in Redcar are in competition to raise as much as possible for South Cleveland Hospital's baby unit.
They are using it as part of their module to train for the real business world by setting up their own venture and running it for the school year.
The 18-year-olds decided last September to organise a number of money-making schemes and hand the cash over to charity.
Now running short of ideas after craft stalls and sponsored walks, the 16 students decided a competition between males and females would add spice to the final weeks of their campaign.
But just to prove that the rivalry is only for fun they will be working together on Easter Saturday to organise a penny mile laying in Guisborough.
MIDDLESBROUGH council has published its submission for the ‘second round’ of City Challenge.
The 78-page document includes ambitious plans for the town centre a theatre, leisure pool, specialist shops and glazed canopies over shops in the Linthorpe precinct.
The strategy aims to regenerate four communities St Hilda's, Grove Hill-Easterside, Ayresome and Newport-Gresham and develop a showpiece town centre.
Council leader Mike Carr said the areas covered in City Challenge Two shared many of the problems of the eastern part of the town, which won round one of the contest.
He added: ‘Unemployment is too high and there are problems with health and environment and the fear of crime.
‘But there is great potential and we aim to build on the skills of the people.’
Coun Carr said it was also vital to make the town centre a place in which the people of the town took pride.
Key elements of the plan include a West Middlesbrough Enterprise Trust, a Challenging for Jobs scheme, Community Security projects, upgrading council houses and encouraging business-community partnerships to reduce crime.
The dead man was named as 31-year-old Robert Dearlove, of Devonshire Road, Middlesbrough.
Mr Dearlove was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital in the early hours of Sunday after a ‘domestic incident’ in nearby Ayresome Park Road.
Cleveland Police could not confirm last night whether or not they were treating the matter as a murder inquiry.
The incident is believed to have taken place at the home of Mr Dearlove's estranged wife Janet.
His brother Gary said Mr Dearlove had two children an 11-year-old boy and seven-year-old girl and described him as ‘a loving and devoted father’.
Mr Dearlove was taken to hospital with serious eye injuries.
He never recovered and died yesterday afternoon.
Speaking before a post-mortem last night, Gary Dearlove said the family were ‘absolutely stunned’ by what had happened.
He added: ‘We know very little, the police have told us very little.
We can't say anything until we know more.
It's just such a waste of a life.’
Mr Dearlove described Robert as ‘a great brother and loving father’.
The dead man worked as a gardener for Middlesbrough Council.
Residents living near the scene of the incident said they were aware something had happened, but didn't know what.
One woman, shocked at hearing of Robert Dearlove's death, said: ‘He was a lovely lad.’
A man has been questioned by police.
Four face trial for deception
FOUR people accused of a series of deception offences at post offices were committed for trial by Whitby magistrates yesterday.
They are: Kenneth Drury, 41, of Elmwood Avenue, Saltburn; Leslie Jones, 29, and Tracy Jones, 25, both of Pearl Street, Saltburn; and Lisa Johnson, 25, of Barnard Road, Easington.
Johnson faces six charges, Dury and Leslie Jones four each, and Tracy Jones one charge.
All the offences are alleged to have been committed in Whitby or Scarborough.
Woman robbed:
A woman, aged 70, was recovering at home yesterday after being attacked and robbed of her handbag as she was walking in Ernest Street, Boldon Colliery, after a night out playing bingo.
Tests continue:
Medical tests were continuing yesterday to establish the cause of death of Lilian Iley, 30, whose naked body was found in the bath at her home in Canning Street, Newcastle, at the weekend.
Man stabbed:
Brent McCafferty, 26, was said to be poorly in hospital last night after being stabbed in the arm in an incident outside his home in Colchester Terrace, Sunderland.
Driver hurt:
Firemen cut a driver free from the wreckage of his car last night after a collision with a lorry at Grimston Grange crossroads, on the Bransby to Gilling East road, near Easingwold.
A 23-year-old man was taken to York District Hospital but his injuries are not thought to be serious.
Festival success:
This year's York Festival and Mystery Plays has put its troubles firmly behind it with some events already sold out with still three months to go.
Now the Festival board is urging people to stake their claims to other events now as many are on the verge of selling out.
Biker stable:
Motorcyclist Alan Day was stable in Middlesbrough General Hospital last night after a crash on Sunday.
Mr Day, 42, of Richard Street, North Skelton, Cleveland, lost control of his BMW bike on Stanghow Road, Skelton.
Ram raid:
Police are hunting thieves who used a stolen car to ram a food store in Buddle Road, Newcastle.
House blaze:
Children are being blamed for a fire in a derelict house in Murrayfield Road, Cowgate, Newcastle.
AN electrical fault is believed to have started a blaze which severely damaged a Teesside community centre.
Fire ripped through the first floor of the Afro-West Indian Centre in Marton Road, Middlesbrough, early yesterday.
Three fire  appliances brought the blaze under control as police diverted traffic from roads near the scene.
The building's first floor, roof and contents were badly damaged in the fire.
Police confirmed they were not treating the fire as suspicious.
Company secretary James Anderson says he does not want to set foot in Teesside following the collapse of negotiations to open a prestige caravan storage site at Middlesbrough.
Mr Anderson, who has a boat moored at Hartlepool Marina, said: ‘I will now go around Sedgefield in County Durham, to get to Hartlepool.
I don't like Teesside.’
Mr Anderson's Darlingtonbased firm Keepsafe Storage hoped to transfer its Teesside operation to a site on Middlesbrough's riverside after being ordered off land at Stockton following a three-year planning wrangle.
He says the Teesside Development Corporation wanted an annual rent of £50,000 for the alternative site he was offered a derelict five acres of ground at Middlesbrough, when the firm was offering £10,000.
‘The negotiations have fallen apart, the gap is just too big.
They wanted this colossal rent which was just a recipe for bankruptcy,’ said Mr Anderson.
He says the firm have not yet fully recovered from the high cost of setting up and securing the Stockton site.
‘We bought these infra red  cameras at £12,500 a time and miles of fencing.
And there are costs with running the site.
If we had simply been moving to another site we would just roll everything up and take it with us.
‘I don't want to go to Teesside again.
We will send someone else to clear out the site.’
Hundreds of Teesside families are being asked this week to pull their caravans off the Stockton site by April 31, which Keepsafe opened without permission in 1989.
Having been recommended the site by the TDC, Mr Anderson said he thought planning permission would be a formality.
When the firm applied for consent it was refused.
The TDC served the firm with an enforcement order to quit the Yarm Road site.
Keepsafe appealed, a public inquiry followed and ruled against the company.
There was no comment from the TDC yesterday.
A PIONEERING North-East tourism initiative has been saved from the axe.
Tees Valley Tourism, a partnership between the public and private sectors, was set up under a special government programme in 1989 with funding for three years.
It has been so successful it is to carry on in a slimmed down form, with a new name Tees Valley Conference and Visitor Bureau under the control of the Northumbria Tourist Board.
It will be funded by what money Tees Valley Tourism has left in the kitty, with contributions from hotels in the area.
Claire Norminton, who will manage the organisation, said last night Tees Valley Tourism had brought £379,000 of business into the area in the last six months and had 5,000 interested holiday contacts on its data base.
‘We have everything in this part of the world.
There has been so much interest in the industrial side while you just have to go a few miles out of Middlesbrough to get to the coast or the middle of the moors.’
Planned tourist features like the Tees Barrage, the Hartlepool Marina, and the Wynyard park business and leisure development were considered by Tees Valley's board of directors along with its existing achievements, strong reasons to retain at least some of its role in the future.
The bureau will be launched by John East, chief executive of the English Tourist Board, today.
£3,500 haul in house raid POLICE are hunting burglars who stole property worth £3,500 from a house in Oakley Gardens, Hartlepool.
Their haul included two television sets, a video recorder, a hi-fi system, a computer, a guitar, compact discs and jewellery.
Fire alert:
A chip pan had caught fire at a house in Sandsend Crescent, Hartlepool, on Sunday night, but the blaze had been put out when the firefighters arrived.
The kitchen and living room of the house were slightly damaged by smoke.
Service birthday:
The Caredocs partnership between Cleveland Ambulance and GPs in the county has celebrated its first birthday.
The service offers an out-of-hours emergency call-out service to the patients of GPs practices on Teesside.
New faces:
Two new faces have joined the team at Cleveland Wildlife Trust.
Corporate development officer Katharine Hardy will be encouraging companies to show their green credentials by joining the Trust, while Phil Sedwill is to take over the ‘Greening The Tees Corridor’ scheme as habitat creation project officer.
Katharine wants to hear from businesses, Phil wants to hear from anyone interested in joining the volunteer Greenfingers team.
Both can be contacted on (0642) 253716.
Truck fire:
Fire crews were called when tyres on an articulated tipper truck carrying slag from British Steel's Redcar blast furnace caught fire early yesterday.
A BS spokesman said it was not a serious incident and comfortably dealt with by fire brigade personnel.
Hi-fi help:
A travelling day unit for the elderly mentally ill in Langbaurgh has received a hi-fi midi system from the ICI community affairs programme.
The unit, based at Dormanstown clinic, will use the equipment for relaxation therapy and anxiety management.
Museum closure:
The Captain Cook Birthplace Museum in Middlesbrough will be closed over Easter due to continuing work on temperature controls.
The museum will open again for May 1.
A NEW service which is expected to encourage more travellers to switch from road to rail made its inaugural run into Middlesbrough station yesterday.
Fifty local authority and business leaders from the North-West were guests of Cleveland County Council and British Rail, which has linked Teesside into its successful TransPennine Service.
BR believes the new service will benefit Teesside, Yorkshire and North-West travellers particularly business travellers who have complained about poor road and rail links between Teesside and the Leeds and Manchester areas.
A £3.5m batch of new trains will join the fleet operating a direct two-hourly service to and from Middlesbrough and Thornaby when it comes into full operation on May 11.
The Teesside TransPennine link is part of a series of changes now under way or in the pipeline for local services:— Northallerton and Thirsk will get hourly trains to York, Leeds, Manchester and Liverpool instead of two hourly;— One train a day in each direction will take in Stockton, Hartlepool and Sunderland, terminating at Newcastle;— The Monday to Saturday Darlington to Hartlepool service, barely used and regularly cancelled, will be axed next month.
Local travellers will change at Thornaby.
Sunday trains are unaffected.
— A new station at Manchester Airport will give York and Scarborough travellers a direct service to the terminal building from May 1993. — BR hopes to open a station at Yarm by the end of 1993 if talks with council officials yields local authority support towards the estimated cost of £500,000.
The county council suggested Eaglescliffe station as an interim measure but BR said passenger data indicated poor use of the station to North-West destinations.
BR's Regional Railways division, which takes in the TransPennine service, has been encouraged in recent years by the growth in passengers and revenue.
This has been achieved by joining services to make longer cross-country routes and by introducing new trains.
Passengers can now enjoy such trips as East Anglia to Liverpool, and Scarborough to Manchester without the inconvenience of having to change trains.
The TransPennine service, launched a century ago but struggling in recent years, has been turned into one of its flagship operations.
With new rolling stock to replace the unreliable and grubby 1950s locomotive-drawn carriages it now has a fleet of trains to equal the comforts of InterCity.
The new Class 158 trains are fitted with air conditioning, baby changing facilities, catering, telephones, disabled toilets and tables.
BR says annual revenue on the TransPennine service is up 120pc since 1986 and passengers by 60pc or nearly 7pc a year.
Growth has continued through the recession.
It is not making a profit, but is now contributing to its operating costs.
Public funding support has been halved.
New trains have significantly reduced delays.
A quarter of trains used to be more than ten minutes late.
That figure is now down below 10pc.
Teesside has long demanded an improved service, accelerated by the demise of the Cleveland Executive two years ago which deprived one of Europe's biggest urban and industrial conurbations of a direct service to London.
BR research has indicated that passenger and revenue growth will be greatest by linking Teesside into the TransPennine network.
Darlington, Newcastle, Northallerton, Thirsk, York and Scarborough are already in it.
Roger Cobbe, service group manager, who is responsible for the new service, is unequivocal about its prospects.
‘It is the best thing that has happened to train services on Teesside for very many years,’ he said.
He said it opens up Teesside as an area for inward investment from the NorthWest and Leeds and will help expand the catchment area for the new universities.
There are already strong business links which will be strengthened.
ICI, for instance, has interests on Teesside and in Warrington, one of the route stops.
‘There is also tremendous tourist potential now in northern cities like Manchester and Liverpool, particularly the Albert Dock and Granada TV studios,’ said Mr Cobbe.
In May next year a new station opens at Manchester Airport giving passengers from Scarborough and York a direct hourly service into the terminal buildings.
This cuts out the need for a cumbersome bus or taxi journey from Manchester Piccadilly to catch a flight.
For Darlington, Newcastle and Teesside passengers it will mean a change at York or Manchester Piccadilly.
A FAMILY holiday turned to tragedy when a four-year-old boy plunged to his death from a fifth floor balcony, an inquest heard.
Dale Anderson was playing on the balcony at the Hotel Barracuda in Magaluf, Majorca, when he fell from the fifth floor.
Yesterday, Cleveland Coroner Michael Sheffield recorded a verdict that Dale, of Greenland Avenue, Whinney Banks, Middlesbrough, died from a fractured skull as a result of an accident.
Dale's father, Michael, said the family had gone for a day trip and returned early in the evening.
He said he and his wife, Tracie, and their sons Michael, ten, and Dale had had a lie down.
But a short time later Michael saw Dale walk out onto the balcony to play with his toys.
Mr Sheffield said: ‘Your son Michael said Dale had gone to the balcony to play with a toy airplane.
He was climbing on the barrier so he came to go back into the room to tell you what he was doing when Dale fell.’
AN expert witness yesterday blamed a doctor's error of judgement for the death of an unborn child.
Dr Philip Myerscough, of Edinburgh University, said putting himself in the shoes of the consultant looking after Debra Busuttil he would have induced labour.
But instead, the consultant at Middlesbrough General Hospital discontinued efforts to induce Mrs Busuttil's labour and sent her home.
Dr Myerscough said: ‘I think it was a serious error of judgement.
It was not an adequate provision of care.’
Mrs Busuttil returned to her home in Ayton Court, Guisborough, but was admitted three days later to Middlesbrough Maternity Hospital because the baby had died.
Mrs Busuttil, now of West Drayton, London, is seeking damages from South Tees Health Authority following the death of her unborn baby in 1984.
She is also claiming compensation because doctors had to carry out a lifesaving hysterectomy.
She claims she would not have needed the operation if she had not been given too much of a drug to hasten the delivery.
The health authority has denied negligence.
Dr Myerscough told the High Court at Teesside he considered not enough care had been given to Mrs Busuttil when she was first admitted to the maternity hospital three weeks before her delivery date because her general practitioner had detected irregularities in the baby's heartbeat.
He said traces showed irregularities but Mrs Busuttil was sent home without any instructions.
Dr Myerscough said he would not have let her go home without repeating the traces of the heartbeat or if she had gone home she would have been asked to attend on alternate days for check-ups.
Mrs Busuttil went to Middlesbrough General Hospital on January 31 because she believed she was in labour.
The consultant at first attempted to induce labour but discontinued it.
Dr Myerscough said: ‘I have tried to put myself in the consultant's shoes in this situation and I think his apparent instinct that he thought the time had come to induce labour was correct.’
He said he believed discontinuing to induce labour and then allowing Mrs Busuttil home without monitoring the baby's heartbeat was not an adequate provision of care.
The case continues.
A CHEF who cancelled the final stage of a £20,000 sex-change operation when he fell for a pretty blonde announced yesterday: ‘She's worth every penny.’
Transexual Derek Arnell, 28, underwent hormone transplants and breast implants and was months away from completing the transformation when he went on a fateful girls' night out.
The son of a Tyneside lorry driver met Sue Galloway, 26, and the office worker transformed his life.
‘She is the most beautiful, genuine person I've ever met,’ said Derek, who lives in Darlington.
‘I'm just grateful I met her before the final operation.’
Their story was first revealed in The Northern Echo earlier this year, but at the time the couple wanted to remain anonymous.
Now they have decided to tell the world about their love.
Derek felt from an early age that he should have been born a woman.
Despite his feelings he married and had two children but the marriage was doomed.
He decided a sex change was the only way to achieve happiness.
He regularly donned a wig and women's clothing and went out on the town as Diane.
Before moving into a Darlington boarding house, Derek explained his situation to his landlady, and to his surprise she invited him to meet her family.
He was introduced to her sister, Sue, and they enjoyed each other 's company immensely.
Over the weeks the friendship turned to love.
Sue asked Derek to a girls' night out and he turned up as Diane.
‘My first reaction was jealously he had great legs,’ she said.
They both realised their friendship had turned to love, but neither admitted their feelings.
But then, as they sat opposite each other in a crowded Darlington bar, Sue suddenly realised that she was about to lose the man she loved.
‘I realised Derek was close to becoming a woman.
I just couldn't stand it, here was a man I felt deeply for and I was going to lose him,’ she said.
Sue leaned over to Derek and yelled: ‘I think I love you.’
It was the last time Derek ever dressed as Diane.
He cancelled the operation at Middlesbrough General Hospital and is now being changed back to a man.
‘I've tried both sides of the fence, It's cost me a lot of money but at least now I know which side I prefer.
I suppose Sue saved me in the nick of time,’ he said.
THE Crown Prosecution Service is still examining a file following the suspicious death of a father-of-two in Middlesbrough.
Robert Dearlove died on Monday afternoon, 36 hours after a domestic incident at the home of his common-law wife Janet.
The couple, who had an 11-year-old daughter and seven-year-old son, were separated.
Mr Dearlove, 31, of Devonshire Road, Middlesbrough, died just hours after a man had appeared in court in relation to the incident.
Michael Joseph Goth, 25, of Liverton Avenue, Whinney Banks, Middlesbrough, was charged with grievous bodily harm with intent.
He was granted conditional bail by Teesside Magistrates.
Now the CPS has to decide whether to press further charges or alternative charges after receiving a file from Cleveland Police following the death.
Mr Dearlove had worked for Middlesbrough Council as a gardener since 1976.
Stab victim in fight for life
A MAN was fighting for his life in Newcastle General Hospital last night after suffering multiple stab wounds and horrific injuries in an attack on a council housing estate.
Police are understood to have found a knife embedded in the body of Derek Clazie, 25, of Tweedmouth, in Berwick, who was discovered unconscious in a pool of blood on the Highcliffe Estate in Spittal.
He was taken 60 miles by ambulance to Newcastle where his condition was ‘very critical.’
Man held: A man featured on Crimewatch was yesterday being questioned by police in connection with a robbery at the National and Provincial Building Society, Bondgate, Darlington last December.
Alan Stephen Wild, 38, was arrested in Lowestoft, Suffolk.
Cyclist hurt:
A boy of about 12 was kept in Northallerton's Friarage Hospital for observation last night after falling off his bike onto the bonnet of a passing car on the A684 in Leeming Bar.
Bypass hope:
An idea to build a western bypass around Scarborough to aid the town's economy won unanimous backing from borough councillors yesterday but they now need to convince North Yorkshire County Council.
Court posts:
Nine new crown court Recorders have been assigned to the North Eastern Circuit by the Lord Chancellor.
They are: Clive Behrens, Stuart Brown QC, Patrick Cosgrove, Michael Fugard CB, Arthur Healey, William Hirst, Christopher Holland QC, Aidan Marron and John Wolstenholme.
Eagle landed:
Experts used drugged food yesterday to recapture bald eagle Samantha at a farm at Lowick, near Berwick, Northumberland.
Samantha escaped from the Yorkshire Dales Falconry Centre at Settle a fortnight ago.
Hospital boost:
An extra £250,000 was approved by the first meeting of the South Tees Acute Hospitals Trust for North Riding Infirmary to convert an in-patient ward into a day ward.
It will mean fewer patients need stay in the infirmary for operations on cataracts and squints.
Arson feared at ex-snooker centre A FIRE at a disused Teesside snooker centre is being treated as arson.
The ground and first floors of the former Super Snooker premises in Redcar Road, South Bank, were badly smoke-damaged in yesterday afternoon's fire.
Couple re-elected: Heather Rafferty and husband Mike have respectively re-elected chairwoman and secretary of the North Tees branch of the RSPCA.
Natural causes:
The death of a Middlesbrough man has been attributed to natural causes.
James Coulson, 68, of Dalkeith Crescent, Hemlington, died in February in South Cleveland Hospital.
Yesterday an inquest was told Mr Coulson was suffering from cancer of the lung and heart disease.
Accidental death:
An 82-year-old retired commercial traveller died on February 13 after a fall in North Tees General Hospital, an inquest heard.
James Robson, of Barlborough Avenue, Stockton, was making progress after he was admitted for problems with his bladder before the fall on February 9.
Cleveland Coroner Michael Sheffield recorded a verdict of accidental death.
Pollution station:
The Department of the Environment has agreed to set up a second air pollution monitoring station at Longlands College, Middlesbrough.
It will monitor a range of hydrocarbons which the first station, set up last year, cannot detect.
Inquest verdict:
Cleveland Coroner Michael Sheffield has recorded a verdict of death by natural causes on retired  fitter and turner Harry Weatherall, 83, of Castleton Road, Stockton, died from an inflammatory lung condition in North Tees General Hospital on January 24.
Kerbs priority:
Cutting high roadside kerbs is a high priority for Saltersgill Community Council in Middlesbrough.
The council has put up £2,000 to lower kerbs, while the Sutton Housing Trust, which manages 520 properties in Saltersgill, has added £5,000.
The Housing Trust hands over a cheque to Community Council chairman and Middlesbrough Mayor Eddie Bolland today.
Road survey:
Campaigners have welcomed Cleveland County Council's decision to carry out a road safety study taking in Sappers Corner and Truro Drive on the A689 on the outskirts of Hartlepool.
House fire:
Two fire engines were called to a house in Miers Avenue, Hartlepool, to fight a fire which destroyed a small amount of carpet and an internal door.
The remainder of the property was affected by smoke.
CASH-STARVED Victim Support schemes in Cleveland have won an important ally in their fight for increased funding the county's Chief Constable.
In a report to police committee members, Keith Hellawell praises the five schemes operating in Cleveland but recognises their financial problems.
He says: ‘It is apparent they are only managing to cover expenditure with increasing difficulty.’
The police committee is asked to consider whether local government should begin to contribute towards Victim Support schemes.
Currently, a Home Office grant pays for the schemes' managers and co-ordinators.
But the workload is increasing in 1991, the five schemes one in each borough and one at Teesside Combined Court received more than 14,000 referrals from Cleveland Police.
Mr Hellawell points out that they play a vital role in helping people cope with the trauma of crime.
‘For the majority of victims, they are the only source of help.
The plight of victims contrasts sharply with the situation for offenders, where more than 30 national organisations were identified as providing support.’
Glenis Porter, co-ordinator of Middlesbrough Victim Support, said the current funding was ‘nowhere near enough’.
‘We are heading for a 1,000 case increase this year on the number of cases we deal with,’ she said.
‘It sounds terrible, but we have to go cap in hand begging for funds to keep solvent.
‘We deal with some very distressing cases particularly involving old people and we have to spend quality time with our victims.
‘Some of our cases can take months.’
Mrs Porter said it was difficult to say that local authorities should help Victim Support, but added: ‘It would be nice if we could be considered because of our vital service.’
Cleveland police committee will discuss whether to support the schemes tomorrow.
A NEW service which is A expected to encourage A more travellers to switch from road to rail made its inaugural run into Middlesbrough station yesterday.
Fifty local authority and business leaders from the North-West were guests of Cleveland County Council and British Rail, which has linked Teesside into its successful TransPennine Service.
BR believes the new service will benefit Teesside, Yorkshire and North-West travellers particularly business travellers who have complained about poor road and rail links between Teesside and the Leeds and Manchester areas.
A £3.5m batch of new trains will join the fleet operating a direct two-hourly service to and from Middlesbrough and Thornaby when it comes into full operation on May 11.
The Teesside TransPennine link is part of a series of changes now under way or in the pipeline for local services:— Northallerton and Thirsk will get hourly trains to York, Leeds, Manchester and Liverpool instead of two hourly.
One train a day in each direction will take in Stockton, Hartlepool and Sunderland, terminating at Newcastle.
The Monday to Saturday Darlington to Hartlepool service, barely used and regularly cancelled, will be axed next month.
Local travellers will change at Thornaby.
Sunday trains are unaffected.
A new station at Manchester Airport will give York and Scarborough travellers a direct service to the terminal building from May 1993.
BR hopes to open a station at Yarm by the end of 1993 if talks with council officials yields local authority support towards the estimated cost of £500,000.
The county council suggested Eaglescliffe station as an interim measure but BR said passenger data indicated poor use of the station to North-West destinations.
BR's Regional Railways division, which takes in the TransPennine service, has been encouraged in recent years by the growth in passengers and revenue.
This has been achieved by joining services to make longer cross-country routes and by introducing new trains.
Passengers can now enjoy such trips as East Anglia to Liverpool, and Scarborough to Manchester without the inconvenience of having to change trains.
The TransPennine service, launched a century ago but struggling in recent years, has been turned into one of its flagship operations.
With new rolling stock to replace the unreliable and grubby 1950s locomotive-drawn carriages it now has a fleet of trains to equal the comforts of InterCity.
The new Class 158 trains are fitted with air conditioning, baby changing facilities, catering, telephones, disabled lavatories and tables.
BR says annual revenue on the TransPennine service is up 120pc since 1986 and passengers by 60pc or nearly 7pc a year.
Growth has continued through the recession.
It is not making a profit, but is now contributing to its operating costs.
Public funding support has been halved.
New trains have significantly reduced delays.
A quarter of trains used to be more than ten minutes late.
That figure is now below 10pc.
Teesside has long demanded an improved service, accelerated by the demise of the Cleveland Executive two years ago which deprived one of Europe's biggest urban and industrial conurbations of a direct service to London.
BR research has indicated that passenger and revenue growth will be greatest by linking Teesside into the TransPennine network.
Darlington, Newcastle, Northallerton, Thirsk, York and Scarborough are already in it.
Roger Cobbe, service group manager, who is responsible for the new service, is unequivocal about its prospects.
‘It is the best thing that has happened to train services on Teesside for years,’ he said.
He said it opens up Teesside as an area for inward investment from the North-West and Leeds and will help expand the catchment area for the new universities.
There are already strong business links which will be further strengthened.
ICI, for instance, has interests on Teesside and in Warrington, one of the route stops.
‘There is also tremendous tourist potential now in northern cities like Manchester and Liverpool, particularly the Albert Dock and Granada TV studios,’ said Mr Cobbe.
In May next year a new station opens at Manchester Airport giving passengers from Scarborough and York a direct hourly service into the terminal buildings.
This cuts out the need for a cumbersome bus or taxi journey from Manchester Piccadilly to catch a flight.
For Darlington, Newcastle and Teesside passengers it will mean a change at York or Manchester Piccadilly.
WOMEN at work will be able to benefit from courses organised by the regional TUC.
The first, looking at women's health at work, runs at Wallsend People's Centre on Tyneside on three Tuesdays from June 23.
A course on speaking out for women is designed to help develop confidence to speak at meetings.
It is on three Tuesdays from June 30 at John Haswell House, Gladstone Street, Gateshead, or on Saturday, June 20, at St Mary's Centre, Middlesbrough.
Tutor Gina Tiller will look at changes in Europe that benefit working women, in a day course at Wallsend People's Centre on Saturday, June 6.
A course on getting the best from pensions, particularly for part-time workers, is at Heaton Education Centre on Saturday, June 27.
The courses are all free for TUC union members.
For further details contact Steve Grinter, TUC regional education office, Swinburne House, Swinburne Street, Gateshead, 091–490 0048.
COUNCILLORS vowed yesterday not to give in to unruly schoolchildren who bring mayhem to Cleveland buses.
The prospect of terminating school services has been raised in the wake of a spate of incidents, including opening emergency doors and throwing missiles from buses.
Coun Jeff Featherstone said he and his two-year-old daughter Hannah had encountered ‘absolutely appalling’ behaviour on a bus serving Hallgarth School, Middlesbrough.
‘Just because my daughter looked at one of these boys, they swore very loudly at her,’ he said.
‘I told them I was not putting up with that sort of behaviour, but they just got more abusive.
‘I have been on the bus since then and there has been nothing quite as bad but I have still heard very loud swearing and seen emergency doors open.’
Hallgarth was named earlier this week as one of three schools with particular problems with ‘dangerous and disruptive’ behaviour.
The others were Eston Park, Middlesbrough, and Henry Smith, Hartlepool.
Cleveland's passenger transport sub-committee yesterday decided to write to the headteacher and chairman of governors at any school where there are continuing problems.
The committee said the letters should suggest banning disruptive pupils, issuing boarding passes and asking the school to consider providing supervision.
Coun Harry Clouth said the buses should not be withdrawn.
‘This would mean we had given in to vandalism and bad behaviour,’ he said.
Pat Archer, of the county council's transportation department, said the problem had dropped slightly in the second half of last term.
He added: ‘We hope this is a permanent situation, not a temporary blip.
It is certainly a serious problem.’
A BUSINESS almost cleaned out by burglars has put up a reward for information leading to conviction of the culprits.
Carsound lost £12,000 of high-quality car radio cassette and CD players during the break-in at its Middlesbrough premises at the junction of Marton Road and North Ormesby Road on the weekend of April 4–6.
Now the company is offering £750 in a bid to catch the burglars.
Anyone with information should contact Cleveland Police on .
A MAN has been charged with murder after a weekend incident.
Michael Joseph Goth, 25, is accused of killing council gardener Robert Dearlove, of Devonshire Road, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, in the early hours of Sunday.
Goth appeared before Teesside magistrates on Monday on a charge of grievous bodily harm with intent and was bailed.
Just hours later, Mr Dearlove died of his injuries in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Goth, of Liverton Avenue, Whinney Banks, was taken into police custody, informed of the murder charge and released on the same bail conditions to appear on May 5.
Revitalisation plan for parks
PEOPLE power is coming to the parks of Middlesbrough.
The advent of Park User Groups will promote residents' involvement in the way the parks are developed and managed.
‘The local park plays a big part in the lives of many families in this town,’ said Midlesbrough Council's leisure services chairman Bob Kerr.
The council plans to revitalise Pallister Park as part of its City Challenge programme and hopes to introduce a new lake and extra facilities to Albert Park.
Refuge appeal:
Cleveland Refuge and Aid for Women and Children is appealing for large play equipment.
If you have any unwanted items such as bikes, prams or push-along toys, call the Women's Advice Line on .
Pledge honoured:
Defeated election candidate Paul Rayner has honoured a pledge he made during the campaign to members of Middlesbrough's Muslim community by writing to the new Home Secretary with details of long delays experienced by would-be immigrants.
Therapy success:
The open day at The Natural Therapy Centre in Guisborough on March 28 was ‘a complete success’, raising awareness of holistic health and almost £100 for Guide Dogs For The Blind.
Linda reads:
Linda France reads from her first book Red at Poetry Live! on Friday May 1.
The Northumberland poet appears at The Southfield, Southfield Road, Middlesbrough, at 8pm.
More details from Andy Croft on .
New chairman:
Dr Rab Telfer has been elected to succeed Mr Richard Lines as chairman of the board of governors at Teesside Polytechnic.
Young artist:
Hartlepool's Gray Gallery plays host to its youngest local artist's exhibition yet the work of 11-year-old Lisa Marie Barker.
Kindest cut:
Anthony Waugh sawed his way through his neighbour's stair bannister in Londonderry Road, Stockton, to release Sarah Walters, three, who had got herself trapped while playing on the steps.
Eggstravaganza:
A three day Easter craft and gift fair with competitions and a treasure hunt is being held at Preston Park Museum, Stockton, this weekend.
Working lunch:
Students from Wrensfield Adult Training Centre, Stockton, will be be serving lunch at the Georgian Theatre cafe today when food hygiene certificates are dished out to them.
Drawing crowds:
Visitors from all over the region are converging on the Gray Art Gallery and Museum, Hartlepool, to see an exhibition of the work of realist painter John Bratby, which is to go on a UK tour.
Bells success:
An appeal for bellringer recruits for Guisborough Parish Church has had a resounding response.
There is now a waiting list.
Fence demand:
Vandals have brought terror to a public walkway in Loftus.
Now people living in Park Terrace are demanding that high security fencing protection is provided by Langbaurgh Council.
Golden gift for the blind
ARTHUR and Kathleen Lea, of Manfield, near Darlington, gave up £1,000 worth of golden wedding anniversary presents by asking friends and relatives to donate money to help sponsor a guide dog instead.
And then the couple matched the £1,000 collection with £1,000 of their own enough money to sponsor two guide dogs.
A spokeswoman for The Guide Dog for the Blind Centre at Middlesbrough said: ‘It was a wonderful donation and because it was so generous we gave the Leas the chance to name the two dogs.’
Their eldest grandsons, James and Philip Heslop, chose the names Oliver and Abbi.
Pool petition:
Around 2,500 people have signed a petition calling for a swimming pool in Bedale.
It is now to go before Hambleton District Council.
Foiled raid:
Burglars tried to force their way into a house in Northallerton.
The raid, on a property in Knotto Bottom Way, failed but not before they had tried to force a sliding window at the front of the home.
A19 crash:
Two drivers escaped injury when their vehicles collided near Thirsk.
The accident happened on the southbound carriageway of the A19 and involved a VW van and a Ford Sierra car.
Van haul:
Thieves stole a caravan worth £2,000.
The five berth Monza, which was cream with a white stripe, was taken from Knayton, near Thirsk, just off the A19.
Car gutted:
A car was gutted by fire in Atley Hill Road, Scorton, near Richmond, late on Tuesday night.
Two crews from Richmond dealt with the blaze.
The cause is unknown.
Animal vigil:
Animal rights protestors plan to hold a Good Friday service outside the gates of the Hazleton laboratories in Harrogate tomorrow afternoon.
Members of the Hazleton Action Group are holding the service together with Animal
Christian Concern.
Rail ramble:
Richmondshire Ramblers' next outing will  include a trip on the Settle-Carlisle railway.
The group and anyone who wishes to join meets at 9.45am in Nun's Close car park, Richmond, on Saturday to catch a train at Ribblehead to Horton-in-Ribbledale before making an eight-mile walk back via Sulber Nick, Alum Pot, Selside and Gauber.
The walk's leader will be Ted Darwin who may be contacted on Richmond 822845.
Operetta night:
Singers Marilyn Hill Smith and Peter Morrison perform Treasures of Operetta at the Georgian Theatre Royal, Richmond, on Sunday at 7.30pm.
Rubbish raid:
Thieves broke into a rubbish dump near Ripon.
They stole tools worth £30 from a cabin at West Tanfield disposal site as well as a radio.
Meeting time:
The Richmond Meet ladies committee holds a fundraising coffee morning in the Town Hall on Saturday, 9am-noon.
Scanner cash:
A coffee morning to raise funds for the Friarage Hospital scanner appeal takes place in Reeth memorial hall on Saturday, 10am-noon.
NOTHING in Neil Kinnock's eight and half years as Labour leader so became the man as his dignified acceptance of his party's calamitous general election defeat.
The speech he delivered at Labour Party's headquarters in Walworth Road, at the moment he had confidently expected to be entering Downing St in triumph, was the most moving I have heard from any British politician since Churchill.
I am not ashamed to say it brought me close to tears.
Hands shaking, voice also trembling with emotion Neil said, as you all know, that he wasn't disappointed for himself.
But he felt ‘dismay and sorrow for so many people in our country who do not share this personal good fortune.’
Regretting that these people would now ‘experience further disadvantage,’ Neil bravely predicted that ‘one day our nation will get better better in spirit.’
And he concluded: ‘The British people deserve better than they got on 9th April, 1992.’
Acres of newsprint have been devoted to what went wrong with Labour's election campaign.
One thing that went seriously wrong is that we didn't hear more of Neil Kinnock speaking as he did amid the wreckage of his political hopes and personal career.
Speaking simply and directly and from the heart.
His vision of a fairer, kinder society shone like a beacon in those final selfless words.
Where was it among the glitz of that infamous Sheffield rally?
All that is water well and truly under the bridge.
And I don't propose to consider here whether Labour should lurch to the left to find its way out of the wilderness.
Frankly I'm not sure the road is still open.
Of broader importance, since not every non-Tory voter seeks a Labour government, are the implications of the election result for our system of democracy.
Since 1935, only once has a party been elected with as much as 50 per cent of the vote: the Tories under Sir Anthony Eden in 1955.
As long as power oscillated between two evenly-balanced parties, who shared more or less the whole of the vote, the election of a minority government didn't matter too much.
The losing minority knew its turn would come.
But the rise of a centre party since the mid 1970s has created an intolerable situation.
Taking votes mainly from one of the existing parties, it has given the other i.e the Tories virtually a clear run.
Of course the Tory party will simply say it is up to the others to attract a winning minority or even a majority.
But the fact remains that for the last 13 years we have been governed by a party rejected by nearly 60pc of voters.
And it has now won a record-breaking fourth consecutive term, the first for 150 years, despite failing to retain even the 44 per cent share of the vote on which it came to power in 1979.
If our democracy is to retain popular support and respect, it seems vital that the 60pc of voters regularly voting for change are given some opportunity to bring their ideals and values to bear on society.
For the  fragmentation of the vote looks like increasing e.g. by the probable revival of the Greens.
Coupled with innate British conservatism, this presents a disturbing prospect of one party government.
This is not what the Suffragettes, and others, envisaged in their  heroic struggles to win the vote.
ARE FISHERMEN conservationists?
No doubt they will say so.
Then what are we to make of current events at Whitby and Scarborough?
Encouraged by the success of a Whitby boat which recently began fishing for scallops, a small armada has headed for the Yorkshire ports.
At the last count 15 vessels from Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales had joined local boats scooping the scallops.
Already the stocks look like being virtually wiped out.
The local fishermen blame the invaders.
But the plunder is just part of the over-fishing that dates back to the 1960s, when North Sea herring were annihilated.
If we could physically see how the diminishing fish stocks are still being attacked this outrage would end.
But it looks like doing so only when the fishermen have emptied the seas.
THE ‘novelty’ of first-class cricket in the North-East might well give the Durham county team the pleasure of playing its home championship games in front of the biggest crowds on the circuit.
That is unless Durham folk take the same unflattering view of today's cricketers as the county's overseas star Dean Jones.
In one of those question-and-answer newspaper profiles, the aggressive Aussie batsmen recently revealed that there is no cricketer in the world he would pay to watch.
STILL SPOTLIGHTING cricket.
If you want an example of computer madness, study the First Class Fixture List.
Worked-out by the all-conquering micro-chip this gives Durham four home fixtures, including two Sunday league games, by April 26.
In the same period Yorkshire play away five times.
And they don't make their home debut until April 30.
THE INTRODUCTION of a two-hourly trans-Pennine rail link to Teesside is a bold move by British Rail.
But why not be even bolder?
Why not run some trains beyond the intended terminus at Middlesbrough to the coast Saltburn and Whitby?
If you were a potential passenger in Liverpool, Huddersfield, Leeds or York, which destination would most tempt you?
Day break
TRYING to talk to civil servants was as hard as talking to the man from Reader's Digest (see above).
This is not because they would not come to the phone, it is because they were not there.
In the Department of Environment in London and in the Department of Energy and the Department of Health they appear to have quit at lunchtime.
The Central Office of Information in Newcastle was being manned by one man, albeit most obliging, the rest having knocked off.
If ever they make Maundy Thursday a holiday of course then there are jobs in which it will be the norm to go home on Wednesday lunchtime.
Meanwhile, anybody working in a pub, a cafe, a restaurant, a tea shop, a cinema, or serving food or drink of any type has to work at all those times.
This is of course a classless society.
On the ball
HERE is a little moral story for Easter, a tale for our times if you like.
It concerns an executive who passed a mental hospital on his way to work and stopped occasionally to watch an inmate going through the motions of winding up and pitching an imaginary ball.
A friend asked the executive what he found so absorbing about the man's performance.
‘Well,’ said the executive, ‘if things keep going on the way they are, I'll be there some day catching for that guy and I want to make sure I know his curves.’
CLEVELAND County Council is taking action to protect its playing fields from the opt-out plans of a Middlesbrough school.
Governors at Gillbrook School in South Bank hope to become the first grant maintained school in the North-East.
As soon as the results of the General Election were known a special governors meeting was called for April 29 to resume the opt-out debate.
Voting was postponed last July in case grant maintained schools were abolished under Labour.
The possibility of an opt out has concerned the county council which fears it could lose playing fields at the former Eston Lowfields School on Gillbrook's campus.
Yesterday the education committee agreed Gillbrook can continue using Lowfields fields on condition it accepts a licence that prevents the school from claiming the land if it opts out.
Education committee chairman, Coun Keith Legg, said: ‘The county council is safeguarding its interests.
Once the governors decide to go for opting out we'll no longer be able to protect that land.’
Clampdown on night spots
POLICE are clamping down on Scarborough's night clubs and it is likely that the licence of one of them could be threatened.
The action follows 35 people being arrested for drinking offences at one club recently.
Scarborough has six leading night spots.
Theatre date:
Members of the Teenact theatre company will present their latest production, Devil's Wager, based on the Biblical story of Job at York College of Ripon and York St John's Chapel Studio between Monday and Saturday.
Publicity award:
Lightwater Valley theme park at North Stainley near Ripon is a finalist in the Institute of Public Relations Sword of Excellence Awards for the launch of its new ride, the Bullet, last year which boosted attendances by 40pc.
THE chairman of governors at a school plagued by bus pests has pledged a continued crackdown on the problem.
Hallgarth, in Acklam, Middlesbrough, was named this week as one of three schools with pupils causing trouble on bus services including pupils opening emergency doors, throwing missiles, spitting and swearing.
Benjamin Laird, chairman of Hallgarth's governors, said several measures had been taken to weed out the culprits, but admitted: ‘We will never wipe out the problem 100 per cent.
Every school has its trouble-makers.’
He said the school would do ‘everything in its power’ to cut out trouble, including  withdrawal of bus passes for those caught.
THE search is on in Cleveland to find the best and most useful new device to crack crime.
Up to £1,000 can be won in a competition organised by the Cleveland Police Crime Prevention Department.
The judges will look for simple and effective devices which also demonstrate market potential and value for money.
Sgt David Chaplin, crime prevention officer for Middlesbrough, said: ‘During 1991, almost 75,000 crimes were reported to Cleveland Police.
Many of these could have been prevented if the right measures were available and used correctly.’
Entry to the competition is open to anyone aged 11–25.
Further details are available from Sgt Chaplin at Dunning Road, Middlesbrough, Cleveland.
AN ARMY cadet force faces a big battle to survive.
Cleveland Army Cadet Force Prissick Base detachment, Middlesbrough, is desperately seeking recruits.
Numbers have fallen since the number of schools on Prissick Base was reduced.
Major Mike Twinn, who commands seven detachments within the Middlesbrough area, believes many people are unaware of the detachment's existence.
He said: ‘The cadet centre is out of sight at the rear of Marton Sixth Form College and has suffered a dramatic drop in numbers attending.’
Any 13 to 18-year-olds interested can visit the base between 6.30 pm and 7.30 pm on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
A TEENAGE mother banned from seeing her six-month-old baby girl after being charged with ill treating her in a cot at a London hospital ward, can now visit her under social services supervision.
The 17-year-old single mother from Middlesbrough, who cannot be named for legal reasons, elected jury trial when she appeared on a cruelty charge at Horseferry Road Magistrates Court in Westminster yesterday.
At an earlier hearing, defence solicitor Colin Nott failed in a bid to have the ban lifted, but successfully appealed at the High Court the next day to have the bail condition lifted so his client could see the baby under supervision.
The jobless woman, whose parents have already had supervised access to the baby now with foster parents was further remanded on bail until May 28.
She is charged with wilfully assaulting her baby on March 11 this year in a manner likely to cause her unnecessary suffering or injury to health at the Royal Brompton Hospital in Sydney Street, Chelsea, where the infant was being treated.
Magistrate Roger Davies, ordered the teenager to live with her parents as a condition of bail and to see her child only under the supervision of local social services.
Concern grows for missing boy
CONCERN is growing for a fifteen-year-old boy who went missing from home following a family dispute over his suspension from school.
Mark Carr, of North Road, Boldon Colliery, left home on Wednesday last week and has since been  spotted in the Biddick Hall area of South Shields.
He is 5ft 2ins, of medium build with blond hair.
Anyone who can help should contact Jarrow police on 091–567 6155.
Church grant:
Durham City Council will give a £1,500 grant towards restoration of a cemetery wall at St Mary's Church, Sherburn village.
Housing refused:
Plans to build six homes on land at Hallgarth Farm, Pittington, have been refused by Durham City councillors.
Home attack:
Tory councillor Isabel Graham has criticised the running of Sunderland's home for battered wives, calling it a ‘farce’ that showed the ‘ineptitude’of the Labour-controlled council.
Concert night:
Van Williams, the singer who has appeared on TVs New Faces, plays at Whispers, the Garden Farm Hotel, Chester-le-Street, on April 23.
Shed thefts:
There has been a spate of thefts from garden sheds in Washington and police are warning residents to lock property out of sight.
Soccer warning:
Football fans attending the Sunderland V Middlesbrough match on April 20 at Roker Park are being asked by police to arrive early as big crowds are expected due to vouchers being issued for Cup Final tickets.
Protest dismissed:
Protests from shop owners in Sunderland over increased parking charges have been dismissed by the city's director of engineering Tom Ball who said that city parking was still amongst the cheapest in the country.
Cash snatch:
A thief made off with £45 from a shop in Easington Village after leaning over the counter and snatching a cash bag.
Knife injury:
A catering student in Seaham had to be taken to hospital after he accidentally sat on a new knife.
He was released from hospital after treatment to a leg wound.
House burgled:
A house in Calvert Terrace, Murton, was broken into on Wednesday night.
Thieves made off with a microwave oven, £200 cash, a compact disc player, television and video recorder.
Albanian visit:
Durham solicitor David Keating has just returned from Albania where he led a delegation of lawyers to help establish the legal profession there.
Homes scheme:
Durham City Council is to seek planning permission for homes on three acres of land near West Lea, Witton Gilbert.
Club fire:
An disused ex-servicemen's club in Ludworth, near Wheatley Hill, East Durham, was damaged in a fire yesterday afternoon.
A HORRIFIED British tourist watched as his girlfriend was shot in the head by a mugger.
Peter Ellis, 27, whose parents are believed to live in Middlesbrough, and Julie Stott were ordered to lie on the pavement by the gunman who drove up to them in New Orleans.
They did as they were told but the robber still opened fire, hitting 27-year-old Julie and narrowly missing Mr Ellis.
She died several hours later in hospital.
The shooting happened in what is usually a quiet section of the French Quarter on a street lined with historic buildings serving as apartments, hotels and restaurants.
Police said the couple were walking to their hotel from a restaurant when a man drove a car up beside them, pointed a gun and ordered them to lie down.
It was not clear whether the robber ever got out of the car or escaped with any of their valuables.
Ms Stott died at the state-run Medical Center of Louisiana.
Mr Ellis had lived and worked in New Zealand for about 18 months.
Colleagues were stunned at Sundour Fabrics, the textile firm in Bolton, Greater Manchester, where Ms Stott was development and design manager.
Chief executive Peter Robinson said: ‘We can't believe it.
She was a super girl.
‘I took her on six years ago and she finished up managing our design workshop.
She was brilliant at the job and had a great future.’
Julie had met up in Los Angeles with Mr Ellis before travelling to New Orleans for the jazz festival.
They were reportedly leaving a restaurant in a normally quiet quarter of the town when the gunman drove up and demanded money and valuables.
Neither resisted, but the man suddenly opened fire before driving off empty-handed.
Mr Ellis was unhurt.
‘They had not been there very long and had just come out of a restaurant,’ said Mr Robinson.
‘Julie wouldn't have resisted at all.
She was used to travelling and used to go abroad for us with exhibitions.’
Road block:
A local farmer helped clear a road after it was blocked by a blown down tree.
The incident happened on the Osmotherley to Thimbleby road which was blocked for about half an hour.
Today's wills
HARROGATE:
Thomas Herbert Bellamy of Walton Park, Pannal, Harrogate, who died in November, left £225,983 net.
HARROGATE:
Florence Mildred Oddy of Duchy Road, Harrogate, who died in January, left £129,650 net.
HARROGATE:
Lilian Rose Margaret Tuff of Wysing Dene, Low Laithe, Wilsill, Harrogate, who died in August, left £215,216 net.
She left £250 to Hartwith Church, near Harrogate.
HARROGATE:
Fred Williamson of Duchy Road, Harrogate, who died in January, left £213,632 net.
KNARESBOROUGH:
Florence Marjorie Alton of Braham Hall Farm, Plompton, Knaresborough, who died in August, left £258,868 net.
LEYBURN:
Robert Wood of Robin Hall, Aysgarth, Leyburn, who died in January, left £102,694 net.
PICKERING:
Charles Herbert Crosier of Barnville, Wilton, Pickering, who died in December, left £150,133 net.
He left £1,000 each to Wilton Village Hall, the Patients' Amenity Fund at Scarborough Hospital; £500 each to Wilton Parish Church, Thornton le Dale Methodist Church, Scarborough Branch RSPCA and Ryedale Talking Magazine Association.
RIPON:
Mary Phillips of Kirkby Road, Ripon, who died in September, left £118,757 net.
SCARBOROUGH:
Marjorie Isabel Arundale of Holbeck Road, Scarborough, who died in January, left £140,580 net.
SCARBOROUGH:
John Andrew Battye of Ratten Row, Seamer, Scarborough, who died in October, left £558,432 net.
SCARBOROUGH:
Wilfred Blundell of Carlton Tower, Belmont Road, Scarborough, who died in November, left £136,278 net.
TADCASTER:
Reginald Clarkson of Ingleby Drive, Tadcaster, who died in January, left £141,403 net.
THORNTON DALE:
Ethel Stewart Bolton of Priestmans Lane, Thornton Dale, North Yorkshire, who died in October, left £129,374 net.
WHITBY:
Mary Isabel Richardson of Dunstay Crescent, Whitby, who died in November, left £131,133 net.
She left £2,000 to St Hilda's Catholic Church, Bagdale and £500 to the priest there for Masses; £1,000 each to St Joseph's Convent, Whitby and the Ecclesiastical Education Fund Middlesbrough Diocese and £500 each to St John of God Hospital, Scorton, St Patrick's Roman Catholic Church, Whitby and Cafod.
WHITBY:
Honor Maxwell Spaven of Bagdale, Whitby, formerly of Egton Road, Aislaby, Whitby, who died in August, left £331,218 net.
She left £1,000 to the Church of St Margaret, Aislaby.
YORK:
Alexander Forster of Hull Road, York, who died in January, left £160,907 net.
YORK:
Kate Lisa Morrell of Ingram House, Bootham, York, who died in January, left £840,799 net.
YORK:
Peter Richard Penty of Greencliffe Drive, Clifton, York, who died in August, left £559,124 net.
Campaigner hoping for county's demise
A CAMPAIGNER for the return of ancient county boundaries has said he would welcome the dissolution of Cleveland County Council.
Nigel Wilkin, who in the 1980s launched a Yarm in Yorkshire campaign, is Cleveland's representative on the national Ridings Society.
He said he would welcome the widely anticipated dissolution of the county council by the Government but would not now insist that Yarm was administered by North Yorkshire County Council.
‘Personally I think they (the Boundary Commission) will revert to the name Teesside.
Hopefully they will make Teesside a smaller geographical area than Cleveland.’
Water change:
Tenants of Hartlepool Council should direct inquiries on water rates to the Hartlepools Water Company.
Before April 1 Council tenants paid for water and sewerage services along with their rents but under new arrangements payments should go direct to the water company.
Helping hand:
A Cleveland club which serves the community is looking for groups to help.
Yarm District Lions Club is keen to raise funds for those in need within Yarm, Eagelscliffe, Thornaby, Hilton, Seamer, Ingleby Barwick and Hutton Rudby.
The club meets regularly at The Fox Covert, High Leven.
Funny money:
Police issued a warning yesterday after a forged £20 was found in Great Ayton.
An attempt to pass the money was made at a car centre in the village.
Car crash:
A mother and her two children had to have a hospital check up after their car crashed into the central reservation on the A19.
The accident, involving a Ford Escort, happened on the northbound carriageway between Clack Lane Ends and the Stokesley junction.
Man injured:
A driver was hurt when his car overturned on the Stokesley to Easby road.
The accident involving a Ford Sierra happened at Easby Firth Farm.
Centre safe:
Cleveland County Council has safeguarded the future of the county's busiest tourist information centre for the next year.
The Guisborough centre, which dealt with more than 30,000 visitors last year, was under threat because of financial problems faced by Langbaurgh District Council.
Road closed:
The A174 between Ship Inn Bank, Saltburn and Coach Road, Brotton, will close to through traffic from April 22 for about 10 days for re-surfacing work.
Diversions will be signposted via the B1267 and A173.
Safety first:
A community safety project has increased the feeling of security among Middlesbrough residents in its first year of operation, claims the borough council.
The scheme has included the distribution of more than 200 home security grants, a Shopwatch project and work with young people.
Green news:
The Green Sheet, full of up-to-date news on the environment, has been produced by Cleveland County Council to encourage its 25,000-plus staff to become more aware of green issues.
Radio stolen:
Thieves removed the back window of a lorry to steal the radio.
The Scania truck was broken into in Great Ayton.
War widows to get cash boost
A CASH-HIT council is to repay to war widows additional relief on rents and poll tax charges that it withheld in error.
Servicemen's wives in Langbaurgh widowed before 1973 had been denied allowances because of an oversight during budget cutbacks made to avoid charge-capping, the council said.
Dummy run:
The Coastguard launched the Crimdon Dene inshore lifeboat and the helicopter at RAF Boulmer was scrambled yesterday after children reported seeing a swimmer floating out to sea near Hartlepool.
Later staff from the Crimdon Caravan Park found a life ring with a dummy full of sand on the beach.
Woman hurt:
A 79-year-old woman who was attacked and robbed of her handbag as she walked near Gateshead town centre has been admitted to hospital for observation after suffering a heart flutter brought on by stress.
Shop burgled:
Thieves escaped with a quantity of cigarettes after breaking into a shop in Cramlington, Northumberland.
Drivers warned:
Motorists are being warned to avoid driving into York city centre over Easter with St George's Field car park, one of the city's busiest, out of action while flood defence work continues.
Trespass charge:
Gerald Malcolm McGann, 37, of Southfield Road, Middlesbrough, appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with trespass.
The hearing was adjourned until April 28.
Caver saved:
Caver Patrick Sault, 24, of Burton Joyce, Nottinghamshire, was rescued yesterday after falling in Alum Pot, at Selside, near Horton-in-Ribblesdale, in the Yorkshire Dales.
He was taken to Airedale General Hospital, Keighley, where his condition was said not to be serious.
Ravine fall:
A 14-year-old boy suffered a leg injury when he fell down a ravine at Delves Lane, Consett, yesterday.
He was rescued by firemen and taken to Shotley Bridge hospital.
Farm blaze:
Firemen tackled a blaze in buildings at Tees Grange Farm, Coniscliffe Road, Darlington, at about 4.10pm yesterday.
Five tons of baled straw were destroyed.
Boy hurt:
Stuart West, aged six, of Milbank Road, Hartlepool, suffered a broken leg when he was hit by a car in the town's Powlett Road yesterday.
Police say the youngster ran out from behind parked cars into the path of the vehicle, driven by Shane Jewson, 23, of Willow Walk, Hartlepool.
Open register:
A Cleveland council leader criticised new regulations forcing councils to publish a register of members' Page 4.
Big boost lined up for tower appeal
AN appeal to save a crumbling Middlesbrough landmark could receive a big boost tomorrow.
A group of young people from Park End plan a sponsored walk to raise money for the church tower fund in North Ormesby.
Father Don Trotter, of The Holy Trinity Church in North Ormesby, who is leading the appeal, said: ‘I'm delighted by the gesture.
The public has been marvellous it is big business and local Government that has let us down.’
Middlesbrough Council last month refused an application for a £5,000 grant towards the tower restoration fund.
More than £40,000 is needed to carry out urgent repairs to the tower.
To date, only one-third of that sum has been raised.
Kevin Hobson, of Kinross Avenue, Park End, has organised tomorrow's walk, which will leave the church tower at 2pm for a return trip to Redcar.
Spillage drama:
Fire crews swilled away fuel after a spillage at the corner of The Avenue and Farndale Drive in Guisborough yesterday.
New classes:
West View Advice and Resource Centre in Hartlepool offers a wide range of new classes after Easter, including creative writing, chess and relaxation/stress management.
Further details are available from Anne Harker on 0429–271275.
Chain stays:
The Mayor of Whitby, Coun Maurice Hatton, will not be taking the official chain of office when he goes on a pilgrimage to the German town of Kleve on April 30, because of its high value.
Instead the town council has decided that a civic medallion should be worn instead.
Bus meeting:
Whitby Town Council is to meet representatives of Tees bus company over the withdrawal of the service to the port's St Andrew's Road area.
Homes plan:
A scheme to build homes on the site of Whitby Seafood factory in Larpool Lane, Whitby, has been submitted to Scarborough Council.
Dessie's date: Racehorse Desert Orchid will visit the York branch of Godfrey's bookshop in Stonegate on April 28 to launch a book by his owner, Richard Burridge, charting his career.
Record start:
Ticket sales for this year's Ryedale Festival have got off to a record start with more than £16,000 netted in the first three weeks and some events are already sold out, says director Geoffrey Emmerson.
The festival, which runs from July 24 to August 11, has a record number of 67 events in 46 venues, including nine stately homes, 22 churches, and village halls and schools.
Charities sought:
The 22 NorthEast Rotaract Clubs are looking for worthwhile charities to support in their September fund-raising week.
Any hopeful charities should contact Dawn Newton, Rotaract Clubs Charity Coordinator, PO Box 5, Whitley Bay, NE26 1BH before Friday, May 1.
On the move:
The Rev Alison Harrison, curate of Stockton, has been named as curate-in-charge of Cockfield and Lynesack by the diocese of Durham.
Trust meets:
The first meeting of the newly-established York Health Services Trust takes place in public on May 11 at York District Hospital at 9.30am.
The new body follows the implementation of the Government's health reforms.
Charlie's send-off: Comedian Charlie Williams is to start the 33rd traditional Easter Monday walk between Scalby and Cloughton, near Scarborough.
The walk is this year to benefit the Ladies Lifeboat Guild.
Walkers have to drink half a pint of ale or lemonade at four pubs on the six mile route.
Sailing chance:
Filey Sailing Club is staging a Come and Try It day on May 2.
Qualified instructors will teach novices the ins and outs of the sport.
Wetsuits and life jackets will be provided.
Market bid:
A new bid is being made to set up a 25-stall weekly market on land at the rear of The Three Tuns Hotel, Murray Street, Filey, by Market Operators and Management.
Scarborough Council refused a previous scheme.
on Darlington 381313.
A VISION of Middlesbrough's future will be discussed by councillors next week.
Plans to make the town ‘a significant regional, social and cultural centre 18 hours a day, seven days a week’ are outlined in a report.
It suggests Middlesbrough needs a wider choice of entertainment, bars, restaurants and shopping facilities than it now offers.
Members of the borough council's policy and resources committee will be asked to consider the report Creating A Better Tomorrow which aims to maintain and enrich Middlesbrough's role as a sub-regional centre.
The town's Environment City title is central to the development plan, along with hopes to attract more visitors to Middlesbrough.
Varied arts and entertainments, and better shopping and leisure facilities are also on the development agenda as are business, transport and housing strategies and schemes to cut crime.
The report says: ‘Our vision is based on an understanding that many different independent elements social, economic and cultural create a city's life and determine whether a community flourishes or simply survives.’
The report says a public-private partnership is vital to ensure any town or city develops to its full potential.
A CAFE in Middlesbrough is on a collision course with the borough council over its opening hours.
Middlesbrough Council claims the cafe, in Marland Buildings, Marton Road, is defying a planning ruling by serving after 6pm.
Residents nearby have complained about noise and disturbance late at night.
Members of a development subcommittee will be asked to authorise enforcement action against the premises when they meet later this week.
The cafe is only supposed to open from 8am until 6pm MondaySaturday.
In February, councillors refused to allow a variation of the hours.
A NEW MP is hoping that Middlesbrough can join him on the promotion trail this season.
Alan Keen, Boro's former tactical scout, won political promotion when he was elected Labour member for the Middlesex constituency of Feltham and Heston on April 9.
After overturning a 5,400 Conservative majority into a near 2,000 margin, the 54-year-old now hopes the Boro can top the Second Division poll.
Mr Keen worked under seven different managers during an 18-year stint with the club.
He ‘spied’ on Boro's coming opponents in the South.
In his first season, he saw Stan Anderson's team win promotion in 1966–7.
‘I remember coming up to Middlesbrough for the final game with Oxford, which Boro won 4–0,’ he recalled.
‘It was a brilliant atmosphere everyone remembers that game.’
Mr Keen was born in London, but his parents returned to their native Teesside when he was only three weeks old.
He was brought up in Victoria Road, Grangetown.
He had moved South when Stan Anderson signed him up and for nearly two decades, Mr Keen travelled thousands of miles preparing dossiers on Boro's future opponents.
His favourite manager?
‘It's hard to beat Big Jack,’ he said, recalling his years under Mr J Charlton.
Mr Keen saw John Neal, Willie Maddren, Bobbie Murdoch and Malcolm Allison come and go before work pressures forced him to leave his scouting post in the early days of Bruce Rioch.
He still watches Boro when they play in the South.
As a politician, Alan Keen may not yet be in the Premier League but he thinks the Boro will be next season.
‘I'm confident we will be in one of the automatic promotion places,’ he said.
Having never fought an election before, Mr Keen has the sort of 100pc record any football manager would envy: played one, won one.
Man hurt in street attack
A DARLINGTON man was yesterday recovering in hospital after a Good Friday attack which left him with broken bones in his face.
Paul Wakefield, 27, of High Moor Road, was assaulted and knocked unconscious as he walked along Northgate just after 8pm on Friday.
He was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital suffering from head injuries and did not regain consciousness until Saturday.
His condition yesterday was described as stable and comfortable.
Darlington police said two people had been arrested in connection with the attack and investigations were continuing.
Girl injured:
Danielle Simpson, six, of Beverley Gardens, Ferryhill, suffered a broken leg and internal injuries in an accident with a motorcycle, in Broom Bank, Ferryhill, yesterday.
Her condition in hospital last night was ‘fairly comfortable.’
HARROGATE:
The future of the town's biggest industry could hinge on the outcome of next month's local election.
Talks are under way with the Government in a bid to ease Harrogate's financial straitjacket as millions of pounds are needed to upgrade and refurbish the conference and exhibition halls in a bid to maintain their position among the country's top venues.
SCARBOROUGH: Extensive work is underway to prepare for a big launch of a scheme to convert the former Odeon cinema into a theatre.
The public launch of the appeal is not likely to be made before September.
YORK: Police officers are being caught on the hop by an explosion of Easter bunnies.
Lawns outside the Fulford Road headquarters have proved the ideal breeding ground.
TYNE AND WEAR: A party of North-East firefighters fly to the Ukraine this week to visit a museum in Kiev dedicated to their foreign counterparts who were killed or injured in the Chernobyl nuclear disaster.
ALNWICK: Three members of the same family were badly hurt when their car crashed on the busy Peppermoor crossroads.
DURHAM: Faith in the City, an exhibition of photographs of life on inner city housing estates in Britain is to visit Durham Cathedral.
It comprises 30 pictures organised by the Church Urban Fund.
CLEVELAND:
Two sisters, formerly from the area, are looking for old classmates from the former Cleveland School to take part in a reunion on Saturday May 9 at Teesside High School, Eaglescliffe.
HARTLEPOOL: A new late night club would stretch their resources to the limit, police say.
They are opposing a bid by the Cotton Club to stay open until 2am.
Residents of the Jackson and Dyke House wards are being given the chance to set up a community newspaper.
Organisers are holding two meetings to display equipment and work.
The town launches its City Challenge bid on Wednesday with 1,000 heart-shaped balloons launched from Christ Church.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
The number of families living in bed and breakfast accommodation in the town rose by 50 to 85 last month.
NORTHALLERTON: Consultants may be employed to push through the town's urgently needed bypass after campaigners voiced disappointment that the scheme was not included in county council spending estimates for at least six years.
A TOWERING fundraising target looked a little nearer yesterday but there were sore feet to show for it!
Kevin Hobson led a team of youngsters from Park End in Middlesbrough on an 18-mile sponsored walk to Redcar and back.
The foot-slog raised around £600 for the North Ormesby Tower Appeal.
The century-old tower, one of Middlesbrough's most famous landmarks, is crumbling and needs more than £40,000-worth of repair work.
Mr Hobson, 29, of Kinross Avenue, sells vegetables at North Ormesby Market.
Car blaze:
The fire brigade was called to Gulliver Road, Hartlepool, on Saturday night where a car was destroyed by fire.
Benefits guide:
Age Concern Cleveland is offering the most up-to-date guide to money benefits for older people.
The 1992/3 issue of Your Rights includes all the latest information and is available for £2.50 from the Age Concern shop, 150 Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough, or by calling Lyndsay Eldon on .
Radio assault: A team from South Cleveland Hospital Radio are gearing themselves up to tackle a tough army assault course.
The 1st Battalion The Green Howards will guide the ten-strong team over the demanding course at Catterick Garrison next Sunday.
Their efforts will raise money for the hospital radio station.
Today's Wills
MIDDLESBROUGH:
Jane McMillan May of Lexden Avenue, who died in January, left £128,081 net.
Edna Smurthwaite of Westmoor View, Marton, who died in December, left £176,235 net.
AN AMBULANCEMEN has called for a man who rescued a youth from mountainous seas yesterday to be given a bravery award.
George Dinsdale, stationed at Redcar, said the man, known only as a Mr Kirwan of Lumley Street, Redcar, jumped into the water near a slipway to rescue a youth who had been dragged in by a huge wave.
‘That young bloke undoubtedly owes his life to Mr Kirwan,’ said Mr Dinsdale, who was called to the scene at about 6.10pm yesterday.
Mr Dinsdale and his partner Ted Vasey took both men to hospital.
Mr Kirwan was treated at Redcar where he is understood to have suffered a minor chest injury.
The youth he rescued, known only as a Mr Thorpe, was treated in the casualty department at Middlesbrough General.
Neither of the men involved in the incident could be contacted last night.
Family members hurt in crash
THREE members of the same family were injured when two cars crashed on a busy Northumberland road.
The accident happened at the Peppermoor crossroads on the Alnwick to Longhoughton Road.
Three passengers in one car, Joan Birkett, 67, and Phillip Birkett, 72, both of Wayside, South Shields, and Denise Birkett, 39, from Surrey, suffered injuries and were taken to hospital.
Joan Birkett was taken to Ashington General Hospital's intensive care unit and was expected to undergo surgery.
Driver Daniel Birkett, also from Surrey, and the other driver, Malcolm Hutcheon, from Edinburgh, were shocked but uninjured.
Police have appealed for witnesses to the accident at about 4.25pm on Friday.
Appeal boost:
Salavation Army work in the North-East has been boosted by grants of almost £4,000 from the BBC's Children in Need Appeal.
The beneficiaries were the North-East School of Music and Drama, a holiday scheme for under-privileged children in Sunderland, and parent and toddler groups in Darlington and Middlesbrough.
Staff chosen:
Rehabilitation staff from South Tyneside District Hospital have been selected as finalists in a national quality healthcare award scheme for their work in developing a  rehabilitation service for people who have suffered strokes.
Radiation checks:
Radiation levels in North Tyneside showed no significant change following the recent release of radioactive iodine from a Russian nuclear plant, said a council spokesman.
Checks were carried out by officers at monitoring stations in Whitley Bay and Seaton Burn.
Sporting chance:
Whiteleas Cricket Club in the North-East Durham Cricket League is seeking pre-season friendlies during April.
Anyone interested should contact club secretary Ian Wilburn on Tyneside (091) 4547665.
Fund help:
Staff from International Paint of Gateshead have raised £500 to boost the town mayor's charity fund.
Representatives will hand over the cheque tomorrow.
On show:
A silver salver which was presented to Lieut Col Leonard Laing, Commander of the 9th Durham (Sunderland) Battalion of the Home Guard, is to go on display at the Monkwearmouth at War Exhibition at Monkwearmouth Station Museum in Sunderland.
Fort launch:
The Arbeia Roman Fort in Baring Street, South Shields, will launch its new revamped magazine on Wednesday at a special events day.
The Arbeia Magazine will include all the latest details on finds and excavations at the fort.
Fire alert:
A man was alerted to a fire in the kitchen of his home in Norton Road, Southwick, Sunderland, at midnight on Saturday by a smoke alarm.
The fire started in the cooker and firemen forced their way into the house to find the man in the living room.
He declined hospital treatment.
Kitchen blaze:
A man was taken to hospital suffering from the effects of smoke inhalation yesterday after a kitchen blaze at his ground-floor flat in Lutterworth Road, Longbenton, Newcastle.
Firemen also rescued five kittens.
Boat accident:
A man suffered a leg injury when the leisure boat he was travelling in, the Deborah Ann, clipped the sea wall at Tynemouth harbour after rope got wrapped around its  propeller .
The Tyne lifeboat was called to help bring the stricken vessel to the quay.
Monastery music:
The first in the 1992 series of Summer concerts at the Bede Monastery Museum, Jarrow Hall, Church Bank, Jarrow, will be a Bach recital at 7.30pm on Saturday, April 25.
Tickets are £2.25.
Military meeting:
The Spring meeting of the Territorial, Auxiliary and Volunteer Reserve association for the North of England will be held on Wednesday at St George's TA centre, Sandyford Road, Newcastle.
Clergy appointment:
The Rev June M Thomas, honorary parish deacon of St Peter, Stockton has been appointed honorary curate-in-charge of St Mark, Stockton by the Diocese of Durham.
A WOMAN was shot and her daughter taken hostage yesterday in a horrifying Easter Sunday siege.
Passers-by said Pauline Reece was shot from an upstairs window in Lyonette Road, Darlington, after she had fled screaming from the house.
Neighbours rallied round and alerted the emergency services, who took 43-year-old Mrs Reece to Darlington Memorial Hospital.
She was later transferred to Middlesbrough General Hospital, where her condition last night was said to be ‘satisfactory’.
A man, understood to be Keith Pringle, remained in the house with Mrs Reece's 21-year-old daughter Leanne.
Zoe Cockburn, 17, of Lyonette Road, who witnessed the incident, said: ‘Pauline just got to the bottom of the drive and he shot out of the window.
A few people ran round to see how she was and he just stood at the window watching with a shotgun.’
A team of three police negotiators managed to make contact with the man, thought to be 24, with a telephone passed through an upstairs window.
About 30 police of whom a third were armed surrounded the semi-detached house and evacuated neighbouring homes.
Roads leading to Lyonette Road were cordoned off and onlookers advised to stay in their homes…
Gary Rothwell and his friend Stephen Foster, from Ferryhill, said they heard the gunshot.
‘We were in the car and then there was a big bang and something that sounded like an explosion,’ said Gary, who had hoped to visit friends near Lyonette Road.
‘Soon the ambulance and armed police arrived.’
TYNE AND WEAR:
A party of North-East firefighters fly to the Ukraine this week to visit a museum in Kiev dedicated to their foreign counterparts who were killed or injured in the Chernobyl nuclear disaster.
ALNWICK: Three members of the same family were badly hurt when their car crashed on the busy Peppermoor crossroads.
DURHAM: Faith in the City, an exhibition of photographs of life on inner city housing estates in Britain is to visit Durham Cathedral.
It comprises 30 pictures organised by the Church Urban Fund.
CLEVELAND: Two sisters, formerly from the area, are looking for old classmates from the former Cleveland School to take part in a reunion on Saturday May 9 at Teesside High School, Eaglescliffe.
HARTLEPOOL: A new late night club would stretch their resources to the limit, police say.
They are opposing a bid by the Cotton Club to stay open until 2am.
Residents of the Jackson and Dyke House wards are being given the chance to set up a community newspaper.
Organisers are holding two meetings to display equipment and work.
The town launches its City Challenge bid on Wednesday with 1,000 heart-shaped balloons launched from Christ Church.
MIDDLESBROUGH: The number of families living in bed and breakfast accommodation in the town rose by 50 to 85 last month.
NORTHALLERTON: Consultants may be employed to push through the town's urgently needed bypass after campaigners voiced disappointment that the scheme was not included in county council spending estimates for at least six years.
WEAR VALLEY: Market traders have voted to reject the council's latest cost-cutting plans, and say they will strike if a compromise is not found.
DARLINGTON: Vandalism and rent increases could soon mean the end of watersports at the reservoir at Middleton St George.
The popular dial-a-ride bus service for the elderly and disabled faces a mounting cash crisis which could radically reduce the timetable, officials have warned.
Staff at the Blackwell Grange golf club are counting the cost of a weekend arson attack which destroyed a hut used for storing green tending equipment.
TWO people were shot and a young woman was taken hostage yesterday as an Easter Sunday love triangle turned to horror.
An unnamed man received serious shotgun wounds to his back in an incident on a minor road between Darlington and Stockton.
And just minutes later 43-year-old Pauline Reece was blasted in the head with a shotgun from an upstairs window of a house in Lyonette Road, Darlington, after she had fled screaming from the house.
Police are linking the two shootings.
In the Lyonette Road incident, neighbours rallied round and alerted the emergency services, who took Mrs Reece to Darlington Memorial Hospital.
She was later transferred to Middlesbrough General, where her condition last night was said to be ‘satisfactory’ and not life threatening.
A man, understood to be Keith Pringle, remained in the house with Mrs Reece's 21-year-old daughter Leanne as armed police surrounded and cordoned off the area.
Leanne has two young children who were last night being cared for by relatives.
It is understood Mr Pringle was involved in the earlier incident, and that the shootings were over his relationship with Leanne.
The identity of the wounded man is not being released by police.
He is also being treated at Middlesbrough General Hospital, where his condition is said to be stable and his life not in danger.
Zoe Cockburn, 17, of Lyonette Road, who witnessed the incident, said: ‘Pauline just got to the bottom of the drive and he shot out of the window.
A few people ran round to see how she was and he just stood at the window watching with a shotgun.’
A team of three police negotiators managed to make contact with the man, thought to be 24, with a telephone passed through an upstairs window.
Missing drugs alert by police
POLICE toured a housing estate yesterday with loud hailers after a bottle of potentially dangerous drugs was lost.
Residents living in the Jennyfields area of Harrogate were warned that the pills could prove harmful if taken by children.
The small brown bottle contained 28 Carbemazapine tablets, described as small and white.
They were lost sometime between Sunday afternoon and yesterday morning.
A spokesman for North Yorkshire police said the pills, used for treating epilepsy, would cause disorientation and drowsiness if taken.
Anyone finding them should hand them in at a police station or to any officer he said.
Street attack:
An elderly churchgoer had her Bible stolen when a woman snatched her handbag in York's Piccadilly on Sunday morning.
The 76-year-old was said to be shocked and upset by the incident.
Scout's award:
Norton Venture Scout, Kevin Brown, 18, has received the Queen's Scout Award from chief scout Garth Morrison.
He will attend a St George's Day Parade at Windsor Castle.
Burglars strike:
Police are investigating a burglary in which a quantity of jewellery was stolen.
The incident happened at a house in Bishopton Park, Ripon, after intruders forced a rear door.
House raid:
Intruders forced a window at the front of a house in Ripon.
They escaped with a television and other electrical items from the property in Ray Lane.
Statues bid:
York Children's Trust is holding talks with the city council to find suitable sites for two statues commemorating the Blue and Grey Coat schools for the poor.
Homes boost:
Land in Bismark Street, Leeman Road, York, may be earmarked for sheltered housing under plans by the city council.
It says around 300 people are waiting for such accommodation equivalent to ten new schemes.
Street closure:
Part of Rawdon Avenue, York, will be closed from next Monday until May 10 to allow contractors to construct a new link main in Melrosegate.
Diversions will be signposted.
Road works:
Maintenance work on a flyover on the A19 near Thirsk could cause traffic delays.
The repairs are being carried out to the bridge at Knayton and the inside lanes of both carriageways are closed.
Rail display:
Model railway enthusiasts in Darlington are planning a display for the public next weekend.
The town's model railway club will be laying on the show at its new club rooms at Darlington railway centre and museum on North Road.
Car fires:
A car was completely destroyed by fire in Dukes Way, Thornaby, at the weekend.
In a separate incident, heat from a car on fire in Victoria Road, Grangetown, Middlesbrough, caused a window at a nearby house to crack, said a fire brigade spokesman.
There were no injuries.
Reward offered:
A Stokesley homeowner yesterday offered a substantial reward for information leading to arrest and conviction of burglars who stole jewellery and electrical items worth more than £15,000.
The break-in happened sometime on Sunday afternoon.
Anyone with any information should contact Stokesley police.
Lift release:
Middlesbrough firemen released three people trapped in a lift at Glastonbury House, Priestfields.
Thieves strike:
A radio-cassette player worth £130 and four tapes were stolen from a car parked at the Helme Park Hall Hotel, Fir Tree, on Saturday night.
Cookery evening:
Tickets are available for an evening of cookery with Peter Bell, who was Northumbrian chef of the year from 1987–1991.
He will give a demonstration at Bishop Auckland College on Wednesday, May 20 at 7pm.
Anything he makes during the evening will be put into a free draw.
Tickets at £4.50, which includes refreshments, are available from the college reception.
THE gunman in the Darlington siege loved his girlfriend so much he resorted to violence in a fit of jealousy, it was claimed last night.
Keith Pringle and his girlfriend Leanne Rees had repeatedly split up but got back together after discovering they couldn't live apart.
Charlotte Ward, whose brother Jason was injured in a shooting incident at Stillington on Easter Sunday morning, told of the relationship.
After the first shooting, father-of-two Pringle, 24, raced back to Lyonette Road, Darlington, where his girlfriend's mother Pauline was shot in the face.
Last night Pringle was still holed up, possibly in the front bedroom, with Leanne, 21, in the semi-detached council house on the town's Whinfield Estate.
Mrs Rees, 43, an activity organiser at Trees Park Village near Middleton St George, was ‘satisfactory’ in Middlesbrough General Hospital, where she is being treated for facial wounds.
Detectives are hoping to interview Jason Ward, 20, who was described as ‘comfortable’ in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Late last night, armed police continued to surround the house where the drama began around 3pm on Sunday.
Yesterday police negotiators maintained contact with Pringle.
Occasionally through the day firearms officers hoisted bags of food and cigarettes to the couple, through an upstairs window.
Last night Charlotte, 18, of Meadow View, Neasham Road, Darlington, told how her brother Jason and Pringle were best friends until a row about Leanne.
‘I think Keith had just flipped,’ said 18-year-old Charlotte.
‘He told us how he loved Leanne, but they had nothing in common.
‘They lived together in Red Hall and then he went his way and she went hers.
A couple of months ago he took her out for a meal and she tried to kiss him.
But he pushed her away, saying he needed time to think about it.
‘There was no way Jason was going out with Leanne.
He had his own house and his girlfriend.’
Charlotte said Pringle had loved Jason as a brother.
All Jason can say to visitors at hospital is: ‘Why did he shoot me?’
‘They were once so close, they were like brothers,’ added Jason's cousin Lisa Dowling, 20.
‘Keith once said if anyone hurt Jason he would do life for him.
‘Now Jason's just in a state of shock.
He can't understand what's gone on.’
The two told how Pringle had called for Jason at his home in Geneva Road, Darlington, on Sunday afternoon and they had gone for a ride around in a van.
The gun was drawn on a back road between Darlington and Sedgefield.
‘We don't know if there was a gun under the seat.
When Jason saw the gun, he jumped out and got into the hedge,’ said Charlotte.
‘Keith would sooner help someone than hurt them.
I feel really sorry for him.’
A GARAGE owner was turned into a human fireball in an explosion yesterday.
Andrew Morton was badly burned when a spark from his welding-torch ignited a fuel line.
The blast set the 29-year-old on fire and only the prompt action of a passer-by prevented potentially fatal injuries.
David Nellis beat down the flames on Mr Morton's back with his bare hands outside D and R Repairs, Telford Road, Cargo Fleet, Middlesbrough.
Later firemen tackling the blaze were in danger from exploding canisters of acetylene and propane.
The drama began at 12.50pm when Mr Morton, of Barrington Crescent, Thorntree, Middlesbrough, was welding.
‘We believe there was an explosion and the fire flashed up his back,’ said Alan Powles, who led a 19-strong team fighting the fire.
He got out fairly quickly and was beaten to the ground by Mr Nellis, who put out the flames.
He could have been much more seriously hurt, but he was burned from head to foot anyway.’
Mr Morton was rushed to Middlesbrough General Hospital's burns unit where last night he was said to be comfortable’.
Mr Nellis was also treated and was later released.
The fire completely destroyed D&R Repairs and the two cars inside.
It also spread to neighbouring Variety Cars, destroying a portable office building.
Mr Powles said: ‘It was a hazardous fire to fight.
The cylinders were causing minor explosions and we had to tackle it from the outside, using the protection of adjoining buildings and cars.
The cylinders were like potential bombs.’
Four fire engines two from Granagetown and two from Middlesbrough fought the flames for an hour before the blaze was under control.
Crews were on the scene for almost two hours.
Neither Mr Nellis, nor Mr Morton's partner could be contacted last night.
UP TO 150 local government jobs could go if two North-East councils have their spending capped by new Environment Secretary Michael Howard.
Labour-controlled Middlesbrough and Langbaurgh Councils expect to hear of their fate later this week.
Bad news could mean 100 jobs are slashed in Langbaurgh and 50 in Middlesbrough.
Brian Roberts, chairman of Langbaurgh Council's policy and resources committee, said: ‘It's all doom and gloom.
‘Howard is a hard-liner who has been put in to bear down on us.
We face 100 job cuts and losing services throughout the borough.’
Both authorities claim they have suffered unfair treatment when their spending needs have been assessed.
Langbaurgh wants to spend £18.6m, £3m higher than the Government's provisional spending level.
Middlesbrough has set a budget of £21.6m, £1.4m above the provisional limit.
Sources suggest the new Environment Secretary will cap the two authorities, and others, to show his determination to curb council spending.
Coun Roberts said if Langbaurgh was capped at £15.6m, it would have a ‘devastating’ effect.
‘About 100 jobs could go and facilities throughout the borough would have to close.’
Charges would also have to be introduced for pensioners' bus passes, currently free.
Langbaurgh has made several all-party attempts to get the Government to reconsider its spending limits.
But despite an independent survey showing the council was being unfairly treated, the Government has refused to budge.
Capping would leave the council which has no financial reserves in a desperate position.
Coun Roberts said: ‘We could provide statutory duties and that would be about all.
It's a very gloomy picture.’
Middlesbrough Council leader Michael Carr said his authority had already made substantial cuts.
He added: ‘The Government seem to make no allowance for additional responsibilities, such as City Challenge and Safer Cities.’
Middlesbrough Council has made no allowances for cost inflation and will not increase its contribution towards concessionary fares for pensioners.
‘We have already cut £6.5m in the last two years and lost 80 jobs last year,’ said Coun Carr.
He refused to speculate how many jobs could be lost if the council was capped, but it is believed to be around 50.
‘If we have to cut, we will make a large number of small cuts, rather than a small number of large cuts.
We don't want to close any institutions.’
School damaged in arson attack
AN East Durham primary school was damaged by fire in an arson attack.
A classroom at Deneside Primary School in Seaham suffered smoke damage and some fire damage around a window after burning papers were thrown inside.
Yesterday, a police spokesman said the classroom would probably need a joist in the ceiling replacing.
The police want to talk to anyone who may have seen something suspicious near the school on Sunday afternoon when the fire occurred.
Anyone with information should contact Seaham police on 091–81 2255.
Two hurt:
Two people were taken to hospital with cuts and facial bruises after the car they were travelling in smashed into a road sign on the A1 western bypass at Lobley Hill, Gateshead, yesterday.
The accident happened at about 4pm and the driver and passenger were both taken to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital at Gateshead for treatment.
Lift release:
Middlesbrough firemen released three people trapped in a lift at Glastonbury House, Priestfields.
Car destroyed:
A car was completely destroyed by fire in Dukes Way, Thornaby, at the weekend.
Windows crack:
Heat from a car on fire in Victoria Road, Grangetown, Middlesbrough, caused a window at a nearby house to crack, a fire brigade spokesman said.
Burglars strike:
Police are investigating a burglary in which a quantity of jewellery was stolen.
The incident happened at a house in Bishopton Park, Ripon, after intruders forced a rear door.
House raid:
Intruders forced a window at the front of a house in Ripon.
They escaped with a television and other electrical items from the property in Ray Lane.
Statues bid:
York Children's Trust is holding talks with the city council to find suitable sites for two statues commemorating the Blue and Grey Coat schools for the poor.
Street closure:
Part of Rawdon Avenue, York, will be closed from next Monday until May 10 to allow contractors to construct a new link main in Melrosegate.
Diversions will be signposted.
Road works:
Maintenance work on a flyover on the A19 near Thirsk could cause traffic delays.
The repairs are being carried out to the bridge at Knayton and the inside lanes of both carriageways are closed.
Rail display:
Model railway enthusiasts in Darlington are planning a display for the public next weekend.
The town's model railway club will be laying on the show at its new club rooms at Darlington railway centre and museum on North Road.
Lift release:
Middlesbrough firemen released three people trapped in a lift at Glastonbury House, Priestfields.
Thieves strike:
A radio-cassette player worth £130 and four tapes were stolen from a car parked at the Helme Park Hall Hotel, Fir Tree, on Saturday night.
Missing clothes:
Thieves stole clothes worth £75 from a washing line on Hardisty Crescent, Bishop Auckland, on Sunday afternoon.
Stolen cash:
Intruders forced their way into a building on High Hope Street, Crook, and stole £20.
Annual meeting:
The restoration of gardens at Belsay Hall, Northumberland, was described by Stephen Anderton at the annual meeting of Houghall Horticultural Society.
Officers were elected at the meeting with Richard Heron continuing as chairman.
Meal fees:
Wear Valley district councillors are being asked to approve increased charges for meals on wheels and luncheon clubs.
Officers are recommending meals on wheels rises from 85p to 90p and lunches from 90p to 95p from November 1.
Police recover stolen antiques
CLEVELAND Police are trying to trace the owners of a hoard of antiques.
The property was found after an investigation into house burglaries in Cleveland and North Yorkshire.
The haul includes a statuette of cherubs, an antique door-bell with angel and dragon, a bronze otter on a wooden base, porcelain, silver teapots and an assortment of rings.
A bow and arrow kit in a leather bag has also been recovered.
Anyone recognising any of the items should contact Det Con Peter Field on Middlesbrough 326326, extension 1394.
Lift release:
Middlesbrough firemen released three people trapped in a lift at Glastonbury House, Priestfields.
Bikers help:
Kind-hearted bikers from around the Darlington area donned their leathers and crash helmets to bring a smile to children in hospital yesterday.
Dozens of motorcyclists teamed up to ride from Teesside International Airport to Darlington Memorial Hospital, taking with them Easter gifts for the young patients.
Thieves strike:
A radio-cassette player worth £130 and four tapes were stolen from a car parked at the Helme Park Hall Hotel, Fir Tree, on Saturday night.
A VISION of Middlesbrough's future was unveiled yesterday.
The ambitious plans drawn up by Middlesbrough council will be passed to various departments which will work on them and report back in a year's time.
The ‘vision statement’ follows reports on the future of Middlesbrough town centre last year.
It sets out what the council hopes to achieve in tourism, housing, the environment, arts and entertainment, and transport.
Leader of the Council Coun Michael Carr said: ‘In particular we wish to widen both the commercial and cultural role of the town centre in the life of people in the region.
‘It is at this stage very much a statement of intent.’
On shopping the statement's aim is to ‘enhance Middlesbrough's position as the area's premier shopping experience where the widest choice, highest quality and a friendly welcome combine in the exciting atmosphere only a thriving town centre can offer.’
St Edward's Primary in Middlesbrough completed a 50/50 arrangement which began when 26 children and 14 adults travelled to Wagenberg and Terjheyden last Easter.
One year later, the Eastbourne Road school is returning the compliment.
Last night, mixed Dutch-English teams took part in a football tournament, with the youngsters hoping to follow in the steps of Gascoigne and Lineker, Van Basten and Gullit.
Outings to Ayresome Park and the Beamish Museum have also been organised for the visitors, who were welcomed at St Edward's yesterday by Middlesbrough Mayor Eddie Bolland.
Headteacher Peter Ormerod said: ‘We had a great trip last year.
‘The aim is to show the kids that we are in the new Europe, that the Dutch children aren't far away and that we are all one.’
A CHARITY which takes deprived children on camping trips has been helped by a Middlesbrough hotel.
The Hospitality Inn was looking for a worthy home for unwanted furniture and bedding after refurbishment.
And South Bank-based Camping Holidays for Underprivileged Children (CHUC) stepped in to take up the offer from the Fry Street hotel.
‘This will help us improve facilities at our centre in Ingleby Greenhow,’ said CHUC chairman, Keith Harper.
Jill Carling, housekeeper at the Hospitality Inn, said: ‘The furniture was no good to us, but the outdoor centre will make good use of it.’
FIRE hero Dave Nellis has spoken of his terror when he saw his best friend turned into a human torch.
Father-of-two Andrew Morton suffered 40pc burns when a spark ignited a fuel line while he was welding in a Middlesbrough garage.
The explosion sent flames shooting up his back.
Mr Nellis pulled his friend towards a water supply and doused the fire.
‘I just heard a whoosh and then he was on fire,’ said 19-year-old Mr Nellis, of Conway Drive, Thorntree, Middlesbrough.
‘He was in shock.
I tried to pick him up and that's when I burnt myself.
We got to the water and put him out but he had  virtually no clothing left on his back, it was all burnt away.’
Mr Nellis said 29-year-old Mr Morton, of Barrington Crescent, Thorntree, seemed very calm.
‘He was in pain, but more in shock.’
Mr Morton, a married man with two children, was doing a repair job for a friend when the explosion happened, at D and R Repairs, Telford Road, Cargo Fleet.
He was said to be comfortable in Middlesbrough General Hospital last night.
Mr Nellis played down his role in helping Mr Morton.
‘Anyone would have done it,’ he said.
‘We just had to get him out.
I wouldn't say I was a hero.’
The Easter Monday blaze totally destroyed the garage workshop and a portable office in neighbouring Variety Cars.
Fire crews tackling the blaze were hampered by exploding gas canisters.
PENSIONERS in Middlesbrough face paying 10p a trip when travelling with their concessionary bus passes.
It's because Middlesbrough Council cannot afford to increase the subsidy for concessionary fares from £1.35m.
About 16,500 people in the town have bus passes.
They currently pay £5 when the pass is issued.
It entitles them to free travel in Middlesbrough, Redcar and Stockton.
But from June 1 they will pay £5 and an additional 10p for each trip they make.
Council leader Michael Carr said government restrictions had forced it to freeze the amount it gives to the bus companies.
They need about £500,000 more than the £1.35m the council has offered.
Coun Carr said they had no option but to ask pass users to make up the difference.
‘Obviously we regard this as something we would not have wished to do.
We have protected pensioners and other pass users for at least the last two or three years when we have been under considerable pressure to abandon free travel.
‘We have resisted that to the extent we are finding ourselves in difficulties with the Government through capping.’
Coun Carr said Cleveland was the only county in which bus services were provided free to those who qualified for bus passes.
And he said the fare of 10p which will be charged will still be good value.
Councillors reached the decision yesterday at a meeting of the policy and resources committee.
Bus passes for last year will still be used until July 1.
A MAN who has twice saved drowning people from mountainous seas last night called for tighter safety measures on Redcar esplanade.
Dave Kirwan, 45, who dived into icy waves to save a teenager late on Easter Sunday, said action had to be taken before someone was killed.
Mr Kirwan is due to receive a Royal Humane Society award for a rescue last September.
Yeterday he demanded a meeting with Langbaurgh council.
He wants the authority to erect safety gates on the three slip-ways.
He also warned the public that the sea can be a killer.
After a 20-minute battle against what he described as ‘the roughest seas I have ever seen at Redcar’, he and the  unconscious youth were flung on to the beach by the waves.
Both were treated in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Mr Kirwan, who suffered hypothermia, concussion, shoulder and chest injuries and bruising, was released yesterday lunchtime.
Last September, Mr Kirwan, of Lumley Road, Redcar, rescued Ronnie Bell, of Paxton Street, Ferryhill.
Mr Kirwan, the managing director of Davset Construction and Building, which is based on The Esplanade, said last night: ‘It's time people realised how dangerous the sea can be.
‘I've got two fishing boats and I understand the dangers.
But people have a fascination with the sea and take risks.
I think it hypnotises them.
‘On the day I rescued this lad a young girl died near Sunderland.’
Charlotte Carter was killed after a huge wave swept her out to sea at Ryhope beach.
Mr Kirwan said the three slip-ways at Redcar beach were the major problem.
But Ian Readman, honorary secretary of Redcar Lifeboat Station, said the suggestion of gates was impractical.
‘We would object to gates, which could stop us getting out to sea as quickly as we might like,’ he said.
‘In any case, if someone is determined to go in the sea, for whatever reason, they can just hop over the wall, which is only two or three feet high.
‘People must take more responsibility for their own actions.’
However, Mr Readman said he would be happy to attend a meeting and recommended that Mr Kirwan should be given another award.
‘He acts very quickly.
He deserves a medal as big as a frying pan.’
Leader of Langbaurgh council, Arthur Taylor, also said he would be happy to discuss the issue with Mr Kirwan.
Coun Taylor said: ‘We are always ready to talk and look at the statistical evidence for increased safety measures.
‘We could also ask the relevant departments to look at how other coastal resorts handle safety.
‘But incidents like this are pretty rare and we would have to look at whether we could justify expenditure.’
Mr Kirwan hit back: ‘Safety shouldn't come into it where lives are at risk.
‘If there was a major disaster they would find the money.
In my mind, this is a disaster.’
A SINGLE bullet fired by a police marksman ended a woman's 47-hour hostage ordeal yesterday.
The shot from a house across the street on a Darlington estate hit Keith Pringle, leaving him critically injured.
Senior officers revealed last night that the decision to open fire was taken after relations between Pringle and negotiators deteriorated yesterday morning.
Fears had grown for the safety of Pringle's former girlfriend, 21-year-old Leanne Rees, who had been held hostage in the house since Sunday.
Seconds after the shot rang out at 1.03pm, officers rushed into the semi-detached house in Lyonette Road.
Leanne, screaming hysterically, was carried outside to safety.
As she was taken away, other officers moved in to find Pringle, 24, slumped in the first floor bedroom with injuries to his neck and face.
The man, who was soaked in blood, was stretchered to a waiting ambulance and taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital.
He was later transferred to Middlesbrough General, where he underwent a 2 7hour operation to insert a tube into his windpipe.
He was in intensive care in a critical but stable condition.
Leanne was also taken to hospital, suffering from shock, but was later released into police custody.
Asst Chief Con Eddy Marchant told a press conference last night police had ‘no alternative’ but to fire.
‘The marksman fired because the situation had deteriorated throughout the morning.’
As the ambulance left the scene, neighbours, who had been kept shut in their houses for two days, began to emerge into the sunshine.
Next-door neighbour Jean Beveridge, who had been given a running commentary by armed police inside her home, revealed the gunman had been daring the police to shoot him.
‘He put the rifle down and was marking his head saying ‘shoot here, shoot here’,’ she said.
‘In the end, he put a cartridge in his mouth and the next thing we heard was a shot and the police rushed in.’
Mrs Beveridge cared for Leanne's two children in her home for the first 24 hours of the siege.
Another eyewitness, James Christey, saw the gunman drinking from a bottle of wine and aiming his 12 bore single barrel, sawn-off shotgun at police marksmen.
A big crowd of press and public gathered at the top of Lyonette Road.
When police relaxed the cordon friends and relatives went to speak to the people who had been trapped in their houses throughout the bank holiday.
During the siege police negotiators kept constant contact with the couple.
On several occasions food, coffee, cigarettes and a telephone were hoisted up to them.
Among the negotiators was a professional psychiatrist.
The siege began on Sunday afternoon after Leanne's mother, Pauline Rees, 43, was shot in her head as she fled from the house.
She was last night ‘comfortable’ in Middlesbrough General.
Earlier, a close friend of Pringle's, Jason Ward, 20, was shot in a minor road near Stillington, on the Cleveland-Durham border.
He is ‘satisfactory’ in the same hospital.
Mr Marchant said Durham police have voluntarily referred the shooting incident to the police complaints authority for a full investigation.
KEITH Pringle had split up with long time girlfriend Leanne Rees on several occasions.
But the 24-year-old could never make the final break from the mother of his two sons, two-year-old Keith and baby Stephen.
He moved home three times in Darlington, but each time Leanne and the children would reappear in his life.
Then on Easter Sunday Pringle confronted best pal Jason Ward, 20, with the suggestion that he had been seeing Leanne.
The two, who had once been like brothers, went out for a drive along the back road between Darlington and Sedgefield.
But at Stillington a shot was fired from a 12-bore shotgun.
Jason jumped out of the passenger seat and over a hedge to escape.
He was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital by a passing motorist and is being treated for leg and arm wounds.
About 40 minutes later back in Darlington Pauline Rees, the mother of Pringle's ex-girlfriend Leanne, was seen fleeing the family's house in Lyonette Road.
As she ran down the driveway of the semi-detached house, a shot was fired from an upstairs front bedroom and she fell to the ground.
Minutes later as neighbours rallied round to help the nursing home worker an ambulance arrived to take her to  hospital .
Leanne was still in the house.
Armed police were immediately drafted into the area, which was sealed off.
Residents within line of fire were evacuated from their homes and advised to take refuge at the Shuttle and Loom pub.
Neighbours not in direct danger were advised to stay in their homes.
Then a lengthy waiting game began.
The 50 officers involved in the case some of whom were armed waited.
A telephone was hoisted through the bedroom window to enable the police to maintain contact and meet requests for food and cigarettes.
Residents often heard police ask Leanne if she was all right and if she had slept.
When they saw her appear at the bedroom window, they could only assume she was all right.
Tension mounted in the early hours of yesterday morning when a shot was heard in the area of the siege house.
It was later revealed the shot was an accidental discharge from inside the house.
A shot had been fired into the ceiling by mistake.
Police were reassured to discover Leanne was uninjured.
But the gunman was growing increasingly agitated by late yesterday morning and police had grown intensely concerned for Leanne's safety.
At about 1pm a single shot was fired from a rifle, hitting the gunman in the upper neck and face.
Firearms experts then entered the house to bring out Leanne Rees, who was taken by ambulance to Darlington Memorial Hospital, where she was treated for shock.
A man was brought from the building and taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital, where he is condition is described as ‘critical’.
Firemen cut girl free
FIREMEN spent nearly 40 minutes cutting a girl's finger free from a park bench last night.
The 11-year-old, identified only as Donna, was playing in Albert Park, Middlesbrough, when she got the finger stuck in a hole on the back of the bench.
Station Officer Eric Warrior, of Middlesbrough Fire Station, said: ‘This highlights the dangers of park benches with ornate designs.
Winch pinched:
A winch worth £2,000 has been stolen from the back of a Ford lorry which was parked in Day Street, Brotton.
Gardeners beware:
Allotment holders have been warned that thieves are active in the East Cleveland area with tools and other items having already been stolen from allotments in Skelton and Brotton.
Subway task:
Schoolchildren have been asked to design a mural as part of a facelift on a grubby subway in the centre of South Bank between Asda and Nelson Street.
Working well:
Teesside Women has celebrated its first six months of existence, during which it has provided a wide range of meetings and workshops for any women who live, work or have an interest in the area.
The next event for the only network of its kind in the NorthEast is a workshop on self-presentation on May 20.
For details, call Julie Allan on .
Hospital overview:
A new Clinical Information System is to be implemented soon in North and South Tees hospitals.
KPMG Management Consulting and IBM will carry out the task, which will allow health service managers to gain a thorough overview of hospital activity.
Lorry fire:
The cab of a flat-backed lorry parked in Oxford Street, Hartlepool, was destroyed in a fire early yesterday.
Two appliances from the the town's fire station raced to the scene to fight the blaze.
DIY inquiry: A public inquiry into a top DIY chain store's bid to set up in Stockton opens today in the town hall.
Wickes Developments wants to set up a 31,000 square foot superstore at Lustrum Avenue, Portrack, but the council turned down the plan saying it would take trade away from the town centre, and create traffic problems.
Man remanded:
Michael Sherwood, 33, of Bribdale Road, Pallister Park, Middlesbrough, was remanded in custody by Teesside magistrates on charges of rape and causing grievous bodily harm.
He is expected to reappear in court on Friday.
Mattress blaze:
Firemen were called to an unoccupied house in Patterson Avenue, Middlesbrough, yesterday when a mattress on the first floor caught fire.
The blaze also damaged floorboards.
BACK UP NORTH:
After a year or two down in Kent, Northern Arts' erstwhile Literature Officer, Jenny Attala, comes back to the region as Principal Officer in the Published and Broadcast Arts Department.
She arrives in June.
A CONTROVERSIAL plan for a superstore and housing on the outskirts of Middlesbrough will be discussed by residents tonight.
The North-Eastern Co-Op and builder John Dowson want to put a £9.5m shop, 20  executive houses and four  flats on the 8.2 acre site.
They said the scheme could create 200 jobs.
But chairman of Cleveland County Council's development and transportation committee David Walsh has warned that the plan for Dixon's Bank, Marton, could jeopardise existing shops and cause traffic chaos.
Coun Walsh promised the county council would make its views known ‘very forcibly’ to planning authority Middlesbrough Council.
Peter Jackson, Middlesbrough council's Conservative group leader, whose council ward includes the proposed site, said: ‘I will do everything in my power to resist this development.’
He said: ‘It's an ill-conceived plan.
Dixon's Bank is already one of Middlesborugh's busiest roads and not capable of taking so much extra traffic.
‘It could also have a major effect on existing shopping centres, particularly the smaller shopping parade at Marton.
‘The shops which have served the community so well for years would lose out.
‘We have been approached by residents with a petition and the opposition appears to be unanimous.’
Suzanne Heron, public relations officer for the NorthEastern Co-op, said a traffic survey had shown the road could take extra capacity.
‘The peak hours for traffic, early morning and early evening, are not the peak hours for a superstore.’
The residents' meeting starts at 7pm at the Langdon Square Community Centre, Coulby Newham.
CONSETT steelworks pensioners yesterday joined the fight to get a share of a £300m British Steel pension surplus.
The decision to team up with former colleagues from Teesside and South Wales means the campaign is on the way to becoming nationwide.
More than 200 pensioners and redundant workers with deferred pensions met at Consett Civic Hall and voted to set up their own action committee.
They are angry that British Steel formerly a public corporation is keeping the £300m for its own use.
A further £300m is going on pension increases for widows and an improved scheme for current workers but they are getting nothing.
They heard how British Coal and BT had distributed surpluses among their pensioners.
John Batstone, secretary of the Teesside-based North-East Coast Pension Campaign Committee, said: ‘We hope the weight of pressure will make British Steel realise that they are being rather immoral in disposing of the surplus, which they inherited from the days of nationalisation.
‘It wasn't as if the surplus was created by the successor company.
We think that the pensioners are entitled to some discretionary benefits from the successful investment of their past service contributions.’
Ken Sessford, a former Consett steelman who chaired the meeting, said: ‘The Middlesbrough and South Wales people will be pretty pleased that Consett has now joined forces in this campaign.
‘What we are after really is a national campaign.
We'll be making contact with Ravenscraig and Shotton in North Wales.
But in the meantime we'll be putting pressure on British Steel and the unions.’
A MEMORIAL plaque honouring 25 seamen from the North-East who died in a ‘forgotten tragedy’ goes on display today.
The SS Samtampa went down off the Welsh coast in a terrible storm exactly 45 years ago.
All 39 hands perished in the worst shipping disaster in Teesside's history.
The 7,210 ship crashed into the infamous Sker Point rocks in the Bristol Channel and broke into three.
Most of the 25 NorthEasterners who died hailed from the Teesside area.
Fittingly, the plaque mounted on an original hatchboard from the ship will be on show in the Kirkleatham Old Hall Museum, Kirkleatham, Redcar.
The SS Samtampa, built for the Second World War, ended its life near Porthcawl.
Its engine failed in the eye of the storm as it headed through the Bristol Channel on its way from Middlesbrough to Newport.
The gales drove the vessel on to the rocks and the efforts of the Mumbles Lifeboat were in vain.
Its eight-man crew also perished as they strived to rescue the Santampa's crew.
Kath Taylor, of Guisborough, lost her 18-year-old uncle, Stanley Daritis, in the tragedy.
She was being born as the Samtampa went down.
Kath and her husband Keith have campaigned for a permanent tribute to the crew in the NorthEast.
‘We felt it was necessary to get some kind of lasting tribute in this area,’ said Mr Taylor.
‘It was a terrible shock to the area.
‘In Porthcawl and Mumbles, they have never forgotten the tragedy, but up here, many people know nothing about it.’
Relatives of men lost when the Samtampa went down met up last May to discuss the tragedy.
A fund was established and donations raised the money necessary for the plaque.
Leigh Lampard, assistant curator of the Kirkleatham Museum, said: ‘With Redcar's maritime connections and the number of men from this area who died in the tragedy, it seemed a fitting place for the plaque.’
A small display, including a photograph and watercolour painting of the Samtampa and the Mumbles lifeboat will serve as a memorial to the lost crewmen.
DETECTIVES are appealing for witnesses after a brutal street attack in Middlesbrough.
An unnamed 21-year-old man was beaten unconscious by a group of thugs who attacked him with sticks.
He had approached the five or six youths, who were hanging around his car, a gold Ford Escort Estate.
The vicious assault happened outside the man's home in Central Avenue, Whinney Banks, just before midnight on Tuesday.
He was detained in Middlesbrough General Hospital with a broken jaw and lacerations.
Det Con Chris Sadler, of Middlesbrough CID said: ‘This was a brutal and totally unprovoked attack.’
Anyone with information should call him on .
THE family of a man shot by police at the end of a 47-hour siege claimed last night it need not have finished in bloodshed.
Relatives of Keith Pringle allege police refused their pleas to be allowed to speak to him in a bid to end the siege peacefully.
They say Pringle would never have harmed his former girlfriend Leanne Rees, who was held hostage at the house in Lyonette Road, Darlington.
The family say Pringle even told Leanne, who once dreamt of being a beauty queen, to leave the house.
Senior officers countered their allegations, saying Pringle's sister had been offered as a mediator but he had refused to speak to her.
A police marksman shot Pringle through the neck as fears grew for Leanne, 21, the mother of his two children.
She was carried screaming from the siege house, where she lives with her parents.
Detectives waiting to question Pringle about the siege and shooting of two other people have mounted a constant vigil at his hospital bedside.
Last night, members of Pringle's family spoke for the first time about police handling of the siege.
One revealed Pringle, who cannot talk because of his injuries, wrote a note from his hospital bed.
‘He said he would never shoot Leanne.
He thought the family didn't want to know him but that wasn't true.
‘We aren't saying we agree with what he's done but if he knew we were there and we loved him it would have come out differently.
‘Darlington police even wanted us to talk to him but negotiators didn't think that would help.
‘Leanne has told him she loves him but can't live with him.
He loves her and he would do anything for his kids.
‘Keith is upset and shocked, he knows how much trouble he's in.
He's never had a gun before, he just flipped.’
Durham's Assistant Chief Constable Eddy Marchant said: ‘The decision as to whether a family member is used is always up to negotiators trained to judge the mood of the individual.
‘In this case Mr Pringle's sister was an option all the way through.
On one occasion she was offered as a mediator but Mr Pringle refused.
‘On the last day the professional psychologist was consulted as to whether she should be introduced again.
He advised against that course of action.’
Pringle is at Middlesbrough General Hospital where gunshot victims Jason Ward, 43, of Westminster Road, Darlington, and Leanne's mother Pauline are also being treated.
Pauline, 43, was shot in the head and is ‘comfortable’.
Jason, Pringle's friend who was shot in the leg at Stillington, is ‘stable’.
Pringle's condition after surgery was yesterday poorly but improving.
Police confirmed Pringle, 24, of Thirlmere Road, Darlington, does not hold a firearms licence.
Police yesterday re-interviewed Leanne, who is staying with relatives.
Estate trouble — six charged SIX youths are due to appear before Hartlepool magistrates this morning charged with public order offences.
They are accused of involvement in a disturbance on the town's West View estate in which a petrol bomb is alleged to have been thrown.
In custody:
Four Hartlepool men alleged to have travelled to North Yorkshire to carry out burglaries at the Malt Shovel pub at Hovingham and the Castle Howard Caravan Park were remanded in custody by Scarborough magistrates yesterday.
Missing girl:
Cleveland Police are concerned for the safety of 15-year-old Anne-Marie Marshall, who has been missing from her home in Rounton Green, Berwick Hills, Middlesbrough, since Monday.
First class:
Suresh Patel, of Margaret Sutton Special School, Soouth Shields, was the North-East regional winner in the Teacher of the Year contest organised by Woman magazine.
Equality council's new branch hope
A RACE Equality Council branch could be set up in Darlington next month.
A steering committee has been set up to monitor discrimination in Darlington and the county as a whole and it hopes to get up to £40,000 from Durham County Council and eight district councils to fund the scheme.
A spokesman said: ‘We are still waiting to hear from Durham County Council and other councils.
But we are optimistic that it will go ahead.’
The REC already has branches in Middlesbrough and Newcastle.
Organisers say they hope to set one up in Darlington as it has the county's highest proportion of ethnic minorities.
Ashdown praised:
Spennymoor Liberal Democrat Ben Ord has written to party leader Paddy Ashdown praising his performance during the General Election.
Coun Ord, a member of Sedgefield District Council, has called for a concerted campaign to get the proportional representation across.
Hall friends:
Fans of the historic Whitworth Hall, near Spennymoor, birthplace of Bobby Shafto, can join a new ‘Friends of Whitworth’ scheme entitling them to concessions when the hall opens to the public for its first full season.
Anyone interested should telephone (0388) 720849.
HOME Secretary Kenneth Clarke was last night under mounting pressure to order a review of the gun laws following a spate of shootings in the North-East.
Labour MP Alan Milburn has called for action following a  siege in Lyonette Road, Darlington, when 21-year-old Leanne Rees was held at gunpoint for 47 hours.
The  siege , which ended with Keith Pringle being shot in the neck by a police marksman, was the latest incident involving firearms and has renewed calls for a clampdown on Britain's gun laws.
But firearms enthusiasts, who shoot for pleasure, have accused politicians of targeting the wrong people.
They believe any moves to reduce the number of firearms will only create a black market in illegal weapons.
According to figures released by Durham constabulary there are 15,931 firearms legally held in the county, 11,098 are shotguns.
Experts believe as many as 30,000 guns and rifles could be held illegally in County Durham alone.
Mr Milburn said: ‘The Darlington  siege and other incidents, including the shooting of a Derwentside council officer, demonstrates the pressing need for a wholesale review.
‘Even the Home Office is now beginning to question whether the Firearms Amendment Act, passed after the Hungerford incident, has helped secure public safety.’
An internal government report recently pointed out a number of  deficiencies in the existing safety procedures.
It called on ministers to set up a firearms control board which would vet all applicants before issuing a guns licence.
Mr Milburn said: ‘I hope the Government will take its recommendations very seriously and the Home Office will reconsider its opposition to Labour's suggestion of a national computer register of people holding guns.’
He would like to see another firearms amnesty.
Darlington councillor David Lyonette also called for a review of the law, adding: ‘There are too many guns in the wrong hands.’
But a member of the Richmond Small Bore Rifle and Pistol Club said: ‘These politicians are placing the emphasis on the wrong people.
They should be looking at the number of guns held illegally.’
Gun club members believe tightening up firearms regulations will result in a black market.
Detectives were last night still at the bedside of Keith Pringle in Middlesbrough General Hospital, where his condition is stable.
Leanne Rees's mother Pauline, who was shot outside her house in Lyonette Road on Sunday, and Pringle's friend Jason Ward, who was shot at Stillington, are also stable in the same hospital.
Max Rees, the father of hostage Leanne Rees, presented neighbours with bunches of flowers yesterday afternoon, but declined to comment.
And in the end just two people got it right 9.6kg.
Yesterday winners Jennie Edwards, 10, and Dawn Waters, 30, received their prize for guessing correctly.
The competition was held at the Cleveland Heritage Centre at Margrove Park, near Guisborough, during an exhibition called Crystals of the North, in February and March.
The lump of lead ore or galena from County Durham was part of the exhibition but also provided a bit of fun.
Both Jennie, of Greenlands Road, Redcar, and Dawn, of Formby Green, Beechwood, Middlesbrough, were presented with a crystal specimen of fluorite from Weardale.
A MISSING teenager returned home yesterday just in time for her birthday.
Anne Marie Marshall was collected by police and returned to her home in Rounton Green, Berwick Hills, Middlesbrough, and today she celebrates her 15th birthday with her family.
Anne Marie worried her mother and police after she disappeared on Easter Monday after an argument.
THE owners of two Redcar amusement arcades have put up a substantial reward after their premises were burgled this week.
Thieves broke into the homes of two under-managers for Fairworld Amusements in Redcar in the early hours of Monday.
They stole keys from both houses and the keys were later used to break into the two Fairworld arcades on the Esplanade at Redcar at around 5am.
Safes at both premises were opened and a large amount of cash was stolen.
Now Fairworld is offering a reward for information which leads to the conviction of the thieves.
The thieves used a blue Vauxhall Astra car stolen from Middlesbrough in their venture.
It was also used to ram the doors of one of the arcades.
The car was later found abandoned in Meggitts Lane, Dormanstown.
Police are appealing for witnesses to the burglary or anyone with information about the raids to contact Redcar CID on 302634.
A STUDY of the eastern Middlesbrough City Challenge area has been given the go-ahead.
The study will look at how life can be improved for the area's 47,000 residents.
Middlesbrough Council has appointed Colin Buchanan and Partners, together with housing specialists Pieda, to carry out the study as part of the five-year City Challenge scheme.
The consultants will work with the council, public and private sector partners and the people in the area.
They will focus on how best use can be made of open spaces in and around housing estates, roads and the transport network, housing and schools.
Council leader and chairman of the City Challenge board Coun Michael Carr said: ‘Our aim in City Challenge is to make major and hopefully permanent improvements to the quality of life of a community currently suffering unacceptable levels of economic and social hardship.’
Coun Carr said when the council comes to consider the findings of the consultants the views of the residents will be important.
Nine-year-old fights for life A NINE-YEAR-OLD girl was yesterday fighting for her life after being knocked unconscious in a road smash.
Stacey Garland from High Gill Road, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough, who was in Sussex visiting her grandfather, was crossing the A283 road at Upper Beeding, Sussex, when she was struck by a Mercedes car.
She was rushed to the Royal Alexandra Hospital, where she was put on a life support machine.
Music plea:
Detectives in Newcastle want to trace a local pop group to return stolen musical equipment including a keyboard, amplifier and speakers which has been recovered.
Contact Market Street CID.
Man hurt:
A 20-year-old man from Wardley is seriously ill in Newcastle General Hospital after being hit by a car on the Felling bypass in Gateshead.
Police have appealed for witnesses.
Traffic warning:
Drivers can expect delays and congestion when the Gateshead viaduct is closed for six months for re-waterproofing.
The road, linking Gateshead to the Tyne Bridge, needs repairs totalling £700,000.
Stolen chemicals:
A car containing hazardous chemicals was stolen in South Hylton, Sunderland.
The blue Ford Fiesta contained cans of highly inflammable  tricholorotheane and could cause serious injury if tampered with.
Dairy celebrates:
Fountains Dairy Products, based at Kirkby Malzeard, near Ripon, marks its eightieth anniversary next week with a reception for local milk suppliers.
Cars blaze:
About 50 scrap cars were destroyed by fire at a scrap yard on Bousfield Industrial Estate, Bousfield Lane, Stockton on Wednesday night.
£3,000 haul in school raid VALUABLES worth about £3,000 were stolen from a school near Stokesley.
Raiders broke into the parochial church school at Swainby, making off with a computer, monitors, a television set, a radio cassette player, cash and a cheque book.
Woman hurt:
An elderly woman was taken to hospital for a precautionary check-up yesterday after a chip pan fire at her home in Annandale Crescent, Hartlepool.
The blaze caused smoke damage to the kitchen.
Winch stolen:
A winch worth £2,000 has been stolen from the back of a Ford lorry parked in Day Street, Brotton.
Allotment raids:
Allotment holders have been warned that thieves are active in the East Cleveland area with tools and other items having already been stolen from allotments in Skelton and Brotton.
Subway mural:
Schoolchildren have been asked to design a mural as part of a facelift on a grubby subway in the centre of South Bank between Asda and Nelson Street.
Rubbish fire:
The fire brigade was called to Spencerbeck House in Middlesbrough in the early hours of yesterday morning where there was a fire in the bin room.
Rubbish was destroyed by the fire and the bin room suffered slight smoke damage.
Plans down:
The number of planning applications dealt with by Middlesbrough Council between January and March fell to 148 compared to 193 for the previous quarter.
Middlesbrough councillors approved 123 of the applications and rejected 25.
‘Dum-dum’ fear over shot cow TESTS are continuing on a bullet found in a cow shot dead as it grazed.
The animal was one of two injured on Newcastle Town Moor.
At first they were thought to have been victims of a crossbow bolt.
But Northumbria Police now say a dum-dum bullet illegal ammunition which causes maximum injury by shattering inside the body may have been responsible for the injuries after a flat-headed bullet was found in a post mortem.
Hoax anger:
Coastguards have slammed youths who sparked a rescue alert by setting off a red flare yesterday between Cullercoats and Tynemouth.
A mobile coastguard and the Cullercoats inshore lifeboat were called out but it was found the flare had been fired from the shore before youths were seen fleeing.
Blaze deaths:
The funerals have taken place of two men found dead in their burnt-out house in Acomb, York a month ago.
A service for Wilfred James Moorby, 65, has been held at York crematorium and David Whitehead, 36, was cremated yesterday in Huddersfield.
Police are not looking for anyone else in connection with their deaths.
Red letter day:
Visitors to a major stamp fair in Brackenhoe School, Marton Road, Middlesbrough, today will have a chance to win a copy of a Victorian Penny Black regarded as the oldest in the world in a raffle.
Leave boost:
North Tees Hospital, a new Teesside NHS trust, is launching a new equal opportunities scheme for employees including provisions covering bereavement, carer, adoption and paternity leave.
Delays expected:
Short delays are expected when work begins on the central reservation of the A1(M) at Bowburn, near Durham, tomorrow for five weeks.
SHOOTING victim Jason Ward spoke for the first time yesterday about his week-long ordeal after suffering serious gunshot wounds.
He discharged himself from hospital against medical advice, saying he could not bear to be in the same building as Keith Pringle, the man police are waiting to interview about a 47hour armed siege in Darlington.
Unemployed Jason, 20, is now convalescing at home in Westminster Road, Darlington, with girlfriend Corinna Howard and friends.
Yesterday exactly a week after he suffered serious leg and arm injuries on a country road at Stillington Jason told of his nightmare which started when he was accused of seeing Pringle's ex-girlfriend, Leanne Rees.
‘I couldn't stay in hospital because I knew he was there,’ said the father-of-one.
‘I couldn't stand to be there.
I just needed people to be with me.’
After the Easter Sunday shooting in Stillington, Leanne's mother, Pauline Rees, 43, was shot in the face outside her house in Lyonette Road, Darlington, and 21-year-old Leanne was taken hostage for 47 hours inside the family's home.
The siege ended on Tuesday when a police marksman shot Pringle in the jaw from a house across the street.
‘I got shot for something I never did,’ said Jason, who was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital for treatment.
‘I'd not even seen Leanne for about four months and then she was with him, but I got half my arm blown away.’
Now he says it will be some time before he gets over the incident which wrecked a close friendship.
‘He was the best mate I ever had.
We'd stuck by each other for about four or five years.’
Jason has undergone treatment to remove pellets and to repair ligaments in his arm.
He has also had skin grafts and his mother, Pat, is convinced her son needs counselling.
‘We'd been sitting with him in hospital keeping his mind occupied, but when our visiting times changed and he was alone he would lie there and think.
As soon as he closed his eyes he just heard the bang,’ said Mrs Ward, of Neasham Road, Darlington.
‘I think he was at a stage where he dare not sleep.
It will always be in his mind.’
Leanne's mother is now satisfactory in Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Pringle, 24, of Thirlmere Road, Darlington, was also said to be in a satisfactory condition in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
RACIAL inequality is to continue to be monitored on Teesside and elsewhere in the North-East.
The role of trades unions as watchdogs of race discrimination must also be more positive, delegates at a seminar were told in Middlesbrough Town Hall at the weekend.
The North-Eastern Regional Seminar on racism, racial equality and the trades union movement on Saturday attracted around 50 people from all over the North-East and Cumbria.
Mehdi Hussaini, honorary chairman of the Racial Equality Council, Cleveland, said: ‘It was agreed that trades unions should be implementing their race discrimination policies in a more positive light.
Birthday for pet care group
ORGANISERS of a service aimed at reuniting lost pets with their owners have just celebrated the group's first anniversary.
Now they are urging people to register lost and found pets to ensure an efficient service.
The group which needs donations also gives advice on looking after pets at all ages throughout their lives.
Anyone who needs to contact Petsearch either to report a missing or found pet or to give a donation should contact .
Sailing away:
Middlesbrough residents have bid their final farewell to their adopted ship.
HMS Jupiter yesterday held its last open day aboard ship before sailing to Portsmouth to be decommissioned.
Her last visit ends a 17-year relationship with the town and celebrations will be tinged with sadness when she weighs anchor and sails off.
Since it was adopted by the town HMS Jupiter has seen active service in the Falklands conflict and the Prince of Wales also spent part of his naval training stint aboard her.
Stabbing arrest:
A man was last night being quizzed by detectives investigating the death of Michael McLoughlin, 32, who was stabbed in the Chieftain Pub, Cruddas Park, Newcastle last week.
The man, who has not been named, was being held in Newcastle's west end police station.
The arrest followed a series of raids on homes in the area.
A LONELY bachelor, who was the victim of a vicious hate campaign, was found battered to death in his flat.
Detectives are working on the theory that he could have arrived home to find his flat in Bisley Court, Darlington, being ransacked and paid the ultimate price.
Another, more sinister possibility, is that the attackers lay in wait for him.
The dead man, who has not been officially identified, is believed to be Brian O'Hare, a quiet man in his fifties who lived alone.
He was returning home on Saturday night after a drink with friends at the Haughton Le Skerne Working Men's Club when the attack happened.
Neighbours were awakened at about 11.45pm by screams for help.
When police arrived minutes later they found the barely-alive victim inside the Red Hall estate flat.
The man was taken to Darlington's Memorial Hospital with severe head injuries and later transferred to Middlesbrough General.
He never regained consciousness.
Detectives were last night questioning several young men and women, aged between 16 and 20.
Meanwhile, neighbours have called for extra police protection on the Red Hall estate.
They claim to be living in fear of gangs who roam the streets after dark.
Darlington borough councillor Paul Geldart last night revealed how Mr O'Hare had begged the authority to find him a new home.
‘Mr O'Hare came to me a number of times complaining that he was being pestered.
He wanted something done about it and even asked for a move.
‘What has happened is an absolute tragedy.
He was an affable sort of man who didn't look as though he would do anyone a bad turn.’
John Peugelaar, who lives in nearby Chepstow Court, said: ‘The situation is getting out of control.
One time I counted nearly 40 people stood outside my flat shouting and screaming.
They were like a mob.’
He added: ‘They wake people up at one or two o'clock in the morning with their laughing and shouting.’
Another resident, who asked not to be named, said: ‘Everyone has had trouble with the gangs at one time or another.
The police come along and things go quiet for a couple of months but then they come back again.’
A Darlington police spokesman said last night: ‘Our inquiries into this incident are still on-going.
However, I can say that when a disturbance is reported on the Red Hall estate it is thoroughly investigated.’
Man crushed to death in crash
A MAN was killed when the van he was travelling in crashed off the road and hit a fence and a tree in North Northumberland yesterday.
Daniel Stuart Mackenzie Chapman, 53, of St Cuthbert's Square, Norham, near Berwick died in the incident two miles east of his home at about 12.45pm.
The van, being driven by David William Crease, 21, went out of control on a straight stretch of unclassified road, crushing Mr Chapman who was sitting in the back.
Car blazes:
A car was destroyed when it burst into flames on a busy  interchange on the A19 yesterday.
The incident happened at about 6.50pm on the Parkway-Mandale interchange in Middlesbrough.
Flat fire:
Firemen were called to a blaze in an eleventh floor flat in Thorntree, Middlesbrough yesterday.
A cooker was destroyed, but no one was hurt.
Smoke damage:
The kitchen of a house in Devon Close, redcar was badly smoke damaged after a cooker caught fire at about 5.35pm yesterday.
Firemen from the town used breathing apparatus and a hose reel.
RADICAL proposals to attract two million visitors and 2,000 jobs to the new city of Sunderland were revealed yesterday.
The plans were unveiled as part of the council's bid to win City challenge cash from the Government for inner city regeneration.
Sunderland council plans to transform Town End Farm, Hylton Castle and Southwick areas of the city as one of 57 authorities around the country hoping to win £37.5m.
A showpiece Glass City to celebrate the city's links with the glass-making industry and a 40,000 seater stadium, which could provide a new home for the football club, are included in the scheme.
The ambitious submission, described as ‘a bold vision for the future’ includes proposals to:
reduce unemployment by 30pc.
radically improve the homes of 8,000 people.
treble participation in further education and training.
The showpiece projects are the Concord Centre and Glass City expected to attract two million visitors and 2,000 jobs.
The Concord Centre is described as the North's equivalent to Birmingham's NEC and would include a stadium, conference and exhibition facilities, three museums, a  multiplex cinema and a 24-lane bowling centre.
The Glass City would include: ‘The tallest stained glass window tower in the world to serve as a beacon to the whole of north Sunderland.’
The plans revealed yesterday are the result of extensive public consultation and are hoped to attract £38m of private investment.
Council leader Eric Bramfitt said: ‘Our submission is not about modernising houses and giving everything else a clean lick of paint.
It's about investing in the future and allowing people to control their own destinies with a little expert help.’
Chief executive Geoffrey Key said: ‘We have great confidence in our proposals for north Sunderland.
In the year we earned city status, our polytechnic becomes a university and our local football team reach the FA Cup final, I have no reason to doubt that City Challenge will signal yet another major success for Sunderland.’
Sunderland failed in its bid to win City Challenge cash last year when NorthEast rivals Newcastle and Middlesbrough were successful.
Deputy council leader Leslie Scott said yesterday: ‘We are close to achieving a near economic miracle in Sunderland.
Acceptance of our City Challenge bid would enable us to wrought that miracle far more quickly.’
POLICE are likely to have to wait weeks before they can interview Keith Pringle the man at the centre of the Darlington siege.
Detective Superintendent Keith Readman, Head of Durham South CID, revealed yesterday the delay had been caused by surgery to 24-year-old Pringle's jaw.
Pringle, of Thirlmere Road, Darlington, was shot in the neck by a police marksman on Tuesday after 21-year-old Leanne Rees had been held at gunpoint for 47 hours.
Detectives have been at his bedside in Middlesbrough General Hospital, where his condition yesterday was ‘satisfactory’.
The drama started at lunchtime on Easter Sunday when Pringle's 20-year-old friend Jason Ward, of Westminster Road, Darlington, was shot in the leg and arm on a country road at Stillington.
Minutes later 43-year-old Pauline Rees, who works at Trees Park Village at Middleton St George, was shot in the face in her driveway in Lyonette Road.
Yesterday Mrs Rees and Mr Ward were both ‘satisfactory and improving slightly’ in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
A FAREWELL march through a ship's adopted town had to be diverted yesterday after police discovered a suspicious package.
The march of the HMS Jupiter crew and a band from the Green Howards continued its way to Middlesbrough Town Hall but was re-routed away from Linthorpe Road after a police officer found the package in a rubbish bin during a precautionary search of the procession's path.
A police spokeswoman said: ‘Because they are a possible target for any bombs we evacuated McDonalds restaurant, surrounding premises and closed off the pedestrian area nearby.’
The march was then diverted down Albert Road and the police Special Operations Service was called in to x-ray the package found to be rubbish wrapped in a newspaper and cling film.
The march marked HMS Jupiter's last visit to its affiliated town of Middlesbrough before it is de-commissioned later this year.
Over the weekend the crew from the ship will be joining in social events including attending the match between Middlesbrough and Bristol Rovers; a ship's company dance at Maddison's and games of soccer, rugby, hockey and squash with local teams.
The Leander Class frigate will be on show to the public on Sunday from 1.30–4pm.
RACISM in trade unions is to be tackled in a seminar today.
The Racial Equality Council of Cleveland and the Northern Trade Union Congress have linked up to organise the seminar for full time, lay officers and activists in the trade union movement in the North-East.
It starts at 10am in Middlesbrough Town Hall.
REC chairman Mehdi Husaini said: ‘All unions have good policies on racial equality at national level but very little is put into practice at local levels.
The picture is no different in Cleveland.
Most of the unions pay lip service to equal rights and racial equality for black members.
‘Trade unions have not given adequate support to black members when they are racially harassed and discriminated against.
The black members perceive the unions as white organisations which are either indifferent or hostile to the concerns of black people.’
Speakers include TUC equal rights officer Claude Moraes and a representative from the Commission for Racial Equality.
MIDDLESBROUGH surgeon Fred Nath aims to raise £10,000 for an operation for a little Romanian boy.
Mr Nath has already raised £700 towards the cost of hospital bills and transport for two-year-old Constantin and now he is hoping others will join him in his fundraising.
If everything goes according to plan Constantin will be brought to the NorthEast by Convoy Aid Romania in July.
Once here he will have an operation to repair a cleft palate by plastic surgeon Charles Viva.
Mr Viva may then look at Constantin's deformed hands and feet to see whether or not there is any chance of improving the boy's grip.
Mr Nath said: ‘The reason I became involved was I went to Romania to see another child, Bogdan, on whom I did an operation.
‘I was shown these two kids in a very pitiful state and I just couldn't do nothing.’
Now neuro-surgeon Mr Nath is intending to take part in a cross country half marathon on the North Yorks Moors in July but he is hoping local clubs and societies will also join in his fundraising push.
Bus company Cleveland Transit also intends to help pay for Constantin's journey.
Anyone who wants to raise money should contact Mr Nath's secretary at Middlesbrough General Hospital or send a cheque payable to Fred Nath (Convoy Aid) to the hospital.
A GIRL knocked over during a visit to her grandfather in East Sussex has improved slightly.
Stacey Garland, nine, of High Gill Road, Nunthorpe, Middlesbrough, was crossing the A283 road near Shoreham.
She is in Brighton's Royal Alexandra Hospital.
Mass lobby urged over cutback fears
TOWN residents are being asked to make a last-ditch appeal to the Government in a bid to avert further cash cutbacks.
Langbaurgh Council is on the brink of being charge-capping, which could mean a further £3m reduction in last year's standstill £15.6m budget.
Services have been slashed already after a £3m pruning, with the final blow being the closure of public toilets, when Saltburn was the worst hit which infuriated the town's fundraising champion Jackie Taylor.
She has now launched an appeal with hundreds of envelopes addressed to Environment Secretary Michael Howard.
They will be available for townspeople in the square today.
‘Another 400 or 500 letters to Mr Howard might just help to remind the Government it isn't just the Labour controlled council they are hitting but the people of Langbaurgh,’ she said.
Magical mystery:
As part of the Invitation to Mystery exhibition at Kirkleatham Old Hall museum, a series of demonstrations on the art of conjuring and magic are being staged by Middlesbrough Circle of magicians from Tuesday.
Hide sought:
Hartlepool Council's development control sub-committee is to consider an application from Nuclear Electric for a bird hide within the grounds of the town's power station.
Plan doubt:
Planning officials are recommending Hartlepool Council's development control sub-committee rejects a plan to build eight flats, a shop and garages on the former Ringtons Tea site and an adjoining builders yard in Oxford Road.
Outhouse gutted:
Firefighters were called to a blaze which destroyed an outhouse in Denholm Green, Pallister Park, Middlesbrough.
Arson strike:
Cleveland police say a fire started in a first-floor bedroom of an unoccupied council house in Dartford Close, Stockton, was started deliberately.
The blaze caused damage estimated at £1,500.
Crime tours:
North Yorkshire police are facing an increasing problem of ‘travelling criminals’, says Superintendent Steve Green of the Malton and Whitby division.
Many criminals are travelling from the Teesside area to the rural area of North Yorkshire.
TWO men were rescued from a pothole after being trapped underground for more than ten hours last night.
The men, plus a colleague from Middlesbrough, had abseiled down Devil's Hole, near Eryholme Farm, Great Ayton, at about midday yesterday.
But their efforts to climb back out were continually thwarted by brittle rock, which made hand and foot holds difficult.
Eveneutally one of the men, Richard Sowerby, 24, of Stanhope Road, Middlesbrough, climbed out and ran into Great Ayton to raise the alarm.
The Cleveland Search and Rescue team, lead by local member Gary Finch, quickly located the remaining two and rescued them within 90 minutes.
They were named last night as Richard's uncle, Gary Sowerby, 25, of Heythorpe Road, Acklam, and John Hodgson, 26, of Witton Close, Middlesbrough.
The men returned home last night uninjured.
PASSENGERS will boycott a new Teesside rail service because it does not stop at Eaglescliffe station, a Stockton councillor claims.
The new Middlesbrough to Liverpool service starts on May 11, but Liberal Democrat councillor John Fletcher, who represents Egglescliffe, said: ‘Residents of the area I represent have told me that they are disappointed the train will not stop at Eaglescliffe.
‘To catch it they would need to go in the opposite direction first to Thornaby station, where parking is limited.
Instead they will probably not use the new service and will continue to change at Darlington.’
The two-hourly service will call at Thornaby, Northallerton, Thirsk, York, Leeds and Manchester.
Messy mail
IT is true that John Fullard of Hartlepool only appears here when he has had some little difficulty with the Post Office.
This is his fourth appearance in a month.
The other day Mr Fullard, of 27 The Grove, Hartlepool TS26 9LZ received four letters.
One of them was meant for him.
The others, all correctly addressed, were for various occupants at 27 The Grove, Greatham, Hartlepool TS5 1PQ.
The Post Office has promised to unravel this confusion several times and stop it to the point of taking special care to check mail to The Groves.
‘I won't repost,’ said John Fullard, ‘it's much quicker to take it round myself.’
POLICE are hunting thugs who went on the rampage and wrecked a mobile classroom at a Cleveland school for youngsters with special needs.
Chris Morris, headteacher at Carisbrooke School, Thorntree, Middlesbrough, described the wanton vandalism as ‘the final straw’ after a spate of break-ins.
Doors were damaged, windows smashed, light fittings torn out and curtains ripped down in the mindless spree, discovered yesterday morning.
Offensive slogans were also sprayed around the classroom by the thugs.
Mr Morris was joined by Cleveland County Council education chairman Keith Legg in calling for public help to catch the vandals.
Coun Legg said: ‘This has caused a great deal of distress, especially to the staff at the school who have a very great commitment to their work and their pupils.
‘Given the nature of the damage, it is likely those involved might have tell-tale signs such as paint on their hands and clothing.
‘I would appeal to anyone who might have information to contact the police as soon as possible.’
Mr Morris said the attack on the school was very upsetting and added: ‘We have had a lot of problems since Christmas, particularly with break-ins.
‘There has been a lot of electrical equipment stolen we are on our third video since Christmas.
‘This is the final straw.
You wonder if all the effort everyone has put in is worthwhile.
I cannot understand what pleasure they derive from it.’
The school, in College Road, Thorntree, has 110 children.
Aged between two and 19, they all have severe learning difficulties.
A TEENAGER had her motorcycle stolen in an unprovoked late night robbery in Middlesbrough.
The 16-year-old was pulled off the 50cc Yamaha, pushed to the ground and kicked before two men and a women escaped on her bike.
She was very shocked by the incident, which happened near The Ritz video shop, Linthorpe Village, late on Saturday.
The first man was about 18, with short, dark brown hair.
He was wearing a red bomber jacket and dark trousers.
The second was aged 19–22, tall and slim, with spiky light brown hair.
He had a thin moustache and was wearing a baggy grey suit.
The woman is described as a dumpy 18-year-old, with long, dark brown permed hair.
She was wearing a black mini-skirt and white lacy top.
Police are appealing for witnesses or anyone who may have seen these people in Linthorpe Village pubs on Saturday night to contact them on .
ONE of the men trapped in a disused air shaft for nearly ten hours has spoken of his ordeal rats, dead sheep and all.
John Hodgson and friends Gary and Robert Sowerby abseiled down the 70ft Devil's Hole near Great Ayton, North Yorkshire, on Sunday.
They then discovered the shaft's brittle shale walls made it almost impossible to get out again.
‘Richard has done it before, but it was the first time I have abseiled down a mine-shaft and the last,’ said John, of Whitton Close, Acklam, Middlesbrough.
The 26-year-old admitted the trio were getting worried before Richard, 24, of Stanhope Grove, Middlesbrough, managed to scramble out to raise the alarm.
‘We thought we might have to spend the night down there and that's when we started getting a bit worried,’ he said.
‘There were a few dead sheep, which was quite unpleasant, and as it started falling dark, we heard rats.
‘I think that's why Richard got out, because he's terrified of rats.’
The trio had abseiled down the shaft at about 12.30pm and it was after 9pm before Richard raised the alarm.
John and Richard's uncle Gary, of Heythrop Drive, Middlesbrough, were rescued 40 minutes later by Cleveland Search and Rescue Team.
Team member Pete Mounsey abseiled down to reach the men and attached them to ropes before hauling them to safety.
‘There were periods when the time seemed to drag,’ said John, who works in Middlesbrough Council's records department.
After Richard had got out, it went slowly but at least we knew he'd get help.’
PLANS to spruce up Middlesbrough's cemeteries are in the pipeline.
The borough council recognises that its newer cemeteries such as Acklam and Thorntree are in need of attention.
A report to be considered today says they are unattractive.
U.S. visitors ‘coup for North’ TOP American travel agents are sampling the attractions and hospitality of the North-East.
And it is hoped their visit will prompt more American tourists to follow them.
Twenty five senior managers of the New York branch of the American Society of Travel Agents are spending four days in the region, Cumbria and Chester.
They will visit attractions such as Hadrians Wall, Beamish Museum, Durham Cathedral, York and the Jorvik Viking Centre.
Sue Lovel, sales and marketing executive for the region, said: ‘We anticipate that this visit will produce a lot of extra business for our region, and it is quite a coup to attract these senior managers to an area outside London.’
Rape denied:
A 20 stone weightlifter, Esmund Lupton, 27, of Welbury House Farm, Newton Aycliffe, denies rape and assault and causing actual bodily harm.
But a Teesside Crown Court jury was told the woman suffered facial injuries in the attack last year.
The case continues.
Girl recovers:
A girl aged nine from Middlesbrough has been discharged from a Sussex hospital after recovering from injuries she received in a road accident.
Stacey Garland, of High Gill Road, Nunthorpe, was visiting her grandfather when she was hit by a Mercedes car last week on the A283 at Upper Beeding.
She has been treated in the Royal Alexandra Hospital, Brighton.
Driver killed:
A Middlesbrough driver has died in a road accident in Kirkby Stephen, Cumbria.
Michael Hatfield, 47, of Grove Hill, was killed when his Ford Sierra crashed on the A683.
No other vehicle was involved.
Kitty quits:
Kitty Grove-Stephensen, chief executive of Teesside and District Society for the Blind, retires on May 15, her 60th birthday.
Her successor is qualified social worker Helen Lockwood.
Ecstasy charge:
A 38-year-old man, arrested after armed police raided his car near Malton in North Yorkshire on Friday, appeared before Scarborough magistrates yesterday.
Derek Swalwell, of Dean Road, Scarborough, was charged with possessing 78 capsules of  ecstasy with a street value of £1,560.
Magistrates adjourned the case until June 9 and Swalwell was granted conditional bail.
Inquest adjourned:
An inquest into the death of a toddler has been adjourned.
Toni Louise Dales, 3, died at her home in Steele Crescent, South Bank, Middlesbrough, on February 4.
Glen Philip McPherson, 24, been charged with murder.
Club treasurer on theft charge
THE treasurer of a Darlington community club appeared before town magistrates yesterday charged with theft of club funds.
Brian William Francis Port, of Burnside Road, Darlington, appeared on six charges of theft from the Firth Moor and District Community Association from May to September last year.
The case was adjourned until June 22 for committal proceedings and Port, 39, was granted unconditional bail.
Theft charges:
Brian Smith, 31, of Thames Way, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates yesterday charged with theft and handling stolen goods.
The case was adjourned until June 15.
Smith was given unconditional bail.
Counterfeit currency:
Robert Corrance, of Fenby Avenue, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates yesterday charged with theft of £40, possessing counterfeit currency and passing counterfeit currency.
Corrance, 30, was released on unconditional bail.
Case adjourned:
The case against David Briggs, of Salters Lane South, Darlington, was adjourned until May 18 by town magistrates yesterday.
Briggs, 20, is charged with furious and wanton driving.
He was released on unconditional bail.
Deception charges:
Glen Daley, 24, and Rachael Lister, 19, appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday on charges of receiving stolen goods and obtaining property by deception.
The couple, of Sun Street, Stockton, were given unconditional bail and the case was adjourned until May 18.
Tim stranded:
Red-faced Radio Cleveland presenter Tim Ellingford flew into a panic when an airline bungle by left him stranded at Heathrow instead of hosting the Sunday lunchtime show from Middlesbrough.
Programme assistant Ian Edgar stood in at the last minute.
Stabbing charge:
Arthur Robinson, 43, of no fixed address, is to appear before Teesside magistrates today charged with the attempted murder of Yvonne McGrory, 44, of Orwell Street, Middlesbrough.
Last night Mrs McGrory was stable with a stab wound to the arm after an incident in Orwell Street at 6am.
Death crash:
A man died last night following a road accident  between Brompton and Darlington.
Armed police stormed the house in Darlington's Lyonette Road after 21-year old Leanne Rees was held at gunpoint for 47 hours.
Darlington man Keith Pringle was shot in the neck by a marksman and is still recovering in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Lights risk:
Police say they recorded 170 motorists driving through red traffic lights in York in just one month.
Insp Bill Blanchard said the number shocked and disturbed them.
About 1,200 motorists were also stopped for speeding in the crackdown.
Radio post:
Phil Dawson, former senior sales executive with Hull's Radio Viking is joining the new York commercial station, Minster FM, due to begin broadcasting in July.
School boost:
Governors at Heworth Primary School in York have applied to the city council to be allowed to make alterations to the building to form an upper storey and to  install a fire escape.
New threat:
New cracks have appeared in Harrogate's Yates' Wine Bar following the collapse of a neighbouring building.
Parliament Street in the town remains closed because of the potential danger.
Bird hide go-ahead:
Hartlepool Council's development control subcommittee has granted planning permission for a bird hide to be built on the site of the town's nuclear power station.
It will be used in connection with the nearby Teesmouth Environmental Centre.
Scheme rejected:
Plans for eight flats, a shop and garaging on the former Ringtons Tea site and a neighbouring builder's yard in Oxford Road, Hartlepool, were thrown out by councillors after planners said the development was too intense for the area.
Cooker fire:
Firemen wearing breathing apparatus entered a house in Southgate, Hartlepool, after a cooker caught fire.
An area of ceiling and wall was damaged in the incident.
Spotlight on success:
Two ‘city successes’ are highlighted in the latest edition of Middlesbrough News, being delivered to 58,000 homes in the town this week.
The borough council publication centres on the City Challenge scheme and the Environment City award.
Scheme extended:
A subsidised dog neutering scheme is being extended in South Tyneside to cut down on the number of stray dogs.
The scheme, run jointly by South Tyneside Council and volunteers from animal aid centres, will now be available to residents throughout the borough.
Leader continues:
Coun Alex Watson was re-elected leader of the ruling Labour group on Derwentside Council at the group's annual meeting.
Coun Kevin Earley continues as his deputy.
Caravan stolen:
An Elddis Whirlwind caravan worth £1,000 was stolen from Redwell House Farm, Waskerley, near Consett.
Dryden remark apology demand
A DERWENTSIDE councillor could face censure from his colleagues over a remark about Albert Dryden who shot and killed the council's chief planning officer last year.
Independent councillor Derek McVickers sparked controversy when he said he understood Albert Dryden's frustration at planning decisions.
At next week's council meeting the ruling Labour group will submit a motion of censure asking Mr McVickers, a Newcastle United director, to withdraw the remark and apologise.
Attempt charge:
Jobless Arthur Robinson, 43, of Faraday Street, Middlesbrough, has appeared before Teesside magistrates charged with attempting to kill his former common-law wife Yvonne McGrory, of Orwell Street, Middlesbrough, at her home early on Monday.
He was remanded in custody.
POLICE are appealing for witnesses after raiders snatched several hundred pounds from an amusement arcade.
A 36-year-old woman was restrained by one person while a woman grabbed the cash from her in the Play-Inn centre, Newport Road, Middlesbrough on Monday at around 7pm.
The pair made off in a yellow car.
The woman is aged 20–25, 5ft 6ins tall, wearing a blue shellsuit.
Anyone with information contact Middlesbrough 301739.
A NEWSLETTER for taxi-drivers hit the road this week.
Over 700 copies of ‘Cab Trade’ have gone to firms and drivers in Middlesbrough and Langbaurgh.
The Middlesbrough Council publication aims to keep cabbies informed of council policy and changes in legislation.
Edition one spotlights new laws on checks the council must make on drivers applying for licences.
Accident boy fights for life
A BOY of 13 was last night fighting for his life after a road accident.
Stacey Paul Norton, of Meadowgate, Eston was hit by a car travelling south on Jubilee Road, Eston just after 4pm.
He suffered a fractured skull, fractured jaw and cuts to his head and body.
He is detained in Middlesbrough General Hospital where his condition last night was said to be ‘poorly but stable’.
Police have appealed for witnesses to contact them.
A CONFUSED old man died while walking along the centre-line of a main road on a foggy December night, an inquest heard yesterday.
Thomas Thompson was hit by a VW Golf on the A167 in North Yorkshire and was thrown into the opposite carriageway where another car drove over him.
The tragedy happened a mile and a half south of Northallerton.
Mr Thompson, 78, of St James Road, Romanby, Northallerton, was rushed to the Friarage Hospital but died after being transferred to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Earlier, driver Geoffrey Wellens had stopped to ask Mr Thompson if he was alright after spotting him on the road.
‘He said he was walking along the middle line so he could see where he was going,’ said Mr Wellens, of Blue Ridge, Morton-on-Swale.
‘I thought it was very dangerous.’
Several witnesses said driving conditions were appalling on the night of the accident.
Cleveland Coroner Michael Sheffield said Mr Thompson, a retired council worker, may have been lost.
He had lost his bearings on a trip to nearby shops a few weeks earlier.
Mr Thompson's son Brian said his father should have worn spectacles, but refused to.
Pathologist Mustansir Nurbhai said Mr Thompson died of extensive cerebral  haemorrhage due to a fractured skull.
Verdict: Accidental Death.
A NORTH-EAST sea captain awaiting trial charged with causing a major oil spillage died after a sustained drinking binge, an inquest heard.
Alcoholic Geoffrey Frederick Gregory was drinking up to 12 pints a day back in 1979.
But Cleveland Coroner's Court heard that his benders got worse after the tanker BT Nautilus spilled 260,000 gallons of oil into a busy shipping channel near New York in June, 1990.
First mate Mr Gregory was charged with operating a vessel under the influence of alcohol or drugs and negligent discharge of a pollutant without a permit.
The charges were dropped a month after he died, aged 53.
Mr Gregory was told by his GP in early 1990 to stop drinking or his life expectancy would be no more than five to ten years.
A merchant seaman since the age of 16, he died following an incident at his home in St George's Crescent, New Marske, Cleveland on May 19 last year.
He had fallen at least twice on his way home from the New Marske Institute Club after a lunchtime's drinking.
Leslie Wilson said Mr Gregory was spilling his beer down his front and had admitted having ‘a skinful’ the night before.
He was given a lift home where son Paul and wife Grace helped him to his bedroom.
Paul admitted he was angry with his father and had treated him roughly.
After leaving him on the bedroom floor, he returned to throw a jug of water in his father's face.
Mrs Gregory later discovered her husband had fallen and hurt himself.
He had broken his thigh.
He was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital, but his condition deteriorated and he died on the afternoon of May 20.
Pathologist Ernest Walton said his death had been brought about by a combination of internal bleeding due to multiple injuries and alcoholic liver disease, which caused liver failure.
Mrs Gregory, 53, said her husband had ruined his life through drinking and said he had drunk heavily during the days before his death.
Paul Gregory said his father's alcoholism had been ‘a great strain on the family.’
A letter from lawyer Richard Regan last June confirmed that charges relating to the matter had been dropped and Mr Gregory absolved from any blame for the oil spill.
Coroner Michael Sheffield recorded a verdict of death by misadventure.
MOST Labour MPs in the NorthEast are backing John Smith for party leader, according to the official lists of nominations.
The MPs nominating Mr Smith include four new MPs Alan Milburn (Darlington), Hugh Bayley (York), Peter Mandelson (Hartlepool) and Bill Etherington (Sunderland North).
Mr Smith is also backed by two members of the Shadow Cabinet, Sedgefield MP Tony Blair and South Shields MP David Clark, and by the Chief Whip, Derek Foster (Bishop Auckland).
The only MP from the NorthEast listed as nominating Bryan Gould is Stephen Byers, the new MP for Wallsend.
But there is a more even division in the contest for the deputy leadership, with 13 nominating Margaret Beckett, seven John Prescott, and three Bryan Gould, who is running for both jobs.
The other North-East MPs listed as backing John Smith are Hilary Armstrong (Durham NW) Stuart Bell (Middlesbrough) Roland Boyes (Houghton and Washington) Nick Brown (Newcastle E) David Clelland (Tyne Bridge)
John Cummings (Easington) Don Dixon (Jarrow) Doug Henderson (Newcastle N)
John McWilliam (Blaydon) Mo Mowlam (Redcar) Joyce Quin (Gateshead) Giles Radice (Durham N) Gerry Steinberg (Durham City) and Jack Jack Thompson (Wansbeck).
The line-up for the deputy leadership is: For Margaret Beckett: Hilary Armstrong, Stuart Bell, Tony Blair, Nick Brown, David Clark, Jim Cousins, Derek Foster, Doug Henderson, John McWilliam, Peter Mandelson, Mo Mowlam and Giles Radice.
For John Prescott: Frank Cook (Stockton N), John Cummings, Don Dixon, Bill Etherington, Gerry Steinberg, Jack Thompson and Hugh Bayley.
For Bryan Gould: David Clelland, Alan Milburn and Joyce Quin.
ORGANISATIONS employing more than 35,000 people signed up for good health at a ceremony in South Cleveland Hospital.
The Health Education Authority's Look After Your Heart Charter ceremony was the first to be held in South Tees and the 14 signatories represented organisations from the very large to the very small and were from both the private and public sector, from traditional and hi-tech industry.
They promised to support the Look After Your Heart Workplace Initiative by implementing at least three of a list of ten criteria.
The criteria included having a workplace policy on smoking, encouraging staff to take more exercise and ensuring that the staff restaurant offers a  healthy food choice.
South Tees workplace health spokeswoman Anne Newnam said the charter aimed to reduce the death rates from coronary heart disease.
A BUSINESSMAN appeared in court yesterday charged with soliciting another man to murder his wife.
Keith Smurthwaite, 38, formerly of High Street, Great Broughton, near Stokesley, denied soliciting George Webster to murder Patricia Smurthwaite between October 17 and October 22 last year.
Smurthwaite, now of Kensington Avenue, Normanby, Middlesbrough, was given conditional bail at Teesside Crown Court until his trial.
He is a partner in the family building firm of W D Smurthwaite and Sons.
A BBC boss went shopping for peace in a North-East market yesterday.
Michael Dalton is the director of the BBC's Radio Goes to Town roadshow which will be bringing all five radio channels and a huge 80 ton marquee — to Stockton High Street, home of the town's famous open market, next month.
Market traders were put out when it was announced they would be losing their pitches to accommodate the big top.
Mr Barton came to town on market day, yesterday, to announce plans for the May 25 to May 30 broadcast and his intention to do some shopping.
‘I intend to buy bits of produce and talk to them.
I hope they realise by being here we will bring in a huge amount of trade.
Our average is about 50,000 people through our exhibition,’ he explained.
‘We expect to be particularly good business for Stockton.
I hope that will be of benefit to the entire town.
The fact of the matter is, if we had not got on to the High Street, it would have been very difficult to justify our coming to Stockton.
‘We have to be in a very high profile place.
It is no good having a playing field three miles out of town, we have to be where the general public is.’
Traders displaced from their pitches on the High Street will set up their stalls in adjoining Dovecot Street.
BBC personalities who will be broadcasting from Stockton and neighbouring Middlesbrough include Jakki Brambles, Johnnie Walker, John Sachs and Mark Goodier, Derek and Ellen Jameson, John Humphrys and Jonathan Dimbleby.
Mental patient denies killing
A PSYCHIATRIC patient appeared before Teesside Crown Court yesterday charged with manslaughter.
George Turnbull, 48, of Christchurch Place, Peterlee, denied the manslaughter of William Sample, another patient at Hartlepool General Hospital, who died on November 29.
Turnbull was remanded to the care of St Luke's Hospital, Middlesbrough.
Fight for life:
A 43-year-old Wearside man was very poorly in hospital last night after being found unconscious outside the Bird in Hand pub in Station Road, New Penshaw, near Sunderland, yesterday morning.
Police say there are no suspicious circumstances.
THE sister of a strangled Teesside women has described the sentence on her killer husband as ‘lenient’.
German sailor Wolfgang Meyer admitted throttling his wife Joyce, 43, on November 17 last year at their home in Wriedel-Schatensen, near Hamburg.
The 37-year-old merchant seaman killed Joyce after a night out ended in drunken violence.
The public prosecutor asked for a four-year sentence, but the judge sent Meyer to jail for six years.
Police chief Horst Regge said: ‘They had a row and were both drunk.
They had a fight, he strangled her and she died.’
Joyce, whose father Les Henderson still lives in South Bank, Middlesbrough, met her husband while working as a ship stewardess.
Her sister Carole Calf, of Accrington, Lancashire, said: ‘The sentence does seem lenient.
Nothing can compensate for the loss of my sister.’
Four vie to give town a new look
DEVELOPERS are queuing up to give a facelift to a North-East town centre.
Teesside Development Corporation has a shortlist of four companies which have each submitted their detailed proposals for Stockton High Street.
Only one is to be chosen.
The project will cost £30m to build and will take the form of a mall containing specialist shops.
The TDC confirmed last night its chief executive Duncan Hall has already had talks with Stockton Borough Council leader Bob Gibson, paving the way for an ‘imminent’ announcement.
Up for grabs:
The former municipal buildings in Church Square, Hartlepool, are to be auctioned off by English Estates in London next month.
They are expected to fetch around £300,000.
Youths detained:
Cleveland police confirmed last night that a number of youths were detained after a stolen car crashed in Castlereagh Road, Stockton, yesterday.
Firemen were called out to swill petrol off the road.
Shoplift charge:
Stockton police yesterday arrested a drunken man in Nelson Terrace and charged him with shoplifting.
Open door:
Marton Sixth Form College in Marton Road, Middlesbrough, holds an open evening tonight where advice on courses and future careers will be given.
A school spokesman said the evening would be useful for all Year 9, 10 and 11 pupils in 11–16 schools.
Better roads:
Two important road improvements in Cleveland have been completed on schedule.
The A177, from Little Waterfall Farm to Slapewath and Charltons, involved the building of a new lay-by at Slapewath, reconstruction and resurfacing.
The other one involved major reconstruction work on Ormesby Road, Middlesbrough, between Longlands Road and Howgill Walk.
Kitchen blaze:
Fire crews tackled a kitchen blaze in Pirbright Grove, Hemlington, just after 6pm yesterday.
The contents and decor of the kitchen were severely damaged by heat and smoke and the rest of the ground floor suffered smoke damage.
Boy ‘stable’:
Teenage paper-boy Stacey Paul Norton, of Meadowgate, Eston, was ‘quite stable’ in Middlesbrough General Hospital last night after being catapulted through a car window in an accident in Eston on Tuesday afternoon.
Duck delight:
Proud parents Jeremy and Jemima have hatched an addition to their Teesside Crown Court family.
The ducks, who live on a pond within the precincts of the court, have now added a duckling to their numbers.
HOPES of freeing Cleveland housewife Maureen Paleschi from a Cairo jail have taken a severe blow.
Her jailed former boyfriend, Mohammed Niazy, has recanted a letter he wrote more than a year ago, exonerating the former Middlesbrough pub landlady of all guilt.
Mrs Paleschi, a mother-of-two, is into her fourth year of a 25-year sentence for smuggling drugs.
She was arrested five years ago by a Cairo narcotics squad who found £3m worth of heroin hidden in a concealed compartment of an ornamental wooden elephant she was carrying through the capital's airport.
According to sister Eva Wilson, Maureen is now close to despair.
‘I have had a letter from Maureen in which she says Niazy has written to her, telling her she was involved at that time and while he is in prison, she will stay in prison.
‘She is very depressed.
That is why I want to get over to see her and Niazy as well.’
In his letter to Mrs Paleschi over a year ago, Niazy said: ‘Just get the embassy to come and visit me and everything will be solved, if God wishes.
‘I know you are innocent and I am willing to tell your Queen about it, if you want me to.’
Mrs Wilson said: ‘I was very upset.
Her letter upset me very much.
It seems she is now of the view she is never going to get out of prison.
She is very down and upset.’
Mrs Wilson, of Perth, Scotland, remains convinced of her sister's innocence.
‘She has always told the truth.
But she asks who is going to believe her, when he is an Egyptian and she is a foreigner?’
Niazy's letter clearing Mrs Paleschi is still in the hands of her Egyptian lawyer, Abdul Raoul Mardi.
Mrs Wilson hopes to win the help of Egyptian newspapers when she flies to Cairo.
THE woman shot seconds before a siege started in Darlington has gone home from hospital.
Pauline Rees, 43, was shot in the face from an upstairs window while she was fleeing her home in Lyonette Road, Darlington, on Easter Sunday.
She underwent treatment in Middlesbrough and was transferred to Darlington Memorial Hospital earlier this week.
Mrs Rees's daughter Leanne was taken hostage in the house.
The incident ended when a police marksman shot Keith Pringle, 24, of Thirlmere Road, Darlington.
Last night Pringle was said to be comfortable in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
THE children's leukaemia clinic at Middlesbrough General Hospital will benefit from a charity event held at a town centre nightclub this week.
The karaoke and disco evening was organised by Sharon Marsh, of Whinney Banks, Middlesbrough, whose six-year-old son Paul, suffers from leukaemia.
She was given the use of the Two Bees nightclub and its equipment free of charge.
Now a Seagar computer game system, a colour TV and toys can be purchased from the £520 raised.
Any surplus money will go into the hospital's  haematology fund.
‘We hope the gifts will help to relieve the boredom for the many children like Paul who have to attend the clinic regularly for treatment,’ said Sharon.
Workmen hurt in roof plunge
TWO workmen were in hospital last night after falling 18ft through a false roof on to a concrete floor.
John Gill, 34, from Leeds, and Jack Wilkinson-Holmes, 54, were doing preliminary work on a ventilation system at the Sarah Brownridge factory, Little Catterton Lane, Tadcaster, when the accident happened.
Last night they were both said to be ‘stable’ in York District Hospital.
Police yesterday confirmed that the factory inspectorate had been informed of the incident.
Helping families:
Cleveland councillors have approved resource centres offering day care for the Family Support Service.
Two children's day nurseries Kier Hardie in South Bank and Turford Avenue in Middlesbrough start the programme rolling.
The county council's social services chairman Bob Pitt said: ‘The service is not just aimed at children at risk from abuse or neglect.’
Royal connection:
Durham Cathedral has made a royal connection with the appointment of a new canon.
The Rev Stephen Pedley, who is currently rector of Whickham, is to be one of the five canons resident at Durham Cathedral.
Mr Pedley is chaplain to the Queen and preaches occasionally at one of the chapels Royal.
TOM Miller and his wife Pauline will suffer more than most from Langbaurgh council's withdrawal of free bus passes.
Mr Miller makes weekly shopping trips to Middlesbrough and Redcar from his home in Carlin How in isolated east Cleveland.
He is 6ft tall and weighs 19 stone.
He said: ‘It's hard to get clothes to fit me and I have to go to the markets.
I use the buses a lot and this news is very upsetting.’
Mr Miller uses the buses to pick up medication from Loftus for his heart condition.
His wife Pauline is confined to a wheelchair.
‘Yesterday I used my pass and went to Loftus free,’ he said.
‘Today I'll have to pay.’
Mr Miller led campaigns to retain some form of concessionary scheme and received abuse for his pains.
‘I have received threatening phone calls and letters, saying I always want something for nothing,’ he said.
‘I've always said I'm prepared to pay something for a pass and other people are, too.
I'll even pay what Langbaurgh council would have to pay the bus companies even if it's £80, it would save me money.’
Mr Miller, of Coronation Street, is conscious there are many people worse off than himself.
‘People will have to cut back,’ he said.
‘Lots of old people in Carlin How go for a day out to Middlesbrough or Redcar this will mean they stay at home more often.
‘My wife likes to get out to Redcar, but we'll be able to go less often now.
‘Like everyone else, we will have to tighten our belts.
Some of my journeys  will have to go.
The passes are a real loss.
Once you have had something, you really miss it.’
A HOME Office grant for a youth work project has signalled a period of intense activity for Middlesbrough's Safer Cities programme.
Co-ordinator Pam McHale said £14,500 had been made available for the Streetlink scheme and that approval was expected for another nine schemes over the next week.
‘Things are really starting to take shape,’ said Ms McHale.
Safer Cities aims to bring together local people and organisations to solve problems on their doorstep.
Middlesbrough became a safer city last October.
The Streetlink cash will be used to employ a youth worker, who will strive to ensure young people do not become either the victims or the perpetrators of crime.
‘We will be looking closely at people who get involved with drugs and alcohol, those who are encouraged to turn to  prostitution and those who are made homeless,’ said Ms McHale.
‘They are vulnerable to crime, whether committing it or falling victim to it.’
Other projects in the pipeline  centre on auto-crime and women.
INJURED Wayne Fairclough was left for dead by his friends after an horrific van smash.
The 16-year-old passenger was flung from the vehicle head first into a metal fence.
He suffered multiple head injuries.
A Teesside inquest heard how Wayne had gone out for a spin in the W-reg white Ford Escort with four pals in November last year.
Driver Michael Conley, 17, had bought the car just hours before for £100.
The hearing heard he had no driving licence, insurance or MOT for the vehicle.
Conley picked up the passengers but as he overtook a car on Overdale Road, Park End, Middlesbrough, he lost control.
The van spun off the road into a school fence and trainee decorator Wayne, of Marrick Road, Park End, was catapulted out of the rear doors.
He suffered brain damage caused by a fractured skull and died later in Middlesbrough General hospital.
In a police statement Conley, of Park End, said: ‘I saw Wayne by the fence and I walked over to him.
He was unconscious and I tried to wake him up but I couldn't.
‘People gathered around and I ran off.’
Front seat passenger Anthony Fryett, 16, of Rodmell Close, Netherfield, said: ‘When the van stopped everyone ran.
We just panicked.’
Police accident expert PC Russell Jordan examined the van.
He said the brakes were worn but it had not contributed to the tragedy.
Coroner Michael Sheffield recorded a verdict of accidental death.
Conley has appeared before Teesside magistrates charged with nine offences, including causing death by reckless driving.
WORK by three local authorities in Cleveland is assisting the introduction of the new council tax throughout the UK.
Cleveland County, Middlesbrough and Hartlepool Borough councils have been instrumental in devising a computer specification which has been adopted by the government as its national standard.
The three councils were part of a consortium of 12 local authorities formed last year to prepare a joint specification of the requirements for a council tax computer system.
Coun Russell Hart, chairman of Hartlepool Council's policy and resources committee, said: ‘The council agreed a strategy for implementing the new tax at a very early stage.’
He added: ‘It is very encouraging that the specification produced by the consortium has been recognised by the government as the official national specification for council tax systems.
MUCH needed improved health facilities in South Cleveland costing over £500,000 have been achieved by the health authority and local councils working closely together.
Margaret McGloin, South Tees Community and Mental Care officer, said she was delighted with the achievements being made in developing integrated communitybased services.
A property has been purchased in South Bank for a multi-agency centre to be opened, subject to contract, later this year at a cost of £240,000.
The centre, in Middlesbrough Road, will contain a health clinic to replace the portable building accommodation currently housing the health clinic in Upper Branch Street.
The health authority had been looking for a site since 1989 but found difficulty in obtaining suitable premises in terms of locality, accessibility and size of ground floor accommodation.
The new centre is a joint initiative between the health authority and Langbaurgh council and will bring several community  services together under one roof.
Funding was made available from the health authority's capital programme with assistance from the council and the Government's Urban Programme.
The Grangetown Neighbourhood Centre in Bolckow Road, Grangetown, is opening later this month at a cost of £130,000 bringing better health  facilities into the area.
It replaces the existing one on the Broadway and the community health house in Birchington Avenue.
Funding came mainly through the health authority's capital programme.
Two units in the newly refurbished Beresford Buildings at Thorntree, Middlesbrough, will provide family planning services, baby clinics, well woman/man clinics and a health promotion service.
South Tees Community Care and Mental Health worked closely with Middlesbrough council to develop the scheme at a cost of £20,000.
A new £280,000 mental health resource centre is planned for Guisborough at the general hospital providing outpatient and day services for people aged 18–65 with mental health problems.
Work on the centre started last month and completion is expected in the autumn.
Mrs McGloin said: ‘We are now reaping the benefits of months of hard work which will help our staff provide even better health care services to local communities.’
POLICE in Cleveland were last night hunting a would-be masked robber and his accomplice.
The bandit, his face hidden by a balaclava, attacked a woman collecting her company's weekly payroll from a Stockton bank.
His victim, who has not being identified, put up a struggle despite being coshed across her back with a piece of hosepipe.
The robber fled in a stolen car, with his accomplice at the wheel.
The gold coloured Cavalier SRi, snatched from Puddlers Road, South Bank, the previous night, was yesterday found abandoned in Middlesbrough General Hospital car park.
The woman was attacked as she left the Yarm Road branch of Barclay's Bank at 11am, yesterday.
‘She was approached from behind and hit over the back with what is thought to be a piece of hosepipe,’ a spokeswoman for Cleveland Police said last night.
‘She resisted and he fled empty handed.’
The man police are looking for is well built, about 5ft 9in or 10in, and was wearing a dark blouson jacket.
Raising cash to spend a penny
A CO-OPERATIVE of local councils could help reopen Langbaurgh's public toilets, a councillor claims.
The idea comes from Coun Tony Mason who believes the town and parish councils in his East Cleveland area could use cash from their precepts to reopen essential toilets such as those in Saltburn town centre, Guisborough, Loftus and Lingdale.
Trust bid:
South Tees Community and Mental Health Care launches its bid to become a third wave NHS trust next Tuesday.
If successful, the trust will come on stream in April, 1993.
Shop raid:
Burglars raided a Stokesley clothes shop.
They made off with £80 worth of children's clothing, including bathing costumes and shorts, from the store in the High Street.
Litter-busters:
The hard work of young litter-busters who tackled National Spring Clean week from April 3–12 is captured in a display in Middlesbrough Tourist Information Centre on Corporation Road.
Reunion joy:
Council officials in Hartlepool have stepped in to ensure that members of the town's branch of the Durham Light Infantry Association are able to attend a special reunion of wartime comrades.
The Mayor, Coun Trevor Lloyd, yesterday handed over a £400 cheque towards the cost of going to the event in Winchester in June.
Cash boost:
Four Hartlepool organisations received a cash boost yesterday when the Mayor, Coun Trevor Lloyd, handed over cheques from the civic lottery fund.
Hartlepool Hospital Radio, the 1940 Dunkirk Veterans Association, Bamburgh Court residents and Henry Smith Young Parents Group received £500, £250, £500 and £150 respectively.
Car crash:
A woman driver was taken to Hartlepool General Hospital for a check-up yesterday after her Ford Escort left the southbound carriageway of the A19 near Elwick and ended up in a ditch.
Changing role:
A former youth hostel in Saltburn may be converted into an old people's home.
North Yorkshirebased Partners in Care Ltd want to convert the premises in a plan to create 35 jobs.
Tree house:
A plan to convert Holly House, in Westgate Guisborough, into a garden centre has been submitted to Langbaurgh council.
A CLEVELAND policeman responsible for a smart piece of off-duty detective work is to be commended by the county's Chief Constable.
Det Con Bill Turnbull's quick thinking helped obtain vital evidence to arrest four youths for armed robbery.
The 51-year-old noticed the youths acting suspiciously in a Middlesbrough pub.
They appeared to be nervous of his presence and left by taxi before finishing their drinks.
Det Con Turnbull recognised two of the youths and his inquiries revealed they had been overheard talking about cash and an off-licence.
He then collected their abandoned glasses and arranged for fingerprints, leading to the arrest of the youths for an armed robbery at the Trading Post newsagents and general dealers at Coulby Newham, Middlesbrough.
In his commendation, Chief Constable Keith Hellawell says: ‘Detective Constable Turnbull is commended for acting in a highly-professional manner, displaying diligence and initiative while off duty.
TWO teenagers who attacked a group of sixth-formers after a party, leaving one with a double fracture of the jaw, were yesterday locked up by a judge.
Punches were thrown outside the Queen's Head Hotel in Bishop Auckland after the pupils, from the town's Bishop Barrington Comprehensive School, emerged from a party, Durham Crown Court heard.
Dean Walker, 18, of Lambton Drive, Bishop Auckland, approached Andrew Harrison from behind and began hitting him repeatedly and then forced him against the shutters of a shop.
Then 17-year-old Lee Diaz, of North End Gardens, Bishop Auckland, attacked a second party-goer, Carl Gent, punching him in the face and fracturing his jaw.
He managed to get away but was then attacked again by both Diaz and Walker, said John Evans, prosecuting.
After the attack 17-year-old Carl Gent had to undergo surgery at Middlesbrough General Hospital and had to have his jaw immobilised.
Andrew Harrison, also 17, suffered bruising and swelling around his head.
Mr Evans said Walker was arrested on December 12, 15 days after the incident, and Diaz on December 17.
Both were picked out from an identity parade by witnesses.
In court
Diaz admitted charges of inflicting grievous bodily harm and affray and Walker admitted affray and assault causing actual bodily harm.
Rod Hunt, defending, said Walker insisted there had been an argument earlier and believed he was challenged when he went out into the street.
He had then completely lost his temper.
Mr Hunt said Diaz lost control when he felt he was being insulted and goaded by the other group of people.
At one stage he believed he was being attacked and he over-reacted.
Judge Angus Macdonald sentenced Diaz to 18 months in a young offenders institution and Walker to 12 months.
He said: ‘The court cannot possibly pass over these offences.
A CAT was the victim of a cruel attack when she was shot in the neck by a pellet.
The tortoiseshell cat was found wounded and frightened in Grangetown, Middlesbrough, and brought to an animal sanctuary.
The pellet went right through the cat's neck and came out the other side, leaving a gaping wound.
An RSPCA spokeswoman said: ‘I just can't understand anyone who would want to do this to an animal.
‘Whoever did it must have been aiming at her head but thankfully they missed.
We don't know who she belongs to or where she comes from.
All we know is she is quite an old cat.’
The cat is now recovering at an animal home in Great Ayton.
A WOMAN stabbed her husband in the back as he laughed at her, a court heard.
But when Kenneth Bowler was treated at hospital and when he made a statement to the police he said he had fallen on a fishing knife when he was drunk.
Yesterday Maria Bowler appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted wounding.
Judge Helen Paling placed her on probation for two years.
Peter Armstrong, prosecuting, said the couple had been married for a year but had lived together for four years before marrying.
For the last three years Bowler, 32, had been taking anti-depressant medication as a result of her husband's treatment of her.
Mr Armstrong said there had been a similar incident last year when Mr Bowler had been stabbed but refused to make a statement to the police.
He claimed he had fallen on a bottle.
In September last year an ambulance was called to the couple's home in St Aidan's Drive, Middlesbrough.
They found Bowler screaming she had stabbed her husband and produced a knife from the kitchen which she said she had used.
The wound was not deep and Mr Bowler discharged himself from hospital.
Mr Armstrong said: ‘He made a statement to the police making no complaint against his wife but claiming he had fallen on a knife.’
Bowler said her husband had been out drinking and when he returned home there had been an argument.
He grabbed her by the throat and threatened to kick her.
Mr Arsmtrong said: ‘She said she thought he was going to start on her again so she went into the kitchen to get a knife and while her husband had his back turned she pushed the knife into his lower back.
‘She said he was laughing at that time and she just wanted to frighten him.’
Ian Fairwood, defending, said the family had psychological and emotional problems to face.
BRITONS caught up in the horrifying riots tearing the heart out of Los Angeles told yesterday of their terror.
Glasgow businessman Douglas Timmons, 42, said he was ambushed by gun-wielding rioters who hurled a brick through the windscreen of a car he was in.
‘I thought I was going to die,’ he said.
‘These guys were crazy.’
Merseysider Glenice Inglis-Moore vividly described seeing the city that is home to Hollywood being torched by rioters.
She said it was ‘like fairyland with hell in the middle of it, with all the fires’.
She told BBC Radio 4's The World At One: ‘There are infernos all over the place.
We've had floods recently.
We've had earthquakes which can't be helped.
But this hell is man made and totally unnecessary.’
People arriving back at London's Heathrow airport from holidays in the U.S. also spoke of being terrified.
Holidaymaker Jane Turner, from Nottingham, said: ‘You could see windows being smashed as we drove past the side streets.
‘People were walking along with televisions, cameras, ghetto blasters absolutely anything they could carry.’
But the riots do not seem to have deterred travellers.
British Airways reported very few cancellations and it was not axing any flights.
So far there are no reports of any Britons being injured in the violence, and the Foreign Office in London is sticking to its advice to anyone travelling to LA go but be careful.
A number of people from the North-East were also caught up in the riots.
They include Dennis and Kathleen Tate, of Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, who were visiting their daughter, but who had not ventured out of her apartment since the troubles began.
They were staying on the eighth floor of the apartment block in the Upper Downtown financial area of the city where their daughter, Anne, a registered nurse, has lived for three years.
Mr Tate said although they felt quite safe on the eighth floor it was disconcerting to see armed security guards and smoke bellowing up through the skyscrapers.
The family took advantage of the non-curfew daylight hours yesterday to travel to Anaheim, in the Disneyland area, where they intended to stay overnight with other relatives.
A Darlington woman yesterday spoke of her fears for her family stuck in the middle of the riots.
Rosemary Sandford said her husband, son and mother-in-law were caught in the middle of looting, rioting and fires.
Mrs Sandford, a press officer for the Darlington Disabled District Association, said: ‘It was quite worrying as there is complete mayhem on the streets.
I've been ringing my family at regular intervals to see how things are going.’
Mr Sandford, 62, a former journalist with NBC, said: ‘Things have quietened down now but it was life-threatening at the time.’
A DARLINGTON man appeared before the town's magistrates' court on two charges of assault, one of resisting arrest and one of criminal damage.
Anthony Wilkinson, 40, of Belgrave Street, Darlington, will face trial at the Crown Court.
He was granted bail.
Man remanded: Sean Kelly, 33, of Tyne Crescent, Darlington, was yesterday remanded in custody by Darlington magistrates pending trial at the Crown Court.
He is accused of burglary and attempted burglary.
French football: Footballers from the Brown Trout pub, Cockerton, have left for a weekend of matches in Amiens, Darlington's twin town.
Burglar sentenced: Jamie Raper, 20, of Wharfe Way, Darlington, was yesterday sentenced at Teesside Crown Court to 12 months in a young offenders' institution after he admitted burgling a house in Carmel Road North, Darlington.
He also asked for a similar offence to be taken into consideration.
Music night: The Middlesbrough West Central Timbrels and Singing Company will provide a musical programme at the Salvation Army Hall in Dundas Street, Spennymoor, at 7pm tonight.
Fair start: North West Durham Labour MP Hilary Armstrong will open Tow Law Community Centre's fair today at 1.45pm.
Assault charge: A man has been charged with the assault of 14-year-old Ben Duley, at Sadberge, on Aril 27.
Darlington police say a man in his 20s will appear at the town's magistrate's court on May 22.
Flag day: A total of £130 was raised in a flag day and collection in Shildon for the RSPCA.
Sponsored singing: sponsored hymn singing at St David's church, Tudhoe raised a total of £702 for church repairs.
POLICE are examining security videos in an attempt to track down arsonists who set fire to a football ground and laid booby traps just hours before Middlesbrough played there.
Officers made a thorough search of Molineux, the home of Midlands side Wolverhampton Wanderers, before deciding the game against Middlesbrough could go ahead on Saturday.
The blaze broke out at dawn on Saturday and destroyed a section of an old wooden stand at the Waterloo end of the ground.
Before the game started, 32 shotgun  cartridges were found buried under the pitch.
A police spokesman said although the cartridges had been tampered with they were harmless and would not have detonated or caused injury.
Ground staff were called in to repair an area of turf which had been dug up by vandals using a pick and shovel.
Police conducted a fingertip and metal detector search of the pitch.
They were backed up by technical officers and explosive experts who offered advice.
Now police are examining video tapes from cameras used for crowd control and security, which it is believed were recording at the time of the attack.
Unfortunately they cut out when the fire blew the electrics.
Officers are also investigating threats made to the club in recent days.
Today, insurance experts will examined the damage, already thought to top £100,000.
Chief Supt Bob Jones, of West Midlands Police, said: ‘It seems to be another example of a small minority wanting to spoil the soccer enjoyment and entertainment of both sets of fans.
‘We would appeal for anyone with information about the fire to contact the police in complete confidence.
It was a highly irresponsible criminal act.’
A total of 53 fans, 34 of them Middlesbrough supporters, were arrested for public order offences in connection with the promotion clash but a police spokesman said overall the crowd was well-behaved.
Middlesbrough won the game to clinch automatic promotion to the Premier Division.
A MAN had to run through a gauntlet of flames to save his life when his first floor flat turned into an inferno.
Police are investigating the blaze which they said was started in ‘suspicious circumstances.’
Paul Deacon, 33, was lucky to be alive after he made a dash through the flames in his flat in Ford Way, Bishop Auckland, County Durham, in the middle of the night.
Yesterday he was recovering in Middlesbrough General Hospital's burns unit with burns to his arms, hands and lower body.
Mr Deacon, whose condition was said to be stable, had been transferred to Middlesbrough from Bishop Auckland General.
His flat was gutted by the fire which burst through windows and roof.
The inferno spat flame 20 feet into the air.
Station Officer Dave Fairley of Bishop Auckland Fire Station said Mr Deacon had escaped by the time his officers reached the scene at 2.30am yesterday.
Mr Fairley said: ‘If he was in his bedroom he would have had to run past a gauntlet of flame.
‘The ferocity of the fire suggested it had been going quite a while before it was discovered.
He was lucky to get out.’
Bishop Auckland CID officers are carrying out the investigation.
Neighbour Richard Hutchinson, 22, helped get people living in flats within the affected building to safety.
He said: ‘We were woken up by the sound of breaking glass.
The place went up in a matter of minutes.
The firemen told one of the neighbours they could see the flames from their station.’
Flames leapt 10 feet from windows and around 15 to 20 feet from the roof.
Mr Hutchinson said he saw Mr Deacon emerge from a back door.
He said he was all right but appeared very shocked.
Mr Hutchinson said: ‘He was saying my dad's in there, my dad's in there but they found out he meant his dog and it died.’
Another neighbour who did not want to be named said: ‘The fire was really ferocious.
It's a wonder anyone got out of it alive.’
Viola Archer, 33 and Esther Spence, 58, who live in the same building, were admitted to Bishop Auckland General Hospital after the blaze suffering from shock.
Last night, only Mrs Spence remained in hospital.
A woman and seven children left a house in nearby Gudmunsen Avenue after a fire was discovered in a bedroom at around 7.30am on Saturday.
A NEW group of volunteers has been set up in Cleveland to fight the increase of drug abuse.
Stephen McMullin, of the Cleveland Coucil for Voluntary Service, said there was now much greater use of amphetamine-based drugs in Cleveland than was ever acknowledged.
‘Particularly in the rave scene of all-night parties young people find these drugs readily available and friends often encourage each other into taking the drugs,’ he said.
Mr McMullin said many parents would be unaware that their children were regularly using Ecstasy, LSD or speed and young people did not realise the long-term harmful effects of the substances they were taking.
‘Publicity has led to young people to believe that drug taking is about heroin and crack and has failed to cover the dangers of other less notorious drugs,’ said Mr McMullin.
‘Paranoia, memory loss, convulsions, internal bleeding and severe weight loss can all result from the use of amphetamines,’ he said.
He said a small  group of people who were interested in doing something about the issue would be interested to hear from people who had views or experiences on the subject.
Contact can be made at the CCVS, 47 Princes Road, Middlesbrough.
Sex attack sparks hunt
A WOMAN was indecently assaulted in Darlington in the early hours yesterday.
The 32-year-old woman was attacked in Arkendale Street at 1.20am after being grabbed from behind and knocked to the ground.
Her attacker, aged about 22, then ran off.
Police said the man was described as white, 6ft tall, with  mousy , cropped hair.
He was wearing jeans and a light brown jacket.
Anyone with any information should contact Darlington CID on 467681.
Body found:
The body of a man was found in a fume filled car on the isolated North Yorkshire moorland road between Stape and Goathland yesterday.
Police said they had not yet been able to identify the man but he is not believed to be local.
Murder charge:
John Hickey, 42, of Quarry Road, Silksworth, Sunderland, will appear before a special sitting of Sunderland magistrates today charged with the murder of his estranged wife.
Mandy Hickey, 27, was found dead in a house in Quarry Road on Thursday afternoon.
A post mortem revealed she had been strangled.
Death probed:
The death of psychiatric patient William Sample at Hartlepool General Hospital is being investigated as part of an inquiry ordered by the government.
The case, in which a fellow patient has denied manslaughter, is one of a number which prompted ministers to commission a study by top psychiatrist Dr William Boyd Boy hurt: Michael Brown, 11, of East Street, Crookhall, Consett, County Durham, was taken to Shotley Bridge Hospital with a fractured shoulder and broken right leg after apparently riding his scooter into the path of a Vauxhall Astra car in nearby Second Street.
Cliff rescue:
Four youngsters were plucked to safety yesterday after becoming trapped on a cliff ledge at Seaham after the tide cut them off.
Nine-year-old Kelly Bell, seven-year-old Kirsty Bell, ten-year-old Michelle Hunter and seven-year-old Sean Stockton, all from the Seaham area, were trapped 15ft up the cliff.
The local coast rescue team used ropes to pull them away from danger after the alarm was raised.
No one was hurt in the incident.
Siege man stable:
Keith Pringle who was shot by a police marksman after a 47-hour siege in Darlington was yesterday said to be in a ‘stable’ condition in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
He suffered a jaw injury in the incident which started on Easter Sunday.
FESTIVITIES this week to mark the official launch of Middlesbrough as as the new Environment City will draw national and international interest.
Representatives from business and commerce, voluntary and environmental groups, will be pulling out all the stops on Wednesday when a party from Leicester, the first Environment City, will join the celebrations.
A party of European journalists, some from the former Eastern bloc, will also be touring the town.
Centrepiece of the celebrations will be the signing of the ‘declaration of intent’ in Central Gardens when Middlesbrough council and its partners in the project promise to preserve and improve the environment.
A parade through the town involving local youngsters, Middlesbrough FC stars Mark Proctor and Curtis Fleming, floats, fire engines and council vehicles will make its way to Central Gardens where TV presenter Paul Frost, will preside over open-air activities.
Events are also planned for Fairydell Park and Marton West Beck.
Regeneration cash to revamp park
A PARK is to undergo a range of improvements after the confirmation of a £5m urban funding package for Middlesbrough.
Albert Park, in the heart of the town, will benefit from a new play area and sports pavilion and an in formation and management centre.
The nearby Dorman Museum will also benefit from the Government cash with an extension to be built to house an exhibition area, tearoom, shop and education resource centre.
Other projects covered by the funding package include improvements to streets, buildings and the general landscape and crime prevention initiatives.
Environment minister Robin Squire said the funding would benefit many people living in Middlesbrough.
Building blaze:
Firemen attended a blaze in a large detached unoccupied building formally used as a day centre at St Luke's Hospital, Middlesbrough.
Roof fall:
Firemen helped ambulance staff lower a workman who had fallen on a roof at a housing site at Ash Green, Coulby Newham, Middlesbrough.
Paul Pattison, of Marina Avenue, Redcar, was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital and released after treatment for a head wound.
House fire:
Firemen were called to a house in Elwick Road, Hartlepool, yesterday after a blaze broke out in the airing cupboard.
A quantity of linen and wiring insulation was destroyed.
The first-floor was affected by smoke.
Mercy trip plea:
Three caring Cleveland folk who will heading for Romania on Thursday to help suffering orphans need more clothes and food to fill their seven-ton lorry and two Post Office vans.
Anything which will help is welcome at the Cleveland Christian Fellowship Charity Fund for Romania shop at Unit 51, In Shops, Thornaby.
The mercy trip trio are Alan and Margaret Lochrie, of Thorn Close, Ingleby Barwick, and John Gordon, of Wilton Village.
Concert gift:
Proceeds of a concert at Middlesbrough Little Theatre on May 10 in memory of Police Superintendent Bill Askew who died of cancer will help pay for a holistic treatment centre, an alternative medicine to fight cancer, at South Cleveland Hospital.
The concert features the Carol Andrew Singers.
In Court THE following case was dealt with by Thirsk magistrates:
George David Watson, 25, of Windsor Oval, Thornaby, admitted using motor van with record sheet withdrawn without proper authorisation, using motor van with incomplete record sheet and causing motor vehicle to wait on road designed as clearway, fined £250 plus £20 costs.
THE following cases were dealt with by Stokesley magistrates:
Stephen Walton, 25, of Erskine Road, Hartlepool, was convicted of using motor car without excise licence, without insurance and fraudulently using excise licence, fined £550 plus £75 costs and £33.33 duty, licence endorsed, eight points.
Paul Collins McInnes, 23, of High Street, Great Ayton, admitted driving motor car without due care and attention and failing to report an accident, fined £150, licence endorsed.
ARSONISTS caused £50,000 damage to an  unused and unoccupied building at South Cleveland Hospital, Middlesbrough yesterday.
The blaze broke out just before midday.
Police have appealed to anyone who may have seen people acting suspiciously in the area of the hospital to contact them.
Pylons ‘a threat to road improvements’ Massive new pylons across Cleveland and North Yorkshire could jeopardise improvements to the A19, the Department of Transport has said.
An official objection to National Grid Company plans for a high-voltage overhead line from Teesside to Shipton, near York, has been lodged by the department.
It is the latest of hundreds of objections from organisations, pressure groups and individuals throughout the two counties.
Most are concerned about the environmental impact of the 150ft. pylons on some of the North's prettiest countryside, the effect on property prices and possible health hazards from the electromagnetic field.
A spokesman for the Department of Transport said both routes proposed by the NGC ran close to the A19 and could interfere with improvement plans for the Norton Parkway section of road.
A representative from the department would attend the public inquiry which starts on May 19 in Northallerton.
Protestors welcomed the official objection although some were concerned that different government departments had clashed over the matter.
Lady Mary Bell of East Rounton, near Northallerton, one of the organisers of the Revolt pressure group, said there appeared to be little co-ordination between the departments of energy and transport.
‘At the last pre-inquiry meeting someone from the Department of Transport jumped up and said it was the first he had heard of the pylons,’ she said.
‘There should be an energy and transport policy to coordinate some of this.’
A spokesman for the National Grid Company said: ‘We have recently been made aware the Department of Transport is objecting.
We are studying the situation but have not formulated any response yet.’
The pylons proposal, which the NGC says is necessary to cope with electricity from a new power station at Wilton, has received a further setback.
Langbaurgh planning councillors refused permission for the upgrading of a 275,000-volt line to carry 400,000 volts.
The section of line between Wilton and Lackenby would carry power from the generators to the main overhead cable via a sub-station.
The NGC spokesman said the council's decision meant the public inquiry would consider the siting of the substation, a matter originally not on the agenda.
Three possible sites had been earmarked by the company one next to the 275,000-volt substation at Lackenby but all had been rejected by the council on health grounds.
— The public inquiry is expected to last at least two months and three pre-inquiry meetings have been held two in Northallerton and one in Marton, Middlesbrough.
Straight face
ALBERT Cowen was former deputy leader of the Labour group in York and a railway worker in the city for 38 years two reasons to bring him into regular conflict with York's Tory MP of nine years, Conal Gregory.
Albert was the first to know the Mr Gregory had lost his seat but had to restrain himself from swinging from the Assembly Rooms chandeliers in celebration.
As the Lord Mayor Albert was also returning officer on the night and so was the first to see the result.
But the office of Lord Mayor demands total impartiality.
‘I had to read the result with a straight face,’ he said.
But I bet a few of the lads in the carriageworks were smiling.
A CLEVELAND drugs advice centre is expanding to provide weekly sessions for people seeking confidential advice.
The sessions aim to make the service more accessible and includes a free needle exchange and condoms supply.
Advice is also available on injecting techniques and safer sex to reduce the risk of hepatitis or HIV.
The service is being provided by South Tees Community Care and Mental Health Care's drugs advice and counselling service.
Sessions will be held every Thursday, starting this week, from 2.00pm to 7pm at 63 Kings Road, North Ormesby, Middlesbrough.
— A six-month pilot scheme is being set up to provide a drop-in facility at Redcar Health Centre, Coatham Road, Redcar.
Starting May 15 the sessions will be held every Friday from 12.30pm to 4.30pm.
Clinical manager Janet Powell said: ‘We have tried to make our service as accessible as possible so that anyone who needs to see us, whether about themselves, a relative or friend, can do so at a time convenient to them,’ she said.
A YOUTH is to appear before Teesside Magistrates charged with starting a £50,000 hospital fire.
The 15-year-old has been bailed to appear before the court on May 27.
Sunday's blaze destroyed disused Berwick House, in the grounds of South Cleveland Hospital, Middlesbrough.
POLL tax payers in Newcastle would pay £32 less if the council's grant from central Government was calculated more accurately, according to a report.
The study by the Local Government Information Unit  said ‘miscalculations’ are reflected in poll tax bills.
In Newcastle residents would have £32 knocked off their £349 bill if the Government assessment of spending had been more accurate.
A spokesman for the unit said: ‘Every council in the country is affected by these miscalculations to some extent.
For some they may be the difference between being capped and not being capped.’
However, the study found that if Gateshead council had spent what the Government said it should then the poll tax would increase by £26 to £297.
The unit's chairman and leader of Middlesbrough Council, Coun Michael Carr, said he wanted ‘a fundamental review of the way in which councils are allocated grant’.
The unit is supported by nearly 90 councils and eight trade unions.
FIREFIGHTERS yesterday freed a four-year-old who trapped his thumb in the bracket of a car wing mirror he found while playing.
Paul Hopper, from Cotswold Crescent, Pallister Park, Middlesbrough, was taken to hospital by his mum.
She was referred to the town's main fire station where he met sub-officer John Yoxall and had the bracket cut off with a small hacksaw.
‘He was calm and very good.
Once we got it off we showed him around the fire appliances and he went away happy,’ said John.
Firemen from Grangetown cut through a wooden shaft linking a metal grass roller and its handle to free the leg of a ten-year-old boy who got trapped while playing in Smith's Dock Park, Normanby.
POLICE were yesterday still waiting to interview a man who was badly burnt in a fire which swept through his first floor flat in the early hours of Sunday morning.
Det Sgt Martyn Lowrie said officers needed to talk to victim Paul Deacon, 33, before they could decide whether the blaze at his first floor flat in Ford Way, Bishop Auckland, could have been started deliberately.
Mr Deacon saved himself by running through the inferno to get to the staircase and outside.
It is understood he has 20pc burns which are on his arms, hands and lower body.
Fire officers have said they believe the blaze, which gutted the flat, was already well alight by the time it was noticed.
Forensic scientists have scoured the scene but have not come up with any conclusive evidence.
Yesterday, Mr Deacon was stable in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
THE railways can claim to have helped Britain progress in many directions, but one of their lesser-known achievements is Middleton St George.
When the Stockton and Darlington Railway first rolled through the countryside in the 1820s, there really wasn't very much in the Middleton area for a bored passenger to look out at from a window.
In his exhaustive study of MSG, David Ovens says there was a Milleton or a Middleton e Rawe on the banks of the Tees in 1166.
By 1291 settlers had created Middleton Sancti Georgii on a low silty plain a mile downstream, but this was  abandoned centuries before the first guard called ‘tickets please’.
But the parish comprising One Row and the long-since destroyed West Hartburn kept the name of its patron saint.
Since 1770 there was a brewer selling ale near an oak tree in the parish, but for a century he had only the company of a blacksmith and a boot and shoe maker.
The same Oak Tree pub today doesn't seem to have many more companions.
Then into the peace of sparsely populated Dinsdale (which probably translates as ‘the sheltered possession of the Dyten family’) came the train.
On the earliest journeys of 1825, there wasn't such a thing as a station.
The driver simply halted wherever people collected waiting for a ride rather like today's bus request stops.
An obvious place for people to congregate was crossroads.
In two-road Dinsdale, the only crossroads was where the Roman road running straight north to Sadberge from the Tees was intersected by the east-west lane joining Stockton and Darlington.
With the railway built just yards north of the crossroads, this corner soon became a popular request stop.
Ever since, well, ever, this crossroads was known as Fighting Cocks.
Why isn't clear.
Perhaps it comes from some dubious bloodsport practised here, although one writer suggests it's due to the equally dubious behaviour of the local land-owning family, the Cocks, but this surely can't be true.
Another intriguing question is whether people congregated at the Cocks because it was a crossroads or because a public house there provided warmth.
In pre-railway times there is no record of a pub, so it seems some entrepreneur witnessed passengers standing on this blasted corner and decided he could profitably offer them shelter and spirits.
In 1830 permission was granted for a cottage to be built at Fighting Cocks to provide accommodation for passengers and parcels.
This cottage  gradually grew into a station, and this station brought prosperity to the land around it.
Into the MSG parish came cheap coal, lime, manure, and rich visitors to spas at Dinsdale and Middleton-One-Row.
For a brief time, this nook of County Durham was quite a fashionable holiday resort among the health-conscious.
The spa fad began to die just as iron ore was discovered on Teesside during the middle of the last century.
Most of the resultant industry was concentrated around the new town of Middlesbrough, but in 1864 the Middleston Iron Company was founded.
Its first two blast furnaces employing 50 men were upgraded within four years to employ 300 more than the population of the whole parish.
The company needed workers, and so began building small terraces of houses for its labourers to live in.
These terraces grew into the village we know today as Middleton St George, which took its name from the ancient parish in which it was situated.
Other industry arrived, notably the Dinsdale Steel and Wire Works in 1882 making bits for the new-fangled telephone and telegram.
The railway was important here, too, for the Works' steel came by train from Sheffield.
Five years later came the Dinsdale Moor Iron Works, but these were troubled times for heavy industry.
Not only were there numerous deep recessions, but by the end of the century it was discovered foreign iron ore was of a higher quality, and although the MSG works did smelt imports from Spain, Russia and Chile, it was furnaces in ports that could do the cheapest.
So in 1877 the men at the Middleton Iron Company were given their notice, though they stubbornly clung to short-time employment until 1883 when the plant was shut down completely until 1897.
By 1906 two furnaces were working, and in 1911 the splendidly-named Linthorpe Dinsdale Ferro Manganese Smelting Company took over.
Business was still financially perilous, and after several false closures, LinDinFerEtc finally finished in 1931.
Coupled with the other heavy industry closures in the village, this meant 80pc of the male population was out of work.
The 40-acre iron works was demolished just after the war and threequarters of a million bricks were reclaimed, but their legacy lingered on with Slag Tip Corner by the notoriously low railway bridge.
In its heyday, the company had filled its own site with slag and so had built a bridge over the road and railway so it could shunt more slag into the neighbouring field.
This bridge, demolished in January 1956, had been 30ft high, but was still only level with the towering heaps.
Some of Middleton's slag had been used to build Darlington's roads the famous blue scorriae bricks that line the town centre yards and back alleys are made from slag and when the RAF set up at Goosepool, the rest of the heaps were turned into runways.
But if the station at Fighting Cocks had effectively founded MSG, the railways did not repay the kindness by honouring the station.
After only 50 years, the railway  hierarchy was contemplating a line connecting Darlington's new Bank Top station with Oak Tree junction, so by-passing the Cocks (actually the station was more commonly called Middleton and Dinsdale, probably as a tourist attraction to the spas).
On June 31 1887 the Cocks closed to passenger traffic, with Dinsdale on the new line opening the following day.
Now the track has been ripped up, the station master's house and station have been converted into homes, and the architecturally-unique waiting-room (or workman's shelter) seems to have fallen down.
Northern Electric donated £1,500 to the Cleveland Unit at Middlesbrough General, which caters for disabled babies and young children.
The cash will be used to buy a computer which will be adapted for use by disabled children.
A SOUTH Tees health unit has formally launched its application to become a third-wave NHS Trust.
The launch in West Lane Hospital, Middlesbrough, also marked the start of a three-month consultation period which gives the public a chance to comment on the application, made by South Tees Community and Mental Health Care.
Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley will decide whether the unit can have trust status later this year.
South Tees Community and Mental Health Care believes NHS trust status will bring important benefits for Cleveland people.
It covers Middlesbrough and Langbaurgh with its population of 300,000 and also provides specialist services such as forensic psychiatry to every district in the North.
The unit employs 1,100 and has an annual budget of £33m.
Unit general manager Moira Britton said: ‘Patients are central to our health care services and as a trust we will be able to manage and organise our services in a more flexible way to meet the individual health needs of our patients.’
She said benefits would include new and improved services including better mental health services and the development of a community paediatric nursing service.
There would also be better access to services for patients, provision of a personalised service to meet individual health needs and improved information on the range of services provided and how to use them.
Services would be delivered at times and places convenient to the patient.
They would be provided in good quality accommodation.
She said there would be development of long-term partnerships with patients, their families and their carers and with other agencies including those in the voluntary sector.
Mrs Briton said trust status would also mean greater control over its own finances and the freedom to determine staff terms and conditions to meet local needs.
The first public meeting is on May 18 at 7.30pm in St Mary's Centre, Corporation Road, Middlesbrough.
POLICE are investigating the theft of a video recorder stolen from students in Middlesbrough on Monday.
Five students, aged about 20, were filming the public for a project when they were approached by a man who asked to borrow the Ferguson Videostar camcorder.
He then walked off with it.
The students followed but he threatened them with a knife before running off.
The thief is described as 20years-old, 5ft 10ins tall, with short ginger hair.
BRITISH Rail has introduced a £20m package of improvements to North-East services aimed at attracting more travellers on to local trains.
There will be more trains between major towns and new services to the MetroCentre at Gateshead.
Other improvements include more frequent early morning and evening trains.
Some routes thought to be in danger will instead get improved services.
Local authorities and the Tyne and Wear Passenger Transport Executive are contributing around £2m to the £20m investment by BR's Regional Railways division in new rolling stock and track.
Northern service group manager for Regional Railways, David Judson, said he hoped the improvements would attract 3pc or 4pc more passengers in the first year alone.
The improvements include an increase in modern Supersprinter trains and more trains from Newcastle, Sunderland and Teesside to the MetroCentre.
Also proposed are new trains between Durham and Middlesbrough, Redcar and Saltburn in Cleveland, and new services linking Teesside into the TransPennine service.
The Bishop Auckland line which has for years been the subject of closure fears will get a better pattern of morning services.
The Whitby line, another which has been the subject of closure worries, will serve shoppers better and has new connections at Grosmont for the North York Moors Railway.
A 15-year-old boy was attacked by a group of youths and robbed of a gold chain in the Smith's Dock Park area of Middlesbrough.
The teenager tried to run away when the youths approached him but they punched him in the face and pushed him to the ground.
The chain had two boxing glove pendants and was valued at £65.
The main attacker was thought to be 6ft, slim, with short, blond hair.
He was wearing a burgundy-coloured bomber jacket and jeans and was thought to me in his mid to late teens.
Anyone with information about the attack which happened at 3pm on Bank Holiday Monday is asked to telephone South Bank CID on Middlesbrough 301933.
THE Mayor of Middlesbrough, Coun Eddie Bolland, supported pedal power when he handed over a tandem to a group helping blind and partially-sighted people take part in cycling and sport.
Cash from the council's community chest bought the tandem for Cleveland Area Tandems for the Sight Impaired (CATSI), which was formed in 1989 and is based at the social centre for the blind in the town's Stockton Road.
The group organises monthly social and sporting activities, including cycle sessions, and has bought nine tandems through sponsorship and fundraising.
At yesterday's handover outside the town hall, Coun Bolland tucked his trouser bottoms into his socks and climbed behind front rider Steve Jones, 17, of Coniston Road, Acklam, Middlesbrough.
He said: ‘I found cycling a pleasure when the sun was shining and there was no wind.
But this organisation makes it a permanent pleasure for blind and partially sighted people.’
Fundraiser Georgina Hamari said CATSI was ‘desperate’ for more front riders to allow more handicapped members to enjoy the outings.
She can be contacted on Middlesbrough 224231.
Tempers flared when 25-year-old Craig Mason spotted his girlfriend Kerry McDermott being kissed by another man in a pub.
Taxi driver Mason admitted assault occasioning actual bodily harm on January 3 and arson between January 2 and 5.
Toby Wynn, prosecuting, said the incident started when Mason, of Holmefields Road, Eston, Middlesbrough, had an argument with Miss McDermott.
Teesside Crown Court heard how she had later gone home by bus to discover all the lights on and the door open at her home in Eddison Way, Hemlington.
Mason dragged Miss McDermott into the kitchen where a roll of towels was burning.
Later he set fire to her bed and made a bonfire of furniture.
‘He kicked and punched her, knocking her to the ground, shouting abuse at her,’ said Mr Wynn, ‘He gave her a very hard blow to the nose which caused it to bleed profusely.
He then shouted that he would burn the place down.’
Minutes later, as the fire took hold, he warned another resident in the house to evacuate the flat.
The fire caused £2,100 in damage and destroyed about £5,000 worth of Miss McDermott's possessions.
Tim Roberts, for Mason, said he had suffered mood swings after he had suffered injuries in an accident when a plate of glass fell on the side of his head last year.
Mason was given a prison sentence of 15 months suspended for two years for setting fire to property and a three-month sentence to run concurrently for assault.
He was also ordered to pay £100 compensation and £200 towards costs.
A MAN was caught after leaving a dentist's appointment card at one of the places he burgled, Teesside Crown Court heard yesterday.
Mark Fenton, 19, and 15-year-old Neil Dolan pleaded guilty to a burglary at Pentland Primary School in Billingham, Middlesbrough.
Fenton admitted aggravated burglary at a house in Roseberry Road, Billingham, where Graham Watson, 20, and Dolan admitted burglary.
Fenton also pleaded guilty to a burglary in Station Road, Billingham.
Tim Clayson, prosecuting, said all three, of Cotswold Crescent, Billingham, had gone to the school where a £50 cassette player had been stolen, but it was later recovered in Fenton's bedroom.
During the second burglary, which took place in December, Fenton had a knife with him, and he had said he was prepared to use it if he had been disturbed.
Almost £5,000 of property, including jewellery, a television and a video recorder, was stolen.
Fenton was tracked down by police after leaving the vital clue at the third burglary.
Fenton was given 18 months detention in a young offenders institution for the aggravated burglary and 12 months concurrent for each of the other offences.
Watson was given a 180-hour community service order for burglary and Dolan was given a 12-month supervision order.
A DOWNS Syndrome sufferer was attacked when he accidentally bumped into a man, a court heard.
Stephen Taylor, 30, bumped into Stephen Elstob in Tubwell Row, Darlington.
Elstob, 23, then punched, kicked and bit Mr Taylor, who has a mental age of between five and eight, leaving him with his nostril almost severed.
Yesterday Elstob, of Trafalgar Terrace, Darlington, admitted wounding at Teesside Crown Court.
Judge Angus Stroyan sentenced Elstob to 12 months in jail consecutive to an eight-year sentence which Elstob is serving for robbery.
The judge told him: ‘You almost severed part of the nostril.
This was a vicious and disgusting offence.
It is an absolutely revolting offence against someone suffering from Downs Syndrome.’
Tim Roberts, prosecuting, said Mr Taylor accidentally bumped into Elstob in the street.
Elstob then turned on him, punching and kicking him.
He said: ‘He then carried out his threat to bite Mr Taylor on the nose.’
A passing taxi driver intervened.
Police believed Elstob was under the influence of drink or drugs.
Mr Taylor was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital where he received seven stitches to his nose.
Brian Sommerville, for Elstob, said he had been drinking and could not remember the attack.
Mr Sommerville said: ‘It may well be drink and drugs were involved and each aggravated the other.
In any event he is remorseful.’
Trippers to avoid free bus pass axe
STOCKTON pensioners can still enjoy a free trip to the seaside in Langbaurgh, despite a bus pass scheme being scrapped.
Their free passes are still valid for Redcar, Marske, Saltburn or Skinningrove, even though pensioners' free bus passes in Langbaurgh have been axed.
Councillor Joan Wade, of Stockton Borough Council, said she wanted to reassure senior citizens in the Stockton area that they can still use their passes to get to Langburgh.
She added: ‘We have had so many inquiries about this and have carefully verified it and we want to set their minds at rest.’
The free bus pass scheme does not apply to pensioners wanting to travel to Hartlepool, as the council there does not participate in the scheme.
Industrial death:
Retired foundryman Henry Hardman, 74, of Richardson Road, Thornaby, died of the industrial disease silicosis, an inquest in Middlesbrough heard.
Champion hope:
Middlesbrough Council is hoping at qualify for a further year's Government grant to finance champion coaching sessions for young sportspeople.
Drop-in boost:
Council house tenants in the Marske area can now take advantage of a drop-in centre each Friday at the housing information centre in Marske Leisure Centre, where they can put their housing problems.
Kitchen fire:
Firemen were called to a kitchen fire in Runciman Road, Hartlepool.
Although the blaze was out when they arrived, it damaged part of the ceiling and a wall.
DEL Amitri see themselves as a laid-back, fashionably unfashionable rock group.
After ten years of touring and rehearsing, the languid Scots have only just finished their third album.
They may give the impression of being lazy but founder member Iain Harvie says it's more due to craftsmanship.
Their recording time works out at three years per album.
‘We spend a lot of time working on each record,’ said Iain.
‘We like to get things right.’
The new album Change Everything is due for release in early summer.
Meanwhile they have released a new single Always The Last To Know a mellow, melodic ballad as a taster.
‘I suppose we've mellowed over the years,’ said Iain.
‘This new album is not radically different from our others although we've spent months in Glasgow writing and rehearsing.’
Iain started the band ten years ago with singer Justin Currie.
‘The rest of the band we got through friends of friends on the Glasgow scene,’ he said.
Great chart success has eluded the band, but they made a dent on the charts two years ago with Nothing Ever Happens.
But Iain, who worked briefly as an architect, says he's too old to worry about pop fame.
‘In my early days I was into Pere Ubu and Josef K, but now I'm more mellow and listen to Lyle Lovett and some classical stuff.
All very mature.’
Del Amitri play Middlesbrough Town Hall tomorrow night.
NEW head chef Nigel Alexander is aiming for a healthier menu after taking over at the King's Head Hotel, Richmond.
Nigel, 27, succeeds Colin Auton who has moved on after seven years at the hotel.
Nigel trained at Kirby College, Middlesbrough, and with John McCoy at Martha's Vineyard, Kirklevington.
He then spent four years in London and the South-East, including a spell at the prestigious Gravetithe Manor in East Grinstead.
He returned North and was head chef at Martha's Vineyard before moving to the King's Head.
He plans to increase the hotel's vegetarian selections and introduce healthier ways of preparing food without losing texture and taste, such as using less cream in sauces.
Phillip Cooke, 19, of Stockton, has also joined the hotel as Chef de Parti.
THREE pensioners are going on the ‘trip of a lifetime’ to the bulb fields of Holland and the Floriade Garden Festival on Saturday.
Rose Roberts, 70, Ann Hetherington, 64, and Rene Tonner, 61, all residents of sheltered housing schemes run by Bradford & Northern Housing Association, will be just three of the 250 senior citizens making the weekend trip.
The event is part of the building society's 25th anniversary celebrations.
For Rose, of Otterhill Court, Hemlington, and Ann, of Chapman Close, Pallister Park, both Middlesbrough, it will be the first time they have ventured out of the country.
For Rose, of Argyll Court, Norton, and her second husband, Maurice, it will be the trip they have always dreamed of taking together.
The holidaymakers leave Hall Garth School, Hall Drive, Middlesbrough, following a sen-off from Middlesbrough's deputy mayor and mayoress, Coun and Mrs Frank Platt.
HOSPITAL colleagues are mourning the loss of a pioneering surgeon who died at his home in Marton, near Middlesbrough.
Frank Walker retired two years ago after working for the South Tees Health authority for 23 years.
He was a member of the team which pioneered kidney transplants in the North-East and was senior consultant general surgeon at South Ceveland Hospital.
In 1969 Mr Walker performed what is believed to be Teesside's first successful aortic graft, the replacement of the body's main blood vessel with a false vessel.
In 1980 he became an examiner for the Royal College of Surgeons.
Mr Walker leaves a widow, Mary, and two children, Donald and Jane.
The funeral is tomorrow at 1.30pm in St Mary's Church, Nunthorpe.
MASKED thugs pinned a man's hand to a fence with a broken carving knife.
The horrific attack happened in Middlesbrough as the victim was walking along an unlit path.
The man had got off a bus and was making his way home at 11.30pm along Black Path adjacent to St Peter's Junior School field in the town's South Bank district.
As he headed for St Margaret's Grove he was bundled over the fence into the field.
Three men wearing balaclava-type masks dragged him to a perimeter fence where the attack took place.
The injured man fainted but when he came round he managed to dislodge his hand from the fence and made his way home with the blade still stuck in the wound.
He was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital where he was treated and released.
The attackers stole over £200 in cash and a gold chain which the victim was wearing.
Det Inspector Ray Mallon said: ‘This man associated with known criminals and we suspect this could be a personal attack although the injured man has no idea as to the identity of the attackers.’
He appealed for anyone with information about the attack, which happened on Saturday night, to contact South Bank CID on Middlesbrough 326326.
THE LATEST application to set up an NHS Trust in Cleveland was yesterday described as ‘a headlong rush’ towards a more divided and more fragmented health service in the county.
Coun Bob Pitt, chairman of the county council's social services committee, was criticising the application by the South Tees Community and Mental Health Care unit to become a third-wave NHS Trust.
He said the move could have serious implications for social services, particularly in the implementation of Care in the Community and Child Protection Services.
‘The result can only be health care services which have virtually no real accountability or contact with the local community,’ he said.
‘If you need evidence of that, you need only look as far as the Trust operation now running acute health services in South Tees.’
He said the board's meetings were held in secret and only two of the non-executive board members lived in the Cleveland area.
He said: ‘We shall certainly study the trust proposals with care and will make our views strongly felt.
But I fear that, as with all previous trust applications in Cleveland, public consultation will turn out to be a cynical sham.’
At Tuesday's launch of the three-month consultation period with gives the public a chance to comment on the application, Moira Britton, unit general manager of South Tees Community and Mental Health Care, said Trust status would bring about long-term partnerships with patients, their families and their carers.
New president:
Dr Jean Bainbridge has taken over from Coun Heather Scott as president of the Darlington and District Soroptimists.
Dr Bainbridge is a former director of public health in Darlington.
Gunman ‘satisfactory’:
Easter Sunday siege gunman Keith Pringle, 24, of Thirlmere Road, Darlington, was yesterday ‘satisfactory’ in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Pringle held former girlfriend Leanne Rees, 21, hostage for 47 hours at her parents' home in Lyonette Road.
Driver's progress:
Driver Eric Eals, 59, from Carlisle, who cheated death when he was thrown through the windscreen of his lorry and fell inches from traffic on the A1 was yesterday ‘quite comfortable’ at the Duchess of Kent military hospital, Catterick.
THE launch of Middlesbrough yesterday as the country's second environment city didn't exactly get off to a flying start.
Fewer people than expected turned out at the town's Central Gardens for the declaration of intent ceremony, the bouncy castle was late into action and British Telecom's hot air balloon was grounded by strong winds.
At one stage it looked as if the balloon was going to take off regardless of the wishes of its crew who fought valiantly to keep it tethered.
But the insipid weather did not prevent schoolchildren enjoying the event.
They delivered cans for recycling and took part in a treasure hunt and other activities in Central Gardens, Fairydell Park and Marton West Beck.
Visitors to the town's Botanic Centre at Acklam saw a display of enviro-art created by Acklam Grange School.
Middlesbrough joins Leicester in environment city status.
The selection was organised by the Royal Society for Nature Conservation wildlife trusts partnership together with BT and the Department of the Environment.
Town Mayor Coun Eddie Bolland said: ‘It shows what Middlesbrough can do.
The town has made great strides forward working with the community and business over the past few years in cleaning up the town and making it the kind of place which is able to compete and win a national environmental accolade.’
An RSPCA bid to confiscate terriers from two convicted badger baiters has been adjourned.
Lee Yafano and John Harvey both admitted digging for badgers on farmland near Middlesbrough.
Teesside magistrates heard they put a terrier with an electronic collar down a badger hole.
The two 19-year-olds used a mini metal detector to trace the dog.
They were ready to dig out a badger when the terrier came across one.
Yesterday the two appeared for sentencing and Simon Catterall, prosecuting, asked Teesside magistrates to confiscate their pet terriers.
Yafano's solicitor John Freer argued the court did not have the power to do that and the case was adjourned for a week to allow both sides to consult legal records.
Yefano of Vine Street, Middlesbrough has a previous conviction for cruelty to cats.
Harvey of Preen Drive, Middlesbrough, has no previous convictions for animal cruelty.
Wine taster in twin town group drive
TASTING the wines of France is just one event on the agenda for a twinning organisation on Teesside looking for new members.
Stockton Twinning Association needs new blood to extend the town's hand of friendship to its twin town of Asnieres-sur-Seine, on the northern outskirts of Paris.
Individuals, groups or organisations with ideas for promoting the twinning are especially welcome.
Anyone wishing to know more about the society is invited to attend its annual meeting at Stockton Town Hall next Thursday at 7pm, when tickets will be on sale for a French wine-tasting.
Assault admitted:
Scott Bell, 38, of Myers Avenue, admitted assault occasioning actual bodily harm on the landlady of Hartlepool's Touchdown pub Pamela Fawcett and a customer, Stanley Galloway, when he appeared at the town's magistrates court yesterday.
He was ordered to pay compensation of £40 to Mrs Fawcett, who sustained a back injury and fined £50 for the second assault.
Bound over:
Brothers Ernest and Michael Robinson of Thompson Grove, Hartlepool, were bound over in the sum of £100 to keep the peace for six months after a fight with another man in York Road.
The brothers, aged 24 and 27, agreed to be bound over after denying the offence.
Man fined:
Andrew Ferguson, 25, of Pelham Street, Hartlepool, was fined £100 and ordered to pay compensation of £117 to the woman driver of a car which he kicked as it slowed down at a road junction.
He pleaded guilty to causing criminal damage at the town's magistrates court yesterday.
Holidays plan:
Lingdale Residents Association has asked Langbaurgh Council's permission to organise holiday activities on spare land at Wilson Street in a bid to discourage vandalism during vacation time.
The council's housing committee is to consider the plea today.
Maiden voyage:
MV Bowcliffe, a £2.8 million coaster, berthed at Eston Jetty, Teesside, before sailing on her maiden voyage carrying 2,200 tonnes of pig iron from British Steel's Cleveland Iron to foundries in France and Belgium.
Glaxo gift:
Sir Paul Girolami, chairman of Glaxo Holdings, will be handing over an £800,000 cheque today to Audry Collins, chairman of South Tees Acute Hospitals NHS Trust at a ceremony to mark the opening of a new dermatology centre at South Cleveland Hospital, Middlesbrough.
Pass plea:
A plea to Prime Minister John Major is being made from Loftus Market Place today.
Townspeople are being asked to sign a petition to help save the bus passes of Langbaurgh's 22,000 pensioners and disabled.
THE season just ended provided a stark contrast to Darlington's two previous campaigns.
It was, sad to say, virtually downhill all the way.
The Brian Little era restored respectability to the club, and when the maestro departed for pastures new at Leicester City, the board moved quickly ‘to provide some continuity’ and appointed his assistant Frank Gray in his place.
Gray, who had tucked away the penalty which set up Quakers' promotion to the Third Division only a few weeks before, had never managed a club, and by Christmas it was becoming clear that, while a likeable character, he was not in the same class as his predecessor.
Little left behind a good side, but there was always a suspicion that it might not be good enough for the Third.
Gray obviously thought it was and only added Mark Sunley and Lee Tucker, both unknowns.
Cash constraints may have governed his approach.
‘There isn't very much difference in standard between the Third and Fourth Divisions.
My squad is strong enough to do well,’ said Gray.
Famous last words.
Gray's view seemed to be vindicated, however, on the first trip, to Bournemouth, when the promotion winners won 2–1, with goals by home defender Alex Watson and Jimmy Willis proving decisive.
After beating Huddersfield in the home leg of the first round Rumbelows Cup Mitch Cook scoring Bobby Gould brought former First Division giants West Brom to Feethams.
Don Goodman, later to be transferred for £1 million to Sunderland, netted the only goal.
Four days later at Huddersfield the realities hit home.
In the return leg of the Rumbelows League Cup tie, the home side exposed some glaring weaknesses in the Darlington defence, and Phil Starbuck scored twice in a 4–0 win.
A disallowed Willis goal when the score was 1–0 proved crucial.
The next home game against Bolton was a cracker.
Quakers stormed into a three goal half time lead, with Willis, Mitch Cook and Coatsworth on target.
The amazing Prudhoe stood between Bolton and a point in the second half with some great saves.
Lou Macari arrived with Stoke City, dominated the game and went away with the points thanks to a goal by Tony Ellis.
Youth boss Ray Hankin said: ‘Over the season we will get points from games like this because of the hard work we put in.
We didn't today because of our trouble in scoring goals.
I still say we will finish in the top ten.’
Hank will never be a pools millionaire.
Another London side, eventual champions Brentford, won the next game at Feethams, 2–1.
By this stage no recognised forward had yet to score, but that was soon rectified at Wigan, when John Borthwick came off the bench to score a last gasp winner for a 2–1 victory.
But then cracks began to appear again, as Quakers' discipline slipped.
Cook and Mick Tait were both sent off as they lost 2–0 at home to Bury, and Willis was sent off the following week in a 4–1 defeat at Exeter, for whom Steve Moran scored a hat trick, Ellison replying from the penalty spot.
Suddenly, goals were easy to score against Quakers.
Bad defending gave Shrewsbury a two goal lead on two occasions, but two goal Ellison and Gary Hamilton rescued their side for a 3–3 draw.
They plunged to new depths at fellow strugglers Hull City, conceding four goals in a nightmare second half after leading 2–1 at the interval.
Andy Payton, later to move to Middlesbrough, destroyed Quakers by setting up three goals and scoring another.
Les McJannet played his first game after a two month lay off, but only the ever improving Ellison made an impression, especially on watching Celtic manager Liam Brady.
October was a bad month, with only one point from four games.
Little, still in touch at Leicester, provided some cash for Gray by shelling out £15,000 for Gary Coatsworth, and taking Mick Trotter, who had hardly played in two seasons, on a free transfer.
If Hull was one of the low points of the season, then the derby game against Hartlepool was one of the few highlights.
Brady agreed to lend Gray Dugald McCarrison, and the Scot became an instant hit, scoring in a one sided 4–0 win, with partner Ellison scoring twice.
Former Sunderland midfielder Nick Pickering, freed by Derby, also made his debut.
BUT the defeat was the turning point for Hartlepool and, arguably, proved the point of no return for Quakers.
Pool had the last laugh in the FA Cup a few weeks later.
The tenth defeat of the season arrived and with it a place at the bottom of the table this time 2–1 at home to Peterborough.
‘I'm not rushing out to get more players,’ said Gray, who had just rejected a bid of £175,000 for Willis from Motherwell.
There was a brief recovery with a 3–1 home win over Fulham, Ellison scoring with a superb chip for one of the goals, but McCarrison blotted his copybook by getting himself sent off for retaliation after scoring one of the goals.
That was the end of his second month's loan after scoring twice in six games; later he was to turn down the chance of a permanent move.
Willis then rejoined his old boss at Leicester in a £200,000 move, and 17-year-old Sean Gregan was brought in for his debut at Huddersfield.
The youngster's display was the only plus in a 2–1 defeat; Ellison missed a penalty when the scores were level, and Mitch Cook was sent off for swearing at a linesman ironically Pickering scored his first goal for the club when Quakers were down to ten men.
Hartlepool, unbeaten since the drubbing six weeks earlier, easily gained their revenge, a 2–1 win in the Cup.
Vice chairman Alan Noble resigned his seat on the board because of business commitments, but that wasn't the last of him.
By the turn of the year, Ellison, who had been linked to some big-name clubs, was looking jaded.
Hopes were raised with a 5–2 win at Chester.
Chairman Dick Corden, looking for new blood on the board, said: ‘I'll be happy to finish fifth from bottom.’
Perhaps that was an indication of the impending cash crisis, which was partly solved by the appointment of Richard Tonks.
Then came the rarity of a second successive win, 3–2 at home to Torquay.
Gray put his job on the line and smashed the club's transfer record by splashing out £95,000 for Nick Cusack, a homesick English centre forward playing in the Scottish Premier League at Motherwell.
Defender Steve O'Shaughnessy and midfielder Steve Gaughan also arrived as Gray reshaped his side, but McCarrison couldn't agree terms.
THE club's AGM in late January revealed debts approaching £500,000, and Corden said in his annual report: ‘Frank Gray will provide a more than adequate replacement and go on to bring further success to the club.’
Another who won't be a pools millionaire!
Cusack scored on his debut, but it wasn't enough in a 4–2 defeat at Swansea, and Quakers remained in an all too familiar third from bottom.
Hopes were raised again with a superb performance at Shrewsbury.
Mardenborough scored both goals in a 2–0 win, his first the goal of the season.
That was Gray's last taste of victory as Darlington manager.
With hopes high after the Shrewsbury victory, the team produced a contrasting performance against Hull City, Dean Windass scoring in the second half.
Captain Kevan Smith said; ‘We can't afford to carry passengers, because every game is going to be difficult now.’
Quakers were fourth bottom, with 28 points.
Worse was to follow in the midweek game at Fulham, where they crashed 4–0, with the home side also missing a penalty.
That was the 11th away defeat of the season.
It was downhill in top gear now.
Despite taking the lead with a long range volley from Nick Pickering, Huddersfield scored three times to take the points back to Yorkshire.
The crowd chanted for the sacking of Gray, who made his first appearance in several months, and banned all his players from giving press interviews after the game.
Chairman Corden refused to give Gray the infamous vote of confidence, but he was eventually forced to take action after Torquay outclassed Quakers 3–0 at a windy Plainmoor, with Justin Fashanu setting up victory.
‘I'm sorry for the fans,’ said the chairman after the game.
Gray complained about the team's lack of good luck.
On the Monday morning, Gray's own luck ran out.
With only eight wins in 31 games, he was sacked, along with his assistant Tony McAndrew.
Rumours that Denis Smith was taking over were rife at the press conference in the afternoon, but Corden announced he was giving the job to youth team coach Hankin.
‘Gray would still have been in a job if we had won at Torquay,’ said Corden, ‘but it was a diabolical performance and we felt something had to be done.’
A grateful Hankin said: ‘We have a mountain to climb, but I am looking forward to the challenge.’
Mick Tait was appointed number two.
The players responded against fellow strugglers Chester.
Pickering's second half goal seemed to be giving them three points, but the sending off of Mick Tait for his second bookable offence and then a defensive lapse allowed Stuart Rimmer to score the equaliser.
The derby against Hartlepool was a personal nightmare for skipper Kevan Smith, as he put through his own goal to set Alan Murray's men on their way to a 2–0 win.
‘We need a miracle, a bloody miracle,’ moaned Hankin.
It was at this point he decided to give the youths in his squad a fling.
After all, he had nothing to lose.
By now, Quakers needed to win eight of their remaining games.
Quakers were easy meat at home.
Smith was omitted from the team, with Mark Sunley and Sean Gregan paired together in defence, but they couldn't stop Preston winning 2–0.
Nick Cusack returned to promotion chasing Peterborough, one of his old clubs, to score the goal in a 1–1 draw.
‘It shows we have a good future,’ said the manager, but the gap at the bottom was nearly insurmountable.
It was all over at Brentford on Good Friday.
Quakers could hardly draw breath as Brentford went three up at half time, with Dean Holdsworth scoring twice.
But by now, speculation was rife about the board, which appeared to have only one serving director, John Brockbank.
Where was Richard Tonks?
Who is the new chairman?
Why all the meetings?
But the wall of silence that protected behind the scenes negotiations produced no answers.
It was academic on the field.
Another defeat, this time by Wigan, was the 13th of the season at Feethams, with Bury scoring a second half winner to finish the away programme on a sad note the 16th on tour.
It all ended in a flourish, of course.
Following confirmation that Alan Noble was returning to the club as chairman in the wake of Dick Corden's departure, the season drew to a close with a 5–2 win over Exeter.
But as the cliche goes, it was too little, too late.
BRITISH Rail hopes to woo television viewers to its branch lines later this month with the launch of a new series of adverts.
It wants to do for Regional Railways what its slick imagery did to boost Inter City.
Regional Railways runs every service other than the flagship high speed trains along the East Coast mainline.
They include the trans-Pennine services between the North-East and Liverpool and Manchester, which are extended to Middlesbrough from Monday.
A 40-second advert showing people reaching their destinations will be broadcast in the Yorkshire television area at the end of May before going nationwide.
It includes a grandad off to see his grandchildren, a family's trip to the seaside and a young girl visiting friends.
Marketing manager Richard Haste said they hoped the adverts would strengthen their position and attract more passengers.
‘The adverts show just how easy and pleasant travelling by Regional Railways can be,’ he said.
A GLUE-SNIFFER was jailed yesterday for ramming a police car while high.
Alan Slater, 26, drove at the vehicle, injuring a policewoman, after an 80mph chase in a residential area.
The father-of-two sped through a built-up area where children were playing.
The drama began when police were called to a pub car park in Blaydon, Gateshead, where a man was reported sniffing glue in a car.
He appeared to be asleep but when he saw officers he took off at high speed.
He narrowly avoided collisions with two cars as he drove onto the western bypass and forced the pursuing police car to take evasive action when he drove towards it on another road.
When a policewoman got out of the vehicle he rammed it and drove straight into a wall which was demolished.
The woman suffered bruising to the head and body in the impact and went on sick leave from work.
Slater, of Redcar Road, Middlesbrough, admitted reckless driving, assault and criminal damage in April and was jailed for four months and banned from driving for the same period.
He told Newcastle magistrates: ‘I'm sorry for what I did.
Maybe this will sort me out.
I could have killed someone.’
Stepping out for the whale
WALKERS in North Yorkshire are being urged to help save the whale.
A fundraising hike, to kick off from Osmotherly, near Northallerton, will be one of 185 taking place across the country.
Last year 11,000 people walked a total of 120,000 miles to raise cash and protest against the slaughter of whales.
This year's local walk across the North York Moors starts from Black Hambleton car park at 10am, on June 14.
Anyone interested should contact Lydia Scarth on Northallerton 775602.
Birds order:
The owners of parrots Billy and Milly have been told to keep the birds indoors after neighbours complained of noise.
Celia and Richard Chamberlain of Old Malton Road, Staxton, Scarborough, have been refused permission for an aviary on appeal to the Department of the Environment.
Accident verdict:
An elderly woman who fell while in a Darlington nursing home never recovered from her injuries an inquest heard yesterday.
Kathleen Ethrington, 89, had lived an active life at her home in Eastbourne Road, Darlington, but in recent months her health failed and she was obliged to move into hospital and then to the Wilton House nursing home.
A verdict of accidental death was recorded.
House arson:
Fire crews spent more than two hours tackling a severe blaze in an empty Middlesbrough house yesterday.
The blaze in an end terrace property in Trent Street, was the latest in a series of fires on the street.
The first floor of the property was 90pc heat and smoke damaged, while the ground floor and roof were also seriously damaged.
The fire spread into the roof of an adjoining empty property.
Police are treating the blaze as arson.
LENNIE Lawrence's army celebrated their march into football's Premier Division amid a sea of red and white yesterday.
Middlesbrough's battle-weary troops were cheered by thousands of fans as they made their way to a civic reception in an open-topped bus.
Later, chairman Colin Henderson talked of developing the Ayresome Park fortress where the Boro lost just two League games this season.
He promised summertime improvements and looked forward to developing a new sports superstadium in the long-term.
‘We are in the Premier League and in a great position to push forward the club and the town,’ he said.
‘It's a time for the local authority, community and club to work together in partnership.’
Mr Henderson has had negotiations with the council and private enterprise to discuss the super-stadium project, but he promised: ‘I want to retain Ayresome Park because I understand the sense of history, the relationship the fans have with Ayresome Park.
‘But we have to look at developing facilities appropriate to the club and the town in the long-term.’
Boro manager Lennie Lawrence praised the team's fans for their marvellous support during the season.
Struggling to make himself heard above the chants of the crowd, the manager said: ‘I have only been on Teesside for ten months, but thank you for making it memorable so far.
‘This is only the start.
We have brought pride back to Teesside and we want to go on to greater things.’
Skipper Alan Kernaghan said the team would be looking for a top ten place next season.
Supporters sang, cheered and honked horns as Middlesbrough Mayor and Boro fanatic Eddie Bolland presented the club with a silver salver and crystal rose-bowl and saluted ‘the best team in England, if not the world’.
The number of children in the crowd suggested school attendances may well have been down yesterday.
The only note of  discord came from fans who swamped the Middlesbrough switchboard complaining about the timing of the event.
Many were angered that work or school meant they could not share the moments of glory after watching the team all season.
A Middlesbrough Council spokesman said: ‘The time was the best we could arrange between ourselves, the club and the police.’
A COUPLE are overcoming their grief by offering a helpline for families to cope with meningitis.
Paul and Pauline Lavery have set up a branch of the National Meningitis Trust after losing toddler Ian.
‘Until effective vaccines are developed, awareness is the only weapon we have against this dreadful disease,’ said Mr Lavery.
The couple aim to promote greater understanding of meningitis by circulating information to health professionals and the public.
Anyone wishing to find out more should contact the Laverys at 1 Enfield Grove, Normanby, Middlesbrough, tel (0642) 468884.
POLICE have denied they overreacted when they stormed a Middlesbrough block of flats.
A team in riot gear went into Glentworth House, Netherfields, on Wednesday night to arrest a 29-year-old man.
One resident accused the police of going ‘over the top’ but a force spokeswoman said: ‘The man was a prisoner with a history of violence.’
The man, serving four years for a firearms offence, was on home leave and had failed to return.
A GIANT charity donation one of the biggest-ever in the North-East will allow a dermatology unit to be built in Cleveland.
Glaxo Holdings, the international pharmaceuticals group, yesterday handed over £800,000 to the South Tees Acute Hospitals NHS Trust.
The cash will pay for a purpose-built dermatology department at South Cleveland Hospital, Middlesbrough.
It will provide a range of high-technology treatment for skin diseases including dermatitis, skin cancer and psoriasis.
Other facilities will include an educational resource and training centre.
Sir Paul Girolami, chairman of Glaxo, which has a factory at Barnard Castle, said: ‘This donation is part of Glaxo's continuing commitment to the advancement of science and health care.’
Trust chairman Audrey Collins, who received the bumper cheque, said: ‘All the staff involved are extremely excited.
‘Thanks to Glaxo's generosity, we will be able to transfer our dermatology outpatients to our main site years ahead of schedule and create a state-of-the-art service for a very vulnerable group of patients.’
The centre is due to be completed next spring.
Colleagues mourn pioneering surgeon Hospital colleagues are mourning a pioneering Cleveland surgeon who died at the weekend.
The former consultant general surgeon, Mr Frank Walker, who introduced several new surgical procedures to the North, died at his home in Marton, Middlesbrough.
He was 66.
Mr Walker served the NHS in South Tees for 23 years.
On his retirement two years ago, he was senior consultant general surgeon at South Cleveland Hospital.
Mr Walker was a member of the team which pioneered kidney transplants in the NorthEast, in his capacity as reader and honorary consultant surgeon to Durham University and the Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle.
In 1967, he joined South Tees at the old Hemlington Hospital.
Here he pursued his special interest in the surgery of inflammatory bowel disease, setting up the first stoma care clinic for patients who had had ileostomies, a form of colostomy.
He also inaugurated a regional branch of the Ileostomy Association, one of the first self-help groups of its kind, which is still going strong.
In 1969, Mr Walker performed what is believed to be Teesside's first successful aortic graft the replacement of the body's main blood vessel with a false vessel.
He regularly lectured on new surgery techniques, and in 1980 he became an examiner for the Royal College of Surgeons.
‘Frank made original contributions to the field of surgery something few people achieve,’ said his successor at South Cleveland Hospital, Mr Rob Wilson.
‘He was a remarkably intellectual man with a rare sense of humour, and he really cared about people.’
Mr Walker leaves a widow, Mary, and two children, Donald and Jane.
The funeral was to take place yesterday at St Mary's Church, Nunthorpe.
Ambulance service seeks trust status The ambulance service in county Durham is seeking NHS trust status the third northern health organisation to do so in the space of a single week.
Plans were unveiled at a press conference in its Durham City headquarters yesterday when a three-month public consultation period was announced.
South Tees Community and Mental Health Care launched its application for NHS trust status on Tuesday at West Lane Hospital, Middlesbrough.
There was a similar application by South West Durham Mental Health Services at Winterton Hosptial, Sedgefield, on Thursday.
Copies of all three application documents are being sent to organisations involved in health care, including health authorities, community health councils and family health services authorities.
They will also be available in public libraries, hospitals and doctors surgeries, in efforts to learn the views of a wide range of individuals and  organisations .
The ambulance service application said improved response times and increased use of information technology systems to ensure a paramedic on every front line vehicle by 1995 would be the benefits of NHS Trust status.
The trust will extend the telecommunications network to include GP call-handling and introduce a telemetry system to enable paramedics to transmit cardiac information direct to coronary care units.
A local patients' charter will also be introduced, specific to the needs of patients.
In addition to directly-provided patient services, the NHS trust will operate other  activities to generate income to benefit these services.
Public consultation meetings will be held at King James Community Centre, Bishop Auckland, on Tuesday June 16 from 7–9pm, and the Dolphin Centre, Darlington, on Thursday June 25 from 7–9pm.
A mobile information unit with a video and  display about Durham County Ambulance Service will tour towns in Teesdale and Weardale explaining details of the application.
The NHS Trust application is one of 11 being launched within the Northern Regional Health Authority during the first fortnight in May.
Mrs Elaine Rodger, director of health care development for the NRHA, said: ‘We are striving to ensure that as many people as possible have the opportunity to receive information about this consultation and can comment on the proposals.
‘Over 70 public meetings have been advertised, nearly 20,000 application documents are being distributed, along with a similar number of summary documents.’
Jeweller hopes to double business club membership
A Darlington jeweller has become the new chairman of the town's business club just a year after joining it.
Mr Nick Bassett, aged 29, has been manager of Northern Goldsmiths, in Blackwellgate, for the last two and a half years.
He spent his childhood in Lincoln and left school at 16 to join his father's jewellery shop.
After five years he moved to become manager of a shop in Scarborough before coming to Darlington in 1989.
He said he hoped to use his year as chairman to try and double the membership from 100 to 200 as well as helping with training.
‘I think we should be setting up things like video libraries and that sort of thing to help our members,’ he said.
‘But the Darlington and District Business Club is very much a social-based thing.
It provides a pleasant and relaxing place for businessmen to meet and talk about problems they might have and how they cope with them.’
He also wants to set up ‘Toastmaster’ a debating event, to help develop the social nature of the club.
‘And there is the  possibility of intertrading between members as well of course.’
He succeeds Mr Roger Curtis, of Curtis Office Supplies in Ridsdale Street.
Away from the workplace Mr Bassett says he is interested in music, sport and photography.
‘I follow Middlesbrough and Darlington football clubs and I'm looking forward to seeing Durham come down to play cricket in the town.’
He lives with his wife, Helen, in the Eastbourne area of the town.
— Anyone interested in joining the club can contact Carmel MolinaAnnett on 368282.
Mr Bassett: new business club chairman.
Accolade for the borough Middlesbrough was this week named British Telecom Environment City.
The town is only the second in the country to win the honour.
The first was Leicester.
To mark the occasion a declaration of intent ceremony was held in the Central Gardens on Wednesday, watched by crowds of local people.
Schoolchildren delivered cans for recycling and took part in a treasure hunt around the gardens, Fairdell Park and Marton West Beck.
The Botantic Centre was also open, and on show was environmental art work by pupils from Acklam Grange School.
Since it was revealed that Middlesbrough was to be given environment city status the borough council has organised a number of  initiatives to help improve the town.
These include plans for a tree foundation, a special business award and proposals for a sculpture to commemorate the honour, which is given by British Telecom in partnership with the Department of the Environment and the Royal Society for Nature Conservation.
Coun. Eddie Bolland, Mayor of Middlesbrough, said the honour showed what Middlesbrough could do.
‘The town has made great strides forward working with the community and business over the past few years, and making it the kind of place which is able and compete and win a national environmental accolade.’
New NHS Trust application South Tees Community and Mental Health Care, which employs more than 1,500 people and has an annual budget of £33m., this week launched its bid to become a self-governing trust.
If its application is successful it will join the third wave of National Health Service Trusts to come into force in April, 1993.
It is following in the wake of North Tees Health, South Cleveland Acute Hospitals and Cleveland Ambulance; all formally became trusts last month.
The services included in the application are those delivered by St.
Luke's Hospital in Middlesbrough, four community hospitals in Langbaurgh and Middlesbrough, three mental health resource centres, six health centres, more than 20 clinics and two sites for people with learning difficulties.
Mrs Moira Britton, unit general manager, said: ‘Patients are central to our health care services and as a trust we will be able to manage and organise our services in a more flexible way to meet the individual health needs of our patients.’
During the next three months there will be a number of exhibitions and public meetings to discuss the trust application with Langbaurgh and Middlesbrough residents.
The meetings will start on May 18 at St. Mary's Centre in Middlesbrough; followed on May 21 at Coatham Memorial Hall in Redcar, June 1 at South Bank activity centre, June 4 at Sunnyfield House in Guisborough, June 8 at Grangetown neighbourhood centre, June 11 at Langdon Square community centre in Coulby Newham, June 15 at Hartlepool civic centre, June 18 at Stockton library, June 22 at Stokesley Town Hall and June 23 at Brotton community centre, all at 7.30pm.
SCHOOLGIRL Alyson Butcher has chalked up an incredible attendance record.
The 16-year-old left Langbaurgh Comprehensive School on Teesside yesterday as one of a very rare breed.
Alyson has passed through three Middlesbrough schools Hemlington Hall Juniors, Abingdon Road Juniors and Langbaurgh without missing a single day.
And she admitted: ‘I do actually enjoy school.’
Alyson, of Hazel Court, Middlesbrough, said she had had minor illnesses, but had always gone to school.
Head of school Tom Hitchen said he could only find one other pupil at the school in the last 25 years who could match Alyson's record.
Alyson received a shield made from an old school desk to mark her record.
‘This means you will take a piece of the school with you,’ said headteacher Ron Newitt, who also presented Alyson with a gift voucher.
Alyson intends to study languages and computer studies at South Park College in Normanby after completing her GCSEs.
A PUB landlord was attacked by a former customer he had barred days before, a court heard.
Trevor Spanswick walked into the Centurion pub in Overfields, Middlesbrough, to talk to a friend five days after the ban but when landlord Eric Curren told him to leave he threatened he would go and get a hammer.
Spanswick, 50, returned a few minutes later with a mash hammer and delivered blows to Mr Curren's hands as he tried to protect himself.
Yesterday Spanswick, of Simonside Walk, Overfields, Middlesbrough, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted assault causing actual bodily harm.
Spanswick was sentenced to nine months imprisonment suspended for two years with a supervision order attached.
Duncan Smith, defending, said the offence was out of character.
He said Spanswick's wife had left him and he was suffering from a depressive illness.
Mr Smith said Mr Curren had since left the pub and Spanswick had not been in touch with him since the incident.
Teenager dies in road smash
TEENAGER Mark Turnbull died when his Renault 21 was in a head-on collision with a Land-Rover on the A170 yesterday.
The other driver, Douglas Ward, 48, of Yedingham, Malton, suffered shock.
The crash happened just within the 30mph limit at Thornton-Le-Dale, not far from Mr Turnbull's home in Elm View, Pickering.
Police have appealed for witnesses to the accident to contact them.
Roots project:
Mormons from Stanley, County Durham, are part of a massive project to computerise old records which will help people trace their roots.
Workshops are being held today and tomorrow at the Sunderland Stake headquarters in Queen Alexandra Road.
Mayor named:
Coun Richard Wastell, of Scarborough, was named as the mayor of Whitby for the third time.
Drugs remand:
Arasak Rahim, 20, of Croydon Road, Middlesbrough, was remanded in custody for a week by Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with possessing £36,000 worth of heroin with intent to supply.
Nick video:
Former EastEnders star Nick Berry is preparing to shoot his latest pop video in Scarborough to accompany his new record, Heartbeat, the theme of his TV series of the same name.
Mere action:
Residents have called on Scarborough council to take action to save the resort's Mere off Seamer Road which is becoming silted up.
Dancer death:
Richard White, 23, arrested in Newcastle in connection with the death of a dancer in Sydney, Australia will ‘strenuously defend’ extradition.
He was remanded in custody by Bow Street magistrates until May 11.
Antiques theft:
Burglars stole hundreds of pounds worth of antiques after workmen left a ladder outside a house in Guisborough Road, Great Ayton.
Garage probe:
Police want car owners who had dealings with Down Town Lancia in Earsdon Road, Whitley Bay, to contact Whitley Bay CID on .
A man has been arrested.
Biker service:
The funeral of Jason McFarlane, 21, of Friar Crescent, Darlington, who died after his motorbike smashed into a parked van on the A1 near Gateshead takes place on Monday.
MORE stringent safety measures were demanded last night after a train smash in Teesside's chemical danger zone.
A road tanker driver had a miracle escape when his fuel-laden vehicle collided with a freight train on an unmanned level crossing near Billingham.
The train's four tankers were empty but hours earlier, it had ferried a 40-tonne cargo of highly toxic hydrocyanic acid along the same track.
The crash left the lorry embedded in the train and leaking diesel just before 9am.
ICI specialists decanted the fuel before fire crews separated the vehicles.
British Transport Police have launched a full inquiry.
Dave Punshon, chairman of Cleveland County Council's consumer protection committee, said the consequences could have been ‘horrific’.
Divisional Fire Officer Brian Bell, who led a 25-strong team at the scene said: ‘If just one tanker of acid had spilled, it could have wiped away half of North Tees.’
Hydrocyanic acid is highly poisonous and  vaporises when exposed to air.
Yesterday's high winds could have swept a poison cloud over Teesside in a matter of minutes.
The train was returning from ICI's Castle Works to BASF after dropping off a load of acid at the plant.
Tanker driver Dennis Dodds, 46, of Tyne Crescent, Spennymoor, was cut free.
His injuries were not serious but he was kept in North Tees Hospital overnight.
Fire crews also freed train driver Mark Francis, 27, of Pallister Avenue, Middlesbrough and his assistant Michael Dodd, 38, of Marsh House Avenue, Billingham.
Carriage and wagon examiner Dennis Harris, of Neasham Road, Middleton St George, was also taken to hospital.
A British Rail spokesman said they had an eye-witness who confirmed the warning signals were working properly.
The spokesman claimed 200 similar crossings had a good safety record and that there had been no accidents on Seal Sands Road since the crossing opened in the late 1970s.
Coun Punshon said he wanted barriers on the road and wanted to know if the lights were working.
‘If they were, how did the driver miss them?
The potential if the train had been full of toxic chemicals could have been horrific.’
A MURDER inquiry was underway in last night after a man was stabbed outside a pub.
He was killed around teatime outside the front door of the Market Tavern in North Ormesby, Middlesbrough.
Police had not named the man last night, but locals said he was known as Big Leo, of Thorntree.
He is believed to be in his 50s.
After the stabbing police barred the door to the Market Tavern and turned away would-be drinkers.
Regulars inside at the time were kept in the pub and quizzed by detectives.
Police last night issued a brief statement, which read: ‘At approximately 5.10pm, an incident took place outside the Market Tavern Hotel, North Ormesby, as a result of which a man has died.
‘The police are treating the death as suspicious and an inquiry has commenced.
‘The police are appealing for any person who was in the area at this time and may have witnessed the incident to contact them.’
A hot food trader in the market square, who only moved to North Ormesby two days ago, said: ‘People told me not to move here.
I ignored them and now look what's happened.’
He said he had heard a commotion, but not seen the incident.
Mean theft:
Burglars who raided a training centre for the mentally handicapped in Lynn Street, Hartlepool, stole a £150 go-cart specially adapted for use by the trainees.
Police are investigating and anyone with information should contact .
Shed warning:
Detectives in Hartlepool are urging householders to secure their garden sheds after a spate of break-ins in the Seaton Carew and Rift House areas.
They say the onset of spring makes tools and other gardening equipment prime targets for thieves.
Club attack:
Glue-sniffing vandals are being blamed for attacks on the bowling pavilion in Hartlepool's Grayfields recreation ground.
In one incident they attempted to saw through its supporting pillars.
Mill at work:
The only working watermill in Cleveland opens to the public tomorrow.
Tocketts Mill, near Guisborough, will mill locally-grown wheat between 11am and 4pm.
Iron Agers: Castle Eden Walkway Country Park is the setting for a woodcrafts weekend today and tomorrow.
Visitors will be able to observe the reconstruction of an iron age smelting kiln between 11am and 4pm.
Road closed:
The A178 Tees Road closes for the first of three successive Sundays tomorrow, between Greatham Creek and the B1277 Brenda Road.
Signed diversions will be in operation.
Wood fun: The people of Loftus in East Cleveland hold a fun day in Espiners Wood tomorrow between 2pm and 6pm.
Sing along:
The annual interdenominational Guisborough clergy sponsored sing-along is to be held on May 14 outside the Methodist Church in Westgate from 10am-noon.
A HARD-UP Middlesbrough man who travelled to London in search of work but ended up plastering sex-for-sale stickers in the capital's call-boxes to raise some quick cash, was going straight back to his parents as soon as he could, Marylebone Magistreates Court heard.
Jobless David Griffiths, 20, spent three fruitless months hunting for work and found himself under arrest when police spotted him putting up stickers in a St John's Wood phone box.
Griffiths, of Thurlby Road, Redcar, who had been staying in Kentish Town, admitted criminally damaging the telephone booth.
He was conditionally discharged for 12 months.
‘He has had a sad time looking for work in London and intends to go back to the North-East with his parents as soon as possible,’ said David Martin, defending.
HUNDREDS of motorcyclists staged a spectacular street protest against what they called ‘unfair and unjust’
European legislation on Saturday.
More than 600 bikers rode in convoy from Teesside industrial estate at Thornaby, through Stockton and Middlesbrough, to Redcar.
They were accompanied by Cleveland and Yorkshire North Euro-MP David Bowe, who supports their campaign against the proposed legislation.
Dave Evans, of the Middlesbrough Motorcycle Action Group, said attempts to make leg protectors compulsory would mean riders were more likely to suffer serious injury in an accident.
‘Proposed noise limits will force all air-cooled machines off the road, which could affect smaller manufacturers,’ he said.
‘We also think introducing horse power limits will have no effect on reducing accidents.’
The action group also says proposed type approval will stop bikers customising their machines.
Mr Bowe said many members of the European Parliament were unconvinced of the need for some of the laws.
‘We should confine ourselves to maintaining safety and not restrict people's freedom of expression,’ he said.
‘The vehicles are not inherently unsafe, it's how they are driven that is the key.’
The MEP, who rode on a motorcycle on an open road for the first time on Saturday, said he was very impressed by the way bikers had organised themselves into a Europe-wide movement.
Mr Evans said there had been days of action in Cleveland every two years since 1979.
‘It started off with the helmet law and it's progressed from there,’ he said.
‘We are fed up with a distant bureaucracy telling us what to do with our bikes.
Our ultimate aim is to make them see sense and leave us alone to allow us our right to ride.’
Frank Pearson, the UK representative of the Federation of European Motorcyclists, said the aim should be ‘education, not legislation.
‘We are determined not to let them ruin our motorcycling.’
TELEPHONE sweethearts Heather Shannon and Chris Fereday became man and wife at the weekend after a whirlwind romance started by chance.
The couple fell in love before they had even set eyes on each other during a six-month long distance courtship.
And just six hours after Chris and Heather met for the first time they had decided to get married.
The romance started last year when computers at the Middlesbrough office of Pearl Assurance broke down.
Office manager Heather rang the company's technical services department in Cambridgeshire where computer analyst Chris picked up the phone and at once both knew it was the start of something special.
After that the couple spoke to each other regularly by phone, exchanged letters, and Peterborough-based Chris even sent Heather a dozen red roses.
But the 200 miles separating them meant they did not meet until six months into the romance when Chris, 25, came to see Heather, 32, of Aberdeen Road, Darlington.
Within hours the couple were betrothed, even though both were stunned at the speed things moved.
On Saturday, 29 weeks to the day since they first met, Heather and Chris were married at Darlington's Elm Ridge Methodist Church.
They are spending their two-week honeymoon in Tenerife.
Heather said she had no second thoughts about Chris, now working for Fujitsu at Newton Aycliffe.
‘It was a chance in a million that we found each other but we haven't looked back since.
It just keeps getting better and better,’ she said.
POLICE have revealed that they are not treating the death of a man outside a Middlesbrough pub as suspicious.
An inquiry was launched after Leo MacDonald, 52, died on the doorstep of the Market Tavern in North Ormesby.
The incident happened at about 5.10pm on Friday and police cordoned off a small area outside the market-place pub.
A statement from Cleveland Police said: ‘Following inquiries, it is now believed that Mr MacDonald died of natural causes.’
Police want to speak to anyone who was in the area on Friday, particularly between 4.30pm and 5.30pm.
They believe Mr MacDonald may have been involved in some kind of argument shortly before his death.
Originally, the Middlesbrough man's death was treated as suspicious and the pub sealed off as police questioned teatime drinkers.
A MIDDLESBROUGH councillor is to report the authority to the Local Government ombudsman and Audit Commission.
Angry Liberal Democrat Joe Michna is unhappy with the cash spent on 2,000 glossy leaflets supporting a five-a-side football development on Clairville Common.
Middlesbrough Council says the £1.2m Anchor International complex will provide 30 jobs and a valuable community facility.
Chief executive John Foster claimed the £231 spent on the leaflets was justified under the 1972 Local Governemnt Act, which allows councils to issue information about their activities.
But Coun Michna said: ‘As far as I'm concerned, this isn't the council issuing information about its activities, it's the council issuing information about a private company's activities.’
Anchor have said they will not go ahead with the project without a liquor licence.
After a licence was rejected in December, they submitted a second application, to be determined by licensing magistrates on Wednesday.
Coun Michna has been a leading opponent of the scheme, which he says is inappropriate for Clairville Common.
‘Whatever the outcome on Wednesday, I will still query the expense on leaflets,’ he said.
Mr Foster said the council had acted ‘properly, within established policy and within the law.’
Sailing into murky waters
THE fight against water pollution in the North-East is being stepped up on Wednesday with the official launch of a ship to analyse river and sea quality.
Water Guardian (pictured above) is a 16.5m floating laboratory built for the National Rivers Authority to monitor water samples from Berwick to Flamborough Head.
Disabled first:
A tourism guide to the North-East which puts the needs of disabled people first is now available free from the Northumbria Tourist Board.
Parking problems:
Councillors will try to resolve parking problems in Lingdale High Street which have brought complaints about traffic congestion.
They are to hold a site meeting.
Home-from-home:
Redcar's Stead Hospital has been able to create a home from home to help rehabilitate patients, thanks to the support of the town's Rotary Club, which raised half of the £38,000 needed to provide a therapy suite.
Challenging day:
City Challenge leaders in Redcar are preparing a presentation for the Department of the Environment officials who are due in the town on May 20.
Recyling urged:
Middlesbrough is urging its residents to jump on to the recycling bandwagon.
The borough council has produced a directory, listing the places  where everything from batteries and bottles to old clothes and engine oil can be recycled.
Girl hurt:
A six-year-old girl was in hospital last night after being knocked down by a car in Raby Road, Hartlepool.
She was taken to Hartlepool General Hospital with internal injuries.
The IRA admitted yesterday it was guilty of the firebomb blitz on the Gateshead MetroCentre at the weekend.
Eleven devices have been found at Europe's biggest shopping complex and a police chief said last night that more could still be hidden.
The latest was found in a clothes shop yesterday morning.
It is thought to have exploded on Saturday night or Sunday morning and caused minor damage.
Following the find, the centre was evacuated again because of a bomb scare which police believe was a hoax.
Only three of the devices found did not explode.
Chief Supt Barry Stewart, head of Northumbria CID, who is  liaising with anti-terrorist officers, said: ‘We can't say with any certainty that we have found them all.’
He was unable to comment on questions about whether an IRA cell might be operating in the area.
He did confirm that the attack appeared to be linked with similar incidents at Blackpool and Manchester last year and his force was working closely with colleagues in those two areas.
Meanwhile, Labour MP for Blaydon, John McWilliam, emerged from talks with the police and MetroCentre officials yesterday to announce a new plan to handle such emergencies at the centre would be reviewed.
The MP said he was seeking a meeting with the Home Secretary to discuss increasing the range of powers  available to police when dealing with emergencies in large privately-owned complexes.
A spokesman for the Church Commissioners, owners of the MetroCentre, said: ‘We are confident that the centre management acted carefully with the police and that the emergency procedure was carried out smoothly and  safely .’
Security at other shopping centres, including those in Sunderland, Middlesbrough, Newcastle and York, has been stepped up.
A MAN is in hospital with knife wounds and a broken jaw after a suspected gangland attack on a nightclub.
The victim from Middlesbrough is thought to be in his early 20s and is being treated in the town's general hospital.
Two other men were targeted by the attackers who swooped on an all-night ‘rave’ for teenagers at the Eclipse nightclub in Stockton's Brunswick Street.
All three are thought to have been working as bouncers.
It is understood a special six-man squad of detectives is making its own inquiries after meeting a wall of silence generated by fear from the injured men and others seen so far.
It is also believed that none of the injured has made a complaint to the police.
Detectives are appealing to teenagers at the soft drinks all-night disco to come forward.
Acting Detective Inspector Mark Braithwaite said: ‘A group of individuals descended on this place about four in the morning.
A disturbance ensued which resulted in the police being called.
‘There were obviously a lot of people there when it took place.
Our main concern is to identify what happened in the premises.’
Police believe four men may have taken part in the grudge attack though they have been told there may have been as many as 10.
In March, The Eclipse was petrol bombed.
A patrolling policewoman's prompt call to Cleveland Fire Brigade prevented the fire from taking hold at the club, which was empty at the time.
Pair went on shoplifting trip
TWO Sunderland men who went to York for a  shoplifting expedition escaped a jail sentence yesterday.
Bradley Cowling of Byron Street, and Brian Goldsmith, of Wayman Street, both Southwick, were arrested after stealing £220 worth of clothes from two high street stores.
Cowling, and Goldsmith, both 20, admitted theft and were each ordered to complete 120 hours community service.
They were also told to pay £30 costs.
Shop raid:
Police were last night hunting two youths who threatened staff at a newsagents on Ford Estate, Sunderland before stealing the till.
Fires probe:
Fires in two gardening centres in the Silksworth Lane area of Sunderland were started deliberately, police said last night.
Health Week:
Durham Health Promotion Services yesterday launched Sacriston Health Week, a series of free events to aimed at promoting healthier lifestyles.
The Family Health Services caravan, the Health Express, will be parked next to Sacriston Post Office all week offering general health information.
School blaze:
Fire caused minor damage to two wooden sheds at the Choppington first school in Northumberland.
Man flees:
A masked man who broke into a woman's house at Newbiggin, Northumberland, fled empty handed when she threatened him with a walking stick.
Shop destroyed:
A disused shop in Howard Street, North Shields, was gutted by fire.
Seventeen firemen fought the blaze for four hours before getting it under control.
Stolen Suits:
William Henry Irish, 31, of Woodland Hill, Leeds, was yesterday committed to Durham Crown Court for trial, charged with handling stolen men's suits worth more than £300,000.
Irish was released on conditional bail.
Tourism Trial:
Peter Sloyan, chief executive of the Northumbria Tourist Board will give a talk Tourism A Candy Floss Industry? at St Mary's College East junior common room, Durham University tonight at 8.
Driving ban:
John Turnbull, 49, of Minehead Gardens, Silksworth, Sunderland, was yesterday banned from driving for three years, fined £450 and ordered to pay costs of £25 by Durham City magistrates after pleading guilty to driving with excess alcohol.
Indonesian travels:
A talk on South-East Asia, Tales of a Traveller in Indonesia, will be given at the St Cuthbert's Cafod group in Durham, at St Cuthbert's Chaplaincy, Old Elvet, at 7.30pm tomorrow.
Open day:
Durham City Council is holding a series of open days from May 14 to 16 at the Town Hall.
Prison Wounding:
Durham City Magistrates yesterday issued a warrant for the arrest of Anthony Nazir Ahmed, 23, of Fairfax Court, Hemlington, Middlesbrough.
He failed to appear at court to answer a charge of inflicting grievous bodily harm which allegedly happened in Durham Prison last July.
Ban and fine:
John Ferguson, 43, of Sandbanks Drive, Hartlepool was fined £350 and banned for three years for his second offence of drink driving.
Ferguson, who was more than twice over the legal limit, pleaded guilty and was ordered to pay £25 prosecution costs.
TEENAGERS in South Cleveland may not know enough about safe sex and are reluctant to use contraceptives, including condoms, says a new report.
South Tees Health Authority will hear on Thursday it may be because teenagers cannot always get condoms easily and they do not have the negotiating skills to insist that condoms are used during sexual intercourse.
Among teenage girls in Middlesbrough and Langbaurgh there were 12 abortions and 28 births in 1990 for every 1,000 teenagers.
The birth rate in particular was higher than in the Northern Region as a whole or England and Wales.
Teenage mothers are more likely to have complications during pregnancy, give birth to small babies and have babies with congenital abnormalities, states the report.
Teenage parents were not as able to take on the role of head of the family, and there was therefore an increased risk of abuse and neglect of the children.
The report, by the public health doctorate, advocates good sex education in schools, providing teenagers with the skills to negotiate the use of condoms and easier access to them.
It proposes setting up a special forum to look at teenage sexual health in South Tees, headed by Dr Ian Holtby, consultant in public health medicine.
Initiatives already under way include research into young people's attitudes to condoms, single teenage mothers' views on family planning services, special support for pregnant teenagers and ‘Streetwise’, a  confidential service for the under-25s which offers advice on contraception, drug/alcohol problems and pregnancy testing.
THE start of the new transpennine rail service linking Middlesbrough with Manchester and Liverpool was hailed yesterday as good news by two Cleveland County Council chiefs.
Leader Paul Harford said: ‘Today puts Cleveland back on the map as far as mainline rail services in Britain are concerned.’
Coun David Walsh, chairman of the environment, development and transportation committee, said: ‘The exciting new element in the introduction of this service is how it fits in with our own plans for modernising and re-invigorating local public transport services so that  dependence on the car as the only available means of getting around can become a thing of the past.’
STERN measures are to be taken to curb traffic problems in one of the most congested towns in Cleveland.
The county council's highways subcommittee heard that the Middlesbrough by-pass, and its final stage, the A172 link from the A66 to Longlands, was not achieving the desired effect of diverting motorists from North Ormesby.
A report stated traffic passing through North Ormesby remained at an unacceptably high level.
Transport planner Andy Hyams told members the introduction of an ‘access only’ order to cover the whole area was investigated but it was felt it would be widely abused and difficult to enforce.
A ‘buses only’ order was also contemplated.
One solution was to close Westbourne Grove between its junctions with Cromwell Street and Elizabeth Terrace.
Mr Hyams said this would force all potential traffic onto the Cromwell Street/Kings Road route where pelican crossings and delays due to traffic movement would increase journey times and persuade drivers to use the bypass.
But after several members argued against the closure the committee agreed to a site visit.
£5,000 damage in school arson attack ARSONISTS caused £5,000 worth of damage after setting fire to a Cleveland comprehensive school.
And it has been revealed that if the flames had spread to gas lines in the science block at Dyke House School in Hartlepool it could have been a lot worse.
Fears that coursework vital to pupils' examination grades may have been destroyed in Sunday's blaze proved groundless.
A spokeswoman for Cleveland County Council said yesterday: ‘Any kind of deliberate attack against a school which causes disruption and inconvenience to students and staff alike is disgraceful.’
Sign approval:
Parish councillor and qualified stonemason Jim Wingham has been given approval by Cleveland County Council to provide a roadside welcome sign for visitors to Victorian Saltburn.
Relative appeal:
Northumbria Police are trying to trace relatives of Thomas Law, 77, of Canterbury Street, South Shields, who died of natural causes on Thursday and is thought to have had relatives in Teesside.
They should contact the coroner's officer Brian Atkinson on 091–567 6155 ext 7854.
Rank approval:
Two new night taxi ranks in Middlesbrough have been approved by Cleveland County Council's highways sub-committee.
They will be in Southfield Road, near the Star and Garter pub (two vehicles) and Borough Road (three) outside number 28.
Mail theft:
Detectives in Hartlepool are investigating the theft of a mail sack from a post office van in Chatham Road, Hartlepool, yesterday.
Decision time:
A decision on Langbaurgh's controversial parking policy in Redcar and Guisborough will be made at a special highways meeting today.
Bikes stolen:
Two mountain bikes worth £2,550 have been stolen from the garage of a house in Eglinton Avenue, Guisborough.
One is a Trek black and orange bike worth £2,000, the other a gent's purple Gary Fisher model worth £550.
Coins alert:
A warning has been issued following the discovery of fake £1 coins in Hartlepool.
They are made of lead and painted gold to resemble the real thing but the crude copies rapidly deteriorate.
Shops are being advised to carefully check all coins handed over.
Civic send-off:
Hartlepool Mayor Coun Trevor Lloyd was on the platform at the town's railway station early yesterday to welcome the launch of a new transpennine service to Liverpool.
House raid:
Detectives are investigating the theft of a video recorder from a house in Millpool Close, Hartlepool.
The burglars broke in shortly before 1am yesterday.
I SHOULD have worn a hat.
It was that sort of occasion 500 women, many of them wearing posh hats and even posher outfits that they'd bought for weddings and were longing for a chance to wear again.
And this was the day to do it the Women of the North lunch in Harrogate, like the Woman of the Year in London ‘only much friendlier and more fun’ according to a lady who'd been to both.
The tiny lady in purple looking after the money, 78 years old and no bigger than twopennorth of copper, was Jess Wilson who turned out to have been a British clay pigeon champion many years ago.
‘The first time I picked up a 12 bore, it was bigger than me and the men all laughed.
Didn't give me any help.
So when I'd picked myself up from the floor, my arm bruised from shoulder to wrist, I thought ‘I'll show the buggers.’
And I did.
‘The only problem is that they taught me to swear like a trooper.’
Dishing out the programmes and shepherding VIPs was Janet McPherson who'd been a champion racing driver, starting with Formula IV and graduating to Formula 1 and, on the way, beating all the men at Silverstone.
A natural brunette, she had a mane of blonde hair.
‘If you spent your time doing 25 laps with a thousand gear changes, sweating in a flame-proof suit and helmet then you'd want to look a bit glamorous at the end of the day,’ she said, The splendid lady in charge of raffle tickets for RUKBA seemed very knowledgeable about Washington.
Not surprising Dilys Palmer was one of its founding fathers (mothers?) with the Washington Development Corporation, who started off with green fields and five working pits and made a new town of it.
‘We were the first to consider the social implications of planning and didn't want one vast sprawl.
We tried to make each area a village with its own identity, a village hall and community,’ she said.
‘We wanted everyone to look out on green fields and I fought, so hard, to stop any high rise buildings.
And we won.
And this was in the 60s when high rise was so fashionable, but we managed not to have them in Washington.’
Another of her pet projects was Biddick Arts Centre ‘an old farmhouse so  derelict that rats were hanging from the rafters,’ and the ponds.
‘A number of people asked us if we could save the ponds and we thought we might be able to do more than that.
So we contacted Peter Scott.’
And the outcome was the Wildfowl and Wetlands Centre, home to numerous species of birds and one of the country's great sanctuaries.
Principal speaker at the lunch was Dr Elizabeth Laws who was born in Horden and moved to Middlesbrough where her parents ran a newsagents ‘I've sold plenty of Northern Echoes in my time,’ she says.
Now she's one of the country's top experts on Aerodynamics, Fluid Mechanics and Aircraft Propulsion, won the Plessey prize for Women in Engineering two years ago and is determined to get more women in engineering.
‘It's creeping up, from about one per cent in my day to 15pc of engineering students are women.
But it's like pouring kettles of hot water into a cold bath it takes a long time for them to make an impression.’
She ‘stumbled into engineering’ because of her love for maths, fostered at the newsagents' till and Middlesbrough Girls High School.
She took just six months off with the birth of each of her sons, now 11 and 14.
‘It was a bit unusual then and there was very little help in the way of nurseries or creches.
But you don't realise how you can cope until you have to.
‘Now they're older, it's not really any easier, there's just different types of problems as they need to be here, there and everywhere after school.’
Although she's determined to get more women into engineering ‘a wonderfully flexible career’, she's wary of women merely imitating men.
‘We may be equal, but we're not the same and we should bring our own, different, talents to work, not shoehorn ourselves into men's positions.
‘True equality won't come until women have the freedom to behave naturally with their own approach to problems.
‘And that will be when people stop saying ‘Eeh, haven't you done well for a woman’.’
Road crash fatal victim named
A COMPANY director was named yesterday as the victim of a fatal road crash which blocked a busy trunk road on Monday.
Frederick Brian Buttell, 56, from the Isle of Man, died when his Fiesta was in collision with a lorry on the A1079 York to Hull road.
Traffic was diverted onto the A166 as emergency services cleared the wreckage between Dunnington and Kexby, near York.
Mr Buttell was certified dead at the scene before his body was freed by firefighters.
An inquest into his death was opened and adjourned yesterday.
Leyland Daf lorry driver Stewart Fisher, 47, from Halifax, was not hurt in the accident.
Cover-up row:
Neighbours living near Scarborough's Filey Road sports centre are opposing plans by the Borough Council to build a giant dome over two tennis courts.
They claim the air-bubble dome will be an eyesore.
Car wash plan:
A £150,000 hi-tech car wash could open next to Scarborough's ambulance station later this year if plans are given the green light.
London-based Anduff Holdings hopes to buy the site, off Seamer Road, and build the car wash which would employ three workers.
Vintage gathering:
A RollsRoyce tourer, built for Lord Astor in 1935 but which also served as a machine gun carrier in the Second World War and later as a hearse, is among classic cars gathering at Duncombe Park, near Helmsley on Sunday.
Appeal boost:
The Purey Cust Trust and Medical Insurance Agency will together present cheques totalling £5,000 tomorrow to buy equipment for the York Diabetic Centre.
About £35,000 of a £150,000 appeal has so far been raised.
Path challenge:
Members of the Vale of York conservation volunteers will race the clock to build a new footpath at the Fosslands Nature Reserve in Old Earswick next week.
They will begin at 10am on Tuesday and aim to complete their task by 4pm on Thursday.
Cheque tonic:
Yorkshire Water has presented a cheque for £25,000 to the National Trust towards the conversion of farm buildings at Swanley Grange, part of the Fountains Abbey estate, into an education base for schoolchildren.
Traffic moan:
Parish councillors at Robin Hood's Bay are calling for policing to be stepped up.
They have complained that traffic has been going down the one-in-three gradient Bay Bank into the old part of the village which is prevented when police have been on duty in the past.
Rubbish haul:
Voluntary rangers, field staff, and youth groups collected more than 6,000 bags of rubbish from litter bins in the North York Moors National park during the past year and 1,315 from litter discarded in the park by tourists.
Today's wills
SELBY:
George Stanley Haslop, of Millgate, left estate valued at £145,602 net.
He left £500 to the National Asthma Campaign, £400 each to Age Concern Selby, Selby War Memorial Hospital, St Mary's Church, Hemingbrough, Selby Citizen's Advice Bureau, Firth House, Selby, and Selby Abbey Church and £200 to the Staff Amenities Fund at Firth House.
BISHOP MONKTON:
Winifred Mary Phillips, of Laburnum Drive, left estate valued at £128,301 net.
LITTLE OUSEBURN:
Henry Richardson, of The Forge, left estate valued at £362,491 net.
LITTLE RIBSTON:
Gerald Paul Marcel Tallet, of The Old Post Office, North View, left estate valued at £101,658 net.
GRASSINGTON:
Kenneth Baxter Campbell, of Hardy Meadows, left estate valued at £172,304 net.
SPOFFORTH:
Victor Griffiths Hope, of Castle Street, left estate valued at £383,030 net.
APPLETON-LE-STREET:
Mary Elizabeth Vasey, of Manor House, left estate valued at £261,254 net.
MALTON:
Robert William Beal, of Bellafax Grange, Marishes, left estate valued at £204,510 net.
YORK:
John Edward Charlesworth, of Horseman Lane, Copmanthorpe, left estate valued at £120,319 net.
Harvey Clasper, of Lamplugh Crescent, Bishopthorpe, left estate valued at £135,128 net.
NORTON:
Hugh Giles Ingham Romanes, of Welham Road, left estate valued at £180,807 net.
He left £2,500 to the Roman Catholic Church of St Mary and St Leonard, Malton, and £250 each to York Minster, the Middlesbrough Diocesan Child Welfare Society, York, National Trust, CAFOD, Oxfam, RAF Benevolent Fund, Albany Trust, London and the Cheltonian Society, Cheltenham College, Gloucs.
Alice Fisher, of Gloster House, Stillingfleet, York, left estate valued at £153,206 net.
She left £1,000 each to St Leonard's Hospice, York, and the British Heart Foundation, and £500 each to St Helen's Church, Stillingfleet, St Peter's Church, Lanton, and Methodist Chapel, Stillingfleet.
A YOUNG mother suffering from post-natal depression killed herself with an overdose of drugs after leaving her baby daughter alone in their home.
An inquest heard that a teenage neighbour, John Robson, who called at the house in Essex Close, Grangetown, Middlesbrough, was unable to get an reply.
The 15-year-old could see and hear the baby crying and went to tell his father.
Inside the house they discovered 22month-old Penny and her mother Robyn Thrower, 25, on the floor.
Mr Robson told Cleveland Coroner Michael Sheffield the telephone was off the hook and things were scattered around the room.
A note had been left by the telephone.
Robyn's mother, Vera Williams, of Wilton Village, who is now looking after Penny, said since her daughter had her baby she had suffered postnatal depression and had been taking various prescribed drugs.
She said she had spoken to her the previous day and she had seemed normal.
Pathologist Dr Campbell Ritchie said forensic tests had shown that the cause of death was an overdose of anti-depressants.
A blood analysis showed 141mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood and Dr Ritche said the effects of the drugs could be heightened by alcohol.
Mr Sheffield said the note made it clear that she intended to take her own life and that she loved her family and daughter.
He recorded a verdict that she killed herself.
A TERRIFIED woman handed over cash after being threatened with an imitation handgun yesterday at the Eastbourne Road petrol station in Grove Hill, Middlesbrough.
The man, about 25, 5ft 10ins, with short brown hair tied in a pony tail, and wearing a dark jacket, faded blue jeans and a white T-shirt, escaped in a white Sherpatype van.
ONE man was killed and another seriously injured yesterday when their car skidded off the road and plunged down an embankment into a tree at a popular beauty spot.
Rescuers found the red Datsun embedded in the tree and took almost an hour to free the men using hydraulic lifting and cutting gear.
A doctor certified the passenger dead at the scene.
The driver, named as Christopher Johnson, of Grangetown, Middlesbrough, was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital with head injuries and two broken legs.
His condition last night was said to be poorly.
Police have yet to name the dead man but he is thought to be from the Grangetown area.
Both men are thought to be about 19-years-old.
The accident happened on the notorious B1257 Stokesley to Helmsley road at Clay Bank, near Chop Gate.
Police are trying to find out what caused the car to go out of control, cross the road and overturn down the steep embankment at just after 1pm.
The road, which is popular with tourists, was closed while the men were cut free.
ARSONISTS have struck for the second time in five days at a Middlesbrough park.
A sports pavilion in Pallister Park has been badly damaged by two fires, one last Thursday and one late on Monday night.
In the latest blaze the lavatory area was badly damaged by fire and heat and the rest of the ground floor badly smoke-damaged.
The pavilion is now totally unusable.
Cleveland Police confirm they are treating both incidents as arson.
PUPILS at a Middlesbrough school handed over a cheque in memory of a former schoolmate yesterday.
Brave Melanie Dean, of Fransham Road, Pallister Park, died in January after a long battle against cystic fibrosis.
In honour of the 14-year-old, Langbaurgh School held a series of sponsored events and raised £400, which they presented to the Cleveland branch of the Cystic Fibrosis Trust.
Deputy head Shirley Ralph said: ‘Melanie was a real character who loved life and her death upset everyone.
‘She was a very brave girl and this is a fitting tribute to her.’
A small picture of Melanie is to be placed in the school's entrance-hall.
PLANS for a superstore on the outskirts of Middlesbrough have been opposed by Cleveland planning councillors.
The North Eastern Co-op applied to Middlesbrough Council to build a supermarket, filling station and car park on land at Dixons Bank, Marton.
The application also contained outline plans for housing.
But yesterday members of Cleveland County Council's develop control sub-committee agreed the application was contrary to the county structure plan and would result in  increased traffic congestion.
A COUNCIL has been accused of putting politics before people in a planning row over a Pizza takeaway.
More than 400 people in New Marske petitioned Langbaurgh Council over the application for the takeaway in the local  shopping parade.
They said it would encourage noise and late-night vandalism and young people driving motor  cycles and cars in the parade.
But after a site meeting councillors recommended the scheme should go ahead.
Now objectors have contacted the council's chief executive complaining about the way the site meeting was conducted.
A spokesman said: ‘You would think the councillors would want the support of 400 of its electorate, but it was obvious from the outset we didn't stand a chance,’ he said.
The residents say the application by Paul and Linda Wilson, of Middlesbrough, is inappropriate for the row of shops which already includes a fish and chip shop.
The incident  happened in rush hour traffic in Acklam Road, Middlesbrough, near its junction with Hambleton Road.
Jaqueline Holliday, of Windsor Road, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, told Cleveland coroner Michael Sheffield she was waiting to turn right into Oxford Road when she saw the man.
She said: ‘He didn't appear to stumble or slip.
He was lying on the offside lane and soon after a car went straight over him.’
The man who died in hospital was identified two days later as Peter Elderfield, 36, of Springvale Terrace, Whinney Banks, Middlesbrough.
He had a history of epilepsy but his GP Dr Brian Williams said ‘his compliance with medication was poor’.
A medical report read to yesterday's inquest stated Mr Elderfield had been known to manipulate fits to obtain accommodation and pathologist Dr Richard Jones, who carried out a post mortem examination, told the coroner there was nothing to indicate he had suffered a fit prior to the incident.
But he added that it was not normal to find such evidence.
He said the cause of death was brain damage due to a fractured skull.
Mr Sheffield said as Mr Elderfield was not complying with his medication it may well be that he had some form of epileptic fit but it could not be said with complete confidence.
He recorded an open verdict.
RAIL commuters have protested at timetable changes they claim will leave them with a long wait or walk.
British Rail has decided not to include the Allens West halt on the list of stops for a rush-hour service between Middlesbrough and Darlington.
The councillor for Eaglescliffe, Liberal Democrat John Fletcher, said commuters from the ward had sent BR chiefs a protest petition.
He said: ‘Although Eaglescliffe passengers will welcome the reintroduction of the 16.52 departure from Middlesbrough, it will not stop at Allen's West.
‘Some Allen's West passengers who have hitherto caught the 16.29 from Middlesbrough tell me that they cannot get to the station in time for its rescheduled departure at 16.21.
They now will have to wait for the 17.18 which previously ran at 17.08 or walk from Eaglescliffe.’
‘I find it surprising that one of the day's most popular services will miss out Allen's West.’
A BR official said: ‘Allen's West has benefited from the new timetable during peak hours and now has three trains rather than the previous two,’ he said.
He said the new 16.52 Middlesbrough to Darlington service was in fact a through train to Bishop Auckland.
He said because it had to cross the busy East Coast line at Darlington the timing was crucial and did not allow for a call at Allen's West.
Helping residents to better health
THE widest range of health and fitness courses ever to be offered to residents of Hartlepool has been launched.
The borough council has drawn up the programme in a bid to highlight the benefits of a healthy lifestyle.
Sessions will be held at the Mill House Leisure Centre and Eldon Grove Community Sports Centre during the day and in the evenings.
Further information is available by contacting the Mill House centre on 223791 or Eldon Grove on 868011.
Maps on show:
A map exhibition at the Margrove Park Heritage Centre, near Guisborough, is on show for the next three months.
One of the exhibits is a 1588 map by a Dutch pilot which includes places such as Guisborough, Robin Hood's Bay, Whitby, Skelton, Stockton and Hartlepool.
New manager:
Rose Holmes, 42, of Bearpark, Durham, has been appointed the new manager at the AA shop on Corporation Road, Middlesbrough.
Meeting date: The first meeting of a group for disabled in the East Cleveland area is tomorrow in the Loftus Community Centre from 1.30–3.30pm.
Dream cash:
The Cleveland Rotofac Trust has received £500 from Middlesbrough Council's Community Chest to put towards a cruiser to take the disabled on trips on local waterways.
Singers win:
Two Cleveland choirs sang their way to six trophies at the prestigious Morecambe Musical Festival.
The Saltburn-based Middleton Singers and Middleton Festival Choir came first in every class they entered.
Road safety:
A right turning bay and pedestrian refuge at the junction of Fairfield Road and Upsall Grove, Stockton, have been approved in principle by Cleveland County Council's highways sub-committee.
Safety net:
Middlesbrough Council is chasing businesses in the town who missed the deadline to sign up for food safety under the Food Premises Registration Regulations.
Scheme's success:
A scheme to help young offenders is to be extended through Cleveland after a successful pilot project.
Juvenile Justice Teams will now be set up North and South of the River Tees.
Boxer's honour:
Boxer Alan Temple, 19, is to be honoured by Hartlepool Council at a civic reception after bringing the ABA featherweight title back to the town.
Mail appeal:
Detectives have issued a fresh appeal for witnesses following the theft of a mail bag from a post office van in Chatham Road, Hartlepool, at 5.30pm on Monday.
Anyone with information can contact the police on .
Allotments fire:
Firemen were called to allotments in Dumfries Road, Hartlepool, to put out a fire in a car.
The vehicle was destroyed and 30 metres of fencing was damaged.
Action call:
Coun John Elders is calling for tougher action after drunken teenage vandals rampaged along the promenade at Seaton Carew, near Hartlepool, wrecking seafront chalets.
Snatch attempt:
Police are hunting two teenagers after a failed snatch from a woman carrying cash in Loftus Market Place.
They  failed when her cash bag split.
Camcorder theft:
A sneak thief walked into a house in Roxby Avenue, Guisborough, and stole a black Sharp Camcorder worth £1,100.
Door damaged:
A timber door was severely damaged by fire in a blaze at the Park Methodist Church, Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough, yesterday.
Missing man:
Police are concerned about an old man who failed to return to the Robert Huggins Home for the Elderly in Acklam, Middlesbrough, after leaving to go shopping on Monday afternoon.
Leslie Simms, 70, is 5ft 3in tall, stocky, with a dark complexion, brown eyes and receding grey hair.
Anyone with information should call Cleveland Police on .
Show cancelled:
A fashion show planned for 7pm at Marton Sixth Form College, Middlesbrough, tonight, has been cancelled.
Organisers apologise for for the late notice.
Lane blocked:
Rush hour traffic in east Middlesbrough was blocked yesterday due to a broken down crane.
It caused tailbacks on the eastbound lane of the A66 between Cargo Fleet Lane and Borough Road roundabouts.
POLICE yesterday named the man killed when a car plunged down an embankment into a tree at a popular beauty spot.
He was John Lane, 22, of Lanchester Road, Grangetown, Middlesbrough.
Mr Lane was a passenger in the car which rolled 24ft down an incline at Clay Bank, between Helmsley and Stokesley.
A doctor certified him dead at the scene after his body was cut free from the wreckage, which rescuers found embedded in a tree.
Driver Christopher Johnson, of Atley Road, Grangetown, was still poorly but stable in Middlesbrough General Hospital yesterday with head injuries and two broken legs.
Police are appealing for witnesses to the accident which happened on the B1257 at Clay Bank, near Chop Gate.
Only one vehicle, a red Datsun Cherry, was involved in the crash at just after 1pm.
POLICE are likely to have to wait almost two months before they can interview Keith Pringle, the man at the centre of the Darlington siege.
Pringle, 24, of Thirlmere Road, Darlington, was shot by a police marksman three weeks ago after a 47-hour siege in which his 21-year-old ex-girlfriend Leanne Rees was taken hostage.
He is now undergoing treatment for a jaw injury in Middlesbrough General Hospital where his condition is said to be stable.
Yesterday a Durham Police spokesman said the consultant in charge of Pringle had told detectives he is to undergo further surgery next month.
TWO BADGER baiters, trapped with the help of a TV wildlife expert, were each fined £500 yesterday.
Les Yafano and John Haytey used an electronic tracking device attached to terriers in a bid to catch the badgers at a giant sett in Cleveland.
Two dogs were sent down the holes after the protected animals.
The baiters then used a hand-held detector to trace the movements underground.
They were caught at the sett after a member of the public spotted them on farmland, said Simon Caterall, prosecuting.
Dr Stephen Harris, of Bristol University, who wrote the script for the wildlife documentary Bockside and other nature programmes, was called in by the RSPCA.
He said that the hi-tech device and other equipment found, such as nets, snares and digging gear, proved the men were after badgers.
He said: ‘These men had terriers with them which are put down setts in illegal badger hunting.
A badger will stand its ground, so if you locate where it is you can dig it up and need only one net.’
Yafano, 20, of Vine Street, and Haytey, 19, of Clarendon Road, both Middlesbrough, pleaded guilty at Teesside Magistrates Court to badger digging.
They first told police they had been hunting for foxes.
Yafano, who had a previous conviction for skinning cats, was fined a total of £500 and his two terriers and hunting equipment was confiscated.
Haytey was also fined £500.
A CAR driver had no chance to avoid an elderly pedestrian, deputy Cleveland coroner Ronald Smith was told.
The impact between the Escort car and 78-year-old widow Mary Loughran shattered the windscreen an inquest heard yesterday.
Medical staff at Middlesbrough General Hospital did their utmost to try to save Mrs Loughran's life but Mr Smith heard that at her age and with such extensive injuries it was very unlikely that she would have survived.
Tracy Freer, of Highmead Walk, Middlesbrough, told Mr Smith she saw Mrs Loughran walk across to the middle of Overdale Road, Park End, hesitate and then carry on.
She walked into the path of an oncoming car driven by Neil Coates.
Ms Freer added: ‘I don't think the motor car could have avoided her.’
The car driver had sounded his horn as he screeched to a halt.
In recording a verdict of accidental death, Mr Smith said Mrs Loughran seemed not have realised there was a car coming.
THE whistle has finally been blown on a controversial battle over a five-a-side football complex in Middlesbrough.
Magistrates yesterday granted a liquor licence to Glasgow-based Anchor International to end a long-running saga.
Anchor will now build ten pitches and a pavilion on the town's Clairville Common at a cost of £1.2m.
But opponents of the scheme described the decision as a ‘defeat for the people’.
Liberal Democrat councillor Joe Michna accused Labour-controlled Middlesbrough Council, which backed the scheme, of taking its people for granted.
He said: ‘One of the first steps taken by the new, so-called Environment City is to take away one of the few longstanding open spaces in the town.
‘It shows how shallow the council's commitment to the environment really is.’
Protestors presented over 1,200 letters of objection to the licensing justices at Teesside, while 500 letters of support for the scheme were handed in.
The issue has bitterly divided the community surrounding the common ever since the complex was first mooted.
John Pitt, joint managing director of Anchor International, accused the protestors of objecting to the licence in a bid to scupper the whole scheme.
Middlesbrough Borough Council had already granted planning permission.
The original application from Anchor, which is building a similar complex in Gateshead, was refused by magistrates in December.
The new application removed plans for a dance floor from the scheme.
The applicants also agreed to close a bar at 10.30pm, Sunday to Friday, and to close the complex at 7pm on Saturday.
Anchor and the council argued that the bar was ‘an essential, but ancillary’ part of the application.
Robert Smithson, for the applicants, assured the Bench that the development was not just an excuse for a pub.
Mr Pitt added: ‘If we wanted to open a pub, we could do it much more cheaply and easily than by building ten football pitches.’
He said the facility would provide jobs and a vital resource to the community.
Youngsters and the unemployed will be given 250 hours of free community use at off-peak times.
But David Bulman, for the objectors, said only 12 full-time jobs would be created and that local people could already play football on the common free of charge.
Police volunteers offer defence tips
VOLUNTEER police officers in Cleveland are offering to teach self-defence and crime prevention techniques to women's groups in the county.
Members of the force's special constabulary section are all trained in the skills.
Divisional commandant George Kane said: ‘Classes can help women be more aware of their surroundings, to know what possible dangers to look out for and to be more confident when out alone.’
Any groups interested should contact Mr Kane on Middlesbrough 301223/4 on Wednesday evenings.
House fire:
The bedrooms and landing of a house in Willington Road, Hardwick, Stockton, were badly damaged by fire yesterday evening and the ground floor suffered smoke and water damage.
Butterfly bid:
Cleveland Wildlife Trust is asking butterfly-lovers for help.
The trust wants to gain an insight into the county's butterfly population.
For more details and a colourful poster call (0642) 253716.
Pitch closes:
The artificial football pitch at Middlesbrough's Southlands Centre is to close for further remedial work from May 27-June 5.
Heartfelt plea:
The British Heart Foundation is seeking items, particularly art work, to go under the hammer at a charity auction.
The auction is planned for May 30 at St Cuthbert's Church Hall, Marton, Middlesbrough.
Anyone who can help should call BHF county organiser Reg Sigsworth on (0642) 476446.
Fun day:
A fun day, including barbecues, competitions and sword dancing is being held in Espiners Wood, Loftus, on Sunday from 2–6pm.
Cash grab:
Cleveland Police are hunting two youths who grabbed a cash bag containing hundreds of pounds from a woman on her way to a Middlesbrough bank.
The 24-year-old's black holdall was grabbed outside the Midland Bank in Linthorpe Road on Tuesday afternoon.
Two arrested:
Police have arrested two different men in connection with robberies at a Redcar building society and a filling station in Grove Hill, Middlesbrough.
Scheme praise:
Two community schemes came under the spotlight in Middlesbrough yesterday.
The East/West Women's Project and the East Middlesbrough Community Venture were assessed by judges in the Times/RIBA Community Enterprise awards.
Both projects were shortlisted and received an honourable mention in the 1991 awards.
Road facelift:
A five-figure facelift is planned for a key approach road to Middlesbrough town centre.
The borough council has earmarked more than £80,000 to spruce up properties on Newport Road, opposite the bus station.
Work begins in the summer.
Bottle cash:
A quarter of a million empty bottles added £616 to Langbaurgh Council's Mayor's charity fund yesterday the return on almost 125 tons of glass left in the borough's bottle banks.
Road closed:
Reconstruction work on the carriageway and footway in Northgate, Guisborough, is due for completion before the end of the month.
History fair: Redcar Bowl is hosting a local history fair from 10am to 4pm on Saturday.
Cuts slammed:
New Hartlepool MP Peter Mandelson claims the case of Natalie Readman, five, who was turned away from the town's general hospital due to a shortage of beds, proves that the quality of local health services is being eroded by the government's NHS reforms.
Paying off:
Money raised from a variety of enterprise initiatives, including a cafe, is helping to send handicapped pupils from Catcote School in Hartlepool on summer breaks.
ONE of the North-East's largest training agencies last night refused to disclose details of irregular payments totalling more than £100,000 to local employers.
Last week the House of Commons Public Accounts Committee named Teesside Training and Enterprise Council as one of two such bodies responsible for the irregularities.
The TEC has  repaid £119,000 to the Department of Employment.
The irregular payments arose out of a disagreement between the TEC and senior civil servants over the interpretation of a section of the TEC's operating agreement.
The TEC's main function is to channel public funds to training schemes for the unemployed.
The Employment Department took the view that the TEC wrongly paid money to employers who had been running their own training schemes outside the Youth Training orbit; this enabled the TEC to meet its government-imposed target of training weeks.
Last night the TEC held it annual public meeting at Marton Hotel and Country Club near Middlesbrough.
Invited guests were asked to submit written questions in advance.
Coun Andy Wilson, secretary of Cleveland County Council's controlling Labour group, asked how much of the over-payment to local firms was paid to agencies in which directors of Teesside TEC had a financial interest.
Coun Wilson also asked for the identity of the companies that received the irregular payments.
The TEC's former chairman Peter Kerr said he was not prepared to disclose the names of the firms involved.
The TEC had more than 100 contracts with training providers, and it would not be in their interest to have such details publicly disclosed.
Mr Kerr said the TEC's private sector board members fell into two categories: some were senior employees of industrial companies with bases on Teesside, while others were effectively owner-managers with large equity stakes in their companies.
None of the overpayments were to companies that had directors in the second category.
Mr Kerr added that none of the companies that had received the irregular payments had been required to repay money.
After the meeting Coun Wilson said he would seek to have the issue raised in the House of Commons.
A million hours of accident-free working by ICI workers brought a £1,000 windfall to a school in Middlesbrough.
Dormanstown Primary spent it on recreation and learning equipment for its special needs unit.
Looking through the circle is Aaron Gilbert, five, while David Lowther, also five, leaps into action, right.
The cash was won by 200 research and technology staff in ICI's Chemicals Products
A TAXI ride home ended in violence when a man was attacked by two people with whom he shared the cab, a court heard.
Paul Young shared his taxi with Nigel Dempsey and Christopher MacPherson but when they arrived in Hemlington, Middlesbrough, Mr Young was invited to go with them for a drink.
Mr Young followed the pair into an alleyway and was attacked.
Yesterday Dempsey and MacPherson, both 25, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted unlawful wounding.
Dempsey, of Grange Road, Middlesbrough, was cleared of assault with intent to rob.
MacPherson, of Elmstone Gardens, Hemlington, was convicted of assault with intent to rob.
Both men were cleared on the direction of Judge Angus Stroyan, QC, of attempted robbery.
The cases were adjourned for the preparation of social inquiry reports.
Robin Denny, prosecuting, said the attack happened at 3am on Sunday May 26 last year.
Mr Young met Dempsey and MacPherson at a taxi office in Middlesbrough and agreed to share a taxi with them to Hemlington.
Mr Young was then invited to a party.
Mr Denny said: ‘They came to an alleyway between houses and there in fact the purpose changed and he was confronted by MacPherson.’
Mr Denny said Mr Young's money was not taken but he was attacked and punched in the face.
A GRIEVING family has hit out at witnesses who failed to turn up at the trial of a man accused of the attempted murder of their son.
Patrick Tapping, 27, faced the charge after an incident in which petrol was allegedly poured over nightclub bouncer Lee Duffy.
But no evidence was offered against Tapping after none of the civilian witnesses needed for yesterday's trial at Teesside Crown Court turned up.
Mr Justice Kennedy ordered there should be a not guilty verdict to the attempted murder charge which Tapping, of Uvedale Road, South Bank, Middlesbrough, had denied.
Tapping was discharged.
Brenda Duffy, of Keir Hardie Crescent, South Bank, Middlesbrough, said she knew the witnesses but claimed she did not know the trial was going ahead.
If she had known she would have persuaded them to appear in court, she said.
Mrs Duffy's son Lee, 26, of Durham Road, Eston, a former boxer and nightclub bouncer, was the victim of an alleged attempted murder in The Commercial pub, Middlesbrough on April 26 last year.
It was the second time witnesses had failed to turn up for Tapping's trial.
The family claim all the witnesses to the incident live locally.
Only two of the seven civilian witnesses needed for the trial had been traced and witness summonses served.
Prosecutor Andrew Robertson said: ‘Although I can't put forward a proper evidential basis for this, there is a feeling they are extremely reluctant to give evidence and don't wish to attend court.’
He said Duffy was now dead.
Another man has been charged with his murder in August.
He said: ‘Duffy was a highly unpopular man and that might in part explain the reluctance to attend.
Also it may be to the witnesses that things are different now he is no longer with us.’
Mr Robertson applied for an adjournment to see if witnesses could be traced but Mr Justice Kennedy denied his application.
Michael Bowerman, defending, said: ‘The prosecution is not in a position to proceed now and that is nothing to do with the defendant at all and yet his life is in a state of limbo.’
Now Mrs Duffy is hoping to have the murder case involving her son moved to another area where nobody has heard of the name Lee Duffy and where she believes a fairer trial would be held.
TWO North-East councils say there could be job losses following the Government's announcement of charge capping yesterday.
Langbaurgh and Middlesbrough councils were among ten councils named in the Commons by Environment Secretary Michael Howard.
Middlesbrough's original poll tax for 1992–93 was set at £353 and Langbaurgh's was £376.
Langbaurgh's budget has been limited to £16.5m which will mean a reduction in poll tax bills of £18 a head.
Middlesbrough will be allowed to spend £20.2m, resulting in £14 a head off poll tax bills and a six per cent cut in services.
Langbaurgh council leader Arthur Taylor described the announcement as ‘devastating’ and Mike Carr, leader of Middlesbrough council said it was ‘a body blow’.
Redcar MP Marjorie Mowlam said she was also devastated by the news.
Coun Taylor said: ‘It's also going to hit most those people in the community who are the most vulnerable including the pensioners.
They will save 55p per week under the new tax and that is not going to get them very far on a bus.
It will take them on one journey in one week in one direction for a very short distance.
Coun Taylor said the council would be going into details about the new budget today and early next week to make the best they could of the situation.
‘It could mean the loss of about 65 jobs spread over all departments,’ he said.
‘Previously the losses have been through voluntary  redundancies or retirements, losing some of our most experienced officers.
What we are being left with is an insecure staff uncertain about their future.’
He said all the evidence of independent accountants pointed to the fact that Langbaurgh was not a high spending authority and had suffered tremendously by the loss of its industrial rate.
Coun Mike Carr condemned the Government ruling as ‘harmful, cruel and unnecessary.’
He said some services would have to be reduced, some would be more expensive and it was possible that some would eventually go altogether.
To get to our current budget we have made across the board cuts of 20pc, that is on top of 25pc made last year,’ he said.
Dr Mowlam said she could not understand the Government's failure to recognise Langbaurgh's problems.
I will certainly see the Minister next week to appeal the case, but having done so, so often in the past I am not terribly hopeful,’ she said.
WHEN Paul Daniels says the words, ‘Well, what if.’
you know a magical idea has sprung to mind.
And with the think-tank of close friends who form Paul's magic circle, the idea grows into a new stage or television trick or illusion.
‘I always try to have some fun in my tricks and for them to be new,’ says the 54-year-old, caught in the middle of rehearsals at Lincoln Theatre Royal during the current national tour.
The West End success It's Magic took off on tour on April 24, taking in 26 venues all over the country and calling for one night at Sunderland Empire on May 16.
Then it's off the Holland and the States.
It's the first time Paul has worked on stage with his son Martin, also a magician and the middle son of three.
‘Being out out there with my son and my wife Debbie (McGee) makes it quite a family show,’ he says.
Daniels is a thinker more than a doer when it comes to rehearsing tricks.
‘I think out in detail what I'm going to do, going down all the possibilities.
I do my thinking out while driving along.’
And with six vehicles the Daniels have plenty off choice in how to travel: the most luxurious are a Bentley tourer and a super Ferrari.
The least luxurious, but most fun is his Sinclair C5 ‘the best £450 I have spent’.
He bought that because he once had a tiff with a BBC car park attendant who wouldn't let him in.
The next time Paul arrived he steered the Sinclair electric C5, ‘up to the barrier bar and slid under.
He ran after me, very angry.
I gave the man a rare old race round.
And laughed my head off,’ recalls Paul.
Daniels is a positive thinker.
Problems are challenges to work around and he doesn't accept the idea that you cannot learn something.
‘I've taught myself to speak French, German and Spanish for shows I have done on the continent.
It's not nice for the audience if I can't speak their language.’
He's also produced language tapes that give a fun way of learning.
It's all to do with memory and word association.
Daniels' burning ambition to be a magician came as an 11-year-old tinkering around with a box of magic given to him as a present, and it has paid off.
‘I am very lucky.
I am paid for something I love doing.’
But does he practise his tricks?
‘Not a.
‘When I was a boy, I would sit and watch television or listen to the radio and practise juggling with billiard balls, or shuffling cards.
That has made my hands dexterous, and I've never lost the ability.
‘I certainly don't go on stage ill prepared but I have never had a script for any of my shows.
I know what I'm doing, and I tell the producer just film it like a football match.’
He's expecting to see son Gary when he arrives in the North; he lives in Dad's old home town of Middlesbrough.
‘We won't have time to visit the South Bank, being in Hull the next day, but I love the North and am glad to fit Sunderland in.’
It's Magic is at Sunderland Empire on May 16, at 7.30pm, box office is .
AN INQUEST was opened yesterday into the death of a man killed when a car rolled down an embankment and hit a tree.
Coroner William WIlkinson sitting at Stokesley Court adjourned the inquest on John Lane, 22, of Lanchester Road, Grangetown, Middlesbrough, until July 2.
Mr Lane was a passenger in the car which rolled 24ft down an incline at Clay Bank, between Helmsley and Stokesley.
Driver Christopher Johnson, of Atley Road, Grangetown, was said to be improving yesterday in Middlesbrough General Hospital with head and leg injuries.
Police are seeking witnesses to the accident on the B1257 at Clay Bank, near Chop Gate.
Only one vehicle was involved.
FORMER Middlesbrough football star Gary Pallister knows all about sports injury.
So the new North Tees Health Trust knew who to turn to to open their new sports injury clinic next Wednesday.
Pallister, now playing for Manchester United, has agreed to open the premises in the physiotherapy gymnasium at North Tees General Hospital, Stockton, at 6pm.
The clinic is already in operation offering treatment by experienced chartered physiotherapists at £10 a session.
A TEESSIDE college is claiming a national first with its training and enterprise centre.
The centre, at Kirby College, Middlesbrough, is thought to be the first unit in the country to receive the British Standards Institute BS5750 Part One registration, the recognised stamp of quality for industry and business.
The recommendation is a ‘considerable achievement’ according to David Wilce, vice principal of the college.
Specials offer to teach self defence
VOLUNTEER police officers in Cleveland are offering to teach self defence and crime prevention techniques to women's groups in the county.
The force's special constabulary section are all trained and willing to pass on their techniques.
Divisional commandant George Kane said: ‘These classes can help women be more aware of their surroundings, to know what possible dangers to look out for and to be more confident when out alone.’
Any groups interested should contact Mr Kane on Middlesbrough 301223/4 on Wednesday evenings.
Well done:
Chief Constable Keith Hellawell awarded long service and good conduct medals to 28 Cleveland police officers at the force's HQ in Ladgate Lane, Middlesbrough.
Fire victim:
A fire victim hurt in a blaze at a house in Oliver Street, Middlesbrough, was treated in the burns unit at the town's general hospital.
Last rites:
Middlesbrough Roman Catholic priest Father Joseph McDonagh, who died on Tuesday, aged 58, is to be buried today in a corner of the garden adjoining his church, St Thomas More, at Beechwood.
Tablers honoured:
Saltburn and District Round Table has won the Danish Axe Award for international Round Tabling and the National Press Award for publicity in recognition of its mercy work in Africa.
Junior panel:
Saltburn/Marske and New Marske parish council wants to form a junior version of its council and is to write to the headteachers at Bydales, Marske and Huntcliff, Saltburn, schools to drum up interest.
In pictures:
A new exhibition dealing with the redevelopment of a community area begins in at the Cleveland Gallery, Victoria Road, Middlesbrough, tomorrow.
Photographic works by Alison Marchant and Alice Maude-Roxby explore personal and community memory and history.
Sports coaching:
Middlesbrough council will be ‘Coaching the Coaches’ during a series of summer sports sessions.
The town's Southlands Centre is now an official Outreach centre for sports coaching.
Further information is available from Jennifer Meikle on  ext.3826.
Theft plea:
Detectives in Hartlepool are appealing for information about a burglary in which jewellery worth more than £2,000 was stolen from a house in Earlsferry Road between Sunday and Monday.
Grand total:
Hartlepool fundraiser John Bell, of Lancaster Road, raised £359 for Age Concern by touring the town's wine bars.
Now he wants to thank everyone who helped.
Reward offer:
Businessman Steve Murray is offering a reward for information leading to the successful prosecution of a thief who smashed into his Mercedes car and stole a computerised CD player while it was parked in Scarborough Street, Hartlepool.
He can be contacted during office hours on .
Popular housing:
A sheltered housing project in Thornaby has proved so popular that only a few flats are left.
North Housing Association, which is responsible for the project, is holding an open day on Monday for potential tenants to meet staff.
Safer going:
Cleveland County Council is to replace a stile running beside Lingdale's Stanhow road allotments to combat a potential danger from motor cyclists.
Kick-off:
Stockton sports centre is organising its annual ‘sportsdrome’ football tournament for six-a-side footballers under 16.
Contact the centre for details.
Cancer help:
North Tees Health Macmillan Nurses will be on hand during a mobile exhibition next week to discuss all aspects of living with cancer.
It will be at the following sites between 10am and 4pm: Monday, Billingham shopping centre; Tuesday, Yarm High Street; Wednesday, Stockton High Street; Thursday, Thornaby town centre car park and Friday, Stockton High Street.
Arson probe:
Detectives are hunting arsonists who set fire to an empty council flat in Vane Street on the Headland, Hartlepool on Wednesday night.
Police are appealing for witnesses and can be contacted on .
Caring service:
Cleveland social services and Cleveland Cooperative Agency are looking to set up a ‘sitting’ service so that carers of elderly people can take a break when the county council's Tithebarn resource centre opens in Stockton later this year.
Jobs info:
Students at Laurence Jackson School, Guisborough, are attending a conference today on how to plan their future.
They will hear from young people who are currently training or at work talking about their experiences of finding employment.
Plea over lollipop warden shortage
EDUCATION officers have appealed for help to find lollipop wardens for four Scarborough primary schools.
Children at St Martin's Church of England, Hinderwell, Wheatcroft and Gladstone Road County Primaries area each in need of wardens.
A spokesman for North Yorkshire County Council said: ‘We are making every effort to fill the vacancies.
The police have been told but their manpower is hard-pressed and they cannot guarantee cover.’
Chalets hit:
Six holiday chalets on Scarborough's North Side have been hit by vandals, police said yesterday.
House raided:
Burglars escaped with a £2,500 haul after breaking into a large detached house in Markington, near Ripon, while the occupants were away.
The stolen items included £1,450 worth of china plates, including Wedgewood and Crown Derby, a canteen of cutlery, bedlinen, men's suits and an  electric toaster.
Open warning:
North Yorkshire police are warning householders to take care when opening windows and doors in the current hot spell to be on their guard against opportunist burglaries.
A spokesman said there had been several raids on homes in the past few days by sneak thieves.
Coffee morning:
A fundraising coffee morning for Yorkshire Cancer Research takes place in Northallerton Town Hall on Wednesday from 10am3pm.
The event will also include various stalls.
Binoculars taken:
A pair of binoculars valued at £70 was stolen in a break-in at a garage attached to a house in Thirsk Road, Northallerton.
Left standing:
A Ford Fiesta car was stolen from Appleton Wiske, near Northallerton, and later found abandoned minus its four wheels, worth about £100.
Car stolen:
Thieves stole a Ford Fiesta XR2 registration D990 KWX from Church Lane, Ripon.
Bike theft:
A Yamaha motorcycle worth £860 was stolen from Cooper Lane, Potto, near Stokesley, and later found abandoned and burnt out on the nearby A19.
Trampoline lifted:
A £200 trampoline was stolen from a garden in Yarm Lane, Great Ayton.
The trampoline is 10ft by 6ft with a yellow canvas and metal tubular frame.
Garage break-in:
Various DIY tools worth a total of £430 were stolen by thieves who broke into a garage at a house in Bymoore Close, Great Ayton.
Intruders strike:
Thieves broke into a garage at a house in Low Green, Great Ayton, and got into a Porsche car and then a BMW car and stole a £271 radio/cassette stereo from the BMW.
Trailer taken:
A horse trailer worth £1,000 was stolen from Station Road, Stokesley.
Driven off:
A £5,000 Yugo Zastava car registration G655 WBL was stolen from the driveway of a house in Romany Road, Stokesley.
Man fined:
A Scarborough man was yesterday fined £50 by magistrates after admitting stealing a brake spanner worth £3.89 from Halfords Superstore on Seamer Road.
Paul Richard Taylor, 32, of Westbourne Grove, Scarborough, was also ordered to pay £30 prosecution costs.
Village lessons:
Villagers in North Skelton are to get lessons on how to hang flower baskets.
Organiser the Action North Skelton group also plans further educational programmes in DIY, local history and computers.
Further information from Dave McLukie on Guisborough 651658.
Tower rethink:
Middlesbrough Council is to reconsider its decision to turn down a request for help from the Church of the Holy Trinity, North Ormesby, which faces a £41,000 bill for repairs to its Grade II listed clock tower.
Today
HARROGATE:
Gardening Daycourses, Hanging Baskets, Tubs and Planters, with tutor Nigel Hutchingson, Harlow Carr Botanical Gardens, Crag Lane, 10am-4pm.
Details, tel.565418.
Fee £13.
HAREWOOD:
All Saints Church Concert, Harewood House, nr Leeds.
Details, tel..
OTLEY:
Otley Show, an agricultural event for all the family, The Show Ground, Bridge End, 10am.
Conference date for offshore firms
A UNIQUE event with long-term implications for the North-East offshore industry is being held on Tyneside next month.
The Northern Offshore Federation and the Tyne and Wear Development Corporation have organised the Anglo Norwegian Oil Symposium at Newcastle Gosforth Park Hotel, on June 17 and 18.
The event is set to examine prospects for the offshore sector, which is the region's biggest employer.
Vandalism sparks public meeting
A PUBLIC meeting has been called in a bid to curb under-aged drinking and vandalism at Seaton Carew, near Hartlepool.
The move follows a recent incident in which promenade chalets at the resort were damaged and concern has been voiced that the troublemakers could hit summer trade.
Now the organisers of the meeting, to be held in the Stafford House Hotel, Church Street, at 7.30pm on Monday, hope to prevent a repeat of the damage and want to hear the views of local  people .
They are particularly keen to find out what youngsters themselves want.
Coun John Elders said: ‘We would particularly like to hear from young people who have strong views on the facilities for them in Seaton and what entertainment could possibly be provided.’
Sad event:
The ashes of a Hartlepool woman whose son died during the Falklands War were scattered at sea yesterday.
Norma Turnbull died at her home in Lindsay Road last Sunday aged 55.
Her son Ian lost his life when HMS Coventry was sunk.
Ship rescue:
Firemen raced to the fish quay in Hartlepool early yesterday after a trawler began to sink.
They pumped out the Patience and managed to stabilise it after about two hours.
Lift drama:
Three people were released by Billingham firemen after becoming trapped in a lift at Dawson House, Billingham.
Eigg sale:
Cleveland businessman Keith Schellengerg has put his Scottish island in the Inner Hebrides up for sale hoping to raise from £1–2m.
Half the proceeds from the Island of Eigg could go to his ex-wife Margaret Williams following their divorce.
Tower rethink:
Middlesbrough Council is to reconsider its decision to turn down a request for help from the Church of the Holy Trinity, North Ormesby, which faces a £41,000 bill for repairs to its Grade II listed clock tower.
Charity dip:
Hundreds of swimmers raised more than £1,000 for Cleveland charities in a superswim at Eston leisure centre.
The event was organised by Cleveland Council for Voluntary Services and Middlesbrough Rotary Club and backed by staff at Northumbrian Water, Thornaby.
Village lessons:
Villagers in North Skelton are to get lessons on how to hang flower baskets.
Organisers the Action North Skelton group also plan further educational programmes in DIY, local history and computers.
Further information from Dave McLukie on Guisborough 651658.
Mobility show:
A mobility resource exhibition will take the form of a fun afternoon at Tristar Nesham, North Ormesby Road, Middlesbrough, tomorrow.
The event, starting at 12.30pm and featuring a guest appearance by a Coronation Street celebrity, will include advice on a wide range of subjects important to the disabled, elderly and special needs community.
Soccer contest:
A Reebok 5s football competition is to be held at Hartlepool's Grayfields recreation ground on June 6 and 7.
It is played on a local, regional and national level and is open to boys aged nine-11 and 12–13 and girls aged 11–13.
Setting sail:
The historic pleasure steamer Balmoral is currently spending four days in Hartlepool, offering cruises from the town's fish quay.
Tickets can be bought on board or from the civic centre.
Loo concern:
Redcar MP Mo Mowlam says she is concerned about possible health risks associated with the closure of public lavatories on the seafront and hopes to persuade Langbaurgh Council to re-open them for the summer.
Traffic delays:
A 75-foot lorry carrying steam generators from the Tees Offshore Base at South Bank to the Teesside Power Station at Wilton caused rush hour traffic delays on the A66 east of Middlesbrough yesterday morning.
Bermuda short
HARTLEPOOL, Middlesbrough and Sunderland footballers all find themselves plodging in the Med off Majorca this week: there's nowt so common for fourth division champions Burnley.
The club's Jarrow born manager Jimmy Mullen (Backtrack, December 10) was obliged to send a deputy to last Friday's manager of the year awards the entire team has shoved off on a sponsored fortnight in Bermuda.
ASHOK Kumar's future is still unclear, a month after his disastrous election defeat in Langbaurgh.
The former Labour MP, who represented the Cleveland constituency for only five months, admits he took the setback very badly.
Days and even weeks after he was beaten by Conservative Michael Bates, he found it difficult to discuss what had happened.
Mr Bates shocked the pundits by increasing his by-election vote by 10,000 to overturn Dr Kumar's slim majority.
But the Labour candidate set an unenviable record by increasing his own vote by 6,000 in a massive 83 pc turn-out and still losing.
‘When you expect something, it is not so bad, even if it is painful,’ he said.
‘When something is totally unexpected, it's terrible.’
Research scientist Dr Kumar had intended to quit Middlesbrough Council if reelected after his success in last November's by-election but now he has decided to stay on.
His employment future is not so certain.
Dr Kumar has been in discussion with his former employers British Steel, who he says have been ‘very sympathetic’.
He says the ball is now in their court, but that he hopes to return to science with the company.
Dr Kumar also plans to stay on Teesside.
Any temptations to quit the area and start afresh have been left behind.
In his spare time since the election, Dr Kumar has plunged into books in a bid to re-activate his mind.
Dr Kumar said he had realised many Labour supporters shared his sense of deep shock after the election.
‘That has helped me, knowing that others share the way I feel.’
There have also been letters from senior Labour figures Neil Kinnock, Roy Hattersley, Tony Blair and Gordon Brown.’
KITTY Grove-Stephensen retired yesterday after five years as chief executive of Teesside and District Society for the Blind.
She said during her term of office the organisation's base in Stockton Road, Middlesbrough, had seen many changes and was now a thriving day centre for people with a visual  impairment .
Mrs Grove-Stephensen is leaving the post at the age of 60 and is looking forward to having more time to devote to church work.
Her successor as chief executive is Helen Lockwood, a qualified social worker with over 20 years experience in Cleveland.
A BEDALE home-care company is expanding further afield.
Seraph, run by Liz Place, has set up a new office in Grange Road to take on staff in the Darlington area.
The firm already recruits people to visit sick people of all ages at home in the Middlesbrough, East Cleveland and Bedale/Northallerton areas.
Liz, who lives at Bedale, sees the need for home-care as increasing in the near future as the Government releases more funds.
Seraph offers nursing care in the home but also catering and some housework.
CROOKS may soon need a lotta bottle to operate on housing estates in Middlesbrough.
The cream of one dairy's workforce have received basic police training on crime prevention techniques and how to spot signs of trouble.
Over 100 Dale Farm milkmen have also been issued with incident report cards which they can pass on to the police through their depot manager.
The dawn patrol rolls into action from the Askwith Road depot, Linthorpe, today.
Divisional crime prevention officer David Chaplin said: ‘The dawn patrol grew out of the realisation that by the nature of doorstep delivery, milkmen are out and about during the early hours of the morning.’
Band attempts to hit the high notes
A CLEVELAND school band conducted by Labour leader Neil Kinnock hopes to go on to more national acclaim.
Egglescliffe School Orchestra hopes to strike the right notes at the National Festival of Music for Youth which is being held from July 8 to 11.
Three groups from the school are taking part in the finals at the Royal Festival Hall, London.
The school, which has taken part in the festival since 1968, was conducted by Mr Kinnock when he visited in March on his party's election trail.
Driving range:
Planning permission is being sought for a driving range beside Hunley Hall golf course which is being built at Brotton.
Tough line:
Langbaurgh Council is to take a tougher line with tenants who harass their neighbours.
They risk eviction under a new clause being introduced in the tenancy condition from next month.
New professor:
East Cleveland academic Dr Mike Featherstone, 45, of Marske Lane, Skelton, has been made a professor by Teesside Polytechnic on the eve of its elevation to university status.
Lifeboat call:
Teesmouth lifeboat towed into safe anchorage a fishing boat and a pleasure cruiser which broke down in separate incidents, four and six miles out to sea from South Gare headland, Redcar.
Rooftop rescue:
A policeman brought down two children who clambered on to the roof of a butcher's shop in South Bank Road, Middlesbrough, at the weekend and could not get down.
Cones mystery:
A mystery fire swept through a store of plastic road cones and signs at a works compound in Stockton.
Factory blaze:
Firemen were called out to deal with a blaze at an empty factory on the Oakesway Trading Estate in Hartlepool at the weekend.
The roof and walls were severely damaged.
A jet and two hose reels were used to put out the flames.
Car fires:
Firemen in Hartlepool were kept busy at the weekend dealing with car fires.
One vehicle was destroyed in Brierton Lane while a blaze involving another in Abigail Walk was out on their arrival.
Camera found:
A camera was left at the Quaker Rally of vintage commercial vehicles in Darlington's Russell Street car park yesterday, to claim it call Mike Fishwick on Darlington 353132 after 6pm.
COUNCIL cleaners are at the centre of a row with a Cleveland school.
Governors at Bowesfield Lane Primary, Stockton, are demanding a better service after repeatedly complaining to Cleveland County Council Education Authority about the standard of cleanliness at the school.
The board has lodged five complaints with the LEA and is questioning whether it is getting value for money.
Council trading standards officer Eric Robinson said the council's contract management officer and the direct services manager would be sent into the school today ‘to address any remaining cleaning problems’.
At a meeting tomorrow, councillors will discuss a governors' resolution that future payments be made only for work completed  satisfactorily .
The resolution sent to council's contracts sub-committee says the governors are concerned ‘that several aspects of the specification for the cleaning of the school have not been fulfilled since the award of the contract and the meeting date’.
Bowesfield headteacher George Aitken said said: ‘This started at my last governors’ meeting.
We decided the cleaning was not up to standard at that particular time.
But since then we have been given additional help with the cleaning, but the same hours.
‘The problem was they had not allowed enough hours to clean the school.
They were getting paid for work not being completed.’
Governors will consider a new report to be made by the head at their next meeting on Wednesday.
The council issues a default notice if there is a question mark over hygiene.
Councillors are obliged to consider terminating a contract if eight notices are issued.
It was learnt yesterday county councillors have already considered ending a schools cleaning contract awarded to a private firm hired to look after Middlesbrough schools after the it notched up 22 default notices between last August and May 1.
Nine of those notices were issued this year.
But councillors decided to give the firm another chance.
The council's own cleaning workers won the schools' cleaning contracts for Hartlepool, Stockton and Langbaurgh and have not come close to having their future considered.
A THIEF who stole power tools from a Whitby store later sold them in a pub, the town's magistrates heard yesterday.
The court heard that Darren Bulmer, 23, of Keir Hardie Crescent, South Bank, Middlesbrough was already in Durham Prison serving sentences for motoring offences on Teesside.
John Hargreaves, prosecuting, said that Bulmer had a long list of previous convictions.
Bulmer admitted stealing the tools valued at £88.
He was sentenced to another month in prison to run consecutive to his current term of detention.
POLICE in East Cleveland issued an alert after a man tried three times to indecently assault a 10-year-old girl.
The man, said to be of scruffy appearance and aged between 25 and 30, crept up and grabbed the girl near her friend's house in Boosbeck.
The girl managed to run off but the man repeated the attack and again she managed to escape.
A spokesman for Guisborough police said the man made three distinct grabs at her.
‘Although she was not hurt she was naturally distressed and we are obviously concerned about the situation and need to find this man quickly.’
The incidents happened at about 6pm on Saturday and police would like to speak to anyone in the area of the Post Office at the time.
The man was described as about 5ft 7ins, white and of proportionate build.
He had short black hair, a scruffy moustache and a pointed nose.
He wore a white T-shirt with multi-coloured writing, denim jeans and scruffy white trainers.
Any information can be given to Guisborough police on Middlesbrough 326326.
Hunt mounted over robbery bid
A MAN who tried to grab a briefcase containing a substantial sum of cash from a man in North Ormesby market-place, Middlesbrough, is being hunted by police.
A 23-year-old supermarket employee was slightly injured when he was hit with a heavy instrument just after noon yesterday.
He resisted and the assailant made off empty-handed on a large, blue and white Yamaha motorbike.
Anyone with information should call Det Sgt David White on (0642) 301833.
Ahead of target:
Former policeman Paul Dale has become Cleveland Ambulance's 60th paramedic.
The service is well on course to have a paramedic on every emergency vehicle by the end of this year, well ahead of the Department of Health's 1996 target.
Lift fault:
Cleveland firemen were called to British Steel's blast furnace site at Redcar to release four men who were trapped in a lift which had broken down.
Flats plans:
Plans for a sheltered housing scheme in Sandringham Road, Park End, Middlesbrough, including 30 flats and accommodation for a warden, have been approved.
Seeking work:
A Job Help club run by Middlesbrough's Grove Hill Triangle Association and Longlands College is opening every Monday morning at 48 Deepdale Avenue.
Further details from Malcolm Walker on Middlesbrough 829934.
Second honour:
Hartlepool pensioner Jack Howe, 75, of Welldeck Road, who is a member of Stockton Camera club, who recently received the Meritorious Service Award of the Photographic Alliance of Great Britain, has now been awarded the Fellowship of the Royal Photographic Society.
In Court THE following cases were dealt with by Easingwold magistrates:
Stanislaw Bojas, 73, of Parliament Road, Middlesbrough, admitted driving motor car exceeding 30mph and driving motor car and failing to wear seat belt, fined £60 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, three points.
Michael David Hand, 39, of Tennyson Avenue, Newborough Park, Eston, Cleveland, admitted driving motor car exceeding 30mph, fined £30 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, three points.
Colin Eeles, 44, of Budworth Close, Billingham, admitted driving motor car with excess alcohol in breath, driving motor car without due care and attention, failing to stop after accident and failing to report accident, fined £1,000 plus £25 costs, licence endorsed, disqualified for three years.
Anthony Norman Cuthbert, 28, of Kirkwall Close, Fairfield, Stockton, was convicted of driving motor car exceeding 30mph and failing to wear seat belt, fined £170 plus £20 costs, licence endorsed, three points.
Weather map ‘not accurate’
TRADERS have protested to the BBC and ITV that television and radio weather forecasts are giving a false picture of the Yorkshire Coast.
Scarborough Chamber of Trade president Ernie Gee said yesterday: ‘We believe the misleading forecasts which have been given recently are losing the resort thousands of pounds in business.’
Mr Gee and leading Scarborough hotelier David Hindley have now had a meeting with television weatherman Bill Giles to explain the problem.
Speed fine:
David Woodier, 28, of Alma House, Middlesbrough, who was caught speeding at almost 90mph told police he was testing the engine of his new car.
He was found guilty in his absence at Thirsk magistrates court yesterday of speeding, driving without insurance and a licence.
He was fined a total of £357 with £45 costs.
MP's post:
Tim Devlin, MP for Stockton South and a barrister, has been appointed Parliamentary Private Secretary to Attorney-General Sir Nicholas Lyell.
Bomb appeal:
Police investigating the IRA firebomb blitz at the Gateshead MetroCentre ten days ago say they are pleased by the response to a weekend appeal to shoppers for information.
Joining up:
David Lee, deputy director of the Imperial War Museum at Duxford has become a member of the board of trustees at the Yorkshire Air Museum at Elvington near York.
Barnes Wallis, son of the man who designed the famous ‘bouncing bomb’, has also agreed to become a patron.
A COUNCIL has tightened its safety procedures after it was prosecuted for cutting through an 11,000-volt cable.
An employee of Nacro was operating a pneumatic drill when he struck the cable buried 3ft 6ins deep on The Black Path at Cargo Fleet, Middlesbrough.
He was taken to hospital with minor burns to his hair, left arm, face and ears.
The man was working for Nacro on behalf of Cleveland County Council.
Both Nacro and the council were prosecuted by the Health and Safety Executive and last month admitted the charges at Teesside Magistrates Court.
Nacro was given an absolute  discharge , but the county council was fined £200 and ordered to pay more than £450 costs.
In a report to Cleveland's health and safety committee, county safety adviser Peter Prunty admits: ‘It would appear that the work that was being undertaken by Nacro had not been planned in sufficient detail to cover such  occurrences .’
In future, the council has determined to check thoroughly for the location of any underground services and to review staff training in such circumstances.
BUS SERVICES to encourage visitors to a national park to leave the car at home start this weekend.
The summer moorsbus service begins on Sunday, backed by the North York Moors National Park.
A spokesman said: ‘There's no better way of discovering the magic of the North York Moors.’
Services will operate on Sundays and Bank Holidays from Darlington, Middlesbrough and York.
There will also be local routes between Scarborough, Whitby, Pickering and Helmsley.
The spokesman said fares were low and tickets interchangeable.
He said the buses would cut air pollution and reduce sheep deaths from accidents with cars.
A STEEL erector was killed when a two-ton steel pipe he was working on became dislodged and dropped, trapping him underneath.
Terry Eaton, 43, of Greenside, Normanby, Middlesbrough, died of bleeding inside the brain due to a fractured skull.
Immediately after his death several hundred workers at Redpath Offshore's Linthorpe Dinsdale operation, on Middlesbrough's Riverside Park, where he worked, went on a three-day protest strike.
An inquest jury in Middlesbrough heard that at the time a module had been loaded onto a large barge ready to go out to sea.
Mr Eaton and colleague Ron Siddle had been working on sea fasteners, fixed to the barge to stop the module moving.
It involved work on the quayside in which the steel pipe, seven metres long and used for lifting, had to be slotted onto a plate prior to it being hoisted into position by a crane and welded.
Mr Siddle, of Hesleden Avenue, Acklam, Middlesbrough, said they had been working on the operation the previous day and the pipe kept jamming when attempts were made to slot it into place.
At the time it was held secure by a crane using two chains.
The next day they decided to use a different crane and the chains were removed.
While Mr Siddle was at the works stores Mr Eaton was seen by crane Driver Alfred Walker, of Holmes Close, Thornaby, lying underneath the pipe using burning equipment when the pipe moved down trapping him.
Mr Siddle said they had never been given any written instructions by Redpath Offshore about safety, but as a skilled workman he knew about having to support loads.
They were going to put the crane on the pipe when he returned from the stores, he said.
Brian Hall, safety and training officer at Redpath Offshore, said he found it difficult to explain why Mr Eaton had placed himself under the pipe.
He said since the incident new instructions insisted that loads must never be left unsupported, supports must be put in place to stop the tube falling and a wider slot in the pipe was now used making the operation easier, quicker and safer.
John Rodwell, a specialist inspector from the Health and Safety Executive, said it appeared Mr Eaton had been using the burning torch to cut at the edge of the slot at one end of the pipe trying to open it and hot gases could have caused it to become dislodged and fall.
The jury returned an accidental death verdict.
A WARRANT for the arrest of a Middlesbrough councillor has been issued by Teesside magistrates.
Coun Mike J Carr failed to appear in court yesterday on a charge of assaulting Cleveland county councillor John Garvey.
Coun Garvey brought the prosecution privately after an incident in Middlesbrough Town Hall on October 15 last year.
Coun Garvey, 40, of Sandwell Avenue, Priestfields, Middlesbrough, is due to appear in court next week, accused of assaulting Coun Carr during the same incident.
Coun Garvey, former vice-chairman of Cleveland police committee, also faces a charge of assaulting another Middlesbrough councillor, David Ross, and of possessing cannabis.
After 33-year-old Coun Carr, of Newlands Road, Middlesbrough, failed to appear yesterday, magistrates issued a warrant backed with bail for his arrest.
Coun Carr later said he had cleared the matter up with his solicitor.
He said he had been ill and had forgotten the court date.
A DRIVER was hailed as a hero last night after helping rescue pensioners from his fume-filled coach.
The drama happened at Clay Bank at Great Broughton, near Stokesley, when the engine overheated and caught fire.
Fumes were driven back into the passenger area, leaving the passengers choking.
Driver Alfred Ridley, 50, helped to lead all 34 passengers from the Sunderland area including 17 invalids from the vehicle.
A spokesman for North Yorkshire fire brigade said: ‘The driver acted quite heroically.
He went back into the smoke-logged coach on several occasions.’
Four people were taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital suffering from the effects smoke.
Two were allowed home last night but two others were detained.
The other 30 passengers were taken in passing coaches to Stokesley fire station where they were looked after until another vehicle picked them up.
No one could be contacted from the Sunderland coach owner, Redby Travel.
MAYOR Frank Platt joined a flower-planting session to confirm his ‘green’ credentials.
The chairman of the Tidy Up Middlesbrough Public Action Campaign helped children from Caldicotes School, Spencerbeck, to spruce up the area as part of Environment Week.
BOTANIST David Bellamy will be in Middlesbrough on Saturday to perform the opening ceremony to mark the completion of Phase I of the town's botanical centre.
The event in Acklam will include a display of free-fall parachuting by the famous Black Lanyards Team, Lingdale Silver Band and a bouncy castle.
There will be displays on acid rain, the ozone layer and global warming.
Troubleshooters:
Smalltown Heroes EP IT'S a little tricky to know what to call the ‘shooters as after 600 gigs under their current name the hard-working Sunderland band are becoming the Smalltown Heroes.
The music on this four-track EP also shows a change, although not such a drastic one.
They still play honest hard rock, but now it sounds fresher and has thousands of hard edges.
For example, A Thousand Smiles builds quite nicely but ordinarily until out of nowhere explodes this magnificent guitar.
And then we tumble into (It's A) Dirty Job which despite the cliche title, rocks out passionately, driven like the opener One Man Show as much by the total harmony vocals as the constant runs of guitars.
The one track here that is not so successful is the slower Rips In My Heart, probably because it doesn't have the wild, enthusiastic live feel of the others.
Troubleshooters now have an international publishing deal, and with the worldwide acclaim of a band like Extreme the ‘shooters could be looked upon as a  igly -Anglicised, less-sickly version of the American stars they must be fairly confident.
They play at the Institute, Darlington, tonight; Newcastle Playhouse on Tuesday; New College, Durham on May 29; Irish Democratic, Consett, May 30; Visions, Billingham, June 4; Newcastle Basement, June 10 and Alex, Sunderland, June 11.
A TOY appeal has been launched after two Czechoslovakian doctors visited Teesside.
Urologist Dr Petr Albin and cardiologist Dr Slavek Januska were particularly impressed with the Cleveland unit for assessing children with special health needs at Middlesbrough General Hospital.
‘They mentioned that there were virtually no toys for children in their country's hospitals, so we decided to launch a collection,’ said South Tees Acute Hospitals NHS Trust spokesman Arthur Allan.
The visitors also saw the accident and emergency department and special units for diabetics and haematology patients at the General before meeting neuro surgeon Fred Nath.
He has hit the headlines through his efforts to bring sick Eastern European children to Britain for key operations.
The delegation then moved on to South Cleveland Hospital.
The toy collection is being organised by Karen Lince at West Lane Hospital, Middlesbrough.
FOUR North-East lifeboat heroes are in line for another prestigious award.
The Redcar crew have already been honoured for a daring rescue earlier this year.
Now Peter Hodge, Derek Robinson, Barry Wheater and Mark Reeves have been put forward in the rescue category of the Silk Cut Nautical Awards.
They saved a Middlesbrough couple and their dog from the sea at Huntcliff, Saltburn, in January.
Helmsman Mr Hodge received a Royal National Lifeboat Institution bronze medal in London earlier this week for his part in the rescue.
His colleagues are to receive the thanks of the RNLI, inscribed on vellum.
Their nomination in the Nautical Awards will be considered by a panel of judges chaired by round-the-world yachtsman Chay Blyth.
A MAYOR who criticised a planned output of BBC broadcasts from Stockton has been accused by a colleague of interfering.
Stockton's mayor, Coun Stephen Smailes, disclosed this week he is complaining to broadcasting chiefs that the pick of the programmes during a BBC promotion in Cleveland next week will come from Middlesbrough.
Coun John Kerridge, Stockton Council's leisure committee chairman, said the mayor was ‘belittling’ the efforts of his department in wooing the BBC to the town.
Coun Kerridge said: ‘The mayor of Stockton should help promote activities in the town.
Employees in the leisure department have worked extremely hard to bring this prestige event to Stockton and we end up with a situation where the first person of the town is kicking us in the teeth.’
‘He has got the wrong end of the stick,’ said Coun Smailes last night.
‘All I am saying is the radio show should give equal coverage to Stockton and Middlesborough, that we should not be coming off second best.’
The BBC says it chose Stewart Park, Middlesbrough, for a Bank Holiday special because it offered better car parking than parks in Stockton, while Stockton did not have an auditorium to compare with the size of Middlesbrough Town Hall.
BBC Radio Goes to Cleveland, a five-channel radio show, runs from May 25 to May 30.
RICHMOND is gearing up to celebrate its centenary Meet.
The Meet, which began life as a annual meeting of North Yorkshire and South Durham cyclists, is now seen as the town's major event of carnival, celebration and fun.
It also raises thousands of pounds which are distributed to charities and worthy groups and individuals of the area.
The 1992 Richmond Meet is being marked as a historic occasion by having the first female Meet president.
Joan Church was unanimously elected  president for the centenary year after years of being among the backroom army of women helpers.
Her president's reception and dinner dance tomorrow night launches the main weekend of events.
The dinner will be held in a marquee in Friary Gardens, Richmond, with guests dressed in Victorian costume.
On Saturday the six-a-side football competition is held in Earl's Orchard, Richmond, kicking off at 11.30am.
A dance to The Dallas Boys is held at Richmondshire cricket club in the town's Hurgill road on Saturday night.
On Sunday morning the Meet president and Meet members will be accompanied by Mayors of Richmond, Darlington, Middlesbrough, Ripon and Hartlepool in a procession from the Town Hall to the parish church for the president's church service.
The Sunday show at Earl's Orchard starts at 1pm and includes dog and falconry displays, a Land-Rover obstacle race, barrel race and clownabout.
The carnival parade sets off from Nun's Close car park at 10am on Monday and winds its way through the town.
It will be followed by a short concert by the Band of the Royal Air Force Regiment in Friary Gardens and a children's dancing display.
The gardens will also be the venue in the afternoon for local pop group, Sorry Mr Pearson, and Barry Benson.
Grass track cycle racing and grass track running will take place at Richmondshire cricket club, starting at 2pm.
RESIDENTS fed up with dirty water coming out of their taps have told Northumbrian Water to clean up its act.
The North Ormesby area of Middlesbrough has suffered serious discolouration and solids in its drinking water.
Residents association secretary Caroline Whitehead said Northumbrian Water should pay people affected compensation under the terms of the Citizen's Charter.
She said: ‘On one day, the water ran dirty for eight hours it was impossible to drink, you couldn't make tea and washing was filthy.
I know of at least 50 people who complained on that one day.’
Middlesbrough Council is monitoring the situation closely after receiving a spate of complaints.
Northumbian Water claims major relining works have caused the problems.
In a letter to the residents association, the company says: ‘Following the problem, our inspectors carried out flushing of the water mains, which helped to alleviate the problem.
‘To ensure discoloured water is kept to a minimum, North Ormesby has been placed on a regular flushing programme.’
Caroline Whitehead admitted things had improved in the last two weeks, but said there were still problems.
‘My mother's washing was discoloured and filthy after its rinse cycle just a couple of days ago,’ she added.
‘I don't really think they have done enough this has been going on for some time.
On the very bad day, I think we should have been offered an alternative source of water.’
The council spokesman said there was no evidence that the water was unsafe to drink.
‘If there was a breach of water quality regulations, we would take action,’ he added.
MIDDLESBROUGH council has declined to appeal against Government charge capping.
Environment Secretary Michael Howard told the authority it could spend £20.2m last week £1.4m below its £21.6m budget.
Council leader Michael Carr said the authority had no faith in the fairness of the appeals procedure and that further delays would increase the burden on the borough's poll tax payers.
‘Two years ago the Government ruled that a budget of £22.3m was  reasonable for this council,’ he said.
‘Now, despite inflation and the many extra duties they have entrusted us with, they insist on a budget of £20.2m.
It sums up how unfair and illogical their system is.’
The capping has brought down the poll tax bill in the borough to £339.22, a reduction of nearly £14.
But Coun Carr has warned that services will suffer as a result of capping.
The council decided not to appeal during a special meeting of its policy and resources committee.
Coun Carr said the council's budget had all-party support and the fact that it had been ignored by Mr Howard showed the futility of an appeal.
Langbaurgh Council has not yet decided whether to appeal against being capped at £16.5m £2m below budget.
Baby is jostled to floor as bag taken
POLICE are hunting a mugger who tipped a baby out of a pushchair as it was being pushed by a 64-year-old woman.
The incident happened in Hetton Park, Hetton-le-Hole, Wearside, at about 3pm on Tuesday.
The robber wrenched a shopping bag containing cash from the pensioner's hands and ran off.
Police have appealed for witnesses.
Office theft:
Thieves stole office equipment worth £900 from the  premises of Admiral Fergus in North Shields after smashing their way in.
Pigeons die:
Police are investigating an arson attack on a pigeon  cree at St Peters allotments, Walker, Newcastle, in which 80 birds worth £1,100 died.
An estimated £400 worth of damage was caused to the loft.
Secretary appointed:
Peter Jordan, 34, has been appointed district secretary of Chester-le-Street District Council following the retirement of Mel Robinson after 23 years.
He has moved to Chester-le-Street from Wyre Borough Council in Lancashire.
New route:
Bus company Go-Ahead Northern is to re-route its service to Pennywell, Sunderland, from May 30 after 7.15pm to avoid the Pennywell shopping area in Portsmouth Road, where vehicles have come under attack recently by stone-throwing youths.
The re-routing of the 126 service follows repeated pleas from the company for youngsters to stop hurling the stones Hostel blaze: Up to 30 people were evacuated from a DSS hostel in Sunderland after a fire in a bedroom.
The blaze broke out on the third floor of Camrex House, Tatham Street, Sunderland, and destroyed a bed.
No one was injured.
Watch grant:
The newly-formed Town Farm Neighbourhood Watch group has been granted £1,000 from Middlesbrough Council to buy security devices.
Plea to Major over homeless A PERSONAL plea is on its way to Prime Minister John Major urging him to let a town house its homeless.
Stockton has more than 5,332 people on house waiting lists and £5.9m ‘lying idle in the bank’ from the sale of council houses, according to the author of the letter, Coun Jack Munsey, deputy leader of the borough council's controlling Labour group.
Government rules prevent the use of that money to build council houses but Coun Munsey wants Mr Major to overturn those policies.
Appeal dismissed:
An appeal against Langbaurgh planners' refusal to allow a hot food takeaway premises at 46 West Road, Loftus, to operate on Sundays between 7pm and 11pm has been dismissed.
Top rider:
Karen Van Meerbeck won her Guisborough Riding Club's top show jumping event at Saltburn by one second on her Spring Melody in a 22 horse jump off.
Shrubs taken:
Thieves pulled up £700 worth of shrubs from a garden centre at Kirkleatham village.
Police are investigating.
Stepping ahead:
A North-East chiropody department is putting its best foot forward in a bid for a healthcare award.
The South Tees Community and Mental Health Care team has been shortlisted from 123 entries for the Hewlett Packard Healthcare Quality Award for its quality project, Empowering the Patient.
New home:
The East-West Women's Project, which provides training and support for women seeking work or enterprise opportunities, has found a new home in Middlesbrough Council's old Holgate depot.
The project also has a town centre nursery and The Meeting Place, a restaurant and training centre on Borough Road.
Restaurant sale:
Hartlepool restaurant Tricolos, just off the town centre, is up for sale for offers around £190,000.
Its owner wants to concentrate on his other, unrelated major business retail interests in Cleveland.
IN the Great North Forest the other day it quickly became clear that there was a pretty significant absence.
Trees.
It might have gone unnoticed except that the dictionary is quite unequivocal about it.
A forest is a dense growth of trees and shrubby undergrowth covering a large tract of land.
In this particular bit of this forest by the coast there were no trees at all.
Somebody had planted a few saplings as if to justify the name, but they looked extremely sorry themselves, sadder even than the Fir Tree in Hans Christian Andersen's story and about to meet a similar fate.
‘Yes, it does seem a little odd,’ said Chris Growcott, marketing man for the Great North Forest, a chap with a job on his hands.
‘We could have said woodland instead of forest but that would have conveyed the idea of something small.
We didn't want to do that.’
Forest it was then and the GNF meets the definition in at least the large tract of land sense.
It covers 60 square miles.
The big question was why it could not have been called something else altogether: Great North Large Tract of Land, for example.
Forests conjure up images of Robin Hood and here in the Great North version there are quarries, the odd colliery and open countryside.
‘Yes, well, I don't know why anybody should have planted trees just here,’ said Chris Growcott, looking disparagingly at the weedy wood nearby.
The Great North Forest then is the Great North Misnomer, which is not to diminish the idea one jot.
The aim is to create a forest for the community.
That is a forest in terms of a place in which people can play and revel.
By July the long-term plan for the GNF will have taken shape in response to the wishes of the people who live in it.
What they want will be provided.
What they might not want, of course, is trees.
POLICE in Cleveland are hunting two youths who assaulted a teenager before stealing his mountain bike.
The 13-year-old was punched in the face and fell off his black and white Raleigh Mustang cycle in the Fairy Dell area of Marton, Middlesbrough.
His assailants, aged about 16, escaped towards Ladgate Lane.
LOCAL students can enjoy cut-price theatre seats, thanks to a new standby system introduced at Middlesbrough Little Theatre.
Subject to availability, and at shows promoted by the theatre, students can now buy a ticket on the door for just £1, if they produce proof of identity.
The success of a pilot standby scheme run for students at Teesside Plytechnic prompted the idea of making it available to a wider student audience, said theatre manager Lynn Hardman.
‘We have had a small but steady flow of people taking advantage of the offer,’ she said.
‘We need to stress that it is a standby scheme, applicable only on the night of the performance.’
A BLAZE at a former bus depot is being treated as arson.
Buildings once used by Cleveland Transit on Middlesbrough Road, South Bank, were left in an unsafe condition and will be demolished after yesterday's fire.
The premises were well alight when fire crews were called out at 2.40pm yesterday.
The buildings belong to Teesside Development Corporation, whose spokeswoman Fiona Blackwell said they were bought when there was a possibility of a massive motorsports development adjoining the site.
‘Demolition had been considered and now we will definitely go ahead with that option,’ she said.
Fireman fights transfer move
A CLEVELAND fireman is appealing against a decision to transfer him from Thornaby fire station to his home town of Billingham.
Leading Fireman Keith Barker, who is also a magistrate, has implemented the grievance procedure, said Cleveland County Council.
Mr Barker declined to comment.
Siege case:
James Thear, 28, of Aspley Gardens, Kenton, Newcastle, was remanded in custody by Newcastle Crown Court yesterday on firearms charges following a siege in Little Benton last December.
Carer rewarded:
Kerry Sadler, 14, of Birtley, near Gateshead, who cares for her mum Ann, who has multiple sclerosis, has won £500 in the final of an ITN contest to find the country's top carers.
Flood busters:
A £1.15m project has got under way to improve the drainage system and prevent homes in the Danesbury Drive area of York from flooding after heavy rain.
Back home:
Two consultants from Newcastle General Hospital, Dr Anil Gholkar and David Mendelow, have returned to Tyneside after a visit to the main hospital in Bejing, China.
Road victims:
Thomas Donnelly, 53, of Central Avenue, Billingham, is in Middlesbrough General Hospital with serious head injuries after being knocked down by a vehicle near his home.
Schoolboy Andrew Bostick, of Leaholm Grove, Stockton, received cuts to his face and left leg when he was knocked down by a car in Fairfield Road, Stockton.
Policy guide for Town Hall action A 146-page guide to the aims, finances and outlook of Middlesbrough council is contained in its Policy in Action document for use by senior staff.
In a foreword Coun Mike Carr, the council leader, calls for local government to be given the powers to respond to the problems of the communities they serve.
He says central government has tightened legal and financial restrictions at a time when council's need more freedom to deal with the deprivation and social problems caused by high long-term unemployment.
Police hunt:
Police are hunting two teenage youths who threatened a 14-year-old with a screwdriver near the Gateway supermarket in West Dyke Road, Redcar, on Wednesday night.
The victim was forced to hand over his watch to the youths, who spoke with southern accents.
A MAN sparked off a full scale alert last night after he refused to be rescued as he drifted a mile and a half off shore in the North Sea in only a five foot toy dinghy.
Trained negotiators and a psychologist eventually managed to talk the man into a rescue boat off Saltburn, Cleveland, after 90 minutes.
The alarm was sounded after a member of public spotted the man drifting in the tiny dinghy just after 7.30pm.
The Redcar lifeboat was alerted and when they tried bring him on board, the man, in his mid-30s, refused point blank to be rescued.
Another lifeboat from Redcar and the Teesmouth lifeboat were also launched and the Staithes crew put on standby but the man stayed in his dinghy.
Police were alerted and a member of the Redcar crew, an offduty police Inspector David Cammish and a psychologist tried to talk him to safety.
Eventually, as darkness began to fall just after 9pm, he went on board a rescue boat and was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
It is understood he was reported missing from a dependency unit at South Cleveland hospital earlier in the day.
A MAN sparked off a full-scale alert last night after he refused to be rescued as he drifted a mile and a half off shore in the North Sea in only a five foot toy dinghy.
Trained negotiators and a psychologist eventually managed to talk the man into a rescue boat off Saltburn, Cleveland, after 90 minutes.
The alarm was sounded after a member of the public spotted the man drifting in the tiny dinghy just after 7.30pm.
The Redcar lifeboat was alerted and when they tried bring him on board, the man, in his mid-thirties, refused point blank to be rescued.
He told them he wanted to paddle to Norway.
Another lifeboat from Redcar and the Teesmouth lifeboat were also launched and the Staithes crew were put on standby, but the man stayed in his dinghy.
Police were alerted and a member of the Redcar crew, an off-duty police inspector, David Cammish, and a psychologist tried to talk him to safety.
‘He was in real danger, although he perhaps didn't appreciate it,’ said a spokesman for Tyne Tees coastguard.
Eventually, as darkness began to fall just after 9pm, he went on board a rescue boat and was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
He was last night described as ‘safe and well’.
It is understood he was reported missing from a dependency unit at South Cleveland hospital earlier in the day.
Alison Marchant/Alice Maude-Roxby: Photographic Installations at Cleveland Art Gallery, Middlesbrough THE difference in scale is what catches the eye first.
Alison Marchant's black and white photographs of derelict interiors are roughly life-size, so the spectator has to stand well back to take everything in.
Alice Maude-Roxby's tiny, even miniscule, compositions, call for a nose distance of mere inches.
Despite that, these two women photographers complement one another well, sharing a feeling for time and space, and expressing thoughtfulness about these elements.
They also have a similar technical approach in the use of superimposed images which encompass more than one viewpoint and stimulate ideas.
Marchant builds up a factual record of dereliction in Stepney with the intention of conveying a sense of loss.
In Homeless History a blown-up snapshot of a young woman, circa 1930, is placed at the entrance to a room where paper peels away from black mould, shattered plaster exposes beams and woodwork is broken.
Her fresh-faced expression gazing as it were on the threshold of life is a poignant reminder of the passing of time and finite nature of dreams.
The artist believes ‘When buildings are lost, history is silent.’
Surely history is silent?
Works of this kind serve to make it visible.
I do not altogether share her regret at the loss of such places.
Although something valuable undoubtedly disappeared when tight-knit inner city communities were dispersed to bleak estates and high rise flats, you only have to look her shot of a dank backyard with wall so high it blocks out sunlight, to recognise that life there was not halcyon either.
Maude-Roxby's neat sequence of small Coastline photographs, reminiscent of early amateur snaps, is a perfect device for describing the process of remembering.
The effect is rather like peeping into someone's mind and glimpsing snatches of recalled images, thoughts and conversation.
A showcase contains some of the cut-outs that are superimposed in her shots.
Especially clever is the marching forest of minute pine trees chiselled with a surgical knife from the pages of a book (product of wood pulp).
The exhibition continues until June 20.
Pru Farrier
FOOTBALL:
Debt-ridden North Shields, who enter the HFS Loans League in August as Northern Counties East League champions, are to sell their Appleby Park ground for £540,000 for private residential development.
They will share fellow-HFS club Whitley Bay's ground after paying debts of about £400,000.
Information plea after copiers raid
POLICE are appealing for information  following a burglary at a Middlesbrough business centre in which over £40,000 worth of photocopiers and fax machines were stolen.
The break-in took place at the System Business Machines premises on the town's Britannia Park industrial estate.
Middlesbrough CID ask asked local businesses to be on their guard against people selling the equipment which also included panafax fax machines.
Anyone with information is asked to telephone Middlesbrough 326326.
Stabbing incident:
A 25-year-old mother was helping police last night after a stabbing incident in Eastcroft Road, Grangetown, Middlesbrough.
The incident happened shortly before noon yesterday after which Alec Patrick Wilkinson, 26, was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital suffering from a stab wound in the back.
His condition last night was ‘satisfactory.’
Court appearance:
An 18-year-old man of no fixed abode appeared at Teesside magistrates court yesterday charged with aggravated burglary in connection with an incident involving a 58-year-old woman in her home in North Ormesby on Thursday.
The woman was uninjured in the incident.
He was remanded in custody yesterday.
Jumble galore:
The Mothers Union is holding a jumble sale at All Saints Chuch hall, South Avenue, Dormanstown today from 10am-12 noon.
Guided walk:
A guided walk around the South Cleveland Heritage Centre starts from the centre at Margrove Park, near Guisborough, at 10am tomorrow.
Caravans stolen:
Detectives are investigating the theft of two caravans worth a total of £11,000 from Throston Grange Farm in Hartlepool.
They were taken sometime between Wednesday and 10am on Thursday.
Anyone with information is asked to contact police on (0429) 221151.
Making tracks:
Miniature steam engine rides, explorer trails, films and talks celebrating the mineral railway line past of the Castle Eden Walkway Country Park, near Thorpe Thewles, Stockton, run tomorrow and Bank Holiday Monday.
Sale first:
Miltoun House, Guisborough, the residential care home for adults recovering from mental illness, is holding its first jumble sale at Sunnyfield House today from 9.30am to 12.30pm.
Pensioner dies in road smash
A MAN in his seventies died and another was badly hurt in a crash which blocked a busy Yorkshire coast road for two hours yesterday morning.
The pensioner, from Leeds, died when his maroon FSO car crashed head on with a van on the A64 Malton bypass in North Yorkshire.
Van driver Colin Brown, from Scarborough, was yesterday satisfactory in York District Hospital.
Inquest opens:
An inquest opened yesterday on two teenagers who died in an old quarry pond.
James Norman Bainbridge, 16, of Beachdale Close, Station Town, and John Clint Robson, 15, of Market Crescent, Wingate, east Durham, were in a boat that capsized on Glass's pond at Wingate, near Peterlee, on Tuesday.
Chain gang:
Chains of office for the mayors of Ashington, Newbiggin and Bedlingtonshire councils have been stolen from the Woodhorn Church Museum in Newbiggin, Northumberland.
Big catch:
The fishing fleets at Scarborough and Whitby have broken all records despite the recession.
Scarborough landings last financial year reached over £4.3m, and Whitby's were £4.2m Sent for trial: Scarborough nursing home care assistant Carol McCausland, 29, of Sands Lane, was committed for trial at York Crown Court yesterday accused of stealing £3,700 from a resident.
She also faced eight charges of forgery.
Scarborough magistrates granted her bail.
Arts awards:
Prize-winning North-East composer John Gasken yesterday launched the 1992 Northern Electric Arts Awards.
Mr Gasken won the performing arts category of the awards back in 1990 with his nationally acclaimed opera, Golem, staged by the Northern Sinfonia and Northern Stage.
Cash boost:
Young patients at Newcastle's Freeman Hospital will benefit from a gift of £1,120 from 49 probationary Durham police constables who raised the cash with a sponsored swim.
Poet's visit:
Caribbean poet Kamau Brathwaite is visiting the NorthEast for a five-week residency from Tuesday as part of the Arts Council's Writers on Tour scheme.
His  itinerary will include a talk and reading at Poetry Live in Middlesbrough, workshops in Berwick and Hexham, readings in Newcastle and Darlington, and talks to pupils in schools at Darlington, Hexham and Bishop Auckland.
Dogs ban:
A ban on dogs on parts of Redcar and Saltburn beaches in Cleveland comes full into force this Bank Holiday weekend.
Signs warn owners that they risk a £100 fine for breaking the bylaws, which are in force from May to September.
Gates gone:
Tyneside police are investigating a spate of thefts of wrought iron garden gates.
They believe they may be stolen to order for someone who is renovating them for resale.
Spare rod:
Fisherman Malcolm Gibson has a new rod after a youth threw his in the sea.
Ashington police bought a new rod and reel for Mr Gibson, who is mentally handicapped.
Average selection
MY ATTENTION has been drawn to the letter from Muriel Green (HAS May 5), chairwoman of the education committee, North Tyneside Council, in which she defends the comprehensive school ideal.
In her letter she claims that because CTCs select their students and therefore ‘turn away children who live in the same street as the school’ parents have less choice.
At Macmillan College we select only because we are overwhelmed by applications and by selection we can thus ensure that we do have a fully comprehensive intake drawn from all parts of our catchment area.
Our annual intake is selected so as to reflect the national average and range of ability.
J.C.
Paddock, Principal, Macmillan College, PO Box 8, Stockton Road, Middlesbrough.
A NEW child psychiatry service has been officially launched in the grounds of Middlesbrough's St Luke's and South Cleveland Hospitals.
The service is part of the Roseberry Centre and was officially opened by Paul Marsden, chairman of South Tees Health Health Authority.
He said: ‘The provision of child psychiatry health service in South Tees is an important development in the services we offer to the local population and one of which we are tremendously proud.’
The Roseberry Centre children's department has 12 day places, an outpatient facility and its own classroom and teaching staff.
A NEW bus service was launched yesterday, heralding the start of a campaign to see less cars in the North York Moors National Park.
The national park is working with five bus operators to provide Sunday services into the park from surrounding towns and cities, including Darlington, Northallerton, Stockton, Middlesbrough and York.
The new services started just days after the Countryside Commission called for more people to travel to the countryside by public transport or face car bans at popular spots.
Bill Breakell, the national park's tourism officer, said: ‘If car congestion continues to grow in some parts of the park it may prove necessary to consider car free zones with access only by bus, foot or cycle.’
Low fare policies £1.50 adult return anywhere in the park will be used to persuade visitors to catch the bus.
Moorsbus operates every Sunday until the end of September and there is a Discovery Walk linked to the service every day it runs.
DETECTIVES are hunting the killer of a friendly bus driver gunned down as he walked up the driveway to his North-East home.
The body of Kevin McEvoy was discovered at 7.15am yesterday by a 14-year-old girl on the first day of her new job as a papergirl.
Police chiefs, who called a Press conference last night to appeal for help from the public, are baffled by the shooting.
Neighbours in Greta Avenue, Hartlepool, heard gunshots around midnight on Saturday, but did not call the police.
Mr McEvoy's wife, Carol, was out at the time, and the couple's two daughters were away on holiday.
Yesterday, neighbours told of their shock at the murder in their quiet road in a pleasant part of the town.
Elizabeth Parkinson, 71, described the McEvoy family as ‘quiet’.
She said: ‘They seemed very nice, but I didn't have a lot to do with them.
I heard two loud bangs as I was watching the television.’
Next door neighbour Les Dawson said he did not know the McEvoy family well, but added: ‘They seemed all right to me.
They always spoke and said hello.
‘I heard a bang and looked out to see a car parked directly opposite the house go away up the street.
‘We are shocked.
You don't expect something like this to happen.’
Mr McEvoy worked as a part-time coach driver for Durham Travel Services in Hetton-le-Hole a year ago.
He left to take a permanent job.
Eric Bowerbank, an engineer with the company, said last night: ‘He was a lovely bloke.
He wouldn't hurt a fly.
He wouldn't have harmed anyone in the world.’
It is believed Mr McEvoy was a keen photographer who took wedding photographs in his spare time.
Mr McEvoy's body and car were removed from the driveway of his home yesterday morning.
He was later identified by his brother-in-law, Philip Douglas.
A postmortem examination at Middlesbrough General Hospital carried out by Home Office pathologist Dr James Sunter revealed that Mr McEvoy, who worked for a local bus company, died of a gunshot wound.
Police do not yet know what sort of gun was used.
The man leading the hunt for the killer, Det Chief Insp Barry Hill, said forensic experts from Wetherby had been to the scene.
‘The motive for his murder has not yet been established,’ he said.
‘We need to trace any members of the public who know Mr McEvoy and in particular anybody who saw him yesterday evening.’
Mr Hill added: ‘We are taking this stage by stage and trying to find the truth.’
Police believe Mr McEvoy had been using his blue Ford Sierra car, registered D234 HAJ, on Saturday evening.
About 40 officers are involved in the hunt and an incident room has been set up.
Anyone with information is asked to ring Middlesbrough 326326 and ask for the Hartlepool murder incident room.
Bells ring after long silence
YORK Minster's bells rang out over the city for the first time in six months at the weekend their longest break since the Second World War.
Major repairs in the bell tower needing extensive scaffolding had forced their silence.
But on Saturday afternoon peals rang out as the York Minster Society of Change-Ringers called Christians to Evensong.
Their silence during the war when Winston Churchill ordered they could only be rung as a warning of invasion.
Four injured:
Four people, including a child, were injured in a multiple pile-up involving a minibus and five cars in thick fog on the moor road between Whitby and Guisborough at the entrance to the Scaling Dam car park on Saturday.
All the injured were taken to hospital in Middlesbrough, but none were seriously hurt.
Boat rescue:
Scarborough lifeboat was launched yesterday to go to the aid of a motor cruiser Sea Spray after it broke down off Cayton Bay.
The crippled boat was later towed back to Scarborough harbour.
No one was hurt.
Park blaze risk prompts alert
THE recent hot spell has led Yorkshire Dales National Park officials to call for help from the public to prevent moorland blazes.
In some areas of the park the vegetation is tinder dry and poses a real risk of a serious moorland fire.
Visitors are being asked to be on their guard against fire and not to use stoves; to dispose of cigarette ends and matches carefully and immediately report any sign of fire to the fire brigade.
Three arrested:
Three men were arrested following a police operation in Birtley, near Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, on Saturday night.
Police officers from Chester-le-Street arrested the men at a house in the Barley Mow area of the town but have  released no further details of the incident.
Tyre blaze:
Vandals sparked a blaze when they set fire to old tyres at the former Walker Tyres site, in West Auckland, early yesterday.
The tyre warehouse burned down on bonfire night last year but hundreds of tyres were left buried under rubble on the site.
Siege man stable:
Keith Pringle was last night said to be ‘stable’ in Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Pringle, 24, of Thirlmere Road, Darlington, suffered a jaw injury when shot by a police marksman at the end of an Easter siege incident in Darlington.
In range:
A 22-bay driving range is to be an additional attraction beside the new golf course being built at Hunley Hall, Brotton.
Long ride:
Three Cleveland motorcyclists set out to ride 2,000 miles to the four compass points of mainland UK in aid of charity.
The riders, Albert Redshaw, Alistair MacNab and Malcolm Scott, are hoping to raise £1,800 to buy specialist car safety seats for young children born with dislocated hips.
Chairman's hat-trick: Coun Norman Lantsbery had been elected chairman of Loftus Town Council for the third year in succession.
Fog hazards:
Two accidents  occurred in less than three hours on the A171 Whitby to Guisborough road during Saturday's foggy conditions.
After the first incident four people were taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital with minor injuries following a multiple accident at Scaling Dam.
The second accident occured three miles away near The Jolly Sailors pub, Two cars were involved but there were no injuries.
Driver trapped:
Firemen were called to release British Steel worker Mohabat Ali Din, 35, of Tollesby Road, Middlesbrough, who was trapped in his Ford Sierra car which collided with a tractor unit at the new bridge between Lackenby and Cleveland works.
Home blaze:
Firefighters tackled a blaze which severely damaged a bungalow in Micklow Close, Redcar, and caused smoke damage of adjoining properties.
In Court The following case was dealt with by Easingwold magistrates:
David Ernest Lovegreen of Manor House Farm, Hutton Henry, Hartlepool, was convicted of using goods vehicle and exceeding permitted gross weight and permitted axle weight, fined £250 plus £58 costs.
A TEENAGE papergirl who found the body of murdered bus driver Kevin McEvoy on her first day at work was back doing her rounds yesterday.
Jackie Hart, 14, was praised by her employer, newsagent Geoff Thomas, for her courage after she discovered the body of gunned down Mr McEvoy in a pool of blood.
Mr Thomas, of the Bungalow Store, Stratford Road, Hartlepool, said he believed Jackie and a 16-year-old paperboy who she ran to for help had handled the situation well.
He said: ‘They are very sensible.
I think they behaved admirably for their ages.
‘I wouldn't wish this on anybody but I am proud of the way they conducted themselves and then went through the ordeal with the police.’
Jackie, of Stockton Road, Hartlepool, was back at work yesterday doing the same round.
Mr Thomas sent her out with another paperboy to make sure she was all right.
He said: ‘I will keep her on the same round but I will keep an eye on her and may switch the rounds.
We'll just see how it goes.’
Jackie discovered the body of Mr McEvoy, 50, who was shot dead outside his home in Greta Avenue, Hartlepool, on Saturday night.
Detectives are still trying to trace people who knew Mr McEvoy.
They also want to talk to anyone in the Greta Avenue, Caledonian Road, Fernwood Avenue area at around 11pm on Saturday night or anyone who saw Mr McEvoy and his blue Ford Sierra car registration number D234 HAJ that night.
Acting Det Chief Insp Barry Hill said: ‘At this stage we will be making inquiries in relation to all his movements.
‘All we would ask is that any person with information comes forward.’
Mr McEvoy's wife Carol, 47, is being comforted by relatives.
She was out working as a care assistant when Mr McEvoy was killed.
The police have traced one of his daughters to break the news to her, but have so far failed to find his second daughter who is also abroad on holiday.
Mr Hill said the murder still appeared to be motiveless.
Anyone with information should contact the Hartlepool murder incident room by ringing Middlesbrough 326326.
IMPROVEMENTS at the double are on the way for shops in Middlesbrough.
A facelift for the properties in the town's Linthorpe Road and in the Market Place and Kings Road, North Ormesby, have been agreed by Middlesbrough Council's planning councillors.
Work on the properties, 134–150 Linthorpe Road, 31–38 Market Place and 1–42 Kings Road, will involve roof and gutter repairs and improvements to the upper stories of the buildings.
The total cost of the work will be around £85,800.
World problems top of weekend agenda
AS world leaders journey to Rio for the Earth Summit meeting, a gathering at Middlesbrough's St Mary's Centre will be facing up to some of the issues confronting world leaders in Brazil.
Green Parties in the North-East have organised a simulation exercise on Saturday for individual groups concerned with development and the global environment.
They will be trying to reach agreement on world problems like climatic change, forest loss, toxic waste, water and development aid.
Anyone who would like to attend should contact organiser Peter Goodwin on Redcar 472249.
Stolen drugs:
Police warned that valium tablets stolen in a burglary at a flat in Northcote Street, Stockton, are harmful to children.
They were in a brown bottle.
Serious fire:
Police believe that a fire which extensively damaged an unoccupied house in Ormesby Bank, Ormesby, Middlesbrough, was started deliberately.
Anyone with information is asked to contact South Bank CID.
Balloons grounded:
International botanist David Bellamy refused to release 1,000 balloons at the official opening of Middlesbrough's botanic centre saying they would kill birds and wildlife.
He said he would rather give the balloons to the children to take home.
Front accident girl recovering
A NINE-YEAR-OLD girl is recovering in hospital after being struck by a car near the North-East coast at the weekend.
Lynn Whirley Sharp, of Carlton Street, Hartlepool, suffered head injuries in the accident on the seafront at Seaton Carew on Saturday.
She was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital where yesterday her condition was described as ‘ill but stable’.
Police have appealed for witnesses.
Boat reprieve:
Scarborough fishermen may again be allowed to store small boats at a seafront car park next winter after complaints from the Harbour Users Association.
Scarborough Council had barred storage on the Eastborough car park but is set to change its mind if owners agree to a charge of about £60.
Green cash:
The Department of the Environment has approved an application by Scarborough Council to spend £88,000 on vital equipment, including mini-bins and a garden waste shredder, for its newly-introduced recycling scheme.
Car torched:
Police in Whitby are investigating an incident in which a car was found on fire yesterday morning on the North York Moors.
The car, a Vauxhall Cavalier reported stolen from the Wakefield area, had crashed into the narrow bridge at Eller Beck, on the A169 Whitby-Pickering road near RAF Fylingdales.
Ancient ritual:
The ancient Penny Hedge ceremony, which dates from feudal times and has been promoted in recent times by the English Tourist Board, takes place in Whitby tomorrow.
The ceremony, staged each eve of Ascension Day, entails a hedge of twigs being planted at nine o'clock in the upper harbour as a penance for the killing of a hermit by a hunting party made up of landed gentry.
PENSIONERS in East Cleveland could be coming in from the cold as far as weather payments are concerned.
Langbaurgh Coun Steve Kay has persuaded the Department of Social Security to take another look at the way the area is divided for cold weather payments.
He was concerned that residents missed out on last year's winter warming cash  because they came under the Whitby weather station where temperatures are warmer than in Boosbeck, Lingdale, Stanghow and Moorsholm villages.
Meanwhile people living in areas such as Guisborough and Middlesbrough received cold weather payments on temperatures taken at RAF Leeming.
The DSS is considering the grouping of the Lockwood parish with Guisborough or providing its own station.
Thousand of households would benefit from pylons scheme, inquiry told Thousands of households in the area would benefit from the new pylons scheme proposed for Cleveland and North Yorkshire, a barrister told a public inquiry which opened this week.
And the countryside of Cleveland and North Yorkshire was not considered beautiful enough to merit undergrounding the power project.
Mr George Bartlett QC opened the case for the National Grid Company at the inquiry in Northallerton on Tuesday with a detailed explanation of why upgrading of the present electricity network was needed.
He argued that fewer houses at the Cleveland end of the line would be affected by overhead lines than at present because 31km of existing pylons would be demolished as part of the scheme.
More than 4,400 Teesside homes now stood within 200 metres of overhead lines, almost 900 of them closer than 50 metres.
Under the preferred Southern route just 234 would be within 200 metres of the new line and none nearer than 50 metres.
‘There can be no doubt at all in view of this that replacement of the existing line by the one proposed would be a substantial environmental improvement and not, as is suggested, an environmental disbenefit to the area of Teesside,’ said Mr Bartlett.
During the opening statement at Hambleton Community Centre, where most of the two-month hearing will take place, he poured cold water on the main arguments of the 8,500 objectors to the scheme.
EXTRA COST Although local authorities, countryside groups and individuals had called for sections of the line from Lackenby to Picton and Picton to Shipton to be laid underground, the area did not merit the extra expense, he said.
None of the five proposed routes crossed areas regarded as of the highest landscape value.
‘North Yorkshire and Hambleton councils seek undergrounding of 20km of land east of Northallerton and Thirsk,’ he said.
‘None of that area has been thought in the past as worthy of structure or local planning notation for its landscape qualities.
‘Even in the Kirby Sigston and Codbeck area, in landscape terms the most significant part of the route, undergrounding can not be justified.’
Undergrounding cables cost £12m. a kilometre compared to £500,000 for overhead cable.
The operation also entailed taking a huge swathe of land permanently to allow repairs and maintenance to take place and would disrupt farming much more than pylons would.
The basis of Mr Bartlett's argument was that NGC had a legal obligation under the 1989 Electricity Act to link power from generators into the grid system.
The company was also legally bound to promote competition in the industry and ensure electricity supplies met standards of supply and quality.
Upgrading the existing cable by means of a new 400,000-volt cable was the only way to ensure sufficient carrying capacity for supplies from the new Teesside Power station under construction at Wilton, those at Hartlepool and Blythe and exports from Scotland.
ASTONISHING ‘It would be astonishing, given the standards, not to apply them in this case,’ said Mr Bartlett.
‘At issue is a major part of the transmission system catering for a very substantial part of the country's generation capacity.’
For three years following the completion of the Wilton power station next spring the NGC had special permission to operate below the legal transmission standards until the new line was built.
During this time a special tripping mechanism would be used if adverse weather or other factors caused faults and problems on the line.
Estimates in the NGC's seven-year plan, published in March, that power supplies would exceed demand by almost 60 per cent by the late 1990s were almost certainly inaccurate.
The figure was based on the number of agreements signed between NGC and power generating companies but it was highly unlikely all these would come to fruition.
The statistics also took no account of power station closures in the next few years, said Mr Bartlett.
Rights and wrongs of government planning policy which allowed permission to be granted for power stations without regard to transmission should not be raised at the inquiry.
NO PLACE ‘There are those who argue the Secretary of State was wrong to grant consent to Wilton power station and they say that, because he was wrong consent, should be refused for transmission connections,’ he said.
‘Such an argument has no place at this inquiry.’
He denied objectors' claims that the line anticipated new power stations would be built on Teesside and would pressurise the area into accepting more gas-fired stations.
The Secretary of State had already said future applications to build power stations would be considered on their own merit and not because there was spare capacity.
On the matter of health risks from electro-magnetic fields, Mr Bartlett repeated the NGC's longstanding argument that there was no proven link.
Even directly below high-voltage lines levels of exposure to EMF were lower than the safety guidelines issued by the National Radiological Protection Board.
ROUTES Five routes two for the Lackenby to Picton section and three for the southern section were put forward by the NGC.
The Southern Option running from Lackenby, skirting residential parts of Middlesbrough and crossing open country to Picton was preferred by the company to the Portrack route which runs North, crosses and re-crosses the Tees and roughly follows the A19.
Of the three routes from Picton to Shipton, the western route was preferred.
It runs closest to Thirsk on the west side of the A19.
The other options were a route roughly following the A19 and one which ran parallel and close to the existing power line, skirting the North York Moors National Park.
Mr Bartlett said it would be possible to combine elements of several lines and there was a tolerance of 200 metres either side of the route to overcome engineering and land problems.
There was a choice of pylon style suitable for the routes, including the low height tower which had two rather than three crossarms and the modernistic folded plate tower which resembled a huge lamp post.
A multi-circuit pylon capable of carrying the existing line and the new cable and therefore replacing the present line rather than adding to it could also be considered for parts of the route.
Mr Bartlett's opening statement was backed up by evidence from Mr Eric Eunson, NGC head of systems development, with detailed facts and figures.
Timetable for hearing
Objectors to the pylons have the chance to question the National Grid Company when cross-examination begins next week.
Because of the Bank Holiday, the hearing resumes at 2pm instead of 10am on Tuesday, when local authorities' barristers take the floor.
Their questions are due to go on throughout Wednesday with other objecting organisations and individuals starting their cross-examination on Thursday.
Although the programme could be altered from day to day, it is expected that objectors' evidence will begin the following Tuesday.
The inquiry runs from Tuesday to Thursday (10am-4.30pm) and Friday (10am-2pm) each week and is expected to last at least two months.
There is a break from June 19 to July 7, after which the hearing switches to the Marton Hotel and Country Club, near Middlesbrough, before returning to Northallerton for the final stages.
Mr John Lindsay (left) and Mr Trevor Graham, the Department of the Environment planning inspectors conducting the pylons inquiry.
The two routes showing alternative ways of taking the power lines from Wilton to Picton.
There are three suggested routes for the pylons taking power lines from Picton to Shipton.
Deaths pact inquest opens
THE inquests into the deaths of a Scarborough couple who were found dead in a suicide pact at nearby Wykeham Forest on Saturday opened yesterday.
Barry Pexton 45, a former dog handler in the Sultan of Brunei's army, and his wife Carol, 38, left their rented home, West End Cottage, Staxton, near Scarborough, last Wednesday telling their two daughters they were going for a drink.
They were later found dead in their fume filled car.
Evidence of identification was given by Mr Pexton's brother, Jeffrey Pexton, of Bransholme, Hull.
The hearing was adjourned to a date to be fixed.
Stabbing charge:
A man alleged to have stabbed his girlfriend with a kitchen knife after a domestic dispute was released on bail by Scarborough magistrates yesterday.
Alan Leslie Prew, 27, of Edgehill Road, Scarborough, was charged with twice assaulting Jane Binns causing actual bodily harm and one charge of maliciously wounding her.
The case was adjourned until June 17.
Faulty shoe:
Woolworth's are appealing to shoppers to return a make of children's sandal which has been found to be faulty.
The Ladybird sandal, white with four straps across the toes and priced £4.99 or £5.99, has a fault in the rear strap and could lead to injury if the metal softener pushes through the fabric.
Customers will get a full refund and can send the sandals to Customer Relations Department, Woolworths plc, Woolworth House, 242–246 Marylebone Road, London NW1 6JL.
Victim freed:
A woman was cut free from the wreckage of a car after a road accident in Elston Avenue, Acklam, Middlesbrough at about 6.05pm last night.
The woman and another passenger were taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Church watch plea:
Christ Church in North Shields is to ask the local community to help combat attacks on churches.
A Northumbria Church Watch scheme is being launched today to encourage a positive attitude to deter criminals.
SHOOTING victim Jason Ward has had the plaster removed from his shattered limbs.
Mr Ward, 20, of Westminster Road, Darlington, left hospital in Middlesbrough a month ago against medical advice because he could not bear to be in the same building as Keith Pringle.
Mr Ward's mother Pat, of Neasham Road, Darlington, said: ‘Jason's got the plasters off now and he's able to walk about.
He's picking up well.’
Yesterday, Det Supt Keith Readman revealed police will have to wait at least another month to interview 24-year-old Pringle, of Thirlmere Road, Darlington, who needs further surgery.
A siege in Lyonette Road, Darlington, ended when a police marksman shot Pringle in the jaw.
Two days earlier Mr Ward and Pauline Rees, 43, of Lyonette Road, Darlington, had been shot in separate incidents.
Mrs Rees's daughter Leanne, 21, the mother of Pringle's two children, was taken hostage on Easter Sunday.
SHOOTING victim Jason Ward who discharged himself from hospital a month ago has had the plaster removed from his shattered limbs.
Mr Ward, of Westminster Road, Darlington, left Middlesbrough General Hosptal, against medical advice because he could not bear to be in the same building as gunman Keith Pringle.
Mr Ward's mother Pat, of Neasham Road, Darlington, said: ‘Jason's got the plasters off now and he's able to walk about.
He's picking up well.
He's a lot more cheerful.’
Yesterday Det Supt Keith Readman, head of Durham South CID, revealed police will have to wait at least another month to interview 24-year-old Pringle, of Thirlmere Road, Darlington.
A 47-hour siege in Lyonette Road, Darlington, ended when a police marksman shot Pringle in the jaw.
Two days earlier 20-year-old Mr Ward and 43-year-old Pauline Rees, of Lyonette Road, Darlington, had been shot in separate incidents.
Mrs Rees's 21-year-old daughter Leanne, the mother of Pringle's two children, was taken hostage on Easter Sunday.
Mr Readman said Pringle had to undergo major surgery to his jaw in the middle of June before police could interview him.
PARAMEDIC Moira Moore is trying to work her passage to Australia to attend an emergency care seminar which, she said, could benefit Cleveland ambulance service.
Speakers from many countries will be attending the October event in Brisbane to discuss pre-hospital care.
Moira, of Town Farm, Middlesbrough, is well-known as a first aid instructor and has trained many people.
The return fare to the conference is £1,800 and it is felt that Cleveland Ambulance cannot justify the expense of public money on one person.
But the Service will allow her time off and she is prepared to make her own arrangements regarding food and accommodation.
‘I am willing to use my skills as a paramedic to accompany someone requiring medical care or to instruct first aid to any organisation in exchange for the flight,’ she said.
Any offers of help would be appreciated by Moira at Ambulance Training (0642) 823171.
Girl steps into shoes of mayoress
A NINE-YEAR-OLD Stockton girl had the time-of-her life when she became the Mayor's escort for the day.
The Mayoress, Marie Smailes, was away, so the Mayor, Coun Stephen Smailes, asked their god-daughter Emma Lee, of Patterdale Avenue, Newham Grange Estate, to stand in as first lady.
‘She had a splendid time visiting the Radio Show and sitting in the Mayor's parlour.
She carried out her position with great dignity,’ said Coun Smailes.
Healthy idea:
Youngsters at St Paulinus RC Primary School in Guisborough are running their own health centre complete with cafe as part of a mini-enterprise venture.
Till theft:
Thieves took a cash register and a quantity of food worth £650 after breaking into a cafe in Zetland Road, Loftus.
Thieves who broke into the Co-op in Skelton High Street, stole £60 in cash.
Police are seeking information.
New face:
Coun John Elders is the new chairman of Hartlepool Conservative Party, replacing Marjorie Swainston.
He is chairman of his own property investment and contracting company.
Noise check:
Noise monitoring equipment costing £5,000 will be bought by Cleveland County Council to fulfil its obligation under the Noise at Work Regulations.
Cars damaged:
Vandals left a trail of damage in East Cleveland at the weekend when they poured paint stripper over two cars a red Vauxhall estate and a grey Opel hatchback in Bolckow Street, Skelton.
A Ford Capri was found burned out on the A171 near Guisborough after thieves removed the radio and cassette player.
Driver freed:
Fire crews released a woman driver after a collision between two cars on Earlsdon Avenue, Acklam, Middlesbrough, last night.
She was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital suffering from shock.
Quicker calls:
A new telephone system has been installed to speed up the operations of Middlesbrough Borough and Cleveland County Councils.
New jobs:
A photocopier sales and servicing firm has created 15 jobs by opening an office in Middlesbrough.
Systemform Business Machines won the contract to install and service 700 copiers for Cleveland County Council.
Rolling effect:
Falling school rolls in Marske have had no effect yet at Bydales.
Head teacher Peter Wilson said 17 pupils more than expected will start in September with most from outside the Marske area.
POLICE in Cleveland last night warned people depositing cash to be extra vigilant after a company director was robbed outside a bank.
The 51-year-old man was about to deposit cash in the Midland Bank in Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough, when he stopped his car in the bank's back yard.
He was approached by two men wearing balaclavas who assaulted him.
They snatched two bags containing a large amount of cash and ran off to a waiting a white Vauxhall Nova GTE, registration number F235 BKM.
It was found abandoned in West Row, Eston.
The injured man, from Longlands Garage, was taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital and treated for minor injuries.
Acting Det Insp Steve Richards urged people taking money to the bank on a regular basis to vary the routes and times.
A terrified bodybuilder was held at knifepoint by three burglars as they ransacked his disabled parents' home.
Anthony Bowen, 21, was bound and gagged after the raiders said they would kill him after they couldn't find any money.
They escaped from the house in Siddington Walk, Pallister Park, with £150 cash, a TV and video and jewellery.
Anthony's parents were on holiday and his brother was out.
Man charged with murder
A CIVIL servant accused of murdering his 75-year-old invalid father 14 years ago appeared before Newcastle magistrates yesterday.
Douglas Graham, 43, a bachelor, of Burnopfield Gardens, Denton Burn, Newcastle, was accused of murdering Henry Graham at the former family home at Berkley Terrace, Lemington, Newcastle, in September 1978.
He was further remanded on conditional bail for three weeks.
Diploma courses:
The University of Teesside is combining with local colleges of further education to offer BTEC higher national diplomas in business and finance.
Cleveland College, Redcar, Kirby College and Longlands Colege, Middlesbrough, Hartlepool College and Stockton and Billingham College will offer options for the awards.
Ash stars:
Actress Leslie Ash, star of TV's Cat's Eyes, will appear with Cannon and Ball in Darlington Civic Theatre's Christmas pantomime Babes In The Wood, a theatre spokesman confirmed yesterday.
Miss Ash lives in Leeds with husband Lee Chapman, centre forward with Leeds United.
Charity box theft:
Police are hunting a thief who stole a charity collection box from a shop in Clayton Street, Newcastle, yesterday.
The box, with a nominal value of £5, was for the Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow trust.
A QUICK-thinking driver released his seat belt and jumped into the passenger seat when he saw another car about to smash into his door, a court heard.
The driver's quick action helped him escape injury when Ian Hooker's black Ford Escort car crashed into him in Marton Road, Middlesbrough.
Yesterday Hooker, 19, appeared before Teesside Magistrates and admitted reckless driving, driving without insurance and having two defective tyres.
Hooker, of Chestnut Drive, Marton, Middlesbrough, was fined £290 and was ordered to pay £30 costs.
He was disqualified from driving for six months.
Wilf Orton, prosecuting, said Hooker, driving at up to 50 miles per hour in a 30 miles per hour limit, had been trying to over-take four slower moving vehicles when he hit the other car side on.
UNEMPLOYED Kevin Brown made off without paying for petrol in his car, a court heard.
But ten days later he returned to the same Thornaby service station, filled up with petrol and then paid by cheque.
A sharp-eyed assistant took down his registration number and contacted the police.
Yesterday Brown, 19, of Corder Road, Middlesbrough, appeared before Teesside magistrates and admitted making off without payment.
He was fined £75 and ordered to pay £25 costs and £15.77 compensation for the petrol.
Raiders' computer haul tops £15,000 COMPUTER equipment worth more than £15,000 was stolen in a break-in over the Bank Holiday weekend at offices in Middlesbrough.
Mac Products UK, whose premises are on the town's Brignell Road, was burgled between Friday and Tuesday.
The raiders kicked in the front door and forced interior doors into the office area where they selected 14 Apple computers with asssociated equipment.
Police said a vehicle must have been used to carry away all the equipment and officers are asking anyone with information to contact them on Middlesbrough 326326.
Work taster:
It's off to work for 16 pupils of Kilton Thorpe Special School at Brotton, who are going all over Cleveland gaining work experience in a variety of jobs ranging from police work, superstore and shop workers, dog handling to children's nurseries.
Sitting targets:
Residents of William Street, North Skelton, have petitioned Langbaurgh Council as they fear their houses and cars are sitting targets for vandals during hours of darkness.
Shed break-in: Intruders raided a shed in Hutton Rudby.
They stole two fans and two convector radiators worth £510 from the building in Blue Barn Lane.
Telescope stolen:
Burglars forced their way into a farm house in Kildale.
Two candlesticks and a brass telescope worth £150 were taken from the property at East Green, Beck Farm.
Thieves strike:
Thieves were branded despicable by police yesterday after they stole a charity honesty box.
The blue cylinder with a red label had been left on a plant stall in Park Rise, Great Ayton, to collect money for the Yorkshire Cancer Fund.
It is thought to contain just £4.
Plan blocked:
Proposals for two detached homes in the tiny village of Newton Bewley were refused planning permission by members of Hartlepool Council's development control subcommittee yesterday.
Officials said they would lead to danger on the busy A689 which runs through the middle of the community.
But 22-year-old Alison Scott, who was hit in the back, says she will not let the incident cloud her life.
‘It makes you realise your life can be here one minute and gone the next,’ Alison told her mum in a trans-Atlantic telephone call.
The psychology and sociology student, who is on a research project at Maryland University, added: ‘I don't intend to let the person who did this to me affect my life in the future.’
Alison was returning from a night out with boyfriend Paul Reany, from Hemlington, Middlesbrough, and another friend, near the university when she was apparently shot from a passing car.
Her mother, June Scott, said: ‘This car slowed up near them.
All of a sudden she said ‘I think I've been shot’.
She felt this thing in her back.
The car revved up and made off.
It was that quick — quick as a flash.’
The bullet entered her back and exited through her chest, puncturing a lung and breaking a rib.
She spent 24 hours in the intensive care unit at Washington Hospital Centre — breaking the news to her family in a telephone call a week later.
Alison, who is flying back to Britain in two weeks, told her mother: ‘I am alive, I am fit.’
Mrs Scott said: ‘She has been very lucky.
It will be lovely to see her again.
She said she did not want any fuss, that she was fine, and everyone over there has been marvellous.’
Alison's general fitness helped keep her alive.
Mrs Scott said: ‘The people in the hospital said she is a healthy, very fit, strong girl.
She played in the women's basketball and used to ride her bike around the university.
She got herself very fit.’
Alison, of Trimdon Avenue, Middlesbrough, told her sister Karen, 26, she is in a great deal of pain because of her broken rib which will not mend for three months.
She has had an operation on her punctured lung.
A spokesman for Prince George County Police said there were no suspects, no witnesses and no motive for the attack.
The officer said Alison had not mentioned a car pulling up alongside or near them in her statement to the police.
‘From what we understand she heard a pop and that is when she noticed the pain in her back and found out she had been shot,’ the officer said.
A TRANSPORT pressure group is urging a rethink on the decision to build a bypass round a Cleveland town.
Transport 2000 claims that reopening a rail link to Guisborough could save taxpayers millions and remove the need for a bypass.
Cleveland County Council approved a detailed route plan for the multi-million pound road earlier this week.
But North-East Transport 2000  spokesman Brian Milnes said: ‘We think the railway could be reinstated for around £1m and take both passengers and freight off the roads reducing the need for a bypass.
‘Most of the cost is embankments and track and that is already there.
Two new halts could be installed for around £200,000.’
Mr Milnes said most of Guisborough's problems were caused by heavy lorries and tourist traffic, both of which could be alleviated by re-opening the railway, which would link into the Esk Valley, Middlesbrough to Whitby line.
Coun David Walsh, chairman of Cleveland County Council's transportation committee, said he sympathised with Transport 2000's view, but thought it was a separate issue to the bypass.
‘Personally, I would argue that there was a case for a commuter rail connection.
If the money was there, I think we should look at a link.
‘But the bypass is about the environmental impact of traffic travelling through Guisborough.
It is very much needed by the town, whether or not there is a rail link.’
A spokeswoman for British Rail said: ‘It would cost many millions to put the line back.
We don't have the money, but if Transport 2000 tell us where to find it, we will listen.’
A GROWING number of rape victims are coming to a Teesside-based support group for help.
Deputy co-ordinator John Hinchcliffe told Middlesbrough Victim Support's annual meeting that it was part of a wider increase in the group's work.
In 1990, Victim Support handled 3,500 inquiries.
This rose to 5,350 last year and the 1992 figure looks set to approach 6,500.
‘It's encouraging that more victims of serious sexual assault feel they can come to us, but it's also sad,’ said Mr Hinchcliffe.
‘Our figures show there is a need, but we are in the business where we want to be out of a job.’
Mr Hinchcliffe said the organisation had helped the relatives of 12 murder victims last year.
Victims of assault, wounding, robbery and sexual crimes were also given counselling but by far the greatest number of people (4,835) were given help after house burglaries.
‘We have a lot of work, but more volunteers are coming forward,’ said Mr Hinchcliffe.
‘This allows volunteers to specialise.’
ARMY veteran Tom Clarkson had a special date yesterday with part of a bomb which hit him in the head during World War Two.
The shrapnel shot through Tom's steel helmet and lodged in his temple during the epic fighting at Dunkirk.
But he survived his brush with death and eventually made it back to an English hospital.
And yesterday, Tom, now 76, and the piece of bomb were among the highlights of an exhibition celebrating the Dunkirk spirit at Middlesbrough's Dorman Museum.
The small but select exhibition, marking the bravery and  sacrifices of the armed forces and civilians, has been put  together by the the Teesside branch of the Dunkirk Veterans Association which has 83 active members.
The memorabilia at the museum in Linthorpe Road includes copies of secret orders about the evacuation, a Christmas card from a German POW camp, a censored postcard, a host of medals…and Tom's shrapnel.
Tom, of Wainstones Close, Great Ayton, was second in command of a battery at Dunkirk.
He recalled: ‘A piece of the bomb went through my steel helmet and lodged in my temple.
‘The fact I managed to get away was mainly due to another local man, Mark Powell, of Linthorpe, who died about four years ago.’
He was helped onto a stretcher, given treatment at a medical centre, and put onto a boat heading home.
He was one of the lucky ones, some had to wait hours, even days, he said.
Bob Swatman, 73, branch chairman, of Low Lane, Middlesbrough, had to wait 17 hours on the beach before he was eventually evacuated with 65 others by a fishing boat which landed at Margate Pier.
The boat went back to rescue others but was sank.
He said: ‘When we were waiting on the beach I don't think we considered our chances of survival.
We thought there was some sort of divine providence which would somehow or other get us away.
The exhibition marks the 52nd anniversary of the evacuation which took place from May 27 to June 4, 1940.
THE cases of two councillors charged with assaulting each other are to be heard together.
Cleveland County Council member John Garvey is alleged to have assaulted Middlesbrough Council's Mike J Carr.
Yesterday his case was adjourned until June 16 to tie in with Coun Garvey's private summons against Coun Carr in which he is alleged to have assaulted Coun Garvey.
Both allegations arise from the same incident in Middlesbrough Town Hall in October last year.
Coun Garvey, of Sandwell Avenue, Middlesbrough, faced committal proceedings to the Crown Court at yesterday's hearing.
But the case was adjourned.
Teesside magistrates also lifted reporting restrictions in the case.
Jimmy Watson, defending, said: ‘It is common ground there was a collision between the defendant and the principal prosecution witness within the Town Hall but thereafter there are divergences of fact.
‘Coun Carr alleges he was attacked by Coun Garvey and sustained actual bodily harm.
‘Coun Garvey alleges he was attacked by Coun Carr and sustained actual  bodily harm.’
Mr Watson said the police were called to investigate and Coun Garvey was charged.
Coun Carr, 33, of Newlands Road, Middlesbrough, was treated as the complainant throughout.
Coun Garvey took out a private summons alleging assault against Coun Carr.
Mr Watson said: ‘It is the intention of Coun Garvey as long as he retains control of his private prosecution to seek that it be directed to the crown court on the basis that the allegation against him is heading towards the crown court and it would be sensible to have the two alleged criminal acts tried arising out of the same incident tried before the same court.’
DETECTIVES have raided a house in their hunt for the brutal killer of a Hartlepool man.
They searched a property in the town's Birchill Gardens following the death of 50-year-old Kevin McEvoy.
They refused to say why they carried out the operation but stressed that no-one was arrested.
Acting Det Chief Insp Barry Hill, who is leading the murder investigation, confirmed that the house had been searched.
But he refused to comment on speculation that it was the home of a former girlfriend of Mr McEvoy.
The former bus driver was found gunned down in the driveway to his home in Greta Avenue on Sunday morning.
Detectives are so far at a loss to explain the reason for his death.
They have issued an appeal for witnesses and are particularly keen to trace the driver of a car seen leaving the area with its lights off on Saturday night.
Anyone with information should contact the police on Middlesbrough 326326.
FRESH calls for a bypass were made last night after a heavy goods vehicle hit the underside of a railway bridge in Cleveland.
A stretch of the A173 in Brotton may be closed for weeks following the accident, which saw masonry crash into the road.
The railway over the 12ft bridge near the junction of Coach Road and Brotton High Street is also closed after yesterday's drama.
Cleveland county councillor Peter Hayden, who represents Brotton, said: ‘I have heard two women were walking under the bridge just minutes before.
‘You shudder to think what might have happened.
I shall certainly be using this incident to press for priority to be given to a Skelton and Brotton bypass.’
British Rail's freight line, which runs across the top of the bridge, may re-open after strength tests today.
Only two trains to and from British Steel Skinningrove were due to use the bridge yesterday,’ said a British Rail spokeswoman.
Normally, ten or 12 trains a day servicing the Boulby Potash Mine use the bridge.
The mine is currently closed for a week's holiday.
The Renault lorry's trailer became wedged under the bridge's archway and a crane was brought to the scene to pull the vehicle free.
The driver of the vehicle, owned by Kayenne Trucking, of Grangetown, near Middlesbrough, was not injured.
But there was further drama when the crane's brakes failed and it slid into the cab of the lorry.
A British Rail spokeswoman could not say whether the lorry driver who was taking rolls of newspaper to Scarborough would face charges.
‘The incident is being investigated by British Transport Police and Cleveland Police to ascertain circumstances surrounding the accident,’ she added.
A Cleveland County Council spokesman said it would make a decision on re-opening the road after the strength tests today.
BR will drive trains over the bridge at walking speed.
THE misery caused by housing shortages will continue to grow unless the Government heeds a new report, claim North-East councils.
A report published today by the Audit Commission says local authorities are fighting a losing battle to bridge the gap between supply of and demand for rented accommodation.
North-East councils backed the findings of the report, which estimated an annual shortfall of 12,000 housing units and a maintenance backlog of £8.5bn nationwide.
Middlesbrough Council housing chairman Bob Brady said the Government was failing to address an extremely serious problem.
He added: ‘There is an ever-widening gap between housing needs and what the Government allows local authorities to borrow.’
Middlesbrough's 1992–3 Housing Investment Programme bid was £25m.
The Government allowed it to borrow just £3m.
‘For the third year running, we have been unable to build a single house, yet in that period we have had to re-house nearly 2,000 homeless families.’
Middlesbrough's waiting list currently stands at 6,500, while more than 1,500 people applied to the council as homeless in 1991–2.
In Newcastle, the waiting list is a staggering 10,000, with 800 families on the homeless list.
Housing chairman Coun George Allison said the council had followed Government recommendations and developed a housing strategy in which resources were spent on modernising and improving stock.
York's director of housing services Bob Towner said the city council's waiting list stood at almost 2,750 on April 1 with over 600 families on the homeless list.
SUMMER bathers have been warned to keep out of the lake in Middlesbrough's Central Gardens.
They have ignored signs telling them not to swim in the lake in the hot weather.
A council spokesman said last night: ‘We urge people to exercise common sense.
‘The gardens are an attraction in hot weather, but bathing unsupervised, although understandable can lead to problems, particularly for children.’
Copter tragedy pilot ‘sacked’
THE pilot of a Bristow helicopter that crashed in the North Sea with the loss of 11 lives earlier this year has been sacked, his lawyer claimed last night.
Captain Jonathan Shelborne has been grounded since the tragedy on March 14 in which ten oil workers, including Andrew Smailes, 31, from Middlesbrough, and his co-pilot died.
The cause of the crash is still unknown.
NEW security systems costing over £31,000 are to be installed in Stockton public libraries following an unexplained loss of books.
In the last year, a random search for 194 titles revealed 109 could not be located.
The titles were chosen from all departments and covered such popular subjects as computers, dictionaries and football.
The total replacement cost, if the books were still in print, would be £800, Cleveland County Council's community development committee was told.
A second survey was undertaken to establish the level of loss of requested items over a six month period.
It showed a total of 362 titles specifically requested by borrowers could not be traced.
The estimated annual loss of the stock would cost £8,000 to replace.
County librarian Janet Barker said security systems now operated in Middlesbrough central lending library, reference department, commercial and technical library and Hartlepool central library.
£9,000 has also been allocated from the committee's 1992–93 budget to install a system in Redcar central library.
Mrs Barker said in order to complete the protection of stock in the four largest libraries in Cleveland, a book security system was now required for Stockton district library.
Three separate security systems costing £31,650 would cover the lending library, childrens library and reference library and theft rates could be expected to be reduced by from 30pc to 4pc.
Helping get set for work
HEALTH and safety officers have been helping teenagers at Bishopsgarth School in Stockton prepare for their work experience in July.
Alex Keddie of the Health and Safety Executive in Newcastle said: ‘It is the first time I have taken part in such an initiative in school.
‘Raising pupils awareness is especially important as so many young people are injured in their first few days at work.’
Caution urged over leagues
CRUDE league tables of examination results are no judge of a good school, one of the North's leading headmasters told parents.
Peter Hobson, head of the £10,000 a year Giggleswick School near Settle pleaded for caution when drawing up a list of good schools.
A good school should educate the whole person not just develop each child's true potential at GCSE and A level, he said.
‘Gilding the lily’ PLANS to rename Scarborough Technical College the Yorkshire Coast College of Further and Higher Education have been delayed while the Yorkshire Coast's other colleges at Redcar and Bridlington are consulted by North Yorkshire County Council.
Coun Arthur Collinge condemned the ‘competitive status seeking’ of colleges that are seeking to gild the lily with new names.
No shortage
A NATIONAL shortage of school governors will not affect North Yorkshire, county councillors have been assured.
Schools in all but a few pockets of the county are expected to find enough people willing to stand for election in September when 1,600 governors are due to be appointed.
A step up
YOUNG scientists from Pindar School in Scarborough got a taste of university life as they mugged up their GCSE science at the soon-to-be University of Teesside.
The poly gave 15 and 16-year-olds hands-on experience of biochemistry equipment that is too expensive for schools to provide.
College first
DERWENTSIDE College is the first college in County Durham to accept the Investors in People national standard for staff training promoted by County Durham Training and Enterprise Council.
Advice plan
NORTH Yorkshire county council plans to market its advice for the appraisal of teachers and heads throughout the country after its scheme was acclaimed by teachers and consultants.
Exchange deals
EXCHANGE and research deals with universities in Finland and Estonia are expected to be sealed by Dr Anne Wright, rector of Sunderland's new university this week.
Britain's best GIRLS from Nunthorpe School near Middlesbrough are the best in Britain after winning the Under-13 class of the British Sports Acrobatics Championships in Oldham.
A WOMAN saved her guide dog from certain death by giving it the kiss of life.
Partially-sighted Trudy Welch sprung into action when golden retriever Olivia swallowed a ball.
‘I got the ball out of her throat, but she was unconscious,’ said the 64-year-old, of Hemlington, Middlesbrough.
‘I gave her the kiss of life and massaged her heart.
Luckily, she came round.’
The former nurse said: ‘It was probably just as well I knew what to do from my nursing days.’
Trudy was walking with three-year-old Olivia in Acklam Hall, Middlesbrough, when the drama happened.
‘There were a lot of people around, but everybody else panicked,’ said Trudy.
‘I'm sure she would have died without the kiss of life and I would have been devastated to lose her.
She is a great companion.’
Olivia ruptured her tonsils and lost a lot of blood in the incident, but recovered quickly after treatment.
The two were back together yesterday to help receive a £1,000 charity cheque presented to the Middlesbrough and Stockton branch of Guide Dogs for the Blind.
Chris Chapman, a trainee accountant with Cleveland County Council, handed the cheque to branch secretary Marie Beedle.
Council employees raised the cash through a series of fundraising efforts.
Marie Beedle said: ‘This money is most welcome.
It will pay for a dog and its training for one year.
The people of Teesside continue to help us tremendously.’
The centre trains between 150 and 200 dogs per year.
‘Hopefully, this money will give someone else the chance to have a wonderful companion like I have in Olivia,’ said Trudy Welch, who gives talks on behalf of the branch.
‘It's amazing what a help Olivia has been to me.’
ONE woman died and another was seriously injured yesterday when their car was in a head-on collision with a lorry near Kexby Bridge on the A1079 York to Hull road.
Passenger Jacqueline Shepherd, of Beverley Road, Hull, was killed and driver Sarah Shepherdson, of Cottingham Road, Hull, suffered serious injuries.
Lorry driver Malcolm Varley, of Grangetown, Middlesbrough and the drivers of two other cars which crashed into the wreckage were unhurt.
TWO workmen were comfortable in hospital yesterday after they fell 50ft while fitting hanging baskets to the ceiling of Gateshead's MetroCentre.
Middlesbrough men Paul Brudenell, of Clynes Road, and Barry Ferguson were working for a firm of contractors at 2am yesterday when the incident happened.
Mr Brudenell was taken to Gateshead's Queen Elizabeth Hospital suffering from a compound leg fracture and his colleague was being treated at Newcastle's General Hospital for a fractured skull.
A MetroCentre spokesman said the men were in the basket of a mechanical hoist fitting brackets for hanging baskets when they fell.
It is believed the platform of the hoist toppled over the first floor balcony sending them crashing to the ground floor.
The Health and Safety Executive have been informed and investigators have visited the scene to establish the cause of the accident.
Routine maintenance work is often carried out in the early hours at the centre when workmen can avoid causing disruption to shoppers.
The accident happened in the Garden Court area near to Argos while the men were working together with others from Durhambased HC Ltd a cleansing firm.
THE Archbishop of York helped a Cleveland church celebrate its diamond jubilee last night.
All Saints Church in Dormanstown, Middlesbrough, welcomed the Rt Rev John Habgood to its 60th anniversary on Ascension Day.
He followed in the footsteps of his predecessor, Archbishop William Temple, who consecrated the church on May 28, 1932.
Rev John Cave said the church had ensured the Archbishop's attendance by ‘booking’ him two years ago.
He said the church was built for just £5,700 in 1932.
A similar building would cost £250,000 today.
‘The church was largely built by selling bricks for sixpence,’ said Mr Cave.
‘A gentleman called Rev Kellet had a reputation as a church-builder.
He was known for riding around on his bicycle, pointing people out and saying ‘You haven't bought a brick!’
The church is in fact only the north aisle of what was intended to be a mini-cathedral.
‘We have a seating capacity of about 250 and the original intention was nearer 750,’ said Mr Cave.
‘But the whole of the church was never built because of the depression, then the war and local job losses.
‘I'm thankful it wasn't finished or it would be impossible to maintain with the small congregations we have.’
A series of events to mark the  anniversary will culminate with a confirmation by the Bishop of Whitby in the autumn.
A COUNTY councillor faces crown court trial after his solicitor failed to convince magistrates that an alleged assault was ‘a storm on a Tees bus’.
Former vice-chairman of Cleveland police committee John Garvey is accused of hitting Middlesbrough councillor Dave Ross in the head with a briefcase.
Coun Ross, of Portland House, Longlands, Middlesbrough, suffered a minor cut to his cheek in the incident on a late-night bus on November 29 last year.
In an old-style full committal hearing, Coun Garvey's solicitor James Watson claimed the incident was accidental and said Teesside Magistrates Court should not commit his client for trial.
But the court accepted the prosecution's argument that there was a case to answer and committed Coun Garvey to stand trial at Teesside Crown Court.
Mr Watson claimed Coun Ross had a deep dislike of Coun Garvey, 40, of Sandwell Avenue, Priestfields, Middlesbrough.
Both men are Labour councillors.
He added: ‘Take Mr Ross's evidence with a pinch of salt.
‘His evidence oozed with personal dislike of Mr Garvey.’
Mr Watson described the incident as ‘trivial, a storm on a Tees bus’.
In evidence, Coun Ross claimed Coun Garvey deliberately rammed the briefcase into his face.
Alan Harle, for the prosecution, said the court's decision was whether a jury could convict, not whether it would convict.
‘It is accepted that it is a minor injury, but it is enough to justify a charge of actual bodily harm,’ he said.
‘Mr Ross's evidence is clear that this was a deliberate action by Mr Garvey.’
But Mr Watson said that Mr Ross saw the briefcase from the corner of his eye and did not see Mr Garvey.
The bus was pulling away, he added.
‘Therefore, how could he tell the assault was deliberate?’ asked Mr Watson.
Mr Watson said the defence would now be looking for a ‘courting couple’ who were seen on the bus at the time of the incident.
Reporting restrictions were lifted at yesterday's hearing.
Cruel conmen trick old lady
POLICE are urging old folk in Cleveland to be on their guard after young conmen tricked their way into the home of a deaf, 87-year-old woman yesterday and stole a small purse containing a diamond ring and an opal ring.
The duo, aged about 19 and wearing denims, got into the house in Alliance Street, Stockton by saying she needed her TV aerial repairing.
Takeaway raiders:
Thieves took £4,000 of equipment from the site of a McDonald's restaurant in Green Street, Hartlepool.
It included a theodolite worth £2,500 and a generator.
Police said last night that two juveniles had been reported in connection with thefts.
Gas benefits:
Farmer M Tinkler is to receive £8,350 in compensation so Cleveland County Council can install a gas control system near Whitton, Stockton.
It is needed to burn off methane gas, which has been discovered seeping off a disused council tip.
Shops boost:
Planning permission has been granted for two ground-floor shops and 16 flats in three adjoining buildings in Church Street, Hartlepool.
Busy time:
Hartlepool firemen tackled a motorcycle fire in Huckelhoven Way and a blazing car in Keith Road.
Empty homes:
Middlesbrough Council's empty properties increased slightly to 174, 1.1pc of its housing stock.
No can do:
A government inspector has blocked Cleveland County Council's bid to buy land around Kilton Mine in the east of the county by compulsory purchase.
A long debate has raged about whether the tip should be flattened or preserved as a monument of the ironstone industry.
New plant to clear the air A £7.5m PLANT to clean up emissions from one of British Steel's Teesside plants opens today.
The hi-tech iron desulphurisation plant collects and cleans fumes from British Steels Basic Oxygen Steelmaking factory.
The company is spending nearly £150m across the company over the next five years to cut down on emissions from its factories.
The new Teesside facility will control emissions during the treatment of liquid iron for the steelmaking plant.
The computer controlled system, which will also monitor emissions, will process 4.25m tonnes of molten iron a year.
Not suspect:
Police are not treating the death of woman found in Cleveland woods as suspicious.
Brenda Whittle, 60, was found in Kirkleatham Woods, near to her home in West Dyke Road, Redcar on Wednesday evening.
Girl dies:
Courageous toddler Gemma Blades has lost a three-year battle for life.
The youngster, of Fremantle Crescent, Saltersgill, Middlesbrough, who overcame a hole in the heart operation, died on Sunday in South Cleveland Hospital, Middlesbrough.
Fine voice:
Scarborough's town crier Alan Booth has defied a serious heart complaint to win a national town criers contest run by Blackburn brewers Daniel Thwaites for the third time.
Cool pool:
Cold swimmers demanded their money back at the new Ponteland Leisure Centre after claiming the water was too cold.
It is the latest in a series of problems to plague the £1.3m complex where the toddler pool has been closed due to dangerous surfaces.
River plea:
Waterways chiefs have appealed to boat owners using York's River Ouse to slow down.
Patrol officer Bob Edwards says heavy wash from cabin cruisers can kill young ducklings and harm other wildlife.
Bomb talk:
A seminar for shop managers and security staff on the lessons learnt from the MetroCentre IRA firebombing is to be held in Newcastle on Monday.
Supt Peter Durham from Newcastle city centre will address staff on how contingency plans can be properly arranged for Newcastle.
Chief dies:
Alec Nuttall, former chief probation officer of Teesside and then Cleveland, has died aged 68.
House blaze:
An empty house in Coxon Hill, Grove Hill, Middlesbrough, was badly damaged by fire last night.
The house was well alight when firemen arrived.
It took them more than an hour to control.
Bypass go-ahead at last but pressure group favours rail link The long-awaited Guisborough bypass was officially given the go-ahead by Cleveland county council on Tuesday just as a transport group called for a re-think on the multi-million pound scheme.
The development control sub-committee gave planning permission and will now begin putting out and accepting tenders for the work.
Members heard there were now no obstacles to building the relief road and that everyone consulted about it was ‘wholeheartedly in favour.’
However, the pressure group Transport 2000 claimed this week that the need for a bypass would disappear if the old rail link to Guisborough were re-opened.
It is many years since the town last saw a train, but the group believes that for about £1m. the railway could once again link Guisborough with the rest of the country via the Esk Valley line from Middlesbrough to Whitby.
Mr Brian Milnes, spokesman, said: ‘Most of the cost is embankment and track and that is already there.
Two new halts could be installed for around £200,000.’
The railway could take both passengers and freight off the roads reducing the need for a bypass.
A spokesman for British Rail said it would cost millions to put a railway link back into Guisborough and BR could not afford to do the work.
Coun. David Walsh, chairman of the environment, development and transportation committee, said the county council now wanted to see the bypass going ahead, using the best design, construction and landscaping standards possible.
It would help to regenerate the East Cleveland economy and solve many of the problems suffered by local people having to endure the noise and discomfort caused by heavy traffic through Guisborough's main shopping street.
Building work is expected to begin by the autumn and the council hopes the bypass will be open by the summer of 1994.
Coun. Keith Pudney, chairman of Guisborough Bypass Action Group, said members were highly delighted at the local authority's decision.
He added: ‘Cleveland county council has kept faith with the scheme even in the face of Government cutbacks.
It is the only road building scheme the council is proceeding with this financial year.’
He was annoyed by the Transport 200 argument, saying a rail link would not remove the need for a bypass which would be used by 14,000 vehicles a day.
‘Transport 2000 should look at the conditions that exist today, not what they would like to exist.’
However, Coun. Walsh agreed that there was a case for a commuter rail connection.
‘If the money was there I think we should look at a link.’
However, a reinstated rail link and a bypass were two separate issues.
Coun. Pudney said the light rail transit system being considered by Cleveland county council could ease commuter traffic if it linked Guisborough with Middlesbrough, but that had no connection with the bypass which would be part of the county's primary road network.
A MASSIVE poster campaign was launched yesterday by detectives hunting the killer of coach driver Kevin McEvoy.
Hundreds of posters are being circulated around Hartlepool in a bid to jog people's memories.
Particular attention centres on four pubs the Owton Lodge, the Traveller's Rest, the Hour Glass and the Smiths Arms at Greatham which Mr McEvoy is known to have visited just before he was gunned down outside his home in Greta Avenue last Saturday.
The police hope new witnesses will come forward with information that could assist their investigation.
The posters include a description of 51-year-old Mr McEvoy who was 6ft 1ins tall and heavily built.
He was wearing a black leather bomber-type jacket, a grey shirt with white stripes, green trousers and light tan shoes.
Det Chief Insp Barry Hill said: ‘Anyone who knows Mr McEvoy or who saw him on Saturday May 23 is asked to ring Middlesbrough 326326 and ask for the Hartlepool incident room.’
So far the police have been unable to establish a motive for his murder.
Detectives are keen to speak to the driver of a car seen leaving the murder scene with its lights off shortly after gunshots were heard.
He may have been in his forties and driving either a grey, silver or light metallic-coloured car.
A LEADING critic of incineration visits Cleveland next week.
Dr Paul Connett speaks in Middlesbrough on Monday, his only North-East date.
Anti-burner group STINC have arranged the meeting.
Spokesman Bernard Kraus said US-based Dr Connett's message was: ‘Don't believe the experts, believe your nose.’
‘His view is that waste should be dealt with at source, that cleaner production methods should be introduced.’
The meeting is in the Friends' Meeting House, Cambridge Road, Linthorpe, at 7.30pm.
Woman victim of pile-up is named A WOMAN killed in a four-vehicle pile-up near York on Thursday has been identified as 43-year-old Jacqueline Shepherdson of Sussex Street, Hull.
She was a passenger in a Metro car driven by Sarah Shepherdson, of Cottingham Road, Hull, who suffered serious injuries in the smash.
Their car was travelling towards York along the A1079 at Kexby when it was in a head-on collision with a Leyland articulated lorry.
Lorry driver Malcolm Varley, from Grangetown, Middlesbrough, was slightly hurt.
Boy poorly:
Sean Broadley of Eskdale Road, Whitby, 11, who was badly burned when his clothing caught alight while he was playing with meths and matches on the cliff top at Robin Hood's Bay on Sunday was very poorly in Pinderfield Hospital, Wakefield.
Historical find:
The renovation of a harbourside shop in Church Street, Whitby have revealed that it is one of the oldest properties in the town, dating back to the Middle Ages.
Dog saved:
A border collie was saved from a fire at a house in Spring Bank, Scarborough.
Club wins:
Scarborough's Champers night club has won its fight to stay in business after magistrates over-ruled police objections to the licence being transferred to new owners, Pat Shannon and Ian Winton.
Sewage killer:
A sewage leak has been blamed for polluting Scarborough's Valley Road pond near the seafront, and killing fish.
Church raid:
Intruders stole about £5 from collection boxes at Masham Church, North Yorkshire.
Couple Freed: Firefighters had to release a man and woman from handcuffs.
The couple turned up at Richmond station and a firemen cut them free with a hacksaw.
Traders condemn car park fees plan
SHOPKEEPERS in Redcar and Guisborough are attacking Langbaurgh Council plans to introduce fees for car parking which would involve drivers buying a scratch card and marking off the length of stay.
Traders claim the idea is unworkable and are refusing to sell the vouchers.
They say they are not against parking charges, but want the council to find a system acceptable to the public.
Raffle total:
A raffle organised by the Triangle Community Association of Grove Hill, Middlesbrough, raised more than £2,256 to be split between the TCA and South Cleveland Hospital's appeal for a lithotripter machine to break up kidney stones.
The TCA plans to buy more nebulisers for Grove Hill children.
Plans on show:
Plans for a new landfill site proposed at Carlin How Farm, near Guisborough, will be on display at Gateway supermarket in Guisborough all next week.
Skip hire firm set to move to estate
JOHN Dee Skip Hire, of Albert Road, Darlington, has applied to the borough council for permission to move to the Cleveland Industrial Estate.
The company, which also sells building materials, has to move because of the proposed cross-town route linking the A68 and A66.
Chimney charges:
Philip Coates, 20, of Ann's Terrace, Darlington, and Andrew Hull, 21, of Bartlett Street, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates yesterday charged with stealing two garden troughs and a chimney pot.
The case was adjourned until July 10.
Cycle theft:
Burglars took a £720 racing cycle, a television, video recorder, a watch and jewellery from a house in Brunton Street, Darlington.
House burglary:
Goods worth £770 were stolen from a house in Ingleby Moor Road, Darlington.
Twin visit:
Around 40 members of Darlington and district town twinning association leave for Mulheim on Monday.
The association's next meeting is on Tuesday June 9 at 7.30pm in the Dolphin Centre.
New members welcome.
Diesel spill:
Cleveland fire crews swilled away a large diesel spillage between Cowpen Village and Central Avenue, Billingham, around lunchtime on Saturday.
One car skidded and crashed into a tree before the road was cleared.
The leaks are believed to have come from an HGV carrying diesel.
Needle warning:
Police have warned that needles and syringes stolen from a nurse's bag in Middlesbrough could prove fatal if used to inject adrenalin and water, which were also taken.
The equipment was stolen on Friday night from a parked car in Berwick Hills Avenue, Brambles Farm.
Business centre nears completion
WORK is well under way on converting the old Brougham School in Hartlepool into a business centre.
The borough council's director of economic development Barry Keel said initial problems over funding had been solved and the centre should be finished by August 31.
‘The post of centre manager was advertised on May 20 and we have already had an encouraging response,’ he said.
Energy savings:
More than £150,000 is being saved annually by energy-conscious Middlesbrough Council.
The local authority has adopted a computerised system to look at where savings can be made.
Shop raid:
Burglars broke through the roof into the Prospects 23 store in Church Square, Hartlepool, and stole clothing worth around £1,100.
Police said anyone offered cheap garments should contact them on .
Women hurt:
Two women were taken to hospital after their car was involved in an accident in Easington Road, Hartlepool.
The road was closed for a while because of a dangerous street light.
Spade raid:
Burglars cut the telephone wires and then used a spade to force open a window at a house in Salcombe Drive on The Fens estate in Hartlepool.
They stole cheque books and bank cards.
Glass removed:
Burglars who broke into a house in Dalkeith Road, Hartlepool, removed the glass from the lounge window.
They stole a television, compact disc player, an amplifier and some speakers, worth a total of £900.
Clothing taken:
Around £300 worth of clothing was stolen by thieves who smashed a window at the River Island store in Hartlepool's Middleton Grange Shopping Centre.
Beach fun:
More than 50 children rooted for rocks and ferreted for fossils on Saturday.
The youngsters also dug for dinosaurs during the RockWATCH event on Saltburn beach, Cleveland.
They discovered the secrets of the seashore before learning how to polish their finds at the Margrove Heritage Centre.
‘We were delighted by the attendance and all the children had great fun,’ said Kathryn Hardy, of the Cleveland Wildlife Trust.
The event was the second organised in Cleveland for RockWATCH, a national club for youngsters interested in fossils, rocks and dinosaurs.
THE recent bout of good weather emphasised just how short Darlington town centre is of parks and open spaces where people can sit and enjoy the sun.
Shop and office workers who miss out on the best of the day only have their lunch breaks to enjoy the brief British summer.
But in Darlington there is a paucity of green space within the town centre where cooped-up employees can go to bask in the sun, or where shoppers can rest a few minutes.
There are a few benches scattered around, notably on Northgate, but who wants to eat their lunch while gulping down diesel fumes from passing buses?
The courtyard in front of the council buildings is the ideal location for a grassy square with a few attractive flowerbeds but instead there is a bleak expanse of concrete.
Compare London with its acres of parks where thousands of workers gather every day of fine weather to stroll, snooze or just sit down.
And if that seems an unfair comparison, think of Middlesbrough ICI's works and gas storage towers may be on the horizon but at least there is Victoria Park with its lawns and flower beds in front of the town hall, and grassland in front of the new court complex.
Nor are there many opportunities in Darlington for open-air dining or drinking.
Admittedly a handful of cafes try to provide al fresco facilities but where are the pub beer gardens?
Certainly the villages around Darlington offer fine riverside walks and ample picnic areas but surely there is a case for creating more accessible green space within the town centre?
Working people and shoppers here have as much right to sit in the sunshine at lunchtime for a few minutes as their counterparts elsewhere in the country.
PRESSURE is mounting on a London businessman to develop an eyesore building on Teesside.
The former blind workshops in Stockton Road, Middlesbrough, are derelict and attract glue-sniffers and vandals.
Now local residents, Middlesbrough Council and the Teesside Society for the Blind are urging owner Herant Aghajan to take action.
‘Something has to be done,’ said Susan Whitehouse, of West Lane Residents' Association.
‘It's in such a terrible state.
Glue-sniffers are going in there and lads are climbing on the roof.
‘It's extremely unsafe and it's only a matter of time before someone is badly hurt.’
Helen Lockwood, director of Teesside Society for the Blind, said: ‘Nothing seems to be happening and this has gone on for so long now.
The building is an absolute eyesore.’
Middlesbrough Council spokesman Mike Clark said: ‘We appreciate the building is an eyesore, but it isn't unsafe.
We would like to see the matter resolved, but the onus has to be on the owner.’
The Northern left messages for Mr Aghajan with his personal assistant but he did not return the calls.
In February, PA Kate Pallis said negotiations about developing the site had reached a standstill.
Ship in search for gas fields
A MAJOR search for gas is to be mounted off the East Coast later this year by a consortium headed by Kelt UK.
A seismic survey ship is to operate over a wide stretch of the North Sea off Hunmanby and Flamborough Head, following a similar survey off Scarborough, Filey and Whitby last year.
David Langham, lands and planning manager for Kelt, said the data collected by the ship would be analysed and depending on the findings a drilling rig could be brought in.
Missing person:
Cleveland Police have repeated an appeal for information about Leslie Simms, 70, who has not been seen since he left an old person's home in Middlesbrough more than three weeks ago.
Poly plea:
Newcastle Polytechnic is appealing to businesses to use its cut-rate research service to solve industrial problems.
Without takers the college could lose two top research awards.
Green parade:
Soldiers of the Junior Infantry Battalion of the Scottish and Kings Division, based in Northumberland, are to help National Trust restoration projects covering revamping safety rails on South Shields cliffs and clearing coastal dereliction at Warren House Gill, near Easington.
Store move:
Yorkshire coast supermarket chain Proudfoot Ltd is set to move from its current South Cliff site to a purpose-built £1.5m new headquarters on the outskirts of Scarborough.
A SENIOR fire-fighter has called on ‘people in high places’ to demolish a Middlesbrough street wrecked by arsonists.
Fire crews were called to empty properties in Trent Street six times over the weekend.
And Station Officer Eric Warrior warned: ‘It's only a matter of time before someone is seriously hurt, no doubt about it.
These houses are so dangerous.
‘Roofs and chimneys are unsafe, and the floors are gone.
It's a danger to my men and to the public.’
Doors and windows have been bricked up to prevent access to the empty properties, but arsonists have now started smashing the breeze-blocks.
‘This weekend was exceptional, but we are regularly there five or six times a week,’ said Mr Warrior.
‘If we have to go ten times a day, we will go, but everyone is saying that the things should be knocked down.
‘It's getting to the stage where it's not a habitable area.’
A Middlesbrough Council spokesman said the authority's policy was to buy up properties in the area with a view to demolition.
‘The eventual aim is to clear and then re-develop the entire area,’ he added.
IT was all the fun of the farm in Middlesbrough on Saturday when the council-run Newham Grange Leisure Farm held a special day for children.
Among the attractions was face-painting and a chance to feed the ducks, as demonstrated by two-year-old Callum Stephenson of Coulby Newham.
‘RECENT events in the UK property markets are unlikely to lead to an early improvement.’
The above statement from Sir Christopher Benson, chairman of one of the UK's leading property companies MEPC, accompanied the publication last week of its interim results.
Given the fact that another property developer, and star of the bull market of the Nineties Mountleigh, had gone into receivership and that administrators have been appointed to the Canary Wharf project it could rank as one of the understatements of the 1992 financial year.
Originally intended as a rival to the City the failure of the project could lead to renewed demand for office space in the City.
Such a move could underpin rent and asset values, though it also has to be pointed out that there is currently an over supply of good quality office space in the City.
Some companies also retain a belief in the long-term attractions of property investment.
John Ritblat's British Land continues to expand its portfolio, acquiring high yielding properties.
Since he survived the last great property collapse of the Seventies this should provide some comfort to holders of shares in property companies.
Careful readers of the financial pages may have come across another property announcement last week.
There amidst the general gloom was a report from Hong Kong Land that it had sold a property in the colony achieving a profit of approximately £273m.
This company is expected to have cash in hand by March next year of £680m as well as having an insignificant debt burden.
As the City ponders over the future of the Canary Wharf development, many are wondering whether the bankers to the project, which include Barclays Bank, might look to the Hong Kong-based company as a white knight.
William Baker Baker is a director of stockbrokers Wise Speke, Middlesbrough
A COUNCILLOR has quit his post with a Middlesbrough-based charity for the homeless after a disagreement.
Middlesbrough Labour member Mike J Carr has helped Community Campus develop from nothing to an organisation which controls 16 properties and employs seven people.
He resigned from his role as promotion and resource worker saying: ‘There were a few points of disagreement, but I retain my membership of the co-op and wish Community Campus every success.’
A MAN accused of holding his girlfriend hostage at gunpoint at a house in Darlington for two days over Easter appeared in court yesterday.
Keith Pringle, 22, of Thirlmere Road, Darlington, has been in hospital since the siege ended on April 21.
He was brought before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with causing grievous bodily harm to Jason Ward and Pauline Rees, imprisoning Leanne Rees against her will at Lyonette Road, Darlington, illegally possessing a 12-bore sawn-off shotgun, and possessing the weapon without holding a firearms certificate.
Pringle, who wore a green sweatshirt, was visibly scarred on the left of his mouth where he was hit by a bullet fired by a police marksman.
When he spoke to give his name, address and date of birth his speech was slurred and indistinct.
No pleas were taken.
Pringle was remanded in custody for a week and will be detained in prison hospital at Stockton until he undergoes major facial surgery at Middlesbrough General Hospital on Monday June 15.
TWO cousins started a fire in a tower block to cover up their botched attempts at a DIY job.
Fire engines were called by neighbours to Spencer Beck House, Middlesbrough, which threatened to turn into a towering inferno after Peter Crook and Martin Davies set fire to a ground floor flat.
Teesside Crown Court heard how Crook, 19, and Davies, 21, who both lived at the nine storey tower block, made a complete mess of the home improvements they were trying to do.
Christopher Attwooll, prosecuting, said the cousins got some friends to help knock through an internal wall between the sitting room and kitchen of Crook's flat.
By the time the work had finished two internal walls had been completely destroyed and Crook took the decision to set fire to the flat in the hope Langbaurgh Council, which owns the block, might rehouse him.
Judge Wiiliam Crawford heard that the cousins set fire to furniture and carpets which quickly sent a pall of smoke to flats above.
Hysterical residents, many of them in their nightclothes, raced from the block as the fire brigade went in to quell the flames.
Only once firemen had arrived did Davies make any attempt to warn his neighbours that the block was on fire.
After lengthy questioning both men admitted their part in the blaze.
Yesterday they both pleaded guilty to arson endangering lives.
Tim Roberts, defending, said both men bitterly regretted their actions ‘which were born out of a moment's folly’.
He said the fire was not premeditated.
He said both men came from deprived backgrounds and bore a grudge against the area in which they lived.
Crook in particular was anxious to leave the ground floor flat because his windows had been smashed and he had been attacked.
Davies, a former RAF driver, was sentenced to two years in prison while Crook will spend two years in a young offenders institute.
TWO young people were killed and two others left badly hurt after a series of road accidents.
Kerry Bell, 24, died when the car in which she was a passenger was in a head-on collision with another on Sunday afternoon.
And teenage motorcyclist Andrew Smith died yards from his York home on Saturday afternoon.
Miss Bell, of Argyle Street, South Bank, York, was returning home in the car driven by Mark Waudby, 32 of Charlton Street, York, when the accident happened at Scholes, near Leeds.
He was said to be comfortable in Leeds General Infirmary with facial injuries and fractures.
Mr Smith, 17, of Heslington Lane, York, died when his Suzuki 250 was in collision with a Volvo 440 in University Road.
Car driver Christopher Ridgway, 34 of The Green, Coneysthorpe, was unhurt.
Police have appealed to witnesses to the crash which happened at about 2.45pm on Saturday.
Meanwhile, a cyclist was still fighting for his life yesterday after crashing in the Yorkshire Dales.
Sol Kossoff, thought to be in his 40s, of Stanmore, Middlesex, suffered serious head injuries after losing control down a steep hill at West Burton, near Leyburn, on Sunday afternoon.
Ambulancemen found him unconscious and he was taken to Northallerton's Friarage Hospital before being transferred to Middlesbrough General with severe head injuries.
ENGINEERING experts are confident they can replace vital bolts in Teesside's famous Transporter Bridge.
The landmark structure has been out of action for two years but is now expected to be back in service in July.
British Ropes has been examining the 80-year-old bridge and in a report to Cleveland County Council says 18 large bolts need to be replaced.
A council spokesman said yesterday the bolts would have to be specially made.
The bridge was set to open this month but repair work has been dogged with difficulties.
It was closed in March 1990 after a piece of the overhead machinery crashed onto the platform beneath.
A CLEVELAND police officer and a teacher have joined forces on a pioneering project to help schools in the county educate young people in citizenship.
Sgt Derek Jobling and Maureen Horseman are working together to produce a resource pack which will eventually be used to support teaching in the  classroom .
The pack will target four main aims of ‘citizenship’ education, including law and the rights and duties of citizens.
It will also inform schools about the role of the police, making young people aware of dangers and help foster crime prevention.
Sgt Jobling has been seconded for the project from Stockton police division and Mrs Horseman from St Anthony's School, Middlesbrough.
They will spend six weeks writing material for the pack which will then be tested in the autumn school term.
It is hoped the pack could be sent out to schools early next year.
Cyclist poorly after hill crash
A CYCLIST was still fighting for his life yesterday after crashing in the Yorkshire Dales.
Sol Kossoff suffered serious head injuries after losing control down a steep hill at West Burton, near Leyburn, on Sunday afternoon.
Ambulancemen found him unconscious and he was taken to Northallerton's Friarage Hospital before being transferred to Middlesbrough General.
Mr Kossoff, thought to be in his forties, of Stanmore, Middlesex, was said to be extremely poorly.
Wash line raids:
Thieves have been raiding washing lines in Ripon.
Clothing worth £125 was taken from two lines in Newby Street and Victoria Avenue.
Two hurt:
The driver of one car and passenger of another were slightly hurt in an accident near Thirsk.
The crash, involving a VW camper and a Volvo car, happened on the A168 at Topcliffe.
On call:
Intruders broke into a doctors surgery at Thirsk.
They broke a rear first floor window and smashed an internal door to get to a quantity of cash at the surgery in Market Place.
Man accused of attempted murder Neil Wilson, 26, of Bardon Court, South Shields, appeared before South Shields magistrates yesterday charged with the attempted murder of Martin Elliott, 24, of Calf Close House, Jarrow.
Mr Elliott suffered both internal and external injuries when he was allegedly run down twice by a car at the weekend.
Magistrates remanded Wilson in custody for a week.
Employee hurt:
A 65-year-old employee from Saverland, in Clayton Street, Newcastle, suffered a broken nose after struggling with an armed robber.
The raider forced him to open the safe and fled with cash.
Conspiracy charges:
Four former staff from a nightclub chain appeared before Newcastle Magistrates yesterday charged with conspiracy to steal cash.
Former European Leisure regional manager Paul Montgomery, 34; former Tuxedo Royale manager Daniel Pettigrew, 34; ex-manager of the President's Bar, Stephen Ireland, 32; and former assistant manager of the bar, Richard Hunter, 25, were all remanded on bail until next month.
Badly paid:
Workers in Northumberland are among the poorest paid and twice as likely to earn less than the average for workers throughout the European Community according to a survey by the Northern Region Low Pay Unit.
Northumberland County Council has vowed to investigate the problem, which is blamed on the county's peripheral position in the country.
Youths freed:
Two youths questioned in connection with an attack on a woman in Hebburn in which caustic liquid was squirted in her eyes have been released without charge after questioning.
The 51-year-old victim suffered a serious eye injury in the attack by youths who drove from the scene laughing.
Case adjourned:
Jane Metcalfe, 46, of West Auckland Road, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates charged with causing harassment, alarm and distress.
The case was adjourned until July.
Opening success:
More than 1000 people visited Middlesbrough botanic centre's open day.
Council leader Mike Carr said the annual budget, to be presented to members today, was a Government budget because £1.4m in spending cuts had been imposed by environment secretary Michael Howard.
The original council budget for 199293 was £21.6m which was agreed by all political parties on the council.
Following Mr Howard's intervention poll tax bills will be reduced by £14 a saving of 27p-per-week.
‘But many people will be paying out more than they save because of increased charges and because the quality of care will not be there,’ said Mr Carr.
Many of the jobs to go will be those already vacant which will not be filled.
‘The budget which we shall be presenting to council tomorrow will show a relatively small number of cuts but it will be right across the council so no particular group of employees will suffer,’ said Mr Carr.
Car parking charges will be going up by 10p and visitors to sports centres will have to pay more.
It has also been suggested that the mayor should attend only three events a week.
Coun Carr said members had considered appealing.
However, he said: ‘The case we would have put had already been voiced March and it would have taken two months for the appeal to be heard during which time there would be no  money coming in to provide council services,’ he said.
‘Whatever cuts we would finally have to make would have to be spread over a shorter period,’ he said.
MIDDLESBROUGH'S second City Challenge was presented to government officers yesterday and the result will be announced in July.
A five year programme has been drawn up for the regeneration of the town centre and the St Hilda's area, Grove Hill, Easterside, Newport, Ayresome and Gresham.
If the town is successful it will mean £37.5m of Government money over five years.
It will be spent on a number of projects intended to make the town centre the hub for commerce and culture.
Plans include a theatre and conference hall.
A resource centre is suggested for Whinney Banks, 400 homes in the Ayresome district would be modernised and 150 bedsits in the Crescent Road area would be upgraded.
Local people would be encouraged to develop business ideas through a West Middlesbrough Enterpprise Trust and an arts and leisure complex would be developed, centred on the town's Dorman Museum, Art Gallery and Albert Park.
Council leader Mike Carr said: ‘We felt the presentation went well and we are hopeful of our plans being accepted.’
THE demolition of a dangerous terrace in the heart of Middlesbrough may be months away.
Owners of houses on fire-ravaged Trent Street are unwilling to sell the derelict properties to Middlesbrough council.
The authority wants to flatten the whole of the Rivers area but admits negotiations are slow.
A senior fireman called on ‘people in high places’ to knock the street down after crews attended six blazes last weekend, probably started by vandals.
Middlesbrough Station Officer Eric Warrior warned: ‘These houses are terribly dangerous.
It's only a matter of time before someone is killed or badly injured.’
But council spokesman Doug Allan said it was impossible to say when Trent Street would go.
‘We own about 60 or 70 of 200 houses in the Rivers area, and Trent Street is no worse or no better than anywhere else.’
The council has set aside £450,000 in the coming year to buy and demolish the houses, the oldest terraced properties in Middlesbrough.
Twelve have been demolished in the last few months.
‘We can only demolish as and when a number of properties become available and can be taken out without affecting the remaining properties,’ said Mr Allan.
‘Make no mistake, we want to clear and then develop the site.
We do not underestimate the problems, but negotiations can be difficult to conclude.
Some people just don't want to sell and we can only pay the going rate.
‘If we could finalise the purchases, we would take the houses out straight away.’
Mr Allan admitted keeping houses secure was a problem and said it seemed that young children were to blame for most of the damage and fires in the street.
One nearby resident who asked not to be named, said: ‘The houses have got to go.
Trent Street is getting like Beirut and the vandals won't stop until it's gone.’
A COMMUNITY recording studio is to run a free training course for unemployed people under 25years-old.
Studio 64 in Middlesbrough's Corporation Road, is planning to train ten out-of-work enthusiasts, offering them the chance to break into the music business.
Studio development worker Don Gamble said each person would receive 300 hours of practical instruction.
For information write to Studio 64, 90 Corporation Road, Middlesbrough, TS1 2RE.
Search on for top twin town
ENTRIES from the North-East are being sought for the Royal Mail's twin town award scheme, which aims to find the best link between a British community and a foreign counterpart.
Entrants to the award must demonstrate success across all areas of culture, sport, youth exchanges, commerce education, world harmony and the environment.
Royal Mail spokesman Adam Novak said: ‘The twin town award scheme is just one way in which we can demonstrate our commitment to the European single market by recognising the extensive contribution twin towns all over the UK have made in furthering the development of international communications.’
Guilty driver:
Mark Henderson, 21, of Southfield Road, Middlesbrough, was put on a two year probation order yesterday after Teesside Crown Court heard details of his part in a high speed chase.
Henderson pleaded guilty to careless driving, driving while disqualified and without any proper insurance cover.
Trial delay:
A man who faces robbery charges after an alleged incident at a Darlington newsagent will be tried at Teesside Crown Court tomorrow.
Peter Mackie, 26, of Londonderry Road, Stockton, pleads not guilty to the robbery charge.
Union support:
The public service super-union Unison moved one step closer yesterday when the union Nupe voted to back its creation at its annual conference in Scarborough.
Unison will be formed next year if it gets similar backing from unions Cohse and Nalgo, and a secret ballot of the members of all three in November.
Meat unease:
The leader of Wear Valley District Council has said he is against a Government decision to transfer responsibility for meat inspections from council officials to a new national body.
Coun Chris Foote Wood said he believed officers working for local authorities with local knowledge should continue to inspect red meat and poultry and the hygiene of premises in which animals are slaughtered.
AGE Concern Cleveland is building up a stock of nearly new clothing in preparation for the opening of its RAGS centre in Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough on June 15.
‘The donations of clothing will be turned into money which will enable Age Concern Cleveland to carry on its work with elderly people,’ said chief officer Dave Punshon.
Offers of top quality second hand garments are welcome.
MINDLESS vandals have caused hundreds of pounds worth of damage in an overnight raid on a council bowling green.
The trespassers gained entry to the greens at Pallister Park, Middlesbrough, and carved an effigy on part of the turf.
Nearby they dug out squares and scattered them about.
Police are now investigating the incident.
Greenkeeper Paul Holmes and park warden Raymond Davies said they were ‘horrified’ when they saw the damage yesterday morning.
Mr Davies said: ‘The park is closed from 10pm so the vandals must have arrived during the night.’
Mr Holmes added: ‘They certainly caused a mess and its taken us all morning trying to patch it up.
It will be weeks, perhaps months, before the playing surface is settled back to normal.’
He said the bowling season was well under way and the sport was very popular in the park.
‘There is a match here tonight but it will be impossible to play on this green.
Fortunately, we have another one which can be used.’
A council spokesman said the greens were well kept and rolled every day, adding: ‘The cost of the vandalism will run into hundreds of pounds.’
THE wife and daughters of coach driver Kevin McEvoy will this morning make an emotional appeal for information about his murder.
Carol McEvoy and her daughters Angela and Moira are due to speak at a press conference at Cleveland police's headquarters in Middlesbrough.
This will be the first time they have spoken in public since Mr McEvoy, 50, was found gunned down in the driveway of his home in Greta Avenue, Hartlepool, on May 23.
Detectives admit that so far they don't have a motive for the killing.
They are currently sifting through information gathered from more than 350 people questioned in a major weekend operation to retrace the dead man's last known movements.
Teams of officers were sent to four pubs the Hour Glass, the Owton Lodge, The Smiths Arms at Greatham and the Traveller's Rest which he is known to have visited just hours before the shooting.
Customers were asked to fill in a brief form stating whether they knew or had seen Mr McEvoy.
Detectives also questioned people in Owton Manor Lane where Mr McEvoy dropped off a friend and Greta Avenue.
The only clue they have was provided by neighbours who reported seeing a silver or grey car driving away from Greta Avenue after gunshots were heard.
A NORTH-EAST ice-cream firm was yesterday fined for operating in unclean premises.
Magistrates heard that an environmental health officer found a fly-strip covered in dead insects hanging near ice lollies when he visited Villa Ices in Union Street, Middlesbrough.
Joseph Anthony Villa, boss of the company since 1966, admitted 13 charges of carrying on a food business in unclean premises.
The business has been in Middlesborugh since 1936.
Mrs Mary Dowson, prosecuting for Middlesborugh Borough Council, said last October's inspection revealed dirty walls, floors and ceilings and corroded equipment.
Denham Bell said Villa, of Harrow Road, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, had been forced to travel widely to keep the business going.
The man he left in charge did not carry out the duties expected of him.
He said Villa was ‘an extremely regretful and embarrassed man’ who had already spent £4,500 on improvement work.
Mr Bell said there was no suggestion that food in the premises was in an unfit condition.
Villa was fined a total of £1560 with £345.33 costs.
A NORTH-EAST double glazing firm has been fined nearly £3,000 for breaches of work safety procedures.
Norlite Windows Ltd, of Riverside Park Industrial Estate, Middlesbrough, admitted two charges of failing to guard a circular sawing machine.
It also admitted failing to report within the statutory seven days that an employee had severed a tendon in his hand while operating the machine.
Clare Friend, of Her Majesty's Factory Inspectorate, said she noticed the machine being operated without a guard during a visit on February 10.
After investigations, she discovered the earlier offences.
‘The dangers associated with sawing machines are well-known,’ she told Teesside Magistrates Court.
‘Such accidents often result in amputated fingers.’
The court heard that the employee injured by the machine used to cut aluminium frames had made a full recovery and was back at work.
Simon Catterall, for the company, said: ‘This is not a  company which cuts corners.
‘Norlite is  terribly sorry and knows it has to do things to the letter in future.’
The firm was fined a total of £2,370 and ordered to pay £445.69 costs.
A PACKAGE of cuts which will mean around 40 job losses was approved by Middlesbrough Council at a meeting last night.
But some members of the ruling Labour group voted against the cuts and one left the meeting after protesting.
The council had to trim its £21.6m spending plans by £1.4m, due to the Government's capping limits.
They set the poll tax for 199293 at £339.22.
Coun leader Mike Carr said about 40 jobs would have to go and warned that the Government's continued stern attitude could lead to further cuts in services in years to come.
A rival package of measures, proposed by Coun Peter Jackson, leader of the minority Conservative party, which would have resulted in savings of £352,000 to be used in other ways, was rejected.
One of the most controversial measures adopted yesterday means that from September 1 old soldiers will have their war pensions disregarded in calculating their entitlement under housing and community charge benefits.
Dissenting Labour councillor Eddie Dryden refused to support the spending cuts and hit out at the way the proposals were presented to the Labour group prior to the meeting.
Coun Dryden did not attend last night's meeting but his views were echoed at by Labour colleague Coun Dave Ross, who said he could not support the cuts before leaving the meeting.
—Residents of Nunthorpe and Stainton and Thornton, which have their own parish councils, will have to pay £341.38 and £340.97 community charge respectively.
Burglars slammed for taking kittens
A SCRAPMAN has criticised burglars who stole a litter of five kittens during a break-in at a car wrecking yard.
Vehicle dismantler Kevin Danks, who runs the Stockton business, said: ‘They were not old enough to leave their mother.’
The burglars broke into the scrapyard he runs with his brother Tony in Adam Street and escaped with £3,000 worth of parts including two car interiors, three sets of alloy wheels and tyres and an engine block.
Wheely great:
After trials in Moorsholm and Loftus wheely bins have been given approval by users.
Now budget costs will be the only control on Langbaurgh Council's four-year plan to provide all its 110,000 users with them.
Merger view:
Consultant Rhona Howarth has been appointed by the Abingdon Childcare Project to look at the possibility of merging MASH (Middlesbrough After-School and Holiday Care) and the East-West Playgroup.
Grisly find:
Firemen who broke into a house in Bruce Crescent, Hartlepool, after a call from worried neighbours found the elderly occupant dead inside.
Fish warning:
Detectives want to hear from anyone offered cheap fish after a burglary at the Golden Flatts fish and chip shop in Jutland Road, Hartlepool.
Anyone with information can contact the police on .
Bike reward:
Schoolboy John Moore, ten, is offering a reward for the return of his £100 mountain bike which was stolen from outside a shop in Murray Street, Hartlepool.
Anyone who can help to recover it should contact either John on 271293 or the police on 221151.
Raid thwarted:
Burglars fled empty-handed after triggering the alarm as they tried to break into Garforth's off-licence in Burbank Street, Hartlepool.
They had earlier cut the telephone wires.
Working women:
Working for Women has launched a new  initiative which will ensure that training and opportunities in County Durham match the needs of women and potential employers.
The group, which is made up of representatives from local companies, colleges and the County Durham Training and Enterprise Council was launched at a ceremony last week.
Guest speakers included Sue Rorstad, managing director of Darlington-based Poppies and Fred Crow chief executive of the TEC.
Hi-tech award: Sunderland-based hi-tech company Peak Test Service has scooped a major technology award from The Wearside Opportunity.
The award will bring Peak £2,000 worth of consultancy from the Advanced Manufacturing Systems Centre at the University of Sunderland's Industry Centre.
Peak makes electronic test units for industry.
Marketing secrets:
Small businesses in the North-East are being invited to discover the marketing secrets of successful growth at seminars in Durham University Business School on June 22.
The Hallmark seminars are based on two years research by DUBS and the David Hall Partnership into consistently successful and profitable companies.
For further information contact Joan Storey at DUBS, telephone .
Driver hire:
Driver Hire Workforce, an employment agency for large vehicle drivers, chauffeurs and other workers, has opened an office in Middlesbrough.
The company claims customer service is its number one priority and currently holds the BS 5750 quality award.
It has negotiated an agreement with the Transport & General Workers' Union which places Driver Hire on the union's fair agency list.
A ROMANIAN baby flown to the NorthEast for a life-saving operation has celebrated his first birthday.
Bogdan Ursu was plucked from a grim Romanian orphanage by an aid organisation and brought to Middlesbrough.
The youngster was destined to follow many of his ancestors by dying from the family curse hydrocephalus water on the brain.
But surgeon Fred Nath operated on Bogdan after Convoy Aid Romania flew him into Teesside Airport in January.
After CAR supremo Rod Jones visited Bogdan yesterday, he said: ‘The change is remarkable.
‘When I first saw him in the orphanage, he had a swollen head and a tiny little starved body with a pot belly.
Now he looks excellent.’
Mr Jones and wife Fanica were joined by nurses and fundraisers who have helped Bogdan, as Joan and Malcolm Vallin declared open house.
The couple caring for the baby in their Middlesbrough home realise there is a long way to go.
Joan said: ‘He is moving now.
There was also a  possibility that he was blind and deaf, but he's proving that's not the case.
‘He is putting on weight and picking up his strength and can sit up on his own for a couple of seconds.
‘Perhaps the best thing is that he is reacting to noises and the sound of his name.
He knows who we are.’
But Joan admitted it had been a gradual process.
‘He was rather like a new-born baby when he came because of the lack of stimulation,’ she said.
‘There was very little stimulation in Romania.
He was just left in his cot.’
Joan and Malcolm, both 51, of Cooks Court, Ormesby, realise it may be some time before Bogdan goes back to Romania.
‘That doesn't worry us,’ said Joan.
‘We have no regrets at all about taking him.
Every time he smiles, he repays what we have done.’
Bogdan still receives physiotherapy and is checked on a regular basis by Fred Nath at Middlesbrough General Hospital.
‘It will be a long process because he is slightly paralysed down one side,’ admitted Joan.
The tot has a tube which runs from his brain into his abdomen, which allows the fluid to drain off.
‘If it becomes blocked over here, it can be dealt with.
In Romania, he might well die,’ warned Joan.
‘That's why we have to be sure before he goes back.’
NORTH-EAST consumers could be out of pocket after the crash of a double glazing firm.
SureStyle Windows, which has called in the receivers, hit the headlines after revelations about the hard-sell tactics of its NorthEast sales staff.
Customers described how salesmen had continued their sales pitches for hours on end.
One threatened to bed down on a couple's settee while they slept on a purchase, while an angry consumer from Redcar had to call police to get rid of another salesman.
Staff at the company's Middlesbrough office were subsequently sacked and SureStyle promised to clean up its act.
But the Lancashire-based company has now ceased trading and will not be sold as a going concern.
Consumers who have paid deposits are likely to lose out, receivers have warned.
Receiver Mark Palios said the crash of the company meant about 150 full-time and 150 associated sales jobs would go.
Most staff are based in the North-West, although the company had a base in Team Valley, Tyneside.
The controversial Middlesbrough operation closed down several weeks ago.
Mr Palios said: ‘It's more appropriate to talk of the company having badwill than goodwill.’
This referred to the demise of both SureStyle and Stormseal, which crashed and then provided most of the assets and some personnel for the setting-up of Surestyle.
The company has total liabilities of £2.8m and a trading loss of £800,000.
Mr Palios advised anyone who had paid deposits or paid for uncompleted work on credit to write to Cork Gully at 6 Minshull Street, Manchester.
Cleveland trading standards officer Eric Robinson who collated a file of complaints against SureStyle, said they wanted the Office of Fair Trading to take action against the directors of SureStyle to ensure they as individuals did not pursue these sales tactics in the future.
A COMMUNITY campaigner claims a loophole in the law is causing a ‘scandalous abuse’ of the old and mentally ill.
Middlesbrough woman Gwen Lamb was shocked to discover that anyone can offer residential accommodation to the most vulnerable in society.
Current legislation says private care homes need not register with local authorities unless they have four or more residents.
Miss Lamb said she became aware of the problem while out shopping.
‘I came across a very bewildered woman asking for a cigarette and I asked her where she lived and took her home.
‘Then I was shocked to discover someone I knew was running the place.
She says her home is good, but she knows abuse does go on.’
Miss Lamb's own inquiries convinced her that exploitation does go on in homes in the Teesside area.
‘It's an unbelievable racket.
These people have no medical experience and no training.
They are unfit to look after such vulnerable people and some of the conditions these people are subjected to are appalling.’
She outlined her fears in a hard-hitting letter to Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley.
A Department of Health spokesman said the loophole should be closed by next year under the Community Care (Residential Accommodation) Bill.
Cleveland social services director Mike Lauermann said: ‘We know these small establishments exist and would welcome the opportunity to register and inspect them.’
A WARRANT has been issued for the arrest of a Middlesbrough man for failing to pay outstanding poll tax charges.
It is the first time such a move has been made by Middlesbrough council.
Michael Amos, formerly of Melsonby Avenue, Park End, and whose latest address was given as Skirlbeck Walk, originally appeared before Teesside magistrates on November 21 for non-payment of the charge.
He was given a 15-day prison sentence which was suspended on the provision that he paid £2.50-a-week off his debt to the council.
The bench heard yesterday that Amos, who did not make an appearance at court, had made only two £5 payments, leaving an outstanding debt of £392.96.
Magistrates made a commitment order against him and asked the court to issue a warrant for his arrest.
A council spokesman said it was their understanding that the effect of the order was to activate the 15-day prison sentence.
A court spokeswoman said the warrant had not yet been issued.
THE cash squeeze on Middlesbrough Citizen's Advice Bureau could strangle the group, claims its manager.
Anne Pritchard says the organisation is being asked to do more work with fewer resources.
The bureau, in Bolckow Street, answered more than 25,000 inquiries in 1991–2, up on the previous year despite the closure of the building for a month.
Yet grants are not keeping pace and Mrs Pritchard feels that hard-up local authorities may soon have to reduce funding.
‘What we need is statutory legislation that says local authorities must fund an advice service,’ she said.
‘We have a better level of funding than many areas, but it is still discretionary and could be taken away.’
Mrs Pritchard said inquiries were becoming much more complex.
‘In cases of multiple debt, we reckon on 12 hours to work through the inquiry,’ she added.
There is also pressure of space in the town centre premises, although this has been partly alleviated by moving one advice worker to Easterside Library.
Its difficulties have meant that while the CAB workload expands, the services it can offer have had to be cut.
The office now closes half an hour earlier at 3.30pm and a limited number of appointments are being offered.
‘We have endeavoured to meet the demand for our help, despite a reduction in staff hours because of reduced funding,’ she said.
Police set to quiz bridge leap man
CLEVELAND police are today hoping to interview a man thought to have made an attempted suicide bid by leaping from a Stockton bridge.
The 39-year-old Thornaby man is being treated for leg and head injuries at North Tees Hospital, Stockton, after he was seen jumping from Victoria Bridge into the Tees, near the town centre on Tuesday night.
River police and firemen were called to the scene after being alerted by a passing cyclist and found the unnamed man on the rocks.
Brothers charged:
Brothers Andrew and Paul Hodgson of Piper Hill, Colburn, Catterick Garrison, appeared before Northallerton magistrates yesterday after being caught trying to sell part of a £1,400 haul from a Bedale pet shop to a dealer in Hutton Rudby.
The men, aged 23 and 22, respectively, admitted handling stolen goods and the case was adjourned for social reports to be prepared.
Bottle shock:
Early risers in Middlesbrough had a surprise when their milkman delivered his pintas yesterday.
Ian Gawthorpe, of Dale Farm Dairies, was accompanied by Radio One DJ Lynn Parsons on his morning round and customers who answered two simple questions won a year's free milk and other goodies.
Career help:
Women who have been away from work for some time and are seeking to re-start can take the first steps to a new career at a Women Returners Event to be held tomorrow in Middlesbrough town hall crypt.
Experienced staff from Middlesbrough Jobcentre will be on hand, along with other professional bodies from 10am to 4pm and creche facilities are available.
Busy line:
Probably the busiest telephone switchboard in Cleveland is benefiting from a £1 million-plus new system.
The system came into operation last week at Cleveland County Council's Middlesbrough headquarters.
Lessons retained:
An application to renew permission for four mobile classroom units at De Brus Secondary School, Marke Lane, Skelton, is expected to be approved at Langbaurgh's planning and development control committee today.
Pass revival:
Langbaurgh Council is set to reintroduce a concessionary fares scheme for pensioners and the disabled from July 1.
Talks have been held with bus companies on the basis of a £10 pass and 10p per journey charge and confirmation of the transport firm's agreement is expected tomorrow.
Bird strike
DICKIE Bird were positive about his first ton for Yorkshire.
‘Phil Sharpe were in't side too,’ he said.
‘Him and Don Wilson and Brian Bolus.
‘Harry Bell were playing for Durham and an oldish chap called Watson, who I kept hitting back over his head.’
The second team century 112, thought Dickie was at Darlington in July 1958.
Britain's best known umpire was back at Feethams for a nostalgic Lord's Taverners charity do (it raised £740) on Monday evening.
That day in 1958 the Northern Echo also reported that municipal busmen had turned down an extra five bob a week on their £8 15s, that Cliff Jones Britain's most expensive footballer at £35,000 had broken a leg and carried a front page headline about the Royal family.
‘Princess Margaret winks at urchin.’
Without recourse to newspaper files, however, Dickie's memory is somewhat wide of the mark.
Neither Bolus, Sharpe nor Harry Bell played and H D Bird hit 108 before being bowled by Don Hardy.
Jack Watson's figures 0–52 from 16 overs do suggest it wasn't one of his better days, however.
Now 71, and only as oldish as he feels, he still plays penetratively for Bearpark.
Bird made 14 First class appearances for his native county, top scoring with 181 not out the following season, and another 79 for Leicester.
Second team or not, however, there's nothing like the first century.
How, we asked, was he rewarded?
‘Rewarded?’ said Dickie, ‘there weren't even a collection.
You're talking about Yorksheer.’
Public opinion
AS well as the Bird feat, Durham's 1958 annual report (’ the content doesn't give much cause for satisfaction,’it stated) records the emergence of a promising young batsman called Colin Milburn in the Durham Public Schools side.
All of which is very curious we could have sworn Colin Milburn went to good old Greencroft comprehensive.
Sackless
SEEKING his repose, Dickie Bird left Monday's function at 10pm.
Sadly neither the column nor our old friend Allan Edgar was so wise.
Edgar wicket keeper, innkeeper and redoubtable raconteur confided some time after midnight that to help run in his pain-free new hip joint he'd taken an early morning paper round in Aycliffe village.
We in turn suggested that his story was a load of balderdash, or words to that effect, and a charitable wager was struck.
Thus it was that at 6 30 the same barely-to-bed morning the column found itself outside the newsagent's in Aycliffe, joined shortly afterwards by the ebullient Edgar.
‘I haven't got a paper round,’ he said.
‘I just wanted to see your face when I turned up.’
Mr Edgar owed the Lord's Taverners ten quid.
Good lad that he is he gave them £20.
A round figure, as it were.
City men
ALL around Feethams during the Durham-Somerset first day we posed the same question: before leg spinner Ian Salisbury's inclusion in yesterday's England squad, which England cricketer last had the same name as an English cathedral city?
No one, but no one , knew.
See us on Tuesday for chapter and verse.
Cup fever
THE doubters were wrong.
The E V Rayner Cup (Backtrack, Tuesday) really does hold 14 pints.
Len Scott's daughter carried out the milk bottle test.
Len's chairman of the Wensleydale Football League, to which Edward Vivian Rayner presented the handsome, 100 guinea trophy in 1920.
A Middleham entrepreneur, he'd made his money in sugar, apparently, before cleaning up with Hazelhurst's soap.
‘The cup's been refilled a few times since then,’ observes Len, ‘and with some funny stuff.’
Which led us to wonder which is the biggest sports trophy by volume in the North-East.
Len thinks you might be able to sink an awful lot from the Sunderland Shipowners' Cup, which is one of the Wearside League's.
Has anyone the bottle to find out?
SCHOOLS Curriculum Award 1992 holders in the North are: Cleveland: Easterside Primary, Middlesbrough; Bishopsgarth and Egglescliffe comprehensives in Stockton; Kirkleatham Hall School, Redcar.
Durham: Eastbourne School, Darlington.
Newcastle: Lemington First School, Westfield School, Gosforth.
North Tyneside: Whitley Bay Marden Bridge Middle School.
North Yorkshire: West Cliff Primary, Whitby; Allertonshire, Northallerton; Burnholme, Easingwold and Joseph Rowntree schools near York; St Aidan's High, Harrogate.
Northumberland: West Woodburn County First, Hexham St Joseph's RC Aided Middle School; Bedlingtonshire High, Bedlington.
South Tyneside: Westoe County Infants, South Shields.
COUNTY council officials in Cleveland have angrily dismissed reports that they have scrapped plans for a revolutionary light rail network.
A national newspaper claimed yesterday that the scheme had been abandoned due to a lack of government backing.
But assistant director of environment, development and transportation, Ken Glew, said preparatory work was progressing.
He said: ‘Last September the county council took a key decision about what its preferred first phase would be.
‘We have identified that as a link from Stockton station into the new Teesdale site, linking up with the new university, alongside the Teesside Park development into the centre of Middlesbrough and then towards the east, turning down Cargo Fleet Lane, terminating at Ormesby.
‘However, in order to get government grant we need to evaluate a whole range of other options.
We have got consultants looking at that and by September of this year we hope to report back to the council.’
If the council decides to press ahead with the light rail transit scheme, the first phase is likely to cost around £68m.
Government grants will cover only 50pc of that and the county council will need to find the remainder.
Mr Glew said there were a number of sources of cash, including firms  benefiting along the route and the EC.
He added: ‘Our studies have shown that from day one, if our traffic projections are correct, we can cover our operating costs through the revenue received.
‘But there is no light rail system in the world that can cover its capital costs in that way and that is why we need the grants.’
Bid to revive pet bird fails
FIREMEN made a desperate bid to revive a pet bird following a shed fire which spread to an aviary.
Stockton brought three caged finches out alive at the house in Greta Road, Norton, but the fourth appeared dead.
Station officer Brian MacLean, said firemen tried to resuscitate the bird but all  attempts failed.
The shed was completely destroyed and the aviary badly damaged.
Driver's reprieve:
A young motorist who crashed into another car while reversing at a fast speed escaped a driving ban at Whitby magistrates yesterday.
Justin Waring 20, from Sycamore Walk, Loftus, was liable for disqualification after admitting careless driving and failing to report an accident.
He was fined £250 with £20 costs and given eight penalty points.
Danger pills:
Tablets in a handbag stolen from a Teesside dentist's waiting room could be dangerous, police have warned.
The Dophiephin capsules, belonging to Barbara McQueen, were stolen from the Shelton Court dentist's in Middlesbrough.
Welcome din:
The North Yorkshire resort of Whitby promises to be a particularly noisy place later this month when it plays host to the region's first-ever town criers' competition.
Some 16 town criers from all over the country, including the world's loudest, will be competing for the trophy.
TENANT Brendan Meehan chased his landlady and three men from his flat, wielding three knives, a court heard yesterday.
Teesside Crown Court heard a row broke out between Meehan, 44, and the Mansha family over a gas meter at his bedsit in Marton Road, Middlesbrough.
Meehan denied making threats to kill on January 20.
Mohammed Mansha, 30, said he had gone to the flat with his mother and brother Asam.
They asked Meehan, who was in a neighbour's room, about a gas meter and a broken window and Mohammed Mansha told him he would have to pay for the damage.
The five then went into Meehan's flat to inspect the damage.
But then Meehan grabbed some knives from the sink.
Mohammed Mansha, of Croydon Road, Middlesbrough, said: ‘He was shouting that he was going to kill.
I presume it was my mother he meant.
‘He lunged at us with a knife.
He cut the sleeve on my leather jacket.
I thought if he had a chance he would kill us.’
They left the flat but Meehan chased them down the road, shouting he was going to get a gun.
Asam Mansha said Meehan threatened to cut him ‘from ear to ear’.
The case continues.
A MAN who reaped revenge for an alleged stabbing four years ago was yesterday jailed for two years.
Kelvin Riley, 24, of Darras Walk, Pallister Park, Middlesbrough, admitted the two revenge attacks on unemployed Michael Murphy, who now has a metal plate in his cheekbone for the rest of his life.
Riley admitted causing grievous bodily harm with intent and assault causing actual bodily harm.
Duncan Smith, prosecuting, said Mr Murphy, 25, was attacked on two separate occasions as he left De Niro nightclub in Middlesbrough.
Teesside Crown Court heard he suffered a black eye and cuts in the first attack.
In the second his jaw was broken in two places and his nose broken.
Mr Smith said the facts of the alleged stabbing, which triggered the grudge, will probably never the known.
He said Riley had never reported the alleged incident, intending ‘to sort it out himself’.
But he added Mr Murphy had always denied any knowledge of an attack on Riley.
Robin Denny, defending, said Riley was a man of otherwise good character and he had a good work record.
‘He had obviously been brooding on this incident some years back,’ said Mr Denny.
Judge William Crowford told Riley: ‘It's a matter of great regret that I must pass a prison sentence on someone with a good record like yourself.’
Line damage: Metro chaos
DAMAGE to an overhead Metro line on Tyneside caused chaos for thousands of passengers yesterday.
Investigators are working to establish whether vandals caused the fault in North Shields which led to trains being cancelled between Tynemouth nd Wallsend.
Shopkeeper for trial:
A Whitby shopkeeper has been committed for trial at Teesside Crown Court accused of two offences of perjury.
Shemin Mohammed, 36, of Marine Prade, Whitby, was granted bail by magistrates at Whitby yesterday.
Three other people are also awaiting committal to the same court accused of similar offences.
Worker falls:
Douglas Jenkins, 47, suffered serious spine and ankle injuries when he fell 20ft from a gantry at the Mayfair Shooting Centre in Durham Road, Sunderland yesterday.
Mr Jenkins, of Woodside Terrace, East Herrington, was working in the premises when he fell.
He was detained last night in Sunderland General Hospital.
Oil spilled:
A spillage of fuel oil at an ICI Billingham depot resulted in an all night clean-up operation.
A spokesman said a substantial amount of Derv was spilled while a rail tanker was being filled at the North Tees road and rail terminal.
Key player:
Playwright Alan Ayckbourn will leave Scarborough today to take part in the launch of a revolution.
Mr Ayckbourn, who is currently writing a new musical which will receive its world premiere at the Stephen Joseph Theatre in Scarborough, will be in Leeds to launch the National Bibliographic Service's computer software system which will make its records available on CD-ROM.
Washing line:
Police in Ripon are trying to trace the owners of stolen washing recovered after four men were arrested.
The clothing was taken on May 28 and 29 and can be collected from the police station in North Street.
Marathon test for campaign
THE audiology service at North Tees General Hospital is holding a marathon hearing test.
The unit, which is launching a £50,000 fund-raising campaign for a refurbishment project, holds the test on Monday, June 15, when expert advice and information will be given for a fee of £1.
Staff hope that at least 100 people will turn up between 9am and 5pm.The project is laying particular emphasis on improving the wheelchair access and availability of hearing aid clinics.
Language school:
A new business language school at Newcastle University opens on June 18 and is tailored to the needs of local firms.
Courses include English for foreign managers who have re-located to the North-East.
Food award:
Sunderland-company Food For Thought have been presented with a Young Enterprise of the Year award at a luncheon in London.
Directors Bruce and Margaret Parsons were there to receive it.
Pay up:
Poll Tax payers in Middlesbrough will begin to receive their accounts today.
The council has dispatched nearly 105,000 bills amended to take account of the reduction imposed by the Secretary of State when he capped the council's expenditure.
The new Poll Tax level is £339.22 for most people.
Inquest verdict:
A coroner recorded a verdict of death due to an asbestos-related industrial disease on Maurice Sturtivant, 64, of Hillcrest Grove in Elwick, near Hartlepool, who died on May 10.
Gates move:
Parish councillors in East Cleveland have asked Cleveland County Council to supply two kissing gates to keep out motorcyclists at the playing field allotment site at Lingdale.
Leaf it off asks BR Landscape architects have had a special request from British Rail when it comes to tree planting alongside a busy branch line.
‘Please don't plant trees which shed thick leaves in autumn,’ begged the engineers.
They also want the trees kept to a height which will not let them block the track should they be blown over.
The unusual request was made to planning councillors considering an application to build 19 detached houses near the Darlington to Middlesbrough line at Middleton St. George.
A BR spokesman at York explained certain types of trees he could not say which shed thick leaves in autumn causing problems for trains on two counts.
The build up of leaves and moisture from the sap makes wheels slip but can also play havoc with track circuits which activate the signals system.
Mr Jeremy Smith from Darlington planning department said the applicants, Southfield Builders, would submit landscaping details later when BR's request would be pointed out.
The committee approved the application for the estate off Dinsdale Close without commenting on the request.
RIP-OFF: Why do I have to pay 20p to gain access to a car boot sale?
I don't pay at the many markets which are held in Cleveland.
When all is said and done, 60pc of the stallholders are making a living from these sales and are paying a fee to the organisers for the space they have.
I reckon it's a ripoff.
N. Gant, Park Road South, Middlesbrough.
Ban on women
I HOPE when the Church of England Synod meets again it will decide not to have women priests in the ministry.
They would be better employed doing similar work like the nuns do for their church.
It really looks soft seeing women preaching in church.
Homosexuals also should be banned.
They serve no purpose to anybody.
Being what they are they have not chastity.
Let the Church of England reign on as it is.
It will still progress without women priests and homosexuals.
Olive Simpson, 8 Dormand Village, Station Town, Wingate.
New moves to attract industry
A PROMOTION aimed at attracting new industry to the Yorkshire coast has been launched by councillors.
A special reception area is being created in Scarborough Town Hall, and the borough council is to have a special logo and marketing slogan designed.
Special fact sheets and brochures are to be produced as part of the campaign.
The authority is also planning to create a ‘workshop trail’ for tourists featuring local craft businesses.
Health post:
Yorkshire regional health authority has appointed Len Wright as its new director of finance.
Mr Wright, 42, who will take up the post in September, is currently finance chief at Wessex regional health authority.
First woman:
Lady Martin Fitzalan-Howard of Brockfield Hall, Warthill, near York, has become the first woman to be appointed High Steward of Selby Abbey since it was founded in 1069.
Church jobs:
Appointments announced by the York Diocese include the Rev Catherine Durnford, assistant curate at Whitby, who has been appointed assistant curate at Redcar; the Rev Christopher Morgan becomes vicar of St Hilda's, York, and the Rev Simon Wright has been re-appointed Rural Dean of Middlesbrough for five years.
Altar work:
Wood carver Donald Foster has spent more than 1,000 hours during the past 12 months restoring the altar of the English Martyrs Catholic Church at Sleights near Whitby.
The focal point is a carving of The Last Supper.
Donald runs the village's Blue Bank Garage.
School awards:
Six North Yorkshire schools are among 339 in the country to receive curriculum awards for the part they play in the community.
They are the Joseph Rowntree and Burnholme schools in York; Easingwold; St Aidan's, Harrogate; Allertonshire, Northallerton and West Cliff Primary in Whitby.
Bus threat:
North Yorkshire County Council is being urged to restore its funding to support a bus service to Murton near York, the home of the Yorkshire Museum of Farming.
Rider York says it will stop running buses to the village at the end of July unless its decision is reversed.
Bravery award:
Scarborough seaman John Normandale has been posthumously awarded a Russian Convoy Medal in recognition of his bravery during the Second World War.
Head retires:
Maurice Young, head teacher at Hob Moor Junior School in York for 20 years, has retired after undergoing a heart operation last year.
He now plans to become a York Minster guide.
Burglars strike:
Police are investigating a break-in at a house in Racecourse Lane, Ripon.
The burglars searched all the rooms while the owners were away.
Garage raid:
Thieves left a pushchair in a garage after stealing £1,500 worth of tools.
The haul, from a garage at Littlethorpe, near Ripon, included a welder, drills and a chainsaw.
Clubs stolen:
Golf clubs were taken from a car after raiders broke into a garage in Ripon.
The set, stolen from Mallory Park Drive, was worth £900.
Argos arrives:
Argos, the high street catalogue shopping shop, is to take over the former Tesco Home and Wear store in Newborough, Scarborough, which closed five months ago.
The news ends speculation that Argos was to move into the multi-million pound redevelopment planned for the Vernon Road bus station site.
Rare honour:
A 90-year-old churchgoer has been given a rare honour.
Dorothy Tyson has been made churchwarden emeritus of St Nicholas's Church, North Grimston near Malton, after completing 30 years as warden.
She ran the village post office until she was 80 and is still actively involved in the community.
Plea fails:
An anniversary plea by a husband for his wife to return home has failed.
Maureen Gilbert 46, of Hallam Close, Filey, went missing a year ago just half an hour after her husband Derek, a self employed plasterer, left for work.
Nationwide inquiries have drawn a blank.
She had been seen near Filey's seafront but no trace has been found of her since.
PEOPLE who still owe rates in Middlesbrough could face a prison sentence as the council adopts a tough new line to recover debts totalling £300,000.
The cash is owed by 470 individuals, landlords and businesses for domestic and business rates outstanding on April 1 1990, the date the rates system was replaced by the Poll Tax.
The council has tried to collect the arrears by issuing final notices and summonses, and now holds distress warrants relating to the majority of accounts.
‘We believe we have done  everything reasonable to try and collect the outstanding cash,’ said Rosie McLeod, principal officer in the borough treasurer's department.
‘People have been given every chance to make payment in full or to make an arrangement to pay, but it seems as though there is a hard core who do not want to pay.’
She said it left the council no choice but to activate the distress warrants granted by the courts.
‘From now on those involved will have to pay up or face committal proceedings, which ultimately means time in prison,’ she said.
Painter cleared of bar assault charge
A SELF-employed painter and decorator was yesterday cleared of assaulting the manager of a Harrogate bar.
Stephen Gill, of Mount Parade, Harrogate, agreed to be bound over to keep the peace after David Bradshaw, prosecuting at York Crown Court, offered no evidence.
The charge arose out of an incident at Trotters Bar in Cheltenham Parade, Harrogate, involving the manager, Grant Mitchell.
Stroke appeal:
Teams are being sought to tackle the army's assault course at Claro Barracks near Ripon on June 20 to raise money for the Stroke Association.
Sponsorship forms can be obtained from its appeals office at the Abbey Business Centre, 30 Lawrence Street, York.
Parking hotline:
A new telephone hotline will be established by York City Council to deal with parking problems in the Barbican area under new revised proposals for a residents' parking scheme.
Polish visit:
The Dean of York, Dr John Southgate, is to lead a delegation from the Minster to Poland this weekend.
Pool opens:
Lord Stockton will open a pool built by the 26th Middlesbrough Scouts at the GW King Training Centre at Crag Bank Wood, Kildale, on the North York Moors, on Monday.
It will benefit special schools in Cleveland.
Bird problem:
Farmers in the village of Hinderwell near Whitby say their crops are being hit after rook shooting in the churchyard was halted by the rector.
Hotel interest:
Touche Ross, the receivers for Scarborough's troubled Royal Hotel, say there has been keen interest from potential buyers and negotiations should start soon.
Homes scheme:
A scheme to build eight houses on land at Prospect Place, Thornton Dale, is set to be approved by the North York Moors National Park authority despite strong protests from neighbours and Ryedale District Council.
Minster boost:
Brewers Bass are donating £1,000 to the York Minster Fund to help pay for its repair programme.
Rave sales:
More than 700 tickets were sold for York's controversial allnight rave on the Knavesmire on July 3 on the first day of sale.
A MAN who handled stolen industrial tools and stole beds was yesterday sentenced to 220 hours community service at Teesside Crown Court Mark Skyrme, 22, of Millbrook Avenue, Brambles Farm, Middlesbrough, had admitted handling stolen goods and burglary at an earlier hearing.
Deborah Sherwin, prosecuting, told the court £20,000 worth of industrial tools were stolen on May 31 last year from premises in Murdoch Road, South Bank, Middlesbrough.
Police found £42 worth of the goods in Skyrme's bedroom.
In the second incident more than £1,858 worth of beds and bedding was stolen from storage at Wallis Road, South Bank, Middlesbrough.
A TENANT accused of threatening to kill his landlady and her family over a row about a broken gas meter was yesterday cleared at Teesside Crown Court.
Tempers had flared between Brendan Meehan, 44, and the Mansha family over damage to the meter and a window at his bedsit flat in Marton Road, Middlesbrough.
Mr Meehan denied making threats to kill and using unlawful violence.
The court was told how Mr Meehan grabbed three knives from a sink area and chased the landlady, her two sons and another tenant from the property in January.
But yesterday at court Meehan said he shouted at the family to keep away from his home.
He added he had only table knives in his kitchen.
‘I'm not a cook.
I have no need for knives like that,’ he said.
‘I don't know who damaged the meter or the window.’
Soccer team the guests of prison
A Teesside football team will kick off in August as the special guests of the area's newest prison.The Billingham Catholic Club eleven, formerly the Wynyard eleven, have arranged a friendly match with Holme House Prison, Preston Farm, Stockton, on August 16, at 10 am.
Steve Powell, who plays for the away team said: ‘Obviously, the prison team can only play at home but they are anxious to play more friendly matches.’
Hot food:
Police are investigating a fire in a kebab van parked on the driveway of a house on the Trunk Road, Teesville, Middlesbrough.
Minor damage was also caused to a car parked nearby.
Nobody was injured.
Fun day:
South Cleveland Hospital is holding a fun day tomorrow in the hospital grounds tomorrow from 11am to 5pm.
Wine off:
A wine tasting session planned by Stockton Twinning Association today has been cancelled until the autumn due to lack of support.
Top marks:
Another 54 food handlers in Hartlepool have proved they know all about serving up safe food for their customers.
They have successfully completed the basic food hygiene courses run by the borough council.
On offer:
Council officials in Hartlepool are urging local people to come forward to fill the last few places on an outward bounds course in the Lake District.
Applicants who must be aged 1824, should contact Haylli Bellerby at the civic centre.
Good news:
The annual report of Hartlepool Council's housing office on the huge Owton Manor estate says there is a high level of tenant satisfaction with improvement works carried out in the area.
Garage blaze:
Firemen wearing breathing apparatus used a hose reel to put out a blaze in a garage in Nicholson Way, Hartlepool.
Part of the asbestos roof and some beams were damaged by the flames.
Two fire engines were called to the scene.
Theft warning:
A warning has been issued following the theft of 24 potentially lethal detonators from British Rail premises in Hartlepool.
Anyone with information should contact the police on .
Cutback threat to town festival
CASH cutbacks have hit this year's Victorian Week at Saltburn.
Langbaurgh council says there will not be as many entertainments as usual during the final gala day on Sunday August 16.
But the council, which has to make severe economies to meet Government spending targets, is trying to ensure that more people spread their visits throughout the entire week.
Recruit sought:
Cleveland Police are looking for an unusual recruit a horse following the retirement of ten-year-old mare Gellerdale.
Sgt John Marshall of the mounted section wants to hear from anyone interested in selling a horse which must be a minimum of 16 hands.
He can be contacted on Middlesbrough 319099.
Car crash:
Four people were taken to hospital after an accident which left a car embedded in a house at the junction of Duke Street and Hart Lane in Hartlepool.
Bikes snatched:
A sneak thief walked into a house at Reid Terrace, Guisborough and stole two mountain bikes.
Roof approved:
Langbaugh Council has approved plans for a pitched roof and extension to the bowling social club at Mount Pleasant Avenue, Marske.
Ton up:
Former headmistress Mary Liverseed held a party for friends at her Billingham home when she celebrated her 101st birthday on Saturday.
Playground fire:
Firemen were called to a playground in Blakelock Road, Hartlepool, yesterday after three rubber tyre swings were set alight.
Part of the timber flooring on the slide was also damaged.
Driver hurt:
The driver of a heavy goods vehicle suffered a cut ear after it overturned on land behind the premises of Stranton Waste and Salvage in Thomlinson Road, Hartlepool.
IT looks like the partnership is again heading for the rocks.
No, not Charles and Di, but the European Community, that other family at war.
Denmark, the unfaithful partner, has turned its back on its sworn bedfellows with an unequivocal ‘Nej’ and prompted another surge of anti-EC hysteria.
One national paper reports its readers seven to one against closer ties with Europe (such polls tend to attract more of the antis) and a respected columnist bemoans the fact that cooked meats and pies are no longer sold at his favourite deli stall on Leeds market, apparently because of the dead hand of Europeanisation.
In doing so, he overlooks the enormous improvements in English cuisine since we forged closer ties with Europe.
No doubt the Leeds deli was selling cheeses, meats and yoghurts we'd never heard of 30 years ago.
No one need be surprised by the regular rows among the European ‘partners’.
Jacques Delors and his mates should note there are only two things which unite Europe hatred for each other and the influence of America.
Hostility among Europeans is traditional.
We have fought each other in wars, at football matches, on the Spanish beaches.
We write vitriol about each other in our newspapers.
We trade insulting names and make jokes at each other 's expense.
Napoleon and Hitler tried to unite Europe.
And look what happened to them.
In Hitler's case the Americans came in and suddenly we all had something in common.
Movies, Big Macs and Coca-Cola have become the language of Europe.
Britain has been so much influenced by America we no longer consider Woolies, Mars bars and shopping malls (see last week) to be American.
Lyon, the gastronomic capital of France, now throngs with burger bars.
But not everyone loves the Yankee dollar.
The Romans woke up one day to find a McDonalds at the foot of the famous Spanish Steps.
Some locals were so shocked by this attack on their national cuisine they took to offering platefuls of spaghetti at the door to dissuade customers from entering.
A magazine published a glossary of American food for bemused Italians defining such delicacies as ‘Il bigcheese’ and ‘Il ketchup’.
A further stage in the American colonisation of Europe is about to hit us.
According to the The Northern Echo last week, the drive-thru chippy is heading for York, Middlesbrough and Newcastle.
Even the spelling is American.
In fact, the company won't sell chips, but ‘fries’.
The man behind this dreadful idea (from the fishing city of Hull, of all places) believes the corner fish and chip shop has a terrible image.
He might find the ladies behind the counter ‘large and ugly’(his words), but most chippies I've frequented are family owned and the service comes with a smile, even if the figure is rather rotund.
Which is more than can be said of some burger bars and ‘diners’ where the staff are young, dour and can't get home quick enough to swap their multinational uniforms for day-glo tracksuits and trainers (I wonder where that fashion came from?).
Have a nice day.
A TEESSIDE man attacked his brother because he thought he was leading his son into a life of crime, a court heard.
Robert Cunningham, 35, of Palm Street, Middlesbrough, hit brother Thomas in the head with a stick outside the town's Southfield Hotel.
He also injured Thomas's common-law wife when he hit her in the legs with the stick, Teesside magistrates heard.
Thomas Cunningham suffered a cut to the scalp which required hospital treatment.
Robert Cunningham, 35, who suffered a broken rib in the fracas, admitted assault.
His solicitor John Freer said: ‘It's absolute and positive that his brother did lead Robert Cunningham's son into a life of crime.
‘He has corrupted the boy and been an awful influence on him.’
Mr Freer said Cunningham hit out because he feared violence from his brother.
‘The injured party here is no Snow White,’ he added.
Cunningham was conditionally discharged for one year and ordered to pay a total of £65 compensation.
POLICE are investigating a robbery at a Cleveland service station where two female assistants were threatened with what they thought was a handgun.
The incident occured at Park End service station, Middlesbrough, at 9.15pm on Saturday when a man pointed the weapon at the assistants demanding cash from the till.
He made off in a W-registered Ford Cortina estate, stolen in Middlesbrough on May 11.
The car was found abandoned in the grounds of Keldholme School, Ormesby Road, later the same evening.
The man was described as 6ft 2in tall, slim with a local accent.
He was wearing a balaclava and dark clothing.
Police are appealing for anyone who was near the service station at 9.15pm on Saturday or anyone who saw the gold-coloured car being abandoned in the school grounds to contact them at North Ormesby CID on Middlesbrough 301835.
A police spokesman said the stolen car was in poor condition with a broken rear  passenger window.
Anyone who may have seen this vehicle since May 11 is also asked to contact them.
A TEESSIDE optician has been suspended by his professional organisation.
Norman Cole, a partner in Specsaver, which has branches in Stockton and Middlesbrough, has been given a temporary suspension for two years from the British College of Opticians.
Mr Cole was disciplined by the General Optical Council after being found guilty of breaching rules in September 1990.
He was also fined £750.
The council alleged serious professional misconduct after Mr Cole failed to give a patient a signed statement or prescription.
He claimed it was a mix-up.
The action taken does not prevent him from practising as he is still on the council register.
TWO North-East heroes have been honoured for their outstanding courage.
Jackie Simms of Middlesbrough and Richard Cook of Malton, North Yorkshire, were deemed ‘local heroes’ at a star-studded celebrity event.
They were among 12 award-winners who received honours at London's Claridge's Hotel from TV personality and cancer victim Roy Castle.
Have-a-go hero Richard was nominated by girlfriend Sarah Parker after chasing a youth who had raided a Malton antiques shop.
The 27-year-old suffered a nasty head wound from an object thrown by the burglar, but caught up with him and rugby-tackled him to the ground.
He then pinned him down until police arrived.
Jackie, of Seathwaite, Acklam, was nominated by mum Dorothy Morren for her outstanding courage.
She contracted rheumatic fever at the age of ten.
It developed into rheumatoid arthritis, but being confined to a wheelchair didn't stop Jackie marrying and bringing up three children.
Not content with that, she and husband Steven have fostered 32 more children!
‘My husband lived practically next door to a children's home when he was young and had quite a few friends in there,’ said Jackie.
‘He saw how unhappy they were and always said when he grew up, he'd love to take care of children.’
Both Jackie and Richard won a medal and certificate for their bravery.
The awards, presented by the National Enquirer magazine, were described as ‘an American salute to British courage.’
Overall winner Darren Norris, of Romford, London, wins a ten-day family holiday to Disney World, Florida.
A BOUNCER broke into the pub where he worked and spent three hours burning open the safe.
When police arrived they found James Joyce, 32, had over £3,000 in a holdall.
Yesterday Joyce, of St Patrick's Close, Grangetown, Middlesbrough, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted burglary.
Judge Tony Briggs sentenced him to 18 months imprisonment suspended for two years.
Christopher Attwooll, prosecuting, said Joyce had been working at Bowler's Pub in Eston on the night of the burglary.
The pub manager put the takings in the safe and then locked up.
When patrolling policemen checked the pub they found a rear window smashed and could hear Joyce and another man inside.
The two men had burned away the safe door which Joyce said had taken three hours.
Alan Harle, defending, said Joyce was still employed as a part-time doorman at the pub.
He said Joyce had a drugs problem but had voluntarily sought help.
Hopes fading for missing pensioner
HOPES are fading for missing Middlesbrough pensioner Leslie Sims.
The 70-year-old has not been seen for four weeks since leaving the Robert Huggins home for the elderly in Acklam.
Cleveland Police are circulating Mr Simms' details to other forces after a possible sighting at Middlesbrough Bus Station three weeks ago.
Aiming high:
The Mall nightclub, Stockton, is one of 20 top UK clubs to be shortlisted in a disco of the year awards competition.
The winner will be announced by TV chat show host Jonathan Ross on June 21 at the Birmingham Metropol.
Home appeal:
Quality Care Homes has appealed to the Secretary of State for the Environment against Middlesbrough council's refusal to grant planning permission for single and two-storey extensions at its premises in Burlam Road.
Big haul:
Raiders who broke into a house in Perth Street, Hartlepool, escaped with property worth more than £4,000.
Figures welcomed:
Councilors have accepted Cleveland's latest child protection register figures as ‘encouraging’.
There were 327 children on the list on April 1, an increase of just two on the previous quarter.
The figures represent 2.4 children per 1,000 in the county, compared to an average of 4.2 per 1,000 in the North-East.
Garage blaze:
Firemen tackled a blaze in a garage at Beckenham Gardens, Hemlington, Middlesbrough, which destroyed the building and a car inside.
Kitchen fire:
Firemen were called to a kitchen fire in a flat at Park Road North, Middlesbrough.
A cooker was damaged by heat and smoke.
The rest of the flat was smoke-logged.
£10 bus pass: Langbaurgh's concessionary bus pass scheme has been agreed at £10 a pass and 10p a journey and will be resumed on July 1.
Renewal of passes and new issues will be started next week.
A MOTHER'S instinct told Ada Hutchinson her son had been involved in a road accident the moment she heard first radio reports about the smash one Sunday morning.
It was March 2 this year and 25-year-old Gary Hutchinson was driving a minibus full of friends and fellow Newcastle United fans back from seeing Kevin Keegan's team win away at Port Vale.
The friends, all from the Meadowfield and Brandon area of County Durham, had stayed overnight on their way home and had made an early start to get back in time to play in a Sunday League fixture for their local pub team.
But their hired minibus, driven by Gary, was involved in a horrific crash with a Vauxhall Cavalier one mile west of Bowes on a stretch of the A66 which was being converted to dual carriageway.
Car driver Brian Edward Boyle, 37, of Howe Hill, Yafforth, Northallerton, died at the scene.
Gary and eight friends were all ferried to hospital.
Ada Hutchinson said: ‘No names were mentioned on the radio but it was mother's instinct.
I knew it was him.’
Mrs Hutchinson went into the family shop at the front of their home in Frederick Street North, Meadowfield, and told her husband Frank.
When they arrived at Darlington Memorial Hospital, Gary was on a life support machine in intensive care.
He never recovered consciousness and died that evening.
The young stonemason had suffered terrible head injuries and but for the attentions of a passing doctor, would have died at the scene of the accident.
Some of the injured had to be transferred to Middlesbrough General Hospital because no scanner was available at Darlington to assess the extent of their head injuries.
Happily, most of Gary's friends are back to work and even the most seriously injured are recovering well.
But Ada Hutchinson was determined to do something to help the hospital where she says staff still keep in touch to see how her family is coping with the tragedy.
The Memorial will get a computer tomography scanner in this financial year.
The equipment takes images from inside the body in the form of thin slices which can then be viewed by specialists on a computer screen.
The Gary Hutchinson Memorial Appeal is aiming to raise between £12,000 and £15,000 to pay for an image transmission system which will allow those pictures to be sent down a telephone line so specialists at another hospital can advise immediately whether a patient needs to be moved for surgery.
Chris Davey, business manager for diagnostic services at Darlington Memorial Hospital, said: ‘This equipment is very important.’
It is a measure of the popularity of Gary Hutchinson that in eight weeks of fundraising, the appeal total has reached almost £5,000.
At Gary's funeral, 500 people packed the church and 200 more were outside to pay their tributes to the well-loved lad who was known to his friends as ‘The Main Man’ because he organised holidays, football and much of their social lives.
Coffee mornings, fancy dress events, a lads versus lasses football match, discos and other sponsored efforts have all contributed to the appeal.
One friend raised £731 in one day by opening her home up for coffee, teas, and raffles.
Regulars at the Brancepath Castle Inn collected more than £1,000 in one weekend of events.
And customers at the Hutchinsons' shop have contributed more than £200 in loose change thrown into a collecting bucket on the counter.
Middlesbrough goalkeeper Stephen Pears, who lives nearby, donated a magnum of champagne which he won as a man of the match prize.
It is one of 30 prizes in a raffle backed by local businesses which is expected to raise £3,000.
Mrs Hutchinson, who has two daughters, aged 16 and 21, said: ‘At first, Frank and I had to cope for everyone else.
But it seems to be hitting me a little bit more now, I'm beginning to realise he's never coming back.
‘We're coping because this appeal has helped us immensely, it's given us something to aim for.
At least at the end we'll know Gary's life hasn't been totally wasted.’
Anyone who would like to contribute to the Gary Hutchinson Memorial Appeal should contact Mrs Hutchinson at 64 Frederick Street North, Meadowfield, County Durham.
DH7 8ND, or by telephone on 091–378 0995.
POLICE are hunting two youths who snatched a handbag from a woman walking alone in broad daylight.
The 31-year-old was attacked in a railway underpass from Station Road to Bridge Street, in Middlesbrough.
The youths ran off towards the town centre with the bag which contained about £80.
One of the wanted youths was described as being 18 to 19 years old, 5ft 6ins tall, wearing a black hat, black jacket with white stripes across the arms and dark coloured trousers.
The second youth was said to be about the same age and was wearing a bright coloured top.
A NORTH-EAST solicitor appeared in court yesterday to face deception charges over legal aid.
Middlesbrough solicitor Bernard Ridsdale-Tombling is charged with 16 offences of falsifying records and obtaining by deception.
Teesside magistrates adjourned the case until July 30 after an application by Ridsdale-Tombling, 38, of Normanby Hall Park, Normanby, Middlesbrough.
David Chadwick, prosecuting, said the Crown Prosecution Service would be making representations for the case to go to Crown Court.
PLANS for an £880,000 multi-purpose leisure scheme building were given the go-ahead yesterday.
Middlesbrough councillors approved the proposals for the town's Pallister Park which is to undergo major improvements as a neighbourhood leisure facility under a five-year City Challenge scheme.
The leisure services committee instructed chief economic development and planning officer Tony Noble to proceed with detailed design work for the building and seek tenders for the project, which was welcomed by members.
As part of the park plan access to the playing facilities will be off the main north-south pedestrian way with the pavilion located between a proposed amphitheatre and existing bowling greens.
The new centre building will include reception desk, hire store, a multi-use area, toilets, first aid room, cafe overlooking the north terrace, a meeting room and bowlers' lockers.
There will be a separate entrance to the play facility which will include a keep-fit area, indoor bowls, table tennis, an office and tuck shop and a parent and toddler room.
Another entrance adjacent to an all-weather facility will be used by team members and changing rooms will be provided for 80 persons.
All doors and windows are to have roller shutters or metal grilles painted in cheerful colours and high level lighting will be provided by glass blocks.
Mr Noble said the scheme was currently being subjected to appraisal by the Department of the Environment to ensure that expenditure on the project represented good value for money.
He said his officers were confident the plans would meet the criteria.
It is estimated that the play park will attract 2,000 visits-a-week.
WORK to turn an empty block of flats into homes for the elderly has been given the go-ahead.
A £630,000 scheme to convert the old Greenwich House block in Brambles Farm Middlesbrough into Jupiter Court, a sheltered housing scheme of 52 flats, is scheduled to start this month.
The scheme, funded by the council through a City Challenge initiative, will see a big improvement to the open spaces and increase the privacy and security of residents, said housing committee chairman Coun Bob Brady.
Coun Brady said: ‘Sheltered schemes such as the ones at Milford and Glastonbury houses have proved to be some of the housing department's biggest success stories.
‘They have proved that you can combine high standards of accommodation and community spirit in high-rise living.
I'm sure that Jupiter Court will write a new chapter in that story.’
New level the North-East's main hope in the £40,000 Daily Mirror/Sporting Life Greyhound Derby, faces a race against the clock to make Saturday's second round at Wimbledon.
The Harry Williams-trained wide runner took a severe knock above the hock before finishing second last Friday.
‘I would rate his chances of running as 50–50,’ said Williams.
The 50–1 chance with Ladbrokes has had tablets, poultices, ice packs and laser treatment to try to clear the injury, and Witton-le-Wear based Williams will take him today to top Rugby vet Paddy Sweeney.
‘It is disappointing because he was just getting the hang of Wimbledon and he would have won if he hadn't taken the knock at the first bend,’ said Williams.
‘But it is an impact injury rather than a strain and basically it is sore and swollen.
We have to get the bruising out and the swelling down and if we do that he will be all right.
‘But if there is any doubt about him by the weekend he won't run.’
The competition quarter-finals are next Tuesday, so New Level would have to be clear of injury to give his best in two races in four days.
If he races on Saturday New Level will line up against the much fancied Ringa Hustle and the dog which beat him in the last round, Apres Soleil, which is on offer at 80–1.
Williams's other hope, Pond Pavarotti, which qualified by finishing third on Friday, will again be racing against 7–1 shot Glengar Ranger.
Williams is not dismayed by Pond Pavarotti's task.
‘He has two outsiders outside him, while two of the three on his inside are fancied.
‘He went into the bend with Glengar Ranger, who took him out a bit and the winner got on the inside of them down the back straight.
‘But he was only beaten by four lengths in the fastest time of the night.’
SUNDERLAND have lined up a £5,000 marathon match a week on Friday between TV Trophy winner Fortunate Man and the track record holder, Bodies Lisa.
Both dogs were in action at Brough Park last week, with Fortunate Man justifying odds of 2–5 by winning the £2,000 Tyneside St Leger over 670 metres and the Irish-owned Bodies Lisa winning a £100 open over 825 metres after being seriously hampered at the first bend.
Fortunate Man's TV Trophy triumph was over 855 metres, so the winner of the Sunderland Regal Sayers Trophy will stay the 827 metre trip at the east Boldon Stadium.
And the winner of the two-dog match will then take on Crayford's Poor Sue rated to be the best stayer in the country at Sunderland in a £6,000-to-the-winner match on June 24.
Sunderland's permit meeting on Monday night attracted a record crowd and £2,365 was raised for the Haswell and District branch of Mencap.
BROUGH PARK is buzzing about the trial time of newcomer Jerpoint Randy, which went round the 500 metres trip in 30.44 secs.
‘That time would make him the best dog at the track,’ said joint racing manager Jimmy Nunn.
‘It is the fastest time by a track dog here for at least three years.’
Jerpoint Randy, brought from Irish track Clonmel by Tyneside roofing contractor Tommy Wardle, is trained by George Miller.
Taxi office bid goes to appeal
A STOCKTON woman's bid to turn an empty shop into a taxi office is to go to a public appeal.
The appeal will take place in Stockton Town Hall on Tuesday, July 21, at 10am and is expected to last one day.
Stephanie Wilkinson is appealing against a decision by Stockton Borough Council to refuse planning permission to turn the shop, in Bowesfield Lane, Stockton, into a taxi office with flat above.
The council believes the change of use would be detrimental to adjoining occupiers and the surrounding area and says that there is already an existing taxi office use approved for premises nearby in Bowesfield Lane.
Doormen plan:
Middlesbrough has become the first local authority in Cleveland to approve a proposed licensing scheme for doormen.
If Stockton, Langbaurgh and Hartlepool follow suit, the need to train and register bouncers could be incorporated in public entertainments licences by April next year.
Cleveland Police are co-ordinating the scheme.
AIDS support: Profits made from condom machines in Middlesbrough's public lavatories are to be paid to Cleveland AIDS Support.
Members of Middlesbrough's public protection committee decided to divert the cash from Newcastle-based Body Positive.
Women's skills:
Women interested in being their own boss are invited to attend a seminar in Women's Skills offices, Sun Alliance House, from 9.30am to 3.30pm tomorrow.
Organisers of the event hope to attract women wish to re-enter the labour market.
Welcome sign:
A new banner welcoming visitors to Newport primary school, Middlesbrough, will be unveiled tomorrow by the Mayor, Coun Frank Platt.
Funds drive:
Age Concern Cleveland will be holding a fundraising evening at the New Albert, Grange Road, Middlesbrough, on June 24.
Pitch damage:
A stolen car which was set alight at Acklam Rugby Club, Saltersgill Avenue, Middlesbrough, damaged part of the pitch.
Helpers sought:
John Butterwick Hospice, Stockton, is seeking qualified nursing helpers and unqualified volunteers.
Anyone interested is asked to contact Mrs D Howard at the hospice, 96 Bishopton Road, Stockton, or by telephoning (0642) 603753.
Caravan theft:
Detectives are appealing for witnesses to the theft of a £4,000 caravan from Ashvale Homes in Easington Road, Hartlepool.
The thieves hooked up the green and cream Piper Clubman to their vehicle and drove it away.
Anyone with information is asked to contact police on (0429) 221151.
Textile display:
An exhibition featuring the work of textile artists Samantha Bell and Suzanne Cuttle begins at the Gray Art Gallery and Museum in Hartlepool today.
It will run until July 19.
A LIGHT rail transit scheme could still go ahead in Cleveland, although the Government has axed funding for a similar project.
The £100m West Midlands Metro project has been put back for at least a year after the Treasury imposed transport budget cuts.
Cleveland County Council's deputy director of transportation Ken Glew described the news as ‘disappointing’.
He said: ‘There is a great imbalance between government spending on roads and public transport.
Their short-sighted view is at the root of the problem.’
Cleveland would need a massive government grant for its long-term plans for a supertram.
The county council has chosen its preferred route, from Stockton Station through Thornaby and Middlesbrough town centre to Ormesby.
The estimated cost is £68m.
Mr Glew was backed in his criticisms of the Government by Tony Young, operations director of the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive.
The opening of the £133m Manchester Metrolink in April was heralded as the new age of the tram.
Mr Young said: ‘A lot of money is needed to allow all the light rail schemes to go ahead, but it's only a fraction of the cost of the roads budget.
‘The Governemnt has to change its attitude.
It is out of step with the rest of Europe.
Light rail supporters claim they are fast, clean, efficient and can reduce congestion.
The Cleveland scheme is well down the list of schemes in the planning stages.
In Sheffield, the South Yorkshire supertram is being built, while Leeds, Nottingham and Croydon, south London, are lining up behind the West Midlands.
Tony Young urged Cleveland to continue planning, despite the apparently hostile government attitude.
‘It took us nearly ten years and we had to jump through massive hoops.
But we have made it.’
THE traders threatening to sue Darlington Council over the pedestrianisation of Skinnergate are wasting their time.
It is hard to imagine a retailer being able to prove that loss of trade was directly attributable to the exclusion of cars.
Our impression is that the scheme has improved both Skinnergate and High Row.
It is certainly a more pleasant environment without cars and will be further improved with the addition of trees and benches.
And Skinnergate is certainly not a desert, as one trader claimed yesterday.
The experience of traders in York, Middlesbrough, Newcastle and other towns and cities around the country is that pedestrianisation does work for them.
Those in Darlington would do better to collaborate with the council to ensure the scheme's success rather than lining the pockets of the legal profession.
2,000 homeless in East Cleveland There are 2,000 single people or young families in East Cleveland who cannot find accommodation of their own, Langbaurgh's chief housing officer admitted this week.
Mr Keith Holloway was commenting on the case of teenager Lee Kennedy, who was found a bed and breakfast place after months of living in a garden shed.
Lee, who left the family home in Skelton two years ago, came in from the cold to highlight the plight of the young homeless: the Rural Development Commission says more than 14,000 people in country areas are without a home 12pc of the national total and many of them are forced to leave rural areas altogether.
For an increasing number of them, bed and breakfast accommodation is all that can be found and many stay there indefinitely.
Cleveland council's homeless resettlement officers say 18-year-old Lee is a classic case.
He registered with Langbaurgh housing authority, but with weekly benefit of about £33, accommodation was difficult to find.
He could not be considered a priority case, but officer Ms Jayne Gardener managed to find the bed and breakfast place in Middlesbrough.
She said: ‘There wasn't a place to be found in Redcar for him, and finding a private flat or bedsit for someone with little funds is very difficult.
Also it is the start of the holiday period.’
The need for low cost housing in East Cleveland generally was highlighted this week with the publication of the results of a housing needs survey.
Only 35 houses were completed in the area in the last year yet the survey revealed 522 households needing different or additional accommodation within five years.
The survey was carried out last year with funding from the Rural Development Commission and Langbaurgh and Cleveland councils, and its results are being distributed throughout the East Cleveland rural development area.
The need is primarily for affordable housing (to buy or rent) for young people wanting to set up home for the first time, or for the elderly wanting smaller, more manageable accommodation.
At local level the survey's findings have been used as part of the Lingdale Revitalisation Project, to argue the case for converting the old village primary school into homes.
In a wider context, Langbaurgh council has used the information in its housing strategy, and hopes it will help in the campaign for Government cash.
The findings were launched at a housing forum at Skelton Civic Centre on Wednesday.
A North-East milkman who was seen by police officers to roll a reefer cigarette at Victoria coach station was fined £60 by a Horseferry Road magistrates yesterday.
David Whitehouse, 25, of North Park, Middlesbrough, admitted being in possession of cannabis at the station on May 9.
Prosecutor Mr David Archer told the court that Whitehouse was seen to roll a cigarette by the officers but when they approached, he crunched it up.
He was searched and a small bag of the drug was found.
THE North-Eastern Co-op is to appeal after councillors threw out its plans for a superstore development on the outskirts of Middlesbrough.
Three petitions containing more than 2,200 signatures were received in opposition to the proposals for Dixon's Bank, Marton.
Middlesbrough Council's economic development and planning committee also heard there had been 72 separate letters against the scheme.
The committee rejected the scheme, which is contrary to the Cleveland structure plan.
It accepted the recommendations of chief planning officer Tony Noble, who said the development could have a major impact on existing shopping centres.
Mr Noble's report also said: ‘The formation and use of an additional access to the A172 would add unduly to the hazards of highway users and could result in increased congestion and delays.
‘The proposed development would create an unacceptable level of noise and disturbance to the amenities of the occupiers of adjacent and nearby properties.’
Residents' spokesman Rob Farnham, of Eagle Park, Marton, told councillors that people in the area were united in their opposition to the plans, which also include a small housing development.
The Co-op claims the £9.5m plan for the 8.2-acre site would create 200 jobs.
It says its traffic surveys show the road can take extra vehicles and that the site would be tastefully landscaped.
But residents have now been backed by both Middlesbrough and Cleveland councils.
The opposition cuts across party boundaries, with Labour, Conservative and Liberal Democrat councillors all against the scheme.
They believe the notorious ‘Marton Crawl’ would be made worse by the extra traffic the superstore would bring.
The application features a superstore, petrol filling station, car park and residential development.
A Co-op spokeswoman said: ‘We are disappointed by the decision of the committee, but it is our intention to appeal.
‘We will do so when we receive formal notification of the decision.’
THIEVES stole drugs from a doctor's surgery and took them to a Middlesbrough man who could identify them with a handbook, a court heard.
They also left thousands of pounds worth of computer equipment which they had stolen in the raid on the Coulby Newham surgery.
Police found over £3,000 of the equipment at Paul Summersgill's sister's home and Summersgill later produced the rest of the £12,000 of equipment.
Yesterday Summersgill, 27, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted three offences of burglary, four offences of handling stolen goods and one offence of possessing amphetamine sulphate.
Judge William Crawford sentenced Summersgill, of Edgeworth Court, Hemlington, Middlesbrough, to three years in jail.
Tim Roberts, prosecuting, said Summersgill had been involved in burglaries at a butcher's, a shop and a show house.
Ken Gillance, defending, said Summersgill became involved in dishonesty because he needed money to feed his drug habit.
A WOULD-BE Royal Marine hit out at police officers as they tried to arrest him, a court heard.
In the struggle with Richard Bennett the officers' helmets were knocked off and stolen by people in a crowd that gathered to watch.
Yesterday Bennett, 23, admitted two offences of common assault at Teesside Crown Court.
Bennett, of Low Grange Farm, South Bank, Middlesbrough, was given a conditional discharge for two years.
Deborah Sherwin, prosecuting, said constables Neil Armstrong and Darren George were abused by the group of youths in Normanby Road, South Bank.
RESIDENTS of a Middlesbrough street say they have an environmental disaster on their doorstep.
People living in Surrey Street say they are tired of an unhealthy eyesore in their midst.
An area at the rear of a shopping parade, including supermarket Star Discount, is a dumping ground and dogs' lavatory, they say.
Residents are being urged to boycott the supermarket blamed for most of the problems.
Locals say children could be badly hurt by barbed wire behind the shops and have complained about fresh food deliveries being left just feet from rotting rubbish.
They also say heavy vehicles are arriving from 5.30am, causing fumes, pollution and noise.
A petition calling for action was sent to Middlesbrough Council seven years ago.
Gresham ward councillor Barry Coppinger has taken up their case.
He is calling for shoppers to boycott Star Discount and wants the council to take legal action against the company.
But the company last night said it wanted to work with residents to solve the problem.
Director and company secretary Diane Pinion said: ‘The rubbish is not from Star Discount, but from other local businesses and people dumping generally on the site.’
She said the company did not own the land at the rear of the shops and was not therefore responsible for maintaining it, but added: ‘As a gesture of goodwill, we will organise to have the rubbish cleared.’
Homes rocked by boat bomb blast
RESIDENTS of Alexandra Street, Grangetown, Middlesbrough, were shaken by a blast in the early hours of yesterday morning when a petrol bomb exploded on a fishing boat just feet from their homes.
Windows in the street were broken by the blast and fire crews from Grangetown put out the blaze.
Crash inquest:
An inquest into the death of James Carney, 24, of Thames Road, Redcar, who was a passenger in a taxi which collided with another vehicle, was adjourned yesterday pending the outcome of court proceedings.
Play area:
A £80,000 scheme for the play area at Homerton Road, Middlesbrough, has been approved by the council's leisure services  committee .
Safety surfaces will be provided below all equipment.
Toddler hurt:
Joseph Hornigold, two, was freed by firemen yesterday after trapping his finger in a spring-loaded hinge at his grandmother's home in Homerton Road, Pallister Park, Middlesbrough.
The boy was taken to hospital for a painkiller and a check-up.
Bin blitz:
Middlesbrough Council is launching a bin-bag blitz on residents who cause health hazards by putting out refuse sacks before collection day.
The authority has warned that it will not hesitate to prosecute persistent offenders.
Free treatment:
Osteopaths in the South Tees area are offering their services free on Monday as part of a national ‘osteopathic work-in day’.
The initiative aims to show the urgent need to fund training for the profession.
Loud protests:
The noise nuisance investigation service offered by Middlesbrough has been inundated with complaints, public protection officer John Mann told councillors.
GREEN guardian angels are set to take to the streets of Middlesbrough.
Two Civic Patrol officers will work with the community to combat litter and graffiti.
The project, part of the East Middlesbrough City Challenge, has been approved by councillors.
Peter Gitsham, the man in charge of the scheme, said: ‘It will help the council tackle litter, fly-tipping, misuse of cycleways, graffiti and stray dogs.’
The officers will patrol the East Middlesbrough area.
Public protection committee chairman Jim Campbell said: ‘This is a new idea, but based on an old-fashioned pride in your street and neighbourhood.’
A MAN who led a killer to his godfather avoided prison yesterday.
Darren Cocker broke into David Simpson's home in Normanby with Geoffrey Wild and Thomas Coulton in 1990 by entering the house while the pensioner slept.
They took £60 in cash from the one-legged war veteran but Coulton, 18, learned how Mr Simpson kept his back door unlocked for visitors and returned in September to burgle the house again.
This time he battered Mr Simpson to death.
Coulton, of Ajax Way, Normanby, Middlesbrough, was convicted of murder and was sentenced to life imprisonment in October last year.
Cocker, 24, and Wild, 21, appeared before Teesside Crown Court yesterday and admitted the burglary at Mr Simpson's home in Hewley Street.
Both had originally been suspected of his murder.
Cocker, of Park Avenue, Teesville, Middlesbrough, also admitted violent disorder and two further burglaries.
Wild, also of Park Avenue, Teesville, admitted a second burglary and an attempted burglary.
Judge Tony Briggs sentenced Cocker to 12 months imprisonment suspended for 12 months and Wild to nine months imprisonment suspended for 12 months.
Christopher Attwooll, prosecuting, said Cocker had taken Wild and Coulton into his godfather's home and they had taken his wallet.
Barry Stewart, defending, said Watson and Paul Cocker had had the offences hanging over their heads for a long time, adding: ‘It was Darren Cocker's godfather who was the tragic victim of crime.’
A CRUNCH meeting tonight will determine the next moves in the battle over a prestige North-East sporting venue.
Developers Foinavon have slapped in a £5m bid for first-class cricket ground Acklam Park in Middlesbrough.
As revealed by The Northern Echo yesterday, the move could see the ground, which has hosted Yorkshire county cricket matches since 1956, turned into a supermarket.
The Green Lane site is also home to Middlesbrough's cricket and rugby union clubs.
Cricket officials and local residents say they will fight tooth and nail to save the ground, home to both clubs since the early 1930s.
But Dave Waddington, chairman of the rugby club, said tonight's executive committee meeting would look at the issue carefully.
‘It's a lot of money and we cannot simply say we are not interested,’ he added.
The clubs co-own the ground, but Mr Waddington said he understood that if one club consented to sell, the other had to buy them out or agree to sell.
A buy-out would be well beyond the means of the cricket club, adding weight to tonight's meeting, which will make recommendations to be put to the club's membership.
The £5m bid is twice as much as the offer from Argyll which owns the Presto and Safeway chains for half the ground in 1987.
Residents' outcry and opposition from the cricket club delayed progress and the rugby club terminated negotiations with Argyll in September, 1988.
Sources from both clubs said they understood the new bid was from the same source, but an Argyll spokesman refused to confirm or deny that the company was behind the bid.
‘It is not our policy to comment on property matters,’ he said.
A spokesman for Foinavon confirmed the bid had been made, but refused to comment further.
Cricket club president Brian Kneeshaw said the club was opposed to the development, whoever the bid came from.
‘The position hasn't changed much since 1987.
We want to stay at Acklam Park,’ he added.
Annette Winterbottom and Balbir Shukle with pupils Lewis McLoughlin and Jennifer Webb look on after Newport Primary School in Middlesbrough rolled out the banner yesterday.
The 9ft x 2ft 6in banner aims to offer a friendly welcome to everyone arriving at the school.
A ROMANIAN baby is to help repay the kindness shown to him by raising money for other children in need.
Orphan Bogdan Ursu,(above) brought to England for a vital operation by Middlesbroughbased Convoy Aid Romania, will join the NSPCC's Jail and Bail appeal.
People are being asked to go behind bars for charity in the Cleveland Centre, Middlesbrough and then raise at least £100 bail for their release.
CAR co-ordinator Rod Jones said: ‘I thought it would be a good idea for baby Bogdan to join us but he is booked for hospital tests next week.
Now we will be collecting on Monday to keep him out of jail instead.’
Firm fined over meat claim
A NORTH-EAST company was fined a total of £1,300 with £582 costs for claiming its products contained more meat than they actually did.
Cleveland Trading Standards brought the prosecution against Munro Teesside Ltd, of North Ormesby, Middlesbrough, which admitted five offences under the 1990 Food Safety Act.
Checks on corn beef and potato slices and steak and kidney pies showed meat content was between one-third and one-half lower than declared.
County trading standards officer Eric Robinson said his department had advised the company how to improve its quality management systems to avoid future problems.
Bomb blast:
A petrol bomb attack  destroyed a fishing boat just feet from homes in Alexandra Street, Grangetown, Middlesbrough.
Janice and Dave Sparrow will have to scrap the boat which they were renovating.
Police said they were investigating the incident as a petrol bombing.
Quality award:
The Hartlepool Marina Servicing Company will receive the British Standard certificate for quality assurance from MP Peter Mandelson in a ceremony at the town's civic centre on Monday.
The company was formed in 1963 and is renowned for providing an efficient steel fabrication and welding service to the petro-chemical industry.
Bike mugging:
Leslie Mitchell, 16, was mugged by three men who stole his £300 mountain bike.
The incident happened in Loyalty Road, Hartlepool, on Wednesday.
Anyone with information can contact the police on (0429) 221151.
Last chance:
Hartlepool Council officials are to be given one last chance to persuade the government that they should be given a slice of its City Challenge cash.
They will meet ministers in London to discuss plans for the town if they are one of 20 local authorities to receive £37.5m over five years.
Build up:
The Mayor of Middlesbrough, Coun Frank Platt, said he was very impressed when he visited the Brunton's Manor Self-Build Group's community house in Middlesbrough yesterday.
Pictured with him is the group's chairman, Tony Edwards one of 22 mainly unemployed people who are building their own homes during the project.
He said completion would take about another week.
Marathon quiz:
Regulars from several Hartlepool pubs are due to gather in the Park Hotel today for a 12-hour charity quiz to raise money for the Telethon appeal.
Hear, hear: Staff at North Tees Hospital, Stockton, aim to carry out 100 hearing tests on Monday to raise money to improve services.
Bus passes:
Blind bus passengers in Stockton are to be issued with passes by Cleveland County Council entitling them to free travel despite the introduction of a 10p flat fare for pensioners from this Sunday.
Sad service:
A memorial service is to be held on Tuesday at North Tees Hospital for parents and relatives whose babies and children have died.
Today
CARLTON:
Stokesley and District Choral Society performs Faure Requiem/Vaughan Williams Serenade to Music, Church, 7.45pm.
Tickets £2.50/£2.
KIRKLEATHAM:
Charity Fair, more than 30 charities selling a variety of goods, Old Hall Museum, 10am-4pm.
Free admission.
MIDDLESBROUGH:
British Cactus and Succulent Society plant stall and display, Settlement, Community Centre, St Paul's Road, off Union Street.
Botanic Centre, open every weekend, shop, tea-room, visitor centre, bouncy castle, Ladgate Lane, Acklam, near Bluebell Hotel, Middlesbrough, 11am-6pm.
Details, tel M'bro 594895.
STAITHES:
Botanical walk, meet Bank Top car park, 2pm.
STOKESLEY:
Family Fun Day, stalls, bouncy castle, games, face painting, hook-a-duck and lots more, Methodist Church Hall, 1.30–4pm.
Admission free.
Hospice cash:
Brewery giant Bass has donated £500 to Darlington's St Theresa's Hospice as part of its scheme to support the charity work of employees past and present.
Homes plan:
Derelict St Andrews School, on Haughton Road, Darlington, looks set to be the site for four new terraced houses.
Darlington Borough Council is to consider the planning application submitted by the National Farmers Union.
Three houses:
A planning application to build three terraced houses at East Farmhouse, High Beaumont Hill, Darlington, has been sent to Darlington Borough Council.
Garden party:
A garden party will be held at 52 Trinity Road, Darlington, home of Barbara Clarke, on Saturday June 20 between 10am and midday to raise money for the Darlington branch of Mind.
Admission will be £1 and coffee and scones will be served.
For more details or if you can offer prizes for the raffle call Mrs Clarke on 463437.
Band Sunday: The Cockerton Silver Band kicks off a summer of outdoor concerts at South Park, Darlington, with a concert at 3pm tomorrow.
The concerts have been organised by Darlington council which hopes to provide a programme of music in the park throughout the summer season.
Bargain time:
A combined summer fair and car boot sale will be held at the Carmel Comprehensive School, The Headlands, Darlington, tomorrow.
Organised by the PTA to boost funds, pitches for cars are £5 and admission to the ground will be noon.
The sale and the fair begins 1pm.
Bouncy castle, lots of stalls, bargains and prizes.
Good morning:
A coffee morning with stalls and a raffle is being held at Harewood House in Harewood Hill, off Grange Road, Darlington, today from 1011.30am.
Host families:
Host families in the Darlington area are being sought for German students this summer.
Local families are required to provide a home from home for paying youngsters, aged 15–16, from Darlington's German twin town of Mulheim.
More information from The Economic Development Unit, Darlington Borough Council, 10 Houndgate, Darlington, DL1 5RF.
Two charged:
Two Darlington teenagers appeared before the town's juvenile court yesterday charged with assault offences.
The two boys aged 15 and 16 were both released on unconditional bail pending another hearing next week.
Fashion show:
Darlington College of Technology is holding another of its special European fashion shows at the college on June 22 and 23.
Heroin charges:
Arasak Rahim, 20, of Croydon Road, Middlesbrough, appeared before Darlington magistrates yesterday charged with possessing £36,000 worth of heroin with intent to supply.
The case was adjourned until June 26 and Rahim was remanded in custody.
Assault charges:
Darren Dargue, 23, of Brinkburn Drive, Darlington, appeared before town magistrates yesterday charged with assaulting his brother Gary Dargue.
The case was adjourned until June 26 and Dargue was released on unconditional bail.
Summonses granted:
Five summonses to remove gipsies illegally camped on British land at Albert Hill, Darlington, were granted yesterday by town magistrates.
Cop shop:
Police have opened their own cop shop at Darlington police station to sell personal attack alarms and security devices.
The scheme has been organised in conjunction with local Neighbourhood Watch co-ordinators.
Gala day:
Hurworth Community Association is holding a village gala day on Saturday June 20.
Attractions include a mini circus, clowns, dancers, dogs, ponies and Cockerton silver band.
WORK on a £40,000 plan to improve a council-run community centre is set to start in September.
City Challenge resources are to be used to turn empty space above the stage at North Ormesby Pavilion, Middlesbrough, into a training and activity room.
The work also involves relocating the kitchen and lounge area to the ground floor and resiting the main entrance.
Coun Bob Kerr, Middlesbrough council's leisure services  committee chairman, said: ‘The changes will make the pavilion more attractive and more accessible to people of all ages.’
He said the changes were only the first step in a longer plan for the building, a former cinema.
‘We want to establish a play resource centre there, making it an attraction for the whole town,’ he said.
The work on the pavilion would help people with disabilities and provide extra space for a wider range of fund-raising events, said community recreation officer Ian Simon.
A TEENAGER was repeatedly stabbed by a masked man in a busy area in broad daylight a year ago.
Candice Dungey's attacker has not been traced, but Det Insp John Kelly, head of Middlesbrough CID, is convinced that someone is withholding information about what he called ‘a very vicious attack’.
He said: ‘People witnessed the man running away, others reported a man hanging around in the area but no one admits seeing the assault happen.
‘I still feel someone either witnessed the assault and was too frightened to come forward or recognised the man hanging around as a friend or relative.’
Candice, 18, was nearing her home in the West Lane area of Middlesbrough when the man pounced near the Phoenix Squash Club.
He stabbed the shop assistant at least six times with a knife.
She fought him off and he fled.
Candice, bleeding and terrified, was helped home by neighbours and taken to hospital by ambulance.
‘She had very serious abdominal wounds and one doctor told me she would have died if she hadn't been so young and healthy,’ said Mr Kelly.
Why Candice was singled out as she walked home from work is a mystery to police.
‘It's been very difficult to establish a motive,’ said Mr Kelly.
‘It was not obviously sexual and there was no suggestion of robbery.
She is of unusual and attractive appearance.
Possibly that was a reason.’
Hong Kong-born Candice, who is of Oriental appearance, took a long time to recover from her ordeal.
She was in hospital for several weeks and still bears the physical and  psychological scars of the attack.
‘There was a very bad defensive injury on her wrist, where the knife cut through it,’ said Mr Kelly.
‘Psychologically, it has left a big scar and she is still reluctant to talk about her ordeal.
‘But she is an adaptable and intelligent girl and will survive this episode and hopefully go on to lead a trouble-free life.’
More than 40 detectives were assigned to the cases after the attempted murder of Candice last June.
The inquiry has been scaled down over the year as leads have fizzled out.
Candice was able to give a description of her attacker a chubby white male, aged 22–27, with light brown short hair, spiky on top, wearing a tan-coloured stocking mask.
He also wore a khaki-green cotton jacket, brown jeans or chinos and trainers.
Unfortunately, this prompted little or no useful information.
But Mr Kelly has not given up hope.
‘I still believe we can detect this crime,’ he said.
BEREAVED relatives will have their suffering compounded by an ‘insensitive’ survey, it has been claimed.
Middlesbrough Council was attacked for a questionnaire about its cemeteries and crematoriums service.
The survey asked the public what it thought of the service and aimed to identify potential areas of improvement.
It showed 14pc of respondents were kept waiting for services, while many complained that the gardening was of a poor quality.
Conservative councillor Jackie Nilsson criticised the survey, saying: ‘It's very insensitive to be sending such a survey to the recently-bereaved.
I was quite aghast when I read some of the questions.’
Respondents were asked 12 questions, many in several parts, about the service including the length of waiting time, the look and layout of buildings and details about memorial facilities.
The report into the survey says ‘many respondents were glad of a chance to talk about their experiences’.
But it found 14pc were kept waiting and some respondents said they had not been allowed the music or songs they requested.
Public protection committee chairman Jim Campbell said this was an obviously sensitive area, which the council had approached in a sensitive manner.
The survey's findings will be considered by the cemeteries and crematorium consultative committee.
EAST Cleveland has its ‘cardboard’ communities according to a shock report.
Homeless young people are sleeping in bus shelters and shop doorways in Redcar and Saltburn and many families are reduced to spending their nights on friends' floors.
The report on East Cleveland's housing shortage was made at a forum in Skelton which revealed that there are: 114  homeless families in East Cleveland 2000 households on the council's waiting list Only 35 new private houses built in the area in 1991–2 Langbaurgh council has £11m from the sale of council houses but is not allowed to spend it on building new ones.
The Rural Housing Trust and representatives of housing associations and private builders as well as council officials  attended the meeting chaired by the Rev Dennis Samways, chairman of Rural Voice and vice-chairman of Cleveland Rural Community Council.
Mr Samways said he came away from the forum feeling angry and frustrated.
‘The need for elderly people is desperate as well as for those wanting first time homes.’
He said a copy of the report from the meeting was being sent to the Housing Minister.
All we can do it seems is to keep on applying pressure in the hope the Government will have change of heart,’ he said.
Eric Sharp, Langbaurgh's principal housing officer, said the problem with people sleeping on the streets was not confined to London.
‘If you know where to look you can find them in Redcar and Saltburn in bus shelters and shop doorways.
‘I don't say they are there for months but when they can't find a friend or relative to put them up they have to resort to anywhere to keep out of the wind and rain.
‘Families sleep on floors at relatives and friends.
We have to accommodate the worst cases in bed and breakfast places but there are very few in East Cleveland so some families have to go to other towns like Stockton and Middlesbrough.’
He said he knew of only one major house-building scheme at present in the area for between 40 and 50 private houses in Brotton and he felt that they would probably be executive-type houses beyond the means of the homeless people on the council's waiting list.
A CAMPAIGN to restore the title of The Ridings to Yorkshire and its original boundaries is fast gaining support, say its leaders.
Among the latest people to back the campaign is John Sykes, MP for Scarborough and Whitby.
‘I want to see the return of the Yorkshire Ridings and the abolition of Humberside and Cleveland so that Yorkshire can again stretch from the Humber to the Tees as it did for a thousand years before 1974,’ said Mr Sykes.
The Campaign for Real Yorkshire has been set up because of the imminent review of local government structures in the county being carried out by the Government's Local Government Commission.
Now The Ridings Society, the Association of British Counties, the Yorkshire Society and the East Riding Action Group have set up the new organisation to press the case for the Yorkshire boundaries to be restored.
Carl Parker, a York financial consultant and co-ordinator of the Campaign for Real Yorkshire, said 70 MPs of all parties were now supporting the old geographical boundaries.
Fifteen thousand signatures had recently been collected by the new group.
‘Interest is growing fast, not only from within the Yorkshire counties themselves but from people living in other parts of the country who want to see the Ridings return.’
he said.
People living in Middlesbrough now in Cleveland and Hull part of Humberside are also backing the campaign, he said.
There is also support from Barnoldswick, which was switched to the rival county of Lancashire.
The Campaign for Real Yorkshire is pressing for Yorkshire boundaries to be restored to Ordnance Survey maps, the marking of the traditional boundaries with roadsigns, and the  axing of Humberside and Cleveland.
One of the latest key points of the campaign is at Robin Hood's Bay, near Whitby, where Mike Pennock has masterminded petitions.
‘The response has been tremendous and we see the success spreading to many other towns and villages.’
he said.
A TEESSIDE school is determined to be a good neighbour to the hospital next door.
Showing they do not mean to let anyone sleep on the job in creating better relations, pupils of Brackenhoe School, Middlesbrough, organised a bed push for South Cleveland Hospital's baby monitor  appeal .
The Marton Road secondary has set itself a target of £1,200.
But life has not exactly been a bed of roses between the two, in the past, it has been revealed.
‘One of the things is, it is very difficult for a hospital next to a school,’ said head of middle school Peter Dawson.
‘They tend to get a lot of children cutting through their grounds.
We want to show we are responsible towards the hospital.’
Ann Marie Dring and Susan Teasdale, both 14, had special reason to play  their part in the fund-raising event at the weekend.
Ann Marie's cousin, Chloe Marsh, now almost two, weighed in at only two pounds after being born prematurely at the hospital.
Susan's cousin, Craig O'Mahoney, was born with heart problems and had to be rushed to a hospital on Tyneside.
School chum Rebecca Reed pushed the bed with her two friends, joined by school secretary Angela Truscott and Mr Dawson.
ROYAL intervention is being sought to stop a major North-East sports ground being sold to a supermarket firm.
Jackie Nilsson, a councillor for the area which includes the Acklam Park ground at Middlesbrough northern home of Yorkshire county cricket has appealed to the Duke of Edinburgh to intercede.
‘I have already written to the Duke of Edinburgh as president of the playing fields association,’ said Mrs Nilsson.
‘Obviously if we can get his support and if he comes up trumps, it will be marvellous,’ she said.
Dave Waddington, chairman of Middlesbrough Rugby Club, co-owners of the site with Middlesbrough Cricket Club, says the £5m offer by developers Foinavon should be seriously considered.
And that is the recommendation officers of the club are to put to members following an executive committee meeting at the weekend.
Mr Waddington explained: ‘Middlesbrough Rugby Union Football Club's primary objective is development of the higher standards of rugby football at all levels and and ages within Middlesbrough.
‘The club has aspirations to achieve national league status for the town within the next three to five years.
And it is recognised that in order to accomplish this, resources will be a major factor.’
Mr Waddington added: ‘A formal offer of £5m has been received for Acklam Park.
This is seen as representing an opportunity for the club to achieve its objectives and must be seriously considered.
‘Basically, we are looking to discuss it further with Foinavon and that will be the recommendation we will be putting to the general committee of the club.’
Coun Mrs Nilsson says residents will fight to keep developers off the sports ground.
She proposes to recruit a famous cricket fan Prime Minister John Major, with whom she dined only last week to the fight.
‘John Major is a great cricket fan.
Having recently had dinner with he and Norma in London, I am sure he would only be too pleased to help.
‘We will get all the big guns and make sure we show them,’ said Mrs Nilsson.
She added: ‘We had a go on this over four years ago.
We thought we had killed the idea off.
‘If they are trying to grind us down we will not give way.
We have to put as much pressure now to make sure the rugby club do not sell,’ she said.
It is understood Argyll Stores, owners of Presto and Safeway, are behind the bid for Acklam Park.
A NEW campaign to restore the name of The Ridings to Yorkshire and its original boundaries, is fast gaining support say its leaders.
Among the latest people to back the campaign is John Sykes, the new MP for Scarborough and Whitby.
‘I want to see the return of the Yorkshire Ridings and the abolition of Humberside and Cleveland so that Yorkshire can again stretch from the Humber to the Tees as it did for a thousand years before 1974,’ said Mr Sykes.
The Campaign for Real Yorkshire has been set up because of the imminent review of local government structures in the county, being carried out by the Government's Local Government Commission.
The Ridings Society, the Association of British Counties, the Yorkshire Society and the East Riding Action Group have set up the new organisation to press the case for the Yorkshire boundaries to be restored.
Carl Parker, a York financial consultant and co-ordinator of the Campaign for Real Yorkshire, said 70 MPs of all parties were now supporting the old geographical boundaries.
About 15,000 signatures had recently been collected by the new group.
‘Interest is growing fast, not only from within the Yorkshire counties themselves but from people living in other parts of the country who want to see the Ridings return,’ he said.
People living in Middlesbrough, now in Cleveland, and Hull, part of Humberside are also backing the campaign he said.
There is also support from Barnoldswick which was switched to the rival county of Lancashire.
The Campaign for Real Yorkshire is pressing for Yorkshire boundaries to be restored to Ordnance Survey maps, the marking of the traditional boundaries with roadsigns, and the axing of Humberside and Cleveland which it says are ‘artificial names’.
One of the latest key points of the campaign is at Robin Hood's Bay, near Whitby where Mike Pennock has masterminded petitions.
‘The response has been tremendous and we see the success spreading to many other towns and villages,’ he said.
A STUDENT is being hailed as a hero after jumping off a 15 foot-high bridge in the dark in a bid to help his girlfriend who had fallen and fractured her skull.
Paula Harrison, 22, is seriously ill in hospital after tumbling into the River Tees from the former railway bridge at Gainford, near Darlington, late on Saturday night.
Miss Harrison, of North Green, Staindrop, is thought to have been on the way home from a riverside  barbecue when the accident happened just before 11 pm.
She and boyfriend Michael Hartley, 27, of Salisbury Terrace, Darlington, were with a Greek friend, negotiating the fenced-off bridge at East End.
Miss Harrison's adopted father Godfrey Hutchinson said: ‘We still don't know exactly how it happened but we know her boyfriend leapt after her to try to help.
‘The other boy ran about a mile to fetch help it's in the countryside.
Now we're very tense, just waiting for news of Paula,’ said Mr Hutchinson.
Mr Hartley, in his final year studying community arts at Newcastle, had been seeing Miss Harrison for about a year.
He and Miss Harrison's adopted mother Sheila Hutchinson were keeping a vigil at Middlesbrough General Hospital yesterday.
Doctors were carrying out brain scans on Miss Harrison.
Mr Hartley's mother Isabel said: ‘He often has  barbecues and goes swimming at the river when it's hot.’
Miss Harrison, a former pupil of Teesdale Comprehensive School, is due to start a course in movement and dance at Newcastle this September.
Parish council clerk at Gainford Margaret Brown said: ‘They shouldn't strictly have been on the bridge but a lot of people do walk on it and climb over the small barricade at each end.
‘The county council has been working there recently, putting up fencing all along it because it's soon to be opened up as official footpath on a new part of the Teesdale Way,’ said Mrs Brown.
Middlesbrough General Hospital said Miss Harrison was in a satisfactory condition last night.
Fire alert at nursing home
OLD people at a Hartlepool nursing home were moved from their beds on Saturday night after a fire broke out.
One resident was taken to hospital with chest pains as a precautionary measure but was released after a check-up.
The fire at Sunnisde Court Nursing Home, Southgate, the Headland, broke out just after midnight.
A bay window, book case, cupboard and a settee were damaged in the fire.
Making splash:
Painting and decorating apprentice Jason Hutchinson, 19, has being judged apprentice of the year with Stockton Borough Council.
He wins a shield and a £100 voucher to buy tools and materials.
Wounding charge:
Jaqueline Goodson, 18, of Lime Road, Teesville, will appear before Teesside Magistrates Court today charged with wounding Barry Smith, of the same address.
Hot water:
A shower unit caught fire while a woman was using it at her home in Weston Crescent, Norton.
Tight spot:
Firemen had to twice use power jacks to prise apart the bars of a roundabout on a council recreation ground on the Roseworth estate at Stockton, to free two children who became trapped.
Bad break:
Four-year-old Jamie Stokes of Eccleston Walk, Easterside, Middlesbrough, had his left leg broken when he was hit by a car in the town's Elland Avenue.
Left alone:
Langbaurgh Constituency Labour Party is calling on Labour councils to unite against moves towards super regional police forces and any suggestion of handing over policing to private security firms.
Man trapped:
A workman was rescued by the fire brigade at the weekend when he became stuck on a hydraulic platform while working at the Seabird Hotel, The Front, Seaton Carew.
A hydraulic platform from Hartlepool fire station had to be used by the fire brigade to bring him safely down.
Firm blaze:
A steel container at Oxford Chemicals, Tees Road, Hartlepool, was damaged by fire yesterday.
Also damaged were 36 rolls of fibre glass insulation.
Burglars strike:
Intruders forced their way into a house which was being renovated.
They stole tools worth £400, including a saw and a workbench, from the property in Blossomgate.
Car crash:
Three people were injured in a car crash at a North York Moors beauty spot.
A Vauxhall Astra went out of control at Sheep Wash near Osmotherley.
The injured were treated to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Nature plans:
A scheme to create a nature conservation area on the banks of Scalby Beck, Scarborough, have been backed by the borough council.
The North York Moors National Park and Countryside Commission are being urged to include it in The Cleveland Way.
Garage blaze:
A car and the garage in which it was parked at a house in Filey Road, Scarborough were gutted by a fire thought to have been caused by an electrical fault on the vehicle.
Inns offered:
Two leading North Yorkshire inns have been put on the market.
Herriot's Hotel and restaurant at Hawes has a price tag of £295,000, while Kirkbymoorside's George and Dragon, which dates back to the 13th century, is for sale at £400,000.
A WANDERING busker with a record of 50 convictions for being drunk and disorderly was given a conditional discharge by Scarborough Magistrates yesterday after they heard he was a harmless nuisance.
Frederick Brine, 41, of no fixed address, wanders around Scarborough and Middlesbrough playing his harmonica, said Franklyn Garvey, defending.
But on March 3 he was seen by police in Scarborough shouting and swearing, drinking from a bottle and offering to give passers-by a drink, Melvyn Kelly prosecuting, told the court.
Two days later he was seen again by police this time on the town's Valley Bridge approaching people and trying to talk to drivers who had stopped at traffic lights.
‘He was obviously very drunk and was making a nuisance of himself,’ said Mr Kelly.
But Mr Garvey said Brine, who has 50 previous convictions for being drunk and disorderly, was just a harmless nuisance.
‘He doesn't draw any state benefits but gets any money he can by begging and borrowing and occasionally busking,’ he said.
Brine, who admitted two charges of being drunk and disorderly and failing to surrender to bail, was conditionally discharged for a year.
Driver fled after causing crash
A FORESTER drove the wrong way along a dual carriageway to escape police after hitting another car, Thirsk magistrates heard yesterday.
Christopher Todd, 19, of Boltby, near Thirsk, drove his Land Rover into the path of a car on the A168 near Thirsk, injuring two people.
Then he drove off, the wrong way down the dual carriageway, said Jane Cockburn, prosecuting.
Blood tests revealed he was almost twice the legal alcohol limit.
Todd yesterday admitted driving with excess alcohol and failing to stop and report an accident.
The case was adjourned for reports Hens raid: Thieves raided a hen house in Ripon.
They made off with nine birds worth a total of £180 from a house in Studley Road.
Burglars strike:
Intruders forced their way into a house which was being renovated.
They stole tools worth £400, including a saw and a workbench, from the property in Blossomgate.
Car crash:
Three people were injured in a car crash at a North York Moors beauty spot.
A Vauxhall Astra went out of control at Sheep Wash near Osmotherley.
The injured were treated to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Nature plans:
A scheme to create a nature conservation area on the banks of Scalby Beck, Scarborough, have been backed by the borough council.
The North York Moors National Park and Countryside Commission are being urged to include it in The Cleveland Way.
Garage blaze:
A car and the garage in which it was parked at a house in Filey Road, Scarborough were gutted by a fire thought to have been caused by an electrical fault on the vehicle.
Inns offered:
Two leading North Yorkshire inns have been put on the market.
Herriot's Hotel and restaurant at Hawes has a price tag of £295,000, while Kirkbymoorside's George and Dragon, which dates back to the 13th century, is for sale at £400,000.
DOORSTEP delivery of housing services is on the way for people living on a Middlesbrough housing estate.
A neighbourhood housing office offering cash collection services, repair reporting and advice on tenancy issues and rehousing opens in Dalby Way, in the Rainbow Shopping Centre, Coulby Newham, on Monday.
The Hollowfield sub-office will close at noon on June 26.
Housing and tax benefit queries will be dealt with at the Hemlington housing office, Viewly Centre.
THREE Middlesbrough councillors who between them have notched up a century of service to local people are to be made freemen of the borough today.
Couns Walter Ferrier, Gwen Popple and Len Poole receive the honour in recognition of their services to the community.
All three have been members of Middlesbrough council since it was formed in 1974 and they served on the authorities which preceded it.
Coun Ferrier, MBE, who has represented the Thorntree Ward for a record 38 years, was mayor in 1974, council leader for several years and is extensively involved in youth work.
He has always had a keen interest in town twinning activities, particularly between Middlesbrough and Oberhausen.
He is a former chairman of Cleveland County Council.
Coun Popple represents the Acklam ward and is deputy leader of the Conservative group on the council.
She has a long association with the scouting movement and is president of the East Middlesbrough scout executive.
Coun Poole is a St Hilda's ward representative.
He was the last mayor of Teesside, chaired the town's protection committee for 18 years, served on several national environmental health bodies and is a past president of the National Society for Clean Air.
He has been a Justice of the Peace for 27 years.
As a preliminary to the ceremony, the Northern Ireland Royal Marine Band will march through Middlesbrough at 2pm and give a performance on the Russell Street boulevard.
At 6pm the Marines will beat the retreat with the town mayor Coun Frank Platt taking the salute.
— Cleveland police warn motorists not to park along the route of the march Corporation Road, Newport Road, Hartington Road, Borough Road, Linthorpe Road, Grange Road and Albert Road.
Driver ‘poorly’:
Philip Smith, of Stanghow Road, was poorly but stable in Middlesbrough General Hospital last night after his car hit a wall on Stanghow Road, between Lingdale and Skelton, Cleveland.
Passenger Aaron Pucik, who suffered internal injuries, was described as comfortable.
Trial stopped:
The Joe Parker murder trial was halted yesterday when the judge ordered a retrial.
He dismissed the jury at Newcastle Crown Court after hearing that ‘certain information had come to light,’ on the sixth day of the trial.
Kevin Todd, 21, of Hill Court and Kevin Harper, 18, of Rutherford Street, both Newcastle, both denied murdering homeless Mr Parker in Newcastle's Chinatown last year.
Whales cash:
Greenpeace supporters raised £2,000 to help save the whales with sponsored walks in Saltburn and Hartlepool at the weekend.
They were part of 184 walks across the country organised by Greenpeace to raise funds to fight whaling.
The walks come as the International Whaling Committee is to meet at the end of this month when the whaling nations are expected to ask to have a ban on whaling lifted.
A WOMAN aged 22 who fell from a bridge in the dark and fractured her skull is still unconscious and is also thought to have a fractured spine.
Paula Harrison, of North Green, Staindrop, had been out for the evening with friends when she fell 15ft from the bridge into the Tees on Saturday.
Her boyfriend, Michael Hartley, 27, of Salisbury Terrace, Darlington, jumped after her, hurting his own ankle in the fall.
Middlesbrough General Hospital said Miss Harrison was poorly but stable yesterday.
Miss Harrison has lived with Sheila and Godfrey Hutchinson for four years.
Her adopted father, Arthur Harrison, also of North Green, Staindrop, has been keeping a vigil for the daughter he has barely spoken to since she was 17.
‘We adopted her when she was a few years old but we had a difference of opinion and she left home,’ said Mr Harrison, a policeman.
‘But blood is thicker than water and I have been at the hospital waiting to hear how she is but she hasn't come round yet,’ said Mr Harrison.
‘They think she's broken her back,’ said Mr Harrison, who lives just 100 yards away from Paula's home with the Hutchinsons.
‘Paula's welfare is paramount so I am not making waves with the Hutchinsons at a traumatic time like this but obviously I'm extremely anxious,’ he said.
Parish council chairman Brian Biddiscombe said Miss Harrison and her friends should not have been on the bridge.
‘It is to be opened up as part of the Teesdale Way but until then it's not a footpath and it's fenced off,’ Coun Biddiscombe said.
Durham County Council has been erecting safety fencing on the bridge in preparation for the opening of the link on the Teesdale Way but work was not complete.
David Newbegin, county council director of the environment, said: ‘It is properly closed off.’
TWO children were taken to hospital with serious injuries after a road accident in County Durham last night.
Jason Blakelock, 11, and Neil Holmes, 15, both from Millfield Road, Fishburn, were hurt when a car collided with their bicycle on the B1278 road near Sedgefield hospital.
Jason is in Middlesbrough General Hospital with a serious head injury.
His condition last night was ‘very ill’ in the intensive care unit.
Neil was in North Tees Hospital with a serious leg injury and was described as ‘stable’.
Car driver David Cook, 19, of Landreth Grove, Trimdon Village, was treated at North Tees for superficial facial injuries and discharged.
Police are appealing for witnesses to the accident, which happened just before 6pm.
FARMERS are being urged to seek grants to help restore hundreds of miles of stone walls in North Yorkshire.
Eddie Rowney, the only master wall-builder in the North, says the scheme will provide much-needed work in rural areas and enhance the environment.
He has been running a series of weekend courses in dry-stone-wall building which have attracted people from all walks of life, including a surgeon, doctors, millionaire businessmen and nurses.
‘We do lack competent wall builders.
There are very good grants but farmers are not taking advantage of them.’
he said.
Mr Rowney added: ‘There is plenty of work and there are some good opportunities for young people to take up wall-building.’
It takes three years to become a qualified craftsman, said Mr Rowney, who trains wall builders at Botton village, near Danby, in the Esk Valley.
A skilled wall builder can earn substantial money, he said.
Grants are available from the European Community, and from the Countryside Commission and National park authorities for farmers living in upland areas.
‘The walls are a valuable part of the English rural scene.
If they were lost an important part of our heritage would disappear,’ Mr Rowney added.
Meanwhile, the National Trust is organising the rebuilding of walls in the county as part of its contribution to Landscape Year.
‘It is fitting that these important landscape features should be given priority and where possible repaired or rebuilt,’ said a spokesman.
The wall at Roseberry Common, near Guisborough, has been restored by employment training scheme trainees from Middlesbrough.
‘The endless ribbons of dry stone walls are a prominent feature of the North York Moors, marking important boundaries and providing shelter for stock on exposed sites.
‘Due to the expense of rebuilding walls, many have fallen into disrepair or disappeared altogether.
Often only a hump remains where a wall once stood’ said the spokesman.
SOCCER hooligan Steven Williamson faces a life ban from watching Leeds United.
Williamson, 22, punched a Middlesbrough fan as the two sets of supporters clashed at York Railway Station on the last day of the season.
At York Magistrates' Court yesterday Williamson admitted assaulting John Coulthard from Middlesbrough.
Angela Cooper, prosecuting, said high spirits turned to aggression when the two sets of fans met on the train journey home.
The Middlesbrough fans were returning from clinching promotion at Wolverhampton and the York-based Leeds Utd supporters were celebrating winning the First Division championship.
Extra police were called to quell the disturbance when, without provocation, Williamson punched Mr Coulthard.
A tooth was knocked out and he also suffered bruising.
Neville Pearce, mitigating, said Williamson of East Lane Cottage, Shipton, York, was an ardent Leeds supporter who now faced a life ban by the club.
‘It's a serious matter at a time when violence among football  supporters has emerged again,’ he said.
Williamson was fined £350, ordered to pay Mr Coulthard £120 compensation and excluded from all soccer grounds in this country for 12 months.
He was also ordered to forfeit £150 from a previous binding over and bound over again for a year in the sum of £250.
TWO North-East councillors came face to face in court for the first time yesterday over allegations that they assaulted each other.
Cleveland County councillor John Garvey is accused of assault causing actual bodily harm to Middlesbrough Borough Council's Mike J Carr.
But Garvey, 40, has brought a private prosecution against Carr, 33, alleging Carr assaulted him in the same incident in Middlesbrough Town Hall in October.
Yesterday both men appeared before Teesside Magistrates.
Garvey, of Sandwell Avenue, Middlesbrough, is expecting to stand trial at the Crown Court for the alleged offence but magistrates decided neither case could go ahead after Garvey's solicitor Jimmy Watson failed to appear.
The cases against both Carr, of Newlands Road, Middlesbrough, and Garvey were adjourned until June 23.
A CLEVELAND sixth form college is showing more than 200 younger pupils how physics can be interesting and even enjoyable.
The Physics Challenge at Marton Sixth Form College, Middlesbrough, has attracted 14 to 16-year-olds over three two-day periods.
Part of their current ‘challenge’ involves designing and building a wooden bridge.
Malcolm Watters, senior careers tutor, careers, said: ‘There is considerable local and national concern about the drop in number of students applying to study physics at advanced level in sixth form colleges.
‘This concern is recognised by both the teaching staff in schools and in colleges and is shared by industrial and commercial colleagues.’
RESIDENTS of a troubled Teesside housing estate have told councillors of the ‘sheer hell’ they face every day.
People from Middlesbrough's Rivers area had horror stories of vandalism and violence to relate to members of a borough council policy sub-committee.
Mother-of-three Dawn Ryan, of Wye Street, said: ‘My daughter was knocked out when someone dropped a door on her head.
My son had his arm slashed open and my other son has been battered with bricks.
‘I have a dog as big as me and it's been poisoned three times.’
A survey has revealed nine out of ten properties in the area are unfit to live in by modern standards.
Many are empty and act as magnets for arsonists and vandals.
Middlesbrough Council wants to buy up 200 properties to clear the area and make a fresh start.
Yesterday's meeting offered options regarding what should be done with the Rivers in the long term.
Sheila McCarthy, of Grange Road, said many residents wanted to stay in the area.
‘Many want to stay, but not in the same place we live in now,’ she said.
‘It's disgraceful, we've lived through sheer hell for three years.
We want the demolition speeded up.’
Council leader Michael Carr said no one argued that this was necessary.
He repeated promises that the council was doing all it could to improve the quality of life for residents in the area.
The authority has had problems demolishing blocks of properties because small numbers are still privately-owned.
A report to the meeting outlined seven possible future uses for the Rivers area, which involved different mixtures of renovated housing, new housing, green space and town centre uses.
Members agreed a detailed study of possible future uses, incorporating some housing, should be carried out.
They also agreed to involve residents in the consultation process.
MARINES were out in force on the streets of Middlesbrough yesterday.
Their presence was part of the Royal Navy staging a ‘shop window’ display to inform the public.
The band of the Scotland and Northern Ireland Royal Marines also marched through the town centre and entertained shoppers with a musical performance on the Russell Street boulevard.
THE families of two boys seriously hurt in a road accident are keeping a hospital bedside vigil.
Best friends and next door neighbours Jason Blakelock, 11, and Neil Holmes, 15, of Millfields, Fishburn, were riding a bike together when the accident happened on Monday evening.
Known as the ‘terrible twins,’ the Sedgefield School pupils are in separate hospitals.
Neil's aunt Valerie Mason, of Millfields, said the boys had been riding a friend's bike when they were involved in a collision with a car.
She said: ‘Neil was on the back but he can't tell us much about it yet.
He tried to run for help straight after the crash but then he saw Jason on the road and collapsed with the shock.
‘The boys spent all their time together and they're called the terrible twins because they're so alike.’
Neil underwent a three-hour operation at North Tees Hospital to stitch his leg, as well as wounds to his arm and head.
Jason is believed to be still unconscious at Middlesbrough General Hospital.
He received serious head injuries and a broken leg in the collision on the B1278 near Segefield Hospital.
The Blakelocks were keeping a vigil at Jason's bedside last night while his schoolfriend Tanya Dennis, of Chayter Terrace, Fishburn, waited for news.
She said: ‘I was there at the accident just after it happened.
Jason had gone through the windscreen and was unconscious.’
Neil's mother Carole Holmes, of Sherburn Road, Durham, had also been at his bedside.
Last night the hospitals said Jason was poorly and Neil was in a stable condition.
Car driver David Cook, 19, of Landreth Drive, Trimdon Village, suffered superficial facial injuries.
A DIY enthusiast's shallow foundations landed him in court.
John McGee was building an extension on to the back of his Middlesbrough home but instead of making the foundations six feet deep, they were just five inches below the surface.
McGee, of Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough, admitted six offences under the Building Act 1984.
Teesside Magistrates were told he had not entered plans with Middlesbrough council, had failed to give notice of work being carried out and had not made the foundations big enough or deep enough.
Magistrates fined him £350.
Noel Wright, prosecuting, said: ‘The defendant is an enthusiastic DIY man and admitted he was responsible.’
AN international treaty which commits three very different communities to work together for the common good is to be signed in Middlesbrough next week.
The unique trans-continental link involves East Middlesbrough Community Venture and Langridge Initiative Centre with St Andrews Resource Centre in Dublin and the Organisation of Collective Co-operatives of Zimbabwe (OCCZIM), which is based in Middlesbrough's twin town of Masvingo.
Town Mayor Coun Frank Platt will witness representatives of the three communities signing the treaty of friendship at the Langridge Crescent Initiative Centre, Berwick Hills.
‘The treaty will pledge the three communities to work together and share information,’ said community venture's chief executive Mike Lilley.
Mr Lilley visited Masvingo earlier this year to study community enterprise which resulted in the Middlesbrough-Masvingo project.
Under the project volunteers and specialist advisors would be seconded to help community enterprise workers in Masvingo improve their skills and find new markets.
A loan fund will also be established.
The link  between Middlesbrough and Dublin was also forged earlier this year when members of East Middlesbrogh Community venture, which the council helped establish to tackle unemployment, visited the St Andrew's Resource Centre.
PLANS for Teesside's ‘mother church’ to celebrate its 150th anniversary are now complete.
St Mary's Roman Catholic Church, Norton Road, Stockton, will hold a celebration mass on Tuesday, July 7.
Bernadette Coyne, information officer for the church, said is was hoped that many Roman Catholics with roots in the church would join in the celebrations.
‘St Mary's is the mother church of Teesside and many years ago was also responsible for the Middlesbrough area.’
Celebrations include a hymns and psalms flower festival from June 26 to 28, with a preview next Thursday attended by the Mayor and Mayoress of Stockton; a concert by pupils of Our Lady and St Bede School on Sunday, June 28; a concert by St Mary's Sixth Form College, Middlesbrough, on Tuesday, June 30, at 7.30pm and a performance by Teesside Appollo Male Voice Choir on Thursday, July 9.
Dead man had a history of anxiety
AN open verdict was recorded on Edward Bourne, a 41-year-old single man, who was found dead in his home in Cornhill Road, Overfields, Middlesbrough.
Mr Bourne had a history of anxiety and agitation and a psychiatric report stated he found the world too difficult to cope with.
The cause of death was an overdose of paracetamol but Dr Nurbhai said a post mortem revealed the toxic level of the drug would not have normally been fatal.
Cleveland coroner, Michael Sheffield, said notes found in Mr Bourne's room indicated they were written in a depressed state of mind but there were also some poems in a light vein.
Green appeal:
A green group is holding an open night in a bid to attract new members.
Friends of the Earth Cleveland has seen a  dramatic decline in numbers over the last decade but spokesman Mark Davidson said: ‘We have several campaigns ongoing and we are active in the Cleveland Environmental Forum.’
Anyone interested in joining should contact .
Drivers warned:
Six people have been prosecuted for persistently ignoring ‘residents only’ parking schemes in Middlesbrough and ordered to pay fines and costs totalling £710.
Direct services committee chairman Stephen Cass said: ‘The council is committed to enforcing the scheme, which has overwhelming support from people living in and around the town centre.’
Holiday alarm:
Middlesbrough council's public protection department, which has warned that badly-fitted burglar alarms can annoy neighbours and attract thieves, has published an easy-to-follow guide highlighting the way to trouble-free security.
School fire:
A store room at Ayresome Infants School nursery, Pariament Road, Middlesbrough, was badly damaged in a fire yesterday afternoon.
Police are investigating the cause of the blaze.
THE SONS of Cleveland child abuse doctor Marietta Higgs appeared in court yesterday and admitted their part in the burglary of a flat-mate's room.
Nicholas and Robin Higgs had approached Neil McEvoy and suggested he break into David Jamison's room at the house they shared in Kensington Road, Middlesbrough, to teach him a lesson.
But Teesside Crown Court was told both brothers changed their minds and tried to persuade McEvoy not to go through with the burglary.
However McEvoy, 21, broke into the house in October 1990 and stole almost £4,000 of property.
Yesterday the Higgs brothers, McEvoy and Patrick Sigsworth appeared before the court.
Nicholas, 21, and Robin, 20, admitted incitement to burglary.
Nicholas Higgs also admitted burglary at another house in Kensington Road.
McEvoy, of The Vale, Grove Hill, Middlesbrough, admitted six offences of burglary, obtaining by deception, attempting to obtain by deception, taking a car without consent and making off without payment.
He also asked for 21 other offences to be taken into consideration.
Sigsworth, 21, of The Crescent, Middlesbrough, admitted two offences of burglary.
The Higgs brothers, of Roman Road, Middlesbrough, were given community service orders.
Nicholas was given 160 hours and Robin 80 hours.
McEvoy was sentenced to 15 months imprisonment.
Sigsworth was given a conditional discharge for 12 months.
Paddy Cosgrove, defending Nicholas Higgs, said the conversation with McEvoy had begun as a joke.
But he said the brothers had asked McEvoy not to carry out the burglary.
POLICE discovered stolen jewellery at a Middlesbrough man's home, a court was told.
Ian Siddle, 30, had around £300 worth of jewellery taken from a burglary and a stolen video recorder in his home when police executed a search warrant.
Yesterday Siddle, of Lynmouth Close, Hemlington, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted two offences of handling stolen goods.
He was given a conditional discharge for 12 months.
Andrew Clarkson, prosecuting, said Siddle told the police he had bought the video from a man in a pub and had found the jewellery and just not handed it in.
Barry Stewart, defending, said Siddle was contrite and ashamed at what he had done.
He said: ‘In no way is this man a professional receiver of stolen goods.’
CHILDHOOD friends came to blows at a factory Christmas party.
Wayne McClelland and Christopher Woodhouse were at the Newbould's factory party at Chaplins pub in Middlesbrough when the row broke out.
McClelland punched Mr Woodhouse twice in the face breaking his nose.
Yesterday McClelland, 17, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted assault causing actual bodily harm.
He was ordered to pay compensation of £250 and costs of £150.
Jamie Hill, prosecuting, said in an earlier incident Mr Woodhouse was involved in a scuffle and McClelland, of Windsor Street, Middlesbrough, stepped in to break it up.
But as they were McClelland claimed Mr Woodhouse had punched in the earlier incident.
Mr Hill said: ‘Then without warning he punched Mr Woodhouse full in the face.’
Alan Harle, defending, said: ‘They were friends before this incident.
They still work in the same department and there doesn't appear to be any further problems.’
Bid to unravel death mystery
DETECTIVES are investigating the mysterious death of a young North-East soldier in Scotland.
Allan Stevenson, 17, of Jesmond Gardens, Hartlepool, was found lying in a pool of blood in an ‘autopoint’ cash booth in Gordon Street, Glasgow, on Monday.
He was rushed to hospital but later died.
The junior leader training at the Army Apprentice College at Harrogate had been on weekend leave and was due back at 11pm on Sunday.
A police spokesman said there were no suspicious circumstances but added: ‘So far we have been unable to establish why he was in Glasgow or when he arrived.’
It is thought he might have hitched a lift and motorists who saw him have been asked to come forward.
Trio held:
Three Tyneside men have been arrested in connection an incident in which three bouncers were allegedly assaulted at the Eclipse nightclub in Stockton on May 12.
A spokesman for Cleveland police said the men were arrested after a joint operation with Tyneside police early yesterday and brought to Teesside for questioning.
Founder dies:
Dorothy Jameson, who founded St Oswald's Hospice in Gosforth, Newcastle, has died, aged 77.
Five years ago she was awarded an MBE in the Queen's Birthday Honours.
Relative Relative plea: Cleveland police are seeking relatives of Edward Sidney White, 64, who was found dead recently at his home in Dorrien Crescent, North Ormesby, Middlesbrough.
There were no suspicious circumstances.
A £30m clean-up of the River Tees has been announced by the Northumbrian Water company.
The money will be spent on extending and modernising its Portrack sewage treatment works at Stockton, resulting in ‘significantly’ cleaner water being discharged back into the River Tees.
Engineering director Alan Girven said: ‘The Portrack extension will give a major boost to the cleaning of the river Tees and is part of our continuing commitment to improving the environment.
‘The whole of Teesside will benefit from having a cleaner river, not just the 200,000 people living in the Stockton and western Middlesbrough areas who are served by the works,’ he said.
Major extensions to the works will provide biological treatment, additional settlement tanks and storm water handling improvements.
Subject to the project being given an early go-ahead by the Teesside Development Corporation, preliminary work should begin towards the end of July with the whole project completed by the autumn of 1994.
Neither the birds nor their watchers have been left out of the scheme.
A new pond and a bird hide are also being installed.
A LABOURER who was depressed because he couldn't get a job was found dead in the rear of a stolen van parked behind a college annex, an inquest heard yesterday.
Pathologist Dr Richard Jones told the hearing that Michael Brown, 24, of Preen Drive, Acklam, Middlesbrough, died due to carbon monoxide poisoning.
His body was discovered by Frank Collins, caretaker of Kirby College, at the rear of The Barns, in Orchard Road, on a Saturday morning when the college was closed.
A hosepipe was attached to the exhaust pipe leading into the interior of the van and the engine was still running.
Angela Jones, 26, of the same address, said she had known Michael for eight years and they had lived together for seven.
She told Cleveland coroner Michael Sheffield he became depressed through being out of work and it made him irritable and upset.
On the evening before his body was found she had organised a baby-sitter to look after their two children and invited him to accompany her to a function at Dowman's British Steel Club, but he had refused to go and instead went out alone.
He arrived back home at about 12.30am, upset at her going to the club.
He then walked out of the house saying he was leaving but did not take anything with him and the car remained outside the house.
After about an hour he telephoned her from a call box and she told him ‘not to do anything silly’.
PC Stephen Noble who attended the scene at the college annex told the coroner a check on the van revealed it had been stolen eleven days previously.
Verdict: Suicide.
AN INQUIRY has been launched after 13 people were taken to hospital following a chemical incident at a council-run hostel for the homeless.
The drama erupted after a resident in the Middlesbrough hostel mixed two household substances, which reacted violently with each other.
Fire and ambulance crews were called to Lincoln Villas in North Ormesby and immediately took four casualties to Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Nine more were taken in as a precautionary measure while firefighters ventilated the building and removed the canisters involved.
Two of the staff at the hostel which has places for 23 residents were detained overnight after being transferred to South Cleveland Hospital.
The male staff member who went to the resident's aid was most badly affected.
He was said to be ‘stable’ last night.
A Middlesbrough Borough Council spokesman confirmed that an inquiry had been launched into the incident.
The Health and Safety Executive has also been informed.
The incident happened at about 2pm yesterday, while a resident was carrying out a routine domestic chore.
‘What appears to have happened is that the resident mixed two household substances, which should not have been mixed,’ said the council spokesman.
‘These produced a chemical reaction and fumes.
The alarm was sounded by a member of staff and emergency procedures followed.
‘The residents were taken to hospital as a precaution, but the member of staff appears to have been badly affected and we are obviously concerned about that.’
He said a full report into the incident would be produced and denied staffing structures were in any way to blame.
‘This was a one-off incident, a very unfortunate occurence, which appears to have been the result of an error by someone who resides in the hostel,’ he added.
Man may have seen shooting
DETECTIVES believe a hitchhiker may have witnessed the murder of a special constable in North Yorkshire.
Special PC Glenn Goodman, 37, was gunned down on the A64 near Tadcaster on June 7.
PC Sandy Kelly, 32, was also shot and is recovering under armed guard in hospital.
Police appealed for the hitchhiker, seen walking towards a slip-road to Tadcaster, to contact them.
Meanwhile, two men accused of the murder, Paul Patrick Magee, 42, and Michael O'Brien, 28, were remanded in custody for four weeks amid tight security at Old Thames Magistrates Court in London yesterday.
They are also charged with the attempted murder of PC Kelly.
Two pregnant: Two schoolgirls became pregnant after a relationship with a 20-year-old man, Whitby magistrates heard yesterday.
Andrew Dixon, of Langdale Terrace, Whitby admitted unlawful sexual intercourse and will be sentenced on July 13.
Church raid: Thieves who broke into St Mary's church at Blyth, Northumberland, stole more than £5,000 worth of silver.
Police are appealing for witnesses to contact them.
Worker robbed: Police were last night hunting two men who attacked and robbed a factory worker of several hundred pounds shortly after he collected the cash from a bank near North Shields town centre.
Arson attack: Police said yesterday that a fire in an empty block of flats on the Moor House estate at Ashington, Northumberland, was started deliberately.
Shop robbed: Thieves escaped with more than £100 after threatening staff in a general dealer's in the west end of Newcastle.
Police said at least two youths were involved.
Council workers: Gateshead Council now employs 11,680 people, including 79 registered disabled, according to latest figures from the authority.
The total includes part-timers.
River rescue: Workman Anthony Robson, 33, from Cleveland, was rescued from the River Tyne by marine police after falling from scaffolding as he worked on the Scotswood Bridge in Newcastle yesterday.
He suffered head and shoulder injuries and was treated at Newcastle General Hospital.
Tight fit: Firemen last night used a hacksaw to rescue a seven-year-old girl who became stuck after she squeezed into the cradle of a baby swing in St Christopher's Park, Richmond Street, Middlesbrough.
as if life at Westminster were not strain enough, the House of Lords took on the Commons in a tug o' war contest this week.
We have to report that the lower House, quite literally, ended up on their backsides.
‘We were six inches off winning when the b + + + + + + rope slipped,’ says Labour deputy chief whip Don Dixon in somewhat unparliamentary language.
Dixon, 63-year-old MP for Jarrow, was the North-East's sole Commons representative.
Among the Peers was the Marquess of Zetland, aged 54 and better known for his love of horse racing.
He is chairman of the Redcar course.
Don Dixon and other MPs had trained with the Paratroopers; the opposition's sole training, insists Lord Zetland, was a couple of glasses of Pimms beforehand.
An annual event for five years, the tug o'war has always been won by the Lords.
Monday night's 2–1 defeat was the closest their ceremonial inferiors had ever come.
‘I said if we didn't win this time we'd abolish the b + + + + + +,’ says Dixon, digging in for the first time since his Army days.
‘My job as deputy chief whip is to get MPs to pull their weight, so I thought I'd better set an example.’
His hobbies, tellingly, are listed as ‘reading and sport.’
‘I'm fitter than almost any of them,’ he claims.
‘Some of our team just turned up on the night, pulled and had a belly full of beer.’
Don Dixon went back to the House, stayed until 11pm, and was back at his desk at six o'clock next morning.
‘Tug o’ war is like that lager they keep advertising,’he says.
‘It's reached muscles I didn't know I had.’
And the winners?
‘The Lords were all gentry, born into the peerage and spent all their life doing nothing but playing sport and climbing mountains.’
Lord Zetland who lives near Ripon and lists his recreations as horse-racing and lawn tennis but not mountaineering was in the team for the second year.
‘It was a very great occasion,’ he says, ‘you don't see too much tug o’war these days.’
New Commons speaker Betty Boothroyd was referee, David Coleman commentated, Tory MP Teresa Gorman turned up (unavailingly) as a mini-skirted cheer leader.
The big heave ho was part of a charity evening for the MacMillan Nurses Fund, of which Lady Zetland is president.
Given enough rope they raised £30,000.
Happy landings
GOALKEEPER Aidan Davison, so his grandma tells us, has just been named the Millwall supporters' player of the year.
‘Another bloomin' great cup for me to clean,’ she added.
Brought up by his grandparents at Close House, near Bishop Auckland, he has kept goal for Spennymoor and Billingham Synthonia and Backtrackies will recall that earlier this season he endured a collapsed lung and a major operation, after most of Derby County fell on top of him.
Soon after his return, Sunderland put six past him at Roker Park (’ he was choked’says gran) with half Close House in the stand.
Now he's on a six week U.S. holiday with his girlfriend, an American air hostess.
After some ups and downs, young Mr Davison has landed on his feet.
Grayson favour
BETWEEN holidays with the club to Majorca, the girlfriend to Greece we also touched base with Simon Grayson.
One of Bremner's boys, Grayson spent six years at Leeds United before a £35,000 move to Leicester City in March.
Leeds won the championship, Leicester, agonisingly, lost in the play off final.
Simon, 22, is a happy man nonetheless.
‘I played nearly as many games in a week for Leicester as I did in six years for Leeds,’ he says.
A Bedale lad — his father Adrian is head of PE at the local comp — he also played cricket for Yorkshire at junior levels.
His brother Paul, conversely, had soccer trials for Middlesbrough and Leeds but plays cricket, more out than in just now, for Yorks.
Both know the difficulty of being nearly men.
Simon is glad he got out.
‘It's been very frustrating.
I was hardly out of the first team squad last season but was substitute just once.’
Bench mark
OUR friends in the Vaux Bluebell Over 40s League, where many an ex-professional has had his energies redirected, have won a remarkable victory with worldwide implications.
Conscious of advancing years, the league always allowed four subs until an alert referee wrote to Durham FA pointing out that international law allowed only two, regardless of age.
‘Well,’ says league secretary Kip Watson, ‘you know what happened after that.’
What happened after that was that divisional FA representative Arthur Clark took up the case and more sedentary media throughout Britain puffed to catch up with the Backtrack exclusive.
Through football's myriad machinery the case has finally reached FIFA, who've bowed to age.
From next season any league in the world for players of 35 and over can have four off the bench.
‘It's incredible that a little league like ours has won a victory at the highest level in the world,’ says Kip.
‘It makes everything worthwhile.’
Bottom line
FACED with a choice between Shildon and Stockholm, the redoubtable Charlie Thomas has opted for a home fixture.
Charlie, 80-odd and ever active, will present an FA centenary award at a Shildon FC dinner on July 3.
That the club marked its centenary in 1990 is unconnected with arthritic administration, rather that for many years Shildon believed it was two years later.
Gateshead based Charlie, an FA vice-president and Shildon manager from 1968–70, had the alternative of unfinished business in Sweden.
England disappoint him.
‘The way it's going,’ he said on Tuesday, ‘we'll be lucky to finish bottom.’
Foreign fields
.
and finally, our amblings from Kimblesworth cricket club a few weeks back erred in suggesting that Maltby, near Thornaby, dropped out of the National Village Cup because they thought Kimblesworth a bit far.
Tom Francis, Maltby's chairman for 22 years, says they told organisers last October that they were pulling out because of fixture congestion.
‘Last year eight of the lads toured India, this year they're talking of Zimbabwe,’ says the chairman.
‘If they can do that, I don't think they'd be too bothered about getting to Kimblesworth.’
Apologies.
Eric's knee-jerk reaction
HARD upon all the publicity about freemasonry, we came upon Eric Gates rolling up his trouser leg on Tuesday afternoon.
The former England footballer on the next bar stool in the Royal Oak at Staindrop was showing the cut and thrust of his latest injury.
After a career spanning Ipswich, Sunderland and Carlisle he now turns out ‘only when they've eight men’ for the Oak, a love of the game that failed to prevent the pub team finishing bottom of their league.
Worse still, on a public park in Bishop Auckland he fell onto a clemmy, slashed his knee through about 360 degrees and within ten minutes was in hospital.
‘It was so bad they could lift it up,’ he says, graphically.
Still between engagements, the unassuming Eric 37 next week remains philosophical.
‘It wouldn't have happened at Wembley, though’ he says.
Schools debate in the gutter
ANY doubts parents might have had that the Government's scheme to persuade schools to opt out of local authority membership was motivated by pure political dogma must now be dissolved.
The secret meeting organised by MPs Tim Devlin and Michael Bates, to which they invited selected headteachers to discuss opting out, drags the education debate down into the gutter of political furtiveness and secrecy.
I have two children currently passing through the education system at secondary and primary levels.
The last thing I want is for them to be used as pawns in political games of chess to suit the personal ambitions of politicians.
Parents want the debate on the future of education of our children to be held in public with all interested parties making a contribution, not ashamedly and secretly in smoke-filled hotel rooms.
Alan Bell, 70 Oxbridge Avenue, Stockton.
New directions
MANY of the craft and training organisations only provide training for our indigenous industries.
The North-East needs to expand the diversity of products and services it offers.
People need to be introduced and trained into processes which do not exist in the area.
Many people would take up the opportunity to train in a completely new craft.
Instead of training people to make plain pinewood furniture, why not offer training in the manufacture of the beautiful marquetry-style woodwork and furniture of Italy, handmade glassware, custom-made leatherwear.
I am sure there must be room for training in more specialised technological industries not at present available here.
Imported industries contributed to the success of the industrial revolution, history could be repeated.
Coun Edmund T.
Pearson, 23 Cowley Road, Acklam, Middlesbrough.
Bowes vision
HARRY Mead is entitled to his opinion and I think we might have suffered his first disparaging comment on Bowes Museum and its founders (Echo June 5) without protest.
His second attack (Echo June 12), however, was spiteful and even more irritating.
John Bowes could have spent the whole of his fortune on good living and racing but he chose to apply a large proportion to this fabulous collection and its breathtaking setting, which now forms part of our local heritage.
We should not blame him for being a man of his time but commend him for his remarkable vision and altruism.
Alan Ayers, 35 Priestgate, Darlington.
ANOTHER fast food takeaway could be on the cards for Darlington.
Planning officers have received an application to convert two shops into a restaurant on the corner of Yarm Road and Peel Street.
Mr A Singh, of Corporation Road, wants permission to turn the buildings into a takeaway and four self contained bed sitting rooms.
His application will be considered by members of the development committee at a later date.
Other planning applications received by Darlington Borough Council include (Darlington address unless otherwise stated): conversion of two shops into one retail unit, rear extension, new shopfront and four car parking spaces at 330 and 332 North Road for A Goodrick, North Road; erection of a satellite dish at the Queen's Head, Tubwell Row, for Bass Taverns, Middlesbrough; high level store signs for C & A, unit 12, The Cornmill; three cantilevered canopies over main entrances to Cornmill shopping centre in Tubwell Row, Prebend Row and Northgate, for Burton Property Trust, London; new shopfront for three units in The Cornmill, for Pentos Retailing Group, Birmingham; new shop signs in The Cornmill, for Pentos Retailing Group, Birmingham; two storey side extension at 31 Troon Avenue, Darlington, for Mr and Mrs W Marchant.
HARD-UP Langbaurgh council is offering £15,000 in grants to voluntary organisations which help residents.
The council, which had to make severe cuts in its budget, is offering the handouts through the Government's Urban Programme and the fund can provide grants of up to £1,000.
Particular emphasis will be given to schemes within the priority areas of South Bank, Grangetown and Redcar.
Council spokeswoman Carol Thompson said: ‘Basically, assistance is available to help voluntary and community groups involved in economic, leisure, arts, sports and community projects.
‘Support will be given to those which meet the needs of disadvantaged groups such as the elderly, disabled, ethnic minorities, women and the unemployed.’
She said grants would be available on a first come, first served basis.
She can be contacted on Middlesbrough 231212, ext 4281.
A GROUP set up to protect abused children in Cleveland has drafted new guidelines.
Cleveland Child Protection Committee has drawn up a new constitution in a bid to stamp out physical and sexual abuse in children as well as neglect and ill treatment.
The move was welcomed yesterday by North Tees Health Authority who will have Dr Ian Guy, director of public health, sitting on the committee.
The committee was set up in the wake of the Cleveland child sex abuse inquiry to implement the National Health Service and Community Care Act.
The committee will produce an annual report and foster effective consultation between agencies such as the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, the local education authority, the police and the probation service.
The committee will be broken down into four district working groups covering Hartlepool, North Tees, Middlesbrough and Langbaurgh, as well as task groups to carry out specific functions.
THE boyfriend of the Teesside woman shot during a visit to the United States has said the couple want to put the incident behind them and lead normal lives.
Paul Reaney was with girlfriend Alison Scott when the gunman struck in Washington DC where the 22-year-olds were working as research assistants.
Paul said: ‘It was a racially-motivated attack.
I'm convinced Alison was shot because she was white but she had no power in constructing the society they were making a statement against.’
Alison spent 17 days in hospital after the shooting, but has made a good recovery and is back home in Trimdon Avenue, Acklam, Middlesbrough.
‘She is pretty well over it,’ he said.
‘She's a strong girl and now we just want to forget it and get on with our lives.’
Playgroup solves water headache
A WATER problem is over for a Cleveland pre-school playgroup whose new building is officially opened on July 1.
Staff at Levendale Under Fives Group, Yarm, became entangled in a row over a separate water supply to their new building which would have meant finding extra cash over and above the £25,000 raised by parents for the new building.
They had wanted to share a supply from nearby Levendale School.
Ruth Appleby, a member of the management committee, said the problem had now been solved amicably among the committee, the school and Cleveland County Council.
Inquest opened: An inquest opened in Middlesbrough on Elizabeth Beedle, a 41-year-old cleaner of Kent Close, Lakes Estate, Redcar, who was certified dead following an incident at her home on June 13.
The Cleveland coroner adjourned the hearing pending further inquiries.
Natural death: Cleveland coroner Michael Sheffield recorded a verdict of natural causes on retired labourer James Hamilton, 67, of Blakelock Road, Hartlepool, who died ten days after being admitted to South Cleveland Hospital, Middlesbrough.
Tall orders: Scout leaders from the 1st Marske Barn Owls are attempting to climb Ben Nevis in Scotland, Scafell in England and Snowdon in Wales within 48 hours this weekend to raise funds for Teesside Hospice.
Training success: John Howell, chief executive of Teesside Training and Enterprise Council, presented 70 certificates to trainees and staff of East Cleveland Training ranging from basic skills to supervisory management qualifications.
Sleeping out: Hartlepool people will be sleeping out for a night later this month to raise money for local projects to tackle homelessness.
A 20-strong group is expected to take part in the event at Tunstall Court on June 26.
Anyone wanting to take part or make a donation should contact Bob Finch or Eileen Adams at the civic centre on 266522, extension 2334 or 2332.
Free trip: Disabled anglers are being offered the chance of a free sea fishing trip by the organisers of the Top Town Sea Angling Championships which take place in Hartlepool on June 27 and 28.
There are still some spare places on boats for the first day.
Anyone interested should write to organiser Ralph Smith at 132 Queens Road, Beighton, near Sheffield.
Ship visit: HMS Sirius, a Leander Class frigate, will arrive in Hartlepool this afternoon for a six-day visit.
Members of the crew who also include wrens, will take part in a number of sporting fixtures and visits.
Name choice: Karl Reed, a pupil at Dyke House School in Hartlepool, is the winner of a contest to name the Dyke House/Jackson ward community newspaper.
His suggestion The Clarion was picked out by the judges.
Mayor's draw: Coun Stephen Smailes, Mayor of Stockton, will make the draw next Friday at North Tees General Hospital, for the British Heart Foundation Stockton and District branch's leisure and pleasure draw, at 3.30 pm.
The first prize is a four day holiday for two in Paris.
Proceeds for local cardiac needs and national heart research.
MBE award: Keith Wotton, one of Langbaurgh council's principal environmental officers, has been awarded the MBE.
Mr Wotton, a Major with the Parachute Regiment at Seaham, lives in Kirkleatham Lane, Redcar.
Three freemen: Three long-serving Middlesbrough councillors have been made freemen of the borough in a special ceremony at the town hall.
Couns Walter Ferrier, Len Poole and Gwen Popple received ‘freedom scrolls’ in recognition of their contribution to the community.
The trio have clocked up more than 100 years of local authority service between them.
Lakes walk: Rambler Joan Stainthorpe is to lead a 12-mile walk along the Kentmere Horseshoe tomorrow from Yoke to Froswick, Harter Fell and Kentmere Pike.
Anyone interested in joining Darlington Ramblers on the walk should meet the group at the Health Centre in Darlington at 8am.
A BUILDING site worker drowned when he drove a fork-lift truck into the River Tees, a inquest heard.
William Langdon, a 45-year-old fireproofer, was asked to use the truck to collect some material from the stores on the SLP Engineering yard in Vulcan Street, Middlesbrough, because the regular driver was late for work.
Mr Langdon, of Park Avenue, Redcar, was working for subcontractor Tees Marine on an oil rig module, and was seen to collect the material, but never returned.
His body was recovered by police underwater divers later the same day.
Crane driver Ian Mendine, of Barrhouse Avenue, Consett, County Durham, told the inquest jury his lift to work had arrived late.
The incident occured when it was dark and raining heavily.
Mr Mendine said in those conditions driving was difficult because the inside of the cab steamed up with condensation, the windscreen wipers did not clear the whole of the screen and the front lights were obscured when carrying a high load.
An investigation found that accesses should remain clear, headlights on the fork-lift truck should be mounted on the roof and the cabin should be fitted with demisting equipment.
The jury  returned a verdict of accidental death.
THE danger of mixing household chemicals was stressed by a Cleveland fire chief and Middlesbrough council following an alert in a hostel.
A resident mixed normally harmless products and produced choking fumes which put 15 people from the council's Lincoln Villa hostel for the homeless in hospital.
A full investigation of the incident was continuing yesterday and a full report will be prepared for the next housing committee meeting.
Firefighters ventilated the building, in Westbourne Grove, North Ormesby, and used a spray to ‘flatten’ the gas.
Wardens, Suninder Gogner and Christine Hoy-Taylor, were detained overnight in hospital and their condition yesterday was comfortable.
They were expected to be discharged last night.
Fire station officer Malcolm Knox yesterday warned people to read the label and stressed that a concoction of household chemicals could kill.
He said the fumes could have proved fatal to someone on their own or an older person.
Council spokesman Doug Allan said labels on any household chemical warned they must not be used in association with other products.
A MAN whose driving manoeuvre ended in the deaths of his wife and mother-in-law could not explain how his car was hit by a truck.
But in a statement to an inquest in Bishop Auckland yesterday, Jacob Blenkinsop, of Northam Close, Stainton Park, Middlesbrough, said truck driver Ian Burrige was not to blame for the accident near Sedgefield on March 5.
The hearing was told Mr Blenkinsop's wife wife, Iris, 57, who was in the front passenger seat, died of chest injuries.
Her mother Edith Humphrey, of Ash Hill, Colby, Middlesbrough, who was sitting behind, died of multiple injuries.
Mr Blenkinsop had intended to turn right off the A689 into the Sedgefield access road.
His red Renault 9, which he bought just the week before, was seen by truck driver Mr Burrige to indicate as it slowed to turn right from a central refuge.
But it pulled out across the path of the Volvo truck, carrying nine tonnes of road stone.
Verdicts: Accidental Death.
Council to make waves at show
A NORTH-EAST council is hoping to make waves at a top boat show.
The European Workboat Show from June 23 to June 25 on the Solent will feature the custom-built £69,000 fireboat being delivered to Cleveland County Council in August.
Dave Punshon, chairman of the Consumer Protection Committee, says its presence at the show demonstrates the boat's state-of-the-art technology.
‘It can be on its way to an incident within four minutes, is capable of travelling at up to 25mph and is extremely manoeuvrable.
It has the latest technology, including sophisticated navigation equipment.’
Body found: Police were called to the Oxford Road area of Hartlepool yesterday after a man collapsed and died.
There were no suspicious circumstances and a postmortem was due to be carried out later.
Bus pass dates: Concessionary bus passes for pensioners can be renewed at Saltburn Cricket Club between 9.30am and 4pm on June 29, and at Guisborough Salvation Citadel Army Citadel in Westgate between 9.30am and 4pm on June 30 and July 1, and not on the dates previously stated in The Northern.
We apologise for the error and any inconvenience caused.
Church aid:
Parishioners at St Barnabas' Church in Linthorpe, Middlesbrough, have pledged £125,000 in just two weeks to pay for refurbishment which will take until October to complete.
Music treat: The trustees of Sir William Turner's Hospital at Kirkleatham, near Redcar, have organised a short season of concerts to mark the 300th anniversary of the local knight starting tomorrow at 2pm with a performance by Marske Band.
Soccer marathon: Staff at British Steel, Stockton, are holding a five-a-side football marathon at Stockton sports centre on Sunday at 2pm.
Teams are all male except for two women's teams who will be playing at 6pm.
Peter's call: Hartlepool MP Peter Mandelson has signed a House of Commons motion urging the Government to provide immediate help to students suffering financial hardship.
He says they should not be forced to abandon their education.
Natural causes: Soldier Allan Stevenson, 17, of Jesmond Gardens, Hartlepool, who was found dead in Glasgow on Monday, died from natural causes, a postmortem has revealed.
Long journey: Nigel Lupton, 32, of Raby Road in Hartlepool, is training hard for a 900-mile cycle ride from Land's End to John O'Groat's next month.
He is tackling the journey in a bid to raise £1,000 for research into breast cancer.
Going back: Graham Robb, the Tory candidate defeated in Hartlepool at the general election, is to move back to Darlington.
He said the difficult decision had been made in the interest of his public relations business.
Safe stolen: A safe containing £1,500 in cash and cheques was stolen from the Abbey National/Cornerstone office in Saltburn.
In a separate incident, gaming machines were broken into and their contents, estimated at £650, stolen in a burglary at Saltburn Golf Club.
Show jeopardy: Langbaurgh's budget economies have cast a shadow over the future of East Cleveland's annual show.
The event will go ahead on August 30, along with the nationally recognised dog show on the Saturday, but the parish council was told the show's future looked gloomy because of increased charges, particularly those for hiring equipment from Langbaurgh council.
Fish stolen: Two Koi carp, 8in long and valued at £100 have been stolen from a garden pond at Zetland Road, Loftus.
Cash pursuit: Four residents and three staff at the Ann Charlton Lodge for Muscular Sclerosis sufferers in Redcar raised £100 for the lodge in a 24-hour Trivial Pursuit marathon.