

A GROUP of North-East nuns travel to South Africa this month to establish the country's first multi-racial convent.
The journey is a repeat of an epic voyage 60 years ago when nuns from the Carmel Convent in Darlington travelled to found the first Carmelite convent in Johannesburg.
The 1992 group of seven sisters aims to fund and build a convent in Mafikeng, in the African homeland of Bophuthatswana.
In August 1931, at the request of the Bishop of Johannesburg, the first Carmelite convent was founded in Rivonia.
A further convent was subsequently founded in Wynberg, Cape Town in 1952, although both convents have been used exclusively by whites.
Last year, in response to a request from South Africa's Bishop of Kimberley, three Carmelite nuns in Germany, knowing Darlington's links with South Africa, contacted the convent and asked for help.
‘I felt a kindred spirit with our German sisters, letters were exchanged and interest began to grow,’ said Sister Bernadette from the Darlington convent, in Carmel Road.
Sister Carmula, Sister Christa and Sister Maria Carmen travelled from Germany to Darlington in November and Sister Margaret from Wynberg in South Africa.
In the meantime three Darlington sisters stepped forward to join the new foundation Sister Mary Joseph from South Shields, Sister Mary Columba from Newcastle and Sister Philippa from Glasgow.
The multinational group has been getting to know each other in the Darlington convent ever since.
Their contemplative order is one of the most enclosed, strictest and silent of the Roman Catholic Monastic Orders.
Apart from two hours a day, Carmelites observe complete silence, pray in solitude and work.
They gather only for services of prayer and plainsong.
The Bishop of Kimberley, German-born Erwin Hecht is delighted that his dream of decades is nearing fulfilment.
When built, the new convent will be a simple single storey building, designed as an oval, with a circular church as the focal point the design follows that of an African village where the chief is at the centre of everything.
Meanwhile the nuns will live close by, enabling them to supervise building work the money for which has come from donations worldwide.
The new Carmel convent will be seen as a spiritual powerhouse for the whole of the Kimberley diocese.
‘We hope to bring our African brethren, who we in the western world have exploited so much in past centuries, some of the spiritual heritage of our European Christian culture in the form of the contemplative monastic life which in time will be adapted and enriched by the beauty and spontaneity of African worship and culture as they come to join us,’ said Sister Bernadette.
As the sisters wait for their visas to arrive there is a tinge of sadness for Sister Inge, who was due to go to South Africa with them.
She was taken ill in October with an inoperable brain tumour.
‘She died in our midst six weeks later having got a swifter visa to eternity than we have to South Africa but we know she goes with us in spirit and will help our endeavours far more powerfully from above,’ said Sister Bernadette.
WORK in the community is paying off for dedicated staff at Corporation Road Baptist Church in Darlington.
Yesterday the Rev John Wilson, minister at Corporation Road, said he was encouraged by local people's response to efforts the church is making to provide a focus for a range of activities.
He said the popular Saturday youth club is just one example of how the church was trying to strengthen its links with its neighbours.
As well as the youth club the church boasts a mother and toddler group, a club for the elderly and a popular meeting point for young people who have regular gatherings at the church's brand new hall.
Mr Wilson said: ‘The most pleasing thing is that we attract people to activities here who don't necessarily have anything to do with the Baptist church.’
People come from all over Darlington for some of the activities but in the Denes area the church is regarded as a genuine focal point for non-churchgoers as well as regular worshippers.
Because of the positive work being done Mr Wilson and his colleagues are keen to stress that there is no link between the Corporation Road Baptist Church and Andrew Cook, who was convicted of a violent attempted rape at Teesside Crown Court on Friday.
The Northern Echo printed the story based on information given by prosecutors at the crown court.
Cupid's counsel
AT FIRST glance the Cleveland Catholic Marriage Advisory Council and St Valentine's Day may seem unlikely bedfellows.
But there you are.
The organisation is using the event to drum up business by running a St Valentine's Raffle.
‘I think it's done by quite a few groups these days,’ said Mike Morrissey of the CMAC.
‘It's a peg to hang it on.’
It should also help to raise cash for the training of counsellors who help to revitalise jaded relationships and can therefore make St Valentine's Days of the future much more worth celebrating.
The CMAC, it transpires, is a misnomer.
Those seeking help need neither be Catholic nor married and will not be the recipients of advice.
They will chat to a counsellor who may propose several possible paths to take and help to pinpoint the problem.
Each of the Cleveland branch's volunteer counsellors (three trained and three in training) holds about 50 sessions a year.
There is no shortage of counsellors.
The ultimate aim naturally is to do itself out of business.
‘But that isn't going to happen,’ said Mike Morrissey, ‘not in the sort of world we live in.
And there is no shortage of people now who want to come forward to talk.
With CMAC the waiting time isn't that long either.’
It sounds like an organisation worth buying a raffle ticket to support though not instead of a card for your beloved, an omission which may lead to the seeking out of a CMAC counsellor.
A CHURCH minister's plea to John Major over the closure of old people's homes in County Durham looks to have failed.
The Rev Bill Harper has championed the cause of the 260 pensioners involved, but is disappointed that the Prime Minister has not replied to his letter pleading for help.
County councillors confirmed this week that the homes will close, blaming competition from private homes, vacant places and the amount of investment needed in council homes.
Mr Harper, from Richmond, North Yorkshire, says his letter has been sent from ‘pillar to post’ from Downing Street to the Department of Environment and on to the Health Department without a word from Mr Major.
Mr Harper, who visits residents in some of the homes, said: ‘What buck passing.
Why doesn't the Prime Minister just come clean with his response?
‘I am committed to these elderly people and I feel they deserve more than this.
I have got to try and help them at times like this when they need me.’
A spokesman at Downing Street said: ‘The Prime Minister receives literally thousands of letters each week.
He is very keen to ensure each gets a proper reply so letters are sent to the relevant department.
‘He does sometimes respond personally but it depends what letters are about.
With this particular letter I cannot say why he chose not to, but he receives so many letters that he cannot physically respond to all of them.’
Mr Harper is still waiting for a response from the Department of Health.
He is hopeful that public outrage could still help sway the county council.
‘We should turn out in droves, all of us, and place our cross against the name of the person in whichever party will care more for the people,’ said Mr Harper.
The homes are Hustledown House in Stanley; Gainford House, Chester-le-Street; Palatine House, Durham City; Ridgeway House, Station Town; Dene House, Bishop Auckland; Greenfields House, Newton Aycliffe and Hollyhurst and Baydale Lodge in Darlington.
THE hopes of a campaigning church minister have been dashed after John Major failed to intervene in closure plans for eight old people's homes.
Rev Bill Harper, from Richmond, has championed the cause of the 260 pensioners in doomed homes but is disappointed the Prime Minister has not replied to his letter.
Durham county councillors confirmed this week that the homes would close, blaming competition from private homes, vacant places, and investment needed on council homes.
The homes are Hustledown House in Stanley; Gainford House in Chester-le-Street; Palatine House in Durham City; Ridgeway House in Station Town, near Wingate; Dene House in Bishop Auckland; Greenfields House at Newton Aycliffe; and Hollyhurst and Baydale Lodge in Darlington.
Mr Harper wanted Mr Major to stop the closures but says his letter has been sent from ‘pillar to post’ from Downing Street to the Department of Environment and on to the Health Department without a word from Mr Major.
Mr Harper said: ‘I am committed to these elderly people and I feel they deserve more than this.
I have got to try and help them at times like this when they need me.’
A Downing Street spokesman said: ‘The Prime Minister receives literally thousands of letters each week.
He is very keen to ensure each gets a proper reply so letters are sent to the relevant department.
‘He does sometimes respond personally but it depends what letters are about.
With this particular letter I cannot say why he chose not to, but he receives so many letters that he cannot physically respond to all of them.’
CATHOLICS in Darlington should soon have sufficient places in their schools, it was revealed yesterday.
Darlington MP Michael Fallon met with Catholic priests at St Augustine's church to discuss ways of expanding places for Catholic pupils.
The move follows months of controversy after Mr Fallon rejected a £91,000 bid to build more classrooms at the overcrowded St Augustine and St Bede primary schools.
Schools Minister Mr Fallon said he gave £243,000 to Durham County Council to spend on schools in the county.
And it was the county's responsibility to decide whether St Bede's and St Augustine's got extra money.
But Catholic priests said Mr Fallon had a duty to provide places for Catholic children under the 1944 Education Act.
Yesterday Mr Fallon met Fr Harry O'Reilly from St Bede's, Canon Bob Spence from St Augustine's and Fr John Caden, a member of the Diocesan Schools Commission.
A joint statement issued by the priests and Mr Fallon said: ‘Mr Fallon agrees that the Catholic community across Darlington should have sufficient places in its own schools.
And he is hoping to enable both St Bede's and St Augustine to expand to meet their demands.’
Mr Fallon is also to meet Bishop David Konstant of Leeds, the Catholic church's senior spokesman on education.
After the meeting Mr Fallon said: ‘We made a good bit of progress.
It is important to look at Darlington as a whole and we have to consider all of the Catholic schools in Darlington.’
Carmel nuns leave soon for new work in Mafeking
THREE nuns from Darlington Carmel Convent follow in the footsteps of their predecessors this month when they travel to South Africa to set up the country's first multi-racial convent.
Sisters Mary Joseph, Mary Columba and Philippa joined three German nuns and one sister from Cape Town in the project which should be up and running by September.
The Nunnery Lane convent became involved in plans for the Carmelite convent at Mafeking after the German sisters were approached by the South African Bishop of Kimberley and got in touch with Darlington.
They knew the town's closed order already had links with South Africa where, in 1931, a group from the Carmel Convent set up the first Carmelite convent in Johannesburg.
While this and a later convent at Wynberg, Cape Town, were used exclusively by white people, the 1992 project is open to all races.
The single-storey building is designed in an oval with a church in the centre, rather like a traditional African village where the chief's house would be in the middle.
Six months' building work would be supervised by the seven nuns and funding came from worldwide donations.
German Sisters Carmula, Christa and Maria Carmen and Sister Margaret from the Wynberg convent travelled to Darlington last year and live in the Nunnery Lane convent until they leave for their new life in Africa.
The group hope to leave Britain on February 20 if the necessary visas are received in time.
Two will probably travel by plane while the rest of the party go by sea.
Originally four Carmel Convent sisters were due to make the journey but, sadly, Sister Inge died late last year after suffering an inoperable brain tumour.
Sister Philippa leaves the Carmel convent in Darlington soon.
Order of St. John honours two men who show they care
TWO local men will travel to London later this month to attend an investiture ceremony organised by the Order of St. John.
Dr. Iestyn Williams, a senior doctor with the order's medical services, will be rewarded for more than 30 years caring for others by being made a Commander.
At the same ceremony in the Grand Priory Church, St. John's Square, Clerkenwall, Mr John Byrne, of Frenchgate, Richmond, will become an officer.
Dr Williams, who came to Darlington from Wales, will be accompanied by his wife, Celia, at the ceremony on February 20.
The retired GP, aged 73, who lives in the Spinney, Middleton St George, worked his way up through the order to the post of county surgeon for County Durham.
Checking the fitness of pilots at Teeside Airport is one of the responsibilities of his present post.
His favourite hobby is motor racing, and he is a familiar face among the crowds at the Croft circuit.
The Isle of Man TT races provide an opportunity for him to combine work and pleasure, though this year will be the last he attends the event.
Mr Byrne joined the order six years ago after 32 years in the Green Howards.
While in the regiment he travelled widely serving in Singapore, Malaya, the Middle East, Cyprus, Germany and several countries in Africa.
After leaving the army at the age of 50 he worked for the Home Office in London, before moving back to Richmond in 1989.
For the last two years his title has been Senior Commandant, Family, Housing and Welfare Service for Catterick Garrison.
‘It means I'm the sort of town clerk for the garrison,’ he said.
‘It's really looking after the housing and welfare for the 2,000 married families on the site.’
He said he joined the order, properly known as the Grand Priory of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, in 1986.
‘When you reach the grand old age of 50 and you realise you have a bit of time on your hands than in some ways the Order is a natural choice,’ he said.
‘There's quite a tradition within the Green Howards, especially, of moving on to St John.
You have the experience of structures and of organising things which means you can be of use to them.
Mr Byrne was involved with the Order's cadet and badge (the six to nine-year-olds) sections in North Yorkshire before becoming Commissioner for the county of Cleveland 18 months ago.
His new post means he is in charge of all St John's activities in the county.
He said the order, set up in 1099 as a religious order, was much more than just the ambulance service.
It was also made up of a hospital in Jerusalem which cares for both Arabs and Jews, an Ambulance Air Wing with 60 volunteer pilots and 50 planes throughout Europe, and an aeromedical section to return people to the nearest hospital to home from the scene of an accident again on a Europe-wide basis.
Mr Byrne travels to London on February 20 with his wife Gillian to be presented with the insignia by the Lord Prior of the Order of St John, The Lord Vestey.
The couple have three adult children, Henrietta, Andreas and Christopher.
Dr. Iestyn Williams.
Mr John Byrne.
Church pips squeak as belts are tightened
The slump in the property market is making life difficult for churches and St Cuthbert's at Darlington is feeling the pinch as much as any.
Parish churches have been told they will receive less money from investments made by the Church of England in property and businesses, and St Cuthbert's is asking its congregation to start making ‘realistic’ donations to make up the shortfall.
The vicar, the Rev. Leslie Gready, wants his flock to give five per cent of their income: otherwise, he believes, the future could be bleak.
In St Cuthbert's monthly newsletter he says: ‘I believe this is the most critical situation which has arisen in the parish during my time here.
‘I'm not exaggerating when I say that if we do not meet this challenge now, we shall be in serious trouble within less than a year.
‘We shall have to be blunt with ourselves and each other.
‘Single 50p coins and £1 coins in the collection plate are not going to get us anywhere near what we need for the life of today's Church.’
The Anglican Church would normally expect to receive 52 per cent of its income from investments in property and business such as the MetroCentre.
But this year the amount it will get from the Church Commissioners the business managers will be well down.
The Diocese of Durham has been told that in 1992 budgets must be cut by £120,000, equivalent to the stipends of nine clergy.
At St Cuthbert's this belt tightening means the vicar must ask his parish for an extra £5,000 and the church steering committee is co-ordinating the appeal for funds, beginning with a planned giving campaign in Lent.
The chairman of the committee is Mrs Margaret Port, and the other members are Ms Sheila Bamber, Mr Jim Blair, Mrs Nancy Foster, Mr Bill Hoskinson, Mr Brian Johnson, Mr Brian Lunn, Mr Alasdair MacConachie, Mr David Morgan, Mr Harry Rogers, Miss Barbara Smith, Mr John Squires and Mr David Woods.
Icke saves
DUE at Durham University tomorrow night if forecasts are correct broadcaster and former prophet David Icke may find other demands upon his time.
Icke, whose only previous North-East connection was in forecasting that Teesside later amended to Tayside would be under water by Christmas, has been signed as a goalie by Jewson Wessex League club Ryde Sports.
He had previously played for Hereford United and Coventry City Reserves.
While is possible that Ryde have signed him in his other capacity as Saviour of the World, the official reason is that regular ‘keeper Ian Lloyd is having trials with York City.
Rival clubs insist there was no competition for his signature, however.
‘We're more interested in making a profit than signing one,’ says Newport's Keith Newbery.
EIGHT Darlington nuns face a gruelling sea journey and a 1,000 kilometre trek through desert on an epic journey to Africa.
News of the remarkable mission was reported in The Northern Echo last week and now fresh details have emerged.
The nuns travel to South Africa this month to build and establish the first multi-racial convent in Mafikeng in the African homeland of Bophuthatswana.
They are all from the contemplative, strict and enclosed Order of the Carmelite in Darlington and are repeating history.
Just over 60 years ago nuns from the same convent left Britain to be instrumental in providing the first Carmelite presence in South Africa.
On Friday the group will start an arduous four week journey on a cargo ship then drive themselves for 1,000 kilometres through the Kalahari Desert.
They had planned to fly out to South Africa but had a long wait for visas.
Now the South African Government has informed the nuns, who are based at Carmel convent in Nunnery Lane, that their visas will be granted.
And Weider Travel, of Felixstowe, has offered them a place on the cargo ship Sexton.
Sister Bernadette, one of the eight travelling, said: ‘We had to give our answer straight away and it was the unanimous yes.
It will give us that much longer to get to know one another and it will be much more interesting than a 12-hour flight.’
The group will leave the town later this week and travel by road to Felixstowe where they will be the guests of Fr John McGuire, the National Director of the Apostleship of the Sea.
Then they will take their place on the ship at Tilbury among the food, plants and livestock cargo.
They will travel through the Bay of Biscay, down the Mediterranean, around the coast of North Africa, passing the Gulf of Guinea, into the Atlantic Ocean and on to Cape Town.
There they will hire a minibus and drive themselves the 1,000 kilometres overland to Bophuthatswana.
CHURCHGOERS in Darlington are to be asked to raise an extra £4,500 towards the parish budget because of the recession.
Most of the income for Church of England parishes comes from the Church Commissioners.
But this year they announced the recession had hit investments mainly in property and so grants would be reduced for several years.
In Darlington, St Cuthbert's Church parishioners already pay more than £21,000 towards costs but that will now be increased to £25,837, up by 20pc.
The Rev Lesley Gready, vicar of St Cuthbert's, is now calling on parishoners to attend a special meeting after evening mass on Ash Wednesday, March 4, when details of a massive fund-raising drive will be announced.
The campaign will last until Easter.
THE issue of Roman Catholic primary schools in Darlington and the need for more places for Roman Catholic pupils is quite remarkable, not least because it has seen the local MP Mr Michael Fallon who is also the Government's Schools Minister make a complete turnabout in his approach to the subject.
I have no doubt that a major influence in forcing him to make what must have been for him a most distasteful and humiliating manoeuvre, was a letter sent by a number of Durham county councillors to a local newspaper in reply to an article penned by Mr Fallon in the previous week's issue.
The basic issue, which Mr Fallon has so far managed to avoid totally in discussing this matter, yet which has made the Catholic community and the county council so anxious and so frustrated, is whether this Government accepts that places in Catholic schools should be provided for Catholic pupils.
The 1944 Education Act provided for this by drawing up what is called the dual system of county schools (ie non-denominational) and Aided Schools whether Catholic or Church of England where a denominational education and environment would be provided.
The Government accepted then and successive governments have always accepted, that there needs to be enough school places for Catholic pupils and enough places in county schools for other pupils.
Mr Fallon and presumably his Government is now explicitly rejecting this.
The first thing he said in his article was ‘the position is that the Government does not provide specific grants for any school to expand if there are schools nearby with empty desks.’
This is simply not the case.
If there is a shortfall of Catholic school provision in an area, it has never been accepted that Catholic pupils should have to go to non-Catholic schools.
They are not.
We are not surprised that the leaders of the Catholic community in Darlington are outraged and anxious; so are we.
It is important that all of us are vigilant that the rights of our community are not lost.
The essential question that voters should be asking Mr Fallon and which he and his Government have resolutely thus far refused to answer, is whether this Government will honour the educational and religious guarantee, accepted in this country for almost 50 years, that sufficient places will be provided in Catholic schools for Catholic pupils.
We want a straight answer to a straight question.
CONGRATULATIONS to the Catholic Fathers for putting the fear of God into Michael Fallon (Echo February 12).
The threat of all Darlington Catholics voting against him was the most astute piece of political blackmail I have ever seen.
It rapidly deflated his pompous stance and produced an about-face smart enough to have pleased a drill sergeant.
It certainly brought a chuckle from my lips.
But being a Tory politician, he still had the gall to be interviewed on TV and claim credit for his actions.
Personally, I hope that not only all Catholics, but all other voters too, show this young man the door.
A. J. Brown, Powlett Street, Darlington.
RECENT publicity about church-aided schools gives cause for thought.
In what is now largely a secular society, where many who are members of churches no longer adhere to the strict rules of their mentors, it is about time that anachronistic denominational schools were done away with.
These schools smack of privilege, hinder the ecumenical movement, encourage sectarianism, make if difficult to counter claims from others for similar treatment and militate against an integrated society.
Nearly 50 years after the 1944 Education Act it is time to bring all education provision more into line with the sort of society it would be realistic to work towards today.
There are people who are unhappy that their taxes (local and national) are in part devoted to subsidising schools with vested interests.
If those who run and use these schools want something special they should go private and let the parents help support them directly through fees.
They could provide free places for the less well off.
R.K. Bradley, 125, Lunedale Road, Darlington.
THE Northern Echo's leading article again championed the cause of church (Catholic) education (Echo February 12).
Would you be so effusive about the indoctrination of Muslims at the State's expense?
If the state is to support Catholic education, then why not state support for all religions?
When Kenneth Baker was Education Minister he opposed the funding of Muslim schools.
He knew, as we all know, that educating children in sectarian schools divides the community.
Look no further than Northern Ireland.
Funding church schools is foolishly promoting bigotry and intolerance.
R.A. Berry, 2 Embleton Close, Newton Hall, Durham.
A GOSPEL church in Darlington has closed following council restrictions.
Members of the Gospel Outreach Centre, Clifton Road, say they were forced to shut down after Darlington council laid down strict planning restrictions.
Worshippers could only play music on Fridays and Sundays, were banned from having a bass drum, and could only use the church between 8am and 10pm.
They also had to keep windows shut during services and soundproof the room.
Church member Philip Rowe said: ‘We closed because of all the council restrictions on us.
It made it impossible to use it as a building never mind as a church.’
He said members were upset about the decision but felt there was nothing else they could do.
Mr Rowe, who lives in George Street, said noise from the nearby cattle market was much worse than the church music.
But ward councillor Hannah Straiton (Lab) said she had received complaints about the noise.
And she said the church was given every opportunity to discuss the planning conditions.
More controversy as furniture store moves into gospel church
A second planning battle looks set to break out over a building which was used by gospel worshippers in Darlington.
Although the Gospel Outreach Centre in Clifton Road closed following a long-running row between church members and planners, a furniture business has moved in without planning permission.
Ward councillor Mrs Hannah Straiton said Clifton Leather Centre, already established in the street, had expanded into the empty building shortly after the church moved out.
The business had applied for planning permission last year but the application was found to be invalid and was withdrawn.
A second application had been submitted and was due to be discussed at the April meeting of the planning committee.
However, the proposed use contravened council policy set in 1987 after consultation with local residents.
‘We contacted people living in the area about the inner Darlington local plan and it was decided then there would be no expansion of commercial uses in the area,’ said Coun. Mrs Straiton.
‘They already have enough to put up with the cattle market and Chatsworth Warehouse which both generate heavy delivery lorries.’
The Clifton Road building stretched right to the back lane and surrounding terraced streets were too small for furniture wagons.
Meanwhile, gospel church members criticised the council for refusing them permission to hold services there.
‘We closed because of all the council restrictions on us,’ said Mr Philip Rowe, a worshipper.
‘It made it impossible to use it as a building never mind as a church.’
But Coun. David Lyonette, chairman of the planning committee, said the church had not been co-operative during the long-running planning wrangle.
Neighbours had complained about noise from the church and the council wanted soundproofing, a limit on the hours the building could be used and a ban on bass drum playing.
‘It seemed as though there was some confusion as to what the church people wanted and did not want,’ said Coun. Lyonette.
‘At one point we thought we had got an agreement but then they said they did not want any conditions at all attached to the application.’
It was the amplifier and not the music which caused concern and it was usual to attach planning conditions to an application of this type, he added.
VICARS are to lose their right to stay in the parish of their choice in a radical shake-up in the Durham diocese.
The change comes as part of a bid by the Bishops of Durham and Jarrow to reduce the number of paid ministers by 36.
The move is forced by Church of England Commissioners who are to cut cash for Durham by £120,000 each year for the next three years.
Middleton-St-George, near Darlington, has been without a rector since Martin King left last summer to become rural dean of Sedgefield.
Churchwarden at Middleton-St-George Christian Duff said: ‘We will have to wait for someone who does not mind the possibility of having to move in five years time.’
Rebecca Jenkins, Diocese press officer for Durham, said: ‘From now on whenever a parish loses its vicar or rector the vacancy will be filled by a temporary minister.’
She said that existing vicars would keep their right to stay in their parish until they were 65 but as soon as a parish became vacant the priest-in-charge system would be introduced.
‘It means they can be redeployed within the diocese.
To all intents and purposes the parish would still have a vicar but he cannot refuse to move elsewhere,’ she said.
Miss Duff said the community in Middleton-St-George was confident a suitable priest-in-charge would soon be found.
‘We have a brand new rectory and I don't think it will be hard to find a new incumbent.
‘There may be benefits for us too — if we don't get on with the new rector he may only be here for five years,’ said Miss Duff.
A LEADING clergyman has warned voters not to support British National Party candidates in the General Election.
The Bishop of Knaresborough, the Rt Rev Malcolm Menin, has urged people to shun right wing extremists who believe in forced repatriation.
Mr Menin said: ‘The British National Party expounds destructive policies which, in my view, no true Christian could support.’
Mr Menin said extremist right wing groups ‘promote the idea of nationalism on the narrowest sense of the word rather than the love of our country.’
The bishop's comments follow warnings of a bloody general election campaign by the BNP's candidate for Darlington, retired headmaster Dr Donald Clarke.
BNP organisers have sprung to Dr Clarke's defence following reports that he had predicted violent clashes in Darlington.
Northern regional organiser Kevin Scott, said: ‘We have said there is going to be violence but it is going to come from the Communists, not us.’
A PARAGRAPH in last weekend's Observer claims that the Bishop of Durham is talking to an advertising agency ‘DMB&B’ about more effective ways of getting the message across.
A computer database and direct marketing mail shots are among ideas under consideration.
DMB&B, it transpires, is D'Arcy Masius Benton and Bowles which employs around 350 people almost exactly the number of clergy in the Diocese of Durham and is one of the country's leading agencies.
Dr Jenkins may like to know that DMB&B's other clients include Lyons, W H Smith's and United Distillers.
Products for which the agency has handled campaigns include Bounce Superchunks, Whiskas, Flash, Havoline Oil and Mars ice cream, one of the consumer sensations of the past ten years.
But can they improve on ‘a conjuring trick with bones?’
THE first news has arrived from the Darlington group of Carmelite nuns who are travelling on a cargo ship on route to Mafeking in Bophuthatswana in southern Africa to build a new multiracial convent.
Church cash:
A grant of £400 is to be given to Sedgefield church, St Edmund's restoration appeal, which has fallen £45,000 short of target.
The grant was agreed by Sedgefield District Council development committee yesterday.
Pilgrims' visit:
Members of St Clare's church, Newton Aycliffe, are planning a pilgrimage to Walsingham in May.
Around 40 members of the congregation are expected to take part in the trip on May 29.
Devotion division
HOW refreshing to read a straightforward, no-nonsense presentation of God's free offer of pardon and peace ‘through Jesus’(The Word Echo March 2).
Well done, Janet Chapman.
How sad, therefore, to see in the same issue the fudging of this certainty by yet another prominent cleric Bishop Harris.
Inter-faith dialogue may be acceptable but inter-faith acts of devotion are most inappropriate for any Christian worth his salt.
This is not due to any animosity towards the adherents of other faiths but due to the inadmissibility of such acts in the Tenets of the Christian Faith.
Firstly, the God whom we worship, i.e. the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
According to the Christian Scriptures all other gods are no gods at all.
Secondly, the Uniqueness of Jesus Christ as God the Son and the only saviour and meditator between God and mankind.
Thirdly, Jesus commissioned his followers to ‘go and make all nations my disciples’
(NEB), not ‘go and unite in acts of worship to their gods’.
R. Ken Evans (Rev), Assembly of God Pentecostal Church, Corporation Road, Darlington.